Comparing Anomaly-Detection Algorithms for Keystroke Dynamics
Kevin S. Killourhy
 
Roy A. Maxion
 
Dependable Systems Laboratory
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Keystroke dynamics—the analysis of typing rhythms to
discriminate among users—has been proposed for detecting impostors (i.e., both insiders and external attackers).
Since many anomaly-detection algorithms have been proposed for this task, it is natural to ask which are the top
performers (e.g., to identify promising research directions).
Unfortunately, we cannot conduct a sound comparison of
detectors using the results in the literature because evaluation conditions are inconsistent across studies.
Our objective is to collect a keystroke-dynamics data
set, to develop a repeatable evaluation procedure, and to
measure the performance of a range of detectors so that
the results can be compared soundly. We collected data
from 51 subjects typing 400 passwords each, and we implemented and evaluated 14 detectors from the keystrokedynamics and pattern-recognition literature.
top-performing detectors achieve equal-error rates between
9.6% and 10.2%. The results—along with the shared data
and evaluation methodology—constitute a benchmark for
comparing detectors and measuring progress.
1. Introduction
Compromised passwords and shared accounts are frequently exploited by both external attackers and insiders.
External attackers test whether accounts use default or common passwords. Insiders compile lists of shared or compromised passwords for later use, e.g., to damage the system in the event that they are ﬁred or demoted. If we had
some means, other than knowledge of a password, with
which to identify exactly who is logging into an account,
and to discriminate between the genuine user of an account
and an impostor, we could signiﬁcantly curb these security threats. One proposed approach is the use of keystroke
dynamics—the analysis of typing rhythms to discriminate
among users—as a biometric identiﬁer.
With keystroke
dynamics, impostor attempts to authenticate using a compromised password could be detected and rejected because
their typing rhythms differ signiﬁcantly from those of the
genuine user.
Many anomaly-detection algorithms have been proposed
for detecting impostors (to be reviewed in Section 2). It is
natural to ask how well each of the detectors performs, and
how different detectors compare to each other. The principle reason to evaluate and compare detectors is to assess
whether a detector is sufﬁciently dependable to be put into
practice. The European standard for access-control systems
(EN-50133-1) speciﬁes a false-alarm rate of less than 1%,
with a miss rate of no more than 0.001% .
At present, no anomaly detector has achieved these error rates in repeated evaluation, and so keystroke dynamics
could not be deployed as a sole access-control technology.
Consequently, a second reason to try to assess and compare
detector performance is to drive progress toward better results. By establishing which anomaly-detection strategies
outperform others, the research community gains insight
into what detector characteristics reduce the error rate, identifying promising directions for further study.
Unfortunately, although researchers have conducted experiments to measure the performance of various anomaly
detectors, these experimental results are impossible to compare. Too many factors vary from one evaluation to another. If we are to assess the state of the art in keystroke
dynamics, and to measure future progress, we need a shared
benchmark data set and a repeatable procedure for conducting evaluations. Only then can the error rates of anomaly
detectors be properly measured and compared against one
2. Background and related work
In this section, we brieﬂy review various uses for
keystroke dynamics (e.g., password vs. whole-paragraph
analysis), and also various classes of analysis technique
(e.g., one-class anomaly detection vs. multi-class classiﬁcation). Then, we focus on a particular technique: using
anomaly detectors to analyze password-typing times. Even
though it should be possible to compare the performance of
different anomaly detectors, we explain why a comparison
based on evaluation results reported in the literature would
be unsound.
2.1. Review of keystroke dynamics
Since Forsen et al. ﬁrst investigated in 1977 whether
users could be distinguished by the way they type their
names, many different techniques and uses for keystroke
dynamics have been proposed. Peacock et al. conducted an extensive survey of the keystroke-dynamics literature. Not all of that research is relevant to the use considered in this work, namely, analyzing password-typing
times. For instance, Gaines et al. considered whether
typists could be identiﬁed by analyzing keystroke times as
they transcribed long passages of text. Techniques for analyzing passages are different from those for analyzing passwords, and the same evaluation data cannot always be used
to assess both.
Further, even among studies of password-typing times,
not all of the extant techniques can be evaluated using the
same procedure. One class of techniques is anomaly detection. The typing samples of a single, genuine user are
used to build (or train) a model of the user’s typing behavior. When a new typing sample is presented, the detector
tests the sample’s similarity to the model, and outputs an
anomaly score. In contrast, another class of techniques is
multi-class classiﬁcation. The typing samples of multiple
users are used to ﬁnd decision boundaries that can be used
to distinguish each user from the others. Since anomaly detectors train on a single user’s data, while multi-class classiﬁers train on multiple users’ data, these two techniques
require different evaluation procedures.
2.2. Anomaly detectors for password timing
Table 1 presents a concise summary of seven studies
from the literature that use anomaly detection to analyze
password-timing data. Each study described one or more
anomaly detectors, gathered password-typing data, conducted an evaluation, and reported the results. The key observation from this table is that, despite the surface similarities, the studies contain substantial differences beyond just
the anomaly detectors. These differences make it impossible to compare anomaly-detector performance from one
study to another.
The table has been split into two sections for readability.
The ﬁrst column in each section provides a reference to the
source study. The remaining columns provide the following
information:
Detector: a descriptive name for the anomaly-detection algorithm used in the study (sometimes using different terminology than the authors to clarify the type of data analysis
that underlies the detection strategy).
Feature Sets: features used to train and test the detectors
(Enter: the Enter key is considered to be part of the password; Keydown-Keydown: time between the key presses
of consecutive keys is used as a feature; Keyup-Keydown:
time between the release of one key and the press of the next
is used; Hold: time between the press and release of each
key is used).
Password Length: number of characters used in the passwords (N/A indicates the length was not available in the
source study).
Password Reps: number of password-typing repetitions
used to train the detector.
Filtering Users: users whose typing times were highly
variable or inconsistent were identiﬁed during data collection and excluded from the study.
Filtering Times: the collected timing data were processed
with an outlier-handling procedure to remove extreme values.
Testing #Attempts: number of attempts that users were
given to try to authenticate successfully (e.g., a 2 means a
user who was rejected the ﬁrst time would be given a second
chance to type the password).
Testing Updating: the typing-model was updated during
testing to accommodate typing behavior that changes over
Results Threshold: name of the procedure for choosing a
threshold on the detectors’ anomaly scores to obtain miss
and false-alarm rates (heuristic: threshold score was chosen
with a heuristic described in the study; zero-miss: threshold was chosen to obtain a miss rate of zero; equal-error:
threshold was chosen to obtain equal miss and false-alarm
Results Miss/False Alarm: reported miss rates (percentage of impostor passwords that are not detected) and falsealarm rates (percentage of genuine user passwords that are
mistakenly detected as impostors): (a) denotes that the detectors were combined into an aggregate detector, and only
the results for the aggregate were reported; (b) indicates that
only results for two-attempt authentication were reported.
To illustrate the problem we encounter when we try to
use the literature to determine which detector has the best
performance, suppose we tried to compare two detectors:
the Neural Network (auto-assoc) detector developed by Cho
et al. , and the Outlier-Count (z-score) detector designed
by Haider et al. . The neural net has a reported miss
rate of 0.0% and a false-alarm rate of 1.0%. The outliercounting detector has a reported miss rate of 13% and a
false-alarm rate of 2%. Since the neural net has a better miss
rate and false-alarm rate, one might be inclined to conclude
that it is better than the outlier-counting detector.
However, that conclusion is unsound because the table
reveals many differences between the studies used to evaluate the two detectors. The neural net (1) trained on a different set of timing features; (2) had more repetitions in the
training data; (3) did not have to deal with users whose typing was inconsistent, or with timing outliers in the training
Feature Sets
Source Study
Hold Length
1 Joyce & Gupta Manhattan (ﬁltered)
Bleha et al. Euclidean (normed)
Mahalanobis (normed)
Cho et al. Nearest Neighbor (Mahalanobis)
Neural Network (auto-assoc)
Haider et al. Fuzzy Logic
Neural Network (standard)
Outlier Count (z-score)
Yu & Cho SVM (one-class)
Araujo et al. Manhattan (scaled)
Kang et al. k-Means
Results (%)
Source Study
Users Times #Attempts Updating Threshold
False Alarm
1 Joyce & Gupta 
0.25 16.36
Bleha et al. 
Cho et al. 
Haider et al. 
Yu & Cho 
Araujo et al. 
Kang et al. 
equal-error
Table 1. Seven different studies investigate 11 different anomaly detectors and report evaluation
results. The diversity of evaluation conditions makes a direct comparison of the anomaly-detector
performance results impossible. Section 2.2 details the contents of each column of the table.
data; (4) was given only one attempt (not two) to correctly
verify the user; and (5) was assessed using a different type
of threshold on the anomaly score. Any of these ﬁve factors
might explain why the neural net has lower error rates than
the outlier-counting detector. If these factors were all controlled, we might discover that the outlier-counting detector
outperforms the neural net (as reported later in this work;
see Table 2).
3. Problem and approach
As illustrated in the previous section, it is unsound to
compare anomaly detectors using the evaluation results reported in the literature. Too many factors differ from one
evaluation to another to make sensible conclusions about
the relative performance of two detectors.
Our objective in this paper is to collect a keystrokedynamics data set, to develop an evaluation procedure, and
to measure the performance of a range of anomaly-detection
algorithms so that the results can be compared on an equal
basis. In the process, we establish which detectors have the
lowest error rates on these data, and we provide a data set
and evaluation methods that can be shared throughout the
research community to evaluate new detectors and assess
progress. Our approach is as follows:
1. Password-data collection: We collected typing data
from 51 subjects, each typing 400 repetitions of a password. The various timing features used by researchers (e.g.,
the keydown-keydowntimes and hold times) were extracted
from the raw data.
2. Detector implementation: Fourteen anomaly detectors
from the literature were reimplemented:
eleven had
been proposed by keystroke-dynamics researchers, and
three were “classic” anomaly detectors from the patternrecognition literature.
3. Evaluation methodology: We developed a procedure to
evaluate each detector, on the same data, under the same
conditions, so that performances can be compared. The error rates of the detectors were calculated and tabulated.
In Sections 4–6, we describe the three steps of our
methodology in more detail.
4. Password-data collection
The ﬁrst step in our evaluation was to collect a sample
of keystroke-timing data. In this section, we explain how
we chose a password to use as a typing sample, designed
a data-collection apparatus, recruited subjects to type the
password, and extracted a set of password-timing features.
4.1. Choosing a password
Choosing passwords for a keystroke-dynamics evaluation is tricky. On one hand, it is often more realistic to
let users choose their own passwords. On the other hand,
data collection becomes more difﬁcult since different impostor samples would be needed for each password. Some
researchers have suggested that letting users choose their
own passwords makes it easier to discriminate them . If
true, then letting users choose their own passwords would
bias the results of an experiment designed to evaluate performance on an arbitrary password. We decided that the
same password would be typed by all of our subjects.
To make a password that is representative of typical,
strong passwords, we employed a publicly available password generator and password-strength checker .
We generated a 10-character password containing letters,
numbers, and punctuation, and then modiﬁed it slightly, interchanging some punctuation and casing to better conform
with the general perception of a strong password. The result
of this procedure was the following password:
.tie5Roanl
The password-strength checker rates this password as
strong because it contains more than 7 characters, a capital
letter, a number, and punctuation. The top rating is reserved
for passwords longer than 13 characters, but according to
the studies that were presented in Table 1, 10 characters is
typical. Those studies that used longer strings often used
names and English phrases that are easier to type.
4.2. Data-collection apparatus
We set up a laptop with an external keyboard to collect
data, and developed a Windows application that prompts a
subject to type the password. The application displays the
password in a screen with a text-entry ﬁeld. In order to
advance to the next screen, the subject must type the 10
characters of the password correctly, in sequence, and then
press Enter. If any errors in the sequence are detected, the
subject is prompted to retype the password. The subject
must type the password correctly 50 times to complete a
data-collection session. Whenever the subject presses or releases a key, the application records the event (i.e., keydown
or keyup), the name of the key involved, and what time the
event occurred. An external reference clock was used to
generate highly accurate timestamps. The reference clock
was demonstrated to have an accuracy of ±200 microseconds (by using a function generator to simulate key presses
at ﬁxed intervals).
Of course, subjects would not naturally type their password 50 times in a row, and they would type it on their own
computers, not our keyboard. We chose to sacriﬁce some
amount of realism so we could use this carefully-controlled
data-collection apparatus. We had two reasons for this decision. First, we wanted to ensure the accuracy of the timestamps (as described above). Second, we wanted to make
the environment as consistent as possible for all subjects. If
some subjects typed the password more frequently than others, or if different subjects used different keyboards, these
differences could make it artiﬁcially easier for an anomaly
detector to distinguish between typists.
4.3. Running subjects
We recruited 51 subjects from within the university. Subjects completed 8 data-collection sessions (of 50 passwords
each), for a total of 400 password-typing samples. They
waited at least one day between sessions, to capture some
of the day-to-day variation of each subject’s typing.
Our set of subjects consisted of 30 males and 21 females.
We had 8 left-handed and 43 right-handed subjects. The
median age group was 31–40, the youngest was 18–20 and
the oldest was 61–70. The subjects’ sessions took between
1.25 and 11 minutes, with the median session taking about
3 minutes.
4.4. Extracting timing vectors
The raw typing data (e.g., key events and timestamps)
cannot be used directly by an anomaly detector. Instead,
sets of timing features are extracted from the raw data.
These features are typically organized into a vector of times
called a timing vector. Different researchers extract different combinations of features (as shown in the Feature Sets
columns of Table 1).
We decided to use all the features used across all of
the studies shown in Table 1. Speciﬁcally, we considered
the Enter key to be part of the password (effectively making the 10-character password 11 keystrokes long), and we
extracted keydown-keydown times, keyup-keydown times,
and hold times for all keys in the password. For each password, 31 timing features were extracted and organized into
a vector. The times are stored in seconds (as ﬂoating-point
Many of the timing features are correlated and some are
linearly dependent (i.e., each keydown-keydown time can
be decomposed into the sum of a hold time and a keyupkeydown time). We did not transform the data to remove
these correlations despite their adverse effect on some detectors because they are typical of keystroke timing data.
Other researchers have investigated strategies to compensate through feature selection . By retaining all the features, we expect our timing data could be useful in a future
evaluation of such work.
5. Detector implementation
The second step in our evaluation was to implement
14 anomaly-detection algorithms that analyze passwordtiming data. We tried to faithfully reimplement the eleven
algorithms listed in the Detector column of Table 1. We
also implemented three “classic” anomaly-detection methods (i.e., the Euclidean, Manhattan, and Mahalanobis distance metrics) from the pattern-recognition literature.
All of these detectors have been described in comprehensive detail elsewhere, and due to space constraints we
cannot include the same detail. However, we provide a concise explanation (and a citation to a more detailed description) for each detector. We note ambiguities which could
inadvertently cause our reimplementation to differ from the
original. Occasionally, we must resort to terminology that is
speciﬁc to a statistical or machine-learning technique (e.g.,
the vocabulary of neural networks); references are provided.
The 14 detectors were implemented using the R statistical programming environment (version 2.6.2) . Each
detector has a training phase where a set of timing vectors
from the genuine user is used to build a model of the user’s
typing behavior, and a test phase where each new test vector
is assigned an anomaly score.
Because some detectors have parameters that affect their
performance, the question of parameter tuning arises. Since
there is no commonly accepted method for tuning the parameters of anomaly detectors for a data set without introducing bias in the evaluation results , we used the parameters speciﬁed by the source study when possible, and
explained what parameters we used.
5.1. Euclidean
This classic anomaly-detection algorithm models
each password as a point in p-dimensional space, where p
is the number of features in the timing vectors. It treats the
training data as a cloud of points, and computes the anomaly
score of the test vector based on its proximity to the center
of this cloud. Speciﬁcally, in the training phase, the mean
vector of the set of timing vectors is calculated. In the test
phase, the anomaly score is calculated as the squared Euclidean distance between the test vector and the mean vector.
5.2. Euclidean (normed)
This detector was described by Bleha et al. who
called it the “normalized minimum distance classiﬁer.” In
the training phase, the mean vector is calculated as in the
standard Euclidean detector. In the test phase, the squared
Euclidean distance between the test vector and the mean
vector is calculated, but the anomaly score is calculated by
“normalizing” this distance, dividing it by the product of the
norms of the two vectors (i.e., if x is the mean vector, y is
the test vector, and d is the squared Euclidean distance, then
the anomaly score is d/(∥x∥∥y∥)).
5.3. Manhattan
This classic anomaly-detection algorithm resembles
the Euclidean detector except that the distance measure is
not Euclidean distance, but Manhattan (or city-block) distance. In the training phase, the mean vector of the timing
vectors is calculated. In the test phase, the anomaly score
is calculated as the Manhattan distance between the mean
vector and the test vector.
5.4. Manhattan (ﬁltered)
This detector was described by Joyce and Gupta . It
is similar to the Manhattan detector except outliers are ﬁltered from the training data. In the training phase, the mean
vector of the timing vectors is calculated, and the standard
deviation for each feature is calculated also. Any timingvector element that is more than three standard-deviations
above the mean is removed, and a more robust mean vector
is computed without these extreme values. In the test phase,
the anomaly score is calculated as the Manhattan distance
between this robust mean vector and the test vector.
5.5. Manhattan (scaled)
This detector was described by Ara´ujo et al. . In the
training phase, the mean vector of the timing vectors is calculated, and the mean absolute deviation of each feature is
calculated as well. In the test phase, the calculation is similar to the Manhattan distance, but with a small change. The
anomaly score is calculated as p
i=1 |xi −yi| /ai where xi
and yi are the i-th features of the test and mean vectors respectively, and ai is the average absolute deviation from the
training phase. The score resembles a Manhattan-distance
calculation, except each dimension is scaled by ai.
5.6. Mahalanobis
This classic anomaly-detection algorithm resembles
the Euclidean and Manhattan detectors but the distance
measure is more complex. Mahalanobis distance can be
viewed as an extension of Euclidean distance to account for
correlations between features. In the training phase, both
the mean vector and the covariance matrix of the timing
vectors are calculated. In the test phase, the anomaly score
is calculated as the Mahalanobis distance between the mean
vector and the test vector (i.e., if x is the mean vector, y is
the test vector, and S is the covariance matrix, the Mahalanobis distance is (x −y)TS−1(x −y)).
5.7. Mahalanobis (normed)
This detector was described by Bleha et al. who
called it the “normalized Bayes classiﬁer.” In the training
phase, the mean vector and covariance matrix of the training
vectors are calculated. In the test phase, the Mahalanobis
distance between the mean vector and test vector is calculated. The anomaly score is calculated by “normalizing”
the Mahalanobis distance using the same divisor as the Euclidean (normed) detector.
5.8. Nearest-neighbor (Mahalanobis)
This detector was described by Cho et al. . In the
training phase, the detector saves the list of training vectors,
and calculates the covariance matrix. In the test phase, the
detector calculates the Mahalanobis distance between each
of the training vectors and the test vector. The anomaly
score is calculated as the distance from the test vector to the
nearest training vector.
5.9. Neural-network (standard)
This detector was described by Haider et al. . It incorporates a feed-forward neural-network trained with the
back-propagation algorithm . In the training phase, a
network is built with p input nodes, one output node, and
⌈2p/3⌉hidden nodes. The original detector was designed
speciﬁcally with 6 input nodes and 4 hidden nodes because
the researchers only considered 6-feature timing vectors.
Our vectors are 31-features long, so we extended their structure to include 31 input nodes while maintaining a ratio of
2 hidden nodes for every 3 input nodes.
The network weights were all initialized to 0.1, and the
bias term of each node was initialized randomly, as described in the source study. The detector was trained to
produce a 1.0 on the output node for every training vector.
We trained for 500 epochs using a learning-rate parameter
of 0.0001. During testing, the test vector was run through
the network, and the output of the network was recorded. If
s denotes the output of the network, the anomaly score was
calculated as 1 −s since, intuitively, if s is close to 1.0, the
test vector is similar to the training vectors, and with s close
to 0.0, it is dissimilar.
5.10. Neural-network (auto-assoc)
This detector was described by Cho et al. , who called
it an “auto-associative, multilayer perceptron.” It also incorporates a feed-forward neural-network trained with the
back-propagation algorithm, but unlike a typical neural network, the structure of the network is designed for use in an
anomaly detector . Intuitively, the training phase teaches
the network to produce output vectors close to the inputs for
the training vectors (hence the “auto-associative” descriptor). Then, during the test phase, input vectors that produce
dissimilar outputs are assigned high anomaly scores.
In the training phase, the neural network is constructed
with p input nodes and p output nodes (where p is the number of timing-vector features). We used p hidden nodes as
well (as described by one of the sources ). The network
is trained to reproduce each input timing vector as the output. We trained for 500 epochs using a learning-rate of
0.0001 and a momentum parameter of 0.0003 (equivalent
to those reported by Cho and his colleagues since our times
are in seconds not milliseconds). In the test phase, the pfeature test vector is run through the network, producing
a p-feature output vector. The Euclidean distance between
the test vector and the output vector is calculated and used
as the anomaly score.
5.11. Fuzzy-logic
This detector was described by Haider et al. . It incorporates a fuzzy-logic inference procedure. The key idea is
that ranges of typing times are assigned to fuzzy sets (e.g.,
the times in the range of 210–290 milliseconds are part of
a set named “very fast”). The sets are called fuzzy because
elements can partially belong to a set (e.g., the time 255 is
strongly in the “very fast” set while 290 is only weakly a
member of the set).
In the training phase, the detector determines how
strongly each feature belongs to each set, and each feature
is matched with the set in which its membership is strongest
(e.g. the t-hold-time feature will be matched with the “very
fast” set if most t hold times are around 255 milliseconds).
In the test phase, each timing feature is checked to see if
it belongs to the same set as the training data (e.g., the test
vector’s t hold time is checked for membership in the “very
fast” set). The anomaly score is calculated as the average
lack of membership across all test vector timing features.
Note that we added sets (e.g., “very very fast”) to accommodate faster times than seen in the source study.
5.12. Outlier-counting (z-score)
This detector was described by Haider et al. , who
called it the “statistical technique.” In the training phase,
the detector calculates the mean and standard deviation of
each timing feature. In the test phase, the detector computes the absolute z-score of each feature of the test vector.
The z-score for the i-th feature is calculated as |xi −yi| /si,
where xi and yi are the i-th features of the test and mean
vectors respectively and si is the standard deviation from
the training phase. The anomaly score is a count of how
many z-scores exceed a threshold (which was unspeciﬁed,
so we used 1.96, typical for outlier detection in this setting).
5.13. SVM (one-class)
This detector was described by Yu and Cho . It incorporates an algorithm called a support-vector machine
(SVM), that projects two classes of data into a highdimensional space and ﬁnds a linear separator between the
two classes. A “one-class” SVM variant was developed for
anomaly detection. It projects the data from a single class
and ﬁnds a separator between the projection and the origin.
In the training phase, the detector builds a one-class
SVM using the training vectors. In the test phase, the test
vector is projected into the same high-dimensional space
and the (signed) distance from the linear separator is calculated. The anomaly score is calculated as this distance, with
the sign inverted, so that positive scores are separated from
the data. The SVM parameter ν was set to 0.5; the source
study set ν with a “heuristic search” but did not elaborate.
5.14. k-means
This detector was described by Kang et al. . It uses
the k-means clustering algorithm to identify clusters in the
training vectors, and then calculates whether the test vector
is close to any of the clusters. In the training phase, the
detector simply runs the k-means algorithm on the training
data (with k = 3). The algorithm produces three centroids
such that each training vector should be close to at least one
of the three centroids. In the test phase, the anomaly score is
calculated as the Euclidean distance between the test vector
and the nearest of these centroids.
6. Evaluation methodology
The ﬁnal step was to evaluate each of the 14 detectors
using the password-timing data. Each detector was trained
and tested using the same procedure, and the anomaly
scores output by each detector were converted into standard
measures of error.
6.1. Training and testing the detectors
Consider a scenario in which a user’s long-time password has been compromised by an impostor. The user is
assumed to be practiced in typing their password, while the
impostor is unfamiliar with it (e.g., typing it for the ﬁrst
time). We measure how well each of our detectors is able to
discriminate between the impostor’s typing and the genuine
user’s typing in this scenario.
We start by designating one of our 51 subjects as the genuine user, and the rest as impostors. We train an anomaly
detector and test its ability to recognize the genuine user and
impostors as follows:
1. We run the training phase of the detector on the timing
vectors from the ﬁrst 200 password repetitions typed by
the the genuine user. The detector builds a model of the
user’s typing behavior.
2. Then, we run the test phase of the detector on the timing
vectors from the remaining 200 repetitions typed by the
genuine user. We record the anomaly scores assigned to
each timing vector as user scores.
3. Finally, we run the test phase of the detector on the timing vectors from the ﬁrst ﬁve repetitions typed by each
of the 50 impostors. We record the anomaly scores assigned to each timing vector as impostor scores.
This process is then repeated, designating each of the other
subjects as the genuine user in turn. After training and testing each of the 14 detectors, we have a total of 741 sets of
user and impostor scores (51 subjects × 14 detectors).
It may seem that 200 repetitions is an unrealistically
large amount of training data.
We were concerned that
fewer passwords might unfairly cause one or more detectors to under-perform (e.g., Table 1 shows detectors trained
with up to 325 passwords). Likewise, an unpracticed impostor might seem unrealistic, since impostors might practice if
Nearest Neighbor (Mahalanobis)
Subject 19
False Alarm Rate
equal−error rate
zero−miss rate
Figure 1. An example ROC curve depicts the
performance of the Nearest Neighbor (Mahalanobis) detector with subject 19 as the genuine user. The curve shows the trade-off between the hit rate and the false-alarm rate.
Proximity to the top-left corner of the graph
is a visual measure of performance.
they knew timing mattered. We believe that our choices are
fair for a ﬁrst evaluation; experiments involving fewer training repetitions and more practiced impostors are planned.
6.2. Calculating detector performance
To measure detector performance, we used the scores
to generate a graphical summary of performance called an
ROC curve . An example ROC curve is shown in Figure 1. The hit rate is the frequency with which impostors
are detected (i.e., 1 −miss rate), and the false-alarm rate
is the frequency with which genuine users are mistakenly
detected as impostors. Whether or not a password generates an alarm depends on how the threshold on the anomaly
scores is chosen. The choice of threshold establishes the
operating point of the detector on the ROC curve. Over the
continuum of possible thresholds, the ROC curve illustrates
the hit and false-alarm rates that would be attained at each
possible detector operating point.
The ROC curve is a common visualization of a detector’s
accuracy, and on the basis of the ROC curve, various measures of error can be derived. Table 1 lists several studies
that have chosen a threshold using detector-speciﬁc heuristics. As the ROC curve shows, the nature of these heuristics
could have a major effect on the reported miss and falsealarm rates. Further, if different heuristics are used for different detectors, comparing detector performance becomes
Two measures are commonly used for determining a
equal-error rate
Manhattan (scaled)
0.096 (0.069)
Nearest Neighbor (Mahalanobis) 0.100 (0.064)
Outlier Count (z-score)
0.102 (0.077)
SVM (one-class)
0.102 (0.065)
Mahalanobis
0.110 (0.065)
Mahalanobis (normed)
0.110 (0.065)
Manhattan (ﬁlter)
0.136 (0.083)
0.153 (0.092)
Neural Network (auto-assoc)
0.161 (0.080)
10 Euclidean
0.171 (0.095)
11 Euclidean (normed)
0.215 (0.119)
12 Fuzzy Logic
0.221 (0.105)
13 k Means
0.372 (0.139)
14 Neural Network (standard)
0.828 (0.148)
zero-miss false-alarm rate
Nearest Neighbor (Mahalanobis) 0.468 (0.272)
Mahalanobis
0.482 (0.273)
Mahalanobis (normed)
0.482 (0.273)
SVM (one-class)
0.504 (0.316)
Manhattan (scaled)
0.601 (0.337)
Manhattan (ﬁlter)
0.757 (0.282)
Outlier Count (z-score)
0.782 (0.306)
0.843 (0.242)
Neural Network (auto-assoc)
0.859 (0.220)
10 Euclidean
0.875 (0.200)
11 Euclidean (normed)
0.911 (0.148)
12 Fuzzy Logic
0.935 (0.108)
13 k Means
0.989 (0.040)
14 Neural Network (standard)
1.000 (0.000)
Table 2. The average equal-error rates (left side) and average zero-miss false-alarm rates (right side)
from the evaluation of the 14 detectors are ranked from best to worst (with standard deviations in
parentheses). The set of top-performing detectors is indicated in bold-face (i.e., those that are not
signiﬁcantly worse than the best-performing detector).
threshold in a detector-independent way and summarizing
performance: equal-error rate and zero-miss false-alarm
rate. To calculate the equal-error rate, the threshold is chosen so that the detector’s miss and false-alarm rates are
equal. This measure was used by Kang et al. . To calculate the zero-miss false-alarm rate, the threshold is chosen
so that the false-alarm rate is minimized under the constraint
that the miss rate be zero. This measure was used in two
earlier studies . The equal-error rate and the zeromiss false-alarm rate are different performance measures,
but both are error rates (i.e., lower values imply fewer errors
and better performance). For each of the 714 combinations
of detector and subject, we generated an ROC curve, and
calculated these two measures.
7. Results and analysis
Table 2 shows the average equal-error and zero-miss
false-alarm rates for each of the 14 detectors over all subjects. The detectors have been rank-ordered from best performance to worst (with separate rankings for each of the
two types of performance measure).
Since the anomaly detectors were evaluated using the
same data, under the same conditions, using the same procedures, it is possible to attribute differences in performance
to the anomaly detector and not to different experimental
conditions. We will establish which detectors are the top
performers on this data set using a statistical analysis, and
then proceed with a detailed comparison of the detectors.
7.1. Finding the top-performing detectors
When comparing the error rates (equal-error or zeromiss false-alarm) of the 14 anomaly detectors, we naturally ask which detector performs best. One detector will
have the minimum error rate on the test data, and the other
13 detectors’ error rates will be higher (assuming no ties).
However, a test of statistical signiﬁcance is required to establish that the difference between the best-performing detector and another detector is real, and not explained by random effects.
We conduct 13 hypothesis tests, comparing the performance of the best-performing detector to each of the other
13 detectors. Formally, each test’s null hypothesis is that
the best-performing detector is no better than the other detector (i.e., a one-sided test). If we cannot reject the null
hypothesis for a detector, we accept that the detector’s performance is competitive with the best-performing detector,
and consider it to be a top-performing detector.
When using hypothesis testing to compare anomalydetector performance, Cho et al. used a paired t-test.
The t-test assumes that the difference between the two error
rates is normally distributed. We plotted the distributions of
the error rates of each detector in our evaluation, and found
that they were far from normal (e.g., some looked multimodal). Consequently, we opted to use the non-parametric
Wilcoxon signed-rank test instead , which has been
shown to be more robust when testing distributions that are
non-normal. We used a signiﬁcance level of α = 0.05, and
since we conducted 13 hypothesis tests, we applied a Bonferroni correction for multiple testing .
7.2. Detector performance comparison
The best equal-error rate was 0.096, obtained by the
Manhattan (scaled) detector described by Ara´ujo et al. .
The Nearest Neighbor (Mahalanobis) detector, and the Outlier Count (z-score) detector were the other top-performing
detectors using the equal-error performance measure.
The best zero-miss false-alarm rate was 0.468, obtained
by the Nearest Neighbor (Mahalanobis) detector described
by Cho et al. . The classical Mahalanobis detector, the
Mahalanobis (normed) detector, and the SVM (one-class)
detector were the other top-performing detectors using the
zero-miss false-alarm performance measure.
Our initial observation is that none of the performance
measures comes close to what is needed to achieve the
0.001% miss rate and 1% false-alarm rate required by the
European standard for access-control systems . Since our
ﬁrst reason for wanting to evaluate and compare anomaly
detectors was to determine if a detector was sufﬁciently reliable to be put into practice, we can conclude that further
progress is needed before we could rely solely on keystroke
dynamics for access control.
Since our second reason for comparing detectors is to
discover promising anomaly-detection strategies that might
drive progress, we look for shared strategies among our
top-performing detectors (according to either performance
measure). These detectors all employ some form of scaling
of the timing features (e.g., by employing the Mahalanobis
rather than Euclidean distance). It has been observed that
different timing features have different variability (e.g., hold
times tend to be faster and more consistent than keydownkeydown times which are slower and more variable). We
ﬁnd that detectors which account for these differences in
scale demonstrate better performance.
The Nearest Neighbor (Mahalanobis) detector is the
only top-performing detector according to both performance measures. Since the equal-error rate and the zeromiss false-alarm rate measure the performance of the detector at different operating points on an ROC curve (see
Figure 1), this result suggests that the Nearest Neighbor
(Mahalanobis) detector is comparatively robust to different
threshold-selection procedures.
Our ﬁnal observation is that the seven worst-ranked detectors (ranks 8–14) are the same for both performance measures, and equivalently, the seven detectors with the best
rank are the same. Even though the ordering of the top
seven is not the same for both measures, this observation
suggests a clear division between seven detectors that are
competitive in this evaluation and seven that are not.
8. Discussion and future work
This study is the ﬁrst time a diverse group of 14 of the
anomaly detectors for keystroke dynamics have been evaluated on an equal basis. While our results are only for a
single data set and evaluation procedure, they demonstrate
the value of shared data and a consistent evaluation methodology. Additionally, our work highlights the need for more
shared data and resources.
8.1. Shared data and methods
The comparison of these particular 14 anomaly detectors is interesting in that it reveals which detection strategies seem to work, and which strategies fare poorly. However, in terms of usefulness to other keystroke-dynamics
researchers, the comparison itself may be less important
than that the comparison was made possible. We invite researchers to use our data and methods to evaluate other detectors and other implementations of these detectors. The
beneﬁt of using these data and methods is a valid comparison with the results in this work.1
To our knowledge, the only other researchers to make
keystroke data publicly available through the Web are Montalv˜ao et al. . From discussion with colleagues, we understand that other data sets are forthcoming, and we welcome this trend since the availability of a diverse set of public data will boost progress in this ﬁeld.
8.2. Extensions to the evaluation method
We foresee uses for the data beyond comparing anomaly
detectors using our evaluation procedure.
As explained
throughout this report, we had to make various tradeoffs
(e.g., about what features to include in our timing vectors,
and how many password vectors to use in training) that undoubtedly had an effect on detector performance. Consequently, the data could also be used to evaluate what effect
these decisions have.
For instance, we chose to use 200 samples to train the
detector, which may seem excessive to some; and we used
unpracticed impostors, which may boost detector performance. As explained in Section 6.1, we made these decisions for the sake of a fair evaluation. If researchers are
concerned about high performance with less training data,
a different evaluation procedure could be developed to train
detectors using fewer passwords. We simply ask that extensions be explicitly and carefully described, so that different
evaluation methodologies are not conﬂated and confused.
8.3. Detector variability across data sets
A key issue is that minor differences—in the detectors,
the data, and the evaluation—can obviously cause major
swings in detector performance. Keystroke-dynamics is a
sensitive instrument in a noisy domain. Since assessment
and comparison depends on controlling these small differences in performance, shared data and common evaluation
procedures are critical.
For example, as shown in Table 1, Cho et al. compared a Nearest Neighbor (Mahalanobis) detector to a Neural Network (auto-assoc) detector.
They reported that
the zero-miss false-alarm rate was 19.5% for the nearestneighbor detector and 1.0%, and for the neural net. In our
evaluation, the zero-miss false-alarm rates were 10.0% and
1The keystroke data set has been linked from each of the authors’ individual webpages and is available directly from
 
The data are accompanied by a comprehensive description of the collection
procedure and detector-evaluation methodology we used.
46.8% respectively. The error rates for both detectors are
higher in our evaluation. Further, the neural net outperforms
the nearest-neighbor detector in their evaluation while the
opposite is true in ours. Additional shared data and further
evaluations are needed to identify and tease apart the factors
that boost and hinder each detector’s performance.
9. Summary and conclusion
Previously, it was not possible to compare the performance of different anomaly detectors across studies in the
keystroke dynamics literature. Our objective in this work
has been to collect a data set, develop an evaluation procedure, and measure the performance of many anomalydetection algorithms on an equal basis. In the process, we
established which detectors have the lowest error rates on
our data (e.g., the Nearest Neighbor (Mahalanobis) detector), and we provide a data set and evaluation methodology
that can be used by the community to assess new detectors
and report comparative results.
Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to Patricia Loring for running
the experiments that provided the data for this paper, and
to Rachel Krishnaswami for her insightful comments and
helpful advice. Thanks also to several anonymous reviewers
for their helpful comments.
This work was supported by National Science Foundation grant numbers CNS-0430474 and CNS-0716677,
and by the Army Research Ofﬁce through grant number
DAAD19-02-1-0389 (Perpetually Available and Secure Information Systems) to Carnegie Mellon University’s Cy-