Behavioral/Systems/Cognitive
Mechanisms of Spatial Attention Control in Frontal and
Parietal Cortex
Sara M. Szczepanski,1,2 Christina S. Konen,1,2 and Sabine Kastner1,2,3
1Department of Psychology, 2Center for the Study of Brain, Mind, and Behavior, and 3Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Princeton,
New Jersey 08540
Theoriesofspatialattentionalcontrolhavebeenlargelybaseduponstudiesofpatientssufferingfromvisuospatialneglect,resultingfrom
circumscribed lesions of frontal and posterior parietal cortex. In the intact brain, the control of spatial attention has been related to a
distributed frontoparietal attention network. Little is known about the nature of the control mechanisms exerted by this network. Here,
we used a novel region-of-interest approach to relate activations of the attention network to recently described topographic areas in
frontalcortex[frontaleyefield(FEF),PreCC/IFS(precentralcortex/inferiorfrontalsulcus)]andparietalcortex[intraparietalsulcusareas
(IPS1–IPS5)andanareainthesuperiorparietallobule(SPL1)]toexaminetheirspatialattentionsignals.Wefoundthatattentionsignals
in most topographic areas were spatially specific, with stronger responses when attention was directed to the contralateral than to the
ipsilateral visual field. Importantly, two hemispheric asymmetries were found. First, a region in only right, but not left SPL1 carried
spatial attention signals. Second, left FEF and left posterior parietal cortex (IPS1/2) generated stronger contralateral biasing signals than
theircounterpartsintherighthemisphere.Thesefindingsarethefirsttocharacterizespatialattentionsignalsintopographicfrontaland
parietal cortex and provide a neural basis in support of an interhemispheric competition account of spatial attentional control.
Introduction
Evidence from monkey physiology and human neuroimaging
studies indicates that spatially selective attention affects processing in the visual system . When attention is directed to a location in the
visual field, neural responses evoked by stimuli at the attended
location are greater than those at ignored locations. These modulatory signals appear to originate from higher-order areas in
frontal and parietal cortex, including the superior parietal lobule
(SPL), intraparietal sulcus (IPS), the frontal eye fields (FEF), and
the supplementary eye field (SEF), and are transmitted via
feedback to the visual system . However, it remains largely unknown how the
frontoparietal network controls the allocation of attention across
the visual field.
Models of spatial attention control have emerged from behavioral studies of patients suffering from visuospatial hemineglect.
One of the leading symptoms of this syndrome is the inability to
direct attention to the contralateral visual field. Notably, the syndrome is more frequently associated with lesions of the right than
the left hemisphere. To account for these observations, Heilman’s
“hemispatial” theory has
proposed that the right hemisphere (RH) directs attention to
both visual hemifields, whereas the left hemisphere (LH) directs
attention to the right visual field (RVF) only . Thus, while the RH can compensate for LH damage, such
compensation is not possible with RH damage, thereby resulting
in neglect of the left visual field (LVF). An alternative account,
Kinsbourne’s “interhemispheric competition” theory, has proposed an opponent processor control system, in which each
hemisphere directs attention toward the contralateral visual field
and is balanced through reciprocal inhibition. Such inhibitory
control could alternatively be achieved through cortico-subcortical interactions between parietal cortex and the superior colliculus (SC) . Neglect occurs as a
consequence of an imbalanced system following damage to one
of the processors, resulting in a bias toward the ipsilesional visual
field .
Despite their differences, these accounts predict that higherorder cortex contains discrete representations of visual space that
are involved in controlling attentional operations throughout the
visual field. In the human brain, topographically organized areas
have been identified in frontal cortex [FEF, precentral cortex/
inferior frontal sulcus (PreCC/IFS)] and posterior parietal cortex
(PPC) (IPS1–IPS5, SPL1) , the locations of which are similar to known activations of
the frontoparietal attention network . We hypothesized that these
topographic frontoparietal areas might be part of a distributed
higher-order control system for spatial attention, and investigated attention-related signals in them. A spatial attention task
(Fig. 1) served to identify activations of the attention network and
Received Aug. 7, 2009; revised Sept. 24, 2009; accepted Oct. 15, 2009.
This study was supported by grants from National Institutes of Health (2RO1 MH64043, 1RO1 EY017699, 2P50
MH-62196) to S.K. and a grant from the German Academic Exchange Service to C.K. We thank Mark Pinsk for help
with the eye movement control studies, Greg Detre for help with data analyses, and Stephanie McMains, Ryan
Mruczek, and Marius Peelen for valuable suggestions on earlier drafts of the manuscript.
CorrespondenceshouldbeaddressedtoSabineKastner,DepartmentofPsychology,CenterfortheStudyofBrain,
Mind, and Behavior, Princeton University, Green Hall, Princeton, NJ 08540. E-mail: .
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3862-09.2010
Copyright © 2010 the authors
0270-6474/10/300148-13$15.00/0
148 • The Journal of Neuroscience, January 6, 2010 • 30(1):148–160
to quantitatively examine attention signals in topographic frontoparietal cortex. Our findings provide evidence in support of an
interhemispheric competition account of spatial attentional
control and have led us to propose a novel model, which provides a framework to interpret both common behavioral
asymmetries in the allocation of attention across the visual
field, such as pseudoneglect, and pathologic attention deficits,
such as neglect.
Materials and Methods
Subjects, visual stimuli, and experimental design. Nine healthy subjects
(20–36 years old, four of them females, with normal or corrected-tonormal visual acuity) gave informed written consent to participate in the
study, which was approved by the Institutional Review Panel of Princeton University. Each subject participated in one scanning session to perform the spatial attention task and in an additional session to localize
topographic areas in frontal and parietal cortex.
Four colorful, complex images, each 2°  2°, were presented in four
nearby locations at 8–12 degrees eccentricity from the fixation point to
either the upper right, lower right, upper left, or lower left quadrant (a
schematic outline of one run is shown in Fig. 1) . The four stimuli were presented simultaneously for 250 ms and
at 1 Hz in blocks of 16 s with a temporal jitter of 250–750 ms. The
order of stimuli and locations within the four stimuli display was
randomized from presentation to presentation for a given block. The
quadrant in which each of the displays appeared for a given block was
chosen pseudo-randomly.
The visual presentations were probed under two conditions: attended
and unattended. In the unattended condition, subjects performed a demanding letter-counting task at fixation (Fig. 1, frames 1, 3, and 6),
counting the number of target letters (a–c) presented among distracters
in a rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) stream, while ignoring the
peripheral stimuli (Fig. 1, frame 2). Each letter was presented for 250 ms.
Target letters occurred every 1.45 s on average. In the attended condition
(Fig. 1, frames 4–5), subjects were instructed by the occurrence of a cue
at fixation to covertly direct attention to the
peripheral display (Fig. 1, frame 5) and to
count the occurrences of a target stimulus in
the display location closest to fixation. The cue
was a line presented for 500 ms close to the
fixation point that was oriented toward the target location in one of the four quadrants. The
cue was always valid and occurred 1 s before the
peripheral stimuli appeared. While subjects
performed the peripheral covert attention task,
they discontinued performing the RSVP task at
fixation. Upon the offset of the peripheral
stimuli, subjects redirected attention to fixation and resumed the RSVP task. Attended and
unattended blocks of visual stimuli were interleaved with blank periods during which subjects performed the RSVP task (Fig. 1, frames 1,
3, 6). A single scan run of 208 s consisted of a
total of three attended and three unattended
blocks of peripheral presentations. The target
for each run was randomly chosen from among
the four complex images and was presented to
subjects before its start. At the end of each scanning run, subjects reported the number of target detections during each attended block.
Twelve runs were tested during a scan session.
Visual display. Visual displays were generated on a Macintosh G4 computer (Apple
Computer) using MATLAB software (The
MathWorks) and Psychophysics Toolbox
functions . A PowerLite 7250
liquid crystal display projector (Epson) outside
the scanner room displayed the stimuli onto a
translucent screen located at the end of the
scanner bore. Subjects viewed the screen at a total path length of 60 cm
through a mirror attached to the head coil. The screen subtended 30° of
visual angle in the horizontal dimension and 26° in the vertical dimension. A trigger pulse from the scanner synchronized the onset of stimulus
presentation to the beginning of the image acquisition.
Data acquisition. Data were acquired with a 3T Allegra MRI scanner
(Siemens) using a standard birdcage head coil. Each subject’s head was
surrounded by foam to reduce head movements. All functional images
were acquired using a gradient echo, echo planar sequence [field of view
(FOV), 256  256 mm 2; 128 matrix; repetition time (TR)  2–2.5 s; echo
time (TE)  41 ms; flip angle  90°]. Twenty to 25 axial slices [slice
thickness  2 mm, gap  1 mm, in-plane resolution  2  2 mm 2]
covering frontal, parietal and dorsal occipital cortex were acquired in 12
series of 104 volumes each for the spatial attention task and in eight series
of 144 volumes or six series of 240 volumes for topographic mapping of
frontal and parietal cortex . An in-plane magnetic field map image was acquired to
perform echo planar imaging undistortion (FOV, 256  256 mm 2; 128
matrix; TR, 345 ms; TE, 5.06/8.06 ms; flip angle, 40°; bandwidth, 260
Hz/pixel). Echo-planar images were aligned to a high-resolution anatomical scan acquired in each session (MPRAGE sequence; 256 matrix;
TR, 2.5 s; TE, 4.38 s; flip angle, 8°; 1 mm 3 resolution). In addition, a series
of six high-resolution structural scans were acquired in a separate scan
session, which were averaged for cortical surface reconstructions
(MPRAGE sequence, same parameters as above).
Data analysis. Data were analyzed using the AFNI software package
 , FreeSurfer , SUMA
( and MATLAB (The Math-
Works). The functional images were motion corrected to the image
acquired closest in time to the anatomical scan and undistorted using the
field map scan. Data were smoothed with a 4 mm Gaussian kernel. Each
time series was normalized to its mean intensity.
For the spatial attention task, a multiple regression analysis was performed. Square-wave regressors that matched the time course of the
design were identified as regressors of interest for the multiple regression
Experimentaldesign.Visualstimuliwerepresentedinoneofthefourquadrantsataperipherallocationandprobed
undertwoconditions:attendedandunattended.Aschematicoutlineofonescanrunisshown.Intheunattendedcondition(frame
#2), subjects performed a demanding letter-counting task at fixation, counting the number of target letters among distracters,
whileignoringtheperipheralstimuli.Intheattendedcondition(frame#5),subjectswereinstructedbyabriefoccurrenceofacue
at fixation (frame #4) to covertly direct attention to one of the four peripheral locations and to count the occurrences of a target
stimulus in the location closest to fixation. Attended and unattended presentations were interleaved with blank fixation periods
(frames #1, #3, and #6) during which subjects performed the letter-counting task. Blocks of attended and unattended presentations alternated with blank periods.
Szczepanski et al. • Mechanisms of Spatial Attention Control
J. Neurosci., January 6, 2010 • 30(1):148–160 • 149
analysis. Each of the regressors was then convolved with a gamma-variate
function to best represent the idealized hemodynamic response. In addition, regressors of non-interest were included in the model to account for
variance due to baseline shifts between time series, mean, linear, and
quadratic trends, and head motion parameter estimates. To study the
relationship of the frontoparietal attention network with topographic
areas in frontal and parietal cortex, attended conditions were contrasted
with unattended conditions. Statistical maps were thresholded at an F
score of 10.80 ( p  0.001, uncorrected for multiple comparisons). Activated voxels were assigned to topographically organized areas in frontal
(FEF, PreCC/IFS) and parietal (IPS1–IPS5, SPL1) cortex, as described in
Definition of ROIs in topographically organized frontal and parietal cortex. All remaining activated voxels that were located outside of topographic frontal and parietal cortex were analyzed as “non-topographic”
frontal or parietal cortex, respectively. The only exception was activated
voxels located in the region of the human SEF in dorsomedial prefrontal
cortex, which is an area that lacks topographic organization, but can be
identified based on anatomical and functional characteristics. All analyses were performed separately for the RH and LH. Thus, activity related
to spatial attention was analyzed in 14 PPC areas (IPS1–IPS5, SPL1, and
non-topographic PPC in RH and LH) and seven frontal areas (FEF,
PreCC/IFS, and non-topographic frontal cortex in RH and LH, and SEF).
To quantify the overlap between the frontoparietal attention network
and the topographically organized areas, the volume of the overlapping
regions was then computed. To report Talairach coordinates, the statistical maps and structural images for each subject were transformed into
Talairach space (Tables 1, 2).
Voxels that were assigned to topographic areas were often contiguous
with clusters that were located outside topographically organized cortex.
Therefore, it is possible that all of the activations obtained in the spatial
attention task would overlap with topographically organized areas if a
stringent enough threshold were applied. To address the possibility that
the results were affected by arbitrarily chosen statistical thresholds used
to generate statistical maps in the spatial attention task, a control analysis
was conducted at different significance levels, one with a more liberal
threshold ( p  0.01) than the one used in our main analysis ( p  0.001)
Table 1. Talairach coordinates and activated volumes for the memory-guided saccade task
Volume (mm 3)
% Overlap with attention activations
Frontal areas
4012 (467)
3876 (332)
2491 (335)
2728 (452)
2306 (533)
1774 (487)
1375 (208)
1219 (292)
2062 (497)
1646 (291)
1900 (235)
1583 (209)
1959 (353)
1630 (159)
1389 (229)
1505 (339)
Values are means (SEM) of peak coordinates in millimeters. N, Number of subjects showing significant clusters of activation; % Overlap with attention activations, Out of the total number of voxels responding to the memory-guided
saccade task, the percentage that also responded to spatial attention. L, Left; R, right.
Table 2. Talairach coordinates and activated volumes for the spatial attention task
Volume (mm 3)
%Overlapwithtopographiccortex
p  0.0001
Frontal areas
1734 (324)
2858 (321)
1282 (400)
1990 (331)
1468 (240)
7011 (1559)
7028 (1214)
Valuesaremeans(SEM)ofpeakcoordinatesinmillimeters.N,Numberofsubjectsshowingsignificantclustersofactivation;%Overlapwithtopographiccortex,Outofthetotalnumberofvoxelsrespondingtothespatialattentiontask,
the percentage that was topographically organized. p values refer to the threshold of activation for the spatial attention task (main analysis: p  0.001; control analyses: p  0.01, p  0.0001). L, Left; R, right.
150 • J. Neurosci., January 6, 2010 • 30(1):148–160
Szczepanski et al. • Mechanisms of Spatial Attention Control
and one with a more conservative threshold ( p  0.0001). We hypothesized that if different thresholds affected voxels assigned to topographic
and non-topographic regions similarly, the proportion of voxels assigned
to the different regions would remain the same regardless of the statistical
threshold for the spatial attention task. Thus, even though the absolute
number of voxels may increase or decrease in each area as a function of
threshold, such an increase or decrease would be equally distributed
across the different areas. Alternatively, if for example, non-topographic
activations located adjacent to topographic areas were merely artifacts of
a liberal threshold, the proportion of voxels would shift toward those
located in topographic areas, which would present a confound for the
data analysis. We calculated the average number of voxels activated in
the spatial attention task that were located in topographic regions and
in non-topographic regions for each of the three thresholds and then
determined the proportion of voxels (topographic relative to nontopographic). One-way repeated-measures ANOVAs were performed
for each hemisphere and region of interest (ROI) to determine
whether the proportions differed depending on the threshold chosen
for the spatial attention task.
A quantitative analysis of the time series of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) signals obtained in the spatial attention task was
performed for each ROI and in each subject. The time series analysis was
based on activated voxels yielded by the contrast attended versus unattended (thresholded at an F score of 10.80, p  0.001, uncorrected for
multiple comparisons). The raw fMRI signals were extracted from the
motion-corrected and undistorted echoplanar imaging images. Linear,
mean, and quadratic trends were removed from the time series, and the
signals were then averaged across all voxels within a given ROI. fMRI
signals for a given experimental condition (i.e., “attended,” or “unattended”) were normalized to the mean intensity of the four time points
preceding the particular condition to yield percentage signal change and
sorted by the location at which the visual stimuli were presented (LVF or
RVF). Mean signal changes were then derived for each of the conditions
by averaging the eight peak intensities of the fMRI time series obtained in
a given condition. The mean signals within each of the ROIs in the LH
and RH were further quantified for each subject by defining an Attention
Modulation Index [AMI  (Ratt  Runatt)/(Ratt  Runatt); R, response as
mean signal change; att, directed attention to the target location; unatt,
peripheral stimuli ignored], which is an estimate of the magnitude of
attentional effects on visually evoked activity. The AMI ranges from 1
to 1, with positive values indicating response enhancement and negative values indicating response suppression. AMIs were defined separately for presentation conditions in the RVF and LVF. A Lateralization
Index (LI) was defined for each of the ROIs in the LH and RH for each
subject to assess the degree to which the fMRI signals obtained in the
attended condition showed a preference for contra- or ipsilateral presentations [LI  (Rcontra  Ripsi)/(Rcontra  Ripsi); contra, attention to contralateral presentations; ipsi, attention to ipsilateral presentations].
Positive values indicate stronger responses to contralateral than ipsilateral presentations; negative values indicate the opposite. AMIs and LIs
for each ROI of right and left frontal cortex and PPC were then
averaged across subjects to yield group data. Statistical significance of
mean signal changes, AMIs and LIs were assessed using repeatedmeasures ANOVAs and paired t tests.
Since each ROI contained a different number of voxels, we considered
the possibility that some of the results were due to volume differences
among ROIs. To account for volume effects, a control analysis was conducted in which a fixed number of 20 voxels were randomly chosen from
each ROI. The same analyses and statistical tests as described above were
conducted for the fixed-volume ROIs in each subject and in the group.
To assess the spatial specificity of attention signals in voxels assigned to
topographic areas, voxels within frontal cortex and PPC that responded
to both tasks were separated into four ROIs based upon saccade phase
(that is, whether they most strongly responded to memory-guided saccades made into the upper right, lower right, upper left, or lower left
visual quadrants). Using Pearson’s linear correlation, the time course of
each voxel for the attention task was then correlated with the time course
of every other voxel within the same ROI and between ROIs. This analysis
yielded a 4  4 correlation matrix for each lobe (frontal cortex and PPC)
and for each subject: the average pairwise correlation between spatial
attention time courses of voxels within the same ROI as compared to the
average pairwise correlation between voxel time courses within each of
the different ROIs. The correlation of the time course of each voxel to
itself was removed, as not to artificially inflate the average correlation
values. Subjects’ correlation matrices were then averaged to obtain a
group correlation matrix separately for frontal cortex and PPC.
If the same voxels were responsive when subjects both covertly attended and performed memory-guided saccades to a particular quadrant, then the average pairwise correlation between attention time
courses of voxels within the same ROI (defined by saccade phase) should
be higher than the average pairwise correlation between voxels belonging
to different ROIs. To test this hypothesis, we first calculated the difference between the average of the on-diagonal elements and the average of
the off-diagonal elements of the 4  4 correlation matrix (the OnOff
measure) for voxels within frontal cortex and PPC. The OnOff measure
provided a single number that described how well attention time courses
correlated between voxels within the same ROI versus those within different ROIs .
A permutation test was then used to determine the significance of the
OnOff correlation measure for the group data. For each subject and
separately for frontal cortex and PPC, the location of each voxel was
scrambled, so that a voxel was randomly assigned to a ROI and a new
correlation matrix was calculated. Individual correlation matrices were
averaged to create a new group correlation matrix and a new OnOff
value. Ten thousand iterations were performed, which generated a distribution of OnOff values. A p value was then determined using the
generated distributions for frontal cortex and PPC and the actual OnOff
values obtained from the experiment.
Definition of ROIs in topographically organized frontal and parietal cortex. Topographic areas in frontal and parietal cortex can be defined using
a variety of tasks, including passive viewing of a colorful and dynamic
periodic mapping stimulus that is also typically used to determine retinotopic maps in visual cortex , a visual spatial attention
task , or a memory-guided
saccade task, as used here . The goal of all the different approaches is
to map retinotopically organized areas in higher-order cortex and to
define ROIs that can be used for subsequent independent investigations
of their response properties (e.g., spatial attention functions, in the case
of the current study). This overall approach is not different from that
taken in many studies investigating response functions of retinotopic
visual cortex . We will
describe the task and data analysis procedures only briefly, since they
have been documented in several previous studies .
A memory-guided saccade task, in which subjects performed delayed
saccades to multiple peripheral locations arranged clockwise around a
central fixation point, was used to identify topographically organized
areas in frontal and parietal cortex . The task was
performed at eight or 12 peripheral locations arranged clockwise around
a central fixation point, with peripheral locations appearing 10  2.5°
from fixation. Stimulus eccentricity in the memory-guided saccade
task was similar to the stimulus eccentricity used in the spatial attention task. Therefore, both tasks covered approximately the same visual space. A Fourier analysis was used to identify voxels activated by
the task . To correctly match the
phase delay of the time series of each voxel to the phase of the visual
stimulus/saccade direction, and thereby localize the region of the visual
field to which the underlying neurons responded best, the response
phases were corrected for the hemodynamic lag (3 s). Contiguous clusters of voxels within frontal and parietal cortex activated by the memoryguided saccade task, showing a smooth progression of phase values
corresponding to different visual field target locations and displaying
phase reversals at shared boundaries between areas, were defined as topographically organized ROIs.
In PPC, six topographically organized areas were identified in each
hemisphere within a contiguous band of activation located along the
Szczepanski et al. • Mechanisms of Spatial Attention Control
J. Neurosci., January 6, 2010 • 30(1):148–160 • 151
IPS and adjacent areas. Each area contained a
representation of the contralateral visual
hemifield and was separated from neighboring areas by alternating representations of
the upper or lower vertical meridian (Fig.
2A, bottom) .
Two areas were located in the posterior portion of the IPS (IPS1, IPS2), immediately anterior to visual area V7, and three areas were
located anterior to IPS1/2, in the anterior/
lateral branch of the IPS (IPS3, IPS4), and
extending anteriorally into the intersection
between the IPS and the postcentral sulcus
(IPS5). An additional area branched off the
medial border of the most superior IPS subregions and extended into the SPL, referred
to as SPL1 (Fig. 2A, bottom). IPS1 was identified in only five out of nine subjects (S1, S4,
S7–S9) due to differences in slice acquisition
between subjects. IPS2–IPS5 and SPL1 were
all identified in eight out of nine subjects (S1,
Two topographically organized areas were
identified in frontal cortex, one area at the
junction of the superior branch of precentral
cortex and the posterior portion of the superior
frontal sulcus, in the region of the human FEF,
and a second area at the junction of the inferior
branch of precentral cortex and the posterior
portion of the inferior frontal sulcus (PreCC/
IFS) (Fig. 2A, top). The FEF was identified in
all nine subjects, while the PreCC/IFS was
identified in eight out of nine subjects (S1, S3–
S9). Mean Talairach coordinates and activated
volumes of frontal and parietal areas are given
in Table 1.
Eye movement recordings. Eye movements
were monitored during scanning sessions in
seven out of nine subjects (S3–S9) while performing the memory-guided
saccade task and in five out of nine (S4–S6, S8, S9) subjects while performing the spatial attention task. The other subjects could not be
eye-tracked due to technical issues at the time of the scan session. A
stimulus screen was used with a hole of 1.9° in diameter located at one
edge through which a subject’s eye was viewed with the help of a
telephoto lens (Model 504 with Long Range Optics, Applied Science
Laboratories). The eye position was displayed in real time on a video
monitor in the scanner control room, superimposed on the stimulus
image. The experimenter observed the eye position display to ensure
that the subjects were alert and performing the appropriate task,
which was to either make a saccade in the correct direction during the
memory-guided saccade task, or to maintain fixation throughout the
spatial attention task. Eye position data were recorded on the stimulus
computer through a serial interface with the eye-tracker control module. The eye tracking system, which measured the eye position at a rate
of 60 Hz, had a resolution of 0.14° and detected differences in relative
eye position of 0.25°.
Ilab software was used to analyze the eye movement
data. Eye position data were output as raw scene camera pixel locations
and converted from pixel values to degrees of visual angle. For the
memory-guided saccade task, we calculated the percentage of saccades
correctly made to a target location over an entire scan session for each
subject . For the spatial
attention task, we calculated separate frequency histograms of the vertical and horizontal eye position data for each subject. Data collected during periods of covert attention to each of the four quadrants and during
periods when stimuli were presented in each of the four quadrants, but
subjects were not attending peripherally, were analyzed separately. t tests
were then used to determine whether eye movements systematically deviated in any direction during each of the eight conditions. Additionally,
one eye movement region (EMR), 1°  1° in size, was defined around the
central RSVP task and the number of times the gaze left this EMR was
calculated.
Relationship of the frontoparietal attention network and
topographic areas
A spatial attention task was used to identify the frontoparietal
attention network and to examine attention-related signals quantitatively in topographic areas of frontal and parietal cortex. In
the attended condition, subjects were cued to covertly direct attention to one of four stimuli presented in the periphery of the
right or the left visual field and to detect the occurrences of a
target stimulus (Fig. 1). The same stimuli were also probed in an
unattended condition during which subjects performed a demanding letter detection task at fixation. Subjects detected on
average 88.5  2.7% (mean, SEM) of the targets presented in the
RVF and 90.8  1.9% of the targets presented in the LVF, the
difference of which was not significant ( p  0.20).
As in previous studies , attention-related activations of the frontoparietal network
were defined by contrasting periods of directed attention to peripheral stimuli with periods in which the same peripheral stimuli
were ignored ( p  0.001, uncorrected for multiple comparisons). The extent of the activations for one representative subject
is shown projected onto the reconstructed cortical surface in Figure 2B (see supplemental Figs. 1, 2 for additional subjects, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material). Two
Topographicareasinfrontalandparietalcortexandthefrontoparietalattentionnetwork.Activationsprojectedonto
an inflated surface of the subject’s brain within frontal (top) and parietal cortex (bottom) from a representative subject (S9).
A, Topographic maps were obtained using the memory-guided saccade task. The color legend is shown (middle) for voxels
whose responses were correlated with the fundamental frequency of the remembered location, indicating the phase of the
response. The visual field color legend labels the saccade direction/memorized location within the visual field to the voxel that is
mostresponsive.BoundariesbetweenPPCareasareoutlinedinwhite;continuouslinesdenotetheupperverticalmeridian,broken
lines denote the lower vertical meridian. Topographic areas within frontal cortex (FEF, PreCC/IFS) and PPC (IPS1–IPS5, SPL1) are
labeled.B,Thefrontoparietalspatialattentionnetworkwasdefinedbasedonthecontrast“attendtotheperiphery”versus“attend
tofixation”( p0.001).Asignificantoverlapofvoxelsactivatedinthespatialattentiontaskwithtopographicfrontalandparietal
areas is immediately obvious. CS, Central sulcus.
152 • J. Neurosci., January 6, 2010 • 30(1):148–160
Szczepanski et al. • Mechanisms of Spatial Attention Control
clusters of activated voxels were localized bilaterally in superior
and inferior lateral frontal cortex: the first in the region of the FEF
and the second in the region of PreCC/IFS. A third region in
dorsomedial frontal cortex (DMFC) was also activated (see Fig.
8A). This area has been previously observed in visuospatial attention tasks and is commonly referred to as
the putative human SEF. In PPC, a large swath of activation was
found bilaterally along the IPS, and extending medially into the
SPL. These clusters of activations in frontal and parietal cortex
were found consistently across subjects (see Table 2 for mean
Talairach coordinates and volumes) and confirm many previous
studies of the frontoparietal attention network .
To investigate the overlap of activations evoked during the
spatial attention task with topographically identified frontal and
parietal areas in the same subjects, the activations from both tasks
were projected onto the cortical surface in each subject (Fig. 2),
and topographic area boundaries were projected onto the activations evoked during the spatial attention task (supplemental Figs.
1, 2, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material). A
considerable overlap is immediately obvious from comparing the
activations obtained with the spatial attention task (Fig. 2B; supplemental Figs. 1, 2, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material) to topographic frontal and parietal cortex (Fig.
2A). To quantify the overlap between the frontoparietal attention
network and the topographically organized areas, the volume of
the overlapping regions was computed. In frontal cortex, of the
average 3016 mm 3 within the LH and the average 4848 mm 3
within the RH that responded to the spatial attention task (not
including the SEF), 50  7% (1513 mm 3) and 46  7% (2240
mm 3) of the volumes were located in topographically organized
cortex, respectively (Table 2). In PPC, of the average 7,011 mm 3
within the LH and the average 7028 mm 3 within the RH that
responded to the spatial attention task, 57  5% (4005 mm 3) and
58  7% (4049 mm 3) of the volumes were located in topographically organized cortex, respectively (Table 2). Activated volumes
evoked by the spatial attention task did not differ between hemispheres ( p  0.30), but were significantly larger in parietal than
in frontal topographic cortex (F(1,7)  9.65, p  0.05).
We considered the possibility that the extent to which the
frontoparietal attention network overlapped with topographic
frontal and parietal cortex was an artifact of the particular significance criterion applied to the statistical maps of the spatial
attention task. A control analysis was conducted using two additional statistical thresholds, one more liberal ( p  0.01) and one
more conservative ( p  0.0001; for details, see Materials and
Methods). We found that, regardless of the threshold value used
for the data obtained in the spatial attention task, the proportion
of voxels located in topographically organized areas to those located in non-topographic cortex was similar in frontal ( p  0.40)
and parietal cortex ( p  0.90) (see Table 2 for percentage of
overlap for each statistical threshold). Therefore, it appears that
thresholding the statistical maps with different significance criteria had a similar effect on all of the regions activated by spatial
attention, regardless of their association with topographic or
non-topographic cortex, suggesting that the activations in nontopographic areas of the spatial attention network were not artifacts of the analysis.
Spatial specificity of attention-related activations within
topographic areas
To further characterize the relationship between attentionrelated activations and topographically organized areas, we investigated the spatial specificity of voxels activated in the spatial
attention task relative to their location in the topographic maps.
If attention-related activations are represented in a spatially specific manner in topographic cortex, one would expect that the
voxels maximally responsive to attention directed to a particular
location in the visual field would align with parts of the topographic map representing saccade directions to the same portion
of visual space, and less so with regions representing other saccade directions. To test this prediction, voxels within frontal cortex and PPC that responded to both tasks were separated into
four ROIs based upon saccade phase (that is, whether they most
strongly responded to memory-guided saccades made into the
upper right, lower right, upper left, or lower left visual quadrants). Using Pearson’s linear correlation, the time series of fMRI
signals of each voxel obtained in the spatial attention task was
then correlated with the time series of every other voxel within
the same ROI and between different ROIs. This analysis yielded a
4  4 correlation matrix, which contained the average pairwise
correlation between spatial attention signal time series of voxels within the same ROI, as compared to the average pairwise
correlation between voxel time series within each of the different ROIs in each lobe (frontal and parietal) and for each
subject. Subjects’ correlation matrices were then averaged to
obtain a group correlation matrix for voxels in frontal cortex
(Fig. 3A) and PPC (Fig. 3B).
If voxels that were responsive when subjects covertly attended
to a particular location overlapped with regions that represented
saccade directions to the same location, then the average pairwise
correlation between attention time courses of voxels within the
same ROI (defined by saccade phase) should be higher than the
Spatialspecificityofattention-relatedactivations.A,B,Voxelswithinfrontalcortex (A) and parietal cortex (B) were separated according to memory-guided saccade phase, to
theupperleft(UL),lowerleft(LL),upperright(UR),orlowerright(LR)visualfield.Theaverage
pairwisecorrelationwasthencomputedbetweenspatialattentiontimeseriesofvoxelswithin
thesameROIorbetweentimeseriesofvoxelswithindifferentROIs.Eachgraphrepresentsthe
correlation values averaged across subjects in a group correlation matrix.
Szczepanski et al. • Mechanisms of Spatial Attention Control
J. Neurosci., January 6, 2010 • 30(1):148–160 • 153
average pairwise correlation between voxels belonging to different ROIs. To test this hypothesis, we first calculated the difference
between the average of the on-diagonal values and the average of
the off-diagonal values of the 4  4 correlation matrix (the OnOff
measure) for voxels within frontal cortex and PPC. The OnOff
measure provided a single number that described how well attention time courses correlated between voxels within the same ROI
versus those within different ROIs .
A permutation test (see Materials and Methods) revealed that
the OnOff measures calculated from the group correlation matrices were significant in both frontal cortex ( p  0.001) and PPC
( p  0.001). That is, the average pairwise correlation between
attention time series of voxels within the same ROI was higher in
both frontal cortex (average correlation of on-diagonal values:
0.086) and PPC (average correlation of on-diagonal values:
0.083) than the average pairwise correlation between attention
time series of voxels belonging to different ROIs (average correlation of off-diagonal values: 0.034, frontal; 0.041, PPC). This
analysis suggests that the direction of attention can be predicted
from the saccade direction represented in the map, thereby demonstrating the spatial specificity of attention-related signals.
Spatial attention signals in topographic frontal and
parietal areas
General response characteristics
To quantify the attention effects obtained in topographic regions
of frontal and parietal cortex, an analysis of the fMRI time series
was performed. All quantitative time series analyses were based
upon voxels activated by the contrast attended versus unattended. Figure 4 depicts the fMRI time series collapsed across all
voxels assigned to topographically organized areas in frontal (A)
and parietal cortex (B) that were activated when subjects attended to the peripheral stimuli (solid lines), presented to the
right visual field (RVF, blue lines) or left visual field (LVF, red
lines), and when they ignored the same stimuli (broken lines).
Mean signal changes evoked during directed attention to the
RVF and LVF and during the unattended conditions were examined in each of the topographically organized areas in frontal
(FEF and PreCC/IFS) (Fig. 5A) and parietal cortex (IPS1–IPS5,
SPL1) (Fig. 5B) in the LH and RH. When collapsed across hemispheres and all topographic areas in frontal and parietal cortex,
mean signal changes predicted the direction of attention to the
LVF or RVF with stronger responses when attention was directed
to the contralateral (1.13  0.04, mean signal change, SEM) relative to the ipsilateral (0.82  0.03, mean signal change, SEM)
visual field (F(1,7)  25.97, p  0.001). More specifically, topographically organized regions within frontal cortex produced significantly greater responses when subjects attended to the
contralateral versus the ipsilateral visual field in both right and
left FEF (LH: t(8)  6.86, p  0.001; RH: t(8)  5.62, p  0.001)
and PreCC/IFS (LH: t(7)  5.20, p  0.001; RH: t(7)  3.45, p 
0.05) (Fig. 5A). Similarly, mean signal changes were significantly
greater when subjects attended to the contralateral versus ipsilateral visual field in IPS1 (LH: t(4)  8.27, p  0.001; RH: t(4) 
5.12, p  0.01), IPS2 (LH: t(7)  6.06, p  0.001; RH: t(7)  3.11,
p  0.05), IPS3 (LH: t(7)  2.86, p  0.05; RH: t(7)  4.00, p 
0.01), IPS4 (LH: t(7)  5.27, p  0.001; RH: t(7)  3.68, p  0.01),
IPS5 (LH: t(7)  4.73, p  0.01; RH: t(7)  4.72, p  0.01) and
SPL1 (RH: t(7)  5.29, p  0.001) (Fig. 5B). Thus, analyses of the
mean signal changes revealed a contralateral bias of attentionrelated signals in all topographic frontal and parietal areas, with
the exception of left SPL1, and a double dissociation of visual field
between the RH and LH. Responses evoked by attention to ipsilateral visual stimuli were also significantly enhanced compared
to the corresponding unattended condition when collapsed
across all topographic areas (t(7)  6.56, p  0.001). Notably, no
bias was found in the unattended condition, in which stimuli
evoked a similarly small response regardless of where they were
presented in the visual field (all p values 0.10). Thus, the spatial
bias toward the contralateral side occurred as a result of the spatial allocation of attention.
Interestingly, only a small volume, an average of 158.4  39.0
mm 3 (SEM), in fewer subjects (n  5) was activated during the
spatial attention task within left SPL1. There were no differences
between attended and unattended conditions in left SPL1 ( p 
0.10) and no differences when subjects attended to the RVF or the
LVF ( p  0.10) (Fig. 5B). This was reflected in the significant
visual field  hemisphere interaction in SPL1 (F(1,4)  8.88, p 
0.05) as well as the significant area  hemisphere  visual field
interaction across PPC areas (IPS1–IPS5, SPL1) (F(5,20)  2.82,
p  0.05). This finding suggests the existence of a hemispheric
asymmetry in PPC regarding the areas that carry spatially specific
attention signals. All areas along the IPS showed attentional modulation with a contralateral bias, whereas only right, but not left,
SPL1 exhibited such response characteristics.
TimeseriesoffMRIattentionsignalsintopographicregionsoffrontalandparietal
cortex.A,B,Spatialattentionsignalsaveragedacrosssubjectsintopographicregionsoffrontal
(A;n9)andparietalcortex(B;n8)areshownseparatelyforeachhemisphere.Datawere
averagedacrossalltopographicfrontal(FEF,PreCC/IFS;A)andparietalvoxels(IPS1–IPS5,SPL1;
B) that were activated by a spatial attention task (attended vs unattended contrast). Solid
curves indicate activity evoked by the attended conditions (ATT) and dashed curves indicate
activity evoked by the unattended (UNATT) conditions. Red curves correspond to directed attention to the LVF, while blue curves correspond to directed attention to the RVF. Error bars
indicate SEM across subjects.
154 • J. Neurosci., January 6, 2010 • 30(1):148–160
Szczepanski et al. • Mechanisms of Spatial Attention Control
Magnitude of spatial attention effects
An AMI (see Materials and Methods) was calculated to estimate
the magnitude of attention effects on visually evoked activity. The
AMI is a quantitative measure that allows a direct comparison of
the degree to which each ROI was modulated by attention. The
index was calculated separately for attention directed to the RVF
(AMIRVF) or LVF (AMILVF). The AMI ranges from 1 to 1,
with positive values indicating response enhancement and negative values indicating response suppression. The AMIRVF and
AMILVF values were plotted against one
another for each frontal (Fig. 6, squares)
and parietal (Fig. 6, circles) ROI and for
each subject. Open symbols in Figure 6
denote topographic areas, and closed
symbols denote non-topographic areas.
In the majority of cases, ROIs in the RH
(red symbols) had greater AMILVF than
AMIRVF values. This places them below
the equality line and indicates greater increases in activity when attending to the
LVF (contralateral) than when attending
to the RVF (ipsilateral). In contrast, most
ROIs in the LH (blue symbols) had greater
AMIRVF than AMILVF values, and were located above the equality line. Topographic
ROIs within the RH of frontal cortex (red,
open, square symbols) had mean AMILVF
values (0.58  0.06) that were significantly
larger than their respective mean AMIRVF
values (0.44  0.05; t(7)  3.20, p  0.05).
Topographic ROIs within the RH of PPC
(red open, circle symbols) also had significantly larger AMILVF (0.55  0.06) than
AMIRVF values (0.39  0.04; t(7)  2.95,
p  0.05). The opposite pattern was found
for topographic ROIs within the LH of
frontal cortex (blue, open, square symbols;
AMIRVF: 0.65  0.06; AMILVF: 0.43 
0.05; t(7)  2.52, p  0.05) and PPC
(blue, open, circle symbols; AMIRVF:
0.66  0.08; AMILVF: 0.36  0.05; t(7) 
3.90, p  0.01). There were no differences
in AMI values between frontal and parietal ROIs or between hemispheres (all p
values 0.10).
Hemispheric asymmetries of spatial
attention signals
To quantify the strength of the attention
effects to the contra- or ipsilateral visual
field, a Laterality Index (LI; see Materials
and Methods) was computed. The LI values were calculated separately for each of
the ROIs within frontal and parietal cortex (Fig. 7), for each hemisphere and each
subject and were then averaged across
subjects to yield group data. Positive values indicate stronger responses to contralateral than ipsilateral presentations;
negative values indicate the opposite.
There were no differences in LI values
between hemispheres after collapsing
across all topographic areas ( p  0.30);
the mean LI value across left topographic
ROIs was 0.17  0.02 (mean, SEM), whereas the mean LI value
across right topographic ROIs was 0.15  0.02 (Fig. 7), suggesting that the contralateral spatial biasing signals generated by the
two hemispheres were balanced. This overall balance, however,
resulted from two notable asymmetries. Within frontal cortex,
attention signals showed a significantly greater contralateral bias
in left than in right FEF (t(8)  2.81, p  0.05). Similarly, within
PPC, left IPS1 and IPS2 showed a stronger contralateral bias than
Mean signal changes in frontal and parietal areas. A, B, Mean signal changes obtained during the spatial attention
taskaveragedacrosssubjectsareshownforareaswithinfrontal(A)andparietalcortex(B).Foreachsubject,meansignalchange
wasdefinedastheaverageoftheeightpeakintensitiesofthefMRIsignalobtainedduringeachcondition.Meansignalsareshown
separately for each hemisphere and for different ROIs: voxels activated by the spatial attention task (attended vs unattended
contrast)thatwereassignedtotopographicareas(Topo)andthosethatdidnotoverlapwithtopographicareas(Non-Topo).Mean
responses of activations assigned to topographic areas in frontal (FEF and PreCC/IFS) and parietal cortex (IPS1–IPS5, SPL1) are
shown separately for each area. Responses were averaged across all frontal and parietal voxels that responded to the spatial
attention task but were not topographically organized, with the exception of the SEF. Solid bars indicate activity evoked by the
attendedconditions(ATT)andhatchedbarsindicateactivityevokedbytheunattended(UNATT)conditions.Whitebarscorrespond
to directed attention to the LVF, while black bars correspond to directed attention to the RVF. Error bars indicate SEM across
subjects. *p  0.05; **p  0.01; ***p  0.001.
Szczepanski et al. • Mechanisms of Spatial Attention Control
J. Neurosci., January 6, 2010 • 30(1):148–160 • 155
the corresponding right areas (IPS1, t(4)  3.25, p  0.05; IPS2,
t(7)  3.12, p  0.05). No significant differences between hemispheres were found in PreCC/IFS, IPS3, IPS4, or IPS5 (all p values
0.40). SPL1 showed a pattern that was different from all of the
other areas, since only right SPL1 carried attention signals that
showed a strong contralateral bias (t(4)  3.04, p  0.05). It
appears that the stronger contralateral bias generated by left FEF
and IPS1/2 counterbalances the asymmetry imposed by the exclusive involvement of right SPL1 in spatial attention. Thus, the
LI analysis revealed a second asymmetry in attention effects
across hemispheres, such that left FEF and areas in the most
posterior aspect of the left IPS (IPS1/2) showed a stronger contralateral bias than their RH counterparts.
Since each ROI contained a different number of voxels, we
considered the possibility that the results were influenced by volume differences among ROIs. Therefore, we conducted an analysis in which a fixed number of 20 voxels were randomly chosen
from each ROI. The same analyses as described above were conducted for the fixed-volume ROIs in each subject and in the
group. All statistical results described above were confirmed in
this analysis indicating that the results were not affected by differences in activated volumes.
Attention-related signals in non-topographic regions
All of the voxels that responded during the spatial attention task,
but did not overlap with topographically organized areas of frontal and parietal cortex, were analyzed separately and assigned to
non-topographic frontal and parietal ROIs. The only exception
to this was the voxels within DMFC, which were analyzed independently as the putative human SEF. In contrast to the topographically organized areas of frontoparietal cortex, directing
attention to the contralateral or ipsilateral visual field did not
differentially modulate signals within the non-topographic regions located adjacent to the FEF or the PreCC/IFS (all p
values 0.20) (Fig. 5A), nor within non-topographic regions
of PPC ( p  0.05) (Fig. 5B), even though these areas showed
strong attentional response enhancement effects (main effect of
attention: F(1,7)  70.56, p  0.001). Correspondingly, the
AMILVF and AMIRVF values for non-topographic ROIs within the
RH (red, closed symbols) and LH (blue, closed symbols) of frontal (square symbols; RH AMILVF: 0.62  0.11, AMIRVF: 0.62 
0.08; LH AMILVF: 0.75  0.16, AMIRVF: 0.66  0.13) and parietal
cortex (circle symbols; RH AMILVF: 0.52  0.14, AMIRVF: 0.56 
0.08; LH AMILVF: 0.53  0.06, AMIRVF: 0.42  0.09) did not
differ from one another (all p values 0.10), and thus fell close to
the equality line (Fig. 6). In addition, no significant differences
were found between LI values within the LH and the RH of nontopographic areas of FEF, PreCC/IFS, or PPC (all p values 0.20).
Thus, the functional role of regions within non-topographic higherordercortexmaybefundamentallydifferentintheattentionalselection process from that of regions within topographic cortex (see
Discussion).
In addition to the frontal and parietal areas discussed thus far,
the spatial attention task also activated a portion of DMFC, in the
region of the putative human SEF (Fig. 8A). However, thus far,
no topographic organization has been found in this region of
cortex . The human SEF is a midline structure that cannot be easily separated into right and left hemispheric components. Analyses therefore initially focused on
regions of bilateral activations (see Table 2 for Talairach coordinates and mean activated volume). The fMRI time series within
SEF were examined separately for activity evoked during the attended and unattended conditions and for attention directed to
the RVF or LVF (Fig. 8B). Analyses of mean signal changes demonstrated a main effect of attention (Fig. 8C; attended versus
unattended: F(1,8)  68.43, p  0.001), thereby confirming several previous reports .
However, there were no differences in modulation when subjects
attended to the RVF or LVF (F(1,8)  0.22, p  0.60).
SEF voxels were next examined separately by hemisphere.
Only voxels that were located clearly in one hemisphere were
used in this additional analysis. All voxels that were located in the
midline, and could therefore not be unambiguously assigned to
one or the other hemisphere, were excluded from the analysis.
Mean signal changes did not differ when subjects were attending
to the contralateral versus ipsilateral visual field in the voxels of
left SEF (F(1,8)  3.01, p  0.10), nor in voxels of the right SEF
(F(1,8)  0.01, p  0.90). In addition, there were no differences
AttentionModulationIndex.Eachpointofthegraphrepresentsasinglesubject’sAMI
value for a given ROI that was calculated based on mean signal changes obtained from voxels activatedduringthespatialattentiontask(attendedvsunattendedcontrast).Dataareshownseparately
for topographically organized ROIs (open symbols) within frontal (FEF and PreCC/IFS; squares) and
parietal cortex (IPS1–IPS5, SPL1, excluding left SPL1; circles), as well as non-topographically organizedROIs(closedsymbols)withinfrontalandparietalcortex.TwoAMIswerecalculatedforeachROI
reflectingattentionalmodulationwhensubjectsattendedtotheRVF(AMIRVF)ortotheLVF(AMILVF)
andareplottedagainstoneanother.BluesymbolsrepresentLHROIsandredsymbolsrepresentRH
ROIs.ForAMIdefinitions,seeMaterialsandMethods.
Laterality Index. LIs for each topographic ROI and hemisphere were calculated
basedonmeansignalchangesobtainedfromvoxelsactivatedduringthespatialattentiontask
(attendedvsunattendedcontrast).LIvaluesareshownseparatelyforeachhemisphereandfor
each topographic ROI, averaged across subjects. Black bars correspond to LH ROIs, white bars
correspondtoRHROIs.ErrorbarsindicateSEMacrosssubjects.*p0.05.ForLIdefinitions,see
Materials and Methods.
156 • J. Neurosci., January 6, 2010 • 30(1):148–160
Szczepanski et al. • Mechanisms of Spatial Attention Control
between LIs in left or right SEF (t(8)  0.76, p  0.50). It therefore
appears that the human SEF is modulated by spatial attention,
regardless of the specific direction of attention in the visual field.
Eye movement controls
Eye movement data were collected during scanning sessions for
five subjects (S4–S6, S8, S9) performing the spatial attention task
(see Materials and Methods for further details). Frequency histograms of the vertical and horizontal eye position data were calculated separately for each subject and for each of the experimental
conditions. The maximum difference in mean horizontal and
vertical eye positions among these conditions was 0.09 and 0.07
degrees, respectively. There were no systematic horizontal or vertical eye deviations between any of the different experimental
conditions (all p values 0.10). Additionally, a small window of
1°  1° in size was defined around the central fixation letter, and
the number of times that the gaze left this window was calculated.
Fixation was well maintained and almost never left the window
surrounding the central RSVP task. Of the horizontal and vertical
position samples, 99.3  0.2% (mean, SEM) were within this
region during a given scan session. This confirms that subjects
maintained fixation throughout the spatial attention task and did
not shift their gaze location along with attention.
Discussion
We characterized attention signals in topographic frontal and
parietal areas using an ROI analysis in individual subjects performing a spatial attention task. Such an approach has been typically used when investigating functional response properties in
retinotopic visual cortex. Here, we extended this approach to
higher-order cortex to relate activations of the frontoparietal attention network to recently described frontal and parietal topographic areas for the first time and to quantitatively examine
spatial attention signals in these areas. We found a stronger spatial
bias toward the contralateral visual field in multiple higher-order
topographic areas. Regions outside topographic higher-order
cortex, including the SEF, showed a large attentional response
enhancement regardless of attentional allocation across the visual
field. Importantly, two hemispheric asymmetries were noted.
Only right SPL1, but not left SPL1, carried attention signals,
whereas left FEF and left IPS1/2 generated stronger contralateral
attention signals than their RH counterparts, thereby possibly
counteracting the right hemispheric asymmetry and balancing
the frontoparietal system for spatial attentional control.
Our results are in agreement with a number of key findings
concerning the frontoparietal attention network: our spatial attention task activated large regions of frontoparietal cortex in
both hemispheres , the extent of activations in the RH
tended to be larger than in the LH , and many voxels showed a preference for contralateral visual space . The ROI-based approach, however, extends these previous findings in several important ways. First, our study clarifies
the diverse literature on the “spatial specificity” of the frontoparietal attention network. While a few studies have demonstrated
contralateral preferences , the majority of studies have failed to find such
preferences . We demonstrate that the frontoparietal network can be subdivided into at least 17 subunits that in previous
studies have been treated as one entity, most likely leading to a
mix of results. Topographic subunits showed a contralateral bias,
but those located outside topographic higher-order cortex,
including the SEF, did not. These different subregions within
the frontoparietal attention network may play different roles
in the attentional selection process. Attention signals in nontopographic areas may subserve the general maintenance of an
attentional state throughout the task, thereby sustaining goaldirected behavior , whereas topographic areas may generate spatially specific biasing signals that
are fed back to retinotopic representations of the attended location in visual cortex . Second, our study systematically characterizes spatial attention signals in newly found higher-order topographic areas of
frontal and parietal cortex. These areas have been characterized
thus far with respect to motion signals , eye movement representations , object information (Konen and Kastner,
AttentionsignalsinSEF.A,Anexamplefromonesubject(S3)illustratestheextent
oftheactivationsfoundwiththespatialattentiontaskinhumanSEF(attendedvsunattended,
p0.001).B,C,fMRIsignals(B)andmeansignalchanges(C)obtainedinSEFaveragedacross
all subjects (n  9) during attended conditions (solid lines/bars) and unattended conditions
(dashedlines/hatchedbars)arealsoshown.Foreachsubject,meansignalchangewasdefined
as the average of the eight peak intensities of the fMRI signal obtained during each condition.
Red lines/bars indicate activity evoked by stimuli that appeared within the LVF, while blue
lines/bars indicate activity evoked by stimuli within the RVF. Error bars indicate SEM across
Szczepanski et al. • Mechanisms of Spatial Attention Control
J. Neurosci., January 6, 2010 • 30(1):148–160 • 157
2008b), and reaching movements . Here, we
add another response property by demonstrating that all topographic higher-order areas, with the exception of left SPL1, carry
contralateral spatial biasing signals. Studying the response properties of topographic cortical units will ultimately lead to a better
understanding of how these human areas compare to those that
are well characterized in the macaque brain . Third, we show asymmetries in the spatial biasing signals generated by several of these topographic areas across
hemispheres. And fourth, our findings inform spatial attentional control models that are largely based on behavioral
studies in neglect patients, particularly interhemispheric competition accounts .
Several theories based on behavioral data from neglect patients have been proposed to explain how the intact human
brain controls spatial attention. Heilman’s hemispatial theory
 has proposed that the RH
directs attention to both visual hemifields, whereas the LH directs
attention to the RVF only . This account
is supported by the far greater prevalence of neglect following RH
damage than LH damage as well as fMRI studies demonstrating a
greater extent of activations in the RH than in the LH . Alternatively,
Kinsbourne’s interhemispheric competition theory has proposed
an opponent processor control system, in which the two hemispheres each direct attention toward the contralateral visual field
(or via a cortico-subcortical loop involving the SC) and balance
one another through reciprocal inhibition .
This theory is supported by evidence that patients with extinction
will often manifest directional biases, favoring stimuli that are
relatively ipsilesional over those that are relatively contralesional
within and between visual fields. It therefore appears that with
damage to frontal and parietal cortex, there is a gradient of attention loss across the visual field, rather than a complete loss of
attention to one hemifield. The Kinsbourne model is further supported by evidence that neglect patients show improvement
when TMS is used to interfere with the control system of their
intact hemisphere , presumably by rebalancing the reciprocal inhibition between the two hemispheres.
The current study, based on data from the normal adult brain,
potentially provides a neural basis for interhemispheric competition accounts of spatial attentional control . Specifically, we propose an account (Fig. 9)
in which each of the LH and RH areas contributes to the control
of spatial attention across the visual field by generating a spatial
bias, or “attentional weight” , as indexed by
the LI, toward the contralateral hemifield. The sum of the weights
contributed by each area within a hemisphere constitutes the
overall spatial bias that can be exerted over contralateral space. As
shown by our LI analysis, the net output of attentional weights
generated by the two hemispheres is similar, indicating that the
control system is normally balanced. This balance across the
hemispheres may be achieved through reciprocal interhemispheric inhibition of corresponding areas. However, the higherorder control system appears to be complicated by the unique
role of right SPL1 (Fig. 9). The attentional weight generated by
this area was not counteracted by left SPL1. Instead, left FEF
and left IPS1/2 generated stronger weights than their righthemispheric counterparts, possibly to maintain a balanced distribution of attentional resources across the visual field. Thus, the
LH control system requires the cooperation of several distributed
subcomponents to balance the spatial biasing signals generated
by the two hemispheres.
Our spatial attentional control model makes a number of predictions that can account for key findings from behavioral studies
in neglect patients. First, our model predicts that dysfunction of
right PPC (including right SPL1) will result in a spatial bias toward the RVF and a neglect of the LVF due to the shift of the
residual attentional weights toward contralateral space. This is in
agreement with data from visuospatial neglect patients with damage to right parietal cortex . Second, our model
predicts that if either the left PPC alone or the left FEF and surrounding regions alone were dysfunctional, a strong neglect of
the RVF would be less likely to result, since the intact area
(e.g.,theFEFifPPCweredamaged)couldcompensatefortheother.
Therefore,isolated dysfunction of either left PPC or left FEF is less
likely to cause a strong shift in the weights toward the LVF. This is
in agreement with observations that right neglect occurs much
less frequently with isolated frontal or parietal lesions. Therefore,
together, the first two predictions are consistent with the notion
of right hemispheric dominance of attentional function . Third, our
model predicts that both left frontal cortex and left PPC need to
be dysfunctional before right neglect is strongly manifested. In
general, too few studies have examined patients in great enough
detail to determine the exact neural correlates of right neglect.
However, interestingly, right neglect has been reported to occur
more frequently in patients with extensive LH damage covering
frontal, parietal, and temporal cortex , thereby providing some
preliminary evidence to support our model predictions regarding
the incidence of right neglect.
Severe and protracted visuospatial neglect most often results
from either right IPL or right superior temporal gyrus (STG) damage, both of which are
quite different from regions typically identified by functional
brain imaging studies of spatial attention in healthy subjects. One
possible explanation is that the spatial attention deficits observed
in neglect after damage to the IPL/STG result from cortical dysfunction downstream from the structural lesion, perhaps due to
an interruption of connections between IPL/STG and the IPS or
SPL, or due to hypoperfused tissue in IPS/SPL .
Future studies using paradigms similar to the one in the present
Model of visuospatial attention. A new model of visuospatial attention control is
proposed, in which a number of topographically organized areas in frontoparietal cortex bias
attentiontothecontralateralvisualfield.ArrowstowardtheRVForLVFdenotethedirectionof
attentionalbiasforeachlobe(frontalcortexorPPC),whilethethicknessofeacharrowrefersto
the strength of the attentional bias, or attentional weight. For example, left FEF and PreCC/IFS
together exert a stronger contralateral bias toward the RVF than their RH counterparts exert
towardtheLVF.GraynodescorrespondtotopographicallyorganizedareaswithintheRH,while
black nodes correspond to those in the LH. Shaded nodes are located in frontal cortex, while
nonshaded nodes are located in PPC.
158 • J. Neurosci., January 6, 2010 • 30(1):148–160
Szczepanski et al. • Mechanisms of Spatial Attention Control
study in both healthy subjects and patients with brain lesions are
necessary to better understand and possibly resolve this longstanding discrepancy between the patient and neuroimaging
literature.