HAL Id: inria-00548597
 
Submitted on 20 Dec 2010
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
The 2005 PASCAL Visual Object Classes Challenge
Mark Everingham, Andrew Zisserman, Chris Williams, Luc van Gool, Moray
Allan, Christopher M. Bishop, Olivier Chapelle, Navneet Dalal, Thomas
Deselaers, Gyuri Dorkó, et al.
To cite this version:
Mark Everingham, Andrew Zisserman, Chris Williams, Luc van Gool, Moray Allan, et al.. The 2005
PASCAL Visual Object Classes Challenge. First PASCAL Machine Learning Challenges Workshop
(MLCW ’05), Apr 2005, Southampton, United Kingdom. pp.117–176, ￿10.1007/11736790_8￿. ￿inria-
The 2005 PASCAL Visual Object Classes
Mark Everingham1, Andrew Zisserman1, Christopher K. I. Williams2,
Luc Van Gool3, Moray Allan2, Christopher M. Bishop10, Olivier Chapelle11,
Navneet Dalal8, Thomas Deselaers4, Gyuri Dork´o8, Stefan Duﬀner6,
Jan Eichhorn11, Jason D. R. Farquhar12, Mario Fritz5, Christophe Garcia6,
Tom Griﬃths2, Frederic Jurie8, Daniel Keysers4, Markus Koskela7,
Jorma Laaksonen7, Diane Larlus8, Bastian Leibe5, Hongying Meng12,
Hermann Ney4, Bernt Schiele5, Cordelia Schmid8, Edgar Seemann5,
John Shawe-Taylor12 Amos Storkey2, Sandor Szedmak12, Bill Triggs8,
Ilkay Ulusoy9, Ville Viitaniemi7, and Jianguo Zhang8
1 University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
2 University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
3 ETH Zentrum, Zurich, Switzerland.
4 RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
5 TU-Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany.
6 France T´el´ecom, Cesson S´evign´e, France.
7 Helsinki University of Technology, Helsinki, Finland.
8 INRIA Rhˆone-Alpes, Montbonnot, France.
9 Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey.
10 Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK.
11 Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, T¨ubingen, Germany.
12 University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.
Abstract. The PASCAL Visual Object Classes Challenge ran from
February to March 2005. The goal of the challenge was to recognize
objects from a number of visual object classes in realistic scenes (i.e.
not pre-segmented objects). Four object classes were selected: motorbikes, bicycles, cars and people. Twelve teams entered the challenge. In
this chapter we provide details of the datasets, algorithms used by the
teams, evaluation criteria, and results achieved.
Introduction
In recent years there has been a rapid growth in research, and quite some success,
in visual recognition of object classes; examples include . Many of these papers have used the same image datasets as in order
to compare their performance. The datasets are the so-called ‘Caltech 5’ (faces,
airplanes, motorbikes, cars rear, spotted cats) and UIUC car side images of .
The problem is that methods are now achieving such good performance that they
have eﬀectively saturated on these datasets, and thus the datasets are failing to
challenge the next generation of algorithms. Such saturation can arise because
the images used do not explore the full range of variability of the imaged visual
class. Some dimensions of variability include: clean vs. cluttered background;
stereotypical views vs. multiple views (e.g. side views of cars vs. cars from all
angles); degree of scale change, amount of occlusion; the presence of multiple
objects (of one or multiple classes) in the images.
Given this problem of saturation of performance, the Visual Object Classes
Challenge was designed to be more demanding by enhancing some of the dimensions of variability listed above compared to the databases that had been
available previously, so as to explore the failure modes of diﬀerent algorithms.
The PASCAL13 Visual Object Classes (VOC) Challenge ran from February
to March 2005. A development kit of training and validation data, baseline algorithms, plus evaluation software was made available on 21 February, and the
test data was released on 14 March. The deadline for submission of results was
31 March, and a challenge workshop was held in Southampton (UK) on 11 April
2005. Twelve teams entered the challenge and six presented their ﬁndings at the
workshop. The development kit and test images can be found at the website
 
The structure of the remainder of the chapter is as follows. Section 2 describes the various competitions deﬁned for the challenge. Section 3 describes
the datasets provided to participants in the challenge for training and testing.
Section 4 deﬁnes the classiﬁcation competitions of the challenge and the method
of evaluation, and discusses the types of method participants used for classiﬁcation. Section 5 deﬁnes the detection competitions of the challenge and the method
of evaluation, and discusses the types of method participants used for detection.
Section 6 presents descriptions of the methods provided by participants. Section 7 presents the results of the classiﬁcation competitions, and Section 8 the
results for the detection competitions. Section 9 concludes the chapter with discussion of the challenge results, aspects of the challenge raised by participants
in the challenge workshop, and prospects for future challenges.
The goal of the challenge was to recognize objects from a number of visual object
classes in realistic scenes. Four object classes were selected, namely motorbikes,
bicycles, cars, and people. There were two main competitions:
1. Classification: For each of the four classes, predicting the presence/absence of an example of that class in the test image.
2. Detection: Predicting the bounding box and label of each object from the
4 target classes in the test image.
Contestants were permitted to enter either or both of the competitions, and to
tackle any or all of the four object classes. The challenge further divided the
13 PASCAL stands for pattern analysis, statistical modelling and computational learning. It is the name of an EU Network of Excellence funded under the IST Programme
of the European Union.
competitions according to what data was used by the participants for training
their systems:
1. Training using any data excluding the provided test sets.
2. Training using only the data provided for the challenge.
The intention in the ﬁrst case was to establish just what level of success could
currently be achieved on these problems, and by what method. Participants
were free to use their own databases of training images which might be much
larger than those provided for the challenge, additional annotation of the images
such as object parts or reference points, 3D models, etc. Such resources should
potentially improve results over using a smaller ﬁxed training set.
In the second case, the intention was to establish which methods were most
successful given a speciﬁed training set of limited size. This was to allow judgement of which methods generalize best given limited data, and thus might scale
better to the problem of recognizing a large number of classes, for which the
collection of large data sets becomes an onerous task.
Image Sets
Two distinct sets of images were provided to participants: a ﬁrst set containing
images both for training and testing, and a second set containing only images
for testing.
First Image Set
The ﬁrst image set was divided into several subsets:
train: Training data
val: Validation data (suggested). The validation data could be
used as additional training data (see below).
train+val: The union of train and val.
test1: First test set. This test set was taken from the same distribution of images as the training and validation data, and
was expected to provide an ‘easier’ challenge.
In the preliminary phase of the challenge, the train and val image sets were
released with the development kit. This gave participants the opportunity to try
out the code provided in the development kit, including baseline implementations of the classiﬁcation and detection tasks, and code for evaluating results.
The baseline implementations provided used the train set for training, and
demonstrated use of the evaluation functions on the val set. For the challenge
proper, the test1 set was released for evaluating results, to be used for testing
Table 1. Statistics of the ﬁrst image set. The number of images (containing at least
one object of the corresponding class) and number of object instances are shown.
images objects
images objects
images objects
images objects
motorbikes
alone. Participants were free to use any subset of the train and val sets for
training. Table 1 lists statistics for the ﬁrst image set.
Examples of images from the ﬁrst image set containing instances of each object class are shown in Figure 1. Images were taken from the PASCAL image
database collection; these were provided by Bastian Leibe & Bernt Schiele (TU-
Darmstadt), Shivani Agarwal, Aatif Awan & Dan Roth (University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign), Rob Fergus & Pietro Perona (California Institute of
Technology), Antonio Torralba, Kevin P. Murphy & William T. Freeman (Massachusetts Institute of Technology), Andreas Opelt & Axel Pinz (Graz University
of Technology), and Navneet Dalal & Bill Triggs (INRIA).
The images used in the challenge were manually selected to remove duplicate images, and very similar images taken from video sequences. Subjective
judgement of which objects are “recognizable” was made and images containing annotated objects which were deemed unrecognizable were discarded. The
subjective judgement required that the object size (in pixels) was suﬃciently
large, and that the object could be recognized in isolation without the need for
“excessive” contextual reasoning e.g. “this blob in the distance must be a car
because it is on a road.” Images where the annotation was ambiguous were also
discarded, for example images of many bicycles in a bike rack for which correct
segmentation of the image into individual objects proves impossible even for a
human observer.
The images contain objects at a variety of scales and in varying context.
Many images feature the object of interest in a “dominant” position, i.e. in the
centre of the image, occupying a large area of the image, and against a fairly
uniform background. The pose variation in this image set is somewhat limited,
for example most motorbikes appear in a “side” view, and most cars in either
“side” or “front” views (Figure 1). Pose for the bicycles and people classes is
somewhat more variable. Most instances of the objects appear un-occluded in
the image, though there are some examples, particularly for people (Figure 1)
where only part of the object is visible.
Annotation All the images used in the ﬁrst image set had already been annotated by contributors of the data to the PASCAL image databases collection.
The annotation was not changed for the challenge beyond discarding images
Fig. 1. Example images from the ﬁrst image set. From top to bottom: motorbikes,
bicycles, people, and cars. The original images are in colour.
for which the annotation was considered incomplete, ambiguous, or erroneous.
For each object of interest (e.g. cars), the annotation provides a bounding box
(Figure 2a); for some object instances additional annotation is available in the
form of a segmentation mask (Figure 2b) specifying which pixels are part of the
Each object is labelled with one of the object classes used in the challenge:
motorbikes, bicycles, people or cars; in addition, the original PASCAL object
class labels were included in the annotation. For some object instances these
specify a more detailed label, typically corresponding to a pose of the object
e.g. PAScarSide and PAScarRear respectively identify side and rear views of a
car. Participants were free to use this information, for example the group from
TU-Darmstadt chose to only train on side views (Section 6.2).
(a) Bounding box
(b) Segmentation mask
Fig. 2. Annotation of objects available for training. (a) all objects are annotated with
their bounding boxes. (b) some objects additionally have a pixel segmentation mask.
Second Test Set
In the ﬁrst image set, images from the original pool of data were assigned randomly to training sets (train+val) and test set (test1). This follows standard
practice in the machine learning ﬁeld in which training and test data are assumed to be drawn from the same distribution. To enable a more diﬃcult set of
competitions a second test set (test2) was also prepared, intended to give a distribution of images with more variability than the training data. This image set
was collected from Google Images speciﬁcally for the challenge. Example images
from test2 are shown in Figure 3. The image set is less homogenous than the
ﬁrst image set due to the wide range of diﬀerent sources from which the images
were taken. Some images resembling the composition of those in the ﬁrst image
set were selected, but also images containing greater variation in scale, pose, and
level of occlusion. Table 2 lists statistics for the test2 image set.
Table 2. Statistics of the test2 image set. The number of images (containing at least
one object of the corresponding class) and number of object instances are shown.
images objects
motorbikes
Fig. 3. Example images from the test2 test set. From top to bottom: motorbikes,
bicycles, people, and cars. The original images are in colour. There is greater variability
in scale and pose, and more occlusion than the images of test1 shown in Figure 1.
Negative Examples
For both training and testing it is necessary to have a pool of negative images not
containing objects of a particular class. Some other work has used a ﬁxed negative
image set of generic “background” images for testing; this risks oversimplifying
the task, for example ﬁnding images of cars might reasonably be achieved by
ﬁnding images of roads; if however the negative image set contains many images
of roads with no cars, the diﬃculty of the task is made more realistic.
The challenge treated both the classiﬁcation and detection tasks as a set of
binary classiﬁcation/detection problems (Sections 4, 5) e.g. car vs. non-car, and
made use of images containing other object classes as the negative examples. For
example in the car detection task, images containing motorbikes (but no cars)
were among the negative examples; in the motorbike detection task, images
false positives
true positives
Fig. 4. Example Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve for the classiﬁcation
task. The two quantitative measures of performance are illustrated: the Equal Error
Rate (EER) and Area Under Curve (AUC).
containing cars (but no motorbikes) became negative examples. Because the
contexts in which the four object classes appear might be considered similar,
e.g. cars, motorbikes, bicycles and people may all appear in a street scene, reuse of the images in this way should make for a more realistic (and harder)
Classiﬁcation Task
The goal in the classiﬁcation task is to determine whether a given image contains
at least one instance of a particular object class. The task was treated as four
independent binary classiﬁcation tasks i.e. “does this image contain an object
of type x?” where x was either motorbike, bicycle, people or cars. Treating
the task in this way enables the use of the well-established Receiver Operating
Characteristic (ROC) for examining results. Other work has also considered the
“forced choice” scenario i.e. “is this an image of a motorbike, a bicycle, a person,
or a car?”; this scenario is inapplicable in the context of the challenge since a
single image may contain instances of objects from more than one class.
Evaluation of Results
Evaluation of results was performed using ROC curve analysis. This required
that participants’ methods output a “conﬁdence” for an image, with large values
indicating high conﬁdence that the object class of interest is present. Figure 4
shows an example ROC curve, obtained by applying a set of thresholds to the
conﬁdence output by a method. On the x-axis is plotted the proportion of false
positives (how many times a method says the object class is present when it is
not); on the y-axis is plotted the proportion of true positives (how many times
a method says the object class is present when it is). The ROC curve makes
it easy to observe the trade-oﬀbetween the two; some methods may recognize
some small proportion of objects very accurately but fail to recognize many,
where others may give more balanced performance.
A deﬁnitive measure for quantitative evaluation of ROC curves is not possible
since, depending on the application, one might wish to place diﬀerent emphasis
on the accuracy of a method at low or high false positive rates. The challenge
used two measures to avoid bias: (i) the Equal Error Rate (EER) measures the
accuracy at which the number of false positives and false negatives are equal.
This measure somewhat emphasizes the behaviour of a method at low false
positive rates which might be reasonable for a real-world application; (ii) the
Area Under Curve (AUC) measures the total area under the ROC curve. This
measure penalizes failures across the whole range of false positives, e.g. a method
which recognizes some large proportion of instance with zero error but fails on
the remaining portion of the data. In practice, in the experiments, the method
judged “best” by each of the two measures was typically the same.
Competitions and Participation
Four competitions were deﬁned for the classiﬁcation task, by the choice of training data: provided for the challenge, or the participant’s own data; and the test
set used: the “easier” test1 images, or the “harder” test2 images. Table 3 summarizes the competitions. For each competition, performance on each of the four
object classes was evaluated. Participants were free to submit results for any or
all of the object classes.
Table 3. Competitions for the classiﬁcation task, deﬁned by the choice of training
data and test data.
Training data
Classiﬁcation
Classiﬁcation
Classiﬁcation
not VOC test1 or test2
Classiﬁcation
not VOC test1 or test2
Table 4 lists the participation in competitions 1 and 2, which used the provided train+val image set for training. Nine of the twelve participants entered
results for these competitions. All but one tackled all object classes (see Section 4.3). Half the participants submitted results for both test sets. No results
were submitted for competitions 3 and 4, in which data other than the provided
train+val image set could be used.
Table 4. Participation in classiﬁcation competitions 1 and 2 which used the provided
train+val image set for training. Bullets indicate participation in the competition for
a particular test set and object class.
motorbikes bicycles people cars
motorbikes bicycles people cars
FranceTelecom
INRIA-Dalal
INRIA-Dorko
INRIA-Jurie
INRIA-Zhang
MPITuebingen
Southampton
Overview of Classiﬁcation Methods
Section 6 gives full details of the methods used by participants. The approaches
used for the classiﬁcation task can be broadly divided into four categories:
Distributions of Local Image Features. Most participants took the approach of capturing the image content as a distribution over local image features.
In these methods a set of vector-valued descriptors capturing local image content is extracted from the image, typically around “interest” points; the image is
represented by some form of probability distribution over the set of descriptors.
Recognition is carried out by training a classiﬁer to distinguish the distributions
for a particular class.
All participants in this category used the SIFT descriptor to represent
the appearance of local image regions.
All but one participant (INRIA-Jurie) used “interest point” detection algorithms to deﬁne points about which local descriptors were extracted, including
the Harris and LoG detectors. Aachen additionally extract descriptors around
points on a ﬁxed coarse grid; INRIA-Jurie extracted descriptors around points
on a dense grid at multiple scales.
Four participants: Aachen, Edinburgh, INRIA-Jurie, and INRIA-Zhang used
a “bag of words” representation. In these methods, local descriptors are assigned
a discrete “visual word” from a dictionary obtained by clustering. The image representation is then a histogram over the dictionary, recording either the presence
of each word, or the number of times each word occurs in the image.
Two participants MPITuebingen and Southampton used an alternative
method based on deﬁning a kernel between sets of extracted features. Both
participants used the Bhattacharyya kernel; for Southampton this was deﬁned
by a Gaussian distribution in SIFT feature space, while MPITuebingen used a
“minor kernel” to lift the calculation into a kernel feature space.
All but two participants in this category used a support vector machine
(SVM) classiﬁer. Aachen used a log-linear model trained by iterative scaling;
Edinburgh used a functionally equivalent model trained by logistic regression.
Recognition of Individual Local Features. METU proposed a method also
employing interest point detection and extraction of local features; the SIFT
descriptor and colour features were used. In the METU method, rather than
examining the entire distribution of local descriptors for an image, a model is
learnt which assigns a class probability to each local feature; a class is assigned
to the image by a noisy-or operation on the class probabilities for each local
feature in the image.
Recognition based on Segmented Regions. HUT proposed a method combining features extracted both from the entire image and from regions obtained
by an image segmentation algorithm; features included colour, shape and texture
descriptors. A number of Self Organizing Maps (SOMs) deﬁned on the diﬀerent
feature spaces were used to classify descriptors obtained from the segmented
regions and the whole image, and these results were combined to produce an
overall classiﬁcation.
Classiﬁcation by Detection. Darmstadt adopted the approach of “classiﬁcation by detection” in which a detector for the class of object is applied to the
image and the image assigned to the object class if a suﬃciently conﬁdent detection is found. The method is described more fully in Section 5.3. This approach
is of particular interest since it is able to show “why” the object class is assigned
to the image, by highlighting the image area thought to be an instance of the
object class.
Discussion of Classiﬁcation Methods
Most participants used “global” methods in which a descriptor of the overall
image content is extracted; this leaves the task of deciding which elements of
the descriptor are relevant to the object of interest to the classiﬁer. All of these
participants used only the class label attached to an image for training, ignoring
additional annotation such as the bounding boxes of objects in the image.
One possible advantage of “global” methods is that the image description
captures information not only about the object of interest e.g. a car, but also
it’s context e.g. the road. This contextual information might prove useful in
recognizing some object classes; however, the risk is that the system may fail
to distinguish the object from the context and thus show poor generalization to
other environments, for example recognizing a car in a street vs. in a ﬁeld.
interpolated
Fig. 5. Example Precision/Recall (PR) curve for the detection task. The solid line
denotes measured performance (perfect precision at zero recall is assumed). The dots
indicate the corresponding interpolated precision values used in the average precision
(AP) measure.
The approach used by METU uses very local information: the classiﬁcation
may be based on a single local feature in the image; interestingly, the learning
method used here ignores the bounding box information provided. HUT combined global and more local information by computing feature descriptors from
both the whole image and segmented regions.
Darmstadt’s “classiﬁcation by detection” approach explicitly ignores all but
the object, using bounding boxes or segmentation masks for training, and looking
at local evidence for testing; this ensures that the method is modelling the object
class of interest rather than statistical regularities in the image background, but
may also fail to take advantage of contextual information.
The Darmstadt method is able to give a visual explanation of why an image
has been classiﬁed as containing an object of interest, since it outputs bounding boxes for each object. For some of the other methods (Aachen, Edinburgh,
METU, HUT) it might be possible to obtain some kind of labelling of the objects
in the image by back-projecting highly-weighted features into the image.
Only two participants explicitly incorporated any geometric information:
HUT included shape descriptors of segmented regions in their image representation, and the Darmstadt method uses both local appearance of object parts and
their geometric relations. In the global methods, geometric information such as
the positions of object parts might be implicitly encoded, but is not transparently represented.
Detection Task
The goal in the detection task is to detect and localize any instances of a particular object class in an image. Localization was deﬁned as specifying a ‘bounding
box’ rectangle enclosing each object instance in the image. One detection task
was run for each class: motorbikes, bicycles, people, and cars.
Evaluation of Results
Evaluation of results was performed using Precsion/Recall (PR) curve analysis.
The output required from participants’ methods was a set of bounding boxes with
corresponding “conﬁdence” values, with large values indicating high conﬁdence
that the detection corresponds to an instance of the object class of interest.
Figure 5 shows an example PR curve, obtained by applying a set of thresholds
to the conﬁdence output by a method. On the x-axis is plotted the recall (what
proportion of object instances in the image set have been detected); on the y-axis
is plotted the precision (what proportion of the detections actually correspond
to correct object instances). The PR curve makes it easy to observe the tradeoﬀbetween the two; some methods may have high precision but low recall, for
example detecting a particular view of an object reliably, where other methods
may give more balanced performance. Use of Precision/Recall as opposed to the
Receiver Operating Characteristic was chosen to provide a standard scale for
evaluation which is independent of the algorithmic details of the methods, for
example whether a “window scanning” mechanism or other means were used.
As in the classiﬁcation case, a deﬁnitive measure for quantitative evaluation
of PR curves is not possible, because of the possible requirements for diﬀerent emphasis at low or high recall. The challenge used the interpolated Average Precision (AP) measure deﬁned by the Text Retrieval Conference (TREC).
This measures the mean precision at a set of eleven equally spaced recall levels
[0, 0.1, . . . , 1]:
r∈{0,0.1,...,1}
pinterp(r)
The precision at each recall level r is interpolated by taking the maximum precision measured for a method for which the corresponding recall exceeds r:
pinterp(r) = max
˜r:˜r≥r p(˜r)
where p(˜r) is the measured precision at recall ˜r.
Figure 5 shows the interpolated precision values for the measured curve
shown. Use of the interpolated precision ameliorates the eﬀects of diﬀerent sampling of recall that each method may produce, and reduces the inﬂuence of the
“sawtooth” pattern of temporary false detections typical of PR curves. Because
the AP measure includes measurements of precision across the full range of recall, it penalizes methods which achieve low total recall (failing to detect some
proportion of object instances) as well as those with consistently low precision.
Evaluation of Bounding Boxes. Judging each detection output by a method
as either a true positive (object) or false positive (non-object) requires comparing
the corresponding bounding box predicted by the method with ground truth
bounding boxes of objects in the test set. To be considered a correct detection,
the area of overlap ao between the predicted bounding box Bp and ground truth
bounding box Bgt was required to exceed 50% by the formula
ao = area(Bp ∩Bgt)
area(Bp ∪Bgt)
The threshold of 50% was set deliberately low to account for inaccuracies in
bounding boxes in the ground truth data, for example deﬁning the bounding
box for a highly non-convex object, e.g. a side view of a motorbike or a car with
an extended radio aerial, is somewhat subjective.
Detections output by a method were assigned to ground truth objects satisfying the overlap criterion in order ranked by the (decreasing) conﬁdence output.
Lower-ranked detections of the same object as a higher-ranked detection were
considered false positives. The consequence is that methods producing multiple detections of a single object would score poorly. All participants included
algorithms in their methods to arbitrate between multiple detections.
Competitions and Participation
Four competitions were deﬁned for the detection task, by the choice of training
data: provided for the challenge, or the participant’s own data; and the test
set used: the “easier” test1 images, or the “harder” test2 images. Table 5
summarizes the competitions. For each competition, performance on each of the
four object classes was evaluated. Participants were free to submit results for
any or all of the object classes.
Table 5. Competitions for the detection task, deﬁned by the choice of training data
and test data.
Training data
not VOC test1 or test2
not VOC test1 or test2
Table 6 lists the participation in competitions 5 and 6, which used the provided train+val image set for training. Five of the twelve participants entered
results for these competitions. All ﬁve of these participants tackled the motorbike class, four the car class, and three the people class. Edinburgh submitted
baseline results for all four classes. The concentration on the motorbike and
car classes is expected as these are more typical “opaque” objects which have
attracted most attention in the object recognition community; recognition of
Table 6. Participation in the detection task. Bullets indicate participation in the
competition for a particular test set and object class.
motorbikes bicycles people cars
motorbikes bicycles people cars
FranceTelecom
INRIA-Dalal
INRIA-Dorko
INRIA-Jurie
INRIA-Zhang
MPITuebingen
Southampton
more “wiry” objects (bicycles) or articulated objects (people) has been a recent
development.
Only one participant, INRIA-Dalal, submitted results for competitions 7 and
8, in which training data other than that provided for the challenge could be
used. This participant submitted results for the people class on both test1 and
test2 image sets.
Overview of Detection Methods
Section 6 gives full details of the methods used by participants. The approaches
used for the detection task can be broadly divided into three categories:
Conﬁgurations of Local Image Features. Two participants: Darmstadt
and INRIA-Dorko used an approach based on local image features. These methods use interest point detectors and local image features represented as “visual
words”, as used by many of the methods in the classiﬁcation task. In contrast
to the classiﬁcation task, the detection methods explicitly build a model of the
spatial arrangement of the features; detection of the object then requires image
features to match the model both in terms of appearance and spatial conﬁguration. The two methods proposed diﬀered in terms of the feature representation:
patches of pixels/SIFT descriptors, clustering method for dictionary or “codebook” learning, and voting scheme for detection. Darmstadt used a Minimum
Description Length (MDL) method to reﬁne ambiguous detections and an SVM
classiﬁer to verify detections. INRIA-Dorko added a measure of discriminative
power of each visual word to the voting scheme.
Window-based Classiﬁers. Two participants: FranceTelecom and INRIA-
Dalal used “window-based” methods. In this approach, a ﬁxed sized window
is scanned over the image at all pixel positions and multiple scales; for each
window, a classiﬁer is applied to label the window as object or non-object, and
positively labelled windows are grouped to give detections. FranceTelecom used a
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) classiﬁer which applies a set of successive
feature extraction (convolution) and down-sampling operations to the raw input
image. INRIA-Dalal used a “histogram of oriented gradient” representation of
the image window similar to computing SIFT descriptors around grid points
within the window, and an SVM classiﬁer.
Baseline Methods. Edinburgh proposed a set of “baseline” detection methods. Conﬁdence in detections was computed either as the prior probability of a
class from the training data, or using the classiﬁer trained for the classiﬁcation
task. Several baseline methods for proposing bounding boxes were investigated
including simply proposing the bounding box of the entire image, the mean
bounding box from the training data, the bounding box of all strong interest
points, or bounding boxes based on the “purity” of visual word representations
of local features with respect to a class.
Discussion of Detection Methods
There have been two main approaches to object detection in the community:
(i) window-based methods, which run a binary classiﬁer over image windows, effectively turning the detection problem into a large number of whole-image classiﬁcation problems; (ii) parts-based methods, which model objects as a collection
of parts in terms of local appearance and spatial conﬁguration. It is valuable that
both these approaches were represented in the challenge. The methods proposed
diﬀer considerably in their representation of object appearance and geometric
information. In the INRIA-Dalal method, a “holistic” representation of primitive local features (edges) is used; the position of features is encoded implicitly
with respect to a ﬁxed coordinate system. The FranceTelecom method might
be understood as learning the approximate position of local object parts; the
convolution operations can be viewed as part detection, and the sub-sampling
steps introduce “slack” in the coordinate frame. The Darmstadt and INRIA-
Dorko methods explicitly decompose the object appearance into local parts and
their spatial conﬁguration. It is particularly interesting to see how these methods
compare across more rigid objects (cars/motorbikes), and those for which the
shape of the object changes considerably (people).
Participants
Twelve participants took part in the challenge. We include here participants’
own descriptions of the methods used.
Participants:
Thomas Deselaers, Daniel Keysers, Hermann Ney
Aﬃliation:
RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany
{deselaers,keysers,ney}@informatik.rwth-aachen.de
 
The approach used by the Human Language Technology and Pattern Recognition group of the RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, to participate
in the PASCAL Visual Object Classes Challenge consists of four steps:
1. patch extraction
2. clustering
3. creation of histograms
4. discriminative training and classiﬁcation
where the ﬁrst three steps are feature extraction steps and the last is the actual
classiﬁcation step. This approach was ﬁrst published in and was extended
and improved in .
The method follows the promising approach of considering objects to be
constellations of parts which oﬀers the immediate advantages that occlusions
can be handled very well, that the geometrical relationship between parts can
be modelled (or neglected), and that one can focus on the discriminative parts
of an object. That is, one can focus on the image parts that distinguish a certain
object from other objects.
The steps of the method are brieﬂy outlined in the following paragraphs.
Patch Extraction. Given an image, we extract square image patches at up to
500 image points. Additionally, 300 points from a uniform grid of 15×20 cells
that is projected onto the image are used. At each of these points a set of square
image patches of varying sizes (in this case 7 × 7, 11 × 11, 21 × 21, and 31 × 31
pixels) are extracted and scaled to a common size (in this case 15 × 15 pixels).
In contrast to the interest points from the detector, the grid-points can also
fall onto very homogeneous areas of the image. This property is on the one
hand important for capturing homogeneity in objects which is not found by the
interest point detector and on the other hand it captures parts of the background
which usually is a good indicator for an object, as in natural image objects are
often found in a “natural” environment.
After the patches are extracted and scaled to a common size, a PCA dimensionality reduction is applied to reduce the large dimensionality of the data,
keeping 39 coeﬃcients corresponding to the 40 components of largest variance
but discarding the ﬁrst coeﬃcient corresponding to the largest variance. The
ﬁrst coeﬃcient is discarded to achieve a partial brightness invariance. This approach is suitable because the ﬁrst PCA coeﬃcient usually accounts for global
brightness.
Clustering. The data are then clustered using a k-means style iterative splitting clustering algorithm to obtain a partition of all extracted patches. To do
so, ﬁrst one Gaussian density is estimated which is then iteratively split to obtain more densities. These densities are then re-estimated using k-means until
convergence is reached and then the next split is done. It has be shown experimentally that results consistently improve up to 4096 clusters but for more
than 4096 clusters the improvement is so small that it is not worth the higher
computational demands.
Creation of Histograms. Once we have the cluster model, we discard all
information for each patch except its closest corresponding cluster centre identi-
ﬁer. For the test data, this identiﬁer is determined by evaluating the Euclidean
distance to all cluster centres for each patch. Thus, the clustering assigns a cluster c(x) ∈{1, . . . C} to each image patch x and allows us to create histograms
of cluster frequencies by counting how many of the extracted patches belong to
each of the clusters. The histogram representation h(X) with C bins is then determined by counting and normalization such that hc(X) =
l=1 δ(c, c(xl)),
where δ denotes the Kronecker delta function, c(xl) is the closest cluster centre
to xl, and xl is the l-th image patch extracted from image X, from which a total
of LX patches are extracted.
Training and Classiﬁcation. Having obtained this representation by histograms of image patches, we deﬁne a decision rule for the classiﬁcation of
images. The approach based on maximum likelihood of the class-conditional distributions does not take into account the information of competing classes during
training. We can use this information by maximizing the class posterior probability K
n=1 p(k|Xkn) instead. Assuming a Gaussian density with pooled
covariances for the class-conditional distribution, this maximization is equivalent
to maximizing the parameters of a log-linear or maximum entropy model
where Z(h) = K
is the renormalization factor. We
use a modiﬁed version of generalized iterative scaling. Bayes’ decision rule is
used for classiﬁcation.
Conclusions.
The method performs well for various tasks (e.g. Caltech
{airplanes, faces, motorbikes}), was used in the ImageCLEF 2005 Automatic
Annotation Task14 where it performed very well, and also performed well in the
PASCAL Visual Object Classes Challenge described in this chapter. An important advantage of this method is that it is possible to visualize those patches
14 
Fig. 6. Darmstadt: Illustration of the IRD approach. (a) input image; (b) detected
hypothesis by the ISM model using a rather low threshold; (c) input to the SVM stage;
(d) veriﬁed hypothesis.
which are discriminative for a certain class, e.g. in the case of faces it was learned
that the most discriminative parts are the eyes.
Participants:
Mario Fritz, Bastian Leibe, Edgar Seemann, Bernt Schiele
Aﬃliation:
TU-Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany
 
We submit results on the categories car and motorbike obtained with the
Implicit Shape Model (ISM) and the Integrated Representative Discriminant
(IRD) approach . The ISM in itself is an interesting model, as it has recently
shown impressive results on challenging object class detections problems .
The IRD approach augments the representative ISM by an additional discriminant stage, which improves the precision of the detection system.
Local Feature Representation. We use local features as data representation.
As scale-invariant interest point detector we use diﬀerence-of-Gaussians and as
region descriptor we use normalized raw pixel patches. Even though there exist
more sophisticated descriptors, we want to point out that due to the rather
high resolution of 25×25 pixels the representation is quite discriminant. The
high dimensionality of the resulting features is taken care of by the quantization
of the feature space via soft-matching to a codebook. More recently 
we have used more eﬃcient feature representation for the task of object class
detection.
Codebook. In both approaches, we use a codebook representation as a ﬁrst
generalization step, which is generated by an agglomerative clustering scheme.
Up to now, our approaches have only been evaluated on single viewpoints. In
order to stay consistent with those experiments, we only selected side views from
the training set. This leaves us with 55 car images and 153 motorbike images for
building the codebook and learning the model.
Learning and Evaluating the Model. The basic idea of the ISM is to represent the appearance of an object by a non-parametric, spatial feature occurrence
distribution for each codebook. When using the model for detection, local feature are computed from the test image and afterwards matched to the codebook.
Based on these matches, the spatial distributions stored in the ISM can be used
to accumulate evidence for object hypothesis characterized by position in the
image and size of the object. For a more detailed description - in particular how
to achieve scale-invariance - we refer to .
MDL Hypothesis Veriﬁcation Stage. As the ISM facilitates the use of segmentation masks for increased performance, we included the provided annotations in the training. Given this information, a pixel-level segmentation can be
inferred on the test images. On the one hand this information can be fed back
in the recognition loop for interleaved recognition and segmentation . On
the other hand, the problem of accepting a subset of ambiguous hypothesis in
an image can be formulated as an optimization problem in a MDL framework
based on the inferred ﬁgure and background probabilities . For both methods
submitted to the challenge we make use of the MDL stage.
SVM with Local Kernel of IRD Approach. The SVM validation stage is
trained on detections and false alarms of the ISM on the whole training set for
cars and motorbikes. We want to point out, that both systems work on the same
data representation, so that the SVM makes full use of the information provided
by the ISM. A hypothesis consists of an inferred position of the object centre in
the image, an inferred object scale and a set of features that are consistent with
this hypothesis. Based on this information, the SVM is used to eliminate false
positives of the representative ISM model during detection. The whole process
is illustrated in Figure 6.
Besides the fact, that it is appealing to combine representative and discriminant models from a machine learning point of view, we also proﬁt from the
explicit choices of the components: While part of the success of the ISM is a
result of its capability for “across instances” learning, the resulting hypothesis
can lack global consistency which result in superﬂuous object parts. By using
an SVM with a kernel function of appearance and position we enforce a global
consistency again. The beneﬁt of enforcing global consistencies were studied in
more detail in .
Experiments. All experiments were performed on the test-sets exactly as speciﬁed in the PASCAL challenge. For computational reasons, the test images were
rescaled to a uniform width of 400 pixels. We report results on both the object
detection and the present/absent classiﬁcation task. Detection performance is
evaluated using the hypothesis bounding boxes returned by the ISM approach.
For the classiﬁcation task, an object-present decision is taken if at least one hypothesis is detected in an image. Since our integrated ISM+SVM approach allows
for an additional precision/recall trade-oﬀ, we report two performance curves for
the detection tasks. One for optimal equal error rate (EER) performance and
one for optimized precision (labelled “ISMSVM 2” in the plots).
Notes on the Results. The models were exclusively trained on side-views.
As the test data also includes multiple viewpoints, 100 % recall is not reachable
given the used training scheme. Given that test-set 1 contains only side-views
for the motorbikes and approximately 59% side-views for the cars and 39% and
12% for test-set 2 respectively, we detect nearly all side-views with a high level
of precision.
Participants: Tom Griﬃths, Moray Allan, Amos Storkey, Chris Williams
Aﬃliation: University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
E-mail: 
Experiments. Our aim in these experiments was to assess the performance
that can be obtained using a simple approach based on classiﬁers and detectors
using SIFT representations of interest points. We deliberately did not use stateof-the-art class-speciﬁc detectors.
All the systems described below begin by detecting Harris-Aﬃne interest
points in images15 . SIFT representations are then found for the image regions
chosen by the interest point detector . The SIFT representations for all the
 
regions chosen in the training data are then clustered using k-means. A test
image can now be represented as a vector of activations by matching the SIFT
representation of its interest point regions against these clusters and counting
how many times each cluster was the best match for a region from the test image.
This approach was suggested by recent work of Csurka, Dance et al. .
All the systems were trained only on the provided training data (train),
with parameters optimised using the provided validation data (val). The test
data sets were only used in the ﬁnal runs of the systems to obtain results for
submission. All the detectors described below assume a single object of interest
per image.
Edinburgh bof Classiﬁer. This classiﬁer uses logistic regression16, based on a
1500-dimensional bag-of-features representation of each image. Interest points
were detected using the Harris-Aﬃne region detector and encoded as SIFT descriptors. These were pooled from all images in the training set and clustered
using simple k-means (k = 1500). The 1500-dimensional bag-of-features representation for each image is computed by counting, for each of the 1500 cluster
centres, how many regions in the image have no closer cluster centre in SIFT
Edinburgh meanbb Detector. This na¨ıve approach is intended to act as a baseline result. All images in the test set are assigned the class probability as their
conﬁdence level. This class probability is calculated from the class frequency as
the number of positive examples of the class in the training set divided by the
total number of training images.
All detections are made using the class mean bounding box, scaled according
to the size of the image. The class mean bounding box is calculated by ﬁnding
all the bounding boxes for this class in the training data, and normalising them
with respect to the sizes of the images in which they occur, then taking the
means of the normalised coordinates.
Edinburgh wholeimage Detector. This na¨ıve approach is intended to act as a
baseline result. All images in the test set are assigned the class probability as
their conﬁdence level. The object bounding box is simply set to the perimeter
of the test image.
Edinburgh puritymeanbb Detector. We deﬁne the ‘purity’ of a cluster with
respect to an object class as the fraction of all the Harris-Aﬃne interest points
in the training images for which it is the closest cluster in SIFT space (subject
to a maximum distance threshold t) that are located within a bounding box for
an object of the class.
In detection, the centre of the bounding box is set as the weighted mean
of the location of all Harris-Aﬃne interest points in the test image, where the
16 We used the Netlab logistic regression function, glm.
weight of each interest point’s location is the purity of its nearest cluster in SIFT
space (with respect to the current object class, subject to a maximum distance
threshold t).
The size and shape of the bounding box for all detections was set to that
of the class mean bounding box, scaled according to the size of the image. The
class mean bounding box was calculated as for the Edinburgh meanbb method.
Conﬁdences are calculated by the bag-of-features classiﬁer, as described for
Edinburgh bof, with the addition of a maximum distance threshold t (so descriptors very far from any cluster do not count).
Throughout, t was set to three times the standard deviation of the distances
of all SIFT descriptors from their nearest cluster centre, a value chosen by experiment on the validation data.
Edinburgh siftbb Detector. This detector assigns the conﬁdence levels calculated by the bag-of-features classiﬁer, as described for Edinburgh bof, while
bounding boxes are predicted as the tight bounding box of the interest points
found in the image by the Harris-Aﬃne detector.
Discussion. Our entries consisted of one straightforward ’bag-of-features’ approach to classiﬁcation and four simple approaches to the detection task. In
comparison to other entries tackling the classiﬁcation task, the performance of
our bag-of-features classiﬁer was almost always behind that of the competitors.
By the area under ROC curve measure (AUC), it achieved only 0.77, 0.72, 0.60
and 0.80 on the four object categories compared with 0.88, 0.82, 0.82 and 0.91
for the next highest competitor in each case. In all but the ﬁnal category (cars),
this meant our entry was the poorest performer.
Following discussions at the challenge workshop, we modiﬁed our approach
in two small ways and performance improved considerably, to 0.89, 0.87, 0.81
and 0.85. The changes we made were to: 1) train our classiﬁer on the train+val
data set instead of only the train data set; and 2) normalise the bag-of-feature
representation vectors. This ﬁrst modiﬁcation provided substantially more training data with which to reﬁne the decision boundary of the classiﬁer, leading to a
small improvement in performance. The fact that the second modiﬁcation led to
such a signiﬁcant performance increase suggests it is the proportions of the diﬀerent visual words in the image that are useful for classiﬁcation rather than their
absolute number. This makes sense, as the images (and the objects within them)
are commonly of diﬀerent sizes and hence the number of features representing
them varies.
Our approaches to the detection task were intended as simple baselines from
which to judge the more complex approaches of the other competitors. Such
baselines were widely acknowledged as useful by attendees at the workshop, and
serve to highlight the real progress made in tackling this challenging task by the
other entries.
input: 52x30
Fig. 7. FranceTelecom: Architecture of the Convolutional Object Finder (COF) system
FranceTelecom
Participants:
Christophe Garcia, Stefan Duﬀner
Aﬃliation:
France T´el´ecom division R&D, Cesson S´evign´e, France
 
 
The proposed system, called Convolutional Object Finder (COF), is based on
a convolutional neural network architecture inspired from our previous work on
face detection . It automatically synthesises simple problem-speciﬁc feature
extractors and classiﬁers, from a training set of object and non-object patterns,
without making any assumptions concerning the features to be extracted or the
areas of the object pattern to be analysed. Once trained, for a given object, the
COF acts like a fast pipeline of simple convolution and subsampling modules
that treat the raw input image as a whole, at diﬀerent scales, without requiring
any local pre-processing of the input image (brightness correction, histogram
equalisation, etc.).
The COF system consists of six layers, excepting the input plane (retina)
that receives an image area of ﬁxed size (52×30 pixels in the case of motorbikes)
to be classiﬁed as object or non-object (see Fig.7). Layers c1 through s2 contain
classifier
non−motorbike
Fig. 8. FranceTelecom: Diﬀerent steps of object localisation
a series of planes where successive convolutions and subsampling operations are
performed.
These planes are called feature maps as they are in charge of extracting and
combining a set of appropriate features. Layer n1 contains a number of partially
connected sigmoid neurons and layer n2 contains the output unit of the network.
These last two layers carry out the classiﬁcation task using the features extracted
in the previous layers.
The neural network is fully trained using a modiﬁed version of the backpropagation algorithm, by receiving object and non-object images with target answer
+1 and −1 respectively. The positive training sets (object images) are augmented
by virtual examples, generated by slightly rotating, translating and scaling the
original object images. In order to reduce the number of false alarms, the set
of negative (non-object) examples is iteratively constructed by a bootstrapping
procedure. It uses a set of scenery images that do not contain the object to detect, in order to extract non-object image areas that produce a positive output
value (false alarm) greater than a certain threshold. This threshold is initialised
with a high value (e.g. 0.8) and is gradually decreased (until 0.0), throughout
the iterative learning process, so that a rough class boundary is quickly found
in the ﬁrst iterations and reﬁned later on.
In order to detect objects at diﬀerent scales, the COF system is placed into
a multi-scale framework as depicted in Fig. 8.
The input image is repeatedly subsampled by a factor of 1.2, resulting in a
pyramid of images (step 1). Each image of the pyramid is then ﬁltered by our
convolutional network COF (step 2). After this processing step, object candidates (pixels with positive values in the result image) in each scale are mapped
back to the input image scale (step 3). They are then grouped according to
their proximity in image and scale spaces. Each group of object candidates is
fused into a representative object whose centre and size are computed as the
centroids of the centres and sizes of the grouped objects, weighted by their individual network responses (step 4). After applying this grouping algorithm, the
set of remaining representative object candidates serve as a basis for ﬁner object
localisation and false alarm dismissal (step 5). This ﬁner localisation consists
of a local search with smaller scale steps in a limited area around each object
candidate. In order to remove false alarms, the sum of positive network outputs
over the local search space is computed at each candidate position and candidate
areas with a value below a certain threshold are rejected.
Experimental results show that the proposed system is very robust with
respect to lighting, shape and pose variations as well as noise, occlusions and
cluttered background. Moreover, processing is fast and a parallel implementation
is straightforward. However, it should be noticed that detection results can be
drastically enhanced if a large training set of thousands of object images is made
available. As future extensions, we plan to enhance the COF system by allowing
a variable aspect ratio for the retina image that will help to cope with highly
variable 3D object shapes and poses.
Participants:
Ville Viitaniemi, Jorma Laaksonen, Markus Koskela
Aﬃliation:
Helsinki University of Technology, Helsinki, Finland
{ville.viitaniemi,jorma.laaksonen,
markus.koskela}@hut.fi
Overview of the PicSOM system. For all the experiments we used a similar
setup utilising our general purpose content-based image retrieval system named
PicSOM . Given a set of positive and negative example images, the system
looks through the image collection and returns images most similar to the positive and most dissimilar to the negative examples. The system operates in its
interactive mode by the principles of query by pictorial example and relevance
feedback. In these experiments, however, the system was operated in batch mode,
as if the user had given relevance feedback on all images in the training set at
The basic principle of the PicSOM system is to use Self-Organizing Maps
(SOMs), which are two-dimensional artiﬁcial neural networks, to organise and
index the images of the collection. The SOM orders images so that visually
similar images – in the sense of some low-level statistical feature – are mapped
to the same or nearby map units in a two-dimensional grid. The PicSOM system
inherently uses multiple features, creates a separate index for each of them and
uses them all in parallel when selecting the retrieved images. In our current
experiments, we used the system to give a qualiﬁcation value for every image in
the test set. That way we could order them in the order of descending similarity
to the corresponding set of training images.
The visual features that were used to describe the images were chosen among
the ones that were already available in the PicSOM system. These are targeted
to the general domain image description, i.e. the feature set was not specialised
a priori to the target image classes. The set of available features consisted of:
– MPEG-7 content descriptors ColorLayout, DominantColor, EdgeHistogram,
RegionShape and ScalableColor
– average colour in CIE L*a*b* colour space
– ﬁrst three colour moments in CIE L*a*b* colour space
– Fourier descriptors of object contours
– a texture feature measuring the relative brightness of neighbouring pixels
Details of the Experimental Procedure. The PicSOM system was applied
to the image classiﬁcation task using the following procedure:
1. The training set images were projected to the parallel feature SOMs.
2. The distance of the projection of a given test image was locally compared
with the nearby projections of positive and negative training images. This
was achieved by kernel smoothing the SOM surface ﬁeld deﬁned by the
positive and negative training impulses.
3. The results from the parallel feature SOMs were summed together.
In the time frame of the VOC challenge, we were not able to utilise the training set annotations beyond the presence/absence information, i.e. the bounding
boxes and other additional annotations were not used.
System parameters were tuned using the validation set performance as an optimisation criterion. Feature selection was performed based on the performance
in the validation set. As the performance measure we used the area under the
ROC curve. All four target classes were processed separately and the optimisations led us to use four diﬀerent sets of features. We used all four optimised
feature sets for all four classes. This resulted in the total of 16 result sets submitted. Other parameters, such as the size of the SOMs, were not optimised.
The ﬁnal results were obtained by using only the union of the provided training
and validation data sets in the training of the SOMs in the system.
The training, validation and testing set images were automatically segmented
to a few parallel segmentations with predetermined numbers of segments. Visual
features were extracted from both the segments and the whole images. Separate SOMs were trained for the segment features and the whole-image features.
Figure 9 illustrates the use of the image segments and the parallel SOMs.
IMAGE DATABASE
TEXTURE SOM
Fig. 9. HUT: An example of using two parallel SOM indices for segmented images in
the PicSOM system. The colour and texture SOMs are trained with image segments
and each segment is connected to its best-matching map unit on each SOM.
Fig. 10. INRIA-Dorko: Example detections on test images for motorbike (left) and
people (right). Blue (dark) points are eliminated due to feature selection, and yellow
(bright) points vote for the best solution (yellow rectangle). Non-yellow rectangles
indicate false detections with lower conﬁdence.
INRIA-Dalal
Participants:
Navneet Dalal, Bill Triggs
Aﬃliation:
INRIA Rhˆone-Alpes, Montbonnot, France
{navneet.dalal,bill.triggs}@inrialpes.fr
Introduction. INRIA participated in eight of the object detection challenges
with its Histogram of Oriented Gradient (HOG) object detector: competitions
5 and 6 for classes Motorbike, Car, Person and competitions 7 and 8 for class
In use, the detector scans the image with a detection window at multiple
positions and scales, running an object/non-object classiﬁer in each window.
Local maxima of “object” score are found, and if the score is above threshold a
detection is declared. The classiﬁer is a linear SVM over our HOG feature set,
trained using SVM-Light .
The Histogram of Oriented Gradient feature set is described in detail in .
Here we focus on giving information not available in , but brieﬂy, after some
optional input normalization, we calculate image gradients at each pixel, use the
gradient orientation to select an orientation channel and the gradient magnitude
as a weight to vote into it, and accumulate these votes over small local regions
called cells. Each cell thus contains a weighted gradient orientation histogram.
The cells are gathered into somewhat larger spatial blocks, and the block’s histograms are normalized as a group to provide local illumination invariance. The
ﬁnal descriptor is the concatenated vector of all channels of all cells of all blocks
in the detection window. To reduce aliasing, the implementation includes careful
spatial and angular interpolation and spatial windowing of the cells within each
block. The blocks are usually chosen to overlap so (modulo windowing eﬀects)
each cell’s histogram appears several times with diﬀerent normalizations. The
window is usually chosen somewhat (10-20%) larger than the object as including
context helps recognition.
Data Preparation. For training and validation we use the size-normalized
object boxes from the positive train and val sets. The corresponding negatives
are sampled randomly from negative images. To allow for context we include an
8 or 16 pixel margin around the image window. Table 7 lists the window sizes
and key parameters of each detector.
HOG Parameter Optimization. HOG descriptors have a number of parameters to set. This was done using the PASCAL train and val sets respectively
for training and validation. For the window sizes given in table 7, the following settings turned out to be optimal for all of the object classes: taking the
square root of image intensities before computing gradients; 20◦orientation bins
(9 in 180◦or 18 in 360◦); 2×2 blocks of 8×8 pixel cells; and an inter block
stride of 8 pixels (so each cell belongs to 4 blocks). Two settings changed from
class to class. (i) Including the signs of gradients (i.e. using orientation range
0−360◦rather than 0−180◦) is helpful for classes in which local contrasts typically have consistent signs (e.g. cars and motorcycles with their dark tyres on
light rims), and harmful for less consistent classes (e.g. humans with their multicoloured clothing). (ii) Regarding normalization, L2-Hys (L2-norm followed by
Lowe-style clipping and renormalization ) and L1-Sqrt (L1-norm followed by
square root, i.e., v →
v/(∥v∥1 + ϵ) typically have comparable performance,
but for the motorbike class L1-Sqrt signiﬁcantly outperforms L2-Hys. We suspect that this happens because L1-Sqrt provides more robustness against the
rapid ﬁne-detail gradient changes that are common in motorcycle wheels.
Table 7. The key parameters for each trained detector.
Orientation
Normalization
(see §6.6)
9 (0−180◦)
18 (0−360◦)
Width 112 18 (0−360◦)
Multi-scale Detection Framework. To use the above window-based classiﬁer
for object detection, it is scanned across the image at multiple scales, typically
ﬁring several times in the vicinity of each object. We need to combine these
overlapping classiﬁer hits to produce a detection rule that ﬁres exactly once for
each observed object instance. We treat this as a maximum ﬁnding problem in
the 3D position-scale space. More precisely, we convert the classiﬁer score to a
weight at each 3D point, and use a variable bandwidth Mean Shift algorithm 
to locate the local maxima of the resulting 3D “probability density”. Mean Shift
requires positive weights, and it turns out that clipped SVM scores max(score, 0)
work well. The (variable) bandwidth for each point is given by (σxs, σys, σs)
where s is the detection scale and σx, σy, σs are respectively the x, y and scale
bandwidths. We use σs = 30% and set (σx, σy) to (8, 16) for the Person class
and (16, 8) for the Motorbike and Car classes – i.e. proportional to the aspect
ratio of the detection window, as in practice the multiple detections tend to be
distributed in this way.
We perform one ﬁnal step. The challenge rules consider detections to be false
if they have less than 50% area overlap with the marked object box, and as
our detection windows have been slightly enlarged to include some background
context, we need to shrink them again. Diﬀerent classes occupy diﬀerent amounts
of their bounding boxes on average, so we do this adaptively. For each class, we
learn a ﬁnal classiﬁer on the combined train+val data set (with settings chosen
by validation on val after training on train). Using this classiﬁer on train+val,
we calculate precision-recall curves for several diﬀerent window shrinkage factors
and choose the factor that gives the best overall performance. Table 7 lists the
chosen shrinkage margins in pixels relative to the detection window size. Note
that this tuning is based on training data. For each challenge we performed just
one run on test set, whose results were submitted to the challenge.
Additional Comments. We did not have time to optimize the window size
of our motorbike classiﬁer before the challenge, but afterwards we found that
larger windows are preferable – 144 × 80 here, versus 112 × 56 in our original
challenge submission. The performance of the new classiﬁer is comparable to the
two best results in the challenge.
INRIA-Dorko
Participants:
Gyuri Dork´o, Cordelia Schmid
Aﬃliation:
INRIA Rhˆone-Alpes, Montbonnot, France
{gyuri.dorko,cordelia.schmid}@inrialpes.fr
Introduction. We have participated in the localization competition for people
and motorbikes. Our method combines class-discriminative local features with
an existing object localization technique to improve both its speed and performance. Our system learns the spatial distribution of the object positions for
automatically created discriminative object-parts, and then, uses the generalized
Hough-transform to predict object locations on unseen test images.
Feature Extraction. Images are described by sparse local features extracted
with a scale-invariant interest point operator. We use a modiﬁed version of the
multi-scale Harris detector . Interest regions are described by the Scale Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) computed on a 4x4 grid and for 8 orientation
bins, resulting in a 128 dimensional descriptor.
Training. We ﬁrst learn a vocabulary of size 1200 from the scale-invariant
features of the training set. We use expectation-maximization (EM) to estimate
a Gaussian Mixture Model with a diagonal covariance matrix. Then, we assign
a rank to each cluster based on its discriminative power as in . Our criterion
is derived from the likelihood score, and prefers rare but very discriminative
object-parts. The rank for cluster Ci is deﬁned as:
˜P +(Ci) =
vj∈D+ P(Ci|vj)
vj∈D+ P(Ci|vj) + 
vj∈D−P(Ci|vj)
where D+ and D−are the set of descriptors extracted from positive and negative images respectively and P(Ci|vj) is the probability of component Ci given
descriptor vj. We then learn the spatial distribution of the object positions and
scales for each cluster. For each training image, we assign all descriptors inside
the rectangle locating the object to its cluster (by MAP), and record the centre
(x,y) and the scale (width and height) of the rectangle with respect to the assigned cluster. This step is equivalent to with the diﬀerence that we collect
the width and height separately and that we do not use the ﬁgure-ground segmentation of the object. The output of our training is a list of clusters with the
following properties:
– the mean and variance representing the appearance distribution of the cluster,
– a probabilistic score for its discriminative power,
– and a spatial distribution of the object positions and scales.
Localization by Probabilistic Hough Voting. The localization procedure
on a test image is similar to the initial hypothesis generation of Leibe et al.
 . The diﬀerence is that we incorporate the discriminative capacity into the
voting scheme: only the 100 most discriminative clusters participate in the voting, and the probabilistic score is integrated into the voting scheme. This allows
better conﬁdence estimations for the diﬀerent hypotheses. Our algorithm is the
following. The extracted scale-invariant features of the test image are assigned
to the closest cluster by appearance (MAP). Then, the chosen clusters vote for
possible object locations and scales (4D space). In practice we simpliﬁed the
voting scheme from by only allowing one cluster per descriptor to vote, and
extended their formulation by weighting each vote with the discriminative score
from (3). The predicted object locations and scales are found as maxima in the
4D voting space using the Mean-Shift algorithm with a scale-adaptive balloon
density estimator . The conﬁdence level for each detection is determined
by the sum of the votes around the object location in the voting space. Fig. 10
shows example detections on test images.
INRIA-Jurie
Participants:
Frederic Jurie, Gyuri Dork´o, Diane Larlus, Bill Triggs
Aﬃliation:
INRIA Rhˆone-Alpes, Montbonnot, France
 
We participated in the competition 1 for all four categories.
Our method is based on an SVM classiﬁer trained on feature vectors built using
local image descriptors. Our approach is purely appearance based, i.e. it does
not explicitly use the local structures of object classes. The learning consists
of four steps (see Fig. 11). First, we extract local image features using a dense
multi-scale representation. Our novel clustering method is then applied to build
a codebook of visual words. This codebook is used to compute “bag of features”
representation for each image, similar to , then an SVM classiﬁer is trained
Fig. 11. INRIA-Jurie: Outline of the learning steps. See text for details.
to separate between object images and the background (the other classes of the
database). In the following we describe in detail each step of our method.
Feature Extraction. Overlapping local features are extracted on each scale
according to a regular grid deﬁned to be suﬃciently dense to represent the entire
image. Our parameters are set to extract approximately 20000 regions per image.
Each region is then represented by a 128 dimensional SIFT descriptor , i.e.
a concatenated 8-bin orientation histograms on a 4x4 grid.
Codebook Creation. The extracted set of dense features has two important
properties. First, it is very highly populated; the large number of features per
image leads to a total of several hundred thousand for the entire training set
(train+val). Second, the dense feature set is extremely unbalanced as was shown
in . Therefore, to obtain a discrete set of labels on the descriptors we have
designed a new clustering algorithm taking into account these properties.
The method has two main advantages. It can discover low populated regions of
the descriptor space, and it can easily cope with a large number of descriptors.
Our iterative approach discovers new clusters at each step by consecutively
calling a sampling and a k-median algorithm (see Fig. 11) until the required
total number of clusters are found. In order to decrease the importance of highly
populated regions we use biased sampling: new regions are discovered far enough
from previously found centres. This is realized by introducing an inﬂuence radius
to aﬀect points close to already found centres. All aﬀected descriptors are then
excluded from any further sampling. Fig. 12 illustrates our sampling step. The
inﬂuence radius (r = 0.6) and the total number of clusters are
parameters of our method.
The biased sampling is followed by the online median algorithm proposed by
Mettu and Plaxton . Their method is based on the facility location problem
and chooses the centres one by one. At each iteration of our algorithm we discover
20 new centres by this algorithm.
We keep all the parameters of our codebook creation algorithm ﬁxed and set
by our earlier experience, i.e. they are not tuned for the PASCAL Challenge
Fig. 12. INRIA-Jurie: Biased sampling. (a) assumes that we discovered 2 new centres
in the previous step, which is marked by the two black points. (b) The inﬂuence radius
determines an aﬀectation ball around each centre. (c) All descriptors within these balls
are removed and the remaining portion is then random sampled.
database. For the creation of the codebook we originally cropped the training
images based on the provided bounding boxes, but later we discovered that our
result remain the same using the full images. (ROC curves are reported with the
cropped images.)
Image Quantization. Both learning and testing images are represented by the
bag of features approach , i.e by frequency histograms computed using the
occurrence of each visual word of our codebook. We associate each descriptor
to the closest codebook element within the predeﬁned inﬂuence radius. Our
association discards descriptors that fall out of all aﬀectation balls; they are
considered as outliers. To measure the distance between SIFT features we used
the Euclidean distance as in .
Classiﬁcation. We used the implementation of to train linear SVM classiﬁers
on the normalized image histograms. In the ﬁrst set of experiments (indicated
by dcb p1 on our reports) we trained the SVMs on binary histograms, each bin
indicating the presence or absence of the codebook elements. In the second set
of experiments (indicated by dcb p2), a standard vector normalisation is used.
INRIA-Zhang
Participants:
Jianguo Zhang, Cordelia Schmid
Aﬃliation:
INRIA Rhˆone-Alpes, Montbonnot, France
{jianguo.zhang,cordelia.schmid}@inrialpes.fr
Abstract. Our approach represents images as distributions of features extracted
from a sparse set of keypoint locations and learns a Support Vector Machine
Kernelization
Classiﬁcaiton
Sparse image representation
Comparison
Descriptors
Construction of
Visual Words
χ2-distance
Harris-Laplace
histogram +
Fig. 13. INRIA-Zhang: Architecture of the approach.
classiﬁer with a kernel based on an eﬀective measure for comparing distributions.
Results demonstrate that our approach is surprisingly eﬀective for classiﬁcation
of object images under challenging real-world conditions, including signiﬁcant
intra-class variations and substantial background clutter.
Introduction. Fig. 13 illustrates the diﬀerent steps of our approach. We ﬁrst
compute a sparse image representation by extracting a set of keypoint locations
and describing each keypoint with a local descriptor. We then compare image
distributions based on frequency histograms of visual words. Finally, images are
classiﬁed with a χ2-kernel and a Support Vector Machine (SVM).
A large-scale evaluation of our approach is presented in . This evaluation
shows that to achieve the best possible performance, it is necessary to use a
combination of several detectors and descriptors together with a classiﬁer that
can make eﬀective use of the complementary types of information contained
in them. It also shows that using local features with the highest possible level
of invariance usually does not yield the best performance. Thus, a practical
recognition system should seek to incorporate multiple types of complementary
features, as long as their local invariance properties do not exceed the level
absolutely required for a given application. An investigation of the inﬂuence of
background features on recognition performance shows the pitfalls of training
on datasets with uncluttered or highly correlated backgrounds, since this yields
disappointing results on test sets with more complex backgrounds.
Sparse Image Representation. We use two complementary scale-invariant
detectors to extract salient image structures: Harris-Laplace and Laplacian . Harris-Laplace detects corner-like structures, whereas the Laplacian
detects blob-like ones. Both detectors output circular regions at a characteristic
SIFT features are used to describe the scale normalized regions; it has
been shown to outperform a set of existing descriptors . SIFT computes
the gradient orientation histogram for the support region. We use 8 orientation
planes. For each orientation, the gradient image is sampled over a 4×4 grid of
locations, resulting in a 128 feature vector.
For the training images and test set 1 of the PASCAL challenge (1373 images
in total), the average number of points detected per image is 796 for Harris-
Laplace and 2465 for the Laplacian. The minimum number of points detected
for an image is 15 for Harris-Laplace and 71 for the Laplacian. This illustrates
the sparsity of our image representation.
Comparing Distributions of Local Features. We ﬁrst construct a visual
vocabulary from the local features and then represent each image as a histogram
of visual words. The vocabulary for the PASCAL challenge is obtained as follows:
1) We randomly select 50000 descriptors from the training images of one class.
2) We cluster these features with k-means (k = 250). 3) We concatenate the
cluster centres of the 4 classes to build the global vocabulary of 1000 words.
A histogram measures the frequency of each word in an image. Each feature
in the image is assigned to the closest word. We use the χ2 distance to compare
histograms:
(h1(i) −h2(i))2
h1(i) + h2(i)
where h1 and h2 are the histograms of two diﬀerent images.
Kernel-based Classiﬁcation. We use an extended Gaussian kernel :
K(Si, Sj) = exp(−1/A · D(Si, Sj))
where D(Si, Sj) is the χ2 distance and Si, Sj are vocabulary histograms. The
resulting χ2 kernel is a Mercer kernel.
Each detector/descriptor pair can be considered as an independent channel.
To combine diﬀerent channels, we sum their distances, i.e., D =  Di, i = 1, ..., n
where Di is the similarity measure of channel i. The kernel parameter A is
obtained by 5-fold cross validation on the training images.
For classiﬁcation, we use Support Vector Machines . For a two-class problem the decision function has the form g(x) = 
i αiyiK(xi, x)−b, where K(xi, x)
is the value of a kernel function for the training sample xi and the test sample
x. The yi ∈{−1, +1} and αi are the class label and the learned weight of the
training sample xi. b is a learned threshold parameter. The training samples
with αi > 0 are usually called support vectors.
We use the two-class setting for binary detection, i.e., classifying images as
containing or not a given object class. If we have m classes (m = 4 for the
PASCAL challenge), we construct a set of binary SVM classiﬁers g1, g2, ..., gm,
each trained to separate one class from the others. The SVM score is used as a
conﬁdence measure for a class (normalized to ).
Conclusions. Our bag-of-keypoints method achieves excellent results for object
category classiﬁcation. However, successful category-level object recognition and
localization is likely to require more sophisticated models that capture the 3D
shape of real-world object categories as well as their appearance. In the development of such models and in the collection of new datasets, bag-of-keypoints
methods can serve as eﬀective baselines and calibration tools.
Participants:
Ilkay Ulusoy1, Christopher M. Bishop2
Aﬃliation:
1Middle Eastern Technical University, Ankara, Turkey
2Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK
 , 
We follow several recent approaches and use an interest point detector to focus attention on a small number of local patches in each image. This
is followed by invariant feature extraction from a neighbourhood around each
interest point. Speciﬁcally we use DoG interest point detectors, and at each interest point we extract a 128 dimensional SIFT feature vector . Following
 we concatenate the SIFT features with additional colour features comprising
average and standard deviation of (R, G, B), (L, a, b) and (r = R/(R + G + B),
g = G/(R + G + B)), which gives an overall 144 dimensional feature vector.
We use tn to denote the image label vector for image n with independent
components tnk ∈{0, 1} in which k = 1, . . . K labels the class. Each class can
be present or absent independently in an image. Xn denotes the observation for
image n and this comprises a set of Jn feature vectors {xnj} where j = 1, . . . , Jn.
Note that the number Jn of detected interest points will in general vary from
image to image.
On a small-scale problem it is reasonable to segment and label the objects
present in the training images. However, for large-scale object recognition involving thousands of categories this will not be feasible, and so instead it is necessary
to employ training data which is at best ‘weakly labelled’. Here we consider a
training set in which each image is labelled only according to the presence or
absence of each category of object.
Next we associate with each patch j in each image n a binary label τnjk ∈
{0, 1} denoting the class k of the patch. These labels are mutually exclusive, so
k=1 τnjk = 1. These components can be grouped together into vectors
τnj. If the values of these labels were available during training (corresponding to
strongly labelled images) then the development of recognition models would be
greatly simpliﬁed. For weakly labelled data, however, the {τnj} labels are hidden
(latent) variables, which of course makes the training problem much harder.
Consider for a moment a particular image n (and omit the index n to keep the
notation uncluttered). We build a parametric model yk(xj, w) for the probability
that patch xj belongs to class k. For example we might use a simple linearsoftmax model with outputs
yk(xj, w) =
which satisfy 0 ⩽yk ⩽1 and 
k yk = 1. The probability of a patch label τj to
be class k is then given directly by the output yk:
p(τj|xj) =
yk(xj, w)τjk
Next we assume that if one, or more, of the patches carries the label for a
particular class, then the whole image will. Thus the conditional distribution of
the image label, given the patch labels, is given by
In order to obtain the conditional distribution p(t|X) we have to marginalize
over the latent patch labels. Although there are exponentially many terms in
this sum, it can be performed analytically for our model to give
[1 −yk(xj, w)]
[1 −yk(xj, w)]
Given a training set of N images, which are assumed to be independent, we
can construct the likelihood function from the product of such distributions, one
for each data point. Taking the negative logarithm then gives the following error
{tnk ln [1 −Znk] + (1 −tnk) ln Znk}
where we have deﬁned
[1 −yk (xnj, w)]
The parameter vector w can be determined by minimizing this error (which corresponds to maximizing the likelihood function) using a standard optimization
algorithm such as scaled conjugate gradients . More generally the likelihood
function could be used as the basis of a Bayesian treatment, although we do not
consider this here.
Fig. 14. METU: One patch labelling example for each class (motorbike, bike, people
and car). Red and green dots denote foreground and background respectively. The
patch labels are obtained by assigning each patch to the most probable class.
Once the optimal value wML
is found, the corresponding functions
yk(x, wML) for k = 1, . . . , K will give the posterior class probabilities for a new
patch feature vector x. Thus the model has learned to label the patches even
though the training data contained only image labels. Note, however, that as a
consequence of the noisy ‘OR’ assumption, the model only needs to label one
foreground patch correctly in order to predict the image label. It will therefore
learn to pick out a small number of highly discriminative foreground patches,
and will classify the remaining foreground patches, as well as those falling on
the background, as ‘background’ meaning non-discriminative for the foreground
An example of patch labelling and image classiﬁcation for each class is given
in Figure 14.
MPITuebingen
Participants:
Jan Eichhorn, Olivier Chapelle
Aﬃliation:
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics,
T¨ubingen, Germany
{jan.eichhorn,olivier.chapelle}@tuebingen.mpg.de
Main Concepts For the absent/present object categorization task we used a
Support Vector Classiﬁer. Each image is converted to a collection of Local Image
Descriptors (LIDs) and a kernel for sets is applied to this representation.
As LID we used the widely known SIFT-descriptors but instead of the
standard diﬀerence of Gaussians multiscale interest point detector we applied
a basic Harris corner detector at one single scale. Each image was converted
to a collection of LIDs where each LID contains coordinates, orientation and
appearance of a particular salient region whose location was selected by the
interest point detector (IPD). Note that, no data dependent post-processing of
the LIDs was performed (as for example PCA or clustering in the appearance
space of the training set).
For the successful use of Support Vector Classiﬁers it is necessary to deﬁne
a kernel function appropriate for the underlying type of data representation.
This function acts as a similarity measure (in our application for images) and
should reﬂect basic assumptions about similarity in the categorization sense. For
technical reasons it has to be a positive deﬁnite function.
To measure the similarity of two images, a possible strategy could be to ﬁnd
salient image regions of similar appearance (e.g. in SIFT-space) and thereby
establishing a geometrical correspondence between the objects on the images
(implicitly assuming that similar regions represent similar object parts).
In our method we avoid the complications of ﬁnding correspondences between images and neglect all geometry information at scales larger than the size
of the extracted salient regions. In practice this means we ignore the coordinates
of the LID and simply use its appearance part. Consequently the representation of a single image is reduced to a set of appearance vectors. On top of
this representation we can now apply a kernel function for sets, the so called
Bhattacharyya kernel . Details of this kernel are described in the following
Section. As a minor kernel we always used a standard Gaussian RBF-kernel
kRBF(x, x′) = exp(−∥x−x′∥
Maybe it is interesting to note that we observed a decreasing performance
when using during training the segmentation mask of the objects that was provided with the datasets. This behaviour might indicate that the method can use
information from the image background to infer the absence or presence of an
object. In case of more realistic datasets and true multi-class categorization this
eﬀect should vanish.
Bhattacharyya Kernel . The name of this kernel function arises from the
fact that it is based on the Bhattacharyya aﬃnity, a similarity measure that is
deﬁned for probability distributions:
kbhatt(p, p′) =
p(x) · p′(x) dx
To deﬁne a kernel function between two sets L and L′, it was suggested in
 to ﬁt a Gaussian distribution to each of the sets: L ∼N(μ, Σ) and L′ ∼
N(μ′, Σ′). Then, the value of the Bhattacharyya kernel is the Bhattacharyya
aﬃnity of the corresponding Gaussians, which can be formulated as a closed
expression
Kbhatt(L, L′) =|Σ|−1
μ⊤Σ−1μ + μ′⊤Σ′−1μ′
where Σ† = 2
Σ−1 + Σ′−1−1 and μ† =
Σ−1μ + Σ′−1μ′
Since the Gaussian approximation reﬂects only a limited part of the statistics
of the empirical distribution, the authors further propose to map the set elements
into a feature space induced by a minor kernel. The Bhattacharyya aﬃnity can
be computed in feature space by use of the kernel trick and doing so allows
to capture more structure of the empirical distribution. However, in feature
space the covariance matrices of each of the sets (Σ and Σ′ respectively) are
structurally rank-deﬁcient and therefore it is necessary to involve a regularization
step before computing the inverse:
˜Σ−1 = (Σ + η · Tr(Σ) · I)−1
Hereby a new parameter η is introduced, which adjusts the amount of regularization. The larger η is the more similar the two covariance matrices appear and
the more the kernel depends only on the diﬀerence of the set means17.
A more detailed analysis of other kernel functions for images represented by
LIDs is under review for publication. A preliminary version can be found in a
technical report .
Southampton
Participants:
Jason D. R. Farquhar, Hongying Meng, Sandor Szedmak,
John Shawe-Taylor
Aﬃliation:
University of Southampton, Southampton, UK
 
17 If the covariance matrices are identical (Σ = Σ′) the Bhattacharyya kernel reduces
to: Kbhatt(L, L′) = exp
4(μ −μ′)⊤Σ−1(μ −μ′)
PDF Method
Processing
Directions
Machine Learning
Classifier
descriptors
descriptors
Computation
Extraction
Dimensionality
Classifier
Classification
Fig. 15. Southampton: General classiﬁcation schema
Introduction. Our method consists of two main phases, as shown in Figure
15, a machine vision phase which computes highly discriminative local image
features, and a machine learning phase which learns the image categories based
upon these features. We present two innovations: 1) the Bhattacharyya kernel is
used to measure the similarity of the sets of local features found in each image,
and, 2) an extension of the well-known SVM, called SVM 2K, is used to combine
diﬀerent features and improve overall performance. Each of the main components
of our approach is described next.
Image Feature Extraction. On every image an interest point detector is applied to ﬁnd the interesting local patches of the image (usually centred around
corners). The types of the detectors used were, Multi-scale Harris-Aﬃne, and
Laplacian of Gaussians (LoG). To reduce the feature dimension and increase robustness to common image transformations (such as illumination or perspective)
a local feature is generated for each patch using the SIFT descriptor. For more
details see or .
Dimensionality Reduction. As the dimension of the SIFTs is relatively high
dimensionality reduction is used to improve the generalisation capability of the
learning procedure and diminish the overall training time. The two types of dimensionality reduction tried are: Principal Component analysis (PCA), which
ﬁnds directions of maximum variance in the input data, and Partial Least
Squares Regression (PLS) , which ﬁnds directions of maximum covariance
between input data and output labels.
PDF Computation. Image feature generation and dimensionality reduction
output a set of local descriptors per image. As most machine learning algorithms
cannot cope with variable length feature sets, previously histograms have been
used to map these to a ﬁxed length representation. An alternative approach is
to model the set of features as a probability distribution (PDF) over feature
Classifier Learning
Classifier A
Classifier B
Test Kernels
difference
decision values
Classifier
Fig. 16. Southampton: SVM 2K combines feature vectors arriving from distinct
space and then deﬁne a kernel between PDFs, which can be used in any kernelised learning algorithm, such as the SVM. We assumed that the set of image
features follow Gaussian distribution and then the Bhattacharyya kernel ,
K(Pr1(x), Pr2(x)) =
Pr2(x)dx, was used to measure similarity of
Classiﬁer Learning. To date only maximum margin based classiﬁers have been
used, speciﬁcally either a conventional SVM or our modiﬁed multi-feature
SVM, called SVM 2K. As shown in Figure 16, SVM 2K combines two distinct
feature sources (or kernels) to maximise the output classiﬁer performance. The
details can be found in .
Experiments. Three learning methodologies within the framework outlined
above were submitted which diﬀered only in the types of interest point detector
used (LoG or multi-scale Harris aﬃne) and the classiﬁer used (SVM or SVM 2K),
with both LoG and Harris-Aﬃne features used for SVM 2K. From initial experiments it was found that a 20 dimensional PLS reduction gave best performance
so this was applied in all cases.
Results: Classiﬁcation Task
Competition 1: test1
Table 8 lists the results of classiﬁcation competition 1. In this competition, training was carried out using only the train+val image set, and testing performed
on the test1 image set. For each object class and submission, the EER and AUC
measures are listed. Some participants submitted multiple results, and results
for all submissions are shown. The ROC curves for the competition are shown
in Figures 18–21, with each ﬁgure showing the results for a particular object
class. In these ﬁgures, only the “best” result submitted by each participant is
shown to aid clarity; the EER measure was used to choose the best result for
each participant.
The INRIA-Jurie method performed consistently best in terms of both EER
and AUC, achieving EER of 0.917–0.977 depending on the class. This method
Table 8. Results for competition 1: classiﬁcation, train using the train+val image
set and test on the test1 image set. For each object class and submission, the EER
and AUC measures are shown. Note that some participants submitted multiple results.
Bold entries in each column denote the “best” methods for that object class according
to EER or AUC.
Motorbikes Bicycles
Submission
Aachen: ms-2048-histo
0.926 0.979
0.842 0.931
0.861 0.928
0.925 0.978
Aachen: n1st-1024
0.940 0.987
0.868 0.954
0.861 0.936
0.920 0.979
Darmstadt: ISM
0.829 0.919
0.548 0.578
Darmstadt: ISMSVM
0.856 0.882
0.644 0.717
Edinburgh: bof
0.722 0.765
0.689 0.724
0.571 0.597
0.793 0.798
HUT: ﬁnal1
0.921 0.974
0.795 0.891
0.850 0.927
0.869 0.956
HUT: ﬁnal2
0.917 0.970
0.816 0.895
0.833 0.931
0.908 0.968
HUT: ﬁnal3
0.912 0.952
0.781 0.864
0.845 0.919
0.847 0.934
HUT: ﬁnal4
0.898 0.960
0.767 0.880
0.857 0.921
0.909 0.971
INRIA-Jurie: dcb p1
0.968 0.997
0.918 0.974 0.917 0.979 0.961 0.992
INRIA-Jurie: dcb p2
0.977 0.998 0.930 0.981
0.901 0.965
0.938 0.987
INRIA-Zhang
0.964 0.996 0.930 0.982 0.917 0.972
0.937 0.983
0.903 0.966
0.781 0.822
0.803 0.816
0.840 0.920
MPITuebingen
0.875 0.945
0.754 0.838
0.731 0.834
0.831 0.918
Southampton: develtest
0.972 0.994
0.895 0.961
0.881 0.943
0.913 0.972
Southampton: LoG
0.949 0.989
0.868 0.943
0.833 0.918
0.898 0.959
Southampton: mhar.aﬀ
0.940 0.985
0.851 0.930
0.841 0.925
0.901 0.961
uses the “bag of words” representation with local descriptors extracted at points
on a dense grid. Performance of the INRIA-Zhang method was very similar;
this method also uses the bag of words representation, but uses interest point
detection to extract a sparser set of local features. For three of the classes, the
ROC curves for the two methods intersect several times, making it impossible
to determine which method performs best overall; only for the “cars” class was
the performance of the INRIA-Jurie method consistently better over the whole
range of the ROC curve (Figure 21).
Performance of two of the other methods using distributions of local features:
Aachen and Southampton, was also similar but typically slightly worse than
the INRIA methods, though the Southampton method performed particularly
well on the “motorbikes” class. The Aachen method uses a log-linear model for
classiﬁcation, and the Southampton method the Bhattacharyya kernel instead
of the bag of words representation.
The MPITuebingen method, which is similar to the Southampton method in
the use of the Bhattacharyya kernel had consistently lower performance; reasons
might include diﬀerences in the method for extraction of local features. The
Edinburgh method, which is very similar to the INRIA-Zhang method gave
consistently worse results; Section 6.3 discusses the likely reasons for this.
Table 9. Results for competition 2: classiﬁcation, train using the train+val image
set and test on the test2 image set. For each object class and submission, the EER
and AUC measures are shown. Note that some participants submitted multiple results.
Bold entries in each column denote the “best” methods for that object class according
to EER or AUC.
Motorbikes Bicycles
Submission
Aachen: ms-2048-histo
0.767 0.825
0.667 0.724
0.663 0.721
0.703 0.767
Aachen: n1st-1024
0.769 0.829
0.665 0.729
0.669 0.739
0.716 0.780
Darmstadt: ISM
0.663 0.706
0.551 0.572
Darmstadt: ISMSVM
0.683 0.716
0.658 0.683
Edinburgh: bof
0.698 0.710
0.575 0.606
0.519 0.552
0.633 0.655
HUT: ﬁnal1
0.614 0.666
0.527 0.567
0.601 0.650
0.655 0.709
HUT: ﬁnal2
0.624 0.693
0.604 0.647
0.614 0.661
0.676 0.740
HUT: ﬁnal3
0.594 0.637
0.524 0.546
0.574 0.618
0.644 0.694
HUT: ﬁnal4
0.635 0.675
0.616 0.645
0.587 0.630
0.692 0.744
INRIA-Zhang
0.798 0.865 0.728 0.813 0.719 0.798 0.720 0.802
MPITuebingen
0.698 0.765
0.616 0.654
0.591 0.655
0.677 0.717
The HUT method, which is based on segmented image regions, performed
comparably to the methods based on local features for all but the “bicycles”
class; the poorer performance on this class might be anticipated because of the
diﬃculty of segmenting a bicycle from the background. The METU method,
based on individual local descriptors, performed worse than the methods using
the global distribution of local features except on the “motorbikes” class.
The “recognition by detection” method submitted by Darmstadt did not
perform well on this competition. Darmstadt chose to train only using side views,
and this will have limited the performance. Another possible reason is that there
was correlation between the object class presence and the appearance of the
background, which this method is unable to exploit.
Competition 2: test2
Table 9 lists the results of classiﬁcation competition 2. In this competition, training was carried out using only the train+val image set, and testing performed
on the test2 image set. The ROC curves for the competition are shown in Figures 22–25, with each ﬁgure showing the results for a particular object class.
Only the “best” result submitted by each participant is shown to aid clarity; the
EER measure was used to choose the best result for each participant.
Fewer participants submitted results for competition 2 than competition 1.
The best results were obtained by the INRIA-Zhang method both in terms of
EER and AUC, and for all object classes; this method also performed close to
best in competition 1.
Motorbikes
Fig. 17. Equal error rate (EER) results for classiﬁcation competitions 1 and 2 by class
and test set. The “best” (in terms of EER) result obtained for each class and each test
set is shown. Note that results were much better for the test1 set than for the test2
set. There is perhaps surprisingly little diﬀerence in performance across classes.
The Aachen method performed similarly to the INRIA-Zhang method in
competition 2, and better relative to the other methods than it did in competition 1; it may be that this method oﬀers more generalization which is helpful on
the more variable images in the test2 image set, but not for test1.
Performances of the Edinburgh, HUT, and MPITuebingen methods were all
similar but varied over the object classes. The poorer performance of the Edinburgh method on the test1 images was not clear for the test2 images.
In competition 2, the performance of the Darmstadt method was comparable
to the others, whereas it performed poorly in competition 1. It may be that in
the test2 dataset there are fewer regularities in the image context of the object
classes, so methods such as the Darmstadt one, which ignore the background,
are more eﬀective.
Comparison of Competitions 1 and 2
Figure 17 shows the best EER obtained for each object class in competition 1
(test1) and competition 2 (test2). The test2 image set seems to be much more
challenging; this was the intention in collecting this set of images. In terms of
EER, performance on the test2 images were worse than on the test1 images,
with EER in the range 0.720–0.798 for the best method, depending on the object
class, compared to 0.917–0.977 for competition 1. Recall that this second test
set was intended to provide a set of images with higher variability than those in
the ﬁrst image set; it seems that this intention has been met.
There is surprisingly little diﬀerence in performance of the best methods
across object classes, using either the test1 or test2 image sets. While performance on the two object classes that the object recognition community might
typically consider ‘easier’: motorbikes and cars, was indeed better than for the
other two classes on the test1 image set, the diﬀerences to the other classes are
small. One might expect recognition of bicycles to be much harder because of
their “wiry” structure which makes segmentation from the background diﬃcult,
or means that local features will a contain signiﬁcant area of background; humans might be considered diﬃcult to recognize because of the high variability of
shape (e.g. diﬀerent poses) and appearance (clothes, etc.). It is not possible to
oﬀer a conclusive explanation of the results here; one possibility is unintended
regularity in the background giving a strong cue to the object class. Because
none of the methods used here except the Darmstadt method delineate the object(s) in the image which result in a positive classiﬁcation, it is hard to tell
which parts of the image are being used by the classiﬁer.
false positives
true positives
INRIA−Jurie: dcb_p2
Southampton: develtest
INRIA−Zhang
Aachen: n1st−1024
HUT: final1
MPITuebingen
Darmstadt: ISMSVM
Edinburgh: bof
Fig. 18. ROC curves for motorbikes in competition 1: classiﬁcation, train using the
train+val image set and test on the test1 image set. The best result in terms of EER
from each participant is shown, with curves ranked by decreasing EER. The axes cover
a range equal to two times the maximum EER of the submitted results.
false positives
true positives
INRIA−Jurie: dcb_p2
INRIA−Zhang
Southampton: develtest
Aachen: n1st−1024
HUT: final2
MPITuebingen
Edinburgh: bof
Fig. 19. ROC curves for bicycles in competition 1: classiﬁcation, train using the
train+val image set and test on the test1 image set. The best result in terms of
EER from each participant is shown, with curves ranked by decreasing EER. The axes
cover a range equal to two times the maximum EER of the submitted results.
false positives
true positives
INRIA−Jurie: dcb_p1
INRIA−Zhang
Southampton: develtest
Aachen: ms−2048−histo
HUT: final4
MPITuebingen
Edinburgh: bof
Fig. 20. ROC curves for people in competition 1: classiﬁcation, train using the
train+val image set and test on the test1 image set. The best result in terms of
EER from each participant is shown, with curves ranked by decreasing EER. The axes
cover a range equal to two times the maximum EER of the submitted results.
false positives
true positives
INRIA−Jurie: dcb_p1
INRIA−Zhang
Aachen: ms−2048−histo
Southampton: develtest
HUT: final4
MPITuebingen
Edinburgh: bof
Darmstadt: ISMSVM
Fig. 21. ROC curves for cars in competition 1: classiﬁcation, train using the train+val
image set and test on the test1 image set. The best result in terms of EER from each
participant is shown, with curves ranked by decreasing EER. The axes cover a range
equal to two times the maximum EER of the submitted results.
false positives
true positives
INRIA−Zhang
Aachen: n1st−1024
Edinburgh: bof
MPITuebingen
Darmstadt: ISMSVM
HUT: final4
Fig. 22. ROC curves for motorbikes in competition 2: classiﬁcation, train using the
train+val image set and test on the test2 image set. The best result in terms of EER
from each participant is shown, with curves ranked by decreasing EER. The axes cover
a range equal to two times the maximum EER of the submitted results.
false positives
true positives
INRIA−Zhang
Aachen: ms−2048−histo
MPITuebingen
HUT: final4
Edinburgh: bof
Fig. 23. ROC curves for bicycles in competition 2: classiﬁcation, train using the
train+val image set and test on the test2 image set. The best result in terms of
EER from each participant is shown, with curves ranked by decreasing EER. The axes
cover a range equal to two times the maximum EER of the submitted results.
false positives
true positives
INRIA−Zhang
Aachen: n1st−1024
HUT: final2
MPITuebingen
Edinburgh: bof
Fig. 24. ROC curves for people in competition 2: classiﬁcation, train using the
train+val image set and test on the test2 image set. The best result in terms of
EER from each participant is shown, with curves ranked by decreasing EER. The axes
cover a range equal to two times the maximum EER of the submitted results.
false positives
true positives
INRIA−Zhang
Aachen: n1st−1024
HUT: final4
MPITuebingen
Darmstadt: ISMSVM
Edinburgh: bof
Fig. 25. ROC curves for cars in competition 2: classiﬁcation, train using the train+val
image set and test on the test2 image set. The best result in terms of EER from each
participant is shown, with curves ranked by decreasing EER. The axes cover a range
equal to two times the maximum EER of the submitted results.
Table 10. Results for competition 5: detection, train using the train+val image set
and test on the test1 image set. For each object class and submission, the AP measure
is shown. Note that some participants submitted multiple results. Bold entries in each
column denote the “best” methods for that object class according to AP.
Submission
Motorbikes Bicycles People
Darmstadt: ISM
Darmstadt: ISMSVM
Darmstadt: ISMSVM 2
Edinburgh: meanbb
Edinburgh: puritymeanbb
Edinburgh: siftbb
Edinburgh: wholeimage
FranceTelecom
INRIA-Dalal
INRIA-Dorko
Results: Detection Task
Competition 5: test1
Table 10 lists the results of detection competition 5. In this competition, training
was carried out using only the train+val image set, and testing performed on the
test1 image set. For each object class and submission, the AP measure is listed.
Some participants submitted multiple results, and results for all submissions are
shown. The precision/recall curves for the competition are shown in Figures 27–
30, with each ﬁgure showing the results for a particular object class.
Performance of methods on the detection tasks varied much more greatly
than for the classiﬁcation task, and there were fewer submissions. For the “motorbikes” class, the Darmstadt method performed convincingly better than other
methods, with an average precision of 0.886. The variant using an SVM veri-
ﬁcation stage (ISMSVM) was slightly better than that without it (ISM). The
FranceTelecom method also performed well on this class, giving good precision across all recall levels, but was consistently outperformed by the Darmstadt
method. The INRIA-Dorko method, which is a variant of the Darmstadt method,
performed only slightly worse than the Darmstadt method at low recall, but precision dropped oﬀsharply at recall above 0.5. The Darmstadt submission used
segmentation masks for training, while the INRIA-Dorko method used only the
bounding boxes, and this may account for the diﬀerence in results.
The INRIA-Dalal method performed signiﬁcantly worse for motorbikes than
the other methods. Section 6.6 reports improved results by modifying the window
size used by the detector. In the challenge, performance was close to the better of
the baseline methods provided by Edinburgh. These baseline methods used the
bag of words classiﬁer to assign conﬁdence to detections and predicted a single
bounding box either simply as the mean bounding box taken from the training
data, or as the bounding box of all Harris points in the image; the diﬀerence in
performance between these two methods was small. The success of these simple
methods can be attributed to the lack of variability in the test1 data: many
of the motorbikes appear in the centre of the image against a fairly uniform
background.
For the “bicycles” class, the only results submitted were for Edinburgh’s
baseline methods. The method predicting the bounding box as the bounding
box of all Harris points did best, suggesting that uniform background may have
been the reason.
For the “people” class, INRIA-Dalal, INRIA-Dorko and Edinburgh submitted
results. The INRIA-Dalal method performed best but AP was very low at 0.013.
The INRIA-Dorko method and baselines all gave almost zero average precision.
The poor results on this task may be attributed to the small size of the training
set relative to the large variability in appearance of people.
For the “cars” class, the INRIA-Dalal method achieved the highest AP of
0.304. For recall below 0.5, the Darmstadt method also performed well, with the
ISMSVM 2 run giving greater precision than the INRIA-Dalal method; precision
dropped oﬀsharply at higher levels of recall. Darmstadt chose to train only on
side views of cars and this explains the drop oﬀin precision as the method fails
to ﬁnd cars from other views.
The FranceTelecom method did not perform as well as the INRIA-Dalal or
Darmstadt methods, but was consistently much better than any of the Edinburgh
baselines. The failure of the baselines suggests that the car images exhibited
much less regularity than the motorbike images.
Competition 6: test2
Table 11 lists the results of detection competition 6. In this competition, training
was carried out using only the train+val image set, and testing performed on
the test2 image set. The precision/recall curves for the competition are shown
in Figures 31–34, with each ﬁgure showing the results for a particular object
Overall performance on the test2 image set was much worse than on the
test1 images. The best results were obtained for motorbikes, and for this class
AP dropped from 0.886 on test1 to 0.341 on test2.
The relative performance of the methods was largely unchanged from that
observed in competition 5. For motorbikes, the Darmstadt method performed
best, and for cars the INRIA-Dalal method. For the “cars” class, the INRIA-
Dalal method performed convincingly better than the Darmstadt method, which
achieved high precision but lower recall in competition 5. The reason for this may
be that the test2 images contain an even lower proportion of side views of cars
than in the test1 data.
The FranceTelecom method also gave results well above the baselines for the
“motorbikes” class, but results for the “cars” class were poor, with precision
dropping oﬀat very low recall.
Table 11. Results for competition 6: detection, train using the train+val image set
and test on the test2 image set. For each object class and submission, the AP measure
is shown. Note that some participants submitted multiple results. Bold entries in each
column denote the “best” methods for that object class according to AP.
Submission
Motorbikes Bicycles People
Darmstadt: ISM
Darmstadt: ISMSVM
Darmstadt: ISMSVM 2
Edinburgh: meanbb
Edinburgh: puritymeanbb
Edinburgh: siftbb
Edinburgh: wholeimage
FranceTelecom
INRIA-Dalal
For the “people” class, only INRIA-Dalal and Edinburgh submitted results.
The precision/recall curve of the INRIA-Dalal method was consistently above
any of the baseline methods, but AP was very low at 0.021; this is probably due
to the limited training data.
For all classes except people the Edinburgh baselines did surprisingly well,
though consistently worse than the other methods. In particular, the method
proposing the bounding box of all Harris points gave good results. This suggests
that there may still be a signiﬁcant bias toward objects appearing on a uniform
background in the test2 images.
Comparison of Competitions 5 and 6
Figure 26 shows the best AP obtained for each object class in competition 5
(test1) and competition 6 (test2). For the “motorbikes” and “cars” classes,
for which results signiﬁcantly better than the baselines were achieved, results on
test1 were much better than on test2 suggesting that the second test set is
indeed much more challenging, as was the intention.
Performance across the object classes varied greatly on both test sets. Note
however that for bicycles only results for “baseline” methods were submitted,
and for people results for only two methods were submitted for test1, and only
one method for test2.
For the test1 images, performance for motorbikes was better than that for
cars, which is interesting since one might expect cars to be easier to recognize
because of their more convex structure. The reason may be due to less variation
in the pose of motorbikes (mostly side views) relative to cars in the test1 images.
Results on the two classes for the test2 images were about equal, suggesting
that there is less bias in the second test set.
Motorbikes
Fig. 26. Average precision (AP) results for detection competitions 5 and 6 by class and
test set. The “best” (in terms of AP) result obtained for each class and each test set is
shown. For the motorbike and car classes the results were much better for the test1
set than for the test2 set. There is a large diﬀerence in performance across classes;
however note that few groups submitted results for bicycles and people.
Competitions 7 and 8
Competitions 7 and 8 allowed participants to use any training data other than
the test data provided for the challenge. Only one participant submitted results: INRIA-Dalal tackled the “people” class on both test sets. Figure 35 shows
precision/recall curves for these results. Average precision was 0.410 for the
test1 images, and 0.438 for the test2 images. These results are strikingly different than those obtained using the same method but only the provided training
data: AP of 0.013 for test1 and 0.021 for test2. This suggests that, certainly
for this method, the size of the training set provided for the “people” class was
inadequate.
Darmstadt: ISMSVM
Darmstadt: ISM
FranceTelecom
INRIA−Dorko
INRIA−Dalal
Edinburgh: puritymeanbb
Edinburgh: siftbb
Edinburgh: meanbb
Edinburgh: wholeimage
Fig. 27. PR curves for motorbikes in competition 5: detection, train using the
train+val image set and test on the test1 image set. All results submitted by each
participant are shown, with curves ranked by decreasing AP.
Edinburgh: wholeimage
Edinburgh: siftbb
Edinburgh: puritymeanbb
Edinburgh: meanbb
Fig. 28. PR curves for bicycles in competition 5: detection, train using the train+val
image set and test on the test1 image set. All results submitted by each participant
are shown, with curves ranked by decreasing AP.
INRIA−Dalal
Edinburgh: siftbb
Edinburgh: meanbb
Edinburgh: puritymeanbb
Edinburgh: wholeimage
INRIA−Dorko
Fig. 29. PR curves for people in competition 5: detection, train using the train+val
image set and test on the test1 image set. All results submitted by each participant
are shown, with curves ranked by decreasing AP.
INRIA−Dalal
Darmstadt: ISMSVM
Darmstadt: ISM
Darmstadt: ISMSVM_2
FranceTelecom
Edinburgh: meanbb
Edinburgh: puritymeanbb
Edinburgh: siftbb
Edinburgh: wholeimage
Fig. 30. PR curves for cars in competition 5: detection, train using the train+val
image set and test on the test1 image set. All results submitted by each participant
are shown, with curves ranked by decreasing AP.
Darmstadt: ISMSVM_2
Darmstadt: ISMSVM
Darmstadt: ISM
FranceTelecom
INRIA−Dalal
Edinburgh: puritymeanbb
Edinburgh: siftbb
Edinburgh: meanbb
Edinburgh: wholeimage
Fig. 31. PR curves for motorbikes in competition 6: detection, train using the
train+val image set and test on the test2 image set. All results submitted by each
participant are shown, with curves ranked by decreasing AP.
Edinburgh: siftbb
Edinburgh: wholeimage
Edinburgh: puritymeanbb
Edinburgh: meanbb
Fig. 32. PR curves for bicycles in competition 6: detection, train using the train+val
image set and test on the test2 image set. All results submitted by each participant
are shown, with curves ranked by decreasing AP.
INRIA−Dalal
Edinburgh: meanbb
Edinburgh: puritymeanbb
Edinburgh: siftbb
Edinburgh: wholeimage
Fig. 33. PR curves for people in competition 6: detection, train using the train+val
image set and test on the test2 image set. All results submitted by each participant
are shown, with curves ranked by decreasing AP.
INRIA−Dalal
Darmstadt: ISMSVM
FranceTelecom
Darmstadt: ISM
Edinburgh: siftbb
Edinburgh: wholeimage
Edinburgh: meanbb
Edinburgh: puritymeanbb
Fig. 34. PR curves for cars in competition 6: detection, train using the train+val
image set and test on the test2 image set. All results submitted by each participant
are shown, with curves ranked by decreasing AP.
Fig. 35. PR curves for people in competitions 7 and 8: detection, train using any data
other than the provided test sets. Results shown are for the sole submission, from
INRIA-Dalal.
Discussion
The challenge proved a worthwhile endeavour, with participation from twelve
groups representing nine institutions. A range of methods for object classiﬁcation
and detection were evaluated providing a valuable snapshot of the state of the
art in these tasks. The experience gained in the challenge, and discussion at the
challenge workshop, resulted in a number of issues for consideration in future
challenges.
Errors in the Data. Several participants commented on errors in the provided
data. Undoubtedly there remained some errors in the ﬁrst data set which arose
from incomplete labelling of the original image databases from which the images
were taken. Future challenges should improve the quality of this data. In terms
of evaluation, all participants used the same data so any errors should not have
caused bias toward a particular method. A key aspect of machine learning is
the ability of a learning method to cope with some proportion of errors in the
training data. It might be interesting for future challenges to consider data sets
with known and varying proportion of errors to test methods’ robustness to such
A related issue is the diﬃculty of establishing ground truth, particularly
for the detection task. For many images it is hard for a human observer to
judge whether a particular object is really recognizable, or to segment individual
objects, for example a number of bicycles in a bike rack. A unique aspect of the
challenge was that the images were collected without reference to a particular
method, whereas many databases will have been collected and annotated with a
particular approach e.g. window-based or parts-based in mind. Future challenges
might employ multiple annotations of the same images to allow some consensus
to be reached, or increasing the size of the datasets might reduce the eﬀect of
such ambiguity on evaluation results. The results of existing methods might also
be used to judge the “diﬃculty” of each image.
Limited Training Data. One participant commented that the training data
provided for the person detection task was insuﬃcient. However, there is a move
in the object recognition community toward use of small training sets, as little
as tens of images for some object classes, so there is some value in testing results with small training sets. Future challenges might consider providing larger
training sets.
Diﬃculty Level of the Data. One participant commented that the train+val
data was too “easy” with respect to the test data. Images were assigned randomly
to the train, val, and test1 image sets, so the training data should have been
unbiased with respect to test1. It is quite possible that for current methods, the
train+val data was not suﬃcient to learn a method successful on test2 images.
This is more a comment of current methods than the data itself, for example
most current methods are “view-based” and require training on diﬀerent views
of an object; other methods might not have such requirements.
Releasing Test Data. In the challenge, the test data with associated ground
truth was released to participants. Code to compute the ROC and PR curves was
given to participants and the computed curves were returned to the organizers.
This protocol was followed to minimize the burden on both participants and
organizers, however, because the participants had access to the ground truth of
the test sets, there was a risk that participants might optimize their methods on
the test sets.
It was suggested that for future challenges the test data and/or ground truth
not be released to participants. This gives two alternatives: (i) release images
but not ground truth. One problem here is that participants may informally
generate their own ground truth by “eye-balling” their results (this is much less
of a problem in most machine learning contests, where it is hard for humans to
generate predictions based on the input features); (ii) release no test data. This
would require that participants submit binaries or source code to the organizers
who would run it on the test data. This option was not taken for the challenge
because of anticipated problems in running participants’ code developed on different operating systems, with diﬀerent shared libraries, etc. Submitting source
code e.g. MATLAB code would also raise issues of conﬁdentiality.
Evaluation Methods. Some participants were concerned that the evaluation
measures (EER, AUC, AP) were not deﬁned before results were submitted. In
future challenges it might be productive to specify the evaluation measures,
though this does run the risk of optimizing a method with respect to a particular
measure. It might be useful to further divide the datasets to obtain a more
informative picture of what each method is doing, for example detecting small
vs. large objects, or particular views.
It was also suggested that evaluation of discrimination between classes carried
out more directly (e.g. in the forced-choice scenario), rather than in a set of
binary classiﬁcation tasks would be informative. Because of the use of images
containing objects from multiple classes, this requires deﬁning new evaluation
measures; one possibility is to measure classiﬁcation accuracy as a function of a
“refusal to predict” threshold.
Increasing the Number of Classes. Future challenges might increase the
number of classes beyond the four used here. This would be useful to establish
how well methods scale to a large number of classes. Other work has looked at
discrimination of 101 classes but only in the case that each image contains
a single object (using the “forced choice” scenario). New data sets must be
acquired to support evaluation in the more realistic case of multiple objects in
an image. A number of researchers are collecting image databases which could
contribute to this.
Measuring State-of-the-Art Performance. The challenge encouraged participants to submit results based on their own (unlimited) training data, but
only one such submission was received. This was disappointing because it prevented judgement of just how well these classiﬁcation and detection tasks can
be achieved by current methods with no constraints on training data or other
resources. Future challenges should provide more motivation for participants to
submit results from methods built using unlimited resources.
Acknowledgements
We are very grateful to those who provided images and their annotations; these
include: Bastian Leibe & Bernt Schiele (TU-Darmstadt), Shivani Agarwal, Aatif
Awan & Dan Roth (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign), Rob Fergus
& Pietro Perona (California Institute of Technology), Antonio Torralba, Kevin
P. Murphy & William T. Freeman (Massachusetts Institute of Technology), Andreas Opelt & Axel Pinz (Graz University of Technology), Navneet Dalal &
Bill Triggs (INRIA), Michalis Titsias (University of Edinburgh), and Hao Shao
(ETH Zurich). The original PASCAL Object Recognition database collection
and web pages were assembled by Manik Varma (University of Oxford). We are also grateful to Steve
Gunn (University of Southampton) for enabling creation of the challenge web
pages, Rebecca Hoath (University of Oxford) for help assembling the challenge
database, and to Kevin Murphy for spotting several glitches in the original development kit.
Funding for this challenge was provided by the IST Programme of the European Community, under the PASCAL Network of Excellence, IST-2002-506778.
This publication only reﬂects the authors’ views.