Sparse Reconstruction Cost for Abnormal Event Detection
Yang Cong1, Junsong Yuan1, Ji Liu2
1School of EEE, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA
 , , 
We propose to detect abnormal events via a sparse reconstruction over the normal bases. Given an over-complete
normal basis set (e.g., an image sequence or a collection of
local spatio-temporal patches), we introduce the sparse reconstruction cost (SRC) over the normal dictionary to measure the normalness of the testing sample. To condense the
size of the dictionary, a novel dictionary selection method
is designed with sparsity consistency constraint. By introducing the prior weight of each basis during sparse reconstruction, the proposed SRC is more robust compared
to other outlier detection criteria. Our method provides a
uniﬁed solution to detect both local abnormal events (LAE)
and global abnormal events (GAE). We further extend it to
support online abnormal event detection by updating the
dictionary incrementally. Experiments on three benchmark
datasets and the comparison to the state-of-the-art methods
validate the advantages of our algorithm.
1. Introduction
The Oxford English Dictionary deﬁnes abnormal as:
deviating from the ordinary type, especially in a way
that is undesirable or prejudicial; contrary to the normal rule or system; unusual, irregular, aberrant.
According to the deﬁnition, the abnormal events can be
identiﬁed as irregular events from normal ones.
the task is to identify abnormal (negative) events given
the normal (positive) training samples.
To address this
one-class learning problem, most conventional algorithms
 intend to detect testing sample with lower
probability as anomaly by ﬁtting a probability model over
the training data. As a high-dimensional feature is essential to better represent the event and the required number
of training data increases exponentially with the feature dimension, it is unrealistic to collect enough data for density
estimation in practice. For example, for our global abnormal detection, there are only 400 training samples with di-
(a) Reconstruction Coefﬁcients of Normal & Abnormal samples.
(b) Frame-level SRC (Sw).
Figure 1. (a) Top left: the normal sample; top right: the sparse reconstruction coefﬁcients; bottom left: the abnormal sample; bottom right: the dense reconstruction coefﬁcients. (b) Frame-level
Sparsity Reconstruction Cost (SRC): the red/green color corresponds to abnormal/normal frame, respectively. It shows that the
SRC (Sw) of abnormal frame is greater than normal ones, and we
can identify abnormal events accordingly.
mension of 320. With such a limited training samples, it is
difﬁcult to even ﬁt a Gaussian model. Sparse representation
is suitable to represent high-dimensional samples, we thus
propose to detect abnormal events via a sparse reconstruction from normal ones. Given an input test sample y ∈Rm,
we reconstruct it by a sparse linear combination of an overcomplete normal (positive) basis set Φ = Rm×D, where
m < D. To quantify the normalness, we propose a novel
sparse reconstruction cost (SRC) based on the weighted l1
minimization. As shown in Fig.1, a normal event is likely to
generate sparse reconstruction coefﬁcients with a small reconstruction cost, while abnormal event is dissimilar to any
of the normal basis, thus generates a dense representation
with a large reconstruction cost.
Depending on the applications, we classify the abnormal events into two categories: the local abnormal event
(LAE), where the local behavior is different from its spatio-
temporal neighborhoods; or the global abnormal event
(GAE), where the whole scene is abnormal, even though
any individual local behavior can be normal. To handle both
cases, the deﬁnition of training basis y can be quite ﬂexible,
such as image patch or spatio-temporal subvolume. It thus
provides a general way of representing different types of
abnormal events. Moreover, we propose a new dictionary
selection method to reduce the size of the basis set Φ for
an efﬁcient reconstruction of y. The weight of each basis is
also learned to indicate its individual normalness, i.e., the
occurrence frequency. These weights form a weight matrix
W which serves as a prior term in the l1 minimization.
We evaluate our method in three datasets and the comparison with the state-of-the-art methods validate the following advantages of our proposed methods:
• We take into account the prior of each basis as the
weight for l1 minimization and propose a criterion
(SRC) to detect abnormal event, which outperforms
the existing criterion, e.g., Sparsity Concentration Index in .
• Beneﬁtting from our new dictionary selection model
using sparsity consistency, our algorithm can generate
a basis set of minimal size and discard redundant and
noisy training samples, thus increases computational
efﬁciency accordingly.
• By using different types of basis, we provide a uni-
ﬁed solution to detect both local and global abnormal
events in crowded scenes. Our method can also be
extended to online event detection via an incremental
self-update mechanism.
2. Related Work
Research in video surveillance has made great progresses in recent years, such as background model , object tracking , pedestrian detection , action recognition
 and crowd counting . Abnormal event detection, as
a key application in video surveillance, has also provoked
great interests. Depending on the speciﬁc application, the
abnormal event detection can be classiﬁed into those in the
crowded scenes and those in the un-crowded scenes. For the
un-crowded scenario, binary features based on background
model have been adopted, such as Normalization Cut clustering by Hua et al. and 3D spatio-temporal foreground
mask feature fusing Markov Random Field by Benezeth et
al. . There are also some trajectory-based approaches to
locate objects by tracking or frame-difference, such as ,
 , and .
For the crowded scenes, according to the scale, the problem can be classiﬁed into LAE and GAE. Most of the stateof-the-art methods consider the spatio-temporal information. For LAE, most work extract motion or appearance
features from local 2D patches or local 3D bricks, like histogram of optical ﬂow, 3D gradient, etc; the co-occurrence
matrices are often chosen to describe the context information. For example, Adam et al. use histograms to measure the probability of optical ﬂow in a local patch. Kratz
 extract spatio-temporal gradient to ﬁt Gaussian model, and then use HMM to detect abnormal events.
The saliency features are extracted and associated by graph
model in . Kim et al. model local optical ﬂow with
MPPCA and enforce the consistency by Markov Random
Field. In , a graph-based non-linear dimensionality reduction method is used for abnormality detection. Mahadevan et al. model the normal crowd behavior by mixtures
of dynamic textures.
For the GAE, Mehran et al. present a new way to
formulate the abnormal crowd behavior by adopting the social force model , and then use Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) to detect abnormality. In , they deﬁne a
chaotic invariant to describe the event. Another interesting
work is about irregularities detection by Boiman and Irani
 , in which they extract 3D bricks as the descriptor and
use dynamic programming as inference algorithm to detect
the anomaly. Since they search the current feature from all
the features in the past, this approach is time-consuming.
3. Our Method
3.1. Overview
In this paper, we propose a general abnormal event detection framework using sparse representation for both LAE
and GAE. The key part of our algorithm is the sparsity pursuit, which has been a hot topic in machine learning recently
and includes cardinality sparsity , group sparsity ,
matrix or tensor rank sparsity . Assisted by Fig.1-2, we
will show the basic idea of our algorithm. In Fig.2(C), each
point is a feature point in a high dimensional space; various features are chosen for LAE or GAE depending on the
circumstances, which is concatenated by Multi-scale Histogram of Optical Flow (MHOF), as in Fig.2(B). Usually at
the beginning, only several normal frames are given for initialization and features are extracted to generate the whole
feature pool B (the light blue points), which contains redundant noisy points. Using sparsity consistency in Sec.3.5, an
optimal subset B′ with a small size is selected from B as
training dictionary, e.g. dark blue points in Fig.2(C), where
the radius of each blue point relates to its importance, i.e.
its weight.
In Sec.3.4, we introduce how to test the new sample y.
Each testing sample y could be a sparse linear combination of the training dictionary by a weighted l1 minimization. Whether y is normal or not is determined by the linear
reconstruction cost Sw, as shown in Fig.1. Moreover, our
system can also online self-update, as will be discussed in
7HPSRUDO%DVLV
6SDWLDO7HPSRUDO
6SDWLDO%DVLV
9DULRXV%DVLV
Figure 2. (A) The Multi-scale HOF is extracted from a basic unit (2D image patch or 3D brick) with 16 bins. (B) The ﬂexible spatiotemporal basis for sparse representation, such as type A, B and C, concatenated by MHOF from basic units. (C) The illustration of our
algorithm. The green or red point indicates the normal or abnormal testing sample, respectively. An optimal subset of representatives (dark
blue point) are selected from redundant training features (light blue points) as basis to constitute the normal dictionary, where its radius
indicates the weight. The larger the size, the more normal the representative. Then, the abnormal event detection is to measure the sparsity
reconstruction cost (SRC) of a testing sample (green or red points) over the normal dictionary (dark blue points).
Sec.3.5. The Algorithm is shown in Alg.2.
3.2. Multi-scale HOF and Basis Deﬁnition
To construct the basis for sparse representation, we propose a new feature descriptor called Multi-scale Histogram
of Optical Flow (MHOF). As shown in Fig.2(A), the MHOF
has K=16 bins including two scales. The smaller scale uses
the ﬁrst 8 bins to denote 8 directions with motion magnitude
r < Tr; the bigger scale uses the next 8 bins corresponding
to r ≥Tr (Tr is the magnitude threshold). Therefore, our
MHOF not only describes the motion direction information
as traditional HOF, but also preserves the more precise motion energy information. After estimating the motion ﬁeld
by optical ﬂow , we partition the image into a few basic
units, i.e. 2D image patches or spatio-temporal 3D bricks,
then extract MHOF from each unit.
To handle different local abnormal events (LAE) and
global abnormal events (GAE), we propose several bases
with various spatio-temporal structures, whose representation by a normalized MHOF is illustrated in Fig.2(B). For
GAE, we select the spatial basis covering the whole frame.
For LAE, we extract the temporal or spatio-temporal basis
that contains spatio-temporal contextual information, such
as the 3D Markov Random Field .
And the spatial
topology structure can take place the co-occurrance matrix.
In general, our deﬁnition of the basis is very ﬂexible and
other alternatives are also acceptable.
3.3. Dictionary Selection
In this section, we address the problem of how to select
the dictionary given an initial candidate feature pool as B =
[b1,b2,··· ,bk] ∈Rm×k, where each column vector bi ∈Rm
denotes a normal feature. Our goal is to ﬁnd an optimal
subset to form the dictionary B′ = [bi1,bi2,··· ,bin] ∈Rm×n
where i1,i2,··· ,in ∈{1,2,··· ,k}, such that the set B can be
well reconstructed by B′ and the size of B′ is as small as
possible. A simple idea is to pick up candidates randomly
or uniformly to build the dictionary. Apparently, this cannot make full use of all candidates in B. Also it is risky to
miss important candidates or include the noisy ones, which
will affect the reconstruction. To avoid this, we present a
principled method to select the dictionary. Our idea is that
we should select an optimal subset of B as the dictionary,
such that the rest of the candidates can be well reconstructed
from it. More formally, we formulate the problem as follows:
where X ∈Rk×k; the Frobenius norm ∥X∥F is deﬁned as
∥X∥F := (∑i, j X2
2 ; and the l1 norm is deﬁned as ∥X∥1 :=
∑i, j |Xij|. However, this tends to generate a solution of X
close to I, which leads the ﬁrst term of Eq. 1 to zero and is
also very sparse. Thus, we need to require the consistency
of the sparsity on the solution, i.e., the solution needs to
contain some “0” rows, which means that the corresponding features in B are not selected to reconstruct any data
samples. We thus change the l1 norm constraint in Eq. 1
into the l2,1 norm, deﬁned as ∥X∥2,1 := ∑k
i=1 ∥Xi.∥2, where
Xi. denotes the ith row of X. The problem is now formulated
F +λ∥X∥2,1.
The dictionary B′ is constituted by selecting basis with
∥Xi.∥2 ̸= 0. The l2,1 norm is indeed a general version of the
l1 norm since if X is a vector, then ∥X∥2,1 = ∥X∥1. In addition, ∥X∥2,1 is equivalent to ∥x∥1 by constructing a new
vector x ∈Rk with xi = ∥Xi.∥2. From this angle, it is not
hard to understand that Eq. 1 leads to a sparse solution for
X, i.e., X is sparse in terms of rows.
Next we show how to solve this optimization problem
in Eq. 2, which is a convex but nonsmooth optimization
problem. Since ∥X∥2,1 is nonsmooth, although the general
optimization algorithm (the subgradient descent algorithm)
can solve it, the convergence rate is quite slow. Recently,
Nesterov proposed an algorithm to efﬁciently solve a
type of convex (but nonsmooth) optimization problem and
guarantee a convergence rate of O(1/K2) (K is the iteration
number), which is much faster than the subgradient decent
algorithm of O(1/
K). We thus follow the fundamental
framework of Nesterov’s method in to solve this problem in Eq. 2. Consider an objective function f0(x) + g(x)
where f0(x) is convex and smooth and g(x) is convex but
nonsmooth. The key technique of Nesterov’s method is to
use pZ,L(x) := f0(Z)+⟨∇f0(Z),x−Z⟩+ L
to approximate the original function f(x) at the point Z. At
each iteration, we need to solve argmin
: pZ,L(x).
In our case, we deﬁne f0(X) = 1
λ∥X∥2,1. So we have
pZ,L(X) = f0(Z)+⟨∇f0(Z),X−Z⟩+ L
F +λ∥X∥2,1
Then we can get the closed form solution of Eq.3 according
to the following theorem:
Theorem 1:
X pZ,L(X) = D λ
where Dτ(.) : M ∈Rk×k 7→N ∈Rk×k
(1−τ/∥Mi.∥)Mi.,
otherwise.
We will derive it in the Appendix, and the whole algorithm
is presented in Alg. 1.
3.4. Sparse Reconstruction Cost using Weighted l1
Minimization
This section details how to determine a testing sample
y to be normal or not. As we mentioned in the previous
subsection, the features of a normal frame can be linearly
constructed by only a few bases in the dictionary B′ while
an abnormal frame cannot. A natural idea is to pursue a
sparse representation and then use the reconstruction cost to
judge the testing sample. In order to advance the accuracy
of prediction, two more factors are considered here:
• In practice, the deformation or any un-predicated situation may happen to the video. Motivated by ,
we extend the dictionary from B′ to Φ = [B′,Im×m] ∈
Rm×D, and D = n+m.
Algorithm 1 Dictionary Selection
Input: B, λ > 0, K, X0, c
1: Initialize Z0 = X0, a0 = 1.
2: for k = 0,1,2,...,K do
Xk+1 = argmin
X : pZk,L(X) = D λ
while f(Xk+1) > pZk,L(Xk+1) do
Xk+1 = argmin
X : pZk,L(X) = D λ
ak+1 = (1+
10: end for
• If a basis in the dictionary appears frequently in the
training dataset, then the cost to use it in the reconstruction should be lower, since it is a normal basis
with high probability. Therefore, we design a weight
matrix W = diag[w1,w2,...,wn,1,...,1] ∈RD×D to
capture this prior information. Each wi ∈ corresponds to the cost of the ith feature. For the artiﬁcial
feature set Im×m in our new dictionary Φ, the cost for
each feature is set to 1. The way to dynamically update
W will be introduced in the following section.
Now, we are ready to formulate this sparse reforestation
x∗= argmin
2 + λ1∥Wx∥1,
where x = [x0,e0]T, x0 ∈Rn, and e0 ∈Rm.
be solved by linear programming using the interior-point
method, which uses conjugate gradients algorithm to compute the optimized direction. Given a testing sample y, we
design a Sparsity Reconstruction Cost (SRC) using the minimal objective function value of Eq.6 to detect its abnormality:
2 + λ1∥Wx∗∥1.
A high SRC value implies a high reconstruction cost and a
high probability of being an abnormal sample. In fact, the
SRC function also can be equivalently mapped to the framework of Bayesian decision like in . From a Bayesian
view, the normal sample is the point with a higher probability, on the contrary the abnormal (outlier) sample is the
point with a lower probability. We can estimate the normal
Algorithm 2 Abnormal Event Detection Framework
Input: Training dictionary Φ, basis weight matrix W0, sequential input testing sample Y ∈[y1,y2,··· ,yT]
1: for t = 1,··· ,T do
Pursuit the coefﬁcient x∗by l1 minimization:
x∗= argmin
2∥yt −Φx∥2
2 +∥Wt−1x∥1
Calculate SRC function St
if y is normal then
Select top K basis coefﬁcients of x∗
Update Wt ←−Wt−1
9: end for
sample by maximizing the posteriori as follows:
x⋆= argmax
x p(x|y,Φ,W) = argmax
x p(y|x,Φ,W)p(x|Φ,W)
x p(y|x,Φ)p(x|W)
x −[log p(y|x,Φ)+log p(x|W)]
2 +λ1∥Wx∥1),
likelihood
p(y|x,Φ) ∝
and the second term p(x;W) ∝
exp(−λ1∥Wx∥1) is the prior distribution. This is consistent
with our SRC function, as the abnormal samples correspond
to smaller p(y|x,Φ), which results in greater SRC values.
3.5. Self-Updating
For a normal sample y, we selectively update weight matrix W and dictionary Φ by choosing the top K bases with
the highest positive coefﬁcients of x∗
0 ∈Rn, and we denote
the top K set as Sk = [s1,··· ,sk].
As we have mentioned above, the contribution of each
basis to the l1 minimization reconstruction is not equal. In
order to measure such a contribution, we use W to assign
each basis a weight. The bases with higher weight, should
be used more frequently and are more similarity to normal
event and vice verse. We initialize W from matrix X of
dictionary selection in Alg.1, i.e.,
where β = [β1,...,βn] ∈Rn denotes the accumulate coefﬁcients of each basis, and wi ∈ (the smaller the value of
wi, the more likely a normal sample it is). The top K bases
in W can be updated as follows:
i , {i ∈Sk},
where Sk is the index set of the top K features in W.
4. Experiments and Comparisons
To test the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm, we
systematically apply it to several published datasets. The
UMN dataset is used to test the GAE; and the UCSD
dataset and the Subway dataset are used to detect
LAE. Moreover, we re-annotate the groundtruth of the Subway dataset using bounding boxes, where each box contains one abnormal event. Three different levels of measurements are applied for evaluation, which are Pixel-level,
Frame-level and Event-level measurements.
4.1. Global Abnormal Event Detection
The UMN dataset consists of 3 different scenes of
crowded escape events, and the total frame number is 7740
(1450, 4415 and 2145 for scenes 1−3, respectively) with a
320 × 240 resolution. We initialize the training dictionary
from the ﬁrst 400 frames of each scene, and leave the others
for testing. The type A basis in Fig.2(B), i.e., spatial basis,
is used here. We split each image into 4×5 sub-regions, and
extract the MHOF from each sub-region. We then concatenate them to build a basis with a dimension m = 320. Because the abnormal events cannot occur only in one frame,
a temporal smooth is applied.
The results are shown in Fig.3, the normal/abnormal results are annotated as red/green color in the indicated bars
respectively. In Fig.4, the ROC curves by frame-level measurement are shown to compare our SRC to three other measurements, which are
i. SRC with W as an identity matrix in Eq.7, S = 1
2 +λ1∥x∗∥1.
ii. by formulating the sparse coefﬁcient as a probability
distribution, the entropy is used as a metric: SE =
−∑i pi log pi, where p(i) = |x(i)|/∥x∥1, thus sparse coefﬁcients will lead to a small entropy value.
iii. concentration
Tk(x)/∥x∥1, where Tk(x) is the sum of the k largest
positive coefﬁcients of x (the greater the Ss the more
likely a normal testing sample).
Moreover, Table 1 provides the quantitative comparisons to
the state-of-the-art methods. The AUC of our method is
from 0.964 to 0.995, which outperforms and is comparable to . However, our method is a more general solution, because it covers both LAE and GAE. Moreover, Nearest Neighbor (NN) method can also be used in high dimensional space by comparing the distances between the testing
sample and each training samples. The AUC of NN is 0.93,
which is lower than ours. This demonstrates the robustness
of our sparse representation method over NN method.
Groun Truth
Our Result
Figure 3. The qualitative results of the global abnormal event detection for three sample videos from UMN dataset. The top row represents
snapshots of the result for a video in the dataset. At the bottom, the ground truth bar and the detection result bar show the labels of each
frame for that video, where green color denotes the normal frames and red corresponds to abnormal frames.
Figure 5. Examples of local abnormal event detections for UCSD Ped1 datasets. The objects, such as biker, skater and vehicle are all well
Area under ROC
Chaotic Invariants 
Social Force 
Optical ﬂow 
Ours Scene1
Ours Scene2
Ours Scene3
Table 1. The comparison of our proposed method with the stateof-the-art methods for GAE detection in the UMN dataset.
Figure 4. The ROCs for frame-level GAE detection in the UMN
dataset. We compare different evaluation measurements, including
SRC, SRC with W = I, concentration function SS and entropy SE.
Our proposed SRC outperforms other measurements.
4.2. Local Abnormal Event Detection
UCSD Ped1 Dataset
The UCSD Ped1 dataset contains pixel-level groundtruth.
The training set contains 34 short clips for learning of normal patterns, and there is a subset of 10 clips in testing
set provided with pixel-level binary masks, which identify
the regions containing abnormal events. Each clip has 200
frames, with a 158 × 238 resolution. We split each frame
into 7 × 7 local patches with 4-pixel overlapping. Type C
basis in Fig.2(B), spatio-temporal basis, is selected to incorporate both local spatial and temporal information, with
a dimension m = 7×16 = 102. From each spatial location,
we estimate a dictionary and use it to determine whether a
testing sample is normal or not. A spatio-temporal smooth
is adopted here to eliminate noise, which can be seen as
a simpliﬁed version of spatio-temporal Markov Random
Field .
Some image results are shown in Fig.5. Our algorithm
can detect bikers, skaters, small cars, etc. In Fig.6, we compare our method with MDT, Social force and MPPCA, etc.
Both pixel-level and frame-level measurements are deﬁned
in . It is easy to ﬁnd that our ROC curve outperforms
others. In Fig.6(c), some evaluation results are presented:
the Equal Error Rate (EER) (ours 19% < 25% ), Rate
of Detection (RD) (ours 46% > 45% ) and Area Under
Curve (AUC) (ours 46.1% > 44.1% ), we can conclude
that the performance of our algorithm outperforms the stateof-the-art methods.
Subway Dataset
The subway dataset is provided by Adam et al. , including two videos: “entrance gate” (1 hour 36 minutes long
with 144249 frames) and “exit gate” (43 minutes long with
64900 frames). In our experiments, we resized the frames
MPPCA 
SF-MPPCA 
Figure 6. The detection results of UCSD Ped1 dataset. (a) Frame-level ROCs for Ped1 Dataset, (b) Pixel-level ROCs for Ped1 Dataset, (c)
Quantitative comparison of our method with : EER is equal error rate; RD is rate of detection; and AUC is the area under ROC.
Ground truth
Table 2. Comparisons of accuracy for subway videos. The ﬁrst
number in the slash (/) denotes the entrance gate result; the second
is for the exit gate result.
from 512 × 384 to 320 × 240 and divided the new frames
into 15 × 15 local patches with 6-pixel overlapping. The
type B basis in Fig.2(B), temporal basis, is used with a dimension of m = 16 × 5 = 80. The ﬁrst 10 minutes are collected to estimate an optimal dictionary. The patch-level
ROC curves for both data sets are presented in Fig. 8, where
the positive detection and false positive correspond to each
individual patch, and the AUCs are about 80% and 83%,
respectively.
The examples of detection results are shown in Fig.7. In
additional to wrong direction events, the no-payment events
are also detected, which are very similar to normal “checking in” action. The event-level evaluation is shown in Table
2, our method detects all the wrong direction events, and
also has a higher accuracy for no-payment events, comparing to others. This is because we use temporal basis which
contains temporal causality context.
All experiments are run on a computer with 2GB RAM
and a 2.6GHz CPU. The average computation time is
0.8s/frame for GAE, 3.8s/frame for UCSD dataset, and
4.6s/frame for the Subway dataset.
5. Conclusion
We propose a new criterion for abnormal event detection, namely the sparse reconstruction cost (SRC). Whether
a testing sample is abnormal or not is determined by its
sparse reconstruction cost, through a weighted linear reconstruction of the over-complete normal basis set. Thanks to
the ﬂexibility of our proposed dictionary selection model,
our method cannot only support an efﬁcient and robust estimation of SRC, but also easily handle both local abnormal
Figure 7. Examples of local abnormal events detection for Subway
dataset. The top row and bottom row are from exit and entrance
video sets, respectively, and red masks in the yellow rectangle indicate where the abnormality is, including wrong directions (A-D)
and no-payments (E-F).
Figure 8. The frame-level ROC curves for both subway entrance
and exit datasets
events (LAE) and global abnormal events (GAE). By incrementally updating the dictionary, our method also supports
online event detection. The experiments on three benchmark datasets show favorable results when compared with
the state-of-the-art methods. Our method can also apply to
other applications, such as event or action recognition.
Acknowledgement
This work is supported in part by the Nanyang Assistant
Professorship (SUG M58040015) to Dr. Junsong Yuan.
We prove Theorem 1 here, where the optimization problem
X : pZ,L(X) can be equivalently written as:
X : f0(Z)+⟨∇f0(Z),X−Z⟩+ L
F +λ∥X∥2,1
2 ∥(X−Z)+ 1
L∇f0(Z))∥2
F +λ∥X∥2,1
L∇f0(Z))∥2
F +λ∥X∥2,1
L∇f0(Z))∥2
Since the l2 norm is self dual, the problem above can be rewritten
by introducing a dual variable Y ∈Rk×k:
L∇f0(Z))∥2
∥Yi.∥2≤1⟨Yi.,Xi.⟩
∥Yi.∥2≤1min
L∇f0(Z))∥2
∥Yi.∥2≤1min
The second equation is obtained by swapping “max” and “min”.
Since the function is convex with respect to X and concave with
respect to Y, this swapping does not change the problem by the
Von Neumann minimax theorem. Letting X = Z −1
L Y, we obtain an equivalent problem from the last equation above
∥Yi.∥2≤1 : −1
Using the same substitution as above,
L∇f0(Z)), we change it into a problem in terms of the original
variable X as
L ∇f0(Z))i.∥2≤1
L ∇f0(Z))i.∥2≤λ
Therefore, the optimal solution of the ﬁrst problem in Eq. 14 is
equivalent to the last problem in Eq. 14. Actually, each row of
X can be optimized independently in the last problem. Considering each row of X respectively, we can get the closed form as
X pZ,L(X) = D λ