Computer assisted learning in undergraduate medical
Trisha Greenhalgh
It is becoming “a truth universally acknowledged” that
the education of undergraduate medical students will be
learning. Access to the wide range of online options
illustrated in the figure must surely make learning more
exciting, effective, and likely to be retained. This assumption is potentially but by no means inevitably correct.
Deans of medical faculties often receive requests
development
learning projects. Decisions to introduce these projects
into the undergraduate curriculum are generally justified by one or more of the arguments listed in box 1.
Developing applications
Computer assisted learning applications generally
require the student to follow the content without
immediate or direct supervision from the tutor. But the
computer can be a temperamental and unforgiving
beast, and computer assisted learning applications
must therefore embody the quality features described
in box 2. For all these reasons, computer assisted learning materials are initially much more labour intensive
and time consuming to prepare than most face to face
courses, and they often require input from fairly senior
members of staff. Once the basic format is agreed and
the initial materials have been written, however,
materials can be maintained and updated relatively
easily and by more junior members. Off the shelf templates that allow someone with no specific training to
produce materials of professional quality are increasingly available. Introducing computer assisted learning
technologies into a traditional course will generally
occur in stages, as described in box 3. Adapting
pre-existing materials designed as handouts or revision
notes can sometimes save considerable time.
Fulfilling its potential
Educationists are excited about the potential of so
called third generation distance education technologies
environment
5 in which the learner actively builds rather
than passively consumes knowledge. This requires a
transformed view of the nature of knowledge itself as
dynamic, open ended, multidimensional, and public
rather than static, finite, linear, and private.
Computer technologies can support a wide range
of learning activities which engage students in a
continuous collaborative process of building and
understanding.
theoretical
appeal and broadly positive results from a handful of
randomised trials conducted by enthusiasts (table), the
real advantages of computer assisted learning in medical curricula outside the research setting have yet to be
shown consistently.
Published studies
Few articles on computer assisted learning in medical
education have been published. A search of Medline
and ERIC databases using the Mesh term “medical
education” and free text terms “computer based” and
“computer assisted” turned up around 200 potentially
relevant studies, of which only 12 were prospective
Box 1: Why fund computer assisted learning?
Computer assisted learning is inevitable—Individual lecturers and departments
are already beginning to introduce a wide range of computer based
applications, sometimes in a haphazard way. Planned and coordinated
development is better than indiscriminate expansion
It is convenient and flexible—Courses supported by computer assisted learning
applications may require fewer face to face lectures and seminars and place
fewer geographical and temporal constraints on staff and students. Students
at peripheral hospitals or primary care centres may benefit in particular
Unique presentational benefits—Computer presentation is particularly suited
to subjects that are visually intensive, detail oriented, and difficult to
conceptualise, such as complex biochemical processes or microscopic
1 Furthermore, “virtual” cases may reduce the need to use animal or
human tissue in learning
Personalised learning—Each learner can progress at his or her preferred
pace. They can repeat, interrupt, and resume at will, which may have
particular advantages for weaker students
Economies of scale—Once an application has been set up, the incremental
cost of offering it to additional students is relatively small
Competitive advantage—Potential applicants may use the quality of
information technology to discriminate between medical schools. A
“leading edge” virtual campus is likely to attract good students
Achieves the ultimate goal of higher education—The goal is to link people into
learning communities. Computer applications, especially the internet and
world wide web, are an extremely efficient way of doing this
Expands pedagogical horizons—The most controversial argument for using
computer assisted learning in higher education is the alleged ability of the
virtual campus to alter fundamentally the relation between people and
Summary points
Reduced funding, rising student numbers,
geographical dispersal, and increased competition
in a complex global market have put medical
schools under pressure to embrace computer
assisted learning
New technologies may have important
educational advantages, but without support and
training for staff and students they could prove an
expensive disaster
Expansion of computer assisted learning requires
cultural change as well as careful strategic
planning, resource sharing, staff incentives, active
promotion of multidisciplinary working, and
effective quality control
Education and debate
Open Learning
Unit, Department of
Primary Care and
Population
Sciences, Royal Free
and University
College Medical
School, London
Trisha Greenhalgh
senior lecturer in
primary care
p.greenhalgh@ucl.
BMJ 2001;322:40–4
BMJ VOLUME 322
6 JANUARY 2001
randomised studies with objective, predefined outcome criteria (table). These studies represent a range of
different settings, interventions, and outcomes and are
therefore not directly comparable. Most studies have
methodological problems, including lack of statistical
power, potential contamination between intervention
and control groups, and attrition of the sample.
As the table shows, the randomised controlled trials
suggested that the efficacy (the “can it work?” question
described by Haynes
17) of high quality programmes in
medical education is reasonably well established, a
finding that is in keeping with meta-analyses of
computer assisted learning in non-medical education.
18 However, the effectiveness and cost effectiveness
of these initiatives remain in doubt.
In the mid-1990s, at least two UK medical schools
supplied all first year students with laptop computers
and enhanced access to a range of networked multimedia applications. One project was never formally
evaluated, but anecdotal reports suggested that many
students found the computers expensive, impractical,
and difficult to integrate with the mainstream curriculum (P Booton, personal communication). Results of the
other project were published. The authors bravely
admitted that some students made no use of their computers at all, technical glitches and incompatibility problems were common, staff were ill prepared for the
change in learning medium, and “there was no
academic organisational structure to shape a coherent
response to the rapid increase in computer use.”
Lack of engagement
Failure of students to engage with newly introduced
technology
non-medical education. Perceived barriers include
inadequate planning, poor integration with other
forms of learning, and cultural resistance from staff.
One ethnographic study in which students were closely
observed while taking part in online courses showed
that considerable frustration and time wasting arose
from poor course design, technical glitches, “dead”
hypertext links, poorly coordinated real time seminars,
and ambiguous instructions.
20 The only study of
computer assisted learning in medical education that
used comparable, in depth, qualitative methods found
few such problems, but it was restricted to students’ use
of computers in a supervised classroom setting.
Transferability and evaluation
Three important conclusions can be drawn from the
reports. Firstly, innovators who have developed apparently successful products should be guarded about
claiming that their systems are transferable, even when
the efficacy of these systems has been shown in the
evaluation
educational technologies should include observation
of unsupervised students attempting to gain access
from remote sites and follow online links and instruc-
Box 3: Stages in integrating web technology
into a traditional degree course (adapted from
Devitt and Palmer
Level 1—Course has a public access web page directed
at potential students
Level 2—Course materials include links to public access
Level 3—Students generate web based resources
(glossaries, topic summaries, etc) and share them on
an internal website
Level 4—Key course resources (lecture notes, slides, etc)
are available on an internal website
Level 5—Students prepare materials based on course
content (for example, clinical case histories) for other
learners and publish them on the internet
Level 6—Participation in web based learning activities is
a course requirement (for example, a course based
bulletin board)
Level 7—Participation in web based learning activities
extending beyond the class is a course requirement
(for example, membership of an academic list server)
Level 8—Web serves as an alternative delivery
mechanism for resident students (range of interactive
materials available for asynchronous access to students
on campus, who may choose to work with these rather
than attend some face to face classes)
Level 9—Entire course is available on the web for
students to access anywhere (includes full electronic
syllabus, teleconferencing, facilities for sending and
receiving attachments, and collaborative coursework)
Level 10—Fully web based course is part of larger
programmatic web initiative (for example, students
may collect transferable credits from this course
towards a trans-university degree)
Box 2: Quality features of applications
Open learning (self study) materials—Applications must be prepared in
advance, cover explicit course aims and learning objectives, and include a
high degree of “signposting,” explanatory text, and trouble shooting
information
Website design—Websites should have a logical structure and sequence, utilise
features such as hypertext and graphics, and include links to public access,
web based materials such as electronic journals where appropriate
Technical design—Applications must be user friendly and operate effectively
within the hardware and software constraints of the end user
University culture—Applications must present an academic ethos in the
untidy, commercial, and laissez-faire culture of web based publishing and
protect the student from the distractions of the internet
Copyright protection—Applications should reflect an agreed university policy
on intellectual property rights
discussion
Interactive IT package
allows feedback
during lectures
Computer assisted
group work within
traditional degree course
Fully web based
interactive
degree course
Bulletin board
"virtual bar"
Students post
on local intranet
MCQs for self
assessment on
local intranet
Students use
presentation software
(PowerPoint, etc)
non-interactive
degree course
Students are directed
to online catalogues
and databases
Assignments
on floppy disc
"Hard copy" materials,
eg reading
lists, on local intranet
Online books,
atlases, archives,
and galleries
Lectures on
video disc
Freestanding
study modules
Email contact
between tutor
and student
High tech,
high cost,
high skill
"instructivist"
Interactive,
"constructivist"
Types of computer assisted learning materials available
Education and debate
BMJ VOLUME 322
6 JANUARY 2001
tions. Thirdly, neither course materials nor teaching
skills are directly transferable from the traditional
lecture theatre to the virtual campus. We should recognise, and take systematic steps to guard against, the
danger of allowing inadequately trained tutors and lecturers to “go virtual.”
Learning culture
The differences in learning culture between computer
based and traditional learning should not be underestimated, especially for the novice. As Reingold
argues, “Fear is an important element in every novice
computer user’s first attempts to use a new machine or
Published randomised controlled trials of computer assisted learning (CAL) methods in undergraduate medical education
Trial (country)
Aim of study
participants
completing
Study groups
Outcome measure
Carr et al (USA)6
To compare a CAL programme
with traditional methods in
teaching management of
(a) Pre-instruction test
(b) CAL programme
(c) Small group seminar
Performance on
written and practical
assessment
No significant difference between
D’Alessandro et al
To compare a CAL textbook
with lecture, printed textbook,
and no textbook as a
supplement to the paediatric
(a) Multimedia textbook
(b) Supplementary lectures
(c) Printed textbook
(d) “Control group”
Performance on
written assessment
at end of placement
and one year later
Multimedia textbook group
performed significantly better than
other groups in end of firm
assessment but this difference was
not sustained at one year.
Devitt et al (Australia)4
To compare different CAL
methods with classroom
teaching in anatomy teaching
(a) CAL (didactic)
(b) CAL (problem based)
(c) CAL (free text response)
(d) Face to face teaching
Performance on
written assessment
Students in CAL (didactic) group
performed significantly better than
the other three groups
Elves et al (UK)8
To compare CAL plus
classroom teaching with
classroom teaching alone in
(a) Classroom teaching of
urological topics
(b) Classroom teaching plus
CAL package
Performance on
multiple choice
assessment
Classroom plus CAL group
performed significantly better than
classroom alone group
Hilger et al (USA)9
To compare a CAL programme
with no instruction in teaching
management of streptococcal
pharyngitis
(a) CAL instruction
programme on strep
pharyngitis
(b) No intervention
Performance on
MCQ assessment
CAL group scored significantly
higher in post intervention
assessment
Kallinowski et al
(Germany)10
To compare a CAL programme
with a lecture in teaching
management of radial fracture
(a) Multimedia CAL package
with video clips and detailed
clinical information
(b) Lecture
Various measures of
student satisfaction
CAL group rated the learning
experience 15%-20% better than
lecture group
Lyon et al (Australia)11
To compare a CAL programme
with text based study in
teaching management of
anaemia and chest pain
(a) Interactive “intelligent”
CAL programme using text,
hypertext, images, and
critiquing theory
(b) Printed text materials
Performance on
higher order
(problem solving)
Large,thorough study designed to
address methodological criticisms
of previous research. No
differences in performance between
groups but CAL group took 43%
less time to achieve same level of
competence
Mehta et al (USA)12
To compare CAL alone with
CAL plus classroom methods
in oncology teaching
(a) Multimedia CAL oncology
programme alone
(b) CAL programme with
classroom teaching
Performance on
written assessment
plus satisfaction
“No major differences” between
groups on oncology knowledge.
75% felt CAL an important
educational resource, but only 1%
felt it could replace classroom
teaching. Main dissatisfaction was
with speed of downloading
multimedia images
Rogers et al (USA)13
To compare CAL with
classroom methods for
teaching basic surgical
knowledge and skills
(a) CAL programme on how
to tie a two handed surgical
knot plus practice board
(b) Lecture and personalised
feedback plus practice board
Knowledge of how to
tie the knot and
practical skill
(recorded on video)
No differences between groups in
knowledge but CAL group
significantly lower in practical skill
Schwarz et al
(Australia)14
To compare three types of
computer based performance
feedback in making diagnoses
(a) Instructional CAL package
without feedback
(b) CAL with simulated patient
cases and outcome feedback
(c) CAL with simulated patient
cases and Bayesian feedback
(d) CAL with simulated patient
cases and Bayesian plus rules
(e) Delphic instruction and
Bayesian plus rules feedback
Performance on
MCQs and diagnostic
accuracy in
structured
assessment
Students in instructional CAL
group improved more on MCQs.
Those using CAL with simulated
patient cases plus feedback
improved more on diagnostic
accuracy. No difference between
different methods of feedback
Summers et al (USA)15
To compare didactic teaching
with video and an interactive
CAL programme for teaching a
basic surgical skill
(a) Didactic tutorial
(b) Videotape
(c) Multimedia CAL
Performance on
MCQ and in objective
structured clinical
evaluation
assessments
Didactic group scored significantly
higher on MCQs. Videotape and
CAL groups had significantly better
technical skills. CAL group’s skills
were better sustained at one month
Weverling et al
(Netherlands)16
To assess the value of a CAL
programme with simulated
patients as a supplement to
classroom teaching in
(a) Standard clinical
neurology course with ward
and classroom teaching
(b) Additional optional access
to CAL programme with 20
simulated patients during the
5 week neurology attachment
Performance in both
problem solving
assessment and a
knowledge test
CAL group performed significantly
better in the problem solving
exercise but not in the knowledge
MCQ=multiple choice question.
Education and debate
BMJ VOLUME 322
6 JANUARY 2001
new software: fear of destroying data, fear of hurting
the machine, fear of seeming stupid in comparison to
others, or even to the machine itself.”
One author has distinguished between students
who “lose themselves” and those who “find themselves”
in the virtual environment of email discussions,
another found that whereas some students perceived
their virtual seminar group as part of a warm, friendly,
and supportive online community, others perceived
themselves facing a whole sea of strangers, perhaps
reflecting different stages in the development of online
learning skills (box 4) or different learning styles.
Issues of costs and training
The cost of hardware and software, and telephone line
charges, often prove a more important barrier to accessing web based materials than the course organisers
initially assume. The amount of training needed to
become comfortable with specialised software packages
is often underestimated; students on a course that relies
heavily on computer work may spend most of their first
term getting to grips with the technology. Few students
learn all the essential technical skills at the outset of the
course. Rather, they tend to use “just in time learning”—
that is, most of them make no attempt to get to grips
with a feature of the software until they actually need to
use that feature. This suggests that too much initial
training may not be popular or effective
Recommendations for introducing
computer assisted learning
Invest in staff development
Developing computer assisted learning applications is
a lengthy and skilled process. Innovators within
traditional courses have embraced the concept and
have often produced creative and high quality material
supplement
individuals are in a minority; most academics will not
become developers or supporters of computer assisted
learning unless considerable time and resources are
dedicated to supporting this activity.
25 Staff who are
sent on “generic” workshops designed to improve their
use of computer assisted learning technologies may
complain afterwards that they still do not know where
to start and feel that the time was not well spent.
all these reasons, staff training should be tightly
targeted and be offered on a project by project basis.
Provide a central resource base
Avoid reinventing the wheel. Templates, models, and
images developed for one course may also serve
another course within the same institution (and even
beyond it). Mechanisms to allow exchange of skills,
resources, and ideas between institutions must be put
in place early, as exemplified by the University of Aberdeen Medical School’s structured approach to the
development
addition, medical schools must identify and become
part of wider networks that are already sharing and
working collaboratively on materials, such as the UK
Assisting Collaborative Education Project.
Aim to use different methods
Academics generally construct courses in a somewhat
haphazard way from prepared lectures, handouts,
photocopies of book chapters, reading lists, journal
articles, laboratory notes, case studies, and so on.
Hence, the vision of a degree course that is completely
virtual—high tech, fully integrated, stand alone, based
entirely on computer applications, and difficult to
upgrade—is unlikely to become the model for the
typical course of the future. Rather, computer assisted
learning products are most likely to be used by
academics if they are easily customised, capable of
integrated
traditional teaching material, and discarded as soon as
their useful life is past.
Staff incentives
Intensive and continuing central support for departmental initiatives should be linked to appropriate
incentives and rewards for individual staff who become
active members of the virtual campus. These should be
both internal (for example, included in criteria for promotion) and external (for example, accreditation via
Association for Learning Technologies).
Example of computer assisted learning application used at UCL Medical School
Box 4: Stages of competence in online learning (adapted from
Level 1—Gaining access. Is able to log on and motivated to continue; posts
first “joining” message when instructed
Level 2—Becoming familiar with the online environment. Possesses basic
technical skills and is confident in sending and receiving messages to and
from tutor and other students
Level 3—Seeking and giving information. Is confident in using all features of
the software. Freely offers, receives, and processes information from others
Level 4—Knowledge construction. Shows actions on line that are likely to lead
to knowledge construction, including creative and active thinking (asking
challenging questions, reflecting, suggesting ideas) and interactive thinking
(critiquing, negotiating interpretations, summarising, proposing actions
based on ideas)
Level 5—Autonomy and development. Takes responsibility for own continuing
development in online learning. Is able to set up and support own virtual
Education and debate
BMJ VOLUME 322
6 JANUARY 2001
Multidisciplinary working
The development of computer based teaching and
learning materials requires expertise in content, in
pedagogy, and in technical aspects of design and delivery. Staff with most to offer in the way of technical
design may overlook important educational principles,
and those who focus on content may make incorrect
assumptions about the ability of the technology to
deliver their imaginative ideas. A multidisciplinary,
team based approach is likely to be the most successful
model for working.
Address issues of organisational culture
Introducing interactive learning technology is a contemporary
difficulties
embedding new ideas and new ways of working into
institutions that are resistant to change. Lessons can be
drawn from strategic change theory; essential steps
energising
commitment, developing political support, managing
the transition, and sustaining momentum. Resistance to
change is most likely to come from the underlying
culture of the organisation—that is, values, ways of thinking, management styles, and pedagogical paradigms.
Initiatives to develop computer based materials
usually begin as distinct projects with management
and development processes separate from, and parallel
to, the existing structures and processes of the university. This inevitably limits the impact of the initiative in
terms of its benefits to the whole organisation,
increases costs through duplication, and imposes limits
to its expansion and continuation. Ad hoc innovations
in computer assisted learning, whether conceived of as
pilot or pump priming projects, frequently fade away
when the individuals associated with them move on to
other activities.
Developing a university from a position in which it
supports small, discrete, department based initiatives to
one in which the virtual campus is embedded in established mainstream activities is complex. Stress lines may
appear in a number of areas, notably student administration, student support, quality assurance, staff development policies and priorities, infrastructure development,
financial management, and resource priorities.
The future
Many medical schools are discovering the prohibitive
cost of producing high quality computer assisted
learning materials. In the spirit of Dr Blunkett’s
collaborative e-university, a new form of academic
commerce in off the shelf, web based course materials
is beginning to emerge.
31 Agreements between universities (and countries) on sharing units of education
may eventually lead to the awarding of a degree that
cannot be identified with a single institution.
25 Funding
of a medical degree may even begin to occur on a
module by module basis and, arguably, is less likely to
come from a single central source.
32 The medical
school of the future may be one that can successfully
offer (in collaboration with other educational providers) a flexible menu of both face to face and self study
modules from which individual students can select to
meet their own unique requirements. Any other
option, including staying as we are, may ultimately
prove unaffordable.
I am grateful to Professor Lewis Elton for helpful comments on
an earlier draft of this paper. The views expressed are mine alone.
Competing interests: None declared.
Phillips R. Developers’ guide to interactive multimedia. A methodology for
educational applications. Perth: Curtin University Press, 1996.
Haag M, Maylein L, Leven FJ, Tonshoff B, Haux R. Web-based training: a
new paradigm in computer-assisted instruction in medicine. Int J Med
Informatics 1999;53:79-90.
Daniel JS. The knowledge media. In: Mega-universities and knowledge
media. Technology strategies for higher education. London: Kogan Page,
1996:101-35.
Devitt P, Palmer E. Computer-aided learning: an overvalued educational
resource? Med Ed 1999;33:136-9.
Grabinger S, Dunlap JC. Rich environments for active learning: a definition. www.warwick.ac.uk/alt-E/rolling/123 .
Thorne M, ed. Universities in the future. London: Department of Trade and
Industry, 1999.
Carr MM, Reznick RK, Brown DH. Comparison of computer-assisted
instruction and seminar instruction to acquire psychomotor and
cognitive knowledge of epistaxis management. Otolaryngol Head Neck
Surg 1999;121:430-4.
D’Alessandro DM, Kreiter CD, Erkonen WE, Winter RJ, Knapp HR. Longitudinal follow-up comparison of educational interventions: multimedia
traditional
1997;4:719-23.
Elves AW, Ahmed M, Abrams P. Computer-assisted learning; experience
at the Bristol Urological Institute in the teaching of urology. Br J Urol
1997;80 (suppl 3):59-62.
10 Hilger AE, Hamrick HJ, Denny FW Jr. Computer instruction in learning
streptococcal
pharyngitis.
1996;150:629-31.
11 Kallinowski F, Mehrabi A, Gluckstein C, Benner A, Lindinger M, Hashemi
B, et al. Computer-based training—a new method in surgical education
and continuing education. Chirurg 1997;68:433-8.
12 Lyon HC Jr, Healy JC, Bell JR, O’ Donnell JF, Shultz EK, Wigton RS, et al.
Significant
efficiency
controlling
confounders of CAI research in the PlanAlyzer project’s computer-based,
self-paced, case-based programs in anemia and chest pain diagnosis. J
Med Systems 1991;15:117-32.
13 Mehta MP, Sinha P, Kanwar K, Inman A, Albanese M, Fahl W. Evaluation
of internet-based oncologic teaching for medical students. J Cancer Educ
1998;13:197-202.
14 Rogers DA, Regehr G, Yeh KA, Howdieshell TR. Computer-assisted
learning versus a lecture and feedback seminar for teaching a basic surgical technical skill. Am J Surg 1998;175:508-10.
15 Schwartz S, Griffin T. Comparing different types of performance
feedback and computer-based instruction in teaching medical students
how to diagnose acute abdominal pain. Acad Med 1993;68:862-4.
16 Summers AN, Rinehart GC, Simpson D, Redlich PN. Acquisition of surgical skills: a randomized trial of didactic, videotape, and computer-based
training. Surgery 1999;126:330-6.
17 Weverling GJ, Stam J, ten Cate TJ, van Crevel H. Computer-assisted education in problem-solving in neurology; a randomized educational study.
Nederlands Tijdschrift voor Geneeskunde 1996;140:440-3.
18 Haynes B. Can it work? Does it work? Is it worth it? The testing of healthcare interventions is evolving. BMJ 1999;319:652-3.
Meta-analytic
computer-based
instruction. In: Baker EL, O’Neil HF, eds. Technology assessment in education
and training. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1994:52-66.
20 Conroy RM, Brazier H, Clarke E. Giving laptop computers to medical
students. CTITM Update 1999;9:10-1.
21 Hara N, Kling R. Students’ frustrations with a web-based distance education course: a taboo topic in the discourse. www.slis.indiana.edu/CSI/
wp99_01.html .
22 Lehmann HP, Freedman JA, Massad J, Dintzis RZ. An ethnographic, controlled study of the use of a computer-based histology atlas during a
laboratory course. J Am Med Informatics Assoc 1999;6:38-52.
23 Reingold H. The virtual community. London: Minerva, 1995:10.
24 Salmon G. E-moderating: a guide to tutoring and mentoring on line. London:
Kogan Page, 2000.
25 Bonk CJ, Cummings JA, Hara N, Fischler RB, Lee SM. A ten level web
integration continuum for higher education: new resources, partners,
courses, and markets. In: Abbey B, ed. Instructional and cognitive impacts of
education.
University
php.indiana.edu/~cjbonk .
26 Daniel JS. The technology adoption life-cycle. In: Mega-universities and
knowledge media. Technology strategies for higher education. London: Kogan
Page, 1996:88-90.
27 Conole G. Integration through iteration: the project-based approach.
Proceedings of the learning technology life cycle 6th international
conference, Bristol, 21-23 September 1999. www.ilrt.bris.ac.uk/alt-c99/
ips-day1.htm .
28 Hamilton
Development and integration of CAL: a case study in medicine. Med Ed
1999;33:298-305.
29 Assisting Collaborative Network. ace.ac.uk .
30 Elton L. New ways of learning in higher education: managing the change.
Tertiary Educ Manage 1999;5:207-25.
31 Brown S. Reinventing the university. Assoc Learning Technol J 1999;6:30-7.
32 Fender B. The e-university project. London: Higher Education Funding
Council for England, April 2000. .
 
Education and debate
BMJ VOLUME 322
6 JANUARY 2001