The Implementation of Low-cost Urban Acoustic
Monitoring Devices
Charlie Mydlarz1,2, Justin Salamon1,2 and Juan Pablo Bello2
1Center for Urban Science and Progress, New York University, USA
2Music and Audio Research Laboratory, New York University, USA
The urban sound environment of New York City (NYC) can be, amongst other
things: loud, intrusive, exciting and dynamic. As indicated by the large majority of noise complaints registered with the NYC 311 information/complaints
line, the urban sound environment has a profound eﬀect on the quality of life
of the city’s inhabitants. To monitor and ultimately understand these sonic
environments, a process of long-term acoustic measurement and analysis is required. The traditional method of environmental acoustic monitoring utilizes
short term measurement periods using expensive equipment, setup and operated
by experienced and costly personnel. In this paper a diﬀerent approach is proposed to this application which implements a smart, low-cost, static, acoustic
sensing device based around consumer hardware. These devices can be deployed
in numerous and varied urban locations for long periods of time, allowing for
the collection of longitudinal urban acoustic data. The varied environmental
conditions of urban settings make for a challenge in gathering calibrated sound
pressure level data for prospective stakeholders. This paper details the sensors’
design, development and potential future applications, with a focus on the calibration of the devices’ Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) microphone in
order to generate reliable decibel levels at the type/class 2 level.
smart cities, MEMS, microphone, IEC 61672, calibration, noise,
cyber physical system
1. Introduction
Noise pollution is an increasing threat to the well-being and public health
of city inhabitants . It has been estimated that around 90% of New York
City (NYC) residents are exposed to noise levels exceeding the Environmental
Protection Agencies (EPA) guidelines on levels considered harmful to people
 . The complexity of sound propagation in urban settings and the lack of an
accurate representation of the distribution of the sources of this noise have led to
an insuﬃcient understanding of the urban sound environment. While a number
of past studies have focused on speciﬁc contexts and eﬀects of urban noise , no
 
May 30, 2016
 
comprehensive city-wide study has been undertaken that can provide a validated
model for studying urban sound in order to develop long-lasting interventions
at the operational or policy level.
To monitor and ultimately foster a greater understanding of urban sound,
an initial network of low-cost acoustic sensing devices were designed and
implemented to capture long-term audio and objective acoustic measurements
from strategic urban locations using wireless communication strategies. These
prototype sensing devices currently incorporate a quad-core Android based mini
PC with Wi-Fi capabilities, and a Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) microphone. The initial goal is to develop a comprehensive cyber-physical system
that provides the capability of capturing, analyzing and wirelessly streaming
environmental audio data, along with its associated acoustic features and metadata. This will provide a low-cost and scalable solution to large scale calibrated
acoustic monitoring, and a richer representation of acoustic environments that
can empower a deeper, more nuanced understanding of urban sound based on
the identiﬁcation of sources and their characteristics across space and time. As
part of this goal, work is ongoing to equip the sensors with state-of-the-art machine listening capabilities, brieﬂy discussed in Section 9.3, such as automatic
sound source identiﬁcation through the development of novel algorithms. This
approach aims to enable the continuous monitoring and ultimately the understanding of these urban sound environments.
1.1. New York City noise
In 2014 the NYC 311 information/complaints line 1, received 145,252 complaints about noise, up 34% from 2013.
As of August 2015, 105,063 noise
complaints have already been registered . NYC has tried to regulate sources
of noise since the 1930s and in 1972 it became the ﬁrst city in the U.S. to enact
a noise code . As a result of signiﬁcant public pressure, a revised noise code
went into eﬀect in 2007 . This award-winning code, containing 84 enforceable
noise violations, is widely-considered to be an example for other cities to follow
 . However, NYC lacks the resources to eﬀectively and systematically monitor noise pollution, enforce its mitigation and validate the eﬀectiveness of such
action. Generally, the Noise Code is complaint driven. The NYC Department
of Environmental Protection (DEP) inspectors are dispatched to the location of
the complaint to determine the ambient sound level and the amount of sound
above the ambient, where a notice of violation is issued whenever needed. Unfortunately, the combination of limited human resources, the transient nature of
sound, and the relative low priority of noise complaints causes slow or in-existent
responses that result in frustration and disengagement.
New York City noise has been the focus of a plethora of studies investigating:
noise levels in relation to air pollutants and traﬃc , noise exposure from
urban transit systems and noise exposure at street level . All of
these highlight the fact that noise is an underrepresented ﬁeld in urban health
1 
and found that average levels of outdoor noise at many locations around the
city exceed federal and international guidelines set to protect public health.
Sensing of noise conditions using 56 relatively low cost logging sound level meters
(SLMs) was investigated in , where general purpose SLMs were used to log
SPL measurements over the period of one week. These type of deployments
can help to identify noise patterns over short periods of time with respect to
other factors such as traﬃc intensity, but are lacking in their ability to monitor
noise over longer duration’s. Long term noise monitoring is required to allow
health researchers to perform better epidemiological studies of environmental
contributions to cardiovascular disease .
With its population, its agency infrastructure, and its ever-changing urban
soundscape, NYC provides an ideal venue for a comprehensive study and understanding of urban sound.
1.2. Type certiﬁcation and IEC 61672
In order for a piece of equipment to be suitable for acoustic measurement
purposes, it should comply with the sound level meter (SLM) standard IEC
61672-1 .
This includes, for example, tolerance limits for a device’s frequency response, self-generated noise and linearity. Two “type” speciﬁcations
are deﬁned where type 1 devices, designated Precision, are intended for accurate sound measurements in the ﬁeld and laboratory, type 2 devices, designated
General Purpose, are intended for general ﬁeld use. The overall accuracy of
the device is determined by its “type” rating. In the US, the general minimum
type speciﬁcation for use in noise surveying is type 2. The American National
Standards Institute’s 1983 ANSI S 1.4 for “type” certiﬁcation shares many
similarities with the more recent 2013 IEC 61672-1, however, the later standard does make more demands on the sound level meter regarding accuracy,
performance and calibration. It is not the intention of this paper to prove that
this sensor network can be used to generate legally enforceable acoustic data
for a location, but the data that it can provide will be a real-time, continuous
and accurate indication of the acoustic conditions in which each sensor inhabits.
This data stream will help to inform and augment urban noise enforcement procedures, e.g. optimizing the allocation of in-depth noise assessment personnel
and equipment.
With the current 2013 IEC 61672-1 standard for type ratings, a traditional
MEMS microphone does not allow for the full set of test procedures to be carried
out. The MEMS diaphragm is electrically connected to the pre-ampliﬁer stage
within the microphone’s casing which does not allow for the direct injection of
an electrical test signal to this internal pre-ampliﬁer as deﬁned in Section 5.1.16
in IEC 61672-1:
5.1.16 The microphone shall be removable to allow insertion of electrical test signals to the input of the pre-ampliﬁer.
Thus, MEMS microphones cannot currently be granted a type rating using
the 2013 IEC speciﬁcations.
Future revisions to the standard would surely
beneﬁt from an expansion to handle the ever advancing MEMS microphones as
the sensing component for low-cost and scalable noise monitoring solutions.
2. A high quality & scalable acoustic sensor network
The last decade has produced a number of diﬀerent approaches for environmental noise monitoring. These static acoustic sensor networks vary from expensive, dedicated acoustic monitoring stations to low-cost examples that make use
of consumer grade hardware. Advances in low-power computing, microphone
technology and networking have provided these dedicated stations incremental upgrades in the form of real-time data transmission capabilities, but these
advancements have had the most profound eﬀect on the more ﬂexible low-cost
sensor nodes which can now perform advanced DSP (digital signal processing)
on audio data captured using high quality microphones and transmit via a number of wireless networking strategies. These statically deployed acoustic sensors
can be grouped into three general categories, where sensor functionality and
cost are the focus:
2.1. Category 1 - Dedicated monitoring stations
These commercial devices are designed and built for the purpose of accurate, reliable, low-noise and enforceable acoustic monitoring and as such can
cost upwards of $10,000USD. These systems generally consist of high-end, dedicated portable logging sound level meters and bespoke network hardware, encased in a weatherized housing. An example from this category is the Bruel
& Kjaer 3639-A/B/C , which retails for ≈$15,000USD and includes a type
1 approved microphone and analysis system with a measurement range from
25-140dBA, the ability to produce 1/3 octave spectral noise data, real-time
wireless data transfer, autonomous operation and a ruggedized casing for long
term exterior operation. Other examples with similar speciﬁcations and price
points include the 01dB OPER@ Station and the Larson Davis 831 Noise
Monitoring System . The hardware and software used in these systems is
usually proprietary and therefore does not provide the ability to customize the
functionality to purposes other than basic acoustic monitoring of noise levels,
except through software module purchases such as threshold based event detection typically costing upwards of $1000 per module. Whilst initial sensor costs
are high, maintenance costs are generally less than in lower cost solutions due
to the specialized and highly engineered nature of these devices. Deployment
durations are generally in the order of a few months at a time due to the high
cost of the hardware and security concerns.
2.2. Category 2 - Moderately scalable sensor network
This group consists of a combination of commercially made and research
group developed devices that provide greater opportunities for larger scale deployments than those of Category 1 with varied accuracy of data. The typical
price point of each node in this group is the $600USD mark. Commercial examples include the $560USD Libelium Waspmote Plug & Sense, Smart Cities
device which, amongst other things, measures simple dBA values with no
type certiﬁcation, to give an indication of a location’s sound pressure level.
The Libelium device is ruggedized for exterior use, runs autonomously, and can
transfer data wirelessly to a central server. This system provides no means to
process the incoming audio data as the conversion to dBA values occurs at the
hardware level on the microphones board. A diﬀerent example in this category
is the RUMEUR network developed by the Noise Observatory Group of
the non-proﬁt organization, Bruitparif, based in Paris. Their network consists
of around 50 ≈$2500USD monitoring stations gathering high quality audio and
accurate acoustic data at the type 1 level, including acoustic event detection.
This network is also complemented by 350 ≈$550USD lower-cost devices that log
dBA values at the type 2 level. Whilst more scalable than Category 1 networks
these are still limited by relatively high costs and in some cases measurement
inaccuracies.
2.3. Category 3 - Low-cost sensor network
This category of sensor network typically consists of custom made nodes
designed to be inexpensive, low-power and autonomous for large scale deployments. The majority of these utilize low-power single board computing cores
with low-cost audio hardware. The price point of ≈$150 per sensor node in this
category make it a viable solution for pervasive network deployments. These
networks are currently, predominately developed by university research groups
including the MESSAGE project at Newcastle University , whose low-cost
sensors monitor noise levels in dBA, with an eﬀective range from 55-100dBA at
≈3dBA accuracy when compared to a type 1 sound level meter. A similar lowcost initiative from Finland has produced sensor nodes costing ≈$150USD
that are capable of transmitting dBA values wirelessly using a low-power computing core and audio system capable of an eﬀective range of measurements
from 36-90dBA. This category is clearly the more scalable due to its low cost
sensor nodes, however, in the examples given, the accuracy of acoustic data is
low and the low power computing cores do not allow for any in-situ DSP.
2.4. What makes a high quality & truly scalable acoustic sensor network?
In order to realize a truly scalable, accurate, autonomous and adaptable
system, a combination of attributes from each of the previously mentioned categories is required. Based on these previous examples of acoustic sensing networks, a viable solution for high quality, large scale urban noise monitoring
should provide a minimum of these features:
• The ability to monitor sound pressure levels with a comparable level of
accuracy to city agency standards
• Enhanced computing capabilities for intelligent, in-situ signal processing
and wireless raw audio data transmission
• Autonomous in its operation
• A low cost per sensor node at the ≈$100USD price point
The presented solution aims to fulﬁll all of these requirements to provide
a viable solution for advanced, large scale urban acoustic monitoring.
proposed sensor nodes will be shown empirically to produce acoustic data at the
type 2 level, the high processing power of the computing core will be detailed
including its ability to operate autonomously using a combination of components
that cost less than $100USD in parts.
3. Applications
Acoustic data gathered using the systems deployed sensor network can be
used to identify important patterns of noise pollution across urban settings.
Decision makers at city agencies can then strategically utilize the human resources at their disposal, i.e. by eﬀectively deploying costly noise inspectors to
oﬀending locations automatically identiﬁed by the the proposed network. The
continuous and long term monitoring of noise patterns by the network allows
for the validation of the eﬀect of this mitigating action in both time and space,
information that can be used to understand and maximize the impact of future
action. By systematically monitoring interventions, one can understand how
often penalties need to be imparted before the eﬀect becomes long-term. With
suﬃcient deployment time, 311 noise complaint patterns could also be compared to the network’s data stream in a bid to model and ultimately predict the
occurrence of noise complaints. The overarching goal would be to understand
how to minimize the cost of interventions while maximizing noise mitigation.
This is a classic resource allocation problem that motivates much research on
smart-cities initiatives, including this one.
The eventual increase in network deployment across large urban areas will
allow for noise mapping with high spatial and temporal resolution. Examples
of the long term goals accomplishable with this approach and the use of existing geo-located datasets include: how sound impacts on the health of a city’s
population, correlates with urban problems ranging from crime to compromised
educational conditions, and how it aﬀects real estate values.
4. Summary of contributions
This paper details the design and measurement of a low-cost MEMS solution
for a novel acoustic sensing device. These speciﬁc contributions are made to the
ﬁeld of noise monitoring in smart cities:
• Measurements as per the IEC 61672-1 speciﬁcation for sound level meters
show the suitability of an analog MEMS microphone solution for accurate
urban acoustic monitoring at the type 2 level
• The use of consumer mini PC devices in acoustic sensing devices allow for
advanced signal processing to be performed in-situ for applications such
as automatic sound source classiﬁcation
• The low cost of the core components of the proposed sensor device provide
an advanced and scalable system for acoustic sensing in smart cities
The paper begins by focusing on the core hardware components of the sensor device, followed by the measurement process carried out on the proposed
MEMS microphone solution. It concludes with a summary of the ﬁndings and
a discussion of the future work. As the main focus is on the hardware development and testing, the sensor networks software and networking elements have
been omitted in this paper.
5. Hardware
5.1. Computing core
The proposed sensing node is based around a consumer computing platform
where low cost and high power are of paramount concern. The design philosophy
is based on the creation of a network that provides dense spatial coverage over
a large area, through the deployment of inexpensive and physically resilient
sensors, whose housing considerations are included in . At the core of the
sensing device is a single board Tronsmart MK908ii mini PC running a Linux
Ubuntu 13.04 based operating system. These small and versatile devices shown
in Figure 1 are priced at $50USD as of August 2015 and provide a 1.6GHz
quad core processor, 2GB of RAM, 8GB ﬂash storage, USB I/O, and Wi-Fi
connectivity. The computing power oﬀered by these units allows for complex
digital signal processing to be carried out on the device, alleviating the need to
transmit large amounts of audio data for centralized processing.
Figure 1: Tronsmart MK908ii mini PC
These mini PCs provide an all in one computing solution that incorporates a
number of ready to use Wi-Fi and ﬂash storage components in a small package.
In contrast, other mini PC solutions, such as the ODROID C1+ from Hard
Kernel , the BeagleBone Black and the Raspberry Pi 2 Model B ,
retail at $35-$55, but at that price do not include a suitable USB Wi-Fi module
or any ﬂash storage. These items must be purchased separately. However, when
purchased in bulk these other devices may become viable solutions in terms of
cost. Table 1 compares the mini PC used to similar solutions as purchased.
Cortex CPU
Storage Wi-Fi
ODROID C1+
A5 1.5GHz 4 core
Raspberry Pi 2B
A7 0.9GHz 4 core
BeagleBone Black
A8 1.0GHz 1 core
0.5GB DDR3
Tronsmart MK908ii
A9 1.4GHz 4 core
Table 1: Comparison of ODROID C1+, Raspbery Pi 2 Model B, BeagleBone Black and
Tronsmart MK908ii
The similar mini PCs currently available contain a less powerful CPU and
reduced RAM making them less amenable for advanced digital signal processing
(DSP) applications such as automatic sound source classiﬁcation. Based on this
comparison, the Tronsmart MK908ii provides a more complete solution for high
quality acoustic sensing applications owing to its superior processing power,
RAM, inbuilt storage and Wi-Fi module. However, with the constant development and subsequent increase in computational power of these single board
computers, solutions such as the Raspberry Pi may become viable solutions in
terms of processing capability in the near future.
USB I/O allows for the inclusion of a USB audio device to handle all analog
to digital conversion (ADC) work, thus providing the means to connect a custom
microphone solution. The USB audio device chosen for this application had
to be: compatible with Linux based devices, low in price, provide input gain
control and a clean signal path. The device selected was the eForCity USB
audio interface which retails for $5USD as of August 2015. It provides a single
microphone input channel with low noise and a software adjustable input gain
The frequency response of the device was measured and whilst it introduces
ﬁltering with a steep roll-oﬀbelow 20Hz and above 20kHz, the audible frequency
range is relatively unaﬀected. Figure 2 shows this response graphically. The
measured noise ﬂoor of the device with 0dB of gain applied was -90.1dBV(A),
providing a wide dynamic range for urban acoustic measurement.
5.2. MEMS microphones
In recent years, interest in MEMS microphones has expanded due to their
versatile design, greater immunity to radio frequency interference (RFI) and
electromagnetic interference (EMI), low cost and environmental resiliency . This resiliency to varying environmental conditions is particularly important for long term acoustic monitoring applications in the harsh subzero
winters and hot and humid summers of NYC. A study characterizing a custom
MEMS microphone solution for acoustic measurement purposes exhibited
Frequency (Hz)
Magnitude (dB)
Figure 2: eForCity USB audio interface frequency response (20Hz-20kHz) normalized at 1kHz
Figure 3: Front/back MEMS microphone custom PCB (Knowles SPU0410LR5H-QB microphone in center of left image)
a very low temperature coeﬃcient for sensitivity of <0.017dB/◦C. A large variation in humidity was also shown to have a minimal impact on the MEMS
microphones sensitivity, with decreases of <0.1dB between relative humidity
(%RH) conditions of 40% and 90%.
Current MEMS models are generally 10x smaller than their electret counterparts. This miniaturization has allowed for additional circuitry to be included
within the MEMS housing, such as a pre-amp stage and an ADC to output
digitized audio in some models. The production process used to manufacture
these devices also provides an extremely high level of part-to-part consistency
in terms of acoustic characteristics such as sensitivity and frequency response,
making them more amenable to multi-capsule and multi-sensor arrays, where
consistency of individual microphones is paramount.
In the proposed prototype microphone system we investigate the Knowles
SPU0410LR5H-QB. The silicone diaphragm MEMS microphone has a manufac-
Figure 4: Custom 3D printable microphone mount with four microphone mount pegs shown
turer quoted “ﬂat frequency response” between 100Hz and 10kHz. It requires
a maximum 3.6V supply and draws only 120µA. In addition, it is quoted as
having a sensitivity of -38dB re. 1V/Pa and a signal-to-noise ratio of 63dBA.
In order to test the Knowles MEMS microphone a PCB shown in Figure 3 was
designed and fabricated . It was found in testing that the switched mode
power supply noise created by the low-cost AC-DC converters used to power the
MEMS was unnecessarily high, see Section 5.4. To reduce this to acceptable
levels an LT1086 linear voltage regulator was introduced to reduce the noisy
USB 5V down to a clean 3.6V DC supply. The use of adequately shielded audio
cabling is also crucial in this application as the low-level audio signal from the
MEMS microphone board is running in close proximity to the radio frequency
(RF) components of the mini PC. This RF interference (RFI) has been observed
on an un-shielded version of the system as a low-level broadband noise burst at
times of high Wi-Fi activity. A proper shielding and grounding strategy reduces
this RFI noise but does not remove it entirely from the signal chain. The test
results in this paper were gathered using the audio components in isolation with
no RF components present using the conﬁguration described above. The total
cost of the components used in the solution is around $7USD as of August 2015.
5.3. Microphone mount
In order to securely mount the MEMS microphone board a custom ABS
plastic mount was fabricated. This 3D printed component is shown in Figure 4
and ensures the microphone port is unobstructed, protected from water droplets
due to the protruding lip and allows for a windshield to be placed around the
mount to reduce the eﬀects of wind noise on the microphone.
The open space behind the microphone board mount point ensures no Helmholtz
resonances can build up as a result of a closed cavity close to the microphone.
Complex diﬀraction eﬀects from oﬀ-axis sound sources may have an eﬀect on the
Voltage (V)
Unregulated PSU
Regulated PSU
Figure 5: Comparison of DC supply noise of unregulated and regulated $3USD PSU (5V DC
oﬀset removed)
response at frequencies of >8.5kHz, which corresponds to the 40mm diameter
of the custom microphone mount. The dimensions and shape of the MEMS microphone PCB also have the potential to eﬀect response at the >13.5kHz range.
These eﬀects will be investigated in a further stage of testing as mentioned in
Section 9.
The top pegs allow the microphone board to be securely seated,
reducing the chance of any mechanical rattling. Externalizing the microphone
board in this way also reduces the eﬀects of RFI from the mini PC’s Wi-Fi
module located within the sensors aluminum housing.
5.4. Power supply considerations
The current sensor design utilizes a constant connection to a 120V mains
supply via a domestic power outlet. One of the main sources of unwanted noise
in the audio signal chains stems from the audio systems power supply unit or
PSU. The key to recording “clean” analog signals is to provide “clean” power
to the audio system.
Any AC noise present on the DC supply of an audio
component will be transferred, to some degree, into the analog audio signal. In
the presented low-cost acoustic sensor a single PSU supplies the 5V DC supply
for the mini PC, which in turn supplies the analog MEMS microphone its 3.6V
DC. A signiﬁcant source of noise in a sensor such as this is load transients, which
are caused by sudden, large current drains from the mini PC’s Wi-Fi module
and CPU. These produce ringing on the power rails which make their way into
the audio signal if not properly dealt with. A $3USD switched mode PSU was
measured using an oscilloscope after removing its 5V DC component and can
be seen alongside its voltage regulated signal using the LT1086 linear voltage
regulator.
Figure 5 shows the high levels of noise present on the unregulated PSU.
Average peak-peak levels of 350mV were observed. These pulses are the result
Frequency (Hz)
Magnitude (dBu)
Unregulated PSU
Regulated PSU
Figure 6: Magnitude spectrum (20Hz-20kHz) of unregulated and regulated $3USD DC power
supplies, AC noise (5V DC oﬀset removed)
of the switching frequency of the switched mode power supply. The regulated
PSU signal shows a vastly improved noise level with a peak-peak average of
Figure 6 shows the magnitude spectrum of these DC supply signals. The unregulated supply has a large amount of harmonic noise caused by the switching
of the PSU, with its fundamental peak well within the audible range at around
750Hz. The regulated version shows that this high level harmonic content has
been greatly attenuated with reductions of upto 26dBu at certain frequencies.
Power supply conditioning using grounded capacitors on the DC supply can help
in reducing this parasitic AC noise, but in conditions where load transients are
also occurring due to Wi-Fi and CPU activity, an additional voltage regulator
can provide a low-cost, consistent and “clean” DC supply for high quality audio
recording.
5.5. Form factor & cost of parts
The sensor’s prototype housing and form factor is shown in Figure 7. The
low-cost unﬁnished/unpainted aluminum housing was chosen to reduce RFI interference from external sources, solar heat gain from direct sunlight and
it also allows for ease of machining. All of the sensor’s core components are
housed within this rugged case except for the microphone and Wi-Fi antenna
which is externalized for maximum signal gain.
In the prototype node shown in Figure 7, the MEMS microphone is mounted
externally via a ﬂexible but rigid metal goose-neck allowing the sensor node to
be reconﬁgured for deployment in varying locations such as building sides, light
poles and building ledges.
Acoustic testing of the entire enclosure with the
Figure 7: Prototype open acoustic sensor node showing core components viewed from the
microphone board mounted with its windshield will be carried out when the
prototype is in a more advanced stage of production.
Cost (USD)
Goose-neck
MEMS mic. board
Windshield
Table 2: Core component list & costs for prototype sensor node
The total cost of core parts for the prototype sensor node is broken down
in Table 2, with the items ordered by descending price. The total cost of parts
excludes construction and deployment costs, but is very low for such a capable
system when compared to similar acoustic sensing nodes.
6. Software & network
The sensor nodes software & network aspects will be brieﬂy summarized for
its initial conﬁguration of high quality raw audio capture.
6.1. Raw audio capture
The presented sensor node continuously samples 16bit audio data at 44.1kHz.
If remote raw audio data collection is required, contiguous one minute segments
of audio are ﬁrst compressed using the lossless FLAC audio encoder . This
FLAC ﬁle is encrypted using 128bit Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) encryption, with the AES password encrypted using the RSA public/private keypair encryption algorithm, resulting in a ﬁle that cannot be decrypted unless
you are in possession of the private key which only resides on the project’s central server. The original raw audio ﬁles are removed. The encrypted ﬁles can
be stored on the device as an additional backup and removed as needed when
storage space is running low. The on-board ﬂash storage of the mini PCs allow
for up-to 2 days of compressed and encrypted 16bit/44.1kHz audio data to be
stored. Any DSP required would be carried out prior to this stage on shorter
length audio buﬀers.
6.2. Network control
In the prototype conﬁguration, each sensor node communicates directly with
an internet connected Wi-Fi router for data transmission and sensor communication/control. The sensor node uploads audio data at 1 minute intervals.
With each of these transmissions the server can respond with a command that
the node should carry out.
Examples of these commands could be a: data
ﬂush request to clear out existing backup audio data, device reboot, manual
microphone gain adjust or software update.
7. Signal pre-processing
7.1. Frequency response compensation
The MATLAB toolbox: Scan IR was used to generate the impulse responses of the reference microphone and MEMS microphone (referred to as the
device under test, DUT) using the swept sine technique. The signals were reproduced through a studio quality Mackie HR824 active speaker and a reference
PCB 377B02 microphone and PCB 426E01 pre-ampliﬁer (assumed to be ﬂat
in frequency response from 20Hz-20kHz) were used to subtract the room and
speaker coloration from the DUT’s impulse response. Reference and DUT microphones were placed at 1m from the center point of the speaker on-axis, 1.3m
from the ﬂoor. The DUT impulse response was generated from an average of 10
microphone boards, whose frequency response are overlaid in Figure 8. Maximum observed diﬀerences between MEMS response’s were calculated at 1.0dB,
with an average standard deviation between responses of 0.1dB.
As is evident in Figure 8, negligible diﬀerences were observed in frequency
response between the 10 MEMS microphones, highlighting the part-to-part consistency of these devices. The peaks and troughs in sensitivity between 2-20kHz
could be partly explained by the microphone mounting conditions. The PCB
the microphone is mounted to may develop resonances that would reside in this
frequency range and result in these observed eﬀects. The rise in response after
10kHz, however, is a result of the Helmholtz resonance created by the microphone’s inner chamber and PCB port . This averaged response was then
used to design an inverse linear-phase FIR ﬁlter that would allow for the timedomain ﬁltering of any test signals captured by the DUT, compensating for the
Frequency (Hz)
Magnitude (dB)
Inverse MEMS freq. response
FIR filter frequency reponse
Figure 8: MEMS frequency response of 10 microphones (clustered lines) showing consistency
between microphone capsules & regularized compensation ﬁlter response with corrospsonding
FIR ﬁlter response using 8192 coeﬃcients (dashed lines)
MEMS microphone response. The inverse ﬁlter was regularized to prevent the
ﬁlter from applying extreme attenuation or ampliﬁcation at the high and low
frequency ranges as can be observed in the dashed ﬁlter response line in Figure
8 at 20Hz and 20kHz. The process was adapted from , where a tapered
window between 0 and 1 is applied to the high and low extremes of the desired
inverse frequency response before the FIR ﬁlter is designed. The resultant 8192
coeﬃcient ﬁlter provides a close match to the desired response at lower frequencies. This can be eﬃciently implemented using the optimized DSP routines of
the mini PC’s Cortex A9 processor providing compensation for the MEMS
microphone response in real-time, allowing for the unbiased, in-situ calculation
of dBA levels. This regularization process also ensures no sub-sonic frequency
content is unnecessarily ampliﬁed, improving the systems overall signal to noise
ratio. However, the ﬁlter gain applied at frequencies between 20-400Hz may
serve to increase the overall noise ﬂoor of the system, which will be revealed
when the self generated noise is quantiﬁed in Section 8.1.
7.2. Calibration
The DUT was mounted directly beside the calibrated reference SLM microphone, shown in Figure 9. The devices were positioned at a height of 1.3m and
at a distance of 1m on-axis from the center point of the speaker.
The distance between the center of each microphone capsule is 20mm, which
was found to produce negligible (<0.1dBA) variations in level response when the
SLM microphone’s position was shifted to match that of the DUT. The output
sound pressure level in dBA from the DUT is calculated from the A weighting
ﬁltered sample values, which represent the AC voltage produced when presented
Figure 9: DUT (top) and SLM (bottom) microphones mounted
with the calibration signal of a 1kHz sine wave at 94dBA. An oﬀset adjustment
is then applied in order to match the 94dBA SPL input level. Figure 10 shows
the processes required to generate the calibrated SPL output from the DUT.
inverse frequency response filter
input audio samples
output SPL values
time weighting filter
frequency weighting filter
SPL calculation
Figure 10: Block diagram of sensor’s SLM functionality
8. Measurements
In order to determine the proposed device’s ability to generate type 2 sound
pressure level (SPL) data, the device was subjected to a subset of the IEC 61672-
3 acoustical test procedures, which describe the international standards for
periodic testing of SLMs. IEC 61672-1 provides the criteria for determining
a complete SLM’s ability to act as a type 1 or 2 device, including its directivity,
which will be aﬀected by the device and microphone housing. This extended
set of tests will be performed on the ﬁnal prototype sensor device in a more
advanced stage of its development.
In the following set of measurements the SLM output (Larson Davis 831 calibrated at the beginning of each measurement stage using the type 1 Larson
Davis CAL200) will be used as a reference for comparison to the DUT readings
to assess its ability to produce type 2 data. As the SLM is a type 1 certiﬁed
device, it has its own set of inaccuracies associated with it. It has met the type
1 speciﬁcations within the deﬁned tolerance bounds for that standard, thus for
the DUT to meet the type 2 speciﬁcations, the type 1 tolerance bounds must be
factored into the DUT assessment. For example, if the type 2 tolerance bounds
for a particular measurement response are ±2.0dB with the corresponding type
1 bounds at ±1.0dB, the adjusted acceptable bounds for the type 2 class in this
instance are ±1.0dB (type 2 tolerance range of 4dB minus the type 1 range of
2dB) when using the SLM as the reference device. These will be referred to
as the “adjusted tolerances”. All of the following output values were generated
from an average of 4 repeat measurements, where none of the test equipment was
moved or altered. No discernible variations (<0.1dB) in output were observed
between the individual measurements before averaging.
Measurements were conducted under low level (<20dBA), fully anechoic
conditions at the Cooper Union, Vibration and Acoustics Laboratory 2. The
atmospheric conditions in the anechoic chamber were measured at the beginning
and end of the measurement process (≈2 hrs), and varied from 22-24◦C in air
temperature and 50-55 %RH in relative humidity.
8.1. Self generated noise
The DUT’s self generated noise (IEC 61672-1/5.7) was measured under low
level, fully anechoic conditions, with all noise generating test equipment located
outside of the chamber. Throughout the duration of the 60s measurement period, the reference SLM logged an average SPL of 22.5dBA, close to its lower
limit of 19dBA. The self generated noise of the DUT was measured at 29.9dBA
(max. 30.1dBA, min 29.7dBA, std. 0.1dBA). The dynamic range was then calculated using the manufacturer quoted acoustic overload point of the MEMS
microphone. This results in an eﬀective dynamic range of 88.1dBA, with an
acoustic overload point of 118dBA. The signal to noise ratio (94dBA @ 1kHz)
of the system was measured at 64.1dBA (max. 64.9dBA, min 63.7dBA, std.
0.3dBA). The 29.9dBA noise ﬂoor of the system could be partly attributed to
the frequency response compensation ﬁlter outlined in Section 7.1. The ﬁlter
gain at low frequencies brings up the noise ﬂoor of the system due to the low
frequency roll-oﬀof the analog MEMS microphone. The use of a MEMS microphone with a closer to ﬂat response should serve to mitigate this problem as
there will be less reliance on the need to compensate for reduced sensitivity at
low frequencies.
The self generated noise value determines the minimum SPL the system
can reliably detect. For an urban acoustic sensor in the relatively loud conditions of NYC this level is well below even a quiet suburban setting . The
World Health Organization (WHO) night noise guidelines for Europe state
that outdoor levels of 30dBA show no observed health eﬀects on humans. The
dynamic range value calculated is more than adequate for the acoustic measurement of urban sound environments.
2 
vibration-and-acoustics
The high end category 1 sensors discussed in Section 2 typically exhibit self
generated noise levels of around 20dBA with dynamic ranges of around 115dBA
common place. Category 3 devices however have been shown to perform far
worse than the presented system with dynamic ranges of around 50dBA.
8.2. Acoustical signal tests of a frequency weighting
To test the DUT’s ability to produce accurate dBA output for diﬀerent
frequencies (IEC 61672-1, 5.5), it was mounted as in Section 7.2 and subjected
to a test signal comprised of 9 steady state 20s sine waves, separated with 5
seconds of silence at octave frequencies from 31.5Hz to 8kHz. Table 3 shows the
mean dBA response from the reference SLM, the DUT, the diﬀerence between
these two and the adjusted tolerance limits for type 2 devices as discussed at
the beginning of Section 8. Standard deviations of the DUT measurements were
<0.1dBA at all frequencies.
Freq. (Hz)
Table 3: Acoustical signal tests in mean dBA, varying frequency (* indicates IEC61672-1
criteria met)
The DUT met all of the adjusted type 2 criteria for dBA frequency weightings
when compared to the type 1 SLM. In addition, the response of the DUT and
SLM were compared for a 20s, continuous level pink and white noise signal,
showing a maximum diﬀerence in response of 0.5dBA.
8.3. Long-term stability
In order to test the long term stability of the DUT, it was subjected to a
30min 1kHz sine wave at 94dBA. The measured diﬀerence between the dBA
reading at the beginning and end of this period must be within the type 2
tolerance of ±0.2dBA stated in IEC 61672-1, 5.14. The DUT met this criteria,
with an observed diﬀerence of 0.07dBA with mean and standard deviation
values throughout the measurement period of <0.1dBA.
8.4. Level linearity
The DUT was subjected to sine waves, linearly increasing up to 94dBA
in level to test for the devices linear response to varying SPL’s at diﬀerent
frequencies (31.5Hz - 8kHz in octave increments). This was carried out using an
acoustical signal under anechoic conditions to test the entire systems response,
as opposed to introducing an electrical signal directly into the pre-amp as per
IEC 61672-1, 5.6.
MEMS mic. at class 2 level above: 42dBA
Test signal time in seconds (125ms sample period − fast setting)
Sound pressure level (dBA)
MEMS mic. (SPU0410LR5H)
SLM (Larson Davis 831)
Figure 11: Linear level response of DUT vs. SLM to 1kHz sine wave upto 94dBA showing
adjusted type 2 tolerance point.
For illustration, the vertical dashed line in Figure 11 shows the point at
which the DUT meets the adjusted type 2 tolerance level (±0.6dB) for a 1kHz
sinusoidal signal. The DUT can eﬀectively operate within type 2 level linearity
tolerances above 40dBA on average for frequencies ranging from 31.5Hz - 8kHz.
This lower limit can be reduced through the use of a lower noise microphone
and pre-amp combination, as discussed in Section 9.2, however this lower limit
would rarely be observed in the urban sound environment. The DUT was also
subjected to a linearly increasing pink and white noise signal, where the type 2
lower limit was observed at 37.2dBA and 36.6dBA respectively, highlighting
the device’s broadband linear response to varying urban SPLs.
8.5. Toneburst response
To test the DUT’s response to transient SPLs, it was subjected to 4kHz
sinusoidal tonebursts, varying in duration from 1000ms down to 0.25ms. IEC
61672-1, 5.9 deﬁnes tolerance limits in terms of dBA readings relative to the
steady state 4kHz reading for type 2 devices. As these are relative measurements
and do not rely on the use of the SLM as a reference, the type 2 tolerance limits
as documented in IEC 61672-1 will be used.
As shown in Table 4, the DUT met all IEC 61672-1, 5.9 criteria for 4kHz
toneburst response.
8.6. Urban audio reproduction
To further assess the DUT’s ability to capture meaningful SPL data, a 15min
urban audio recording was replayed a total of 4 times under anechoic conditions
Duration (ms)
IEC61672 ∆
Table 4: Toneburst tests at 4kHz, varying duration (* indicates IEC61672-1, 5.9 type 2 criteria
with the SLM and DUT microphone mounted directly adjacent to each other onaxis to the speaker. One of the more eventful samples of this time history data
collected from the DUT and SLM is shown in Figure 12. It contains numerous
impulsive events such as door closures and banging sounds.
Time in seconds (125ms sample period − fast setting)
Sound pressure level (dBA)
MEMS mic. (SPU0410LR5H)
SLM (Larson Davis 831)
Figure 12:
Sample of DUT vs.
SLM time history SPL values of urban audio recording
reproduced under anechoic conditions
As can be seen in Figure 12, the DUT closely follows the measurements
made by the type 1 SLM. Correlation analysis was carried out on the resultant
averaged SPL time histories from the SLM and DUT. The correlation coeﬃcient
(R2) was calculated between the entire dBA (fast time weighting) time history
for each device. The total R2 value for this 15min urban signal was 0.9723
(p ≤0.0001). The mean diﬀerence between the SLM and DUT time history
values was 0.4dB, with a standard deviation of 0.1dBA, minimum vales of
0.1dBA and maximum values of 1.8dBA.
It seems that the MEMS microphone system slightly over-estimates the dBA
values on the rise portion of transient sound events and slightly under-estimates
on the falling edge of these. This may be due to the fact that the DUT samples
more frequently than the SLM resulting in this ”over/under shooting” when
measuring transient events.
9. Future work
9.1. Further measurements
The full IEC 61672-1 standard includes speciﬁcations for parameters including: device directivity, high level thresholds and environmental variations, which
require the full housing of the device to be incorporated. The ﬁnal prototype
will be tested against the extended set of requirements, including a long term
exterior comparison against a type 1 SLM. Other factors such as the location of
the sensor will be investigated as the majority of potential deployment locations
are in close proximity to building facades. The resilience of these MEMS microphones to the varying environmental conditions of NYC is a critical aspect
of this research. Further environmental testing is needed to quantify the eﬀects
of temperature and humidity on the devices response. Measurements will be
carried out using equipment supplied by the Brookhaven National Laboratories, Biological, Environmental & Climate Sciences Department 3 to test sensor
functionality at extreme temperatures and humidities ranging from -20◦C to
+50◦C and 25% RH to 100% RH. This will allow for the determination of sensitivity and frequency response variation under these varying conditions in a
controlled environment.
9.2. Hardware development
The high level RFI conditions in the vicinity of the sensor node and noisy
low-cost power supply rely on a microphone solution with adequate RF shielding
and a high power supply rejection ratio (PSRR). A digital MEMS microphone
solution ensures that both of these external inﬂuences are no longer an issue
when it comes to the gathering of high quality acoustic urban data.
observed on the output from the analog MEMS board is caused in part by parasitic noise from the power supply unit (PSU). This can cause measurement
inaccuracies at particular frequencies where the noise is prevalent. The next
iteration of the sensor’s microphone solution will be an entirely digital design,
utilizing a digital MEMS microphone (includes a built in ADC) and a USB
audio CODEC enabling it to connect directly to the sensors computing device.
The vastly improved power supply rejection ratio (PSRR) values and reduced
EM/RF interference of the digital MEMS microphones over their analog counterparts should result in a much lower noise ﬂoor and an increase in dynamic
range. The elimination of this noise will also result in an improved ability to
capture clean audio signals for further in-situ processing and analysis.
3 
The microphones non standard form factor is also worth revising. If a MEMS
microphone could be built onto a circular 1/2inch PCB, the device could be
calibrated using a standard 1/2inch acoustic calibrator making the calibration
process much easier and potentially more accurate across multiple sensor nodes.
Battery powered sensor node solutions will also be investigated including
power mode cycling and adaptation for periods of low acoustic activity.
9.3. Automatic sound source identiﬁcation
The sensor presented in this article allows for the accurate, continuous monitoring of sound levels across a city. Whilst the gathering of accurate SPL data
in-situ is crucial to the monitoring of noise in smart cities, identifying the source
of these noise events is of great importance. The sensor’s powerful processing
unit means there is the capability of performing additional analysis of the audio signal. In tandem with the sensor development, considerable eﬀorts have
been employed on machine listening algorithms for the automatic identiﬁcation
of urban sound sources . One of the key advantages of running these
classiﬁcation models directly on the sensing device is that there is no need to
transmit audio data to a centralized server for further analysis, in this way
abating possible security and privacy concerns related to the recording of audio
data. However, porting these models to the device presents a challenge due
to the models’ high computational complexity. To this end, future work will
involve research into model compression , which can be used to obtain the
performance of deep learning architectures using shallow ones which require less
computational resources.
10. Conclusion
An advanced and accurate, low-cost sensor network has been presented.
Based on this preliminary testing phase including the frequency compensation
procedures, our analog MEMS microphone solution can produce accurate SPL
data of high quality. Its adherence to the type 2 speciﬁcations for the tests
undertaken is promising for its future use in a low-cost environmental acoustic
sensor. The main limiting factor of its noise ﬂoor means it cannot eﬀectively
operate in ambient conditions of <30dBA, or at type 2 accuracies at levels
<40dBA, however, this level would rarely be observed in the urban sound environment of NYC. The capabilities of this solution allow it to generate real-time
acoustic data at or above the type 2 level. An accurate source of data from a
reliable and low-cost sensor network is the cornerstone of any eﬀective cyberphysical system for noise monitoring. With city agencies such as the NYC DEP
relying on a minimum of type 2 level acoustic data, this solution can provide
a reliable stream of data to inform and eﬀectively prioritize existing noise enforcement procedures.
11. Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the New York University, Center for Urban
Science and Progress (CUSP) for their seed funding of the current noise sensing
initiative, Brookhaven National Labs for their equipment loan and support,
The Cooper Union for the use of their acoustic laboratory, the Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) for their input on the NYC noise code and
Deckard Audio for their input on the digital microphone design.