October 29, 2003
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
International Journal of Pattern Recognition and Artiﬁcial Intelligence
c⃝World Scientiﬁc Publishing Company
ADAPTIVE FEATURE SPACES FOR LAND COVER
CLASSIFICATION WITH LIMITED GROUND TRUTH DATA
JOSEPH T. MORGAN1, ALEX HENNEGUELLE2, JISOO HAM1, MELBA M. CRAWFORD1
and JOYDEEP GHOSH2
1Center for Space Research
2Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
The University of Texas at Austin
{JMorgan, Crawford, jham}@csr.utexas.edu
{Hennegue, Ghosh}@ece.utexas.edu
Classiﬁcation of land cover based on hyperspectral data is very challenging because typically tens of classes with uneven priors are involved, the inputs are high dimensional, and
there is often scarcity of labeled data. Several researchers have observed that it is often
preferable to decompose a multi-class problem into multiple two-class problems, solve
each such sub-problem using a suitable binary classiﬁer, and then combine the outputs
of this collection of classiﬁers in a suitable manner to obtain the answer to the original
multi-class problem. This approach is taken by the popular error correcting output codes
(ECOC) technique, as well by the binary hierarchical classiﬁer (BHC). Classical techniques for dealing with small sample sizes include regularization of covariance matrices
and feature reduction. In this paper we address the twin problems of small sample sizes
and multi-class settings by proposing a feature reduction scheme that adaptively adjusts
to the amount of labeled data available. This scheme can be used in conjunction with
ECOC and the BHC, as well as other approaches such as round-robin classiﬁcation that
decompose a multi-class problem into a number of two (meta)-class problems. In particular, we develop the best-basis binary hierarchical classiﬁer (BB-BHC) and best basis
ECOC (BB-ECOC) families of models that are adapted to “small sample size” situations. Currently, there are few studies that compare the eﬃcacy of diﬀerent approaches
to multi-class problems in general settings as well as in the speciﬁc context of small sample sizes. Our experiments on two sets of remote sensing data show that both BB-BHC
and BB-ECOC methods are superior to their non-adaptive versions when faced with
limited data, with the BB-BHC showing a slight edge in terms of classiﬁcation accuracy
as well as interpretability.
Keywords: multi-class problems, multiple classiﬁer systems, hierarchical classiﬁers, error
correcting output codes, small sample size problem, remote sensing.
1. Introduction
The increasing availability of data from hyperspectral sensors has generated tremendous interest in the remote sensing community because these instruments characterize the response of targets (spectral signatures) with greater detail than traditional
sensors and thereby can potentially improve discrimination between targets30,32. A
common application is to determine the land cover label of each (vector) pixel by
October 29, 2003
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
J. T. Morgan, A. Hennegulle, J. Ham, M. M. Crawford, and J. Ghosh
using labeled training data (ground truth), X, to estimate the parameters of the
label-conditional probability density functions, P(x1, x2, . . . , xD|Li), i = 1, . . . , C,
or to directly estimate the aposteriori class probabilities. Unfortunately, classiﬁcation of hyperspectral data is challenging for several reasons. The dimensionality of
the data (D) is high (∼200), and the number of classes C is often in the teens.
The sensor measurements obtained from a given land cover type can vary somewhat over time and space, and thus the class-conditional likelihoods can vary from
image to image. Obtaining labeled data is expensive and time consuming because it
either involves ﬁeld campaigns or manual interpretation of high resolution imagery.
However, hyperspectral data tend to be correlated both spectrally and spatially,
and these two properties can often be exploited to make the classiﬁcation problem
more tractable.
In our previous work on land cover classiﬁcation28, we had addressed the problem of being faced with a moderately large number of classes by systematically
decomposing a C-class problem into a binary hierarchy of C −1 simpler two-class
problems that could be solved using a corresponding hierarchy of classiﬁers, each
involving a simple discriminant (Fisher projection). The use of a simple feature
extraction process also helped deal with the high dimensionality of the input space.
The resulting top-down Binary Hierarchical Classiﬁer (TD-BHC), which is really
an ensemble of classiﬁers arranged as a hierarchy, provided superior results in terms
of test accuracies as compared to using a variety of direct approaches to the multiclass problem. In addition, the hierarchies of classes automatically derived from
the data yield valuable domain knowledge about the relationships among diﬀerent
types of land cover.
This paper addresses a diﬀerent challenge stemming from the scarcity of labeled
data, which is often of limited quantity relative to the dimensionality D, at least
for some poorly represented classes. This leads to the well-studied small sample
size problem. For example, a classiﬁer using Fisher’s linear discriminant function
requires the inversion of the within-class covariance matrix. For the covariance matrix of D-dimensional data, there are D(D + 1)/2 parameters to estimate and,
minimally there must be D + 1 observations of each class to ensure estimation of
non-singular/invertible class speciﬁc covariance matrices2. A popular rule-of-thumb
is that there should be at least 5D data points/class for adequate estimation of the
covariance matrix22. Existing hyperspectral classiﬁers including the BHC are thus
susceptible to small sample size issues31. This paper introduces a technique for
adaptively reducing the dimensionality of the feature space by recursively combining highly correlated, adjacent spectral bands until the reduced dimensionality is
commensurate with the amount of data available. The more classic approach of regularization of covariance estimates is also embodied in this technique, which can be
used in conjunction with both the BHC and error correcting output codes (ECOC).
Experiments show that the resulting multi-classiﬁer systems with adaptive feaure
reduction modules provide substantial improvements over a range of small sample
October 29, 2003
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Adaptive feature spaces for land cover classiﬁcation with limited ground truth data
sizes, without compromising performance for larger data sets.
2. Related Work
This paper addresses the issue of solving multi-class problems as well as tackling
small sample size situations in the context of hyperspectral data. This section describes related work in these areas.
2.1. Solving multi-class problems through output space
decomposition
Many real-life problems such as handwriting recognition involve more than two
classes. In such cases, one has two choices: solve the problem directly using a single
classiﬁer that can provide multiple class labels, or decompose the output space into
multiple two-class problems that are solved by diﬀerent binary classiﬁers, and then
combine the outputs of these classiﬁers in a suitable way to determine the ﬁnal
class label. A straightforward way of directly solving for multiple classes is to use
a universal approximator such as the multi-layer perceptron (MLP) or radial basis
function network, with C output units. A 1-of-C coding has to be used to obtain the
desired outputs for training purposes, i.e., for a given input, the desired response is
1 for the output unit corresponding to its class label, and 0 for all the other output
units. Theoretically, given such an encoding and a well trained network with an
adequately large number of hidden units, it can be shown that the outputs of such
a network approximate the corresponding aposteriori class probabilities42,5 in the
mean square sense. Thus, one can approach the Bayes optimum decision as closely
as desired. In practice, with limited data, imperfect training and complex class
boundaries, this becomes increasingly diﬃcult to achieve as the number of classes
increases.
Several other classiﬁcation models such as decision trees (C5.0, CHAID, CART
etc) can also directly address multi-class problems. However, several classiﬁers are
more naturally suited to binary classiﬁcation. A topical example is the support
vector machine (SVM) in its original formulation52. Although several extensions
of SVMs to multi-class problems have been subsequently suggested (see papers
referred to in 18), the results of 18 show that such direct approaches are inferior to
decomposing the problem into several binary classiﬁcation problems, each addressed
by a binary SVM.
Over the years, several approaches to decomposing the output space, rather than
directly solving for the C-class problem, have been proposed. These approaches can
be categorized as:
1. solving C one-versus-rest two-class problems;
2. examining
pairwise classiﬁcations,
3. applying error correcting output codes11,
4. miscellaneous approaches, and
October 29, 2003
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
J. T. Morgan, A. Hennegulle, J. Ham, M. M. Crawford, and J. Ghosh
5. binary hierarchical classiﬁers.
We brieﬂy summarize and compare the ﬁrst four approaches before presenting the
hierarchical output space decomposition approach proposed by us recently.
2.1.1. One-versus-rest.
The traditional approach to multi-class problems is to develop C classiﬁers, each focussed on distinguishing one particular class from the rest. Often this is achieved by
developing a discriminant function for each of the C classes. A new data point is assigned the class label corresponding to the discriminant function that gives the highest value for that data point. For example, in Nilsson’s classic linear machine38, the
discriminant functions are linear, so the decision boundaries are constrained to be
hyperplanes that intersect at a point. This is an example of the discriminant analysis family of algorithms, that includes Quadratic Discriminant Analysis, Regularized Discriminant Analysis12, and Kernel Discriminant Analysis16.
The essential diﬀerence among diﬀerent discriminant analysis methods is the nature
and bias of the discriminant function used.
Anand et.al.1 did a detailed empirical evaluation of the one-versus-rest method
as compared to a one-shot approach when MLPs are used as classiﬁers. They showed
that training an MLP with C output nodes, one for each class, was much slower
than the modular alternative, at comparable levels of generalization performance.
They also theoretically analyzed the spatial crosstalk phenomenon that hinders the
one-shot approach. However, note that when C is large, there will be some classes
for which the number of training data is much less than that for the rest of the
classes combined, i.e. the corresponding two-class problem will encounter highly
imbalanced priors. This leads to performance degradation and slower convergence,
even for an MLP trained using error back-propagation, as shown for example, in 4.
2.1.2. Pairwise classiﬁcation.
Also known as round robin classiﬁcation15, these approaches learn one classiﬁer
for each pair of classes (employing a total of
classiﬁers in the process), and
then combine the outputs of these classiﬁers in a variety of ways to determine the
ﬁnal class label. This approach has been investigated by several researchers13,17,3,39.
Typically the binary classiﬁers are developed and in parallel, a notable exception
being the eﬃcient DAG structured ordering given in 39. A straight-forward way of
ﬁnding the winning class is through a simple voting scheme used for example in 13,
which evaluates pairwise classiﬁcation for two versions of CART and for the nearest
neighbor rule. Alternatively, if the individual classiﬁers provide good estimates of
the two-class posterior probabilities, then these estimates can be combined using
an iterative hill-climbing approach suggested by 17.
Our ﬁrst attempt at output space decomposition was to apply a pairwise classiﬁer framework for land cover prediction problems involving hyperspectral data27.
October 29, 2003
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Adaptive feature spaces for land cover classiﬁcation with limited ground truth data
For this application, class-pair speciﬁc feature extraction not only yielded superior
classiﬁcation accuracies, but also provided important domain knowledge with regard
to what features were more useful for discriminating speciﬁc pairs of classes. While
such a modular learning approach for decomposing a C-class problem is attractive for a number of reasons, including focussed feature extraction, interpretability
of results and automatic discovery of domain knowledge, the fact that it requires
O(C2) pairwise classiﬁers might make it less attractive for problems involving a
large number of classes. Further, the combiner that integrates the results of all the
classiﬁers must resolve the couplings among these outputs that might increase
with the number of classes.
2.1.3. Error correcting output codes (ECOC).
Inspired by distributed output representations in biological systems, as well as by
robust data communication ideas, ECOC is one of the most innovative and popular
approaches to have emerged recently to deal with multi-class problems11. A C-class
problem is encoded as ¯C binary problems. For each binary problem, one subset of
the classes serves as the positive class (target = 1) while the rest form the negative
class (target = 0). As a consequence, each original class gets encoded into a ¯C
dimensional binary vector. The C × ¯C binary matrix is called the coding matrix.
A given test input is labelled as belonging to the the class whose code is closest to
the code formed by the outputs of the ¯C classiﬁers in response to that input.
In the original ECOC paper11, four ways of chosing the subsets of classes and
therefore determining the code matrix were investigated. In general, it was believed
that selecting matrices with good row and column separation would give better
results. Most empirical studies using ECOCs employ a large number of binary
classiﬁers ( ¯C ≫C), and sometimes ¯C is in the hundreds or more. Given such long
codewords, subsets of classes chosen at random may perform nearly as well. In fact,
the advantage of carefully crafted codewords seems to be clear only when the code
lengths are short56. Moreover, the problem of designing an optimal binary code
matrix is NP-Complete9.
2.1.4. Miscellaneous Approaches.
There are some approaches to multi-class problems proposed by other authors that
do not fall into the three categories described above. Sequential methods impose
an ordering among the classes, and the classiﬁers are developed in sequence rather
than in parallel. For example, one can ﬁrst discriminate between class “1” and the
rest. Then for data classiﬁed as “rest”, a second classiﬁer is designed to separate
class “2” from the other remaining classes, and so on. Problem decomposition in the
output space can also be accomplished implicitly by having C classiﬁers, each trying
to solve the complete C-class problem, but with each classiﬁer using input features
most correlated with only one of the classes. This idea was used in 50 for creating
October 29, 2003
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
J. T. Morgan, A. Hennegulle, J. Ham, M. M. Crawford, and J. Ghosh
an ensemble of classiﬁers, each using diﬀerent input decimation. This method not
only reduces the correlation among individual classiﬁers in an ensemble, but also
reduces the dimensionality of the input space for classiﬁcation problems. Signiﬁcant
improvements in misclassiﬁcation error, together with reduction in the number of
features used, was obtained on various public domain datasets using this approach.
2.1.5. The Binary Hierarchical Classiﬁer.
The top down BINARY HIERARCHICAL CLASSIFIER (TD-BHC) framework
was introduced in 28,29 as a way of recursively decomposing a C-class problem into
C −1 two-(meta)class problems. It results in a multi-classiﬁer system with C −1
classiﬁers arranged as a binary tree. The root classiﬁer tries to optimally partition
the original set of classes into two disjoint meta-classes while simultaneously determining the Fisher discriminant that separates these two subsets. This procedure
is recursed, i.e., the meta-class Ωn at node n is partitioned into two meta-classes,
(Ω2n, Ω2n+1), until the original C classes are obtained at the leaves28. Fig. 1 shows
an example of a C-class BHC. Note that the partitioning of a parent set of classes
into two sets of metaclasses is not arbitrary, but is obtained through a deterministic annealing process that encourages similar classes to remain in the same partition. The tree structure also allows the easier discriminations to be accomplished
earlier20. The TD-BHC was found to be competitive with pairwise classiﬁcation
and superior to a range of direct methods for classiﬁcation of hyperspectral data28.
Further results in 26 show that it performed well for several other data sets from
UCI and NIST as well.
Subsequently, a bottom-up version (BU-BHC) was developed based on an agglomerative clustering algorithm used for recursively merging the two most similar
meta-classes until only one meta-class remains26. Fisher’s discriminant was again
used as the distance measure for determining the order in which the classes are
merged. The bottom-up procedure is computationally more expensive than the
top-down version, but sometimes produces even better results, although it is locally more greedy.
Comments and Comparisons. A common characteristic of the ﬁrst three
approaches described above, is that they do not take into account the underlying aﬃnities among the individual classes (for example, their closeness or amount
of separation) while deciding on class selection/grouping for binary classiﬁcation.
Both one-versus-rest and pairwise methods treat each class the same way, while in
ECOC, design of the code matrix is based on the properties of this matrix, rather
than the classes they represent. That is why it is helpful to have a strong base
learner when applying ECOC, since some of the groupings may lead to complicated decision boundaries. In contrast, the groupings in BHC are determined by
the properties of the class distributions. Not being agnostic to class aﬃnities helps
us in determining natural groupings that facilitate both the discrimination process
and the interpretation of results.
October 29, 2003
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Adaptive feature spaces for land cover classiﬁcation with limited ground truth data
Internal node
W1 = {1, É , C}
W3 = {2, É , C-2, C}
W2 = {1, C-1}
W5 = {C-1}
W6 = {5, 9}
WA = {3, 6, C}
W2A+1 = {3, C}
W4A+2 = {3}
W4A+3 = {C}
Fig. 1. An example of a BINARY HIERACHICAL (multi)-CLASSIFIER for solving a C-class
problem. Each internal node n comprises of a feature extractor, a classiﬁer, a left child 2n, and a
right child 2n + 1. Each node n is associated with a meta-class Ωn.
Two noteworthy studies have emerged recently that compare one-versus-rest,
pairwise and ECOC approaches. Furnkranz15 shows that the
learning problems of pairwise classiﬁcation can be learned more eﬃciently than the C problems
of the one-versus-rest technique. His analysis is independent of the base learning
algorithm. He also observes that both of these approaches are more eﬃcient than
ECOC. A large number of empirical results are shown using Ripper and C5.0 as
base classiﬁers. The BHC uses only C −1 classiﬁers, similar to one-versus-rest, but
since the class groupings are based on aﬃnities, the binary classiﬁcations are simpler in general. Hence BHCs do not compromise much on eﬃciency in the process
of reducing the number of classiﬁers needed.
Hsu and Lin18 completed a detailed study comparing one-versus-rest and pairwise classiﬁcation, both using the SVM as base classiﬁer, to two approaches for
directly generalizing the SVM algorithm to multi-class problems. The pairwise
method performed the best, both in terms of accuracy and training time. One-
October 29, 2003
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
J. T. Morgan, A. Hennegulle, J. Ham, M. M. Crawford, and J. Ghosh
versus-rest was second, and both methods were better than the direct generalizations of SVM.
2.2. Small sample size problems
The substantial methodology in this area can be largely categorized as one of four
approaches41. Regularization methods, including shrinkage, try to stabilize the estimated covariance matrix directly by weighting the sample covariance matrix as
well as supplemental matrices46. The covariance matrix can be shrunk toward the
identity matrix or a pooled covariance matrix. Hybrid approaches assign weights
to the sample covariance matrix and a pooled covariance matrix47,35. While this
may reduce the variance of the parameter estimates, the bias of the estimates can
increase dramatically. Rather than stabilizing the covariance matrix directly, the
pseudo-inverse of the covariance matrix can be substituted for the true inverse.
Pseudo-inversion utilizes the non-zero eigenvalues of the covariance matrix14,46.
However, in addition to poor performance when the ratio of training data to dimensionality is very small, the pseudo-inverse has a peaking eﬀect in its performance.
Let |X| represent the cardinality of the (training) set X. It has been shown that the
pseudo-inverse performs best when |X| = D/2 and that the performance degrades
as |X| approaches D45,40.
An alternate approach involves transforming the input space into a reduced
feature space via feature extraction or selection2,14. Such transformations may result
in some loss of interpretability and may be poorly estimated due to the limited data.
A third approach is to exploit an unlabelled examples that may be available
using “semi-supervised learning” methods. Speciﬁc techniques for identifying and
augmenting the existing training data with unlabeled data already exist and have
been shown to enhance strictly supervised classiﬁcation48,19,6,23,36,10,43. The quality
of these approaches is very sensitive to the initial (guessed) labels of the unlabelled
data, to the selection of the initial training samples and to outliers. Note that one
can also artiﬁcially add labelled examples, sometimes called virtual examples, by
perturbing the data or by exploiting any known invariances about the data44.
The fourth approach uses an ensemble of weaker classiﬁers. Bagging, Simple
Random Sub-sampling, and a variety of Arcing (adaptively reweighting and combining methods such as boosting) involve selecting subset samples of the original
data and generating a classiﬁer speciﬁc to each sub-sample7. When the data set
is very small, however, these methods are inadequate because the degradation in
individual classiﬁer performance (because of lack of data) cannot be compensated
for by the gains from using an ensemble49.
2.3. Feature Extraction from Hyperspectral Data
Hyperspectral sensors simultaneously acquire information in hundreds of spectral
bands. A hyperspectral image is essentially a three-dimensional array I(p, q, d),
where (p, q) denotes a pixel location in the image, and d denotes a spectral band
October 29, 2003
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Adaptive feature spaces for land cover classiﬁcation with limited ground truth data
(wavelength). The value stored at I(p, q, d) is the response (reﬂected or emitted
energy) from the pixel (p, q) at a wavelength corresponding to spectral band d. The
input space for a hyperspectral data (classiﬁcation problem) is an ordered vector
of real numbers of length D, the number of spectral bands, wherein the response
of bands that are spectrally “near” each other tend to be highly correlated within
certain regions of the spectrum.
Analysis of hundreds of simultaneous channels of data necessitates the use of
either feature selection or extraction algorithms prior to classiﬁcation. Feature selection algorithms for hyperspectral classiﬁcation are costly, while feature extraction
methods based on Karhunen Loeve (KL) transforms, Fisher’s discriminant, or Bhattacharya distance cannot be used directly in the input space because the covariance
matrices required by all these approaches are highly unreliable, given the ratio of
the amount of training data to the number of input dimensions. The results are also
diﬃcult to analyze in terms of the physical characteristics of the individual classes
and are not generalizable to other images.
Several authors have proposed approaches for extracting features from remotely
sensed hyperspectral data28,25,29,32. Lee and Landgrebe33,34 proposed methods for
feature extraction based on decision boundaries for both Bayesian and neural network based classiﬁers. In these methods, a classiﬁer is ﬁrst learned for a two-class
problem in the input space. A decision boundary is computed by moving along the
closest samples in the two classes, and a vector normal to the decision boundary is
noted. Eigenvectors of the decision boundary feature matrix formed by collection
of these normal vectors yield the direction of projection for the two-class problem.
The C-class problem is then solved using a (weighted) sum of the decision boundary
feature matrices.
Jia and Richards proposed a Segmented Principal Components Transformation
(SPCT) that exploits the observation that the original input features - the bands
of the hyperspectral data - that are spectrally close to one another, tend to be
highly correlated24,25. Edge detection algorithms are used to transform the original
D individual bands into subsets of adjacent bands that are highly correlated, based
on the estimated population correlation matrix. From each subset, the most signiﬁcant principal components are selected to yield a feature vector that is signiﬁcantly
smaller in dimension than D. Although this approach exploits the highly correlated
adjacent bands in hyperspectral data, it does not guarantee good discrimination
capability because the Principal Component Transform preserves variance in the
data rather than maximizing discrimination between classes. Additionally, the segmentation approach of SPCT is based on the correlation matrix over all of classes,
and thus loses the often-signiﬁcant variability in the class conditional correlation
matrices. Subsequently, Kumar et al. proposed band combining techniques inspired
by Best Basis functions30. Adjacent bands were selected for merging (alt. splitting)
in a bottom-up (alt. top-down) fashion using the product of a correlation measure
and a Fisher based discrimination measure28. Although these two methods utilize
October 29, 2003
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
J. T. Morgan, A. Hennegulle, J. Ham, M. M. Crawford, and J. Ghosh
the ordering of the bands and yield excellent discrimination, they are computationally intensive. Additionally, the quality of the discrimination functions, and thus
the structure of the resulting feature space, is aﬀected by the amount of training
data, and this critical issue is not addressed.
3. An Adaptive Feature Space for Hyperspectral Data
We propose a simple method for tuning the amount of feature reduction to the
quantity of available training data. The basic idea is to progressively merge adjacent
bands that are highly correlated, so that the input dimensionality is reduced without
signiﬁcant loss in discriminatory power. While this method was originally designed
for and is particularly suited to hyperspectral data37, it can be applied to other
high-dimensional data sets for which sequential inputs are highly correlated. We
ﬁrst describe how the technique is used in conjunction with the BHC, although the
method can also be employed to reduce the input features used for other classiﬁers.
3.1. Integrating Band Combination into Hierarchical,
Multi-Classiﬁer Systems
The proposed approach can be viewed as a best-basis version of BHC (BB-BHC)
that performs a band-combining step prior to the partitioning (top-down variant)
or combining (bottom-up variant) of meta-classes. Band combining is performed
on highly correlated AND spectrally adjacent bands as this intuitively leads to the
least loss in discrimination power. Because the correlation between bands varies
among classes, the band reduction algorithm must be class dependent. In order to
estimate the correlation for a group of adjacent bands (meta-bands) B = [p : q]
over a set of classes Ω, we deﬁne the correlation measure Q(B) as the minimum of
all the pairwise correlations within that group:
Q(B) = min
p≤i<j≤q QLk
i,j is the (i, j)th element of the sample covariance matrix for class Lk .
The correlation measure (1) is used to determine which set of adjacent meta-bands
should be merged at each successive step of the algorithm. Once the number of
group bands is small enough, we maximize the discrimination between classes in
the reduced space.
To address small sample sizes, rather than using a threshold on the correlation measure to determine whether bands or group-bands should be merged, our
algorithm focuses on preserving as many of the original bands as possible, commensurate with the amount of training data available. Thus the band-combining
algorithm ensures that the least amount of discriminatory information is lost while
trying to achieve a satisfactory ratio of training data to dimensionality. For linear
models, the ratio of the number of training samples to the input dimensionality is
October 29, 2003
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Adaptive feature spaces for land cover classiﬁcation with limited ground truth data
considered to be the most important indicator of whether the training set is adequate. Because the literature recommends diﬀerent thresholds for the minimum
αratio ≤|X|
D , we allow this to be a user-deﬁned input31,21,41,53. Note that |X| represents the number of data points in a child meta-class, and this number decreases
as we proceed toward the leaves.
In pseudo-code, the adaptive band-combining algorithm that is performed before
partitioning or merging meta-classes is:
1. D∗= min
2. Initialize l = 0, N = D, and Bk
l = [k, k], ∀k = 1, . . . , D
3. If N > D∗then continue. Otherwise, stop.
4. Find the best pair of band to merge: K = argmaxk=1,...,N−1Q(Bk
5. Update band structure:
• l = l + 1, N = N −1
• If K > 1 then Bk
l−1, ∀k = 1, . . . , K −1
• If K < N then Bk
l−1 , ∀k = K + 1, . . . , N
6. Return to step 3.
3.2. Best Basis and Limited Data
When constructing a basis speciﬁc to each split in the BB-BHC, the quality of
the correlation measure, computed from the class conditional covariance matrices,
is dependent on the quantity of training data available to estimate the meta-class
covariance matrices. This becomes even more critical for the low branches of the
BB-BHC as the meta-classes become smaller in cardinality, and the amount of
training data per meta-class decreases. In particular, the class speciﬁc correlation
matrices QLk
are required in (1) to estimate the correlation measure
Q(B). However, if the label speciﬁc SLk covariance matrices are not suitable for
inversion, failure to stabilize their estimation before constructing the basis unsatisfactorily passes the disadvantage of the small sample size from the estimate of
Fisher’s discriminant and linear discriminant function to the basis construction.
Therefore, the label speciﬁc sample covariance matrices must be stabilized. The
shrinkage technique35 can be suitably employed for this purpose, taking advantage
of the natural hierarchy provided by the BHC framework. We deﬁne the ancestor sample covariance matrix SAnc as being the sample covariance matrix which
is estimated from at least αratioD observations and is most closely related to Lk
based on the BB-BHC structure. Because the trees can be constructed either in
a top-down or bottom-up manner, the search for SAnc must be performed diﬀerently for the two approaches. In the top-down framework, if meta-class Ωk is being
considered for partitioning, then SΩk = P
Li∈Ωk P(Li)SLi is the ﬁrst candidate for
SAnc. However, if |XΩk| ≤αratioD, then the BB-BHC tree structure is climbed in
October 29, 2003
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
J. T. Morgan, A. Hennegulle, J. Ham, M. M. Crawford, and J. Ghosh
search of a meta-class where |XΩk| ≥αratioD. With the bottom-up framework, if
{Ω2n, Ω2n+1} are being considered for agglomeration, the ﬁrst candidate for SAnc
is SPooled = P(Ω2n)SΩ2n +P(Ω2n+1)SΩ2n+1. However, because the BB-BHC is now
being constructed bottom-up, the structure cannot be climbed in search of a suitable SAnc. Therefore, if |XΩi+Ωj| ≤αratioD, then SAnc = PC
i=1 P(Li)SLi. Note
that this estimate for SAnc is used, even when the total quantity of training data
available is less than αratioD. When applicable, the stabilized estimates of the label
speciﬁc covariance matrices are utilized to estimate the correlation measure in (1).
4. Empirical Studies
4.1. Multiple Classiﬁer Systems Studied.
The base methods for comparison are the bottom-up and top-down versions of BHC,
denoted by TD-BHC and BU-BHC respectively. Applying the pseudo-inverse for
tree construction (estimating Fisher’s discriminant) and feature extraction (calculating Fisher’s linear discriminant function) yields TD-P-BHC, BU-P-BHC, while
using the adaptive best-basis construction results in TD-BB-BHC and BU-BB-
BHC. We also wanted to compare these methods with other approaches to multiclass problems. Previously we had shown that, for a hyperspectral data set with
at least 180 samples per class, the TD-BHC gives comparable results to a pairwise
classiﬁer architecture that utilizes a best-basis technique for combining bands28.
For smaller sample sizes, the pairwise architecture is expected to suﬀer even more
that BHC or ECOC because each of its
component binary classiﬁers can only
use data from two of the original classes. In contrast, the BHC deals with metaclasses at all levels above the leaf classiﬁers. At the root, all the data are available,
and the amount of data available at each internal node progressively diminishes,
as the number of original classes in each metaclass decreases. Thus, it is clear that
the pairwise or round-robin architecture will be at a further disadvantage as the
sample sizes shrink, and hence is not considered in this study.
Instead we compare the results with those obtained by an ECOC architecture.
As mentioned earlier, each component classiﬁer in this framework solves a binary
problem, with the original set of classes divided into two groups based on the
corresponding column of the code matrix. Thus each classiﬁer uses all the data!
Moreover, if the code matrix is chosen so that the two groups always have roughly
the same number of classes, and the priors of these classes are comparable, then
each two-metaclass problem is reasonably balanced. Thus one would expect the
ECOC method to be much less susceptible to small size problems as compared to
pairwise classiﬁcation.
We decided to use the Bose-Chaudhuri-Hochquenghem (BCH) code, which
shows excellent separation among both rows and columns. BCH codes are multilevel, cyclic, error-correcting, variable-length digital codes used to correct errors
up to approximately 25% of the total number of digits. They are based on Galois
ﬁeld theory and have superior error correcting properties to well-known Hamming
October 29, 2003
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Adaptive feature spaces for land cover classiﬁcation with limited ground truth data
Table 1. BCH Table
codes, and were also recommended in the original ECOC paper11 for a larger number of classes. The two datasets studied in this paper involve 11 and 13 classes
respectively. We chose to use a code-length of 15 to accommodate up to 32 classes.
This choice provides an error correction of 3 bits. Therefore any two rows have a
Hamming distance of at least 7 bits. The ﬁrst 16 rows of the BCH code for this
choice are shown in Table 1. For the experiments, the ﬁrst 11 and ﬁrst 13 rows were
chosen respectively. Note that the most signiﬁcant data bit is all zeros (it is all ones
for the next 16 entries), and thus this column (number 11 in Table 1) is deleted,
leaving 14 binary classiﬁers. This number is comparable to the C −1 classiﬁers used
in the BHC.
4.2. Empirical Results
The proposed algorithms were tested on hyperspectral data obtained from two sites:
Bolivar Peninsula, Galveston, Texas and NASA’s John F. Kennedy Space Center
(KSC), Florida.
4.2.1. Bolivar Peninsula
Bolivar Peninsula is located at the mouth of Galveston Bay and is part of the low
relief barrier island system on the Texas Gulf coast. The area contains two general
vegetation types, wetlands and uplands, with the marsh area further characterized
in terms of sub-environments. For classiﬁcation purposes, 11 classes representing
the various land cover types were deﬁned for the site (Table 2). These include:
water, wetlands (low proximal marsh, high proximal marsh, high distal marsh, and
pure salicornia) and uplands (trees, general uplands, two agricultural classes, sand
ﬂats, and a transition zone)51,55. The low proximal marsh corresponds to tidal ﬂats
October 29, 2003
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
J. T. Morgan, A. Hennegulle, J. Ham, M. M. Crawford, and J. Ghosh
Table 2. Classes for Bolivar Peninsula and the quantity of
training data per class
Total Observations
Low Proximal Marsh
High Proximal Marsh
High Distal Marsh
Sand Flats
Agriculture 1(pasture)
General Uplands
Agriculture 2(bare soil)
Transition Zone
Pure Salicornia
comprised of Spartina alterniﬂora, which experiences frequent ﬂooding. The high
proximal marsh, which is composed of a mixture of Spartina alterniﬂora and Salicornia virginica, is ﬂooded less frequently and has more continuous vegetation cover.
The high distal marsh, which is inundated even less frequently than the proximal
marshes, contains Spartina patens, Salicornia virginica and Juncus roemerianus.
Adjacent to the high distal marsh, a small highly saline region of sand ﬂats surrounded by pure Salicornia virginica delineates the boundary between the wetlands
and uplands. The topography of these areas is mainly a function of sedimentary
processes such as high-energy wave and low-energy tidal and wind processes. As a
result, the frequency of the inundation, soil salinity, and vegetation cover all depend
on this topography55. HyMap (Hyperspectral Mapper) collected data over Bolivar
Peninsula on September 17, 1999, at 5m spatial resolution. Data were acquired in
126 bands with almost contiguous spectral coverage from 440-2480 nm8. After removing water absorption and low SNR bands, 122 bands were used in the analysis.
Multiple experiments were performed using stratiﬁed (class speciﬁc) sampling
at percentages of: 75, 50, 30, 15, 5, and 1.5. Even at the sampling percentage of 75,
the amounts of training data for classes 5 and 10 are still less then D (sand ﬂats
|XL5| = 111 and transition zone |XL10| = 86). We used αratio = 5 for all sampling
percentages except for 1.5% (αratio = 1.5). The lower threshold ensured that there
were at least two observations per label Li. Ten experiments, using simple random
sampling of the training data, were performed at each percentage for the bottomup and top-down frameworks of the traditional BHC [TD-BHC, BU-BHC], the
traditional BHC using the pseudo-inverse for tree construction (estimating Fishers
discriminant as a distance measure) and feature extraction (calculating Fishers linear discriminant function) [TD-P-BHC, BU-P-BHC], and the adaptive best-basis
BHC [TD-BB-BHC, BU-BB-BHC]. Ten additional experiments were conducted using a best basis implementation of ECOC [BB-ECOC] for comparison. The results
are presented in Figure 2. Each data point in Figure 2 (top) denotes the mean value
October 29, 2003
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Adaptive feature spaces for land cover classiﬁcation with limited ground truth data
Fig. 2. Classiﬁcation (test set) accuracies for Bolivar Peninsula
of test set accuracy. The corresponding standard devations are shown separately in
Figure 2 (bottom) to reduce clutter.
By adapting the size of the feature space to reﬂect the amount of training data
available, a high level of classiﬁcation accuracy is preserved for an extremely low
number of observations. At 75% sampling, the performance of all 7 classiﬁers is
comparable in terms of both the average and standard deviations of the accuracies
of the test data. At 50% sampling, which is typically used to separate data sets
into training and testing, the average overall accuracies of the classiﬁers are still
similar. The variability of the BHC, increases somewhat, as does the TD-P-BHC.
Importantly, even though using the pseudo-inverse does not improve the average
accuracies at 50% sampling, because there are at least D+1 observations per Li, the
results indicate that while the covariance matrices are non-singular, they are still
poorly estimated. Not only does the BB-BHC perform the best at every sampling
percentage with respect to the other TD and BU classiﬁers, but the accuracies
are generally more stable (smaller standard deviation of accuracies) as well. The
BB-BHC also yields the consistently higher accuracies than the BB-ECOC, even
with the classiﬁer diversity introduced by the ECOC. However, as expected, the
October 29, 2003
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
J. T. Morgan, A. Hennegulle, J. Ham, M. M. Crawford, and J. Ghosh
ECOC produces extremely stable results, as indicated by the standard deviation of
the accuracies at each sampling percentage. Thus, combating the limited amount of
training data by using the correlation matrix for feature reduction helps retain the
information necessary for successful land cover prediction in both the structured
BHC and the ECOC. Overall classiﬁcation accuracies of > 90% can still be achieved
at the 5% sampling rate, and > 80% accuracies were obtained at the 1.5% sampling
rate, although the results are dominated at this level by the classes with larger
4.2.2. Cape Canaveral
The wetlands of the Indian River Lagoon system, located on the western coast of
the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) at Cape Canaveral, Florida, are a critical habitat for several species of waterfowl and aquatic life. The test site for this research
consists of a series of impounded estuarine wetlands of the northern Indian River
Lagoon (IRL) that reside on the western shore of the Kennedy Space Center. The
impoundments were created during the 1950s and 1960s for the purpose of mosquito
control. The marshes along the IRL contain both high and low marsh communities.
The three dominant marsh groups that comprise the high marsh communities are
cabbage palm savanna, sand cordgrass, and black rush. The cabbage palm savanna
consists of isolated canopies of Cabbage Palm (Sabal palmetto) and a graminoid
layer of sand cordgrass (Spartina bakerii) and black rush marsh (Juncus roemerianus). Salt tolerant grasses and halophytes dominate the low marsh communities.
The primary salt tolerant grass is Distichilis spicata. Halophytes typically include
Batis maritima and Salicornia virginica. This study also includes investigation of
upland vegetation, as it is adjacent to the impounded wetlands. In addition, accurate classiﬁcation and mapping of upland vegetation is important for monitoring
habitat of the endangered Florida Scrub Jay. The majority of the upland vegetation
at KSC is oak scrub and saw palmetto scrub. Other upland communities include
slash pine (Pinus elliottii) and hardwood swamps that are dominated by deciduous trees such as Red Maple (Acer rubrum). Dense hammocks of Cabbage Palm
(S. palmetto) and Live Oaks (Quercus virginiana) are also common54. Discrimination of land cover for this environment is diﬃcult due to the similarity of spectral
signatures for certain vegetation types. For classiﬁcation purposes, 13 classes representing the various land cover types that occur in this environment have been
deﬁned for the site (Table 3).
The NASA AVIRIS (Airborne Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer) spectrometer acquired data over the KSC, Florida on March 23, 1996. AVIRIS acquires
data in 224 bands of 10 nm width from 400 - 2500 nm. The KSC data, acquired
from an altitude of approximately 20 km, have a spatial resolution of 18 m. After
removing water absorption and low SNR bands, D = 176 bands were used for the
analysis. Again, multiple experiments were performed using stratiﬁed (class speciﬁc) sampling at percentages of: 75, 50, 30, 15, 5, and 1.5. At 75% sampling rate,
October 29, 2003
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Adaptive feature spaces for land cover classiﬁcation with limited ground truth data
Table 3. Classes for Kennedy Space Center and the quantity
of training data per class
Total Observation
Willow Swamp
CP Hammock
CP/Oak Hammock
Slash Pine
Oak/Broadleaf Hammock
Hardwood Swamp
Graminoid Marsh
Spartina Marsh
Cattail Marsh
Salt Marsh
the quantity of training data for classes 5, 6, and 7 is less than D and, at 50%,
so are classes 2, 3, and 4. Ten experiments, using simple random sampling, were
performed at each percentage for all seven classiﬁers. The results are presented in
The overall trends in test set accuracies for Cape Canaveral are very similar to
those of Bolivar Peninsula, although the performance of the BHC degrades even
more quickly. At the lower sampling percentages, the covariance matrices of the
BHC are very poorly estimated in the full dimensional space, yet the accuracies are
still fairly high using pseudo-inversion, indicating that the diﬀerences in class means
is the main reason the level of discrimination is being maintained. This result is also
reﬂected by the standard deviations of the accuracies, which increase dramatically
at the 15%-30% sampling rate for the pseudo-inverse classiﬁers where the covariance
matrices are still helping maintain a higher level of classiﬁcation accuracy (than the
1.5%-5% range), though unstable. Although average accuracies are somewhat lower
than those produced by the BB-BHC, the BB-ECOC yields quite stable results at
all sampling levels.
5. Conclusions and Future Work
The dependency of classiﬁcation accuracy on the ratio of training data size to the
dimensionality of the data has been widely noted and needs to be addressed in the
design of a classiﬁer. While the advent of hyperspectral sensors has provided unique
opportunities in remote sensing, the high-dimensional features provided by these
sensors signify that researchers should take note of classiﬁers that are designed to
be more tolerant of the quantity of training data available. This paper presented a
multiple classiﬁer framework that utilizes the ﬂexibility gained by transforming the
output space and input space simultaneously to combat both the small sample size
problem and the issue of being faced with a large number of classes. By reducing
October 29, 2003
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
J. T. Morgan, A. Hennegulle, J. Ham, M. M. Crawford, and J. Ghosh
Fig. 3. Classiﬁcation (test set) accuracies for Cape Canaveral
the size of the feature space in a directed manner, dependent on the quantity
of training data available in the binary hierarchy of meta-classes, a high level of
classiﬁcation accuracy is preserved even when the quantity of training data for some
classes is low. In addition, the adaptive feature space technique can be used with
other multiple classiﬁer approaches to multi-class problems, most notably, the error
correcting output code technique.
Combating the small sample size problem with the dynamic best-basis algorithm helps preserve the interpretability of the data, but using Fisher’s linear
discriminant function as the feature extractor at each internal node of the BHC
diminishes this attractive characteristic. While the discriminant function weights
on each band/group-band could be analyzed to determine the respective bands
importance, the interpretation and insight should be improved if feature selection
were performed rather than feature extraction. Therefore, the use of feature selection rather than feature extraction, and the ensuing trade-oﬀbetween classiﬁcation
accuracy and retention of domain knowledge, should be investigated further.
Another contribution of this paper is that it provides an overview of several
October 29, 2003
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
Adaptive feature spaces for land cover classiﬁcation with limited ground truth data
approaches to multiple-class problems, and also provides the ﬁrst comparison of
the BHC method with the powerful and popular ECOC approach. The results are
quite ﬂattering to the BHC, at least for the two challenging hyperspectral datasets
that we examined.
Most likely, this is due to the grouping of classes based on aﬃnities rather than
on a code matrix that does not consider the properties of the individual classes.
However, this advantage is perhaps ampliﬁed because the base classiﬁers used in
this study are not very powerful. One needs to note that the design space is indeed
very broad for both methodologies. For example, the ECOC can be used with a
variety of base classiﬁers and feature selection/extraction methods, and there are
several ways of obtaining suitable coding matrices as well56. Similarly other types of
classiﬁers and feature extraction modules can be organized in a hierarchical fashion
as well. A very large number of experiments need to be performed to explore this
rich design space. Finally, while the focus of this paper was on hyperspectral data
classiﬁcation, one also needs to experiment with other types of data sets, such as
letter recognition, that exhibit a moderately large number of classes and fairly high
input dimensionality, to fully ﬂush out the scope and power of the methodologies
proposed in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by the NASA EO -1 program, Grant NCC5-
463, the Terrestrial Sciences Program of the Army Research Oﬃce(DAAG55-
98-1-0287), NSF grant ECS-9900353, the Texas Advanced Technology Research
Program(CSRA-ATP-009), and a grant from Intel Corp. We thank Amy Neuenschander and Yangchi Chen for their help with data preparation and interpretation
of results.