Using Rubrics and Content Analysis for Evaluating Online Discussion:
A Case Study from an Environmental Course
USING RUBRICS AND CONTENT ANALYSIS FOR
EVALUATING ONLINE DISCUSSION: A CASE
STUDY FROM AN ENVIRONMENTAL COURSE
Center for Learning and Teaching, American University in Cairo, Egypt
Adham R. Ramadan
Department of Chemistry, American University in Cairo, Egypt
This paper presents a case study of using course-specific rubrics combined with content analysis, together
with instructor and student feedback, to assess learning via online discussion. Student feedback was
gathered via Small Group Instructional Diagnosis, and instructor feedback was collected through formal
interviews. Content analysis used emergent coding with different assessment criteria for each phase of the
online discussion. Student participation was high, with a number of students feeling they learned beyond
what was discussed in class. Some students however were overloaded by the large number of postings
and repetitiveness during some of the phases of the discussion. The instructor was pleased to find students
who were quiet in class being active in the online discussion. However, he found that student
contributions demonstrated insufficient reflection and critical thinking. Content analysis showed that
students met, on average, 59-82% of the essential assessment criteria in their postings, and that their
contributions significantly improved as the online discussion progressed. However, a limited number of
postings reflected critical thinking. In using online discussion, the use of assessment criteria is therefore
commendable, as it was found that content analysis gave an insight beyond student and instructor
perceptions. The insights gleaned from the methodology indicate its usefulness in assessing online
discussion activities more objectively, and with respect to specific learning objectives.
Action Research; Asynchronous Discussion; Computer Conferencing; Content Analysis; Environment;
Online Discussion; Rubrics
INTRODUCTION
The American University in Cairo (AUC) is an American liberal arts university based in Cairo, Egypt. Its
language of instruction is English. It follows a semester system, encompassing 15 working weeks. Classes
usually meet two to three times per week, and consist of up to 40 students. No degree courses are offered
via distance learning, but some instructors add an online component to their courses without reducing
face-to-face contact time, using the learning management system WebCT.
The course ‘Man and the Environment’ is an introductory course to environmental science that students
of non-science/engineering majors can choose to take in order to fulfil the general science requirement of
their liberal arts degree. The course aims at presenting the principles of environmental science, together
Using Rubrics and Content Analysis for Evaluating Online Discussion:
A Case Study from an Environmental Course
with the primary concerns of natural resource management and the major challenges for environmental
protection on a global scale. At AUC, this is carried out through four modules. Module I presents the
fundamentals of ecosystems and how they operate particularly with respect to energy and nutrient cycles.
Module II focuses on the major natural resources and their management. Module III is concerned with
environmental degradation and global initiatives to combat it. Module IV relates environmental
management and protection to diverse issues such as economic development, policy, law, and sustainable
development. The four modules are of different sizes with module III being the largest. This primarily
stems from the fact that environmental degradation is reaching serious dimensions globally, and
particularly so in Egypt. Students’ understanding of details and dynamics of such degradation, as well as
ways and initiatives to combat it, is of crucial importance to their commitment to environmental
protection. In this respect, it was considered important that students be able to identify issues of primary
environmental concern and critically reflect on why these issues persist, while realizing the complexity of
their interdependence. Egypt was used as an example of a developing economy faced with serious
environmental challenges. Proposing possible solutions to issues of concern would help students
appreciate the complementary roles of different entities such as individuals, civil society, regulatory
bodies, private businesses, the political establishment, and others.
Class time was not enough for extensive discussion and exchange of experiences and opinions, especially
concerning a topic of such complexity. The instructor therefore needed to find an ‘innovative’ way to
carry this out outside of class time.
II. WHY ONLINE DISCUSSION?
Asynchronous online discussion seemed to be an appropriate pedagogical tool to meet the above needs. It
allows students to discuss the issues online and outside of class time ; it is praised for promoting
student reflection and for encouraging those students who are reluctant to speak up in class .
Moreover, conversations are recorded , which allows both the instructor and the students to refer to
them later.
In this respect, and for the purposes of this course, online discussion was particularly suitable as a
significant number of students seemed hesitant to speak up in class. In addition, recent research found
that 71% of surveyed AUC students (n = 99) who had online discussion as part of a course they took
agreed or strongly agreed that it enhanced their learning experience. However, the investigators were
aware of the most commonly cited limitations of online discussion , namely, the effect of its textbased dryness on learning particularly for visual learners; too many unread postings causing information
overload, potentially de-motivating students and causing them to stop participating; the reluctance of
some students to participate altogether; and the fact that some students read but do not post (also known
as ‘lurking’) which is often seen as unfair to the other students.
A majority of students taking the course were found to be already familiar with WebCT, the learning
management system used at AUC (74% were moderately or very experienced with it). They were also
generally experienced with web technologies such as email (100%) and internet (89%), so no technical
access issues were anticipated which might have reduced their participation in the online discussion.
Online discussion had been used within the context of this course for three semesters before this research
was carried out. Students were awarded bonus marks for submitting ‘good quality’ postings. However,
this was subjective, and it was considered important to measure the impact of this pedagogical innovation
on student learning and motivation. In this respect, it was decided that an ‘action research’ project be
Using Rubrics and Content Analysis for Evaluating Online Discussion:
A Case Study from an Environmental Course
carried out in the Spring 2005 semester, as a collaboration between the course instructor and the Center
for Learning and Teaching (CLT) at AUC, to collect feedback from students and conduct a content
analysis of the online discussion transcripts. This would result in data gauging student perceptions and
measuring actual student learning that had occurred.
A significant number of studies have been conducted on online discussion. However, they have either
focused on totally online courses (e.g. ) or on blended courses where in-class engagement was
difficult because of large numbers of students (a number of the examples in . In addition, there is
insufficient research addressing explicit learning gains achieved . Some researchers conducting a study
on blended courses with small classes, focused on learner perceptions only , and did not go further
to conduct content analysis on student learning. Others did recommend the use of rubrics to
assess student learning objectively, but did not go further to use rubrics in conducting content analysis.
Although some researchers conducted content analysis of online discussion for small numbers of graduate
students in a blended learning context, they based their content analysis on a predetermined framework
rather than a course-specific rubric set . Others developed rubrics and analyzed them to assess the
effectiveness of interaction in distance courses, but not learning . Meyer developed a rubric set to
assess the quality of online courses, but again, this was not directly applied for assessing learning .
The investigation presented here is unique: course-specific rubrics combined with content analysis, as
well as student and instructor perceptions, are used in order to measure learning via online discussion.
This is carried out in a course with a small number of non-native English-speaking students meeting three
times per week.
III. PURPOSE OF THIS STUDY
This study aims to investigate how online discussion can be used to achieve learning goals and specific
learning objectives. In this respect, one of the overarching learning goals for using online discussion was to
encourage students to apply what was presented in class to specific examples from their daily experiences
in order to deepen their awareness of the issues at hand. A second goal was to assist them in developing
their reasoning skills, and encourage critical thinking and analysis instead of memorization. These
overarching goals were also translated into specific learning objectives as specified in section IV-B.
This study is unique in that content analysis of the online discussion is carried out based on ‘rubrics’
specific to the activity’s learning objectives, rather than applying a general framework. It is hoped that the
results of this study demonstrate the benefit of combining rubrics with content analysis in assessing
learning. Moreover, this study explores the usefulness of using online discussion in small classes where
students meet regularly, as opposed to large classes and distance courses.
IV. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
The two known methods of measuring quality of online discussions are ‘learner feedback’ and
‘content analysis’ with content analysis considered to be the more revealing . In this
respect, an action research approach was followed, triangulating the results of the content analysis of
online discussion transcripts with feedback from students and the instructor’s own perceptions.
Using Rubrics and Content Analysis for Evaluating Online Discussion:
A Case Study from an Environmental Course
A. Structure of the Online Discussion Activity
The online discussion was structured into four separate but related cycles, each cycle addressing a certain
aspect of the environmental status in Egypt. The length and timing of each cycle would depend on student
feedback, lasting from about one to two weeks, and beginning on the same day the preceding cycle ended.
The topic tackled in cycle one ("What do you think the major environmental challenges in Egypt are?")
was set in advance, but the exact topics tackled within cycles two to four were not pre-set. The
progression of these topics was developed in response to the way student participation and feedback
proceeded. Students would get ‘bonus’ marks for posting ‘meaningful contributions’. However, they were
not given any assessment criteria. The cycle topics and learning objectives are included in Table 1.
B. Content Analysis
Some researchers use pre-existing cognitive frameworks to conduct content analysis on online discussion
transcripts, for example comparing Bloom’s taxonomy and Perry’s Intellectual Development model ,
while others use frameworks specifically developed for online discussion or develop their own .
Although this approach has the advantage of focusing on certain aspects of the learning activity, it limits
the scope of conclusions, hides other aspects of data not present in the framework, and is unlikely to
directly meet every learning activities' unique objectives . It was decided not to use any of the
available analysis frameworks in the literature, such as that of Henri , or Gunawardena, Lowe and
Anderson , or the Transcript Analysis Tool , because they were either too sophisticated for the
level of the students (e.g. Henri’s metacognition category was unlikely in any of the postings) or they
were developed for a different type of learning activity (e.g. Gunawardena’s framework refers to a
learning activity that involves argumentation and resolving a problem collaboratively). Using any of these
would not allow effective assessment of learning objectives specific to the particular course and activity
at hand. However, some features of Henri’s model were adopted in the current research, by including
quantitative data on participation, and keeping track of postings that were ‘reactive’, i.e. offering a
reaction to the contents of other postings (corresponding roughly to Henri’s ‘interactive’ category).
In this respect, a number of assessment criteria, ‘rubrics,’ were developed by emergent coding to be used
in the content analysis. Emergent coding is a methodology that builds coding categories from existing
transcripts instead of applying a pre-existing external framework to the transcripts. In the case of this
investigation, the transcripts are the online discussion transcripts, and this approach was deemed more
appropriate for the investigation since none of the existing frameworks could directly meet the learning
objectives set by the instructor.
The authors read through the online discussion transcripts together, keeping in mind the primary learning
objectives, as specified in Table 1, and then devised a set of rubrics to measure these learning objectives.
The rubrics for the different cycles were therefore different, depending on the set learning objectives for
that cycle. However, they also encompassed some generic criteria applicable to all cycles, such as
correctness of information supplied, and originality. The posting was used as the unit of analysis, and all
the cycle rubrics were applied to it. Scoring was carried out in a binary fashion with a rubric receiving a
score of either ‘1’ (yes) or ‘0’ (no) depending on the content of the posting. Some of the rubrics were
essential in assessing the learning objectives, whereas others were a ‘bonus’ (i.e. the students were not
expected to meet them, but those who did were considered more advanced). For example, one rubric
"Original" was defined as "posting contains at least one original idea,” as opposed to one which is
repetitive of another posting, even if reworded, and this “originality” criterion was expected of all
students. An example of one of the "bonus" rubrics is one that was named "Building" and is determined
on whether a "posting builds upon what is in another posting, developing it and/or adding new
information," with the purpose of demonstrating if students have built on what their peers have
Using Rubrics and Content Analysis for Evaluating Online Discussion:
A Case Study from an Environmental Course
contributed as opposed to either ignoring it or repeating it. The details of these rubrics and the points they
investigate are presented in Table 2.
Cycle Details
Rubrics Used
What do you think the major environmental
challenges in Egypt are?
Primary learning objective:
Apply principles covered in class to daily
conditions to identify environmental problems
Essential:
[Direct], [Effects], [NotIncorrect], [OnTopic],
[Relevant], [Sources], [Totality]
[Connections], [MultipleChallenges],
[Originality]
Why do you think these environmental
challenges persist today in Egypt?
Primary learning objective:
To be able to critically consider the identified
environmental challenges and identify the factors
underlying the inability of having them
Essential:
[CauseEffect], [NotIncorrect], [OnTopic],
[Original], [OverallCauses], [Relevant]
[MultipleReasons], [JumpsToSolutions],
[RelatesCauses]
Cycle III:
How do you think the causes for the persistence
of environmental challenges in Egypt today
could be addressed (what are possible
solutions)?
Primary learning objective:
To be able to go beyond identifying problems
towards thinking of and identifying possible
Essential:
[Implementable], [NotIncorrect], [OnTopic],
[Original], [RelatesDiff], [Relevant]
[Building], [Critical], [MultipleSolutions]
What entities do you think are responsible for
implementing the solutions identified in cycle
Primary learning objective:
To identify the complementarity of roles and
responsibilities of different entities in addressing
environmental challenges in Egypt
Essential:
[AwareAccounts], [MultipleRoles],
[NotIncorrect], [OnTopic], [Original], [Relevant]
[Building], [Critical]
Table 1. Cycles I to IV: Questions, Primary Learning Objectives, and Rubrics Used for Posting Content Analysis
Using Rubrics and Content Analysis for Evaluating Online Discussion:
A Case Study from an Environmental Course
Rubric Name
Explanation
[AwareAccounts]
Does the posting demonstrate an awareness of the accountability of
different entities?
[Building]
Does the posting build upon what is in another posting, developing it
and/or adding new information?
[CauseEffect]
Does the posting identify the relationship between the cause and the
[Connections]
Does the posting make the connection between several challenges?
[Critical]
Does the posting demonstrate critical evaluation of the solution it
Does the posting refer to a direct environmental challenge? (as opposed
to an indirect one resulting from another more basic challenge).
Does the posting specify the effect(s) of the environmental
challenge(s)?
[Implementable]
Is the method suggested in the positing for addressing the causes of
persistence of environmental challenges implementable?
[JumpsToSolutions]
Does the posting specify solutions?
[MultipleChallenges]
Does the posting specify more than one challenge?
[MultipleReasons]
Does the posting specify several reasons to the persistence of
environmental challenge, and/or several effects of an identified reason?
[MultipleRoles]
Does the posting demonstrate an awareness of multiple roles and
responsibilities?
[MultipleSolutions]
Does the posting suggest several solutions to the identified reason?
[NotIncorrect]
Does the posting contain incorrect information?
Is the posting within the topic under discussion? (as opposed to
addressing a topic unrelated to the discussion).
[Original]
Does the posting contain at least one original idea? (as opposed to one
which is repetitive of another posting, even if reworded).
[OverallCauses]
Does the posting refer to general overall causes of the environmental
challenges (such as lack of awareness, legislation, enforcement of
legislation, financial constraints)?
[RelatesCauses]
Does the posting specify how several causes interact to render an
environmental challenge persistent?
[RelatesDiff]
Does the posting establish a connection between different causes for the
persistence of environmental challenges and any one particular
[Relevant]
Does the posting address issues that exist in Egypt?
Does the posting specify the source(s) of the environmental
challenge(s)?
[Totality]
Does the posting demonstrate that the student is aware where/how the
specified challenge fits in the total environmental status?
Table 2. Details of Rubrics Used in Posting Content Analysis
Using Rubrics and Content Analysis for Evaluating Online Discussion:
A Case Study from an Environmental Course
The rubrics were developed taking into account the learning objectives, and then applied to sample sets of
postings for each cycle by both investigators collaboratively. These postings were chosen so as to form as
much of a representative sample with regards to length and content as possible. This collaborative coding
approach was carried out to hone the rubric definitions, increase objectivity, and achieve a level of interrater agreement on how to interpret each rubric and assess postings. Rubrics developed for each of the
four cycles are presented in Table 1. All postings, including the sample set, were then coded using the
finalized rubrics. To ensure intra-rater reliability, the resulting coding of the sample sets was then
compared to their initial coding. Coding was not carried out by both authors on purpose, since in an
authentic situation, assessment of online discussions is likely to be carried out by the course instructor
only, with the emergent coding approach ensuring consistency of the application of each rubric. The
finalized coding was then used to analyze patterns in all postings. A tailor-made Access-Excel package
was developed for coding and for analyzing patterns in all postings.
C. Instructor and Student Perceptions
The instructor’s perceptions were collected via two formal interviews and several informal discussions
throughout the semester. On the other hand, student feedback, giving an insight into the educational
situation was collected via Small Group Instructional Diagnosis (SGID). This is a structured group
interview process that takes place in the absence of the instructor. Groups of students are asked about
what they believe helps them learn in a course and how improvements could be made. SGIDs produce
both written and oral feedback. For this research, a number of questions directly pertaining to the
students’ perceptions of the online discussion activity were added:
1. Do you feel that the online discussions have helped you connect the course with real
life (Egyptian environmental problems) more than if you hadn't had them?
2. Did you know beforehand that the instructor uses online discussions and that it could
improve your grade?
3. Do you feel the online discussions have motivated you?
4. Is your opinion online affected by what the instructor seems to think is a good
5. What could have been done to improve online discussions? [this question was created
on the spot to address the issues that students said came up with online discussions]
In addition, a demographic survey was conducted at the beginning of the semester. Laurillard 
advocates conducting such surveys to understand more about students’ backgrounds and what they bring
to the course. The survey included questions on students’ familiarity with technology, to rule out its lack
as a possible hindrance to effective student participation. The majority of students were very familiar with
web technology, and therefore it can safely be concluded that it does not present a hindrance to any of
them for contributing to the online discussion.
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Instructor Perceptions
According to the course instructor, student engagement in online discussion can demonstrate significant
variations from semester to semester. For the Spring 2005 semester, during which the current research
was conducted, a significant number (25%) of students were quiet in class but very active online. This
was primarily due to limited spoken English skills, which made these students reluctant to speak up in
class. The course instructor was satisfied with the overall student performance in online discussion,
although his perception was that their critical thinking skills were not developed well enough, and that
Using Rubrics and Content Analysis for Evaluating Online Discussion:
A Case Study from an Environmental Course
some students just posted without giving their writing much thought. This was based on the absence of
clear indications in the postings that students were capable of recognizing relations existing between
environmental challenges which they had successfully identified; that they were aware of multiple causal
relations, as for example between one cause and several effects, and/or several causes to one effect; that
they were aware of the limitations and/or difficulties of some of the solutions they were putting forward
for addressing identified environmental challenges; and that they were aware that some challenges could
be addressed through different possible solutions. Another issue of concern was the recurring
convergence of a significant number of students on one issue, failing to look beyond it into others, or to
develop it further. This was of particular concern when the issue was an obvious one, not necessitating
much debate, or discussion (e.g. the lack of awareness being a cause of environmental degradation), thus
leading to considerable repetitiveness in the postings.
B. Student Perceptions
When students were asked for feedback about online discussion in an SGID conducted during the fourth
cycle of the discussion, ten students wrote that online discussion was an important factor in helping their
learning in the course; six said online discussion helped them connect the course with environmental
issues in Egypt, and six said the activity motivated them. These numbers need to be considered in light of
the number of students who contributed to online discussion (32 students) rather than the total number of
students in class (40 students). Furthermore, some students complained of ‘information overload’, stating
that they stopped contributing to online discussion when postings became too many and too repetitive,
with postings concurring to stated opinions without any further contributions. This is indeed valid
feedback considering that the SGID conducted during the fourth discussion cycle, came right after the
third cycle, which had the highest percentage of repetitive postings (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Number of ‘Repetitive’ Postings for the Total of Student Postings
No. of Postings
Repetitive
Using Rubrics and Content Analysis for Evaluating Online Discussion:
A Case Study from an Environmental Course
Figure 2. Student and instructor postings for Cycles I to IV of the online discussion
C. Content Analysis
Average No.
of Student
Postings per
No. of Students
Participating
Average No.
of Postings
per Student
Word Count
per Student
applicable
32 different
students (out of
a total of 40 in
applicable
Not applicable
Table 3. Quantitative Details for Each of the Four Cycles of the Online Discussion
Table 3 presents quantitative details for each cycle. The number of student postings and the number of
students participating are indicative of the degree of engagement of the class as a whole, whereas the
average number of postings per student and the average word count per student posting are indicative of
the level of engagement for each of those students participating in the discussion. Figure 1 presents the
number of ‘original’ versus ‘repetitive’ postings, and Figure 2 presents the number of student postings
and those of the instructor for each cycle. The overall trends in these variables throughout the four cycles
are summarized in Table 4.
No. of Postings
By Instructor
By Students
Using Rubrics and Content Analysis for Evaluating Online Discussion:
A Case Study from an Environmental Course
Length of a cycle
General increase, with a maximum in Cycle III
Number of student postings
General increase, with a maximum in Cycle IV
Average number of student posting per day
General decrease with a minimum in Cycle III
Number of students participating
Stable, with a maximum in Cycle II
Average number of postings per student
General increase
Average word count per student posting
General increase
Percentage of ‘repetitive’ student postings of
Lowest for Cycle I, stable for the other cycles,
with a maximum in Cycle III
Percentage of instructor postings of the total
Stable but decreased in Cycle IV
Table 4. General Trends for Contributions to Online Discussion
1. Student Engagement
The results show that as online discussion progressed, an increase in student engagement occurred. This is
reflected in the increase of the total number of postings, as well as the average number of postings per
student. The decrease in the average number of student postings per day should not be considered a
contradiction to the general increase in student engagement. It is believed that this is due to external
factors such as the approach of the end of the semester with all the associated deadlines of term papers
and projects. Students getting busier with other required course work (as opposed to the ‘bonus’ online
discussion), would post fewer messages per day. Nevertheless, the total number of postings per cycle
increased and the average number of postings per student increased steadily, demonstrating a continued
interest and engagement in the online discussion. Fewer student postings per day resulted in prolonging
the last two cycles: it took more days to discuss the topics at hand thoroughly. Instructor engagement in
the first three cycles was similar, and decreased significantly in the fourth cycle (Figure 2). This ruled out
the possibility of the instructor’s engagement in the discussion as being the cause of the increased student
participation.
2. Repetitiveness
Regarding the repetitiveness issue which some students raised during the SGID, it was found that it
started by being exceptionally low (13%) in the first cycle, increasing to 46% in the second cycle, and
reaching a noticeable maximum of 64% for the third cycle, then decreasing once more to 40% in the
fourth cycle. These figures need to be considered in light of the instructor encouragement (in his postings)
of students reacting to one another’s postings. Though a number of students succeeded to do so, using the
content of their colleagues’ postings to further develop ideas and express opinions, a significant number
agreed to others’ posting contents, repeating (though through rewording) the same ideas of the posting
reacted to with no additions. The correlation between the exceptionally high occurrence of repetitions and
the topic of Cycle III is noteworthy and is further discussed below.
3. Meeting Rubrics
Tables 5 and 6 present details of posting content analysis for the four cycles of the online discussion. It is
clear from Table 5 that as the online discussion progressed, the quality of the postings generally
Using Rubrics and Content Analysis for Evaluating Online Discussion:
A Case Study from an Environmental Course
improved. The percentage of rubrics met, on average, increased. In Cycle I, 63% essential rubrics were
met on average, whereas for Cycle IV 81% essential rubrics were met on average. The exception to this
upward trend is Cycle III where 60% of essential rubrics were met.
Average no. of
essential rubrics met
Percentage of
essential rubrics met
Mode for no. of
rubrics met
Frequency at
4.4 out of 7
4.4 out of 6
3.6 out of 6
4.9 out of 6
Table 5. Summary of Posting Content Analysis
The mode of rubrics met, as well as the frequencies at these modes, also improved as cycles progressed.
In Cycle I, six messages (out of 23, i.e. 26%) met five of the seven essential rubrics. For Cycle IV, 28
messages (out of 55, i.e. 51%) met all six essential rubrics. Again, Cycle III was the exception to this
upward trend, where 15 messages (out of 51, i.e. 29%) met only three of the six essential rubrics.
Cycle III data could be a reflection of a limited understanding of students of the topic under discussion
“How do you think the causes for the persistence of environmental challenges in Egypt today could be
addressed?”(i.e. why are these environmental challenges persisting?). Indeed, the percentage of postings
meeting the rubric [OnTopic] is the lowest (82%) for all four cycles, as shown in Table 6. This limited
understanding might explain the high level of repetitions seen in Cycle III. Some students not being very
clear about the topic of discussion for the cycle, would tend to react to their colleagues’ postings
(particularly if they have been encouraged to do so by the instructor), by mostly agreeing to what is in
them without further elaboration, criticism or development. These reactions would present the basis for
further reactions, etc.
Essential rubrics:
percentages met
Bonus rubrics:
percentages met
[NotIncorrect]
[Relevant]
[Totality]
[Connections]
[MultipleChallenges]
[Originality]
[CauseEffect]
[NotIncorrect]
[Original]
[OverallCauses]
[Relevant]
[JumpsToSolutions]
[MultipleReasons]
[RelatesCauses]
Using Rubrics and Content Analysis for Evaluating Online Discussion:
A Case Study from an Environmental Course
[Implementable]
[NotIncorrect]
[Original]
[RelatesDiff]
[Relevant]
[Building]
[Critical]
[MultipleSolutions]
[AwareAccounts]
[MultipleRoles]
[NotIncorrect]
[Original]
[Relevant]
[Building]
[Critical]
Table 6. Percentages of Essential and Bonus Rubrics Met in Student Postings
4. Critical Reasoning Skills
A number of rubrics reflecting critical reasoning skills need to be more closely considered. For Cycle I,
the essential rubrics [Totality] and [Effects] were met by 39% and 30% of the postings respectively,
demonstrating that a significant number of students, though successfully identifying valid environmental
challenges, were not clear about how the identified challenges related to one another and/or contributed to
the detrimental environmental conditions. For Cycle III, the essential rubrics [Implementable], [Original],
and [RelatesDiff] were met by 41%, 35%, and 8% of the postings respectively. The [Original] rubric
reflects the high level of repetitions as discussed above. The [RelatesDiff] and [Implementable] rubrics
scores demonstrate that multiple cause-effect relations were very seldom considered by students and
solutions were suggested without giving much thought to whether they were implementable. Indeed this
is also reflected by the very low scores of the bonus rubrics [Critical], met by 12% and 9% of postings in
Cycles III and IV respectively, and [MultipleSolutions], met by 10% of postings in Cycle III.
5. Connecting the Course to Egypt’s Environmental Problems
The overall objective for using online discussion was to help students make connections between the
course contents and Egypt’s environmental problems, as an example for a developing country with
significant environmental challenges. The rubric [Relevant] was one directly addressing this point. It was
met by 78% and 90% of postings in Cycles I and II respectively, and then met by 100% of postings in
Cycles III and IV, demonstrating that this overall objective was successfully met by those students taking
part in the online discussion, and that student increased engagement through the four cycles assisted in
VI. CONCLUSIONS
This investigation combines the use of rubrics and content analysis to both assess individual student
learning and to gauge the entire class learning outcomes from online discussion. This is applied to a small
class meeting regularly.
Using rubrics allowed objective assessment of learning against the instructor’s cycle-specific learning
objectives. Rubrics proved more beneficial than the instructor’s own subjective assessment because they
showed more learning than expected: the instructor could see how well students were doing with respect
Using Rubrics and Content Analysis for Evaluating Online Discussion:
A Case Study from an Environmental Course
to the over-arching learning goals, but the detailed rubrics pointed out specific areas of strength and
weakness in each student's learning.
The use of emergent coding also proved more beneficial in practice than the use of pre-determined
frameworks as it allowed an assessment specific to the activity's learning objectives. In addition, content
analysis captured the wider picture of the entire class learning from the online discussion. It allowed the
instructor to identify the learning objectives which were most difficult to achieve and the ones which were
widely met. In this respect, the combination of rubrics and content analysis demonstrate that student
learning was greater than student and instructor perceptions, and pinpoints a number of possible
improvements to the activity which the instructor can apply in the future. These encompass informing
students of the assessment criteria (rubrics) in advance in order to guide them towards the learning
objectives, which is common practice for rubrics ; focusing questions and feedback on addressing
specific deficiencies; dividing students into a number of smaller discussion groups to limit repetitiveness
and information overload, as suggested by McConnell ; and referring to ideas expressed in the online
discussion during class meeting times, thus encouraging students who made contributions .
In addition to the above, results also demonstrate that online discussion can be beneficial even when
classes are small and meet regularly as it allows more in-depth appreciation of content implications, and a
venue for quiet students to interact. Although some research warns that learners for whom English is
not a first language may suffer in online discussion, this investigation shows that, on the contrary, online
discussion seems to be a better forum for such learners to express themselves, as they have more time to
reflect and compose their answers than they would have for an oral discussion in the classroom.
VII. REFERENCES
1. McConnell, D. Implementing Computer Supported Cooperative Learning, 2nd Ed., London: Kogan
Page, 2002.
2. Hiltz, S. R. Impacts of college-level courses via Asynchronous Learning Networks: Some
Preliminary Results. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks 1(2): 1–19, August 1997. Online
 
3. Green, L. Online Conferencing: Lessons Learne, 1998. Online 
/moderators/lessonse.pdf.
4. Meyer, K. The Ebb and Flow of Online Discussions: What Bloom Can Tell Us About Our
Students’ Conversations. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks 9(1): 53–63, March 2005.
Online 
5. Hammond, M. A Review of Recent Papers on Online Discusson in Teaching and Learning in
Higher Education. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks 9(3): 9–23, 2005. Online
 
6. Bali, M. and A. Ellozy. Does WebCT Enhance Learning? Case Studies at AUC. 3rd International
E-learning Conference, Egypt, January 2005.
7. Preece, J., B. Nonnecke and D. Andrews. The top 5 reasons for lurking: Improving community
experiences for everyone. Computers in Human Behavior 20(1): 201–223, 2004.
8. Offir, B., I. Barth, I. Lev and A. Shteinbok. Teacher–student Interactions and Learning Outcomes
in a Distance Learning Environment. The Internet and Higher Education 9(2): 65–75, 2003.
9. Nisbet, D. Measuring the Quantity and Quality of Online Discussion Group Interaction. Journal of
eLiteracy 1(2): 122–139, 2004.
10. COHERE. Briefing on Blended Learning, 2004. Online: 
Using Rubrics and Content Analysis for Evaluating Online Discussion:
A Case Study from an Environmental Course
11. Wu, D. and S. R. Hiltz. Predicting Learning from Asynchronous Online Discussions. Journal of
Asynchronous Learning Networks 8(2): 139–152, April 2004. Online 
/publications/jaln/v8n2/pdf/v8n2_meyer.pdf.
12. Fredericksen, E., A. Pickett, P. Shea, W. Pelz and K. Swan. Student Satisfaction and Perceived
Learning with Online Courses: Principles and Examples from the SUNY Learning Network.
Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks 4(2): 7–41, September 2000. Online 
13. Young. A. and C. Norgard. Assessing the Quality of Online Courses from the Students’
Perspective. The Internet and Higher Education 9(2): 107–115, 2006.
14. Monroe, B. Fostering Critical Engagement in Online Discussions: The Washington State
University Study, 2003. Online: 
15. Hein, T. L. and E. S. Irvine. Assessment of student understanding using on-line discussion groups.
Proceedings of Frontiers in Education Conference, Tempe, Arizona, USA, 130–135. . Online: 
16. Hara, N., C. J. Bonk and C. Angeli. Content Analysis of Online Discussion in an Applied
Educational Psychology. Instructional Science 28(2): 115–152, 2000.
17. Meyer, K. Evaluating Online Discussion: Four Different Frames of Analysis. Journal of
Asynchronous Learning Networks 8(2): 101–114, April 2004. Online: 
/publications/jaln/v8n2/pdf/v8n2_meyer.pdf.
18. Roblyer, M. D. and W. R. Winecke. Exploring The Interaction Equation: Validating a Rubric to
Assess and Encourage Interaction in Distance Courses. Journal of Asynchronous Learning
Networks 8(4): 24–37, December 2004. Online: 
/v8n4/pdf/v8n4_roblyer.pdf.
19. CSU. Rubric for Online Instruction, CSU, Chico. Online: 
20. Henri, F. Computer conferencing and content analysis. In A Kaye (Ed.) Collaborative Learning
through Computer Conferencing: The Najaden Papers, 117–136. London: Springer-Verlag, 1992.
21. Lally V. Analysing teaching and learning in networked collaborative learning environments: Issues
and work in progress. In V. Lally and D. McConnell (eds.), Networked Collaborative Learning and
ICTs in Higher Education: The Edinburgh Papers, 5–26. Sheffield: School of Education University
of Sheffield, 2002a.
22. Fahy, P. J., G. Crawford and M. Ally. Patterns of Interaction in a Computer Conference
Transcript. International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning 2(1): 2001. Online:
 
23. Gunawardena, C. N., C. A. Lowe, and T. Anderson. Analysis of a global debate and the
development of an interaction analysis model for examining social construction of knowledge in
computer conferencing. Journal of Educational Computing Research 17(4): 397–431, 1997.
24. Parlett, M. and D. Hamilton. Chapter 1.1: Evaluation as illumination: a new approach to the study
of innovatory programmes. In D. Hamilton, D. Jenkins, C. King and B. MacDonald (Eds.), Beyond
the Numbers Game, 6–22. London: Macmillan Education Ltd., 1977.
25. White, K. Mid-Course Adjustments: Using Small Group Instructional Diagnoses To Improve
Teaching and Learning. In Washington Center's Evaluation Committee (Ed.) Assessment in and of
Collaborative Learning, 1995.Online: 
26. Laurillard, D. What students bring to learning. In Rethinking University Teaching: A Framework
for the Effective Use of Educational Technology, 30–47. London: Routledge, 1993.
27. Pearson Education. The Advantages of Rubrics: Part one in a five-part series, 2005. Online:
 
28. Morse, K. Does One Size Fit All? Exploring asynchronous learning in a multicultural environment.
Asynchronous
 
Using Rubrics and Content Analysis for Evaluating Online Discussion:
A Case Study from an Environmental Course
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to express their thanks to Dr. Aziza Ellozy, Director of the Center for Learning
and Teaching of the American University in Cairo for invaluable discussions and comments, as well as
continuous support and encouragement throughout the course of this investigation.
The authors would also like to express their gratitude to Mr. Nicholas Bowskill, Mrs. Emma Pincott, and
Mr. Gerard Clarke for their invaluable input throughout this research process through their roles in the
M.Ed. in the eLearning Program at the University of Sheffield, UK.
IX. ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Maha Bali is a Senior Instructional Technologist at the Center for Learning and Teaching of the
American University in Cairo.
Adham Ramadan is an Associate Professor at the Department of Chemistry of the American University