Consistency of Random Survival Forests
Hemant Ishwaran and Udaya B. Kogalur
Cleveland Clinic
We prove uniform consistency of Random Survival Forests (RSF), a newly introduced forest
ensemble learner for analysis of right-censored survival data. Consistency is proven under general
splitting rules, bootstrapping, and random selection of variables—that is, under true implementation
of the methodology. Under this setting we show that the forest ensemble survival function converges
uniformly to the true population survival function. To prove this result we make one key assumption
regarding the feature space: we assume that all variables are factors. Doing so ensures that the feature
space has finite cardinality and enables us to exploit counting process theory and the uniform
consistency of the Kaplan-Meier survival function.
Consistency; Ensemble; Factors; Kaplan-Meier; Random Forests; Survival Tree
1 Introduction
One of the most exciting machine learning algorithms to have been proposed is Random Forests
(RF), an ensemble method introduced by Leo Breiman . RF is an all-purpose
algorithm that can be applied in a wide variety of data settings. In regression settings (i.e. where
the response is continuous) the method is referred to as RF-R. In classification problems, or
multiclass problems, where the response is a class label, the method is referred to as RF-C.
Recently the methodology has also been extended to right-censoring survival settings, a method
called random survival forests (RSF) .
RF is considered an “ensemble learner”. Ensemble learners are predictors formed by
aggregating many individual learners (base learners), each of which have been constructed
from different realizations of the data. A widely used ensemble technique is bagging . In bagging, the ensemble is formed by aggregating a base learner over independent
bootstrap samples of the original data.
Although there are many variants of RF , the most popular, and the one we focus on here, is that described by Breiman in
his software manual and discussed in Breiman under the name Forest-
RI (short for RF random input selection). In this version, RF can be viewed as an extension of
bagging. Using independent bootstrap samples, a random tree is grown by splitting each tree
node using a randomly selecting subset of variables (features). The forest ensemble is
© 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers
we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting
proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could
affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Stat Probab Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 July 1.
 
Stat Probab Lett. 2010 July 1; 80(13-14): 1056–1064. doi:10.1016/j.spl.2010.02.020.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
constructed by aggregating over the random trees. The extra randomization introduced in the
tree growing process is the crucial step distinguishing forests from bagging. Unlike bagging,
each bootstrap tree is constructed using different variables, and not all variables are used. This
is designed to encourage independence among trees, and unlike bagging, it not only reduces
variance, but also bias. While this extra step might seem harmless, results using benchmark
data have shown that prediction error for RF can be substantially better than bagging. In fact,
performance of RF has been found comparable to other state-of-the-art methods such as
boosting , and support vector machines , Breiman discussed bounds on the generalization error for a forest as a tradeoff involving number of variables randomly selected as candidates for splitting, and the
correlation between trees. He showed as number of variables increases, strength of a tree
(accuracy) increases, but at the price of increasing correlation among trees; which degrades
overall performance. In Lin and Jeon , lower bounds for the mean-squared error for a
regression forest were derived under random splitting by drawing analogies between forests
and nearest neighbor classifiers. Recently, Meinshausen proved consistency of RF-R
for quantile regression, and Biau, Devroye, and Lugosi proved consistency of RF-C
under the assumption of random splitting.
In this paper, we prove consistency of RSF by showing that the forest ensemble survival
function converges uniformly to the true population survival function. Because RSF is a new
extension of RF to right-censored survival settings not much is known about its properties.
Even consistency results for survival trees are sparse in the literature. For right-censored
survival data, LeBlanc and Crowley showed survival tree cumulative hazard functions
are consistent for smoothed cumulative hazard functions. The method of proof used
convergence results for recursive-partitioned regression trees for uncensored data Breiman
et.al .
We take a different approach and establish consistency by drawing upon counting process
theory. We first prove uniform consistency of survival trees, and from this, by making use of
bootstrap theory, we prove consistency of RSF (Section 3). These results apply to general tree
splitting rules (not just random ones) and to true implementations of RSF. We make only one
important assumption: that the feature space is a finite (but very large) discrete space and that
all variables are factors (Section 3). In this regard we deviate from other proofs of forest
consistency which assume that the feature space is continuous. A continuous space is a more
general assumption than ours and we readily acknowledge this limitation (see the Discussion).
At that same time, discrete variables are very often encountered in medical settings involving
survival data. Section 2.3 discusses an example related to esophageal cancer. Furthermore, in
Section 4 we investigate the extent to which an assumption of a discrete feature space limits
our results. We show by way of example that embedding forests in a discrete setting is realistic
in that one can analyze problems with continuous variables by treating them as factors having
a large number of factor labels. For the interested user, we note that all computations in the
paper were implemented using the freely available R-software package, randomSurvivalForest
 .
2 Random survival forests
Let (X, T, δ), (X1, T1, δ1), … ,(Xn, Tn, δn) be i.i.d. random elements such that X, the feature,
is a d-dimensional vector taking values in
, a discrete space (to be described in Section 3).
Here T = min(T0,C) is the observed survival time and δ = I(To ≤ C) is the binary {0, 1} censoring
value, where it is assumed that To, the true event time, is independent of C, the censoring time.
Ishwaran and Kogalur
Stat Probab Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 July 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
An individual (case) i is said to be right-censored at time Ti if δi = 0; otherwise, if δi = 1, the
individual is said to have experienced an event at Ti. It is assumed that X is independent of δ
and that (X, T, δ) has joint distribution ℙ. The marginal distribution for X is denoted by μ and
defined via μ(A) = ℙ{X ∈ A} for all subsets A of
. It is assumed that μ(A) > 0 for each A ≠
2.1 The RSF algorithm
The collection of values {(Xi, Ti, δi)}1≤i≤n are referred to as the learning data and are used in
the construction of the forest. We begin with a high-level description of the RSF algorithm.
Specific details follow (Section 2.2).
Draw B independent Efron bootstrap samples from the learning data
and grow a binary recursive survival tree to each bootstrap sample.
When growing a survival tree, at each node of the tree randomly select p candidate
variables to split on (use as many candidate variables as possible, up to p − 1, if there
are less than p variables available within the node). Split the node by using the split
that maximizes survival difference between daughter nodes (in the case of ties, a
random tie breaking rule is used).
Grow a tree as near to saturation as possible (i.e. to full size) with the only constraint
being that each terminal node should have no less than d0 > 0 events.
Calculate the tree survival function. The forest ensemble is the averaged tree survival
2.2 Survival trees and forests: details of the algorithm
The tree survival function calculated in Step 4 of the algorithm is the Kaplan-Meier (KM)
estimator for the tree’s terminal nodes. To be more precise, let
) denote the terminal
nodes of a survival tree,
. These are the extreme nodes of
reached when the tree can no
longer be split to form new nodes (daughters). Let h ∈
) be a terminal node. Define
to be the number of individuals in h observed to be at risk just prior
to time t (i.e., the number of individuals who have neither experienced an event nor been
censored prior to t). Let
be the counting process defined as the number of events in [0;
t] for all cases in h. Define the indicator process
. The Nelson-Aalen
estimator for cases within the terminal node h is
where we adopt the convention that
. The KM estimator
for cases within h is
Each case i has a d-dimensional feature xi ∈
. To determine the survival function for i, drop
xi down the tree. Because of the binary nature of a survival tree, xi will be assigned a unique
Ishwaran and Kogalur
Stat Probab Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 July 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
terminal node h′ ∈
). The survival function for i is the KM estimator for xi’s terminal
This defines the survival function for all cases and thus defines the survival function for the
tree. To make this clear, we write the tree survival function as
The forest ensemble survival function is the averaged tree survival function. If the forest is
comprised of trees {
b}1≤b≤B, where Ŝb(t|x) is the survival function for
b given x, the
ensemble survival function is
Note that in practice each tree in the forest is constructed from an independent bootstrap sample
of the data (Step 1 of the algorithm), but for now we ignore this complication. We revist this
issue later in Section 3.3 when we consider bootstrap resampling.
2.3 Esophageal cancer
Before delving into the theoretical results (Section 3) we present a previously published
example illustrating RSF. In this example, RSF was applied to define a cancer stage grouping
for esophageal cancer. Currently, staging of esophageal cancer is based solely on anatomic
extent of disease using an orderly, progressive grouping of TNM cancer classifications. TNM
stands for three anatomic features of esophageal cancer: depth of cancer invasion through the
esophageal wall and adjacent tissues (T), presence of cancer-positive nodes along the
esophagus (N), and presence of cancer metastases to distant sites (M). There are five
subclassifications of T (Tis, T1, T2, T3, and T4), two of N (absence or presence of cancerpositive nodes), and two of M (absence or presence of distant metastases).
TNM classifications for esophageal cancer are known to be overly simplistic; in part because
they reflect only anatomic extent of cancer. Other cancer characteristics known to affect
prognosis include location of the cancer along the esophagus, cell type (squamous cell
carcinoma vs. adenocarcinoma), and histologic grade; a crude reflector of biologic activity. It
is also widely known that an increasing number of cancer-positive lymph nodes is associated
with decreasing survival, and it is suspected this relationship is non-linear and may depend
upon other factors, such as depth of cancer invasion, T.
In order to develop a more biologically plausible stage grouping, a RSF analysis was applied
to a large group (n = 4627) of esophageal cancer patients . Variables
measured on each patient included TNM classifications, number of lymph nodes removed at
surgery, number of cancer-positive lymph nodes, other non-TNM cancer characteristics,
patient demographics, and additional variables to adjust for country and institution. All
variables were discrete (this included patient age, which as customary was recorded in years).
The primary outcome used in the analysis was time to death, measured from date of surgery.
Ishwaran and Kogalur
Stat Probab Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 July 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 1 displays some aspects of the forest constructed from this data. Plotted in the figure is
five-year predicted survival for lymph node-positive patients who were free of distant
metastases. The curves plotted are averaged ensemble survival functions evaluated at five years
with each curve being constructed from a forest using a different number of trees (5, 10, 50,
and 250 trees, respectively). Each curve is stratified by depth of cancer invasion (T1, T2, T3,
and T4; note that Tis plays no role in node-positive cancers) and by number of cancer-positive
nodes. Each point on a curve is the average of the ensemble survival function, averaged over
all patients for a given T, for a given number of cancer-positive nodes. As the number of trees
increases, the curves begin to stabilize, and after about 250 trees one can see there is not much
to be gained by using additional trees. This shows that forest ensembles can stabilize fairly
quickly. The other interesting aspect of Figure 1 is that RSF has clearly identified a non-linear
relationship between survival and number of cancer-positive nodes, with survival decreasing
rapidly as number of nodes increases. Furthermore, this relationship depends strongly upon T
(the more deeply invasive the tumor, the less the effect). These results are consistent with the
biology of esophageal cancer.
3 Properties of survival forests
3.1 Feature space
In establishing consistency of RSF we assume that each coordinate 1 ≤ j ≤ d of the ddimensional feature X is a factor (discrete nominal variable) with 1 < Lj < ∞ distinct labels.
While this assumes that the feature space
has finite cardinality, the actual size of
quite large, L1 × ⋯ × Ld, and moreover, the number of splits that a tree might make from such
data can be even larger, depending on d and Lj.
To see this, note that a split on a factor in a tree results in data points moving left and right of
the parent node such that the complementary pairings define the new daughter nodes. For
example, if a factor has three labels, {A,B,C}, then there are three complementary pairings
(daughters) as follows: {A} and {B,C}; {B} and {C,A}; and {C} and {A,B}. In general, for a
factor with Lj distinct labels, there are 2Lj−1 − 1 distinct complementary pairs. Thus, the total
number of splits evaluated when splitting the root node for a survival tree when all variables
are factors can be as much as
Following the root-node split, are splits on the resulting daugther nodes, and their daughter
nodes, recursively, with each subsequent generation requiring a large number of evaluations.
Each evaluation can result in a new tree, thus showing that number of trees (space of trees)
associated with
can be extremely large.
3.2 Uniform consistency of survival trees
To show that the ensemble survival function converges to the true population survival function
we first prove consistency of a single tree. Consistency of forests will be readily deduced from
this (Section 3.3).
In the following, and throughout the paper, the true survival function, or population parameter,
is assumed to be of the form
Ishwaran and Kogalur
Stat Probab Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 July 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
where α(·|x) is the non-negative hazard function for the subpopulation X = x.
The following result proves uniform consistency of a survival tree, and is a consequence of the
uniform consistency of the KM estimator. The proof takes advantage of the finiteness of
which turns the problem of proving tree consistency into a more manageable problem of
establishing consistency for a single terminal node.
Theorem 1. Let t ∈ (0, τ), where τ = min{τ(x) : x ∈
{C > 0} > 0, and α(·|x) is strictly positive over [0, t] for at least one x ∈
where Ŝ(·|x) is a tree survival function defined as in (2).
3.3 Uniform consistency of survival forests
We have so far implicitly assumed that trees are grown from the learning data, ℒ = {(Xi, Ti,
δi)}1≤i≤n. But in practice, trees are actually grown from independent bootstrap samples of the
data. In order to prove consistency of a true implementation of RSF, we must extend our
previous result to address bootstrap resampling.
denote an Efron bootstrap sample of ℒ. Let
the survival tree grown from ℒ* and let Ŝ*(t|x) be the KM estimator for
is defined similar to (1), and the above sum is over
*), the set of terminal
The ensemble survival function for a survival forest comprised of B survival trees is
is the survival function for the survival tree
grown using the bth bootstrap
sample. We prove consistency of RSF by establishing consistency of
for each b.
Theorem 2. Let τ* = min(τ, sup(F)), where sup(F) is the upper limit of the support of F(s) =
1 − ℙ{To > s}ℙ{C > s}. Then under the same conditions as in Theorem 1, for each t ∈ (0, τ*):
Ishwaran and Kogalur
Stat Probab Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 July 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
stands for op in bootstrap probability for almost all ℒ-sample sequences; i.e. with
probability one under ℙ∞.
Uniform consistency of the ensemble, Ŝe(t|x), follows automatically from Theorem 2, because
The right-hand side is
by Theorem 2.
3.4 Uniform approximation by forests
Theorem 2 establishes consistency of a bootstrapped survival tree, and from this consistency
of a survival forest follows. While this is a useful line of attack for establishing large sample
properties of forests, it does not convey how in practice a forest might improve inference over
a single tree. Indeed, in finite sample settings, a forest of trees can have a decided advantage
when approximating the true survival function. Recall the esophageal cancer example of
Section 2.3 where we saw first hand how averaging over trees improved prediction accuracy.
To provide theoretical support for superiority of forests, we make use of the following setting.
Suppose that we are allowed to construct a binary survival tree
b from a prechosen learning
data set ℒb = {(Xb,i, Tb,i, δb,i)}1≤i≤n in any manner we choose. The only constraint being that
each terminal node of
b must contain at least d0 = 1 events. We are allowed to construct b =
1, …, B such trees for any B < ∞ of our choosing. Let Sb(t|x) be the KM tree survival function
b, and let
be the ensemble survival function constructed from {
b}1≤b≤B, where {Wb}1≤b≤B are nonnegative forest weights that we are free to specify. The next theorem shows that one can always
find an ensemble that uniformly approximates the true survival function (3). Trees do not
possess this property.
Theorem 3. If n > d, and s ∈ [0, τ), then for each ε > 0 there exists an ensemble survival
function (4) for a survival forest comprised of B = B(ε) survival trees, with each tree consisting
of d + 1 terminal nodes, such that
4 Treating a continuous problem as discrete
Our theory has been predicted on the assumption that all variables are factors, but in practice
data with continuous variables are often encountered. Here we show that one can discretize
continuous variables and treat them as factors without unduly affecting prediction error and
inference: thus showing that our theory extrapolates reasonably to general data settings.
Ishwaran and Kogalur
Stat Probab Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 July 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
For illustration we consider the primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) data of Fleming and Harrington
 . The data is from a randomized clinical trial studing the effectiveness of the drug Dpenicillamine on PBC. The dataset involves 312 individuals and contains 17 variables as well
as censoring information and time until death for each individual. Of the 17 features, seven are
discrete and 10 are continuous. Each of the 10 continuous variables were discretized and
converted to a factor with L labels. We investigated different amounts of granularity: L = 2,
For each level of granularity, L, we fit a survival forest of 1000 survival trees using log-rank
splitting with node-adaptive random splits. Splits for nodes were implemented as follows. A
maximum of “nsplit” complementary pairs were chosen randomly for each of the p randomly
selected candidate variables within a node (if nsplit exceeded the number of cases in a node,
then nsplit was set to the size of the node). Log-rank splitting was applied to the randomly
selected complementary pairs and the node was split on that variable and complementary pair
maximizing the log-rank test. Five different values for nsplit were tried: nsplit= 5, 10, 20, 50,
The top plot in Figure 2 shows out-of-bag prediction error as a function of granularity and
nsplit value. As granularity rises, prediction error increases—but this increase is reasonably
slow and well contained with larger values of nsplit. This is quite remarkable because total
number of complementary pairs with a granularity level of L = 30 is on order 230 (over 1 billion
pairs) and yet our results show that using only a handful of randomly selected complementary
pairs keeps prediction error in check.
Prediction error measures overall performance, but we should also consider how inference for
a variable is affected by increasing granularity. To study this we looked at variable importance
(VIMP). VIMP measures predictiveness of a variable, adjusting for all other variables
 . Positive values of VIMP indicate predictiveness, and negative and zero
values indicate noise. For each forest we dropped bootstrapped data down the forest and
computed VIMP for each variable. This was repeated 1000 times independently. The bottom
plot of Figure 2 displays the 68% bootstrap confidence region from this distribution. The
analysis was restricted to only those forests grown under an nsplit value of 1024 but was carried
out for each level of granularity (color coding scheme used to depict granularity is described
in the caption of the figure). Overall, one can see that the bootstrap confidence regions are
relatively robust to the level of granularity.
5 Discussion
We proved uniform consistency of RSF under settings that mirror those seen in actual data
applications. Our consistency result followed by showing consistency of a single bootstrapped
survival tree. As we remarked, while this is a useful line of attack for establishing large sample
properties, it does not tell us why RF work. Theorem 3 presented one argument, but a general
theory explaining why RF works still remains elusive. We hope that our work will motivate
others to study this problem.
The major assumption in our approach was the assumption of a discrete feature space. Other
proofs of consistency have used continuous feature spaces, and these results are more general.
At the same time, because applications of RF to survival settings is much less studied than
regression and classification settings, our results are useful because they add to the literature
on forests. It is also interesting to note that a discrete space assumption implies, with probability
one, that each node of the tree will contain one unique × value. This is in line with the original
Forest-RI method suggested by Breiman .
Ishwaran and Kogalur
Stat Probab Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 July 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.