On causal inference in the presence of interference
Eric J. Tchetgen Tchetgen and Tyler J. VanderWeele
Departments of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Harvard University
Interference is said to be present when the exposure or treatment received by one individual may
affect the outcomes of other individuals. Such interference can arise in settings in which the
outcomes of the various individuals come about through social interactions. When interference is
present, causal inference is rendered considerably more complex, and the literature on causal
inference in the presence of interference has just recently begun to develop. In this paper we
summarize some of the concepts and results from the existing literature and extend that literature
in considering new results for finite sample inference, new inverse probability weighting
estimators in the presence of interference and new causal estimands of interest.
1 Introduction
Interference is said to be present when the exposure or treatment received by one individual
may affect the outcomes of other individuals. Such interference can arise in settings in
which the outcomes of the various individuals come about through social interactions
 . Most of the literature on causal inference proceeds by making an
assumption of "no-interference." For example, Rubin’s formulation of the potential
outcomes framework an assumption referred to as the "Stable Unit Treatment Value
Assumption" or "SUTVA" is made which includes within it a no-interference assumption
 . Such no-interference assumptions are employed routinely though not always
acknowledged. When interference is present, causal inference is rendered considerably more
complex, and the literature on causal inference in the presence of interference has just
recently begun to develop . In this paper we hope to both
summarize some of the concepts and results from the existing literature and to extend that
literature in considering new results for finite sample inference, new inverse probability
weighting estimators in the presence of interference and new causal estimands of interest.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we present the notation we
will be using throughout. In section 3 we review notions of direct, indirect (spillover), total
and overall causal effects of Hudgens and Halloran that arise when interference is
present. In section 4 we discuss inference for these effects in randomized trials and present
new results on variance estimation and finite sample confidence intervals in the presence of
interference. In section 5 we consider the context of observational studies and present a
result on inverse probability weighting estimators of causal effects when interference is
present. In section 6, we discuss varieties of direct and indirect effects present in the causal
inference literature and comment on the terminological ambiguity concerning the
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Stat Methods Med Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 02.
 
Stat Methods Med Res. 2012 February ; 21(1): 55–75. doi:10.1177/0962280210386779.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
expressions "direct effect" and "indirect effect"; we also introduce a new causal estimand
that indicates a non-zero "infectiousness effect" in the context of vaccine trials . Finally, in section 7, we offer some concluding remarks and directions for future
2 Preliminaries
2.1 Counterfactuals
As in Hudgens and Halloran , suppose data is observed on N > 1 groups of
individuals, or blocks of units. For i = 1, …, N let ni denote the number of individuals in
group i and let Ai ≡ (Ai1, …, Aini) denote the treatments those ni individuals received.
Throughout, we assume perfect compliance, that is treatment assigned to an individual is
equivalent to treatment received by the individual. We assume that Aij is a dichotomous
random variable with support equal to {0, 1}, so that Ai takes values in the set {0, 1}ni. Let
Ai, −j ≡ (Ai1, … Aini)\Aij ≡ (Ai1, …, Aij−1, Aij+1, … Aini) denote the ni – 1 subvector of Ai
with the jth entry deleted. Following Hudgens and Halloran and Sobel , we
refer to Ai as an intervention, treatment or allocation program, to distinguish it from the
individual treatment Aij Furthermore, for n = 1, 2, …, we define
(n) as the set of vectors of
possible treatment allocations of length n; for instance
(2) ≡ {(0, 0), (0, 1), (1, 0), (1, 1)}.
Therefore, Ai takes one of 2ni possible values in
(ni), while Ai,−j takes values in
1) for all j. For positive integers n and k, we further define
(n, k) to be the subset of
wherein exactly k individuals receive treatment 1, that is every element a of
, where 1n is the vector of length n with entries all equal to one.
For each block i, we shall assume there exist counterfactual (potential outcome) data Yi(·) =
{Yi(ai) : ai ∈
} where Yi(ai) = {Yi1 (ai), …, Yini (ai)}, and Yij (ai) is individual j’s response
under treatment allocation ai; and that the observed outcome Yij for individual j in block i is
equal to his counterfactual outcome Yij (Ai) under the realized treatment allocation Ai. The
notation Yij(ai) makes explicit the possibility for interference between individuals within a
block, that is, the potential outcome for individual j may depend on another’s individual
treatment assignment in block j. Also, note that for counterfactuals to remain well defined,
this notation implicitly assumes that counterfactuals for an individual in block i do not
depend on treatment assignments of individuals in a different block i′ ≠ i. This encodes the
assumption of partial interference considered by Sobel and Hudgens and Halloran
 , which they point out to be particularly appropriate when the observed blocks are
well separated by space or time such as in some group randomized studies in the social
sciences, or in some community-randomized vaccine trials. The ordinary no interference
assumption generally made in the causal inference literature is
then that for all i and j if ai and are such that
, which in turn
implies that the counterfactual outcomes for individual j in group i can be written as {Yij
(a) : a = 0, 1}.
Hereafter, we follow the convention in Sobel and Hudgens and Halloran , and
suppose that Yi(·) is fixed as it does not depend on the random treatment allocation program
Ai. In addition to treatment and outcome data, we suppose that we also observe fixed data Li
Tchetgen and VanderWeele
Stat Methods Med Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
= (Lil, …, Lini), i = 1, … N, where Lij denotes pretreatment covariates for individual i in
block j; we allow Lij to contain block level covariate along with block aggregates of
individual level covariates.
2.2 Treatment Assignment in Group Randomized Experiments
In group randomized experiments, treatment allocation is determined by the experimenter;
therefore the assignment mechanism πi (Ai) of Ai is known. Let πi(Ai; α0) denote an
experimenter’s particular choice of parametrization for the distribution of Ai indexed by the
parameter α0, that is πi (Ai) = πi(Ai; α0). In this paper, we consider two types of
parametrizations.
Definition—(A) A parametrization of type A with parameter ni and K0,i for block i, entails
a so-called mixed individual group assignment strategy, whereby the treatment program Ai
in block i is randomly allocated conditional on
with probability
mass function
(B) A parametrization of type B entails a Bernoulli individual group assignment strategy,
whereby treatment is randomly assigned to different individuals within block i according to
the known probability mass function
where 0 < α0 < 1.
For example, two type A treatment assignment strategies α0 and α1 might entail randomly
assigning half of ni individuals in group i to treatment 1 and the other half to treatment 0
under a strategy corresponding to α0 versus assigning all individuals in a group to treatment
zero under the second strategy corresponding to α1. Similarly, two treatment assignment
strategies
of the second type might assign each individual in a group to treatment 1
with probability 1/2 under strategy
versus assigning each individual in a group to
treatment 0 with probability 1/3 under strategy
. Sobel and Hudgens and Halloran
 considered Type A treatment allocation programs in group randomized trials; in
Section 5, we show that allocation programs of type (B) play an important conceptual role in
the Definition and estimation of causal effects in observational studies.
Suppose our goal is to assess the causal effects of assigning groups to α0, compared to α1,
where α0 and α1 are two individual group assignment strategies of type A. To achieve this
goal in an experimental study, Hudgens and Halloran considered the following twostage group randomization framework. In the first stage, each of the N groups is randomly
assigned to either α0 or α1. In the second stage individuals within a group are randomly
Tchetgen and VanderWeele
Stat Methods Med Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
assigned to treatment conditional on their group’s assignment in the first stage. For instance,
in the first stage, half of the N groups might be assigned to an allocation strategy α0 while
the other half is assigned to α1; in the second stage, two-thirds of the individuals within
groups assigned α0 are randomly assigned to treatment 1, while one-third of the individuals
within a group assigned to α1 receive treatment 1. Such a design is commonly known as
split-plot randomization or pseudo-cluster randomization. As Hudgens and Halloran 
point out, two-stage randomization designs are key to obtaining answers for important
public health questions in the face of interference, such as: how many cases due to an
infectious disease will be averted by vaccinating two-thirds of the population compared to
only vaccinating one-third of the population?
3 Causal Estimands
3.1 Direct Causal Effects
Following Halloran and Struchiner , we define the individual direct causal effect of
treatment 0 compared to treatment 1 for individual j in group i by:
and the individual average direct causal effect for individual j in group i by
where for a = 0, 1,
Note that in the above display, and until stated otherwise, πi (·; α0) may either be of Type A
or B. Thus,
is a difference in individual average counterfactual outcomes when aij
= 0 and when aij = 1 under α0. This is a marginal causal effect as it is a comparison between
expected values of the marginal distributions of Yij(Ai,−j, aij = 0) and of Yij(Ai,−j, aij = 1)
with respect to α0. Finally, we define the group average direct causal effect by
and the population average direct causal effect by
3.2 Indirect Causal Effects or"Spillover Effects"
Halloran and Struchiner also define an individual indirect causal effect as the causal
effect on an individual of the treatment received by others in the group. Specifically, let
Tchetgen and VanderWeele
Stat Methods Med Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
be the individual indirect causal effect on subject j in group i of treatment
allocation ai compared with so that:
Sobel refers to the indirect effect defined above as a"spillover effect." Note that if
interference is absent then
. Similar to direct effects, define the
individual average indirect causal effect by
. Finally,
define the group average indirect causal effect as
the population average indirect causal effect as
3.3 Total Causal Effects
Total effects reflect both the direct and the indirect effects of a particular treatment
assignment on an individual. Following Halloran and Struchiner we define the
individual total causal effects for individual j in group i as:
the individual average total causal effect by
group average total causal effect by
population average total causal effect by
3.4 Overall Causal Effects
Following Hudgens and Halloran , we define the individual overall causal effect of
treatment ai compared to treatment for individual j in group i by
Similarly, define the individual average overall causal effect comparing α0 to α1 by
, the group average overall causal effect by
and the population average overall effect by
The following simple yet instructive properties describe the relationship between the various
causal effects:
It follows immediately from their Definitions, that total effects at the individual,
group or population levels can be decomposed as the sum of direct and indirect
Tchetgen and VanderWeele
Stat Methods Med Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
causal effects at the corresponding level. That is, for example
 .
Total causal effects are not commutative, for instance
so that while the total causal effects are not necessarily equal, they are constrained
in sum to equal the sum of direct effects .
. In the absence of indirect
effects, the total effects are commutative if and only if the direct effects are equal
 .
We also have the following decomposition for the overall effect:
The group average overall effects are equal to a weighted sum of the group average
indirect, direct and total effects:
Under the assumption of no interference between individuals of a group, the individual
indirect causal effect is equal to zero and therefore individual, group and population average
causal total effects are equal to the average causal direct effects at the corresponding level.
Recall that in the absence of interference, the counterfactual outcomes for individual j in
group i can be written as {Yij (a) : a = 0, 1} and the individual and group average causal
effect ct become Yij (1) – Yij (0) and
respectively. Furthermore,
the assumption of no interference implies that the various causal effects do not depend on
the treatment assignment strategies α0 and α1, whereas in the presence of interference within
groups, these effects do in general depend on the assignment strategies.
4 Inference in group randomized studies
4.1 Estimation
In this section, we consider the estimation of the following four key causal contrasts, the
population average direct causal effect
, the population average indirect causal
, the population average total causal effect
and the population
average overall effect
. Unbiased estimators of these parameters under a twostage randomization scheme were proposed by Hudgens and Halloran under the
following assumption:
Tchetgen and VanderWeele
Stat Methods Med Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Assumption 1—Let S ≡ (S1, …, SN) denote the first stage of randomization group
assignments with Si = 1 if group i is assigned to α0 and zero if group i is assigned to α1. Let
η denote the parametrization for the distribution of S and let C = ∑iSi denote the number of
groups assigned α1. Then, {η, α0, α1} are assumed to be Type A parametrizations.
Suppose Si = 1 and let
, also define
. Hudgens and Halloran proposed the
following estimators:
which they showed to be unbiased under Assumption 1, i.e.
where the expectation is taken with respect to the joint density of (S,A1, …, AN).
4.2 Variance Estimation
4.2.1 Variance Estimation under Stratified interference—Unbiased estimation of
the variances of the various estimators of the previous section appears not to be generally
available without additional assumptions regarding the underlying structure of interference.
Hudgens and Halloran illustrate this difficulty by considering the estimation of Var
(Ŷ (1; α0)|Si=1) under assumption 1 only. They note that the estimator Ŷ (1; α0) is based on
a single systematic random sample of fixed size Ki from the set of potential outcomes {Yij
Tchetgen and VanderWeele
Stat Methods Med Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
(ai) : ai ∈
(ni;Ki), zij = 1}. By the non-existence of an unbiased estimator of the variance
of the sample mean from a single systematic sample, this implies the non-existence of an
unbiased estimator of Var (Ŷ (1; α0)|Si=1). However, as we show in the next lemma, the
non-existence of an unbiased estimator of Var (Ŷ (1; α0)|Si=1) does not preclude the
possibility for simple yet conservative estimation of the latter quantity, as an unbiased
estimator of an upper bound for the variance is often a useful measure of uncertainty. The
following lemma gives the result for a nonnegative outcome.
Lemma 1: Suppose that Yij (ai) ≥ 0 for all ai ∈ A(ni;K0,i) and for j = 1, …, ni, and define
then the following holds under Assumption 1:
The proof of this lemma is given in the appendix.
In contrast with Lemma 1 Hudgens and Halloran consider variance estimators that
rely on the following assumption of Stratified interference.
Assumption 2: Stratified interference: For
Assumption 2 states that ai ↦ Yij (ai) is a function of ai only through (aij, ∑j′≠j aij′), that is
an individual’s counterfactual outcome only depends on his exposure level aij, and on the
total number of people exposed in his group. Let Yij (aij; α0) ≡ Yij (aij, ai,−j; α0) for any ai,−j
∈ A(ni – 1, Ki – aij), aij = 0, 1; and let
is the within-group sample variance and
the between group sample
variance for individuals with Aij = a ∈ {0, 1}. Also, let
Tchetgen and VanderWeele
Stat Methods Med Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
and define
Hudgens and Halloran proved that under assumptions 1 and 2:
That is the variance estimators (6)-(9) are generally conservative. However, as they show in
equation (10), equality holds if and only if
Tchetgen and VanderWeele
Stat Methods Med Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
for fixed constant, for j = 1, …, ni and i = 1, …, N, which is equivalent to an additive
individual direct causal effect across all groups. Note that when Yij (Ai) is binary, and 0 < |
DE (α0)| < 1, then the hypothesis of additive direct treatment effects cannot hold as the only
values of DE (α0) consistent with additivity are 0, 1 and −1. Hudgens and Halloran 
also establish analogous conditions under which equality holds for each of the other
equations (11)–(13).
Despite the availability under assumptions 1 and 2, of reasonable variance estimators given
by equations (6) – (9) for the various estimators of causal effects proposed by Hudgens and
Halloran , a formal framework for statistical inference on population average causal
effects is currently lacking. As a remedy, in the following section, we develop a finite
sample framework for making causal inferences in the context of interference.
4.3 Finite sample inference for a binary outcome
We construct novel finite sample confidence intervals for the four population average causal
effects of interest. To simplify the exposition, we mainly focus on the case of a binary
outcome. To the best of our knowledge there currently exists no method, whether finite or
large sample-based, to construct a confidence interval for any of the causal parameters of
current interest. In a technical report, we show that
admits an alternative
representation as a martingale, an observation which enables us to use a Hoeffding-type
exponential inequality to obtain the desired finite sample confidence interval. We prove the
following results.
Theorem 1—For any level γ ∈ (0, 1), the interval
is a finite sample (1 – γ) CI of DE (α0) under assumption 1, where
and for i = 1, …, N
Tchetgen and VanderWeele
Stat Methods Med Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
According to the theorem, for each value of (q, N, γ), the coverage probability Pr{DE(α0) ∈
CDE (γ, q, N)} is guaranteed under assumption 1 to be no smaller than 95%, with the length
of CDE (γ, q, N) proportional to
, so that for a fixed value of (γ q), CDE (γ q, N)
becomes increasingly precise as the number of groups in the study grows. However, we note
that CDE (γ q, N) may not be particularly useful when N is small, for those values of (γ q)
. This is because in such a case, the corresponding confidence
interval is noninformative, as it contains the entire range of possible values of
since [−1, 1] ⊆ CDE (γ, q, N) and
. To further illustrate this point, suppose that
and q = 1/2, then
. This implies that CDE (γ q, N) is
guaranteed to be noninformative for values of N ≤ 9. As made evident in the proof of the
theorem, the term 4
in equation (15) is an upper bound for the squared absolute
deviation of the conditional average direct effect
from the population average direct effect
Ȳ(0; α0) – Ȳ(1; α0). This bound increases as q decreases towards zero, a situation which can
arise in a study where the proportion of groups randomized to the treatment allocation α0 is
very small, and can happen even when C and N are both relatively large. This will invariably
result in an increase in uncertainty in our inferences on
. However, we note that
more accurate inferences may still be possible for the population conditional average causal
direct effect which we define as
and which corresponds to the average causal direct effect for the population of groups
actually randomized to α0. The next theorem provides a finite sample confidence interval for
Theorem 2—For any level γ ∈ (0,1), the interval
is a finite sample (1 – γ) CI of
under assumption 1, where
Tchetgen and VanderWeele
Stat Methods Med Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Note that both CDE (γ, q, N) and CIDEc (γ, q, N) are centered around the same estimator
, which is unbiased for
and is conditionally unbiased for
However, the length of the second confidence interval no longer includes the term 4
and thus will often be substantially shorter.
The following theorem provides a finite sample confidence interval for the population
average indirect causal effect.
Theorem 3—For any level γ ∈ (0, 1), the interval
is a finite sample
under assumption 1, where
The next two theorems give finite sample confidence intervals for the population average
total causal effect and for the population average overall causal effect respectively.
Theorem 4—For any level γ ∈ (0, 1), the interval
is a finite sample
under assumption 1, where
Tchetgen and VanderWeele
Stat Methods Med Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Theorem 5—For any level γ ∈ (0, 1), the interval
is a finite sample
under assumption 1, where
, with the corresponding confidence
intervals having identical length. Future work could improve about the length of these
confidence intervals by a sharpening of the exponential inequalities used in their derivation
 and by leveraging additional assumptions such as that of
Stratified interference or by deriving potentially sharper alternative exponential inequalities.
In future work, we also plan to consider inference for continuous and possibly unbounded
outcomes. The technical developments necessary to achieve these results are beyond the
scope of the current paper and will be addressed elsewhere.
5 Towards Inference in observational studies
In this section, we briefly consider an approach for drawing causal inferences from
observational data in the presence of interference. We begin by noting that in the absence of
(two-stage) randomization, the estimators of Section 5 are no longer valid in an
observational study. This is because Assumption 1 is in general no longer tenable in the nonexperimental setting of an observational study, therefore, a different approach is needed. To
make progress, we consider the following assumption:
Assumption 3
For i = 1, …, N, we assume that conditional on Li, the treatment allocation Ai is
independent of the counterfactual variables Yi(·), that is:
Tchetgen and VanderWeele
Stat Methods Med Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
where fA|Li (ai|Li) ≡ Pr {Ai = ai|Li}
This assumption is a group-level generalization of the standard conditional randomization
assumption routinely made at the individual-level in the analysis of observational studies. It
states that the treatment allocation program Ai is randomly assigned to individuals in group i
conditional on the vector of covariates Li observed on these individuals. Whereas in the
previous section, the outcome was assumed to be binary, hereafter, no such assumption is
needed. In addition to Assumption 3, we suppose that the following positivity assumption
Assumption 4
For i = 1, …, N we assume that conditional on Li, we have that for all ai ∈
Assumption 4 is a group-level version of the positivity assumption routinely made at the
individual level in the analysis of observation studies. In the appendix, we show that the
following theorem holds:
Suppose that fA|Li (·|Li) satisfies assumptions 3 and 4, and that α0 is the parametrization of
a Bernoulli individual group assignment strategy (i.e. a type B parametrization) which
satisfies assumption 4. Let
Tchetgen and VanderWeele
Stat Methods Med Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
According to this theorem, if the allocation probability mechanism fA|L(·|Li) is known, the
population counterfactual averages Ȳi (a; α0) and Ȳi (α0) are identified from the observed
are unbiased estimators of Ȳi (a; α0) and Ȳi (α0)
respectively. The theorem also immediately gives the following result. Let
Unfortunately,
feasible in practice since, as is usually the case in observational studies, fA|L(·|Li) is
unknown to the analyst. To proceed, we must estimate this unknown treatment allocation
mechanism from the observed data. Because Li will typically include a large vector of
Tchetgen and VanderWeele
Stat Methods Med Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
covariates, nonparametric estimation of fA|L(Ai|Li) is not a viable option, and parametric or
semi-parametric models must be adopted in practice. Next, we provide a brief and informal
description to illustrate what a parametric approach entails in practice, in the particularly
favorable setting where the number of groups N is reasonably large. In such a setting, we
propose to estimate a parsimonious model fA|Li (Ai|Li;ψ) = fA|L(Ai|Li;ψ) i = 1, …, N, with
unknown parameter ψ = (ψa, ψb), where fA|L(Ai|Li; ψ) is assumed to be a mixed model of
with hA|L (1|Lij bi; ψa) say the logistic regression model logit
and bi a random effect known to follow a parametric
density fb (bi|Vi;ψb) indexed by an unknown parameter ψb. The standard logistic-normal
mixed model corresponds to the choice of fb (bi|Vi;ψb) univariate normal with mean ψa,1 and
variance ψa,2. Estimation of ψa = (ψa,1, ψa,2) and ψb is obtained by maximizing
with respect to ψ to give ψ̂. The mixed model paradigm is particularly appealing in the
current setting, as it provides a flexible framework to account for a possible non-null
conditional association between Aij and Aij′ given Li, for j ≠ j′. Furthermore, under the
assumption that Ai and Ai′, are independent given Li and Li′ for i ≠ i′, ψ̂ is a maximum
likelihood estimator, and thus, under standard regularity conditions it is
However, note that the mixed model is agnostic to a possible non-null conditional
association between Aij and Ai′j′ for i ≠ i′. Such a non-null association between the exposure
levels of individuals belonging to different groups may arise say due to the spatial proximity
of the two groups, even in the absence of between-group interference. In such a case, ψ̂ is no
longer the mle, but will remain consistent as the number of groups grows to infinity,
provided that the non-null association of exposure levels between groups is not too
pervasive. Specifically, this will hold provided that the dependence between the treatment
allocation program of a given group is non-null only with that of a fixed number of groups,
as determined say by spatial proximity. Feasible estimators of the various causal effects are
then obtained by substituting
Alternately, one may use the more stable estimators
Tchetgen and VanderWeele
Stat Methods Med Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
A large sample estimator of the variances of the estimates of the various causal effects can
be obtained under standard regularity assumptions using well known Taylor series
arguments that we do not reproduce here. The finite sample behavior of these various
estimators will be examined in a simulation study we plan to report elsewhere.
Thus far we have assumed thatYi(·) is fixed; we will now briefly consider a setting in
whichYi(·) is considered random. Hong and Raudenbush assume Stratified
interference (Assumption 2) and assume that Yij (ai) depends on ai,−j only through some
known scalar function v(ai, −j) so that Yij (ai) can be written as Yij (aij, v(ai,−j)). Suppose now
that for all i, j, Aij is determined by simple randomization then assumption 3 will hold and it
will also be the case that
Hong and Raudenbush consider a variation on this assumption in the context of
observational data. Specifically, they assume that
and from this it follows that
and from this one could obtain conditional direct, indirect and total effects, namely,
Hong and Raudenbush also allow Lij to contain cluster level covariate along with
cluster aggregates of individual level covariates. A similar approach is taken in
VanderWeele in the context of mediation in the presence of interference. Note,
however, that (20) requires that Yij (aij, v) be mean independent of both Aij and V (ai,−j)
conditional on Lij. If, for each individual Aij is randomized conditional on Lij, although this
Tchetgen and VanderWeele
Stat Methods Med Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
will imply that Yij (aij, v) is mean independent of Aij conditional on Lij, it does not
necessarily guarantee that Yij (aij, v) is mean independent of V (ai,−j conditional on Lij. More
generally, instead of (21) we might consider
where h(Li) is a known function of Li. However once again, with (21), even if for each
individual Aij were randomized conditional on Lij, h(Li), this does not guarantee that Yij (aij,
v) is mean independent of V (ai,−j) conditional on Lij, h(Li) unless h(Li) = Li.
6 Varieties of direct and indirect effects
We have considered several types of effects that arise when there is interference between
units. We have considered the effect on some outcome of an individual’s treatment when the
treatment of other units in a cluster are held fixed at a certain value; following, Hudgens and
Halloran , this was referred to as a"direct effect." We have also considered the effect
on an individual’s outcome of holding the individual’s own treatment fixed but modifying
the treatments received by other individuals in the same cluster; again following Hudgens
and Halloran , this was referred to as an "indirect effect." Of course, the terms "direct
effects" and "indirect effects" are also used in the context of questions of mediation analysis,
i.e. in assessing the extent to which the effect of some treatment on an outcome is mediated
through some intermediate (the indirect effect) and the extent to which it occurs through
other pathways (the direct effect). In some contexts, both interference and mediation may be
present and of interest and the terms "direct effect" and "indirect effect" become ambiguous
as they may make reference to the concepts from interference or from mediation.
In the infectious disease literature, the terminology of "direct and indirect effects" when
interference is present dates at least as far back as Halloran and Struchiner although
Hudgens and Halloran arguably provide the first formal counterfactual definitions.
The terminology of "direct and indirect effects" in the context of mediation analysis extends
at least as far back as the literature on structural equation modeling 
motivated by the method of path coefficients of Wright ; counterfactual notions of
direct and indirect effects were described in detail by Holland and Robins and
Greenland . Because of the potential ambiguity in terms "direct effect" and "indirect
effect," Sobel chose to use the term "spillover effect" for the effect on an individual’s
outcome of holding the individual’s own treatment fixed but modifying the treatments
received by other individuals. An early paper in experimental
educational psychology appears to have interchangeably used "indirect effect" and "spillover
effect" to denote the effect on a child’s outcome of holding the child’s own treatment fixed
but modifying the treatments received by other children. Complicating terminological issues
yet further, the causal inference on mediation itself has produced alternative Definitions of
direct and indirect effects based on potential interventions on the mediator or alternatively on the notion of principal strata .
Tchetgen and VanderWeele
Stat Methods Med Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Variants of the notions of direct and indirect effects based on principal strata may in fact
further be reformulated in the context of interference. Consider a vaccine trial (type A
randomization) in which each cluster has two individuals so that for all i, ni = 2 (e.g. a study
of married households with no children) such that half of the households were randomized
to no vaccine (α0 = 0) and half of the households were randomized to having one individual
(e.g. the wife) vaccinated (α1= 0.5). For each i, let j = 1 denote the subject that is potentially
vaccinated (e.g. the wife) and j = 2 the subject that is never vaccinated (e.g. the husband). In
the infectious disease context, a vaccination for individual 1 may prevent individual 2 from
being infected either because the vaccine prevents individual 1 from being in infected or
possibly because, even if individual 1 becomes infected, the vaccine itself renders the
infection less contagious. A distinction between these two possibilities is sometimes drawn
by using "susceptibility effect" to describe the former and "infectiousness effect" to describe
the latter . Consider the following causal quantity, Ei(Yi2 (1, 0) – Yi2 (0,
0)|Yi1 (1, 0) = Yi1 (0, 0) = 1); this is the effect on individual 2 of vaccinating individual 1
(with individual 2 unvaccinated) amongst the subset of households for whom individual 1
becomes infected irrespective of whether individual 1 receives the vaccination; this would
be a principal strata direct effect . If this quantity were non-zero we might
interpret this as evidence of an "infectiousness effect" of the vaccine since the vaccination of
individual 1 affects the outcome of individual 2 even though it has no effect on the outcome
of individual 1. Future work could potentially adapt estimation methods for principal strata
direct effects to attempt to estimate and
potentially test for the presence of an "infectiousness effect", Ei(Yi2 (1, 0) – Yi2 (0, 0)|Yi1 (1,
0) = Yi1 (0, 0) = 1).
Note that although the infectiousness effect quantity defined above is a "principal strata
direct effect," within the context of interference it is a form of an "indirect effect" since
individual 2’s vaccination status is fixed to be unvaccinated in the causal comparison.
Within the context of interference, both the "susceptibility effect" and the "infectiousness
effect" are in fact forms of "indirect effects" (in the interference sense) because both the
"susceptibility effect" and the "infectiousness effect" concern the effect on individual 2 of
holding individual 2’s vaccine status fixed but changing the vaccine status of individual 1; if
interference were absent, neither of the effects would be present. If interference were absent
then the principal strata "infectiousness effect" quantity defined above would reduce to
Ei(Yi2 (0) – Yi2 (0)|Yi1 (1) = Yi1 (0) = 1)=0. Again terminology concerning "direct and
indirect effects" is ambiguous and is easily confused: what is a "direct effect" in the context
of principal strata is an "indirect effect" in the context of interference.
Because of the multiple varieties of direct and indirect effects, the use of more specific
terminology may be desirable. In the context of interference, "indirect effect" and "direct
effect" could be replaced by "spillover effect" and "unit-treatment effect"; in the context of
mediation, "indirect effect" and "direct effect" could be replaced by "mediated effect" and
"unmediated effect." In the context of infectious diseases and the principal strata effect
defined above, "susceptibility effect" and "infectiousness effect" could be used rather than
making reference to "direct and indirect effects." Yet further caution with regard to
Tchetgen and VanderWeele
Stat Methods Med Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 November 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
terminology on direct and indirect effects will be needed when both interference and
mediation are present and of interest .
7 Concluding remarks
In this paper we have reviewed some of the literature on causal inference in the presence of
interference, we have provided new results on inference without the assumption of Stratified
interference and we have described an inverse probability weighting approach to causal
inference under interference in the context of observational studies. Interference arises in
settings in which social interactions are present including settings of infectious disease, the
study of neighborhoods and classrooms and in a variety of economic contexts. Although
most work in causal inference has proceeded under a no-interference assumption, there are
clearly many contexts in which such an assumption is not plausible. The issues raised by
interference can be circumvented to a certain extent by implementing treatment programs at
the cluster level rather than the individual level. However, interference gives rise to spillover
effects which are themselves of intrinsic interest and the analysis of such spillover effects is
inaccessible without explicitly taking interference into account. Theory and methods to
address questions of interference and spillover effects will thus likely be important for a
number of applied research settings.
The present work could be extended in a number of directions. Finite sample confidence
intervals of shorter length than those in section 4 could be obtained by employing additional
assumptions such as Stratified interference; continuous and unbounded outcomes could also
be considered. The finite sample behavior of the inverse probability weighting estimation
approach we proposed in this paper could be explored. Identification or partial Identification
results for the "infectiousness effect," formalized in terms of principal strata, could be
developed. Finally, further research could also potentially develop a more general
framework for interference and spillover effects so as to consider a range of settings in
which both interference and mediation were present and also so as to potentially allow for
both within-cluster and between-cluster forms of interference. Causal inference under
interference is a relatively new subfield and considerable work remains to be carried out.