Smart Augmentation
Learning an Optimal Data Augmentation Strategy
Joseph Lemley
Collage of Engineering and Informatics
National University of Ireland Galway
Galway Ireland
Email: 
Shabab Bazrafkan
Collage of Engineering and Informatics
National University of Ireland Galway
Galway Ireland
Email: 
Peter Corcoran
Collage of Engineering and Informatics
National University of Ireland Galway
Galway Ireland
Email: 
Abstract—A recurring problem faced when training neural
networks is that there is typically not enough data to maximize the
generalization capability of deep neural networks(DNN). There
are many techniques to address this, including data augmentation,
dropout, and transfer learning. In this paper, we introduce an
additional method which we call Smart Augmentation and we
show how to use it to increase the accuracy and reduce overﬁtting
on a target network. Smart Augmentation works by creating
a network that learns how to generate augmented data during
the training process of a target network in a way that reduces
that networks loss. This allows us to learn augmentations that
minimize the error of that network.
Smart Augmentation has shown the potential to increase
accuracy by demonstrably signiﬁcant measures on all datasets
tested. In addition, it has shown potential to achieve similar or
improved performance levels with signiﬁcantly smaller network
sizes in a number of tested cases.
INTRODUCTION
In order to train a deep neural network, the ﬁrst and
probably most important task is to have access to enough
labeled samples of data. Not having enough quality labeled
data will generate overﬁtting, which means that the network
is highly biased to the data it has seen in the training set and,
therefore will not be able to generalize the learned model to
any other samples. In there is a discussion about how much
the diversity in training data and mixing different datasets can
affect the model generalization. Mixing several datasets might
be a good solution, but it is not always feasible due to lack of
accessibility.
One of the other approaches to solving this problem
is using different regularization techniques. In recent years
different regularization approaches have been proposed and
successfully tested on deep neural network models. The dropout technique and batch normalization are two wellknown regularization methods used to avoid overﬁtting when
training deep models.
Another technique for addressing this problem is called
augmentation. Data augmentation is the process of supplementing a dataset with similar data that is created from the
information in that dataset. The use of augmentation in deep
learning is ubiquitous, and when dealing with images, often
includes the application of rotation, translation, blurring and
other modiﬁcations to existing images that allow a network to
better generalize .
Augmentation serves as a type of regularization, reducing
the chance of overﬁtting by extracting more general information from the database and passing it to the network.
One can classify the augmentation methods into two different
types. The ﬁrst is unsupervised augmentation. In this type of
augmentation, the data expansion task is done regardless of
the label of the sample. For example adding a different kind
of noise, rotating or ﬂipping the data. These kinds of data
augmentations are usually not difﬁcult to implement.
One of the most challenging kinds of data expansion is
mixing different samples with the same label in feature space
in order to generate a new sample with the same label. The
generated sample has to be recognizable as a valid data sample,
and also as a sample representative of that speciﬁc class. Since
the label of the data is used to generate the new sample,
this kind of augmentation this can be viewed as a type of
supervised augmentation.
Many deep learning frameworks can generate augmented
data. For example, Keras has a built in method to randomly
ﬂip, rotate, and scale images during training but not all of these
methods will improve performance and should not be used
“blindly”. For example, on MNIST (The famous handwritten
number dataset), if one adds rotation, the network will be unable to distinguish properly between handwritten “6” and “9”
digits. Likewise, a system that uses deep learning to classify
or interpret road signs may become incapable of discerning
left and right arrows if the training set was augmented with
by indiscriminate ﬂipping of images.
More sophisticated types of augmentation, such as selectively blending images or adding directional lighting rely
on expert knowledge. Besides intuition and experience, there
is no universal method that can determine if any speciﬁc
augmentation strategy will improve results until after training.
Since training deep neural nets is a time-consuming process,
this means only a limited number of augmentation strategies
will likely be attempted before deployment of a model.
Blending several samples in the dataset in order to highlight
their mutual information is not a trivial task in practice. Which
samples should be mixed together how many of them and
how they mixed is a big problem in data augmentation using
blending techniques.
 
Augmentation is typically performed by trial and error,
and the types of augmentation performed are limited to the
imagination, time, and experience of the researcher. Often, the
choice of augmentation strategy can be more important than
the type of network architecture used .
Before Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) became
the norm for computer vision research, features were “handcrafted”. Handcrafting features went out of style after it was
shown that Convolutional Neural Networks could learn the
best features for a given task . We suggest that since the
CNN can generate the best features for some speciﬁc pattern
recognition tasks, it might be able to give the best feature
space in order to merge several samples in a speciﬁc class
and generate a new sample with the same label. Our idea is to
generate the merged data in a way that produces the best results
for a speciﬁc target network through the intelligent blending
of features between 2 or more samples.
RELATED WORK
Manual augmentation techniques such as rotating, ﬂipping
and adding different kinds of noise to the data samples, are
described in depth in and which attempt to measure the
performance gain given by speciﬁc augmentation techniques.
They also provide a list of recommended data augmentation
In 2014, Srivastava et al. introduced the dropout technique
 aiming to reduce overﬁtting, especially in cases where there
is not enough data. Dropout works by temporarily removing a
unit (or artiﬁcial neuron) from the Artiﬁcial Neural Network
and any connections to or from that unit.
Konda et al. Showed that dropout can be used for data
augmentation by ”projecting the the dropout noise within a
network back into the input space”. 
Jaderberg et al. devised an image blending strategy as part
of their paper ”Synthetic Data and Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
for Natural Scene Text Recognition” . They used what they
call “natural data blending” where each of the image layers is
blended with a randomly sampled crop of an image from a
training dataset. They note a signiﬁcant (+44%) increase in
accuracy using such synthetic images when image layers are
blended together via a random process.
Another related technique is training on adversarial examples. Goodfellow et al. note that, although augmentation
is usually done with the goal of creating images that are
as similar as possible to the natural images one expects in
the testing set, this does not need to be the case. They
further demonstrate that training with adversarial examples can
increase the generalization capacity of a network, helping to
expose and overcome ﬂaws in the decision function .
The use of Generative Adversarial Neural Networks 
is a very powerful unsupervised learning technique that uses a
min-max strategy wherein a ’counterfeiter’ network attempts to
generate images that look enough like images within a dataset
to ’fool’ a second network while the second network learns to
detect counterfeits. This process continues until the synthetic
data is nearly indistinguishable from what one would expect
real data to look like. Generative Adversarial Neural Networks
can also be used to generate images that augment datasets, as
in the strategy employed by Shrivastav et al. 
Another method of increasing the generalization capacity
of a neural network is called “transfer learning”. In transfer
learning, we want to take knowledge learned from one network, and transfer it to another . In the case of Convolutional Neural Networks, when used as a technique to reduce
overﬁtting due to small datasets, it is common to use the trained
weights from a large network that was trained for a speciﬁc
task and to use it as a starting point for training the network
to perform well on another task.
Batch normalization, introduced in 2015, is another powerful technique. It was discovered upon the realization that
normalization need not just be performed on the input layer,
but can also be achieved on intermediate layers. 
Like the above regularization methods, Smart Augmentation attempts to address the issue of limited training data
to improve regularization and reduce overﬁtting. As with
 , our method does not attempt to produce augmentations
that appear “natural”. Instead, our network learns to combine
images in ways that improve regularization. Unlike and ,
we do not address manual augmentation, nor does our network
attempt to learn simple transformations. Unlike the approach
of image blending in , we do not arbitrarily or randomly
blend images. Smart augmentation can be used in conjunction
with other regularization techniques, including dropout and
traditional augmentation.
SMART AUGMENTATION
Smart Augmentation is the process of learning suitable
augmentations when training deep neural networks.
The goal of Smart Augmentation is to learn the best
augmentation strategy for a given class of input data. It does
this by learning to merge two or more samples in one class.
This merged sample is then used to train a target network. The
loss of the target network is used to inform the augmenter at
the same time. This has the result of generating more data for
use by the target network. This process often includes letting
the network come up with unusual or unexpected but highly
performant augmentation strategies.
A. Training Strategy for Smart Augmentation
During the training phase, we have two networks: Network
A, which generates data; and network B, which is the network
that will perform a desired task (such as classiﬁcation). The
main goal is to train network B to do some speciﬁc task
while there are not enough representative samples in the given
dataset. To do so, we use another network A to generate new
This network accepts several inputs from the same class
(the sample selection could be random, or it could use some
form of clustering, either in the pixel space or in the feature
space) and generates an output which approximates data from
that class. This is done by minimizing the loss function LA
which accepts out1 and image i as input. Where out1 is the
output of network A and mage i is a selected sample from the
same class as the input. The only constraint on the network
A is that the input and output of this network should be the
same shape and type. For example, if N samples of a P-channel
image are fed to network A, the output will be a single Pchannel image.
B. The Generative Network A and Loss Function
The loss function can be further parameterized by the
inclusion of α and β as f(LA, LB; α, β). In the experiments
and results sections of this paper, we examine how these can
impact ﬁnal accuracy.
Network A can either be implemented as a single network
(ﬁgure 2) or as multiple networks, as in ﬁgure 1. Using more
than one network A has the advantage that the networks can
learn class-speciﬁc augmentations that may not be suitable for
other classes, but which work well for the given class.
Network A is a neural network, such as a generative model,
with the difference that network A is being inﬂuenced by
network B in the back propagation step, and network A accepts
multiple samples as input simultaneously instead of just one
at a time. This causes the data generated by network A to
converge to the best choices to train network B for that speciﬁc
task, and at the same time, it is controlled by loss function
LA in a way that ensures that the outputs are similar to other
members of its class.
The overall loss function during training is f(LA, LB)
where f is a function whose output is a transformation of LA
and LB. This function could be an epoch-dependent function
i.e. the function could change with the epoch number. In the
training process, the error back-propagates from network B to
network A. This tunes network A to generate the best augmentations for network B. After training is ﬁnished, Network A is
cut out of the model and network B is used in the test process.
The joint information between data samples is exploited to
both reduce overﬁtting and to increase the accuracy of the
target network during training.
C. How Smart Augmentation Works
The proposed method uses a network (network A) to learn
the best sample blending for the speciﬁc problem. The output
of network A is the used for the input of network B. The idea
is to use network A to learn the best data augmentation to
train network B. Network A accepts several samples from the
same class in the dataset and generates a new sample from
that class, and this new sample should reduce the training loss
for network B. In ﬁgure 3 we see an output of network A
designed to do the gender classiﬁcation. The image on the left
is a merged image of the other two. This image represents
a sample from the class “male” that does not appear in the
dataset, but still, has the identifying features of its class.
Notice that in ﬁgure 3, an image was created with an open
mouth and open eyes from two images. The quality of the
face image produced by network A does not matter. Only
its ability to help network B better generalize. Our approach
is most applicable to classiﬁcation tasks but may also have
applications in any approach where the selective blending of
sample features improves performance. Our observations show
that this approach can reduce overﬁtting and increase accuracy.
In the following sections, we evaluate several implementations
of our smart augmentation technique on various datasets to
show how it can improve accuracy and prevent overﬁtting. We
also show that with smart augmentation, we can train a very
small network to perform as well as (or better than) a much
larger network that produces state of the art results.
Experiments were conducted on NVIDIA Titan X GPU’s
running a pascal architecture with python 2.7, using the Theano
 and Lasange frameworks.
A. Data Preparation
To evaluate our method, we chose 4 datasets with characteristics that would allow us to examine the performance of the
algorithm on speciﬁc types of data. Since the goal of our paper
is to measure the impact of the proposed technique, we do not
attempt to provide a comparison of techniques that work well
on these databases. For such a comparison we refer to for
gender datasets or for the places dataset.
1) Highly constrained faces dataset (db1):
dataset, db1 was composed from the AR faces database 
with a total of 4,000 frontal faces of male and female subjects.
The data was split into subject exclusive training, validation,
and testing sets, with 70% for training, 20% for validation,
and 10% for testing. All face images were reduced to 96X96
grayscale with pixel values normalized between 0 and 1.
2) Augmented, highly constrained faces dataset (db1a):
To compare traditional augmentation with smart augmentation
and to examine the effect of traditional augmentation on smart
augmentation, we created an augmented version of db1 with
every combination of ﬂipping, blurring, and rotation (-5,-
2,0,2,5 degrees with the axis of rotation at the center of the
image). This resulted in a larger training set of 48360 images.
The test and validation sets were unaltered from db1. The
data was split into a subject exclusive training, validation, and
testing sets with 70% for training, 20% for validation, and 10%
for testing. All face images were reduced to 96X96 with pixel
values normalized between 0 and 1.
3) FERET: Our second dataset, db2, was the FERET
dataset. We converted FERET to grayscale and reduced the
size of each image to 100X100 with pixel values normalized
between 0 and 1. The data was split into subject exclusive
training, validation, and testing sets, with 70% for training,
20% for validation and 10% for testing.
Color FERET Version 2 was collected between December 1993 and August 1996 and made freely available with
the intent of promoting the development of face recognition
algorithms. The images are labeled with gender, pose, and
Fig. 1: Smart augmentation with more than one network A
Fig. 2: Diagram illustrating the reduced smart augmentation concept with just one network A
Fig. 3: The image on the left is created by a learned combination of the two images on the right. This type of image
transformation helped increase the accuracy of network B.
The image was not produced to be an ideal approximation
of a face but instead, contains features that helped network B
better generalize the concept of gender which is the task it was
trained for.
Although FERET contains a large number of high-quality
images in different poses and with varying face obstructions
(beards, glasses, etc), they all have certain similarities in quality, background, pose, and lighting that make them very easy
for modern machine learning methods to correctly classify. In
our experiments, we use all images in FERET for which gender
labels exist.
Fig. 4: Arbitrarily selected images from FERET demonstrate
similarities in lighting, pose, subject, background, and other
photographic conditions.
4) Adience: Our third dataset, db3, was Adience. We
converted Adience to grayscale images with size 100x100 and
normalized the pixel values between 0 and 1. The data was
split into subject exclusive training, validation, and testing sets,
with 70% for training, 20% for validation and 10% for testing.
Fig. 5: Arbitrarily selected images from the Adience show
signiﬁcant variations in lighting, pose, subject, background,
and other photographic conditions.
5) DB4: Our fourth dataset, db4, was the MIT places
dataset . The MIT PLACES dataset is a machine learning
database containing has 205 scene categories and 2.5 million
labeled images.
The Places Dataset is unconstrained and includes complex
scenery in a variety of lighting conditions and environments.
We restricted ourselves to just the ﬁrst two classes in the
dataset (Abbey and Airport). Pixel values were normalized
between 0 and 1. The ”small dataset,” which had been rescaled
to 256x256 with 3 color channels, was used for all experiments
without modiﬁcation except for normalization of the pixel
values between 0 and 1.
Fig. 6: Example images from the MIT places dataset showing
two examples from each of the two classes (abbey and airport)
used in our experiments.
EXPERIMENTS
In these experiments, we call network B the network that
is being trained for a speciﬁc task (such as classiﬁcation). We
call network A the network that learns augmentations that help
train network B.
All experiments are run for 1000 epochs. The test accuracy
reported is for the network that had the highest score on the
validation set during those 1000 epochs.
To analyze the effectiveness of Smart Augmentation, we
performed 30 experiments using 4 datasets with different
parameters. A brief overview of the experiments can be seen in
Table I. The experiments were conducted with the motivation
of answering the following questions:
1) Is there any difference in accuracy between using smart
augmentation and not using it? (Is smart augmentation
effective?)
2) If smart augmentation is effective, is it effective on a
variety of datasets?
3) As the datasets become increasingly unconstrained, does
smart augmentation perform better or worse?
4) What is the effect of increasing the number of channels
in the smart augmentation method?
5) Can smart augmentation improve accuracy over traditional augmentation?
6) If smart augmentation and traditional augmentation are
combined, are the results better or worse than not combining them?
7) Does altering the α and β parameters change the results?
8) Does Smart Augmentation increase or decrease overﬁtting
as measured by train/test loss ratios?
9) If smart augmentation decreases overﬁtting, can we use
it to replace a large complex network with a simpler one
without losing accuracy?
10) What is the effect of the number of network A’s on the
accuracy? Does training separate networks for each class
improve the results?
As listed below, we used three neural network architectures
with varied parameters and connection mechanisms. In our
experiments, these architectures were combined in various
ways as speciﬁed in table I.
• Network B1 is a simple, small Convolutional neural
network, trained as a classiﬁer, that takes an image as
input, and outputs class labels with a softmax layer. This
network is illustrated in ﬁgure 7.
• Network B2 is a unmodiﬁed implementation of VGG16
as described in . Network B2 is a large network that
takes an image as input and outputs class labels with a
softmax layer.
• Network A is a Convolutional neural network that takes
one or more images as input and outputs a modiﬁed
Fig. 7: Illustration of network B1
Fig. 8: Illustration of network A
A. Smart Augmentation with one Network A on the Gender
Classiﬁcation Task
Experiments 1-8, 19,22, and 24 as seen in table I were
trained for gender classiﬁcation using the same technique as
illustrated in ﬁgure 9. In these experiments, we use smart
augmentation to train a network (network B) for gender
classiﬁcation using the speciﬁed database.
Fig. 9: Diagram of simpliﬁed implementation of Smart Augmentation showing network A and network B
TABLE I: Full listing of experiments.
The ﬁrst, k images are randomly selected from the same
class (male or female) in the dataset. These k samples are
merged into k channels of a single sample. The grayscale
values of the ﬁrst image, img0, are mapped to channel 0 and
the grayscale values of the second image im1 are mapped to
channel 1 and so on until we reach the number of channels
speciﬁed in the experiments table. This new k channel image
is fed into the network A. Network A is a fully convolutional
neural network (See ﬁgure 8) which accepts images as the
input and gives the images with the same size at the output in
a single channel.
An additional grayscale image is then randomly selected
from the same class in the dataset (this image should not be
any of those images selected in step 1). The loss function
for this network A is calculated as the mean squared error
between this randomly selected image and the output of
network A. The output of network A, and the target image
is then fed into network B as separate inputs. Network B is
a typical deep neural network with two convolutional layers
followed by batch normalization and max-pooling steps after
each convolutional layer. Two fully connected layers are placed
at the end of the network. The ﬁrst of these layers has 1024
units and the second dense layer is made of two units as the
output of network B using softmax. Each dense layer takes
advantage of the drop-out technique in order to avoid over-
ﬁtting. The loss function of network B is calculated as the
categorical cross-entropy between the outputs and the targets.
The total loss of the whole model is a linear combination of
the loss functions of two networks. This approach is designed
to train a network A that generates samples which reduce the
error for network B. The validation loss was calculated only
for network B, without considering network. This allows us to
compare validation loss with and without smart augmentation.
Our models were trained using Stochastic Gradient Descent with Nesterov Momentum , learning rate 0.01 and
momentum 0.9. The lasagne library used to train the network
in python.
In these experiments, we varied the number of input
channels and datasets used. Speciﬁcally, we trained a network
B from scratch with 1-8 input channels with a single network A
on db1, 2 channels on network A for db2 and 3, and 2 channels
on network db1a as shown in the table of experiments.
B. Smart Augmentation with two Network A’s on the Gender
Classiﬁcation Task
In experiments 9-16 and 20 we evaluate a different implementation of smart augmentation, containing a separate
network A for each class. As before, the ﬁrst k images are
randomly selected from the same class (male or female) in
the dataset. These k samples are merged into k channels of a
single sample.The grayscale values of the ﬁrst image, img0,
are mapped to channel 0 and the grayscale values of the second
image, im1, are mapped to channel 1, and so on until we reach
the number of channels speciﬁed in the experiments table just
as before. Since we now have two network A’s, it is important
to separate out the loss functions for each network as illustrated
in ﬁgure 9.
All other loss functions are calculated the same way as
One very important difference is the updated learning rate
(0.005). While performing initial experiments we noticed that
using a learning rate above 0.005 led to the “dying RELU”
problem and stopped effective learning within the ﬁrst two
epochs. This network is also more sensitive to variations in
batch size.
The goal of these experiments was to examine how using
multiple network As impacts accuracy and overﬁtting compared to just using one network A. We also wanted to know
if there were any differences when trained on a manually
augmented database (experiment 20).
C. Training without Smart Augmentation on the Gender Classiﬁcation Task
In these experiments, we train a network (network B)
to perform gender classiﬁcation without applying network A
during the training stage. These experiments (23, 21, 18, and
17) are intended to serve as a baseline comparison of what
network B can learn without smart augmentation on a speciﬁc
dataset (db3,db2, db1a, and db1 respectively). In this way, we
measure any improvement given by smart augmentation. A full
implementation of Network B is shown in ﬁgure 7.
This network has the same architecture as the network B
presented in the previous experiment except that it does not
utilize a network A.
As before, two fully connected layers are placed at the end
of the network. The ﬁrst of these layers has 1024 units, and
the second dense layer has two units (one for each class). Each
dense layer takes advantage of the drop-out technique in order
to avoid over-ﬁtting.
All loss functions (training, validation, and testing loss)
were calculated as the categorical cross-entropy between the
outputs and the targets.
As before, models were trained using Stochastic Gradient
Descent with Nesterov Momentum , learning rate 0.01
and momentum 0.9. The lasagne library was used to train the
network in python.
D. Experiments on the places dataset
In the previous experiments in this section, we used 3
different face datasets. In experiments 25 - 30 we examine
the suitability of Smart Augmentation with color scenes from
around the world from the MIT Places dataset to evaluate our
method on data of a completely different topic. We varied
the α and β parameter in our global loss function so that we
could identify how they inﬂuence results. Unlike in previous
experiments, we also retained color information.
Experiment 25 utilized a VGG16 trained from scratch as
a classiﬁer, chosen because VGG16 models have performed
very well on the places dataset in public competitions .
The input to network A was 256x256 RGB images and the
output was determined by a 2 class softmax classiﬁer.
In experiment 26 we use a network B, identical in all
respects to the one used in the previous subsection, except
that we use the lower learning rate speciﬁed in the experiments
table and take in color images about places instead of gender.
These two experiments (25,26) involved simple classiﬁers
to establish a baseline against which other experiments on the
same dataset could be evaluated.
In experiments 27-28, k images were randomly selected
from the same class (abbey or airport) in the dataset. These k
samples are merged into k × 3 channels of a single sample.
The values of the ﬁrst three channels of image img0 are
mapped to channel 0-2, and the ﬁrst three channels of the
second image im1 are mapped to channels 3-5, and so on, until
we reach the number of channels speciﬁed in the experiments
table multiplied by the number of color channels in the source
images. This new k × 3 channel image is used by network
A. Network A is a fully convolutional neural network) which
accepts images as the input, and outputs just one image.
An additional image is then randomly selected from the
same class in the dataset. The loss function for network A is
calculated as the mean squared error between the randomly
selected image and the output of network A. The output of
network A, and the target image is then fed into network B as
separate inputs. Network B is a typical deep neural network
with two convolutional layers followed by batch normalization
and max-pooling steps after each convolutional layer. Two
fully connected layers are placed at the end of the network. The
ﬁrst of these layers has 1024 units and the second dense layer
is made of two units as the output of network B using softmax.
Each dense layer takes advantage of the drop-out technique in
order to avoid over-ﬁtting. The loss function of network B is
calculated as the categorical cross-entropy between the outputs
and the targets.
The total loss of the whole model is a linear combination of
the loss functions of two networks. This approach is designed
to train a network A that generates samples that reduce the
error for network B. The validation loss was calculated only for
network B, without considering network A. This allows us to
compare validation loss with and without smart augmentation.
Our models were trained using Stochastic Gradient Descent
with Nesterov Momentum , learning rate 0.005 and momentum 0.9. The Lasagne library was used to train the network
in python.
Fig. 10: Diagram of our implementation of Smart Augmentation with one network A for each class
Fig. 11: Diagram of implementation of network B without
Smart Augmentation
In these experiments, we varied the number of input
channels and datasets used. Speciﬁcally, we trained a network
B from scratch with 1-8 input channels on network A on db1,
2 channels on network A for db2 and 3, and 2 channels on
network db1a as shown in the table of experiments.
In experiments 29-30, k images are randomly selected
from the same class (abbey or airport) in the dataset. These k
samples are merged into k × 3 channels of a single sample.
The values of the ﬁrst three channels in image img0 are
mapped to channel 0-2 and the ﬁrst three channels of the
second image im1 are mapped to channels 3-5 and so on until
we reach the number of channels speciﬁed in the experiments
table multiplied by the number of color channels in the source
images. This new k × 3 channel image is fed into the network
A. Network A is a fully convolutional neural network which
accepts images as the input and outputs a single color image.
An additional image is then randomly selected from the
same class in the dataset. The loss function for each network A
is calculated as the mean squared error between the randomly
selected image and the output of network A. The output of
network A, and the target image is then fed into network B as
separate inputs. Network B is a typical deep neural network
with two convolutional layers followed by batch normalization
and max-pooling steps after each convolutional layer. Two
fully connected layers are placed at the end of the network. The
ﬁrst of these layers has 1024 units, and the second dense layer
is made of two units as the output of network B using softmax.
Each dense layer takes advantage of the drop-out technique in
order to avoid over-ﬁtting. The loss function of network B is
calculated as the categorical cross-entropy between the outputs
and the targets.
TABLE II: Results of Experiments on Face Datasets
Experiments on Face Datasets
Input Channels
Test Accuracy
0.869942188
0.956647396
0.942196548
0.942196548
0.907514453
0.933526039
0.916184962
0.924855471
0.881502867
0.890173435
0.956647396
0.956647396
0.700206399
0.760577917
0.835242271
0.884581506
TABLE III: Results of Experiments on Place Dataset
Experiments on MIT places dataset
Target Network
Test Accuracy
Small net B
Small net B
Small net B
Small net B
Small net B
The total loss of the whole model is a linear combination
of the loss functions of the two networks. This approach is
designed to train a network A that generates samples that
reduce the error for network B. The validation loss was
calculated only for network B, without considering network
A. This allows us to compare validation loss with and without
smart augmentation.
Our models were trained using Stochastic Gradient Descent
with Nesterov Momentum , learning rate 0.005 and momentum 0.9. The lasagne library was used to train the network
in python.
In these experiments, we varied the number of input
channels and datasets used. Speciﬁcally, we trained a network
B from scratch with 1-8 input channels on network A on db1,
2 channels on network A for db2 and 3, and 2 channels on
network db1a as shown in the table of experiments.
The results of experiments 1-30 as shown in Table I are
listed in tables II and III and are listed in the same order
as in the corresponding experiments table. These results are
explained in detail in the subsections below.
A. Smart Augmentation with one Network A on the Gender
Classiﬁcation Task
In ﬁgure 12, we show the training and validation loss
for experiments 1 and 17. As can be observed, the rate of
overﬁtting was greatly reduced when smart augmentation was
used compared to when it was not used.
Without smart augmentation, network B had an accuracy of
88.15 for the AR faces dataset; for the rest of this subsection,
this result is used as a baseline by which other results on that
dataset are evaluated.
One can see how the smart augmentation technique could
prevent network B from overﬁtting in the training stage. The
smaller difference between training loss and validation loss
caused by the smart augmentation technique shows how this
approach helps the network B to learn more general features
for this task. Network B also had higher accuracy on the test
set when trained with smart augmentation.
In ﬁgures 13 and 14 we show examples of the kinds of
images network A learned to generate. In these ﬁgures, the
image on the left side is the blended image of the other two
images produced by network A.
We observe an improvement in accuracy from 83.52% to
88.46% from smart augmentation on Feret with 2 inputs and
an increase from 70.02% to 76.06% on the adience dataset.
We see that there is no noticeable pattern when we vary the
number of inputs for network A. Despite the lack of a pattern,
a signiﬁcant difference was observed with 8 and 3 channels
providing the best results at 95.38% and 95.09% respectively.
At the lower end, 7, 5, and 4 channels performed the worst,
with accuracies of 91.62%, 91.04%, and 91.04%.
Recall that the accuracy without network A was: 88.15%
for the AR faces dataset. We suspect that much of the variation
in accuracy reported above may be due to chance. Since in this
particular experiment, images are chosen randomly there may
be times when 2 or more images with very helpful mutual
information are present by chance and the opposite is also
possible. It is interesting that when 3 and 8 channels were
used for network A, the accuracy was over 95%.
B. Smart Augmentation and Traditional Augmentation
We note that traditional augmentation improved the accuracy from 88.15% to 89.08% without smart augmentation on
the gender classiﬁcation task. When we add smart augmentation we realize an improvement in accuracy to 95.66%
The accuracy of the same experiment when we used 2 networks A’s was also 95.66% which seems to indicate that both
conﬁgurations may have found the same optima when smart
augmentation was combined with traditional augmentation.
Fig. 12: Training and validation losses for experiments 1 and 17, showing reductions in overﬁtting by using Smart Augmentation.
The smaller difference between training loss and validation loss caused by the smart augmentation technique shows how this
approach helps the network B to learn more general features for this task. To avoid confusion, we remind the reader that the
loss for smart augmentation is given by f(LA, LB; α, β). This means that the loss graphs are a combination of the losses of two
networks whereas the losses without smart augmentation are only f(LB).
Fig. 13: The image on the left is a learned combination of the
two images on the right as produced by network A
Fig. 14: The image on the left is a learned combination of the
two images on the right as produced by network A
This demonstrates that smart augmentation can be used
with traditional augmentation to further improve accuracy. In
all cases examined so far, Smart Augmentation performed
better than traditional augmentation. However, since there are
no practical limits on the types of traditional augmentation that
can be performed, there is no way to guarantee that manual
augmentation could not ﬁnd a better augmentation strategy.
This is not a major concern since we do not claim that smart
augmentation should replace traditional augmentation. We only
claim that smart augmentation can help with regularization.
C. Smart Augmentation with two Network A’s on the Gender
Classiﬁcation Task
In this subsection, we discuss the results of our two
network architecture when trained on the gender classiﬁcation
These experiments show that approaches which use a
distinct network A for each class, tend to slightly outperform
networks with just 1 network A. This seems to provide support
for our initial idea that one network A should be used for
each class so that class-speciﬁc augmentations could be more
efﬁciently learned. If the networks with just 1 and 0 input
channels are excluded, we see an average increase in accuracy
from 92.94% to 93.19% when smart augmentation is used,
with the median accuracy going from 92.49% to 93.35%.
There is only one experiment where smart augmentation
performed worse than not using smart augmentation. This can
be seen in the 9th row of table II where we use only one
channel which caused the accuracy to dip to 86.99%, contrasted with 88.15% when no smart augmentation is used. This
is expected because when only one channel is used, mutual
information can not be effectively utilized. This experiment
shows the importance of always using at least 2 channels.
D. Experiments on the Places Dataset
As with previously discussed results, when the places
dataset is used, networks with multiple network A’s performed
slightly better. We also notice that when α is higher than β an
increase in accuracy is realized.
The most signiﬁcant results of this set of experiments is
the comparison between smart augmentation, VGG 16, and
network B trained alone. Note that a small network B trained
alone (no Smart Augmentation) had an accuracy of 96.5%
compared to VGG 16 (no Smart Augmentation) at 98.5%.
When the same small network B was trained with smart
augmentation we see accuracies ranging from 98.75% to 99%
which indicates that smart augmentation, in some cases, can
allow a much smaller network to replace a larger network.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Smart Augmentation has shown the potential to increase
accuracy by demonstrably signiﬁcant measures on all datasets
tested. In addition, it has shown potential to achieve similar
or improved performance levels with signiﬁcantly smaller
network sizes in a number of tested cases.
In this paper, we discussed a new regularization approach,
called “Smart Augmentation” to automatically learn suitable
augmentations during the process of training a deep neural
network. We focus on learning augmentations that take advantage of the mutual information within a class. The proposed
solution was tested on progressively more difﬁcult datasets
starting with a highly constrained face database and ending
with a highly complex and unconstrained database of places.
The various experiments presented in this work demonstrate
that our method is appropriate for a wide range of tasks and
demonstrates that it is not biased to any particular type of
image data.
As a primary conclusion, these experiments demonstrate
that the augmentation process can be automated, speciﬁcally
in nontrivial cases where two or more samples of a certain
class are merged in nonlinear ways resulting in improved
generalization of a target network. The results indicate that
a deep neural network can be used to learn the augmentation
task in this way at the same time the task is being learned.
We have demonstrated that smart augmentation can be used to
reduce overﬁtting during the training process and reduce the
error during testing.
It is worthwhile to summarize a number of additional
observations and conclusions from the various experiments
documented in this research.
Firstly, no linear correlation between the number of samples mixed by network A and accuracy was found so long as
at least 2 samples are used.
Secondly, it was shown that Smart Augmentation is effective at reducing error and decreasing overﬁtting and that this
is true regardless of how unconstrained the database is.
Thirdly, these experiments demonstrated that better accuracy could be achieved with smart augmentation than with
traditional augmentation alone. It was found that altering the
α and β parameters of the loss function slightly impacts
results but more experiments are needed to identify if optimal
parameters can be found.
Finally, it was found that Smart Augmentation on a small
network achieved better results than those obtained by a much
larger network (VGG 16). This will help enable more practical implementations of CNN networks for use in embedded
systems and consumer devices where the large size of these
networks can limit their usefulness.
Future work may include expanding Smart Augmentation
to learn more sophisticated augmentation strategies and performing experiments on larger datasets with larger numbers
of data classes. A statistical study to identify the number of
channels that give the highest probability of obtaining optimal
results could also be useful.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research is funded under the SFI Strategic Partnership
Program by Science Foundation Ireland (SFI) and FotoNation
Ltd. Project ID: 13/SPP/I2868 on Next Generation Imaging
for Smartphone and Embedded Platforms. This work is also
supported by an Irish Research Council Employment Based
Programme Award. Project ID: EBPPG/2016/280
We gratefully acknowledge the support of NVIDIA Corporation with the donation of a Titan X GPU used for this