Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence 5 1-26
A formal analysis of the role of multi-point crossover
in genetic algorithms
Kenneth A. De Jong
Compllter Science Departmellt, George MasQ" Ullicersity, Fairfax, VA 22030. USA
William M. Spears
AI Cellter - Code 5510, NQm/ Research Laboratory. Washillgtoll, DC, USA
On the basis of early theoretical and empirical studies. genetic algorithms have typically
used I and Z-point crossover operators as the standard mechanisms for implementing
recombination. However. there have been a number of recent studies. primarily empirical in
nature, which have shown the benefits or crossover operators involving a higher number of
crossover points. From a traditional theoretical point of view. the most surprising of these
new results relate to uniform crossover. which involves on the average L /2 crossover points
for strings of length L. In this paper we extend the existing theoretical results in an attempt
to provide a broader explanatory and predictive theory of the role of multi-point crossover
in genetic algorithms. In particular. we extend the traditional disruption analysis to include
two general forms of multi-point crossover: n-point crossover and uniform crossover. We
also analyze two other aspects or multi-point crossover operators, namely. their recombina­
tion potential and exploratory power. The results of this analysis provide a much clearer
view .of the role of multi-point crossover in genetic algorithms. The implications of these
results on implementation issues and performance arc discussed, and several directions for
further research are suggested.
1. Introduction
One of the unique aspects of the work involving genetic algorithms (GAs) is
the important role that recombination plays in the design and implementation of
robust adaptive systems. In most GAs, individuals are represented by fixed· length
strings and recombination is implemented by means of a crossover operator
which operates on pairs of individuals (parents) to produce new strings (off·
spring) by exchanging segments from the parents' strings. Traditionally, the
number of crossover points (which determines how many segments are ex·
changed) has been fixed at a very low constant value of 1 or 2. Support for this
decision came from early work of both a theoretical and empirical nature [4.9].
However, there continue to be indications of an empirical nature that there
are situations in which having a higher number of crossover points is beneficial
~ J.e. Baltzer A.G. Scientific Publishing Company
/(.1'1. Dc IOllg. IVM. Sl'f:Clrs / 111(' role ofnwlti·poilll crOSSOlW
 . Perhaps the most surprising result (from a traditional perspective) is the
effectiveness on some problems of uniform crossover, an operator which pro­
duces on the average (LI2) crossings on strings of length L [IIJ.
The motivation for this paper is to extend the theoretical analysis of the
crossover operator to include the mUlti-point variations and provide a better
understanding of when and how to exploit their power. We will concentrate on
three different aspects of multi-point crossover operators: their disruptive effect,
recombination potential, and exploratory power. Specifically. this paper will
focus on two forms of mUlti-point crossover: n-point crossover and uniform
crossover.
Sections 2 through 5 of this paper provide a thorough treatment of the
disruptive effects of n-point and uniform crossover, while section 6 explains the
role of disruption in the genetic algorithm. Section 7 describes. in detail, a new
theory of recombination potential, based on the earlier disruption theory. Our
.thoughts on the exploratory power of n-point and uniform crossover are
outlined in section 8. The implications of these theories are discussed in the
final section.
2. Traditional analysis
Holland provided the initial formal analysis of the behavior of GAs by
characterizing how they biased the makeup of new offspring in response to
feedback on the fitness of previously generated individuals. By focusing on
hyperplane subspaces or" L-dimensional spaces (i.e"., subs paces characterized by
hyperplanes of the form "-d,-d 2-dJ-", where the d; are the defining positions
of the hyperplane), Holland showed that the expected number of samples
(individuals) allocated to a particular k th order hyperplane Hk at time t + 1 is
m(Hk,l+l»m(Hk,l)
(l-kP'II-PcPAHd).
In this expression, !(Hk ) is the average fitness of the current samples allocated
to Hk , j is the average fitness of the current population, Pm is the probability of
using the mutation operator, Pc is the probability of using the crossover
operator, and PiHk ) is the probability that the crossover operator will be
"disruptive" in the sense that the children produced will not be members of the
same subspace as their parents.
The usual interpretation of this result is that subspaces with higher than
average payoffs will be allocated exponentially more trials over time, while those
subspaces with below average payoffs will be allocated exponentially less trials.
This assumes that there are enough samples to provide reliable estimates of
hyperplane fitness, and that the effects of crossover and mutation are not too
K.A. De Jong. WM. Spears / The rofe of /lllIfli-poillt crosso/'cr
r··················--------···
--- .... ----~
Fig. t. A 3rd order hyperplane.
disruptive. Since mutation is typically run at a very low rate (e.g., Pm = 0.000, it
is generally ignored as a significant source of disruption. However, crossover is
usually applied at a very high rate (e.g., Pc: ;;<: 0.6). So, considerable attention has
been given to estimating Pd , the probability that a particular application of
crossover will be disruptive.
To simplify and clarify the analysis, it is typically assumed that individuals are
represented by fixed-length binary strings of length L, and that crossover points
can occur with equal probability between any two adjacent bits. For ease of
presentation these same assumptions will be made for the rem.ainder of this
paper. Generalizing the results to non·binary fixed-length strings is quite
straightforward. Relaxing the other assumptions is more difficult.
Under these assumptions, Holland provided a simple and intuitive analysis of
the disruption of l·point crossover: as long as the crosso~er point does not occur
within the defining bou.ndaries of Hie (i.e., between any of the k fixed defining
positions), the children produced from parents in Hie will also reside in Hie .
Figure 1 represents this graphically for a 3rd order hyperplane. Note that d 1• d 2•
and d3 represent the three defining positions of the 3rd order hyperplane, while
PI and P2 indicate the two parents. The dotted line represents I·point crossover.
If crossover does occur inside the defining boundaries, disruption mayor may
not result. Disruption will depend on where the crossover point occurs inside
the defining boundaries and on the alleles that the parents have in common on
the k defining positions. Hence, Pd can be bounded by the probability that the
crossover point will fall within the defining boundaries of Hie' Under the
assumption of uniformly distributed crossover points, this yields:
PAH/c)< L-l'
where dl(HIe ) is the "defining length" of Hie' namely. the distance between the
first and last of the k fixed defining positions of hyperplane H/c.
This analysis has led to considerable discussion of the "representational bias"
built into I·point crossover, namely, that crossover is much more disruptive to
hyperplanes whose defining positions happen to be far apart. It also suggests a
K.A. Df? lOl/g, IV"'!. Spears I Thf? rolf? ofmulti-paine crosson!r
plausible role for inversion operators capable of effecting a change of represen­
tation in which the defining lengths of key hyperplanes are shortened.
De Jong extended this analysis to II-point crossover by noting that no
disruption can occur if there are an even number of crossover points (including
0) between each of the defining positions of a hyperplane. Hence. we have a
bound for the disruption of II-point crossover:
Note that Pk •
is defined to be the probability that an even number of
crossover points will fall between each of the k defining positions. De Jong 
provided an exact expression for Pk '''/'
for the special case of 2nd order
hyperplanes (i.e., k = 2):
P2.f!l'f!,,(n, L. L 1) is the probability that an even number of crossover points will
fall within the 2nd order hyperplane defined by Land L ,. Recall that L is the
length of the string, while L, is the defining length of the hyperplane. The
second term of the summation is the probability of placing an even number of
crossover points within the two defining points. The third term is the probability
of placing the remaining crossover points outside the two defining points.
Finally, the combinatorial represents the number of ways an ev~n number of
points can be drawn from the Il crossover points.
The family of curves generated by Pl'''''..n provide considerable insight into
the change in disruptive effects on second order hyperplanes as the number of
crossover points is increased. Figure 2 plots the curves for binary strings of
length L. Notice how the curves fall into two distinct families depending on
whether the number of crossover points is even or odd. Since P2.f!I'f!n guarantees
no disruption, ~e are interested in increasing P2.f!I'f!n whenever possible. By
going to an even number of crossover points, we can reduce the representational
bias of crossover, but only at the expense of increasing the disruption of the
shorter definition length hyperplanes.
If we interpret the area above a particular curve as measure of the cumulative
disruption potential of its associated crossover operator, then these curves
suggest that 2-point crossover is the best as far as minimizing disruption. These
results together with early empirical studies were the basis for using 2-point
crossover in many of the implemented systems. Since then, there have been
several additional studies focusing on crossover.
Bridges and Goldberg have extended Holland's analysis of 1-point
crossover, deriving tighter bounds on the disruption by taking into account the
KA. De JOIIS, IV,M. Spears / The role of 1IIII/Ii,pO;1I1 crOSSOI'er
O~--------------~------------~O
Defining Length
Fig. 2. n-point crossover disruption on 2nd order hyperplanes.
properties of the second parent and gains in samples in H" due to disruption
elsewhere.
Syswerda introduced a "uniform" crossover operator in which Po speci­
fied the probability that the allele of any position in an offspring was determined
by using the allele of the first parent, and 1 - Po the probability of using the
allele of the second parent. He provided an inilial analysis of the disruptive
effects of uniform crossover for' the case of Pu = 0.5, and compared it with 1 and
2-point crossover. He presented some provocative results suggesting that, in
spite of higher disruption properties, uniform crossover can exhibit better
recombination behavior, which can improve empirical performance.
Eschelman, Caruana, and Schaffer analyze crossover operators in terms of
"positional" and "distributional" biases, and present a set of empirical studies
suggesting that no n-point, shuffle, or uniform crossover operator is universally
better than the others.
These results and other empirical studies motivated us to attempt to clarify
the effects of multi-point crossover by extending the current analysis. In the
remaining sections we present a general analysis of crossover disruption, provid­
ing precise formulations for the disruption probabilities of both uniform and
n-point crossover on k th order hyperplanes. Two other properties of crossover
are also analyzed in detail: the recombination potential and exploratory power
of both uniform and n-point crossover.
These theoretical extensions allow us to explain the apparent contradictory
nature of recent empirical studies, and help us understand more clearly the
interacting effects of crossover and other GA features such as population size.
In addition, the analysis reemphasizes the important differences between the
KA. De long. w.M. Spears / Tile rule uf mltfli-point crosson:r
roles of crossover and mutation, and suggests the need for an adaptive crossover
mechanism,
3. Crossover disruption for higher order hyperplanes
One possible explanation for the conflict between the early analysis and
recent empirical results on the merits of having more crossover points is that the
analysis involved only the special case of 2nd order hyperplanes. It is possible
that, if properly extended to higher order hyperplanes, the theory would predict
the benefits of a corresponding increase in the number of crossover points. In
this section we attempt to resolve this issue by generalizing De Jong's disruption
results to hyperplanes of arbitrary order.
As noted earlier, the disruption probability Pill, Hk ) of n·point crossover on
a k th order hyperplane Hk can be conservatively bounded by 1 - p".t'l'('fI (fl, H,,)
where Pk.eL'en(n, Hk ) is the probability that n·point crossover produces only an
even number of crossover points between each of the defining positions of H".
De Jong's formula for calculating PZ.eI'en can be generalized by noting that
Pk..et'en can be defined recursively in terms of P k
1.!!Ien' To see this, consider how
PJ.l"t.<'I! can be calculated in terms of PZ.",...n' Figure 3 illustrates the approach
graphically.
The probability of n-point crossover generating only an even number of
crossover points between both dl-dz and dz-dJ can be calculated by counting
the number of ways an even number of crossover points can fall between d t-d"
and for each of these possibilities requiring an even number to fall in d 1-£12 (a
second order calculation involving L I and L z). More formally, we have:
.._............._---_ ..
'--_ ......... --------­
Fig. 3. Non-disruplive II-point crossover.
KA. De long. n:,\f. Spears I nle role ofmulti·point crosson~r
O~------------~~~------------~
Defining Length
Fig. 4. PA.~•.~,. on 3rd order hyperplanes.
In general, we have:
Pk.et:en(n, L, L p .. " L k _ l ) = i~ (~1;)( i) ( L I)
XPk_l.uen(2i, L 1,··., Lk _ I ).
Figures 4 and 5 illustrate Pk.t.'!'en for hyperplanes of order 3 and 5. Note that
each point on the graph represents an average over all. hyperplanes of a
particular defining length. Note that, apart from a skewing effect, the curves
Defining Length
Fig. 5. p".um on 5th order hyperplanes.
. ,', . ..
KA. De JOl/f(. WM. Speurs / TI,e roll' of 1IIIIIIi'{Joilll cro.uOlW
-------------------,
~------------------­
Fig. 6. Disruption in "odd" crossovers .
yield the same interpretation as De long's earlier curves for 2nd order hyper­
planes: 2-point crossover minimizes disruption. So, extending the analysis thus
far does not help in understanding the potential benefits of higher numbers of
crossover points (seen in some empirical results).
4. Precise formulations of n-point disruption probabilities
Although the previous section generalized De long's initial disruption analy­
sis, it did not explain the potential benefits of higher numbers of crossover
points (seen experimentally). A second explanation for the conflicting results on
the merits of a higher number of crossover points is that the Pbw1 curves are
very weak bounds on Pd' It is possible that Pd itself, if computable, would yield
different results. In this section we attempt to resolve this issue by providing
exact equations for Pd'
The primary reason for the weakness of the Pk.~wl bound is that it ignores
the fact that many of the cases in which an odd number of crossover points fall
between hyperplane defining positions are not disruptive to the sampling
process. This occurs whenever the second parent happens to have identical
alleles on the hyperplane defining positions which are exchanged by "odd"
crossovers *. Figure 6 illustrates this in the simple case of 2nd order hyper­
planes. Note that, in this figure, VI and t'2 represent the alleles (i.e., values) at
those defining positions. Of the four possible combinations of matches on the
defining positions of H 2 , only the first (-L'I-V2 -, -V I-V2 -) actually results
in a disruption.
Hence, in order to obtain precise disruption probabilities for an arbitrary
hyperplane Hk , we must generalize
PIc.~I.al to P k•s (Le., the probability of
survival) by including "odd" crossovers which are not disruptive. We achieve
• An "odd" crossover occurs when an odd number of crossover points falls within two adjacent
defining positions of the hyperplane.
KA. De Jong, WM. Spears I n'e role ofmulti·point croSSOL'er
this in two steps: by first counting all possible odd crossovers, <lnd then
calculating which of those are not disruptive.
The probability that an odd number of crossover points will fall within a 2nd
order hyperplane is given by:
Let C be the probability that a particular odd crossover will not be disruptive.
Then we can write:
We can combine the contributions from the odd and even cases by defining Cs
to be the probability that any particular crossover will not be disruptive. In this
Notice the similarity to eq. (4) defined earlier. In this case we are now
considering all possible distributions of crossover points (both even and odd). In
We are left, then, with the problem of computing the correction factor C,.
We achieve this in the following manner. Given a particular distribution of
crossover points, we can identify how many of the given hyperplane's defining
positions are being exchanged by this particular crossover. If both parents match
on these positions, no disruption occurs. For example, reconsider fig. 6. In this
case the particular crossover will not disrupt tbe 2nd order hyperplane if the
parents match on either the first or the second or both defining positions. If we
let P,q(d) represent the probability that both parents have the same alleles on a
particular defining position d, then
C$ = P,q( dl ) + P,q(dz) - P,q(dl)P,q(dz)
specifies the probability that this crossover will not be disruptive. If we assume,
for example, that P,q(dj ) == 0.5 for both defining positions, then C" = 0.75 which
agrees with the prior discussion for fig. 6 .
.This same observation is true for k th order hyperplanes. We now must
consider subsets X ofthe set of k defining positions. For the ease of presenta·
tion we denote K to be that set of k defining positions. Suppose that a
KA. De lOllg. W.M. Spears / TIle role of multi-point croSSQ!'er
-------..,
r------------~-­
~---------~-----j
Fig. 7. Non-disruptive "odd" crossover on 4th order hyperplanes.
crossover results in a subset X of defining positions being exchanged. In this
case no disruption will occur if: (1) the parents match on the subset X, or (2) if
they match on the subset K - X, or (3) they match on the set K. Hence, the
general form of the correction is:
Cs = n Pl!q(d) + n P~q(d) - n P~q(d).
If an even crossover occurs, then I X I = 0 and C = 1, as we would expect.
However, for an odd crossover C < 1 (unless P~q(d) - 1 for all dE K). Figure 7
illustrates these ideas for one particular crossover on 4th order hyperplanes.
Deriving precise expressions for the values of Pt:q( d) at a particular point in
time is difficult in general since they vary from generation to generation in
complex, nonlinear, and interacting ways. We can, however, get considerable
insight into the effects of shared alleles on disruption analysis by looking at
several specific cases. Suppose, for simplicity, that for the hyperplane HI.: of
interest, Peq(d) is approximately the same for all the defining positions dE K,
I.e.• P.)d) = Pt:q' In this case the general form for C reduces to the simpler
In the case of the 4th order hyperplane in fig. 7, this becomes
Cs = P~~ + P~~ -
If we assumeP~q = 0.5 (as is typical in the first few generations). then Cs = (7/16)
reflects the proportion of cases in which this particular crossover will not be
disruptive.
Figures 8 and 9 show the effects of counting the non-disruptive "odd"
crossovers in these special cases. Figure 8 assumes a value of Peq = 0.5, which is
likely to hold in the early generations when matches are least likely. Figure 9
assumes a value of Peq = 0.75 to get a feeling of the effect as the population
becomes more homogeneous. Note that in both cases, the amount of expected
disruption has been significantly reduced and the relative difference in disrup­
tion among different numbers of crossover points is reduced as well. At the
same time, note that the curves for the various number of crossover points have
held their relative position with respect to one another.
KA. De JOtlg. w.M. Spears I TIle role ofmulti·point crOSSOL'er
Fig. 8. PIt• on 3rd order hyperplanes with P~q =0.5.
These results help explain the fact that in some empirical studies liule or no
difference in effect is seen by varying the number of crossover points used in
n-point crossover between, say, 1 and 16. It does not help explain why more
crossover points might be significantly better, nor does it provide any insight into
the relationship between Il-point crossover and uniform crossover.
Defining length
Defining length
Fig. 9. PIt•s on 3rd order hyperplanes with P~q - 0.75.
K.A. De lOIlK. W.M. Spears / Til<:' role of mlllli-poillt crOSS(}I'~r
5. Analyzing uniform crossover
Syswerda defined a family of "uniform" crossover operators which is a
variant of a notion that has been informally experimented with in the past: to
produce offspring by randomly selecting at each locus the allele of one of the
parents. By defining Po to be the probability of using the first parent's allele,
offspring can be produced by flipping a Po biased coin at each position *.
A good way of relating uniform crossover to the more traditional II-point
crossover is to think of uniform crossover as generating a mask of Os and Is.
indicating which parent's allele is to be used at each position. As we scan the
mask from left to right, a switch from 0 to 1 or from 1 to 0 represents a
crossover point. For example, the mask 0011100 defines a 2-point crossover
operation. If Po == 0.5, all masks are equally likely_ If we examine the II-point
crossover operations defined by this set of masks, we see immediately that they
. are binomially distributed around «L - 1)/2). For example, the set of all 8-bit
masks results in the following distribution:
O-pt crossover: 0.008
I-pt crossover: 0.055
2-pt crossover: 0.164
3-pt crossover: 0.273
4-pt crossover: 0.273
5-pt crossover: 0.164
6-pt crossover: 0.055
7-pt crossover: 0.008
resulting in an average of 3.5 crossover points for an 8-bit mask.
If Po '* 0.5, the masks are no longer uniformly distributed, but contain on the
average longer runs of Os or Is. From the point of view of fl-point crossover. the
effect is to skew the binomial distribution toward O. For example, setting
Po == 0.1 changes the distribution of 8-bit masks to:
O-pt crossover: 0.430
1-pt crossover: 0.108
2-pt crossover: 0.323
3-pt crossover: 0.064
4-pt crossover: 0.064
5-pt crossover: 0.008
6-pt crossover: 0.003
7-pt crossover: 0.000
resulting in an average of 1.26 crossover points for an 8-bit mask.
* Other informal studies viewed the process as a random walk and defined PI! as the probabilil~
of switching between parents. The two views are equivalent if and only if Po =0.5.
KA. De lOl/g, WM. Spears / The role ofl1Iu/ri'poitit crusson:r
We are now in a position to analyze the disruption properties of uniform
crossover in the same manner as the analysis of II-point crossover in the
preceding sections. The notion of an even number of crossover points between
the defining positions of hyperplane Hk corresponds to masks which have either
all Os or all Is on the defining positions of Hk - Hence, the corresponding
conservative bound on the disruption of uniform crossover is given by:
PAHd ~ I-Pk.uen(Hk)'
Pk.eL'en( Hk) == (PO)k + (1 - PO)k.
If Po == 0.5 for example, then
for all hyperplanes of order k. Notice that, unlike the traditional
crossover, there is no representational bias with uniform crossover in the sense
that all hyperplanes of order k are equally disrupted regardless of how long or
short their defining lengths are.
As before, we can obtain an exact formulation of Pd if we include non-disrup­
tive "odd" crossovers. For uniform crossover this corresponds to those masks
which are not either all Os or all Is on the hyperplane defining positions, but are
non-disruptive because the parents share common alleles on those particular
positions. If we let IK I be the cardinality of the set K, and PS( K) be the
power set of K, then the probability of survival for uniform crossover is:
Pk,S< H,J = Pk,et'en( Hk)
(P )I/I(1_p )IK-1i
lePS(K J-K - ( )
X [ [1 Peq(d) + [1 Peq(d) - [1 Peq{d)l,
where Peq is the probability of matching alleles, as before. Note that the last
term in the expression is identical to the correction Cs defined earlier for the
n-point crossover analysis. If the above is rewritten more concisely by combining
the "even" and "odd" terms, Pk •s can be expressed in a form similar to that
derived for the n-point crossover analysis:
Pk.s{Hk) = E (Po)lll(! _po)IK-ll
x[[1Peq{d)+ [1 Peq(d)- [1Peq (d)).
As before, we can get considerable insight into these equations by examining
the disruption on hyperplanes for which PI! (d) = Peq for all d E K. Figure 10
graphically illustrates this for 3rd order hype~planes, and shows the relationship
K.A. De 101lg. WM. 5pt'ars / The role ofmlllti·point crossocer
-L..-______~_-----~0.5
Defining Length
Fig. 10. Pk •• on 3rd order hyperplanes with Ptq '"' 0.5.
between uniform crossover (Po = 0.5) and II-point crossover. Note that uniform
crossover is much more disruptive than n-point crossover, but has the interest­
ing property that its disruption is illdependelll of hyperplane defining length.
This analysis also allows us to see clearly the effect of setting Po to something
other than 0.5. Note that because of the symmetry of uniform crossover, Po and
1 - Po produce the same effects. So, it is sufficient to consider the effects of
decreasing Po. As noted earlier, this has the effect of reducing the expected
number of crossover points. One would therefore expect a reduction in disrup­
tion as well. Figure 11 illustrates this effect for 3rd order "hyperplanes. Notice
how the disruption of uniform crossover can be controlled by lowering Po,
0.5 --'-------...........---------L'- 0.5
Defining Length
Fig. 11. Disruption of uniform crossover (Ptq "" 0.5).
KA. De JOllg, IV.M. Spears / TIle role of lIIuJtj·poifll crossot'er
0.6-f-----r------,------+-0.6
Evaluations • 100
Fig. 12. 6·peak (30 bits) - population 1000.
without affecting the property that the disruption has no defining length bias. In
particular, note that by simply lowering Po to 0.1, uniform crossover is less
disruptive (overall) than 2·point crossover and has no defining length bias! This
suggests a much more positive view of the potential of uniform crossover,
namely, as an unbiased recombination operator whose disruption potential can
be easily controlled by a single parameter Po.
To illustrate the effect of disruption on performance, fig. 12 presents the
results of running a GA on a 30-bit problem with 6 peaks (from ). The
measure of performance is simply the best individual found at every generation.
Since we are maximizing, higher curves represent better performance *. I t is
clear that the level of disruption provided by the standard form of uniform
crossover (Po = 0.5) is too high for this problem and performance suffers
relative to 2-point crossover. However, with uniform crossover we can increase
and decrease performance on a given problem with a fixed population size
simply by varying Po. Note that in this particular case, a value of Po =0.2 for
uniform crossover results in performance similar to 2·point crossover. Referring
back to fig. 11, we can now see why. On this particular problem uniform
crossover with Po - 0.2 provides approximately the same level of disruption as
2-point crossover, but without the corresponding length bias.
One might be tempted to conclude that further reductions in disruption
(Po < 0.2) would result in even better performance. However, fig. 12 indicates
that, for this particular problem, performance is significantly degraded when
Po == 0.01. This suggests that having a proper (but not necessarily minimal)
• All experimental results are averaged ov~r 10 independent runs.
/(A. De JUI/g, WM. Spears / TI,,' role vf IIllllti·poem crVSSVler
0.6 -f:-----~----....._---__i~ 0.6
Evaluations· 100
Fig. 13. 6-peak (30 +270 fake bits) - population 1000.
crossover disruption rate is an important component in achieving good perfor­
mance. We explore this theme in some detail in the next section.
The fact that the disruption rate of uniform crossover is independent of
hyperplane defining length can be shown to be helpful in overcoming certain
representational dependencies, Suppose an important hyperplane has a defining .
length of 30. If the string length L is 60, then the defining length of the
hyperplane is L12. However, if the string length is 300. then the defining length
of the hyperplane is L / lO. Figure 11 indicates that the disruptive effect of
uniform crossover is the same in either situation, while the disruptive effect of
n-point crossover changes.
Syswerda illustrated how this can clearly affect performance with his "sparse
I-max" problem in which 270 fake bits were appended to a 30-bit problem .
One can show similar results with almost any problem. Figure 13 illustrates this
on our 6-peak problem problem appended with 270 fake bits. Note that, in
comparison to the original 30-bit problem shown in fig. 12, the performance of
uniform crossover (Po == 0.2) remains unchanged, while the performance of
2-point crossover is considerably worse after the 270 fake bits have been added.
Referring back to fig. 11, we see that the effect of appending 270 fake bits is
that the defining lengths of the hyperplanes involving the 30 important bits are
~ LIIO (L is the length of the string). 2-point crossover is less
disruptive within this range (0 to L / lO) of defining lengths and, in this case, the
result is a less than optimal balance of exploration and exploitation;
In summary, we note that the analysis in this section has highlighted two
important properties of uniform crossover. The first is the ease with which the
disruptive effect of uniform crossover can be precisely controlled by varying Pw
The second important property is that the disruptive potential of uniform
K.A. De Jom!. IV.M. Sp('(1rJ ! Til(' role- of1II11IIi','Oilll cm~.wn:r
crossover does not depend on the defining length of hyperplanes. This allows
uniform crossover to perform effectively regardless of the distribution of impor­
tant alleles.
6. A more positive view of disruption
An implicit assumption of the previous sections was that disruption is a bau
thing and should be minimized. If we take this point of view, that performance
of GAs is inversely related to the amount of sampling disruption of crossover,
then we have not achieved our goal of extending the existing theoretical analysis
to explain the recent empirical results involving the benefits of crossover
operators involving larger numbers of crossover points. The disruption analysis
of the previous sections clearly shows that increasing the number of crossover
points for both uniform and Il-point crossover increases the disruption rates.
The escape from this apparent dilemma can be found in a recurring theme in
Holland's work: the importance of a proper balance between exploration and
exploitation when adaptivelysearching an unknown space for high performance
solutions . Because GAs involve finite populations, because selection pressure
comes from observed (rather than actual fitness differentials), and because no a
priori assumptions are made about the space being searched, a certain level of
disruption is required (beneficial) to balance the pressure to exploit current
observations,
This suggests the need for a broader theory which captures the effects of
crossover in conjunction with other key aspects of GAs such as population size,
mutation rate, and selection mechanisms. The initial pieces of such a theory arc
beginning to emerge, but are not as well developed as the disruption analysis. In
this section we analyze two important situations in which crossover disruption
interacts strongly with other aspects of GAs. The first relates to the evolving
makeup of the population and the need for different levels of disruption at
different points in the evolutionary process. The second involves the need for
varying disruption levels as a function of population size and problem complex­
6.1. CROSSOVER PRODUCTIVITY
Sampling disruption is important for understanding the effects of crossover
when populations are diverse (typically early in the evolutionary process).
However, when a population becomes quite homogeneous, another factor be­
comes important: whether the offspring produced by crossover will be different
than their parents in some way (thus generating a new sample) or the same
K.A. D~ )01/1(, WAf. SIJ('ars / TII(' mit' of1IIIIIIi-floi'" ('ms\"()/'~r
6oo 1r--------------_______
.5 unifocm
------...,.....
Productivity 500
400~--------~--------~--------~400
Evaluations • 100
Fig. l4. Productivity on 6-pcak (30 bits) - population 1000.
If we try to formally compute the probability that the offspring will be
different than their parents, the computation is precisely the same as the
previous disruption computations. To see this, consider two parents whose
alleles differ on only four loci. In order for crossover to produce new offspring,
some but not all of those alleles must be exchanged. The probability of this
occurring is just Pi H). In other words, those operators that are more disrup­
tive are also more likely to create new individuals from parents with nearly
identical genetic material.
This property of crossover has been dubbed 'crossover productivity" and is
easy to measure experimentally. Figure 14 illustrates how significantly the
"productivity" of 2-point crossover can drop off as evolution proceeds on the
6-peak problem. The vertical axis indicates the number of crossovers, per 100
evaluations, that produced offspring different from their parents. Since Pc = 0.6,
and the population size is 1000, the maximum productivity is 600. Note that. as
expected, uniform crossover (Po = 0.5) is more productive than 2-point crossover,
especially as the population loses diversity.
This observation helps explain some of the experimental results in which
higher crossover rates performed well. Figure 12 illustrates how the added
productivity of uniform crossover (Pu = 0.5) helps performance at the end of a
run (i.e., when the population loses diversity). A more dramatic example is
shown in fig. 15. Notice that, in this case, 2-point crossover is surpassed by
uniform crossover.
This analysis strongly suggests the need for an adaptive crossover operator
whose disruption rate changes with the context of the evolving population
dynamics. We have some empirical results to support this (e.g., [l]). However, a
K.A. De JOll/-:. WM. Spears / ThC' rolC' of"wl/i-poi'" crossOI'(:r
Evaluations • 100
Fig, 15. 6-pcak (30 + 270 fake bits) - population 1000.
formal analysis specifying the "balance equations" involving crossover disrup­
tion and population homogeneity is not yet available.
6.2. POPULATION SIZE EFFECfS
It is also quite straightforward to show that additional exploration is required
when the population size is too small to provide the necessary sampling accuracy
for complex search spaces [5J. Figures 12 and 16 illustrate this effect on the
6-peak problem. Notice how uniform crossover dominates 2-point crossover on
.5l1"1iform
0.6 -l----------r--------t- 0.6
Evaluations • 100
Fig. 16. 6·pcak (30 bits) - population 20.
K.A. Dc jVl/g. W.M. Spears / The role vftnlllti-pV;1It crOSSOl'er
O.S ~-----.------.------t- 0.6
Evaluations • 100
Fig. 17. 6-pcak (30 bils) - population 1000.
the 6-peak problem with a small population, but just the opposite is true with a
large population.
Figure 16 illustrates the importance of high disruption when small population
sizes are used. Since small populations tend to converge quickly, high disruption
helps to maintain exploration. Since larger populations converge less quickly,
disruption is less useful. However, despite a larger population, it is still possible
to have too little disruption. Consider our 6-peak problem in which uniform
crossover is run with a Po of 0.01. The results are shown in fig. 17. Notice that a
reduction of Po from 0.2 to 0.01 is detrimental to performance, although the
reduction from 0.5 to 0.2 is beneficial. This reemphasizes the need for a balance
between exploration and exploitation in order to achieve efficient search, and
points out that problem complexity and population size can change the balance
These results go a long way towards explaining the sometimes contradictory
results of many empirical studies concerning the use of uniform and n-point
crossover. It does not, however. provide a strong predictive theory relating
specific population sizes to appropriate crossover disruption rates. One of the
difficulties in developing such a theory is that the properties of the space being
searched affect the relationships which need to be expressed. If the important
properties of the search space are assumed to be unavailable a priori, these
results strongly suggest the need for adapting population size, disruption rates,
etc. to the characteristics of the search space. Again, we have some tantalizing
empirical evidence of the benefits of such an approach (e.g., ), but a theoreti­
cal analysis at this level is still a long way off.
KA. De }ol/g. WM. Spears / The role of mlliti-point crosSOl'er
6.3. MUTATION AS A SOURCE OF DISRUPTION
An obvious question at this point is how the sampling disruption provided by
mutation affects the balance and choice of crossover operators. There are a
significant number of empirical studies in which GA performance is improved
by increasing and/or adapting the mutation rate (sec, or example, ). Cur­
rently, there is no theory which captures the interrelationship precisely. Clearly,
all of the issues raised earlier come into play, including population size,
selection pressure, and the properties of the search space.
However, it is important to understand that the nature of the disruption
produced by crossover is significantly different than that of mutation. Crossover
disruption is better viewed and understood as a side effect of two important
properties of crossover, namely its recombination potential and its exploratory
power. Focusing on these two "positive" aspects of crossover gives a clearer
picture of its role in GAs. We analyze these features in the next two sections.
7. Crossover recombination potential
The previous sections have described, in detail, the disruptive effects of
n-point and uniform crossover. A more positive approach to analyzing crossover
operators is to focus on their recombination potential, which is defined as the
ability of crossover to create higher order hyperplanes when the parents contain
the necessary lower order hyperplanes (building blocks). Syswerda pointed out
that recombination can be considered to be a specialized form of survival, in
which two lower order hyperplanes survive onto the same string, resulting in a
higher order hyperplane . This observation allowed Syswerda to construct a
recombination analysis from his survival analysis. His analysis shows uniform
crossover (Po = 0.5) to have a higher recombination potential than 1 and 2-point
crossover.
However, since this survival analysis was limited to 1 and 2-point crossover,
and to uniform crossover with a Po of 0.5, the recombination analysis was
similarly limited. This motivated us to create a new recombination analysis in a
similar vein, since our survival analysis includes all of n-point crossover and a
parameterized uniform crossover. In the following discussion we will consider
the creation of a k th order hyperplane from two hyperplanes of order 111 and ,1.
We will restrict the situation such that the two lower order hyperplanes are
non-overlapping, and k = m + n. Each lower order hyperplane is in a different
parent. We denote the probability that the kth order ,hyperplane will be
recombined from the two hyperplanes as Pl.,'
7.1. RECOMBINATION ANALYSIS FOR n·POINT CROSSOVER
Since recombination is a restricted form of survival, It IS appropriate to
reexamine our previous survival equations (eqs. (9) and (10». Recall that the
KA. De long. W.M. Spean I The rofe of mufti-poillt crosson:r
---------------.,
r--------------­
IL ______ • ..II
Fig. 18. Recombination of two 2nd order hyperplanes.
equations correctly consider all possible crossover distributions (both even and
odd), while the correction factor C1 computes the probability that disruption will
not occur, given a particular distribution. An analysis of recombination under
n-point crossover is simple if one modifies Ct' Recall that recombination will
occur if both lower order hyperplanes survive in the same individual. Suppose
that an n-point crossover results in a subset X of the k defining positions
surviving in the same individual. In this case recombination will occur if: (I) the
parents match on the subset X, or (2) if they match on the subset K - X, or (3)
they match on the set K. Hence, the general form of the correction is:
As an example, consider fig. 18. In this figure, we represent the recombina­
tion of two 2nd order hyperplanes. One hyperplane is depicted with circles, and
the other with squares. Since three of the defining positions will survive onto the
same individual (under the 2-point crossover shown), the probability of recombi­
nation, assuming P~/d) = P~q for all dE K, is:
Note the similarity in description with the survival correction factor Cs (the
only difference is in how X is defined). In other words, given a k th orde r
hyperplane, and two hyperplanes of order nand m, Pk •r is simply Pk .s with the
correction factor redefined as above.
7.2. RECOMBINATION ANALYSIS FOR UNIFORM CROSSOVER
The analysis of recombination under uniform crossover also involves the
analysis of the original survival equation (see eq. (19». Note that, due to the
independence of the operator {each allele is swapped with probability Po}. cq.
19 can be divided into three parts. The first part expresses the probability that a
hyperplane will survive in the original string:
K.A. De lOl/g. IJ~M. SPC.'ctTS / The mit· ofmulti-point crosson:r
The second part expresses the probability that a hyperplane will survive in the
other string:
Pk.s.o,ltu(Hk) = E (PII)III(l-Pu)IK-/1 [1Pl"q(d).
/ E PS( K )
The final part expresses the probability that a hyperplane will exist in both
Pk.s,ho(/,(Hk ) = L
(Pn)tll(1_po)IK-1l n Pl"q(d).
Pk.AHk) =Pk.s.orig(Hk) + Pk.s.ollurCHk ) -Pk.s.bol,,(Hk)·
This formulation allows us to express recombination under uniform crossover.
Again, assuming the recombination of two non-overlapping hyperplanes of order
It and m into a hyperplane of order k:
Pk,'( Hk) = Pm,s.orig( Hm)Pn,s.OlhU( Hn) + Pm.s.olh,,( Hm)Pn.s,or;g( Hn)
- Pm.s.boll,( H",)Pn.s.bol"( Hn)'
This equation reflects the decomposition of recombination into two indepen­
dent survival events. The first term is the probability that Hm will survive on the
original string, while Hn switches (Le., both hyperplanes survive on one parent).
The second term is the probability that both hyperplanes survive on the other
parent. The third term reflects the joint probability that both hyperplanes
survive on both strings, and must be subtracted.
Figure 19 illustrates the relationships of the crossover operators in terms of
their recombination potential. Note specifically that there is evidence to support
1I!2-PI~ 0.7
.1 unilorrn
.01 unilorrn
Defining Length
Fig. 19. Recombination of 3rd order hyperplanes (P,q'" 0.5).
K,A. Dc JOII/:. IV.M. SPl'llfS I Till' mit' ofmlllti.poillt em.uon'r
the claim that uniform crossover ( Po = 0.5) has a higher recombination potential
than the other crossover operators. However, it is even more interesting to note
that these relationships are qualitatively identical to those shown in fig. II. In
other words, if one operator is better than another for survival, it is worse for
recombination (and vice versa). This observation appears to hold for all k, and
suggests very strongly that one cannot increase the recombination power without
a corresponding increase in disruption. It also suggests that, because of this
direct relationship, both recombination and crossover disruption rates can be
controlled by a single mechanism.
8. Crossover exploration power
Throughout this paper we have viewed disruption as a means for maintaining
a balance between exploration and exploitation during adaptive search. It has
also been pointed out that disruption does not necessarily imply useful explo­
ration. The disruption caused by crossover and mutation simply implies that a
hyperplane sample has been modified in some way so as to no longer be a
member of that hyperplane, without any indication as to the possible forms that
change might take. The potential number of ways in which a genetic operator
can effect a change has been called its exploratory power. It is clear that
crossover, in general, can make significantly broader changes to an individual
than mutation can, thus providing for a more radical. but more performance-bi­
ased form of disruption.
Recently, it has been pointed out that uniform crossover has the additional
property that it has more exploratory power than n-point.crossover . To see
that this is true, consider the extreme case in which one parent is a string of all
Os and the other all Is. Clearly uniform crossover can produce offspring
anywhere in the space while 1 and 2-point crossover are restricted to rather
small subsets. In general, uniform crossover is much more likely to distribute its
disruptive trials in an unbiased manner over larger portions of the space.
The difficulty comes in analyzing whether this exploratory power is a virtue. If
we think of exploitation as the biased component of the adaptive search process.
it makes sense to balance this with unbiased exploration. Clearly, this ex­
ploratory power can help in the early generations, particularly with smaller
population sizes, to make sure the whole space is well sampled. It can help avoid
some "deceptive" traps presented by certain classes of problems. At the same
time, some of this same exploratory power can be achieved over several
generations via repeated applications of 1 and 2-point crossover. Unfortunately,
our current analysis tools do not allow us to make comparisons of properties
which span generations and are strongly affected by selection. Hopefully we will
develop such tools and resolve questions of this type in the near future.
K.A. D(' JOllg. WAf. Spetlrs / The mle ofmu/ti'poil/t croSJon:r
9. Conclusions and further work
The extensions to the analysis of II-point and uniform crossover presented in
this paper provide considerable additional insight into the role of multi-point
crossover in genetic algorithms. One of the unanticipated results of this effort is
the surprisingly positive view of uniform crossover that emerges. There appear
to be three potentially important features of uniform crossover. First, the
disruption/recombination of hyperplane sampling under uniform crossover docs
not depend on the defining length of the hyperplanes. This reduces the possihil­
ity of representation effects, since there is no defining length bias. Second. the
disruption potential is easily controlled via a single parameter Po. This suggests
the need for only one crossover form (uniform crossover), which is adapted to
different situations by adjusting Po. Finally, when a disruption does occur.
uniform crossover results in a minimally biased exploration of the space being
The paper, however, raises another issue: the need for a broader theory
capable of indicating how to achieve a proper balance of exploration and
exploitation for a particular problem by appropriate choice of population size,
genetic operator rates, and selection pressure. A fun theoretical analysis of this
appears to be quite far off. The authors are currently working on extending the
results presented here in that direction. Our goal is to understand these
interactions well enough so that GAs can be designed to be self-selecting with
respect to such decisions as optimal population size and the proper balance
between exploration and exploitation.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the reviewers and the many other members of the GA
community for their helpful comments and criticisms as the research presented
here evolved to its current state. We would also like to thank Diana Gordon for
her help in our preliminary recombination analysis. Finally, I would like to
thank my father, William C. Spears, for creating within me a desire to under­
stand intelligence, from his knowledge of and interest in all face~s of psychology.