warwick.ac.uk/lib-publications
Manuscript version: Author’s Accepted Manuscript
The version presented in WRAP is the author’s accepted manuscript and may differ from the
published version or Version of Record.
Persistent WRAP URL:
 
How to cite:
Please refer to published version for the most recent bibliographic citation information.
If a published version is known of, the repository item page linked to above, will contain
details on accessing it.
Copyright and reuse:
The Warwick Research Archive Portal (WRAP) makes this work by researchers of the
University of Warwick available open access under the following conditions.
Copyright © and all moral rights to the version of the paper presented here belong to the
individual author(s) and/or other copyright owners. To the extent reasonable and
practicable the material made available in WRAP has been checked for eligibility before
being made available.
Copies of full items can be used for personal research or study, educational, or not-for-profit
purposes without prior permission or charge. Provided that the authors, title and full
bibliographic details are credited, a hyperlink and/or URL is given for the original metadata
page and the content is not changed in any way.
Publisher’s statement:
Please refer to the repository item page, publisher’s statement section, for further
information.
For more information, please contact the WRAP Team at: .
Accuracy and transferability of GAP models for tungsten
Wojciech J. Szlachta, Albert P. Bart´ok, and G´abor Cs´anyi
Engineering Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Trumpington Street, Cambridge, CB2 1PZ, UK
 
We introduce interatomic potentials for tungsten in the bcc crystal phase and its defects within
the Gaussian Approximation Potential (GAP) framework, ﬁtted to a database of ﬁrst principles
density functional theory (DFT) calculations.
We investigate the performance of a sequence of
models based on databases of increasing coverage in conﬁguration space and showcase our strategy
of choosing representative small unit cells to train models that predict properties only observable
using thousands of atoms. The most comprehensive model is then used to calculate properties of
the screw dislocation, including its structure, the Peierls barrier and the energetics of the vacancydislocation interaction. All software and raw data are available at www.libatoms.org.
PACS numbers: 65.40.De,71.15.Nc,31.50.-x,34.20.Cf
Tungsten is a hard, refractory metal with the highest melting point (3695 K) among metals, and its alloys
are utilised in numerous technological applications. The
details of the atomistic processes behind the plastic behaviour of tungsten have been investigated for a long
time and many interatomic potentials exist in the literature reﬂecting an evolution, over the past three decades,
in their level of sophistication, starting with the Finnis-
Sinclair (FS) potential , embedded atom model (EAM)
 , various other FS/EAM parametrisations , modiﬁed embedded atom models (MEAM) and bond
order potentials (BOP) .
While some of these
methods have been used to study other transition metals
 , there is renewed interest in modelling tungsten
due to its many high temperature applications—e.g. it
is one of the candidate materials for plasma facing components in the JET and ITER fusion projects .
A recurring problem with empirical potentials, due to
the use of ﬁxed functional forms with only a few adjustable parameters, is the lack of ﬂexibility: when ﬁtted to reproduce a given property, predictions for other
properties can have large errors. Figure 1 shows the basic performance of BOP and MEAM, two of the more
sophisticated potentials that reproduce the correct screw
dislocation core structure, and also the simpler FS, all in
comparison with density functional theory (DFT). While
the ﬁgure emphasises fractional accuracy, we show the
corresponding absolute numerical values in Table I. BOP
is poor in describing the vacancy but is better at surfaces,
whereas MEAM is the other way around. While this compromise can sometimes be made with good judgement for
speciﬁc applications, many interesting properties, particularly those that determine the material behaviour at
larger length scales, arise from the competition between
diﬀerent atomic scale processes, which therefore all need
to be described equally well. For example, dislocation
pinning, depinning and climb involve both elastic properties, core structure, as well as the interaction of dislocations with defects. One way to deal with this problem
is to use multiple levels of accuracy as in QM/MM or
Elastic const.
Surface energy
FIG. 1. Fractional error in elastic constants and defect energies calculated with various interatomic potentials, as compared to the target DFT values.
vacancy energy [eV]
100 surface [eV/˚A2]
110 surface [eV/˚A2]
111 surface [eV/˚A2]
112 surface [eV/˚A2]
TABLE I. Elastic constants and defect energies calculated
with various interatomic potentials, and corresponding target
DFT values.
to allow the parameters of the potential to vary in time
and space .
Here we describe a milestone in a research programme
aimed at creating a potential that circumvents the problem of ﬁxed functional forms. The purpose of the present
work is twofold. Firstly, we showcase the power of the
non-parametric database driven approach by constructing an accurate potential and using it to compute atomic
scale properties that are inaccessible to DFT due to computational expense. Secondly, while there has been vigarXiv:1405.4370v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 28 Aug 2014
orous activity recently in developing such models, most
of the attention has been focussed on the interpolation
method and the neighbourhood descriptors (e.g.
neural networks , Shepherd interpolation , invariant polynomials , Gaussian processes ),
rather less prominence was given to the question of how
to construct suitable databases that ultimately determine
the range of validity of the potential. Our second goal
is therefore to study what kinds of conﬁgurations need
to be in a database so that given material properties are
well reproduced. A larger database costs more to create
and the resulting potential is slower, but can be expected
to be more widely applicable, thus providing a tuneable
tradeoﬀbetween transferability, accuracy and computational cost.
In our Gaussian Approximation Potential (GAP)
framework , the only uncontrolled approximation
is the one essential to the idea of interatomic potentials:
the total energy is written as a sum of atomic energies,
with ε a universal function of the atomic neighbourhood
structure inside a ﬁnite cutoﬀradius as represented by
the descriptor vector ˆqi for atom i (deﬁned below). This
function is ﬁtted to a database of DFT calculations using
Gaussian process regression so, in general, it is
given by a linear combination of basis functions,
αjK(ˆqj, ˆq) ≡k(ˆq)T α,
where the sum over j includes (some or all of) the con-
ﬁgurations in the database, the vector of coeﬃcients α
are given by linear algebra expressions (see below and
in ), and the meaning of the covariance kernel K is
that of a similarity measure between diﬀerent neighbour
environments.
The expression for the coeﬃcients αj—normally simple in Gaussian process regression—is more complicated
in our case because the quantum mechanical input data
we can calculate is not a set of values of the atomic energy function that we are trying to ﬁt. Rather, the total
energy of a conﬁguration is a sum of many atomic energy function values, and the forces and stresses, which
are also available analytically through the Hellmann-
Feynman theorem, are sums of partial derivatives of the
atomic energy function. The detailed derivation of the
formulas shown below is in .
Let us collect all
the input data values (total energies, force and stress
components) into the vector y with D components in
total and denote by y′ the N unknown atomic energy
values corresponding to all the atoms that appear in all
the input conﬁgurations. We construct a linear operator
L that describes the relationship between them through
y = LT y′. For data values that represent total energies,
CASTEP 
(version 6.01)
exchange-correlation functional
pseudopotential
(valence 5s2 5p6 5d4 6s2)
plane-wave energy cutoﬀ
maximum k-point spacing
electronic smearing scheme
smearing width
atomic environment kernel
0 < r ≤(rcut −r∆)
2 cos(1 + π r−rcut+r∆
(rcut −r∆) < r ≤rcut
φn(r) = exp[−(r −rcutn/nmax)2/2σ2
dr r2φn(r)φn′(r)
(U−1)nn′φn′(r)
0.0001 eV/atom
0.01 eV/˚A
0.01 eV/atom
GAP software version
TABLE II. DFT parameters used to generate training data
and GAP model parameters.
the corresponding rows of L have just 0s and 1s as their
elements, but for forces and stresses, the entries are differential operators such as ∂/∂xi corresponding to the
force on atom i with cartesian x coordinate xi. Writing
Kij ≡K(ˆqi, ˆqj) for the element of the covariance matrix
KNN corresponding to atoms i and j, the covariance matrix of size D × D of the observed data is,
KDD = LT KNNL,
where the diﬀerential operators in L act on the covariance function K that deﬁnes KNN. In our applications,
N can exceed a hundred thousand, and therefore working with N × N matrices would be computationally very
expensive.
Because many atomic environments in our
dataset are highly similar to one another, it is plausible
that many fewer than N atoms could be chosen to ef-
ﬁciently represent the range of neighbour environments.
We choose M representative atoms from the full set of N
atoms that appear in all the input conﬁgurations (typically with M ≪N), and denote the square covariance
matrix between the M representative atoms by KMM
and the rectangular covariance matrix between the M
representative atoms and all the N atoms by KMN (with
MN). The expression for the vector of coeﬃcients in equation 2 is then,
α = [KMM + KMNLΛ−1LT KNM]−1KMNLΛ−1y,
where the parameter σν represents the tolerance (or expected error) in ﬁtting the input data. It could be a single constant, but in practice we found it essential to use
diﬀerent tolerance values corresponding to the diﬀerent
kinds of input data, so that the Λ matrix is still diagonal,
but has diﬀerent values corresponding to total energies,
forces and stresses as they appear in the data vector y.
Although one might initially expect zero error in ab initio
input data, this is not actually the case due to convergence parameters in the electronic structure calculation.
A further source of error in the ﬁt is the uncontrolled
approximation of equation (1), i.e. writing the total energy as a sum of local atomic energies. The numerical
values we use are shown in Table II. They are based on
convergence tests of the DFT calculation carried out on
example conﬁgurations.
We note the following remarks about the expression
in (4). The quantum mechanically not deﬁned and therefore unknown atomic energies for the input conﬁgurations, y′, do not appear. The number of components in
the coeﬃcient vector α is M, so the sum in equation (2)
is over the M representative conﬁgurations.
of calculating α is dominated by operations which scale
like O(NM 2), so it can be signiﬁcantly reduced by choosing M to be smaller and accepting a reduced accuracy
of the ﬁt. After the ﬁt is made the coeﬃcient vector α
stays ﬁxed, and the evaluation of the potential is accomplished by the vector dot product in (2) with most of the
work going towards computing the vector k for each new
conﬁguration, and thus scaling like O(M). The M representative atoms can be chosen randomly, but we found
it beneﬁcial to employ the k-means clustering algorithm
to choose the representative conﬁgurations.
We now turn to the speciﬁcation of the kernel function.
We use the “smooth overlap of atomic positions” (SOAP)
kernel ,
w|ˆqi · ˆqj|ξ
where the exponent ξ is a positive integer parameter
whose role is to “sharpen” the selectivity of the similarity measure, and σw is an overall scale factor. Note
that for the special choice of ξ = 1, the Gaussian process regression ﬁt is equivalent to simple linear regression, and so potential energy expression in (2) simpliﬁes
to ε(ˆq) =
· ˆq, in which the term in parentheses can be precomputed once and for all. Unfortunately we found that such a linear ﬁt signiﬁcantly limits
the attainable accuracy of the potential.
The elements of the descriptor vector ˆq are constructed
as follows. The environment of the ith atom is characterised by the atomic neighbourhood density, which we
e−|r−rij|2/2σ2
atomfcut(|rij|)
nlmgn(|r|)Ylm(ˆr)
where rij are the vectors pointing to the neighbouring
atoms, σatom is a parameter corresponding to the “size”
of atoms, fcut is a smooth cutoﬀfunction with compact
support, and the expansion on the second line uses spherical harmonics and a set of orthonormal radial basis functions, gn, with n, l and m the usual integer indices. The
elements of the descriptor vector ˆq are then,
ˆqi = qi/|qi|
Values for the all the parameters and other necessary
formulas are given in Table II. The orthonormal radial
basis is obtained from a set of equispaced Gaussians by
Cholesky factorisation of their overlap matrix.
The SOAP kernel is special because it is not only invariant with respect to relabelling of atoms and rotation
of either neighbour environment, but it is also faithful in
the sense that K only takes the value of unity when the
two neighbourhoods are identical. This is because it is
directly proportional to the overlap of the atomic neighbourhood densities, integrated over all three dimensional
rotations ˆR,
drρi(r)ρj( ˆRr)
The SOAP kernel is therefore also manifestly smooth and
slowly varying in Cartesian space, just as we know the
Computational
costa [ms/atom]
constantsb [GPa]
spectrumb [THz]
formationc [eV]
Surface energyb
Dislocation
structured [˚A
Dislocation-vacancy
binding energy [eV]
Peierls barrier
GAP1 : 2000 × primitive unit cell
with varying lattice vectors
0.1452 0.0008
GAP2 : GAP1 + 60 × 128-atom unit cell
0.1522 0.0006
GAP3 : GAP2 + vacancy in: 400 × 53-atom unit cell,
20 × 127-atom unit cell
0.018 0.0941 0.0004
GAP4 : GAP3 +
(100), (110), (111), (112) surfaces
180 × 12-atom unit cell
(110), (112) gamma surfaces
6183 × 12-atom unit cell
0.0001 0.0002
GAP5 : GAP4 + vacancy in: (110), (112) gamma surface
750 × 47-atom unit cell
0.0001 0.0002
-0.774 0.154
GAP6 : GAP5 +
2⟨111⟩dislocation quadrupole
100 × 135-atom unit cell
0.0001 0.0001
a Time on a single CPU core of Intel Xeon E5-2670 2.6GHz, b RMS error, c formation energy error, d RMS error of Nye tensor over the
12 atoms nearest the dislocation core, cf. Figure 4.
TABLE III. Summary of the databases for six GAP models, in order of increasing breadth in the types of conﬁgurations they
contain, together with the performance of the corresponding potentials with respect to key properties. The colour of the cells
indicates a subjective judgement of performance: unacceptable (red), usable (yellow), good (green). The ﬁrst ﬁve properties
can be checked against DFT directly and so we report errors, but calculation of the last two properties are in large systems, so
we report the values, converged with system size. The conﬁgurations are collected using Boltzmann sampling, for more details
on the databases leading to the models see the supplementary information.
true Born-Oppenheimer potential energy surface to be,
away from electronic energy level crossings and quantum
phase transitions. The entire GAP framework, including the choice of descriptor and the kernel, is designed so
that its parameters are easy to set and the ﬁnal potential
is not very sensitive to the exact values. Some are physically motivated and stem from either the properties of
the quantum mechanical potential energy surface (rcut,
σw, σatom) or the input data (e.g. σν), while others are
convergence parameters and are set by a tradeoﬀbetween
accuracy and computational cost (nmax, lmax, M). We
include in the supplementary information a table demonstrating convergence of the ﬁtted potential as a function
of nmax, lmax, and rcut. By far the most “arbitrary” part
of the potential is thus the set of conﬁgurations chosen
to comprise the training database.
Since the potential interpolates the atomic energy in
the space of neighbour environments, we need good coverage of relevant environments in the database. We therefore need to start by deciding what material properties
we wish to study and what are the corresponding neighbour environments. Our strategy is to deﬁne, for each
material property, a set of representative small unit cell
conﬁgurations that are amenable to accurate ﬁrst principles calculation. In Table III we show the performance
with respect to key material properties of six models,
each ﬁtted to a database that contains the conﬁgurations indicated on the left, in addition to all the conﬁgurations of the preceding one. In particular, as proposed
by Vitek , the structure of 1
2⟨111⟩screw dislocations in bcc transition metals can be rationalised in terms
of the strictly planar gamma surface concept, and therefore we use gamma surfaces in the database to ensure
the coverage of neighbour environments found near the
dislocation core. Where the dislocation structure is very
far from correct, the numerical performance metric on it
has been omitted. The table shows that, broadly speaking, the small representative unit cells are necessary and
also suﬃcient to obtain each property accurately, so the
GAP model interpolates well but does not extrapolate
to completely new kinds of conﬁgurations. Adding new
conﬁgurations never compromises the accuracy of previously incorporated properties. For information, Table IV
shows the results of the automatic allocation of the repre-
TABLE IV. Number of representative atomic environments
in each database of the six GAP models. The rows represent
the successive GAP models and the columns represent the
conﬁguration types in the databases, grouped according to
which GAP model ﬁrst incorporated them. The allocations
shown are based on k-means clustering. The rightmost column shows the total number of representative atoms in each
GAP model (M).
Frequency [THz]
FIG. 2. Phonon spectrum of bcc tungsten calculated using
GAP and FS potentials, and some reference DFT values.
sentative atoms in each GAP model to the various types
of conﬁgurations.
We also show the performance of the ﬁnal GAP6 model
on Figure 1 and omit the subscript from now.
phonon spectrum of the GAP model is shown in Figure 2 along with that of the DFT and FS. There is clear
improvement with respect to the analytical model, but
remaining deﬁciencies are also apparent.
Strategies to
enhance the training database in order to improve the
description of phonons is an important future direction
We now investigate the properties of the 1
2⟨111⟩screw
“soft” lattice site
“hard” lattice site
FIG. 3. Representation of the three diﬀerent initial transition
paths for the Peierls barrier calculation. Path A corresponds
to the linear interpolation directly from the initial to the ﬁnal state, whereas paths B and C are the two distinct linear
interpolations that include a potential meta-stable state (corresponding to the “hard” structure of the dislocation core) at
reaction coordinate r = 0.5.
dislocation further by calculating the Peierls barrier using a transition state searching implementation of the
string method . Three diﬀerent initial transition
paths, shown in Figure 3, are used to explore the existence of the metastable state corresponding to a “hard”
core structure . We ﬁnd that the “hard” core
is not even locally stable in tungsten—starting geometry
optimisation from there results in the dislocation line migrating to a neighbouring lattice site, corresponding to
the “soft” core conﬁguration. All three initial transition
paths converge to the same minimum energy pathway
(MEP), shown in Figure 4, with no “hard” core transition
state. For large enough systems, the MEP is independent
of the boundary conditions: the “quadrupole” calculations contained two oppositely directed dislocations in
periodic boundary conditions, while the “cylinder” con-
ﬁgurations had a single dislocation with ﬁxed far ﬁeld
boundary conditions. For comparison we also plot the
MEP of the Finnis-Sinclair model, and show the corresponding core structures using Nye tensor maps .
For the smallest periodic 135 atom model, we computed
the energies at ﬁve points along the MEP using DFT to
verify that the GAP model is indeed accurate for these
conﬁgurations.
Due to the intrinsic smoothness of the potential, it
can be expected to perform well for conﬁgurations which
contain multiple defect structures as long as the local
deformation around each defect with respect to the corresponding conﬁgurations in the database is small. So we
ﬁnally turn to an example of the kinds of atomistic properties that are needed to make the connection to materials modelling on higher length scales, but are inaccessible
to direct DFT calculations due to system size limitations
imposed by the associated computational cost. Figure 5
shows the energy of a vacancy in the vicinity of a screw
dislocation calculated in a system of over 100,000 atoms
GAP, r = 0
DFT, r = 0
Energy [eV/b]
Nye tensor [˚A−1]
(screw comp.)
Reaction coordinate, r
GAP, quadrupole (135 at.)
GAP, quadrupole (459 at.)
GAP, quadrupole (1215 at.)
GAP, cylinder (33633 at.)
FS, cylinder (33633 at.)
DFT, quadrupole (135 at.)
FIG. 4. Top: the structure of the screw dislocation along the
minimum energy path as it glides; bottom: Peierls barrier
evaluated using GAP and FS potentials, along with single
point checks with DFT in the 135 atom quadrupole arrangement.
Binding energy [eV]
FIG. 5. Dislocation-vacancy binding energy evaluated using
GAP and FS potentials. The top panels show the interpolated
binding energy using a heat map, the graphs below are slices
of the same along the dotted lines shown in the top panels.
using cylindrical ﬁxed boundary conditions 230 ˚A away
from the core and with periodic boundary conditions applied along the dislocation line with a periodicity corresponding to three Burgers vectors. The Finnis-Sinclair
potential underestimates this interaction by a factor of
Although the potential developed in this work does not
yet constitute a comprehensive description of tungsten
under all conditions, we have shown that the strategy of
building a database of representative small unit cell con-
ﬁgurations is viable, and will be continued with the incorporation of other crystal phases, edge dislocations, interstitials, etc. In addition to developing ever-more comprehensive databases and computing speciﬁc atomic scale
properties with ﬁrst principles accuracy on which higher
length scale models can be built, our long term goal is to
discover whether, in the context of a given material, an
all-encompassing database could be assembled that contains a suﬃcient variety of neighbour environments to be
valid for any conﬁguration encountered under conditions
of physically realistic temperatures and pressures. If that
turns out to be possible, it would herald a truly new era
of precision for atomistic simulations in materials science.
The authors are indebted to A. De Vita and N. Bernstein for comments on the manuscript. APB is supported
by a Leverhulme Early Career Fellowship and the Isaac
Newton Trust. GC acknowledges support from the EP-
SRC grants EP/J010847/1 and EP/L014742/1. All software and data necessary for the reproduction of the results in this paper are available at www.libatoms.org.
 M. W. Finnis and J. E. Sinclair, Philos. Mag. A 50, 45
 M. S. Daw and M. I. Baskes, Phys. Rev. B 29, 6443
 G. J. Ackland and R. Thetford, Philos. Mag. A 56, 15
 A. P. Sutton and J. Chen, Philos. Mag. Lett. 61, 139
 J. Wang, Y. L. Zhou, M. Li, and Q. Hou, Modell. Simul.
Mater. Sci. Eng. 22, 015004 .
 F. Ercolessi and J. B. Adams, Europhys. Lett. 26, 583
 M. I. Baskes, Phys. Rev. B 46, 2727 .
 Y. R. Wang and D. B. Boercker, J. Appl. Phys. 78, 122
 B.-J. Lee, M. I. Baskes, H. Kim, and Y. Koo Cho, Phys.
Rev. B 64, 184102 .
 M.-C. Marinica, L. Ventelon, M. R. Gilbert, L. Proville,
S. L. Dudarev, J. Marian, G. Bencteux, and F. Willaime,
J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 25, 395502 .
 M. Mrovec, R. Gr¨oger, A. G. Bailey, D. Nguyen-Manh,
C. Els¨asser,
and V. Vitek, Phys. Rev. B 75, 104119
 T. Ahlgren, K. Heinola, N. Juslin, and A. Kuronen, J.
Appl. Phys. 107, 033516 .
 X.-C. Li, X. Shu, Y.-N. Liu, F. Gao,
and G.-H. Lu, J.
Nucl. Mater. 408, 12 .
 J. A. Moriarty, Phys. Rev. B 38, 3199 .
 W. Xu and J. A. Moriarty, Phys. Rev. B 54, 6941 .
 M. Mrovec, D. Nguyen-Manh, D. G. Pettifor,
V. Vitek, Phys. Rev. B 69, 094115 .
 G. F. Matthews,
P. Edwards,
A. Lioure, P. Lomas, A. Loving, C. Lungu, H. Maier,
P. Mertens, et al., Phys. Scripta 2007, 137 .
 R. Neu, M. Balden, V. Bobkov, R. Dux, O. Gruber,
A. Herrmann, A. Kallenbach, M. Kaufmann, C. F.
Maggi, H. Maier, et al., Plasma Phys. Controlled Fusion
49, B59 .
 R. Pitts, S. Carpentier, F. Escourbiac, T. Hirai, V. Komarov, S. Lisgo, A. Kukushkin, A. Loarte, M. Merola,
A. Sashala, et al., J. Nucl. Mater. 438, Supplement,
S48 .
 N. Bernstein, J. R. Kermode, and G. Cs´anyi, Rep. Prog.
Phys. 72, 026501 .
 A. D. Vita and R. Car, MRS Bull. 491, 473 .
 J. Behler and M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 146401
 J. Behler, R. Martoˇn´ak, D. Donadio, and M. Parrinello,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 185501 .
 N. Artrith and J. Behler, Phys. Rev. B 85, 045439 .
 J. Ischtwan and M. A. Collins, J. Chem. Phys. 100, 8080
 M. A. Collins, Theor. Chem. Acc. 108, 313 .
 X. Zhang, S. Zou, L. B. Harding, and J. M. Bowman, J.
Phys. Chem. A 108, 8980 .
 X. Huang, B. J. Braams, and J. M. Bowman, J. Chem.
Phys. 122, 044308 .
 Z. Xie, B. J. Braams,
and J. M. Bowman, J. Chem.
Phys. 122, 224307 .
 A. P. Bart´ok, M. C. Payne, R. Kondor, and G. Cs´anyi,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 136403 .
 A. P. Bart´ok, R. Kondor, and G. Cs´anyi, Phys. Rev. B
87, 184115 .
 A. P. Bart´ok, M. J. Gillan, F. R. Manby, and G. Cs´anyi,
Phys. Rev. B 88, 054104 .
 M. J. Gillan, D. Alf`e, A. P. Bart´ok,
and G. Cs´anyi, J.
Chem. Phys. 139, 244504 .
 M. Rupp, A. Tkatchenko, K.-R. M¨uller, and O. A. von
Lilienfeld, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 058301 .
 D. MacKay, Information Theory, Inference and Learning
Algorithms .
 C. Rasmussen and C. Williams, Gaussian Processes
for Machine Learning .
 E. Snelson and Z. Ghahramani, in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 18 
pp. 1257–1264.
 A. P. Bart´ok, Ph.D. thesis, University of Cambridge
 W. J. Szlachta, Ph.D. thesis, University of Cambridge
 V. Vitek and F. Kroupa, Philos. Mag. 19, 265 .
 V. Vitek, R. C. Perrin, and D. K. Bowen, Philos. Mag.
21, 1049 .
 V. Vitek, Philos. Mag. 84, 415 .
 W. E, W. Ren,
and E. Vanden-Eijnden, Phys. Rev. B
66, 052301 .
 W. E, W. Ren, and E. Vanden-Eijnden, J. Chem. Phys.
126, 164103 .
 S. Ismail-Beigi and T. A. Arias, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 1499
 D. E. Segall, A. Strachan, W. A. Goddard, S. Ismail-
Beigi, and T. A. Arias, Phys. Rev. B 68, 014104 .
 D. Cereceda, A. Stukowski, M. R. Gilbert, S. Queyreau,
L. Ventelon, M.-C. Marinica, J. M. Perlado, and J. Marian, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 25, 085702 .
 C. Hartley and Y. Mishin, Acta Mater. 53, 1313 .
 B. G. Mendis, Y. Mishin, C. S. Hartley,
Hemker, Philos. Mag. 86, 4607 .