IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
A Survey of Heterogeneous Information
Network Analysis
Chuan Shi, Member, IEEE,
Yitong Li, Jiawei Zhang, Yizhou Sun, Member, IEEE,
and Philip S. Yu, Fellow, IEEE
Most real systems consist of a large number of interacting, multi-typed components, while most
contemporary researches model them as homogeneous networks, without distinguishing different types
of objects and links in the networks. Recently, more and more researchers begin to consider these
interconnected, multi-typed data as heterogeneous information networks, and develop structural analysis
approaches by leveraging the rich semantic meaning of structural types of objects and links in the
networks. Compared to widely studied homogeneous network, the heterogeneous information network
contains richer structure and semantic information, which provides plenty of opportunities as well as
a lot of challenges for data mining. In this paper, we provide a survey of heterogeneous information
network analysis. We will introduce basic concepts of heterogeneous information network analysis,
examine its developments on different data mining tasks, discuss some advanced topics, and point out
some future research directions.
Index Terms
heterogeneous information network, data mining, semi-structural data, meta path
C. Shi, Y.T. Li are with Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China. E-mail: ,
 .
J.W. Zhang and P.S. Yu are with University of Illinois at Chicago, IL, USA. E-mail: , .
Y.Z. Sun is with Northeastern University, MA, USA. E-mail: .
November 17, 2015
 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
I. INTRODUCTION
We know that most real systems usually consist of a large number of interacting, multityped components , such as human social activities, communication and computer systems,
and biological networks. In such systems, the interacting components constitute interconnected
networks, which can be called information networks without loss of generality . It is clear
that information networks are ubiquitous and form a critical component of modern information
infrastructure. The information network analysis has gained extremely wide attentions from
researchers in many disciplines, such as computer science, social science, physics, and so on.
Particularly, the information network analysis has become a hot research topic in data mining and
information retrieval ﬁelds in the past decades. The basic paradigm is to mine hidden patterns
through mining link relations from networked data. The analysis of information network is related
to the works in link mining and analysis , , , social network analysis , , hypertext
and web mining , network science , and graph mining .
Most of contemporary information network analyses have a basic assumption: the type of
objects or links is unique . That is, the networks are homogeneous containing the same type
of objects and links, such as the author collaboration network and the friendship network
 . These homogeneous networks usually are extracted from real interacting systems by simply
ignoring the heterogeneity of objects and links or only considering one type of relations among
one type of objects. However, most real systems contain multi-typed interacting components and
we can model them as heterogeneous information networks (called HIN or heterogeneous
network for short) with different types of objects and links. For example, in bibliographic
database, like DBLP , papers are connected together via authors, venues and terms; and
in Flickr, photos are linked together via users, groups, tags and comments.
Compared to widely-used homogeneous information network, the heterogeneous information
network can effectively fuse more information and contain rich semantics in nodes and links,
and thus it forms a new development of data mining. More and more researchers have noticed
the importance of heterogeneous information network analysis and many novel data mining
tasks have been exploited in such networks, such as similarity search , , clustering
 , and classiﬁcation . Since Y. Sun, J. Han, et al. proposed the concept of heterogeneous
information network in 2009 , and the meta path concept subsequently in , heterogeneous
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
information network analysis becomes a hot topic rapidly in the ﬁelds of data mining, database,
and information retrieval, and a lot of papers have appeared in top conferences and journals of
these research ﬁelds. In addition, some special workshops on heterogeneous information networks
began to be held. For example, the workshop on Heterogeneous Information Network Analysis
(HINA) has been held for 3 years in conjunction with IJCAI, and the workshop on Mining Data
Semantics (MDS) has also been held for several times.
This paper ﬁrstly presents a survey of heterogeneous information network analysis in recent
years. Although some articles have introduced the developments of this ﬁeld , , , they
focus on summarizing the works of authors themselves. This paper attempts to clearly introduce
basic concepts in heterogeneous network analysis and make a comprehensive investigation on
contemporary research developments. Moreover, this paper also discusses some advanced topics
and points out several future development directions of this ﬁeld.
The remaining part is organized as follows. Section II introduces the basic concepts and
examples in this ﬁeld. Section III presents research developments in major data mining tasks,
and the advanced topics and future works are introduced in Section IV. Finally, Section V
concludes this paper.
II. BASIC CONCEPTS AND DEFINITIONS
In this section, we introduce some basic concepts in this ﬁeld, compare the heterogeneous
information network with other related concepts, and give some HIN examples.
A. Basic deﬁnitions
An information network represents an abstraction of the real world, focusing on the objects
and the interactions among these objects. Formally, we deﬁne an information network as follows.
DEFINITION 1: Information Network , . An information network is deﬁned as a
directed graph G = (V, E) with an object type mapping function ϕ : V →A and a link type
mapping function ψ : E →R. Each object v ∈V belongs to one particular object type in the
object type set A: ϕ(v) ∈A, and each link e ∈E belongs to a particular relation type in the
relation type set R: ψ(e) ∈R. If two links belong to the same relation type, the two links share
the same starting object type as well as the ending object type.
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
Different from the traditional network deﬁnition, we explicitly distinguish object types and
relationship types in information network.
DEFINITION 2: Heterogeneous/homogeneous information Network. The information network is called heterogeneous information network if the types of objects |A| > 1 or the types
of relations |R| > 1; otherwise, it is a homogeneous information network.
(a) Network instance
written-by
publishing/
published-in
citing/cited
(b) Network schema
An example of heterogeneous information network on bibliographic data .
EXAMPLE 1: Fig. 1 shows a HIN example on bibliographic data . A bibliographic information network, such as the bibliographic network involving computer science researchers
derived from DBLP 1, is a typical heterogeneous network containing three types of information
entities: papers, venues, and authors. For each paper, it has links to a set of authors, and a venue,
and these links belong to a set of link types.
In order to better understand the object types and link types in a complex heterogeneous
information network, it is necessary to provide the meta level (i.e., schema-level) description
of the network. Therefore, the concept of network schema is proposed to describe the meta
structure of a network.
DEFINITION 3: Network schema , . The network schema, denoted as TG = (A, R), is
a meta template for an information network G = (V, E) with the object type mapping ϕ : V →A
and the link type mapping ψ : E →R, which is a directed graph deﬁned over object types A,
with edges as relations from R.
1 
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
The network schema of a heterogeneous information network speciﬁes type constraints on
the sets of objects and relationships among the objects. These constraints make a heterogeneous
information network semi-structured, guiding the semantics explorations of the network. An
information network following a network schema is called a network instance of the network
schema. For a link type R connecting object type S to object type T, i.e., S
−→T, S and T
are the source object type and target object type of link type R, which can be denoted as
R.S and R.T, respectively. The inverse relation R−1 holds naturally for T
−→S. Generally, R
is not equal to R−1, unless R is symmetric.
EXAMPLE 2: As described above, Fig. 1(a) demonstrates the real objects and their connections
on bibliographic data. Fig. 1(b) illustrates its network schema which describes the object types
and their relations in the HIN. Moreover, Fig. 1(a) is a network instance of the network schema
Fig. 1(b). In this example, it contains objects from three types of objects: papers (P), authors
(A), and venues (V ). There are links connecting different types of objects. The link types are
deﬁned by the relations between two object types. For example, links existing between authors
and papers denote the writing or written-by relations, while those between venues and papers
denote the publishing or published-in relations.
Different from homogeneous networks, two objects in a heterogeneous network can be connected via different paths and these paths have different physical meanings. These paths can be
categorized as meta paths as follows.
Examples of meta paths in heterogeneous information network on bibliographic data.
DEFINITION 4: Meta path . A meta path P is a path deﬁned on a schema S = (A, R),
and is denoted in the form of A1
−→Al+1, which deﬁnes a composite relation
R = R1 ◦R2 ◦· · · ◦Rl between objects A1, A2, · · · , Al+1, where ◦denotes the composition
operator on relations.
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
For simplicity, we can also use object types to denote the meta path if there are no multiple
relation types between the same pair of object types: P = (A1A2 · · · Al+1). For example, in Fig.
1(a), the relation, authors publishing papers in conferences, can be described using the length-2
meta path A
A, or APA for short. We say a concrete path p = (a1a2 · · · al+1)
between objects a1 and al+1 in network G is a path instance of the relevance path P, if for each
ai, φ(ai) = Ai and each link ei = ⟨ai, ai+1⟩belongs to the relation Ri in P. It can be denoted
as p ∈P. A meta path P is a symmetric path, if the relation R deﬁned by it is symmetric
(i.e., P is equal to P−1), such as APA and APV PA. Two meta paths P1 = (A1A2 · · · Al) and
P2 = (B1B2 · · · Bk) are concatenable if and only if Al is equal to B1, and the concatenated
path is written as P = (P1P2), which equals to (A1A2 · · · AlB2 . . . Bk). A simple concatenable
example is that AP and PA can be concatenated to the path APA.
META PATH EXAMPLES AND THEIR PHYSICAL MEANINGS ON BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA.
Path instance
Physical meaning
Sun-NetClus-Han
Author-Paper-Author (APA)
Authors collaborate on the same paper
Sun-PathSim-Yu
Sun-PathSim-VLDB-PathSim-Han
Author-Paper-Venue-Paper-Author (APVPA)
Authors publish papers on the same venue
Sun-PathSim-VLDB-GenClus-Aggarwal
Sun-NetClus-KDD
Author-Paper-Venue (APV)
Authors publish papers at a venue
Sun-PathSim-VLDB
EXAMPLE 3: As examples shown in Fig. 2, authors can be connected via meta paths “Author-
Paper-Author” (APA) path, “Author-Paper-Venue-Paper-Author” (APV PA) path, and so on.
Moreover, TABLE I shows path instances and semantics of these meta paths. It is obvious that
semantics underneath these paths are different. The APA path means authors collaborating on
the same papers (i.e., co-author relation), while APV PA path means authors publishing papers
on the same venue. The meta paths can also connect different types of objects. For example,
the authors and venues can be connected with the APV path, which means authors publishing
papers on venues.
The rich semantics of meta path is an important characteristic of HIN. Based on different meta
paths, objects have different connection relations with diverse path semantics, which may have
an effect on many data mining tasks. For example, the similarity scores among authors evaluated
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
based on different meta paths are different . Under the APA path, the authors co-publishing
papers will be more similar, while the authors publishing papers on the same venues will be
more similar under the APVPA path. Another example is the importance evaluation of objects
 . The importance of authors under APA path has a bias on the authors who write many
papers having many authors, while the importance of authors under APVPA path emphasizes the
authors who publish many papers on those productive conferences. As a unique characteristic
and effective semantic capturing tool, meta path has been widely used in many data mining tasks
in HIN, such as similarity measure , , clustering , and classiﬁcation .
B. Comparisons with related concepts
With the boom of social network analysis, all kinds of networked data have emerged, and numbers of concepts to model networked data have been proposed. Here we compare heterogeneous
network concept with these related concepts.
Heterogeneous network vs homogeneous network. Heterogeneous networks include different types of nodes or links, while homogeneous networks only have one type of objects and
links. Homogeneous networks can be considered as a special case of heterogeneous networks.
Moreover, a heterogeneous network can be converted into a homogeneous network through
network projection or ignoring object heterogeneity, while it will make signiﬁcant information
loss. Traditional link mining , , is usually based on homogeneous network, and
many analysis techniques on homogeneous network cannot be directly applied to heterogeneous
Heterogeneous network vs multi-relational network . Different from heterogeneous
network, multi-relational network has only one type of objects, but more than one kind of
relationship between objects. So multi-relational network can be seen as a special case of
heterogeneous network.
Heterogeneous network vs multi-dimensional/mode network . Tang et al. proposed
the multi-dimensional/mode network concept, which has the same meaning with multi-relational
network. That is, the network has only one type of objects and more than one kind of relationship
between objects. So multi-dimensional/mode network is also a special case of heterogeneous
Heterogeneous network vs composite network , . Qiang Yang et al. proposed the
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
composite network concept , , where users in networks have various relationships, exhibit
different behaviors in each individual network or subnetwork, and share some common latent
interests across networks at the same time. So composite network is in fact a multi-relational
network, a special case of heterogeneous network.
Heterogeneous network vs complex network. A complex network is a network with nontrivial topological features and patterns of connection between its elements that are neither
purely regular nor purely random . Such non-trivial topological features include a heavy tail
in the degree distribution, a high clustering coefﬁcient, community structure, and hierarchical
structure. The studies of complex networks have brought together researchers from many areas
including mathematics, physics, biology, computer science, sociology, and others. The studies
show that many real networks are complex networks, such as social networks, information
networks, technological networks, biological networks, and so on . So we can say that many
real heterogeneous networks are complex networks. However, the studies on complex networks
usually focus on the structures, functions, and features of networks.
C. Example datasets of heterogeneous information network
Intuitively, most real systems include multi-typed interacting objects. For example, a social
media website (e.g., Facebook) contains a set of object types, such as users, posts, and tags, and
a health care system contains doctors, patients, diseases, and devices. Generally speaking, these
interacting systems can all be modeled as heterogeneous information networks. Concretely, this
kind of networks can be constructed from the following three types of data.
1) Structured data. Structured data stored in database table is organized with entity-relation
model. The different-typed entities and their relations naturally construct information networks.
For example, the bibliographic data (see the above example) is widely used as heterogeneous
information network.
2) Semi-structured data. Semi-structured data is usually stored with XML format. The attributes
in XML can be considered as object types, and the object instances can be determined by
analyzing the contents of attributes. The connections among attributes construct object relations.
3) Non-structured data. For non-structured data, heterogeneous information networks can
also be constructed by objects and relationship extraction. For example, for text data, entity
recognition and relation extraction can form the objects and links of HIN.
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
(a) Multi-relation
(b) Bipartite
(c) Star-schema
(d) Multiple-hub
Network schema of heterogeneous information networks.
Although heterogeneous information networks are ubiquitous, there are not many standard
datasets for study. Here we summarize some widely used heterogeneous networks in literals.
Multi-relational network with single-typed object. Traditional multi-relational network is
a kind of HIN, where there is one type of object and several types of relations among objects.
This kind of networks widely exist in social websites, like Facebook and Xiaonei . Fig. 3(a)
shows the network schema of such a network , where users can be extensively connected
with each other through connections, such as recording, browsing, chatting, and sending friends
applications.
Bipartite network. As a typical HIN, bipartite network is widely used to construct interactions
among two types of objects, such as user-item , and document-word . Fig. 3(b) shows
the schema of a bipartite network connecting documents and words . As an extension of
bipartite graphs, k-partite graphs contain multiple types of objects where links exist among
adjacent object types.
Star-schema network. Star-schema network is the most popular HIN in this ﬁeld. In database
table, a target object and its attribute objects naturally construct a HIN, where the target object,
as the hub node, connects different attribute objects. As an example shown in Fig. 3(c), a
bibliographic information network is a typical star-schema heterogeneous network , ,
containing different objects (e.g., paper, venue, author, and term) and links among them. Many
other datasets can also be represented as star-schema networks, such as the movie data ,
 from the Internet Movie Database 2 (IMDB) and the patent data from US patents data
2www.imdb.com/
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
Multiple-hub network. Beyond star schema, some networks have more complex structures,
which involve multiple hub objects. This kind of networks widely exist in bioinformatics data
 , . A bioinformatics example, shown in Fig. 3(d), includes two hubs: Gene and Chemical
compound. Another example can be found in the Douban dataset 4 .
Besides these widely used networks, many real systems can also be constructed as more
complex heterogeneous networks. In some real applications, users may exist in multiple social
networks, and each social network can be modeled as an HIN. Fig. 4(a) shows an example
of two heterogeneous social networks (Twitter and Foursquare) . In each network, users
are connected with each other through social links, and they are also connected with a set of
locations, timestamps and text contents through online activities. Moreover, some users have
two accounts in two social networks separately, and they serve as anchor nodes to connect
two networks. More generally, some interaction systems are too complex to be modeled as an
HIN with a simple network schema. Knowledge graph is such an example. We know that
knowledge graph is based on Resource Description Framework (RDF) data, which complies with
an < Subject, Property, Object > model. Here “Subject” and “Object” can be considered as
objects, and “Property” can be considered as the relation between “Subject” and “Object”. And
thus a knowledge graph can be considered as a heterogeneous network, an example is shown in
Fig. 4(b). In such a semantic knowledge base, like Yago , there are more than 10 million
entities (or nodes) of different types, and more than 120 million links among these entities.
In such a schema-rich network, it is impossible to depict such network with a simple network
D. Why Heterogeneous Information Network Analysis
In the past decades, link analysis has been extensively explored . So many methods have
been developed for information network analysis and numerous data mining tasks have been
explored in homogeneous networks, such as ranking, clustering, link prediction, and inﬂuence
analysis. However, due to some unique characteristics Multiple HINs 
(b) Schema-rich HIN 
Two examples of complex heterogeneous information network.
rich semantics) of HIN, most methods in homogeneous networks cannot be directly applied in
heterogeneous networks, and it is potential to discover more interesting patterns in this kind of
It is a new development of data mining. Early data mining problems focused on analyzing
feature vectors of objects. In the late 1990s, with the advent of WWW, more and more data mining
researches turned to study links among objects. It is one of the main research directions to mine
hidden patterns from feature and link information of objects. In these researches, homogeneous
networks are usually constructed from interconnected objects. In recent years, abundant social
media emerge, and many different types of objects are interconnected. It is hard to model these
interacted objects as homogeneous networks, while it is natural to model different types of objects
and relations among them as heterogeneous networks. Particularly, with the rapid increment of
user-generated content online, big data analysis is an emergent yet important task to be studied.
Variety is one signiﬁcant characteristic of big data . As a semi-structured representation,
heterogeneous information network can be an effective tool to deal with complex big data.
It is an effective tool to fuse more information. Compared to homogeneous network, heterogeneous network is natural to fuse more objects and their interactions. In addition, traditional
homogeneous networks are usually constructed from single data source, while heterogeneous
network can fuse information across multiple data sources. For example, customers use many
services provided by Google, such as Google search, G-mail, maps, Google+, etc. So we can
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
fuse these information with a heterogenous information network, in which customers interact
with many different types of objects, such as key words, mails, locations, followers, etc. Broadly
speaking, heterogeneous information network can also fuse information cross multiple social network platforms. We know that there are many social network platforms with different objectives,
such as Facebook, Twitter, Weixin, and Weibo. Moreover, users often participate in multiple social
networks. Since each social network only captures a partial or biased view of a user, we can fuse
information across multiple social network platforms with multiple heterogeneous information
networks, where each heterogeneous network represents information from one social network
with some anchor nodes connecting these networks.
It contains rich semantics. In heterogeneous networks, different-typed objects and links
coexist and they carry different semantic meanings. As a bibliographic example shown in Fig.
1, it includes author, paper, and venue object types. The relation type “Author-Paper” means
author writing paper, while the relation type “Paper-Venue” means paper published in venue.
Considering the semantic information will lead to more subtle knowledge discovery. For example,
in DBLP bibliographic data , if you ﬁnd the most similar authors to “Christos Faloutsos”,
you will get his students, like Spiros Papadimitriou and Jimeng Sun, under the APA path;
while the results are reputable researchers, like Jiawei Han and Rakesh Agrawal, under the
APV PA path. How to mine interesting patterns with the semantic information is a unique issue
in heterogeneous network.
III. RESEARCH DEVELOPMENTS
Heterogeneous information network provides a new paradigm to manage networked data.
Meanwhile, it also introduces new challenges for many data mining tasks. We have analyzed
more than 100 papers in this ﬁeld, and divided them into 7 categories according to their data
mining tasks. The proportion of papers belonging to each category is shown in Fig. 5. In this
section, we will summarize the developments about these 7 main data mining tasks.
A. Similarity Measure
Similarity measure is to evaluate the similarity of objects. It is the basis of many data mining
tasks, such as web search, clustering, and product recommendation. Similarity measure has
been well studied for a long time. These studies can be roughly categorized into two types:
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
Recommendation
Similarity measure
Link prediction
Information fusion
Classiﬁcation
Clustering
Paper distribution of heterogeneous information network analysis on different data mining tasks.
TOP-5 MOST SIMILAR AUTHORS TO “CHRISTOS FALOUTSOS” UNDER DIFFERENT META PATHS ON DBLP DATASET.
Christos Faloutsos
Christos Faloutsos
Spiros Papadimitriou
Jiawei Han
Jimeng Sun
Rakesh Agrawal
Jia-Yu Pan
Agma J. M. Traina
Charu C. Aggarwal
feature based approaches and link based approaches. The feature based approaches measure the
similarity of objects based on their feature values, such as cosine similarity, Jaccard coefﬁcient,
and Euclidean distance. The link based approaches measure the similarity of objects based on
their link structures in a graph. For example, Personalized PageRank evaluates the probability
starting from a source object to a target object by randomly walking with restart, and SimRank
 evaluates the similarity of two objects by their neighbors’ similarities.
Recently, many researchers begin to consider similarity measure on heterogeneous information
networks. Different from similarity measure on homogeneous networks, similarity measure on
HIN not only considers structure similarity of two objects but also takes the meta path connecting
these two objects into account. As we know, there are different meta paths connecting two
objects, and these meta paths contain different semantic meanings, which may lead to different
similarities. And thus the similarity measure on HIN is meta path constraint. For example, based
on the bibliographic network in Fig. 1, TABLE II shows the most similar authors to Christos
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
Faloutsos, a well-known expert in data mining, under different meta paths . Based on APA
path, the most similar authors to Christos are his students (e.g., Spiros Papadimitriou and Jimeng
Sun), while the most similar authors are reputable researchers in the same ﬁeld with Christos
under the APVPA path (e.g., Jiawei Han and Rakesh Agrawal).
Considering semantics in meta paths constituted by different-typed objects, Sun et al. 
ﬁrst propose the path based similarity measure PathSim to evaluate the similarity of same-typed
objects based on symmetric paths. Following their work, some researchers , extend
PathSim by incorporating richer information, such as transitive similarity, temporal dynamics,
and supportive attributes. A path-based similarity join method is proposed to return the top
k similar pairs of objects based on user speciﬁed join paths. In information retrieval community,
Lao and Cohen , propose a Path Constrained Random Walk (PCRW) model to measure
the entity proximity in a labeled directed graph constructed by the rich metadata of scientiﬁc
literature.
In order to evaluate the relevance of different-typed objects, Shi et al. , propose
HeteSim to measure the relevance of any object pair under arbitrary meta path. As an adaption
of HeteSim, LSH-HeteSim is proposed to mine the drug-target interaction in heterogeneous
biological networks where drugs and targets are connected with complicated semantic paths. In
order to overcome the shortcoming of HeteSim in high computation and memory demand, Meng
et al. propose the AvgSim measure that evaluates similarity score through two random walk
processes along the given meta path and the reverse meta path, respectively. In addition, some
methods , combine meta path based relevance search with user preference.
More works begin to integrate the network structure and other information to measure similarity of objects in HIN. Combining the inﬂuence and similarity information, Wang et al. 
simultaneously measure social inﬂuence and object similarity in a heterogeneous network to
produce more meaningful similarity scores. Wang et al. propose a model to learn relevance
through analyzing the context of heterogeneous networks for online targeting. Yu et al. 
predict the semantic meaning based on a user’s query in the meta-path-based feature space and
learn a ranking model to answer the similarity query. Recently, Zhang et al. propose a
similarity measure to compute similarity between centers in an x-star network according to the
attribute similarities and the connections among centers.
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
B. Clustering
Clustering analysis is the process of partitioning a set of data objects (or observations) into a
set of clusters, such that objects in a cluster are similar to one another, yet dissimilar to objects
in other clusters. Conventional clustering is based on the features of objects, such as k-means
and so on . Recently, clustering based on networked data (e.g., community detection) has
been studied a lot. This kind of methods model the data as a homogeneous network, and use
the given measure (e.g., normalized cuts , and modularity ) to divide the network into a
series of subgraphs. Many algorithms have been proposed to solve this NP-hard problem, such
as spectral method , greedy method and sampling technique . Some researches also
simultaneously consider objects’ link structure and attribute information to increase the accuracy
of clustering , .
Clustering on a bibliographic heterogeneous network .
Recently, clustering of heterogeneous networks attracts much attention. Compared with homogeneous networks, heterogeneous networks integrate multi-typed objects, which generates new
challenges for clustering tasks. On the one hand, multiple types of objects co-existing in a network
lead to new clustering paradigms. For example, a cluster may include different types of objects
sharing the same topic . Fig. 6 shows the clustering process on a bibliographic heterogeneous
network, which splits the original network into several layers (a set of sub-network clusters). For
example, a cluster of the database area consists of a set of database authors, conferences, terms,
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
and papers. In this way, clustering in HIN preserves richer information, but it also faces more
challenges. On the other hand, abundant information contained in HIN makes it more convenient
to integrate additional information or other learning tasks for clustering. In this section, we will
review these works according to the types of integrated information or tasks.
The attribute information is widely integrated into clustering analysis on HIN. Aggarwal et al.
 use the local succinctness property to create balanced communities across a heterogeneous
network. Considering the incompleteness of objects’ attributes and different types of links in
heterogeneous information networks, Sun et al. propose a model-based clustering algorithm
to integrate the incomplete attribute information and the network structure information. Qi et
al. propose a clustering algorithm based on heterogeneous random ﬁelds to model the
structure and content of social media networks with outlier links. Cruz et al. integrate
structural dimension and compositional dimension which compose an attributed graph to solve
the community detection problem. Recently, a density-based clustering model TCSC is
proposed to detect clusters considering the connections in the network and the vertex attributes.
Text information plays an important role in many heterogeneous network studies. Deng et al.
 introduce a topic model with biased propagation to incorporate heterogeneous information
network with topic modeling in a uniﬁed way. Furthermore, they propose a joint probabilistic
topic model for simultaneously modeling the contents of multi-typed objects of a heterogeneous
information network. LSA-PTM is introduced to identify clusters of multi-typed objects
by propagating the topics obtained by LSA on the HIN via the links between different objects.
Incorporating both the document content and various links in the text related heterogeneous
network, Wang et al. propose a uniﬁed topic model for topic mining and multiple objects
clustering. Recently, CHINC uses general-purpose knowledge as indirect supervision to
improve the clustering results.
User guide information is also integrated into clustering analysis. Sun et al. present a
semi-supervised clustering algorithm to generate different clustering results with path selection
according to user guidance. Luo et al. ﬁrstly introduce the concept of relation-path to
measure the similarity between same-typed objects and use the labeled information to weight
relation-paths, and then propose SemiRPClus for semi-supervised learning in HIN.
Clustering is usually an independent data mining task. However, it can be integrated with
other mining tasks to improve performances through mutual enhancing. Recently, ranking-based
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
clustering on heterogeneous information network has emerged, which shows its advantages on the
mutual promotion of clustering and ranking. RankClus generates clusters for a speciﬁed type
of objects in a bipartite network based on the idea that the qualities of clustering and ranking are
mutually enhanced. The following work NetClus is proposed to handle a network with the
star-schema. Wang et al. introduce ComClus to promote clustering and ranking performance
by applying star schema network with self loop to combine the heterogeneous and homogeneous
information. In addition, a general method HeProjI is proposed to do ranking based clustering in
heterogeneous networks with arbitrary schema by projecting the network into a sequence of subnetworks . And Chen et al. propose a probabilistic generative model to simultaneously
achieve clustering and ranking on a heterogeneous network with arbitrary schema. To make use of
both textual information and heterogeneous linked entities, Wang et al. develop a clustering
and ranking algorithm to automatically construct multi-typed topical hierarchies. What’s more,
Qiu et al. propose an algorithm OcdRank to combine overlapping community detection and
community-member ranking together in directed heterogeneous social networks.
Outlier detection is the process of ﬁnding data objects with behaviors that are very different
from expectation. Outlier detection and clustering analysis are two highly related, but differentaimed tasks. To detect outliers, Gupta et al. propose an outlier-aware approach based
on joint non-negative matrix factorization to discover popular community distribution patterns.
Furthermore, they propose to detect association-based clique outliers in heterogeneous networks
given a conjunctive select query . What’s more, Zhuang et al. propose an outlier detection
algorithm to ﬁnd subnetwork outliers according to different queries and semantics. Also based
on queries, Kuck et al. propose a meta-path based outlierness measure for mining outliers
in heterogeneous networks.
In addition, some other information is also integrated. For example, a social inﬂuence based
clustering framework SI-Cluster is proposed to analyze heterogeneous information networks
based on both people’s connections and their social activities . Besides the traditional models
employed in clustering on HIN, like topic model and spectral clustering, Alqadah et al. 
propose a novel game theoretic framework for deﬁning and mining clusters in heterogeneous
information networks.
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
C. Classiﬁcation
Classiﬁcation is a data analysis task where a model or classiﬁer is constructed to predict
class (categorical) labels. Traditional machine learning has focused on the classiﬁcation of
identically-structured objects satisfying independent identically distribution (IID). However, links
exist among objects in many real-world datasets, which makes objects not satisfy IID. So link
based object classiﬁcation has received considerable attention, where a data graph is composed
of a set of objects connected to each other via a set of links. Many methods extend traditional
classiﬁcation methods to consider correlations among objects , . The link based object
classiﬁcation usually considers that objects and links in the graph are identical respectively. That
is, the objects and links among them constitute a homogeneous network.
Classiﬁcation process on a bibliographic heterogeneous network .
Different from traditional classiﬁcation researches, the classiﬁcation problems studied in HIN
have some new characteristics. First, the objects contained in HIN are different-typed, which
means we can classify multiple types of objects simultaneously. Second, label knowledge can
spread through various links among different-typed objects. Taking Fig. 7 as an example ,
four types of objects (paper, author, conference and term) are interconnected by multi-typed
links. The classiﬁcation process can be intuitively viewed as a process of knowledge propagation throughout the network, where the arrows indicate possible knowledge ﬂow. In this HIN
condition, the label of objects is decided by the effects of different-typed objects along differenttyped links.
Many works extend traditional classiﬁcation to heterogeneous information networks. Some
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
works extend transductive classiﬁcation task, which is to predict labels for the given unlabeled
data. For example, GNetMine is proposed to model the link structure in information networks
with arbitrary network schema and arbitrary number of object/link types. Recently, Luo et al.
propose HetPathMine to cluster with small labeled data on HIN through a novel meta
path selection model, and Jacob et al. propose a method to label nodes of different types
by computing a latent representation of nodes in a space where two connected nodes tend to
have close latent representations. Some works also extend inductive classiﬁcation that is to
construct a decision function in the whole data space. For example, Rossi et al. use a
bipartite heterogeneous network to represent textual document collections and propose IMBHN
algorithm to induce a classiﬁcation model assigning weights to textual terms.
Multi-label classiﬁcation is prevalent in many real-world applications, where each example can
be associated with a set of multiple labels simultaneously . This kind of classiﬁcation tasks
are also extended to HIN. Angelova et al. introduce a multi-label graph-based classiﬁcation
model for labeling heterogeneous networks by modeling the mutual inﬂuence between nodes
as a random walk process. Kong et al. use multiple types of relationships mined from
the linkage structure of HIN to facilitate the multi-label classiﬁcation process. Zhou et al. 
propose an edge-centric multi-label classiﬁcation approach considering both the structure afﬁnity
and the label vicinity.
As a unique characteristic, meta path is widely used in classiﬁcation on HIN. Meta paths are
usually used for feature generation in many methods, such as GNetMine and HetPathMine
 . Moreover, Kong et al. introduce the concept of meta-path based dependencies among
objects to study the collective classiﬁcation problem.
Similar to clustering problem, classiﬁcation is also integrated with other data mining tasks on
HIN. Ranking-based classiﬁcation is to integrate classiﬁcation and ranking in a simultaneous,
mutually enhancing process. Ji et al. propose a ranking-based classiﬁcation framework,
RankClass, to perform more accurate analysis. As an extension of RankClass, Chen et al.
 propose the F-RankClass for a uniﬁed classiﬁcation framework that can be applied to
binary or multi-class classiﬁcation of unimodal or multimodal data. Some methods also integrate
classiﬁcation with information propagation. For example, Jendoubi et al. classify the social
message based on its spreading in the network and the theory of belief functions.
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
D. Link prediction
Link prediction is a fundamental problem in link mining that attempts to estimate the likelihood
of the existence of a link between two nodes, based on observed links and the attributes of nodes.
Link prediction is often viewed as a simple binary classiﬁcation problem: for any two potentially
linked objects, predict whether the link exists (1) or not (0). One kind of approach is to make this
prediction entirely based on structural properties of the network. Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg
 present a survey of predictors based on different graph proximity measures. Another kind
of approach is to make use of attribute information for link prediction. For example, Popescul et
al. introduce a structured logistic regression model that can make use of relational features
to predict the existence of links.
Collective link prediction in heterogeneous information network .
Link prediction in an HIN has been an important research topic for recent years, which has the
following characteristics. First, the links to be predicted are of different types, since objects in
HIN are connected with different types of links. Second, there are dependencies existing among
multiple types of links. So link prediction in an HIN needs to collectively predict multiple types
of links by capturing the diverse and complex relationships among different types of links and
leveraging the complementary prediction information. For example, Fig. 8 shows a collective
prediction problem of multiple types of links in HIN . Based on different meta paths, two
objects have different link relations, and these relations have mutual effects.
Utilizing the meta path, many works employ a two-step process to solve link prediction
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
problem in HIN. The ﬁrst step is to extract meta path based feature vectors, while the second
step is to train a regression or classiﬁcation model to compute the existence probability of a
link , , , , . For example, Sun et al. propose PathPredict to solve
the problem of co-author relationship prediction through meta path based feature extraction
and logistic regression-based model. Zhang et al. use meta path based features to predict
organization chart or management hierarchy. Utilizing diverse and complex linkage information,
Cao et al. design a relatedness measure to construct the feature vectors of links and
propose an iterative framework to predict multiple types of links collectively. In addition, Sun
et al. model the distribution of relationship building time with the use of the extracted
topological features to predict when a certain relationship will be formed.
Probabilistic models are also widely applied for link prediction tasks in HIN. Yang et al.
 propose a probabilistic method MRIP which models the inﬂuence propagating between
heterogeneous relationships to predict links in multi-relational heterogeneous networks. Also,
the TFGM model deﬁnes a latent topic layer to bridge multiple networks and designs a
semi-supervised learning model to mine competitive relationships across heterogeneous networks.
Dong et al. develop a transfer-based ranking factor graph model that combines several social
patterns with network structure information for link prediction and recommendation. Matrix
factorization is another common tool to handle link prediction problems. For example, Huang
et al. develop the joint manifold factorization (JMF) method to perform trust prediction
with the ancillary rating matrix via aggregating heterogeneous social networks.
The approaches mentioned above mainly focus on link prediction on one single heterogeneous
network. Recently, Zhang et al. , , propose the problem of link prediction across
multiple aligned heterogeneous networks. A two-phase link prediction method is put forward
in . The ﬁrst phase is to extract heterogeneous features from multiple networks, while
the second phase is to infer anchor links by formulating it as a stable matching problem. In
addition, Zhang et al. propose SCAN-PS to solve the social link prediction problem for
new users using the “anchors”. Furthermore, they propose the TRAIL method to predict
social links and location links simultaneously. Also aimed at the cold start problem of new users,
Liu et al. propose the aligned factor graph model for user-user link prediction problem
by utilizing information from another similar social network. In order to identify users from
multiple heterogeneous social networks and integrate different networks, an energy-based model
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
COSNET is proposed by considering both local and global consistency among multiple
Most of the available works on link prediction are designed for static networks, however, the
problem of dynamic link prediction is also very important and challenging. Taking into account
both the dynamic and heterogeneous nature of web data, Zhao et al. propose a general
framework to characterize and predict community members from the evolution of heterogeneous
web data. In order to solve the problem of dynamic link inference in temporal and heterogeneous
information networks, Aggarwal et al. , develop a two-level scheme which makes
efﬁcient macro- and micro-decisions for combining the topology and type information.
E. Ranking
Ranking is an important data mining task in network analysis, which evaluates object importance or popularity based on some ranking functions. Many ranking methods have been proposed
in homogeneous networks. For example, PageRank evaluates the importance of objects
through a random walk process, and HITS ranks objects using the authority and hub scores.
These approaches only consider the same type of objects in homogeneous networks.
An example of ranking in bibliographic heterogeneous network .
Ranking in heterogeneous information networks is an important and meaningful task, but faces
several challenges. First, there are different types of objects and relations in HIN, and treating all
objects equally will mix different types of objects together. Second, different types of objects and
relations in HIN carry different semantic meanings, which may lead to different ranking results.
Taking the bibliographic heterogeneous network in Fig. 9 as an example, ranking on authors
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
may have different results under different meta paths , since these meta paths will construct
different link structures among authors. Moreover, the rankings of different-typed objects have
mutual effects. For example, reputable authors usually publish papers on top conferences.
The co-ranking problem on bipartite graphs has been widely explored in the past decades. For
example, Zhou et al. co-rank authors and their publications by coupling two random walk
processes, and co-HITS incorporates the bipartite graph with the content information and
the constraints of relevance. Soulier et al. propose a bi-type entity ranking algorithm to rank
jointly documents and authors in a bibliographic network regarding a topical query by combining
content-based and network-based features. There are also some ranking works on multi-relational
network. For example, MultiRank is proposed to determine the importance of both objects
and relations simultaneously for multi-relational data, and HAR is proposed to determine
hub and authority scores of objects and relevance scores of relations in multi-relational data
for query search. These two methods focus on the same type of objects with multi-relations.
Recently, Huang et al. integrate both formal genre and inferred social networks with
tweet networks to rank tweets. Although this work makes use of various types of objects in
heterogeneous networks, it still ranks one type of objects.
Considering the characteristics of meta path on HIN, some works propose path based ranking
methods. For example, Liu et al. develop a publication ranking method with pseudo
relevance feedback by leveraging a number of meta paths on the heterogeneous bibliographic
graph. Applying the tensor analysis, Li et al. propose HRank to simultaneously evaluate
the importance of multiple types of objects and meta paths.
Ranking problem is also extended to HIN constructed by social media network. For image
search in social media, Tsai et al. propose SocialRank which uses social hints for image
search and ranking in social networks. To identify high quality objects (questions, answers, and
users) in Q&A systems, Zhang et al. devise an unsupervised heterogeneous network based
framework to co-rank multiple objects in Q&A sites. For heterogeneous cross-domain ranking
problem, Wang et al. propose a general regularized framework to discover a latent space
for two domains and minimize two weighted ranking functions simultaneously in the latent
space. Considering the dynamic nature of literature networks, a mutual reinforcement ranking
framework is proposed to rank the future popularity of new publications and young researchers
simultaneously .
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
F. Recommendation
Recommender systems help consumers to make product recommendations that are likely to be
of interest to the user such as books, movies, and restaurants. It uses a broad range of techniques
from information retrieval, statistics, and machine learning to search for similarities among
items and customer preferences. Traditional recommender systems normally only utilize the
user-item rating feedback information for recommendation. Collaborative ﬁltering is one of the
most popular techniques, which includes two types of approaches: memory-based methods and
model-based methods. Recently, matrix factorization has shown its effectiveness and efﬁciency
in recommender systems, which factorizes the user-item rating matrix into two low rank userspeciﬁc and item-speciﬁc matrices, and then utilizes the factorized matrices to make further
predictions . With the prevalence of social media, more and more researchers study social
recommender system, which utilizes social relations among users , .
An example of heterogeneous information network for movie recommendation .
Recently, some researchers have begun to be aware of the importance of heterogeneous
information for recommendations. The comprehensive information and rich semantics of HIN
make it promising to generate better recommendations. Fig. 10 shows such an example in movie
recommendation . The HIN not only contains different types of objects (e.g., users and
movies) but also illustrates all kinds of relations among objects, such as viewing information,
social relations, and attribute information. Constructing heterogeneous networks for recommendation can effectively fuse all kinds of information, which can be potentially utilized for
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
recommendation. Moreover, the objects and relations in the networks have different semantics,
which can be explored to reveal subtle relations among objects.
Meta path is well used to explore the semantics and extract relations among objects. Shi et
al. implement a semantic-based recommendation system HeteRecom, which employs the
semantics information of meta path to evaluate the similarities between movies. Furthermore,
considering the attribute values, such as rating score on links, they model the recommender
system as a weighted HIN and propose a semantic path based personalized recommendation
method SemRec . In order to take full advantage of the relationship heterogeneity, Yu et al.
 , introduce meta-path-based latent features to represent the connectivity between users
and items along different types of paths, and then deﬁne recommendation models at both global
and personalized levels with Bayesian ranking optimization techniques. Also based on meta path,
Burke et al. present an approach for recommendation which incorporates multiple relations
in a weighted hybrid.
A number of approaches employ heterogeneous information network to fuse various kinds
of information. Utilizing different contexts information, Jamali et al. propose a contextdependent matrix factorization model which considers a general latent factor for every entity and
context-dependent latent factors for every context. Using user implicit feedback data, Yu et al.
 , solve the global and personalized entity recommendation problem. Based on related
interest groups, Ren et al. propose a cluster-based citation recommendation framework
to predict each query’s citations in bibliographic networks. Similarly, Wu et al. exploit
graph summarization and content-based clustering for media recommendation with the interest
group information. Based on multiple heterogeneous network features, Yang et al. model
multiple features into a uniﬁed framework with a SVM-Rank based method. In addition, using
multiple types of relations, Luo et al. propose a social collaborative ﬁltering algorithm.
G. Information Fusion
Information fusion denotes the process of merging information from heterogeneous sources
with differing conceptual, contextual and typographical representations. Due to the availability
of various data sources, fusing these scattered distributed information sources has become an
important research problem. In the past decades, dozens of papers have been published on
this topic in many traditional data mining areas, e.g., data schemas integration in data ware-
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
(a) Network alignment 
(b) Subgraph isomorphism 
An example of information network alignment.
house , protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks and gene regulatory networks matching
in bioinformatics , , , , and ontology mapping in web semantics .
Nowadays, with the surge of HIN, information fusion across multiple HINs has become a novel
yet important research problem. By fusing information from different HINs, we can obtain a
more comprehensive and consistent knowledge about the common information entities shared in
different HINs, including their structures, properties, and activities.
To fuse the information in multiple HINs, an important prerequisite will be to align the
HINs via the shared common information entities, which can be users in social networks,
authors in bibliographical networks, and protein molecules in biological networks. For instance,
Fig. 4(a) is about the alignment of two heterogeneous social networks via the shared users,
and Fig. 11(a) shows an example about alignment of two biological networks via molecules of
common properties. Perfect HIN alignment is a challenging problem as the underlying subgraph
isomorphism problem, as shown in Fig. 11(b), is actually NP-complete . Meanwhile, based
on the structure and attribute information available in HINs, a large number of approximated
HIN alignment algorithms have been proposed so far. Enlightened by the homogeneous network
alignment method in , Koutra et al. propose to align two bipartite graphs with a fast
network alignment algorithm. Zafarani et al. propose to match users across social networks
based on various node attributes, e.g., username, typing patterns and language patterns etc. Kong
et al. formulate the heterogeneous social network alignment problem as an anchor link
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
prediction problem. A two-step supervised method MNA is proposed in to infer potential
anchor links across networks with heterogeneous information in the networks. However, social
networks in the real world are actually mostly partially aligned and lots of users are not anchor
users. Zhang et al. have proposed the partial network alignment methods based on supervised
learning setting and PU learning setting in and respectively. In addition to these
pairwise social network alignment problems, multiple (more than two) social networks can be
aligned simultaneously. Zhang et al. discover that the inferred cross-network mapping of
entities in social network alignment should meet the transitivity law and has an inherent one-toone constraint. A new multiple social alignment framework is introduced in to minimize
the alignment costs and preserve the transitivity law and one-to-one constraint on the inferred
By fusing multiple HINs, the heterogeneous information available in each network can be
transferred to other aligned networks and lots of application problems on HIN, e.g., link prediction and friend recommendation , , community detection , information diffusion
 , will beneﬁt from it a lot.
Via the inferred mappings, Zhang et al. propose to transfer heterogeneous links across aligned
networks to improve quality of predicted links/recommended friends , . For new
networks and new users with little social activity information, the transferred information can greatly overcome the cold start problem when predicting links for them. What’s
more, information about the shared entities across aligned networks can provide us with a
more comprehensive knowledge about the community structures formed by them. By utilizing
the information across multiple aligned networks, Zhang et al. propose a new model to
reﬁne the clustering results of the shared entities with information in other aligned networks
mutually. Jin et al. propose a scalable framework to study the synergistic partitioning of
multiple aligned large-scale networks, which takes the relationships among different networks
into consideration and tries to maintain the consistency on partitioning the same nodes of different
networks into the same partitions. Zhang et al. study the community detection in emerging
networks with information transferred from other aligned networks to overcome the cold start
problem. In addition, by fusing multiple heterogeneous social networks, users in networks will
be extensively connected with each other via both intra-network connections (e.g., friendship
connections among users) and inter-network connections . As a result, information can reach more users and achieve broader inﬂuence across
the aligned social networks. Zhan et al. propose a new model to study the information diffusion
process across multiple aligned networks in .
H. Other applications
Besides the tasks discussed above, there are many other applications in heterogeneous networks, such as inﬂuence propagation and privacy risk problem. To quantitatively learn inﬂuence
from heterogeneous networks, Liu et al. ﬁrst use a generative graphical model to learn
the direct inﬂuence, and then use propagation methods to mine indirect and global inﬂuence.
Using meta paths, Zhan et al. propose a model M&M to solve the inﬂuence maximization
problem in multiple partially aligned heterogeneous online social networks. For privacy risk in
anonymized HIN, Zhang et al. present a de-anonymization attack that exploits the identiﬁed
vulnerability to prey upon the risk. Aiming at the inferior performances of unsupervised text
embedding methods, Tang et al. propose a semi-supervised representation learning method
for text data, in which labeled information and different levels of word co-occurrence information
are represented as a large-scale heterogeneous text network.
I. Application Systems
Besides many data mining tasks explored on heterogeneous network, some demo systems have
designed prototype applications on HIN. Through employing a path-based relevance measure to
evaluate the relevance between any-typed objects and capture the subtle semantic containing
in meta path, Shi et al. implement a HeteRecom system for semantic recommendation.
Yu et al. demonstrate a prototype system on query-driven discovery of semantically
similar substructures in heterogeneous networks. Danilevsky et al. present the AMETHYST
system for exploring and analyzing a topical hierarchy constructed from an HIN. In LikeMiner
system, Jin et al. introduce a heterogeneous network model for social media with ‘likes’,
and propose ‘like’ mining algorithms to estimate representativeness and inﬂuence of objects.
Meanwhile, they design SocialSpamGuard , a scalable and online social media spam
detection system for social network security. Taking DBLP as an example, Tao et al. 
construct a Research-Insight system to demonstrate the power of database-oriented information
network analysis including ranking, clustering, classiﬁcation, recommendation, and prediction.
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
Furthermore, they construct a semi-structured news information network NewsNet and develop
a NewsNetExplorer system to provide a set of news information network exploration and
mining functions.
Some real application systems also have been designed. One of the most famous works
is ArnetMiner 5 , which offers comprehensive search and mining services for academic
community. ArnetMiner not only provides abundant online academic services but also offers
ideal test platform for heterogenous information network analysis. PatentMiner 6 is another
application which is a general topic-driven framework for analyzing and mining heterogeneous
patent networks.
IV. ADVANCED TOPICS
Although many data mining tasks have been exploited in heterogeneous information network,
it is still a young and promising research ﬁeld. Here we illustrate some advanced topics, including
challenging research issues and unexplored tasks, and point out some potential future research
directions.
A. More complex network construction
There is a basic assumption in contemporary researches that a heterogeneous information
network to be investigated is well-deﬁned, and objects and links in the network are clean and
unambiguous. However, it is not the case in real applications. In fact, constructing heterogeneous
information network from real data often faces challenges.
If the networked data are structured data, like relational database, it may be easy to construct
a heterogeneous information network with well-deﬁned schema, such as DBLP network and
Movie network , . However, even in this kind of heterogeneous network, objects and links
can still be noisy. (1) Objects in a network may not exactly correspond to entities in real world,
such as duplication of name in bibliography data. That is, one object in a network may
refer to multiple entities, or different objects may refer to the same entity. We can integrate entity
resolution with network mining to clean objects or links beforehand. For example, Shen et
5 
6 
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
al. propose a probabilistic model SHINE to link named entity mentions detected from the
unstructured Web text with their corresponding entities existing in a heterogeneous information
network. Ren et al. propose a relation phrase-based entity recognition framework, called
ClusType. The framework runs data-driven phrase mining to generate entity mention candidates
and relation phrases, and enforces the principle that relation phrases should be softly clustered
when propagating type information in a heterogeneous network constructed by argument entities.
(2) Relations among objects may not be explicitly given or not complete sometimes, e.g., the
advisor-advisee relationship in the DBLP network . Link prediction can be employed
to ﬁll out the missing relations for comprehensive networks. (3) Objects and links may not
be reliable or trustable, e.g., the inaccurate item information in an E-commerce website and
conﬂicting information of certain objects from multiple websites. So it is the ﬁrst step to clean and
integrate networked data for high-quality network construction, such as trustworthiness modeling
 , and spam detection .
If the networked data are unstructured data, such as text data, multimedia data and multilingual data, it becomes more challenging to construct qualiﬁed heterogeneous information
networks. In order to construct high-quality HINs, information extraction, natural language
processing, and many other techniques should be integrated with network construction. Mining
quality phrases is a critical step to form entities of networks from text data. Kishky et al.
 propose a computationally efﬁcient and effective model ToPMine, which ﬁrst executes a
phrase mining framework to segment a document into single and multi-word phrases, and then
employs a new topic model that operates on the induced document partition. Furthermore, Liu
et al. propose an effective and scalable method SegPhrase+ that integrates quality phrases
extraction with phrasal segmentation. Relationship extraction is another important step to form
links among objects in network. Wang et al. mine hidden advisor-advisee relationships
from bibliographic data, and they further infer hierarchical relationships among partially ordered
objects with heterogeneous attributes and links . Broadly speaking, we can also extract
entity and relationship to construct heterogeneous network from multimedia data and multilingual data, as we have done on text data.
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
B. More powerful mining methods
For ubiquitous heterogeneous information networks, numbers of mining methods have been
proposed on many data mining tasks. As we have said, heterogeneous information networks
have two important characteristics: complex structure and rich semantics. According to these
two characteristics, we summarize the contemporary works and point out future directions.
1) Network Structure: In heterogeneous network, objects can be organized in different forms.
Bipartite graph is widely used to organize two types of objects and the relations among them
 , , . As an extension of bipartite graphs, K-partite graphs are able to represent
multiple types of objects. Recently, heterogeneous networks are usually organized as star-schema
networks, such as bibliographic data , , and movie data , . To combine the
heterogeneous and homogeneous information, star schema with self loop is also proposed .
Different from only one hub object type existing in star schema network, some networked data
have multiple hub object types, e.g., the bioinformatics data . For this kind of networks,
Shi et al. propose a HeProjI method which projects a general heterogeneous network into
a sequence of sub-networks with bipartite or star-schema structure.
In real applications, the networked data are usually more complex and irregular. Some real
networks may contain attribute values on links, and these attribute values may contain important
information. For example, users usually rate movies with a score from 1 to 5 in movie recommender system, where the rating scores represent users’ attitudes to movies, and the “author
of” relation between authors and papers in bibliographic networks can take values (e.g., 1, 2, 3)
which means the order of authors in the paper. In this kind of applications, we need to consider
the effect of attribute values on the weighted heterogeneous information network . There
are some time-series data, for example, a period of biographic data and rating information of
users and movies. For this kind of data, we need to construct dynamic heterogeneous network
 and consider the effect of time factor. In some applications, one kind of objects may exist
in multiple heterogeneous networks , . For example, users usually co-exist in multiple
social networks, such as Facebook, Google+, and Twitter. In this kind of applications, we need to
align users in different networks and effectively fuse information from different networks ,
 , . More broadly, many networked data are difﬁcult to be modeled with heterogeneous
network with a simple network schema. For example, in RDF data, there are so many types of
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
objects and relations, which cannot be described with network schema , . Many research
problems arise with this kind of schema-rich HINs, for example, management of objects and
relations with so many types and automatic generation of meta paths. As the real networked data
become more complex, we need to design more powerful and ﬂexible heterogeneous networks,
which also provides more challenges for data mining.
2) Semantic Mining: As a unique characteristic, objects and links in HIN contain rich semantics. Meta path can effectively capture subtle semantics among objects, and many works
have exploited the meta path based mining tasks. For example, in similarity measure task, object
pairs have different similarities under different meta paths , ; in recommendation task,
different items will be recommended under different paths . In addition, meta path is also
widely used for feature extraction. Object similarity can be measured under different meta paths,
which can be used as feature vectors for many tasks, such as clustering , link prediction
 , and recommendation .
However, some researchers have noticed the shortcomings of meta path. In some applications,
meta path fails to capture more subtle semantics. For example, the “Author-Paper-Author” path
describes the collaboration relation among authors. However, it cannot depict the fact that Philip
S. Yu and Jiawei Han have many collaborations in data mining ﬁeld but they seldom collaborate
in information retrieval ﬁeld. In order to overcome the shortcoming existing in meta path, Shi
et al. propose the constrained meta path concept, which can conﬁne some constraints on
objects. Taking Fig. 3(c) as an example, the constrained meta path APA|P.L =′′ Data Mining′′
represents the co-author relation of authors in data mining ﬁeld through constraining the label
of papers with “Data Mining”. Moreover, Liu et al. propose the concept “restricted metapath” which enables in-depth knowledge mining on the heterogeneous bibliographic networks by
allowing restrictions on the node set. In addition, traditional HIN and meta path do not consider
the attribute values on links, while weighted links are very common in real applications. Examples
include rating scores between users and items in recommender system and the order of authors
in papers in bibliographic network. Taking Fig. 10 as an example, the rating relation between
users and movies can take scores from 1 to 5. Under the meta path “User-Movie-User”, Tom
has the same similarity with Mary and Bob, but we can ﬁnd that they may have totally different
tastes due to different rating scores. Shi et al. propose weighted meta path to consider
attribute values on links and more subtly capture path semantics through distinguishing different
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
link attribute values. As an effective semantic capture tool, meta path has shown its power in
semantic capture and feature selection. However, it may be coarse in some applications, so we
need to extend traditional meta path for more subtle semantic capture. Broadly speaking, we can
also design new, and more powerful semantic capture tools.
More importantly, the meta path approach faces challenges on path selection and their weight
importances. How can we select meta paths in real applications? Theoretically, there are inﬁnite
meta paths in an HIN. In contemporary works, the network schema of HIN is usually small and
simple, so we can assign some short and meaningful meta paths according to domain knowledge
and experiences. Sun et al. have validated that the long meta paths are not meaningful and
they fail to produce good similarity measures. However, there is no work to study the effect of
long meta paths on other mining tasks. In addition, there are so many meta paths even for short
paths in some complex networks, like RDF network. It is a critical task to automatically extract
meta paths in this condition. Recently, Meng et al. study how to discover meta paths
automatically which can best explain the relationship between node pairs. Another important
issue is to automatically determine the weights of meta paths. Some methods have been proposed
to explore this issue. For example, Lao et al. employ a supervised method to learn weights,
and Sun et al. combine meta-path selection and user-guided information for clustering.
Some interesting works are still worth doing. The ideal path weights learned should embody
the importance of paths and reﬂect users’ preferences. However, the similarity evaluations based
on different paths have signiﬁcant bias, which may make path weights hard to reﬂect path
importances. So prioritized path weights are needed. In addition, if there are numerous meta
paths in real applications (e.g., RDF network), the path weight learning will be more important
and challenging.
In Fig. 12, we summarize some typical works in the HIN ﬁeld from two perspectives: network
structure and semantic exploration. We respectively select several typical works from six mining
tasks mentioned above, and put these works in a coordinate according to network structure and
semantics explored in these works. Note that we denominate those un-named methods with the
ﬁrst letter of keywords in the title, such as UGES and CPIH . Along the X-axis,
the network structure becomes more complex, and semantics information becomes richer along
the Y-axis. For example, RankClus is designed for bipartite networks and only captures
link semantics (different-typed links contain different semantics). While PathSim can deal
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
star−schema
multi−network
schema−rich
node/link semantics
constraint on node
constraint on link
NetClus 
RankClus 
HeteRecom 
GNetMine 
PathSim 
HeteSim 
ComClus 
HeProjI 
PathSelClus 
Evo−NetClus 
HeteRec 
DYNALINK 
TRAIL 
Hete−CF 
SemRec 
Network structure
Semantics exploration
classification
similarity measure
clustering
link prediction
recommendation
Summarization of typical works on HIN according to network structure and semantic exploration.
with more complex star-schema networks and use meta path to mine deeper semantics. Further,
SemRec adds constraints to links to explore more subtle semantic information in a weighted
HIN. From the ﬁgure, we can also ﬁnd that most contemporary works focus on simple network
structures (e.g., bipartite or star schema networks) and primary semantic exploration (e.g., meta
path). In the future, we can exploit more complex heterogeneous networks with more powerful
semantics capture tools.
C. Bigger networked data
In order to illustrate the beneﬁts of HIN, we need to design data mining algorithms on big
networked data in wider domains. The variety is an important characteristic of big data. HIN is a
powerful tool to handle the variety of big data, since it can ﬂexibly and effectively integrate varied
objects and heterogeneous information. However, it is non-trivial work to build a real HIN based
analysis system. Besides research challenges mentioned above, such as network construction, it
will face many practical technique challenges. Real HIN is huge, even dynamic, so it usually
cannot be contained in memory and cannot be handled directly. We know that a user at a time
could be only interested in a tiny portion of nodes, links, or sub-networks. Instead of directly
mining the whole network, we can mine hidden but small networks “extracted” dynamically from
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
some existing networks, based on user-speciﬁed constraints or expected node/link behaviors. How
to discover such hidden networks and mine knowledge (e.g., clusters, behaviors, and anomalies)
from such hidden but non-isolated networks could be an interesting but challenging problem.
Most of contemporary data mining tasks on HIN only work on small dataset, and fail to
consider the quick and parallel process on big data. Some research works have begun to consider
the quick computation of mining algorithms on HIN. For example, Sun et al. design a coclustering based pruning strategy to fasten the processing speed of PathSim. Lao et al. 
propose the quick computation strategies of PCRW, and Shi et al. , also consider the
quick/parallel computation of HeteSim. In addition, cloud computing also provides an option
to handle big networked data. Although parallel graph mining algorithms and platforms
 have been proposed, parallel HIN analysis methods face some unique challenges. For
example, the partition of HIN needs to consider the overload balances of computing nodes, as
well as balances of different-typed nodes. Moreover, it is also challenging to mine integrated
path semantics in partitioned subgraphs.
D. More applications
Due to unique characteristics of HIN, many data mining tasks have been explored on HIN,
which are summarized as above. In fact, more data mining tasks can be studied on HIN. Here
we introduce two potential applications.
The online analytical processing (OLAP) has shown its power in multidimensional analysis
of structured, relational data . The similar analysis can also be done, when we view a
heterogeneous information network from different angles and at different levels of granularity.
Taking a bibliographic network as an example, we can observe the change of published papers
on a conference in the time or district dimension, when we designate papers and conferences
as the object types and publish relations as the link type. Some preliminary studies have been
done on this issue. Zhao et al. introduce graph cube to support OLAP queries effectively
on large multidimensional networks; Li et al. design InfoNetOLAPer to provide topicoriented, integrated, and multidimensional organizational solutions for information networks.
Yin et al. have developed a novel HMGraph OLAP framework to mine multi-dimensional
heterogeneous information networks with more dimensions and operations. These works consider
link relation as a measure. However, they usually ignore semantic information in heterogeneous
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
networks determined by multiple nodes and links. So the study of online analytical processing
of heterogeneous information networks is still worth exploring.
Information diffusion is a vast research domain and has attracted research interests from many
ﬁelds, such as physics, biology, etc. Traditional information diffusion is studied on homogeneous
networks , where information is propagated in one single channel. However, in many
applications, pieces of information or diseases are propagated among different types of objects.
For example, diseases could propagate among people, different kinds of animals and food, via
different channels. Few works explore this issue. Liu et al. propose a generative graphical
model which utilizes the heterogeneous link information and the textual content associated with
each node to mine topic level direct inﬂuence. In order to capture better spreading models that
represent the real world patterns, it is desirable to pay more attention to the study of information
diffusion in heterogeneous information networks.
V. CONCLUSION
There is a surge on heterogenous information network analysis in recent years because of rich
structural and semantic information in this kind of networks. This paper provides an extensive
survey in this rapidly expanding ﬁeld. We present the recent developments of different data
mining tasks on heterogenous information network, along with future development directions.
Hopefully, this survey will give researchers an understanding of the fundamental issues and a
good starting point to work on this ﬁeld.
November 17, 2015
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING