The “Independent Components” of Natural Scenes are Edge
ANTHONY J. BELL*,† and TERRENCE J. SEJNOWSKI*
*Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Computational Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute,
10010 N. Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, U.S.A.
It has previously been suggested that neurons with line and edge selectivities found in primary
visual cortex of cats and monkeys form a sparse, distributed representation of natural scenes, and
it has been reasoned that such responses should emerge from an unsupervised learning algorithm
that attempts to find a factorial code of independent visual features. We show here that a new
unsupervised learning algorithm based on information maximization, a nonlinear “infomax”
network, when applied to an ensemble of natural scenes produces sets of visual filters that are
localized and oriented. Some of these filters are Gabor-like and resemble those produced by the
sparseness-maximization network. In addition, the outputs of these filters are as independent as
possible, since this infomax network performs Independent Components Analysis or ICA, for
sparse (super-gaussian) component distributions. We compare the resulting ICA filters and their
associated basis functions, with other decorrelating filters produced by Principal Components
Analysis (PCA) and zero-phase whitening filters (ZCA). The ICA filters have more sparsely
distributed (kurtotic) outputs on natural scenes. They also resemble the receptive fields of simple
cells in visual cortex, which suggests that these neurons form a natural, information-theoretic
coordinate system for natural images.
Information theory; Independent components; Neural network learning
INTRODUCTION
Both the classic experiments of Hubel & Wiesel on neurons in visual cortex, and
several decades of theorizing about feature detection in vision , have
left open the question most succinctly phrased by Barlow & Tolhurst “Why do we
have edge detectors?”
That is: are there any coding principles which would predict the formation of localized,
oriented receptive fields? Barlow's answer was that edges are suspicious coincidences in an
image. Since the mathematical framework for analysing such “coincidences” is Information
Theory , Barlow was thus led to propose that our visual cortical
feature detectors might be the end result of a “redundancy reduction” process , in which the activation of each feature detector is supposed to be as
“statistically independent” from the others as possible. Such a “factorial code” potentially
© 1997 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved
†To whom all correspondence should be addressed [ ]..
Published as: Vision Res. 1997 December ; 37(23): 3327–3338.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
involves dependencies of all orders, but most studies have used only the second-order
statistics required for “decorrelating” the outputs of a set of feature detectors.
A variety of Hebbian feature-learning algorithms for decorrelation have been proposed
 , but in the absence of particular external constraints the solutions to the decorrelation
problem are non-unique (see: Decorrelation and Independence). One popular decorrelating
solution is Principal Components Analysis (PCA) but the principal components of natural
scenes amount to a global spatial frequency analysis . Therefore,
second-order statistics alone do not suffice to predict the formation of localized edge
detectors.
Additional constraints are required. Field has argued for the importance of
sparse, or “minimum entropy”, coding , in which each feature detector is
activated as rarely as possible. This has led to feature-learning algorithms 
with a “projection pursuit” flavour, the most successful of which has been the
Olshausen & Field demonstration of the self-organization of local, oriented receptive
fields using a sparseness criterion.
Here we present results similar to those of Olshausen and Field, using a direct informationtheoretic criterion which maximizes the joint entropy of a nonlinearly transformed output
feature vector. We have previously demonstrated the ability of this nonlinear information
maximization process to find statistically independent
components to solve the problem of separating mixed audio sources . This “Independent Components Analysis” (ICA) problem is
equivalent to Barlow's redundancy reduction problem, therefore, if Barlow's reasoning is
correct, we would expect the ICA solution to yield localized edge detectors.
That it does so is the primary result of this paper. The secondary result is that the outputs of
the resulting filters are indeed, more sparsely distributed than those of other decorrelating
filters, thus supporting some of the arguments of Field , and helping to explain the
results of Olshausen's network from an information-theoretic point of view.
We will return to the issues of sparseness, noise and higher-order statistics in the Discussion.
First, we describe more concretely the filter-learning problem. An earlier account of the
application of these techniques to natural sounds appears in Bell & Sejnowski .
BLIND SEPARATION OF NATURAL IMAGES
The starting point is that of Olshausen & Field , depicted in Fig. 1. A perceptual
system is exposed to a series of small image patches, drawn from one or more larger images.
Imagine that each image patch, represented by the vector x, has been formed by the linear
combination of N basis functions. The basis functions form the columns of a fixed matrix,
A. The weighting of this linear combination (which varies with each image) is given by a
vector, s. Each component of this vector has its own associated basis function, and
represents an underlying “cause” of the image. The “linear image synthesis” model is
therefore given by:
which is the matrix version of the set of equations
, where each xi represents a
pixel in an image, and contains contributions from each one of a set of N image “sources”,
sj, linearly weighted by a coefficient, aij.
BELL and SEJNOWSKI
Vision Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 09.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
The goal of a perceptual system, in this simplified framework, is to linearly transform the
images, x, with a matrix of filters, W, so that the resulting vector:
recovers the underlying causes, s, possibly in a different order, and rescaled. Representing
an arbitrary permutation matrix (all zero except for a single “one” in each row and each
column) by P, and an arbitrary scaling matrix (non-zero entries only on the diagonal) by S,
such a system has converged when:
The scaling and permuting of the causes are arbitrary, unknowable factors, so we will
consider the causes to be defined such that PS = I (the identity matrix). Then the basis
functions (columns of A) and the filters which recover the causes (rows of W) have the
simple relation: W = A−1.
All that remains in defining an algorithm to learn W (and thus also A) is to decide what
constitutes a “cause”. A number of proposals are considered in the Discussion, however, in
the next two sections, we concentrate on algorithms producing causes which are
decorrelated, and those attempting to produce causes that are statistically independent.
DECORRELATION AND INDEPENDENCE
The matrix, W, is a decorrelating matrix when the covariance matrix of the output vector, u,
satisfies:
In general, there will be many W matrices which decorrelate. For example, in the case of
equation (2), when 〈uuT〉 = I, then:
which clearly leaves freedom in the choice of W. There are, however, several special
solutions to equation (5).
The orthogonal (global) solution [WWT = S]
Principal Components Analysis (PCA) is the orthogonal solution to equation (4). The
principal components come from the eigenvectors of the covariance matrix, which are the
columns of a matrix, E, satisfying:
where D is the diagonal matrix of eigenvalues. Substituting equation (6) into equation (5)
and solving for W gives the PCA solution, WP:
BELL and SEJNOWSKI
Vision Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 09.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
This solution is unusual in that the filters (rows of WP) are orthogonal, so that WWT = D−1,
a scaling matrix. These filters thus have several special properties:
The PCA filters define orthogonal directions in the vector space of the image.
The PCA basis functions (columns of Ap, or rows of
—see Fig. 1) are just
scaled versions of the PCA filters (rows of WP). This latter property is true because
WWT = D−1 means that W−T = DW.
When the image statistics are stationary , the PCA filters are global
Fourier filters, ordered according to the amplitude spectrum of the image.
Example PCA filters are shown in Fig. 3(a).
The symmetrical (local) solution [WWT = W2]
If we force W to be symmetrical, so that WT = W, then the solution, WZ to equation (5) is:
Like most other decorrelating filters, but unlike PCA, the basis functions and the filters
coming from WZ will be different from each other, and neither will be orthogonal. We
might call this solution ZCA, since the filters it produces are zero-phase (symmetrical). ZCA
is in several ways the polar opposite of PCA. It produces local (centre–surround type)
whitening filters, which are ordered according to the phase spectrum of the image. That is,
each filter whitens a given pixel in the image, preserving the spatial arrangement of the
image and flattening its frequency (amplitude) spectrum. WZ is related to the transforms
described by Goodall and Atick & Redlich .
Example ZCA filters and basis functions are shown in Fig. 3(b).
The independent (semi-local) solution [fu(u) = Πifui(ui)]
Another way to constrain the solution is to attempt to produce outputs which are not just
decorrelated, but statistically independent, the much stronger requirement of Independent
Components Analysis, or ICA . The ui are
independent when their probability distribution, fu, factorizes as follows: fu(u) = Πifuiui,
equivalently, when there is zero mutual information between them: I(ui,uj) = 0, ∀ i ≠ j. A
number of approaches to ICA have some relations with the one we describe below, notably
Cardoso & Laheld , Karhunen et al. , Amari et al. , Cichocki et al.
 and Pham et al. . We refer the reader to these papers, to the two above, and to
Bell & Sejnowski for further background on ICA.
As we will show, in the Results, ICA on natural images produces decorrelating filters which
are sensitive to both phase (locality) and frequency information, just as in transforms
involving oriented Gabor functions or wavelets.* They are, thus, semilocal, depicted in Fig. 2 as partway along the path from the local (ZCA) to the global (PCA)
solutions in the space of decorrelating solutions.
Example ICA filters are shown in Fig. 3(d) and their corresponding basis functions are
shown in Fig. 3(e).
*See the Proceedings of IEEE, 84, 4, April 199—a special issue on wavelets.
BELL and SEJNOWSKI
Vision Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 09.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
AN ICA ALGORITHM
It is important to recognize two differences between finding an ICA solution, WI, and other
decorrelation methods: (i) there may be no ICA solution; and (ii) a given ICA algorithm may
not find the solution even if it exists, since there are approximations involved. In these
senses, ICA is different from PCA and ZCA, and cannot be calculated analytically, for
example, from second-order statistics (the covariance matrix), except in the gaussian case
(when second-order statistics completely characterize the signal—see section entitled:
Second- and Higher-order Statistics).
The approach developed in Bell & Sejnowski was to maximize by stochastic
gradient ascent the joint entropy, H[g(u)], of the linear transform squashed by a sigmoidal
function, g. When the nonlinear function is the same (up to scaling and shifting) as the
cumulative density functions (c.d.f.s) of the underlying independent components, it can be
shown * that such a nonlinear “infomax” procedure also minimizes
the mutual information between the ui, exactly what is required for ICA.
However, in most cases we must pick a nonlinearity, g, without any detailed knowledge of
the probability density functions (p.d.f.s) of the underlying independent components. The
resulting “mismatch” between the gradient of the nonlinearity used, and the underlying
p.d.f.s may cause the infomax solution to deviate from an ICA solution. In cases where the
p.d.f.s are super-gaussian (meaning they are peakier and longer-tailed than a gaussian,
having kurtosis greater than 0), we have repeatedly observed, using the logistic or tanh
nonlinearities, that maximization of H[g(u)] still leads to ICA solutions, when they exist, as
with our experiments on speech signal separation . Although the
infomax algorithm is described here as an ICA algorithm, a fuller understanding needs to be
developed of under exactly what conditions it may fail to converge to an ICA solution.
The basic infomax algorithm changes weights according to the entropy gradient. Defining yi
= g(ui) to be the sigmoidally transformed output variables, the learning rule is then:
In this, E denotes expected value, y = [g(u1)…g(uN)]T, and |J| is the absolute value of the
determinant of the Jacobian matrix:
In stochastic gradient ascent we remove the expected value operator in equation (9), and
then evaluate the gradient to give :
, the elements of which depend on the nonlinearity as follows:
*In a previous conference paper , we also published a proof of this result, which ought to have referenced
the equivalent proof by Nadal & Parga.
BELL and SEJNOWSKI
Vision Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 09.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
Amari et al. have proposed a modification of this rule, which utilizes the natural
gradient rather than the absolute gradient of H(y). The natural gradient exists for objective
functions which are functions of matrices, as in this case, and is the same as the relative
gradient concept developed by Cardoso & Laheld . It amounts to multiplying the
absolute gradient by WTW, giving, in our case, the following altered version of equation
This rule has the twin advantages over equation (11) of avoiding the matrix inverse, and of
converging several orders of magnitude more quickly, for data, x, that are not prewhitened.
The speed-up is explained by the fact that convergence is no longer dependent on the
conditioning of the underlying basis function matrix, A, of equation (1). This is the
equivariant property explained by Cardoso & Laheld .
Writing equation (13) in terms of individual weights, we have:
The weighted sum non-local term in this rule can be seen as the result of a simple backwards
pass through the weights from the linear output vector, u, to the inputs, x, so that each
weight “knows the influence” of its input, xj.
It is also possible to write the rule in recurrent terms. As in the well known Jutten & Hérault
 network, or that of Földiák , we may use a feedback matrix, V, giving a
network: u = x − Vu. Solving this gives u = (I + V)−1 x, showing that V is just a coordinate
transform of the W of equation (2). The learning rule for V is, therefore, a coordinate
transform of the rule for W. This is calculated as follows. Since the relationship between W
and V is W = (I + V)−1, we may write V = W−1 − I. Differentiating, and using the quotient
rule for matrices gives:
Inserting equation (13) and rearranging gives the learning rule for a feedback weight matrix:
In terms of an individual feedback weight, vij, this rule is:
BELL and SEJNOWSKI
Vision Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 09.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
where δij = 1 when i = j, 0 otherwise. Thus, the feedback rule is also non-local, this time
involving a backwards pass through the (recurrent) weights, of quantities,
, calculated
from the nonlinear output vector, y. Such a recurrent ICA system has been further developed
for recovering sources which have been linearly convolved with temporal filters by
Torkkola and Lee et al. .
The non-locality of the algorithm is interesting when we come to consider the biological
significance of the learned filters later in this paper.
We took four natural scenes involving trees, leaves and so on* and converted them to
greyscale byte values between 0 and 255. A training set, {x}, was then generated of 17 595,
12 × 12 samples from the images. The training set was “sphered” by subtracting the mean
and multiplying by twice the local symmetrical (zero-phase) whitening filter of equation (8):
This removes both first- and second-order statistics from the data, and makes the covariance
matrix of x equal to 4I. This is an appropriately scaled starting point for further training
since infomax [equation (13)] on raw data, with the logistic function, yi = (1 + exp(−ui)−1,
produces a u-vector which approximately satisfies 〈uuT〉 = 4I. Therefore, by prewhitening x
in this way, we can ensure that the subsequent transformation, u = Wx, to be learnt should
approximate an orthonormal matrix (rotation without scaling), roughly satisfying the relation
WTW = I . This W moves the solution along the decorrelating
manifold from ZCA to ICA (see Fig. 2).
The matrix, W, is then initialized to the identity matrix, and trained using the logistic
function version of equation (13), in which equation (12) evaluates as: yi = 1 − 2yi. The
training was conducted as follows: 30 sweeps through the data were performed, at the end of
each of which the order of the data vectors was permuted to avoid cyclical behaviour in the
learning. During each sweep, the weights were updated only after every 50 presentations in
order that the vectorized MATLAB code could be more efficient. The learning rate
[proportionality constant in equation (13)] was set as follows: 21 sweeps at 0.001, and three
sweeps at each of 0.0005, 0.0002 and 0.0001. This process took 2 hours running MATLAB
on a Sparc-20 machine, though a reasonable result for 12 × 12 filters can be achieved in 30
min. To verify that the result was not affected by the starting condition of W = I, the training
was repeated with several randomly initialized weight matrices, and also on data that were
not prewhitened. The results were qualitatively similar, though convergence was much
The full ICA transform from the raw image was calculated as the product of the sphering
(ZCA) matrix and the learnt matrix: WI, = WWZ. The basis function matrix, A, was
calculated as
. A PCA matrix, WP, was calculated from equation (7). The original (unsphered) data were then transformed by all three decorrelating transforms, and for each the
kurtosis of each of the 144 filters was calculated, according to the formula:
*The images (gif files) used are available in the Web directory ftp://ftp.cnl.salk.edu/pub/tony/VRimages.
BELL and SEJNOWSKI
Vision Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 09.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
Then the mean kurtosis for each filter type (ICA, PCA, ZCA) was calculated, averaging over
all filters and input data. This quantity is used to quantify the sparseness of the filters, as will
be explained in the Discussion.
The filters and basis functions resulting from training on natural scenes are displayed in Figs
3 and 4. Figure 3 displays example filters and basis functions of each type. The PCA filters,
Fig. 3(a), are spatially global and ordered in frequency. The ZCA filters and basis functions
are spatially local and ordered in phase. The ICA filters, whether trained on the ZCAwhitened images, Fig. 3(c), or the original images, Fig. 3(d), are semi-local filters, most with
a specific orientation preference. The basis functions, Fig. 3(e), calculated from the Fig. 3(d)
ICA filters, are not local, and look like the edges that might occur in image patches of this
size. Basis functions in the column Fig. 3(d) (as with PCA filters) are the same as the
corresponding filters, since the matrix W (as with WP) is orthogonal. This is the ICA-matrix
for ZCA-whitened images.
In order to show the full variety of ICA filters, Fig. 4 shows, with lower resolution, all 144
filters in the matrix W. The general result is that ICA filters are localized and mostly
oriented. Unlike the basis functions displayed in Olshausen & Field , they do not
cover a broad range of spatial frequencies. However, the appropriate comparison to make is
between the ICA basis functions, and the basis functions in Olshausen and Field's Fig. 4.
The ICA basis functions in Fig. 3(e) are oriented, but not localized and therefore it is
difficult to observe any multiscale properties.* However, when we ran the ICA algorithm on
Olshausen's images, which were preprocessed with a whitening/lowpass filter, our algorithm
yielded basis functions which were localized multiscale Gabor patches qualitively similar to
those in Olshausen's Fig. 4. Part of the difference in our results is therefore attributable to
different preprocessing techniques. Further discussion and comparison of these two
approaches is deferred to the section entitled: Sparseness.
Figure 5 shows the result of analysing the distributions (image histograms) produced by
each of the three filter types. As emphasized by Ruderman and Field , the
general form of these histograms is double-exponential (exp–|ui|), or “sparse”, meaning
peaky with a long tail, when compared with a gaussian. This shows up clearly in Fig. 5,
where the log histograms are seen to be roughly linear across 12 orders of magnitude. The
histogram for the ICA filters, however, departs from linearity, having a longer tail than the
ZCA and PCA histograms. This spreading of the tail signals the greater sparseness of the
outputs of the ICA filters, and this is reflected in the kurtosis measure of 10.04 for ICA,
compared with 3.74 for PCA, and 4.5 for ZCA.
Univariate statistics can only capture part of the story, so in Fig. 6(a, c, e) are displayed, in
contour plots, the average of the bivariate log histograms given by all pairs of filters, for
ICA, ZCA and PCA, respectively. In contrast with these joint probability distributions, Fig.
*The definition of “localized” causes some ambiguity here. While our ICA basis functions contain non-zero values all over the
domain of the filter, their “contrast energy” occurs along one oriented local patch. PCA filters, on the other hand, are “more non-local”
since neither of these conditions are satisfied.
BELL and SEJNOWSKI
Vision Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 09.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
6(b, d, f) shows the corresponding distribution if the outputs of the filters were independent
(i.e., the outer product of the marginal (univariate) distributions in Fig. 5). Only the ICA
joint histogram captures well the “diamond”-shape characteristic of the product of the sparse
univariate distributions, thus satisfying, to a greater extent, the independence criterion:
In summary, these simulations show that the filters found by the ICA algorithm of equation
(13) with a logistic nonlinearity are localized, oriented, and produce outputs distributions of
very high kurtosis. The significance of these results is now addressed.
DISCUSSION
A substantial literature exists on the self-organization of visual receptive fields. Many
contributions have emphasized the roles of decorrelation and PCA . Often this has been accompanied by
information theoretic arguments. The first work along these lines was by Linsker ,
who first proposed the “infomax” principle which underlies our own work. Linsker's
approach, and that of Atick & Redlich , Bialek et al. and van Hateren 
uses the second-order (covariance matrix) approximation of the required information
theoretic quantities, and generally assumes ganssian signal and gaussian noise, in which case
the second-order information is complete. The explicit noise model and the restriction to
second-order statistics mark the two differences between these approaches and our approach
to infomax.
The assumption of a noise model has been generally thought to be a necessary ingredient. In
the case where the decorrelating filters are of the local ZCA type (see section entitled:
Decorrelation and Independence), the noise model is required to
avoid centre–surround receptive fields with peaks a single pixel wide, as in Fig. 3(b) . In the case of the PCA-style global filters, noise is
automatically associated with the filters with high spatial frequency selectivity whose
eigenvectors have small eigenvalues.
In both cases, it is questionable whether such assumptions about noise are useful. In the case
of PCA, there is no a priori reason to associate signal with low spatial frequency, and noise
with high spatial frequency, or indeed, to associate signal with high amplitude components
and noise with low amplitude. On the contrary, sharp edges, presumably of high interest,
contain many high-frequency, low-amplitude components. In the case of local ZCA-type
filters, some form of spatial integration is assumed necessary to average out photon shot
noise. Yet we know photoreceptors and the brains associated with them can operate in the
single photon detection regime. Therefore, shot noise is, in at least some cases, not
considered by neural systems to be something noisy to be ignored, and such systems appear
to operate at the limit of the spatial acuity allowed by their lattices of receptors.
This raises another point: high frequency “aliasing” noise due to the image-sampling grid.
With a frequency-based noise model, it might be thought that a high frequency cut-off
should be applied to remove this. However, even these signal components have local phase
structure, and therefore the correct “independent” filters with which to represent them are
localized high-frequency filters, such as those seen at the bottom of Fig. 4. With their phase
locality, these filters could extract information about the exact location of, for example,
sharp edges. The point here is that if local inhomogeneities in so-called aliasing-noise carry
BELL and SEJNOWSKI
Vision Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 09.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
information of potential relevance, there is no reason to call this noise, and no reason to
remove it with global (non-phase-sensitive) low-pass filtering, as is usually done.
In a general information theoretic framework, there is nothing to distinguish signal and noise
a priori, and we therefore question the use of the concept of noise in these models. Of course
there are signals of lesser or greater relevance to an organism, but there is no signature in
their spatial or temporal structure that distinguishes them as important or not. It is more
likely that signal and noise are subjective concepts to do with the prior expectations of the
organism (or neural subsystem). In the case of the simple linear mappings we are
considering, there is no internal state (other than the filters themselves) to store such prior
expectations, and therefore we consider “noiseless infomax” to be the appropriate
framework for making the first level of predictions based on information-theoretic
reasoning.
Second- and higher-order statistics
The second difference in earlier infomax models, the restriction to second-order statistics,
has been questioned by Field ; Field and Olshausen & Field . This has
coincided with a general rise in awareness that simple Hebbian-style algorithms without
special constraints are unable to produce local oriented receptive fields like those found in
area V1 of visual cortex, but rather produce solutions of the PCA or ZCA type, depending
on the constraint placed on the decorrelating filter matrix, W.
The technical reason for this failure is that second-order statistics correspond to the
amplitude spectrum of a signal (because the Fourier transform of the autocorrelation
function of an image is its power spectrum, the square of the amplitude spectrum). The
remaining information, higher-order statistics, corresponds to the phase spectrum. The phase
spectrum is what we consider to be the informative part of a signal, since if we remove
phase information from an image, it looks like noise, while if we remove amplitude
information (for example, with zero-phase whitening, using a ZCA transform), the image is
still recognizable. Edges and what we consider “features” in images are “suspicious
coincidences” in the phase spectrum: Fourier analysis of an edge consists of many sine
waves of different frequencies, all aligned in phase where the edge occurred.
As in our conclusions about “noise”, we feel that a more general information theoretic
approach is required. This time, we mean an approach taking account of statistics of all
orders. Such an approach is sensitive to the phase spectra of the images, and thus to their
characteristic local structure. These conclusions are borne out by the results we report,
which demonstrate the emergence of local oriented receptive fields, which second-order
statistics alone fail to predict.
Sparseness
Several other approaches have arisen to deal with the unsatisfactory results of simple
Hebbian and anti-Hebbian schemes. Field ; Field emphasized, using some of
Barlow arguments, that the goal of an image transformation should be to convert
“higher-order redundancy” into “first-order redundancy”. In formal terms, if the output of
two filters is u1 and u2, we may write their joint entropy as the sum of their individual
entropies, minus the mutual information between them:
What is meant by higher order redundancy here is the I(u1,u2) term. The creation of
“Minimum Entropy codes” is the shifting of redundancy from the I(u1,u2) term to the H terms. Assuming the H(u1,u2) term to be constant, this minimization of I(u1,u2)
creates minimum entropy in the marginal distributions. A low entropy for H(u1), for
example, can mean that the distribution, fu1(u1), is sparse (low number of non-zero values),
and this quality is identified in Field , with the fourth moment of the distribution, the
kurtosis. Very sparse distributions are peaky with long tails, and have positive kurtosis.
They are often referred to as “super-gaussian”.
Field's arguments led Olshausen & Field , in work that motivated our approach, to
attempt to learn receptive fields by maximizing sparseness. In terms of our Fig. 1, they
attempted to find receptive fields (which they identified with basis functions—the columns
of our A matrix) which have underlying causes, u (or s), which are as sparsely distributed as
possible. The sparseness constraint is imposed by a nonlinear function that pushes the
activity of the components of u towards zero. This search for minimum entropy sparse codes
does not guarantee the attainment of a factorial code (any more than our infomax net does),
but the increase in redundancy of the ui-distributions, while maintaining a full basis set, will,
in general, remove mutual information from between the elements of u.
Thus, the similarity of the results produced by Olshausen's network and ours may be
explained by the fact that both produce what are perhaps the sparsest possible uidistributions, though by different means. In emphasizing sparseness directly, rather than an
information theoretic criterion, Olshausen and Field do not force their “causes” to have low
mutual information, or even to be decorrelated. Thus, their basis function matrices, unlike
ours, are singular, and non-invertible, making it difficult for them to say what the filters are
that correspond to their basis functions. This is not a flaw, however. Presently, there is no
reason why decorrelation or a full-rank filter matrix should be absolutely necessary
properties of a neural coding system.
Our results, on the other hand, emphasize independence over sparseness. Examining Figs 5
and 6, we see that our filter outputs are also very sparse. This is because infomax with a
sigmoid nonlinearity can be viewed as an ICA algorithm with an assumption that the
independent components have super-gaussian pdfs. This point is brought out more fully in a
recent report . It is worth mentioning that an ICA algorithm without this
assumption will find a few sub-gaussian (low kurtosis) independent components, though
most will be super-gaussian. This is a limitation of our current approach.
In summary, despite the similarities between our (BS) results and those of Olshausen and
Field (OF), the following differences are worth noting.
Unlike BS, the OF network may find an over-complete representation (their basis
vectors need not be linearly independent).
Unlike BS, the OF network may ignore some low-variance direction in the data.
Unlike BS, the OF basis function matrix is not generally invertible to find the filtermatrix.
Unlike OF, the BS network attempts to achieve a factorial (statistically
independent) feature representation.
Another exploration of a kurtosis-seeking network has been performed by Fyfe & Baddeley
 , with slightly negative conclusions. In a further study, Baddeley argued
against kurtosis-maximization, partly on the grounds that it would produce filters which are
two pixels wide. This is, to some extent, vindicated by our results in Fig. 4, where the filters
achieving the highest kurtosis in Fig. 5 are seen to be dominated by very thin edge detectors.
However, whether such a result is “unphysiological” is debatable (see section entitled:
Biological significance).
BELL and SEJNOWSKI
Vision Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 09.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
Projection pursuit and other approaches
Sparseness, as captured by the kurtosis, is one projection index often mentioned in
projection pursuit methods , which look in multivariate data for directions
with “interesting” distributions. Intrator has pioneered the application of projection
pursuit reasoning to feature extraction problems. He used an index emphasizing multimodal
projections, and connected it with the BCM learning rule.
Following up from this, Law & Cooper and Shouval used the BCM rule to
self-organize oriented and somewhat localized receptive fields on an ensemble of natural
The BCM rule is a nonlinear Hebbian/anti-Hebbian mechanism. The nonlinearity
undoubtedly contributes higher-order statistical information, but it is less clear, than in
Olshausen's network or our own, how the nonlinearity contributes to the solution.
Another principle, predictability minimization, has also been brought to bear on the problem
by Schmidhuber et al. . This approach attempts to ensure independence of one output
from the others by moving its receptive field away from what is predictable (using a
nonlinear “lateral” network) from the outputs of the others. Finally, Harpur & Prager 
have formalized an inhibitory feedback network which also learns nonorthogonal oriented
receptive fields.
Biological significance
The simplest properties of classical V1 simple cell receptive fields ,
that they are local and oriented, are properties of the filters in Fig. 4, while failing to emerge
(without external constraints) in many previous self-organizing network models . However, the transformation from retina to V1,
from analog photoreceptor signals to spike-coding pyramidal cells, is clearly much more
complex than the matrix, WI, with which we have been working.
Nonetheless, recent evidence has been found for a feedforward origin to the oriented
properties of simple cells in the cat . Also the ZCA filters approximate
the static response properties of ganglion cells in the retina and relay cells in the lateral
geniculate nucleus, which, to a first approximation, prewhiten inputs reaching the cortex.
If we were to accept WI as a primitive model of the retinocortical transformation, then
several objections arise. One might object to the representation learned by the algorithm: the
filters in Fig. 4 are predominantly of high spatial frequency, unlike the several-octave spread
seen in cortex . The reason there are so many high spatial frequency
filters is because they are smaller, therefore, more are required to “tile” the 12 × 12 pixel
array of the filter. However, the active control of eye movements and the topographic nature
of V1 spatial maps means that visual cortex samples images in a very different way from our
random, spatially unordered sampling of 12 × 12 pixel patches. Changing our model to
make it more realistic in these two respects could produce different results.
One might also judge the algorithm itself to be biologically implausible. The learning rule in
equation (13) is non-local. The non-locality is less severe than the original algorithm of Bell
& Sejnowski , which involved a matrix inverse. However, in both its feedforward
[equation (14)] and feedback [equation (17)] versions, it involves a feedback of information
from, or within, the output layer. One might try to imagine a mechanism capable of
performing such a feedback. However, since it is difficult to identify the parameters of our
static matrix, WI, with “true” biophysical parameters, we prefer to imagine that potentially
real biophysical self-organizational processes ) occur in local
BELL and SEJNOWSKI
Vision Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 June 09.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
spatial media where the feedforward and the feedback of information are tightly functionally
coupled, and where some microscopic and dynamic analogue of equation (13) may operate.
One thing that is notable about our learning rule is its deviation from the simple Hebbian/
anti-Hebbian correlational way of thinking about unsupervised learning. There is a
correlational component in equation (14), but it is between a nonlinearly transformed output,
and a term which is a weighted feedback from the linear outputs. In the experimental search
for biophysical learning mechanisms, perhaps too much focus has been given to simple
correlational Hebbian rules.
Regardless of whether any biological system implements an unsupervised learning rule like
ICA, the results allow us to interpret the response properties of simple cells in visual cortex
as a form of redundancy reduction, as Barlow conjectured.
Conclusion
We have presented an analysis of the problem of learning a single layer of linear filters
based on an ensemble of natural images. The localized edge detectors produced are the first
such to result from an information theoretic learning rule, and their phase-sensitivity is a
result of the sensitivity of our rule to higher-order statistics.
Edges are the first level of invariance in images, being detectable by linear filters alone.
Further levels of invariance (shifting, rotating, scaling, lighting) clearly exist with natural
objects in natural settings. These further levels may be extractable using similar information
theoretic techniques, but ac method for learning nonlinear co-ordinate systems and nonplanar image manifolds must found. If this can be done, it will greatly increase both the
computational and the empirical predictive power of abstract unsupervised learning
techniques.
Acknowledgments
This paper emerged through many extremely useful discussions with Bruno Olshausen and David Field. We are
very grateful to them, and to Paul Viola and Barak Pearlmutter for other most helpful discussions. The work was
supported by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Office of Naval Research.