Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2016, pages 110–119,
San Diego, California, June 12-17, 2016. c⃝2016 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Diversity-Promoting Objective Function for Neural Conversation Models
Jiwei Li1∗
Michel Galley2
Chris Brockett2
Jianfeng Gao2
Bill Dolan2
1Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
 
2Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA
{mgalley,chrisbkt,jfgao,billdol}@microsoft.com
Sequence-to-sequence neural network models
for generation of conversational responses tend
to generate safe, commonplace responses (e.g.,
I don’t know) regardless of the input. We suggest that the traditional objective function, i.e.,
the likelihood of output (response) given input
(message) is unsuited to response generation
tasks. Instead we propose using Maximum Mutual Information (MMI) as the objective function in neural models. Experimental results
demonstrate that the proposed MMI models
produce more diverse, interesting, and appropriate responses, yielding substantive gains in
BLEU scores on two conversational datasets
and in human evaluations.
Introduction
Conversational agents are of growing importance in
facilitating smooth interaction between humans and
their electronic devices, yet conventional dialog systems continue to face major challenges in the form
of robustness, scalability and domain adaptation. Attention has thus turned to learning conversational patterns from data: researchers have begun to explore
data-driven generation of conversational responses
within the framework of statistical machine translation (SMT), either phrase-based ,
or using neural networks to rerank, or directly in the
form of sequence-to-sequence (SEQ2SEQ) models
 .
SEQ2SEQ models offer the promise of scalability and
language-independence, together with the capacity
* The entirety of this work was conducted at Microsoft.
to implicitly learn semantic and syntactic relations
between pairs, and to capture contextual dependencies in a way not possible with
conventional SMT approaches .
An engaging response generation system should
be able to output grammatical, coherent responses
that are diverse and interesting. In practice, however, neural conversation models tend to generate
trivial or non-committal responses, often involving
high-frequency phrases along the lines of I don’t
know or I’m OK . Table 1 illustrates this
phenomenon, showing top outputs from SEQ2SEQ
models. All the top-ranked responses are generic.
Responses that seem more meaningful or speciﬁc
can also be found in the N-best lists, but rank much
lower. In part at least, this behavior can be ascribed
to the relative frequency of generic responses like
I don’t know in conversational datasets, in contrast
with the relative sparsity of more contentful alternative responses.1 It appears that by optimizing for
the likelihood of outputs given inputs, neural models assign high probability to “safe” responses. This
objective function, common in related tasks such as
machine translation, may be unsuited to generation
tasks involving intrinsically diverse outputs. Intuitively, it seems desirable to take into account not
only the dependency of responses on messages, but
also the inverse, the likelihood that a message will be
provided to a given response.
We propose to capture this intuition by using Maximum Mutual Information (MMI), ﬁrst introduced in
1In our training dataset from the OpenSubtitles database
(OSDb), 0.45% sentences contain the sequence I don’t know, a
high rate considering huge diversity of this dataset.
Input: What are you doing?
−0.86 I don’t know.
−1.09 Get out of here.
−1.03 I don’t know!
−1.09 I’m going home.
−1.06 Nothing.
−1.09 Oh my god!
−1.09 Get out of the way. −1.10 I’m talking to you.
Input: what is your name?
−0.91 I don’t know.
−0.92 I don’t know!
−1.55 My name is Robert.
−0.92 I don’t know, sir.
−1.58 My name is John.
−0.97 Oh, my god!
−1.59 My name’s John.
Input: How old are you?
−0.79 I don’t know.
−1.06 I’m ﬁne.
−1.64 Twenty-ﬁve.
−1.17 I’m all right.
−1.66 Five.
−1.17 I’m not sure.
−1.71 Eight.
Table 1: Responses generated by a 4-layer SEQ2SEQ
neural model trained on 20 million conversation pairs
take from the OpenSubtitles dataset. Decoding is implemented with beam size set to 200. The top examples are
the responses with the highest average probability loglikelihoods in the N-best list. Lower-ranked, less-generic
responses were manually chosen.
speech recognition ,
as an optimization objective that measures the mutual dependence between inputs and outputs. Below,
we present practical strategies for neural generation
models that use MMI as an objective function. We
show that use of MMI results in a clear decrease in
the proportion of generic response sequences, generating correspondingly more varied and interesting
Related work
The approach we take here is data-driven and end-toend. This stands in contrast to conventional dialog
systems, which typically are template- or heuristicdriven even where there is a statistical component
 .
We follow a newer line of investigation, originally
introduced by Ritter et al. , which frames
response generation as a statistical machine translation (SMT) problem. Recent progress in SMT
stemming from the use of neural language models
 has inspired attempts
to extend these neural techniques to response generation. Sordoni et al. improved upon Ritter
et al. by rescoring the output of a phrasal
SMT-based conversation system with a SEQ2SEQ
model that incorporates prior context. apply direct end-to-end SEQ2SEQ models These SEQ2SEQ models are Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) neural networks that can implicitly capture compositionality and long-span dependencies. attempt to learn response templates from
crowd-sourced data, whereas we seek to develop
methods that can learn conversational patterns from
naturally-occurring data.
Prior work in generation has sought to increase
diversity, but with different goals and techniques.
Carbonell and Goldstein and Gimpel 
produce multiple outputs that are mutually diverse,
either non-redundant summary sentences or N-best
lists. Our goal, however, is to produce a single nontrivial output, and our method does not require identifying lexical overlap to foster diversity.2
On a somewhat different task, Mao et al. utilize a mutual information objective in
the retrieval component of image caption retrieval.
Below, we focus on the challenge of using MMI in
response generation, comparing the performance of
MMI models against maximum likelihood.
Sequence-to-Sequence Models
Given a sequence of inputs X = {x1, x2, ..., xNx},
an LSTM associates each time step with an input
gate, a memory gate and an output gate, respectively
denoted as ik, fk and ok. We distinguish e and h
where ek denotes the vector for an individual text unit
(for example, a word or sentence) at time step k while
hk denotes the vector computed by LSTM model at
time k by combining ek and hk−1. ck is the cell state
vector at time k, and σ denotes the sigmoid function.
Then, the vector representation hk for each time step
2Augmenting our technique with MMR-based diversity helped increase lexical but not
semantic diversity (e.g., I don’t know vs. I haven’t a clue), and
with no gain in performance.
k is given by:
ik = σ(Wi · [hk−1, ek])
fk = σ(Wf · [hk−1, ek])
ok = σ(Wo · [hk−1, ek])
lk = tanh(Wl · [hk−1, ek])
ck = fk · ck−1 + ik · lk
k = ok · tanh(ck)
where Wi, Wf, Wo, Wl ∈RD×2D. In SEQ2SEQ
generation tasks, each input X is paired with a sequence of outputs to predict: Y = {y1, y2, ..., yNy}.
The LSTM deﬁnes a distribution over outputs and sequentially predicts tokens using a softmax function:
p(yk|x1, x2, ..., xt, y1, y2, ..., yk−1)
exp(f(hk−1, eyk))
y′ exp(f(hk−1, ey′))
where f(hk−1, eyk) denotes the activation function
between hk−1 and eyk, where hk−1 is the representation output from the LSTM at time k −1. Each
sentence concludes with a special end-of-sentence
symbol EOS. Commonly, input and output use different LSTMs with separate compositional parameters
to capture different compositional patterns.
During decoding, the algorithm terminates when
an EOS token is predicted. At each time step, either
a greedy approach or beam search can be adopted for
word prediction. Greedy search selects the token with
the largest conditional probability, the embedding of
which is then combined with preceding output to
predict the token at the next step.
MMI Models
In the response generation task, let S denote an input message sequence (source) S = {s1, s2, ..., sNs}
where Ns denotes the number of words in S. Let
T (target) denote a sequence in response to source
sequence S, where T = {t1, t2, ..., tNt, EOS}, Nt
is the length of the response (terminated by an EOS
token) and t denotes a word token that is associated
with a D dimensional distinct word embedding et. V
denotes vocabulary size.
MMI Criterion
The standard objective function for sequence-tosequence models is the log-likelihood of target T
given source S, which at test time yields the statistical decision problem:
ˆT = arg max
log p(T|S)
As discussed in the introduction, we surmise that this
formulation leads to generic responses being generated, since it only selects for targets given sources,
not the converse. To remedy this, we replace it with
Maximum Mutual Information (MMI) as the objective function. In MMI, parameters are chosen to
maximize (pairwise) mutual information between the
source S and the target T:
log p(S, T)
This avoids favoring responses that unconditionally
enjoy high probability, and instead biases towards
those responses that are speciﬁc to the given input.
The MMI objective can written as follows:3
ˆT = arg max
log p(T|S) −log p(T)
We use a generalization of the MMI objective which
introduces a hyperparameter λ that controls how
much to penalize generic responses:
ˆT = arg max
log p(T|S) −λ log p(T)
An alternate formulation of the MMI objective
uses Bayes’ theorem:
log p(T) = log p(T|S) + log p(S) −log p(S|T)
which lets us rewrite Equation 9 as follows:
ˆT = arg max
(1 −λ) log p(T|S)
+ λ log p(S|T) −λ log p(S)
(1 −λ) log p(T|S) + λ log p(S|T)
This weighted MMI objective function can thus be
viewed as representing a tradeoff between sources
3Note: log
p(S)p(T ) = log p(T |S)
= log p(T|S)−log p(T)
given targets (i.e., p(S|T)) and targets given sources
(i.e., p(T|S)).
Although the MMI optimization criterion has been
comprehensively studied for other tasks, such as
acoustic modeling in speech recognition , adapting MMI to SEQ2SEQ training is
empirically nontrivial. Moreover, we would like to
be able to adjust the value λ in Equation 9 without repeatedly training neural network models from
scratch, which would otherwise be extremely timeconsuming. Accordingly, we did not train a joint
model (log p(T|S) −λ log p(T)), but instead trained
maximum likelihood models, and used the MMI criterion only during testing.
Practical Considerations
Responses can be generated either from Equation 9,
i.e., log p(T|S) −λ log p(T) or Equation 10, i.e.,
(1 −λ) log p(T|S) + λ log p(S|T). We will refer to
these formulations as MMI-antiLM and MMI-bidi,
respectively. However, these strategies are difﬁcult
to apply directly to decoding since they can lead
to ungrammatical responses (with MMI-antiLM) or
make decoding intractable (with MMI-bidi). In the
rest of this section, we will discuss these issues and
explain how we resolve them in practice.
MMI-antiLM
The second term of log p(T|S) −λ log p(T) functions as an anti-language model. It penalizes not
only high-frequency, generic responses, but also ﬂuent ones and thus can lead to ungrammatical outputs.
In theory, this issue should not arise when λ is less
than 1, since ungrammatical sentences should always
be more severely penalized by the ﬁrst term of the
equation, i.e., log p(T|S). In practice, however, we
found that the model tends to select ungrammatical
outputs that escaped being penalized by p(T|S).
Again, let Nt be the length of target T.
p(T) in Equation 9 can be written as:
p(tk|t1, t2, ..., tk−1)
We replace the language model p(T) with U(T),
which adapts the standard language model by multiplying by a weight g(k) that is decremented monotonically as the index of the current token k increases:
p(tk|t1, t2, ..., tk−1) · g(k)
The underlying intuition here is as follows. First, neural decoding combines the previously built representation with the word predicted at the current step. As
decoding proceeds, the inﬂuence of the initial input
on decoding (i.e., the source sentence representation)
diminishes as additional previously-predicted words
are encoded in the vector representations.4 In other
words, the ﬁrst words to be predicted signiﬁcantly
determine the remainder of the sentence. Penalizing
words predicted early on by the language model contributes more to the diversity of the sentence than it
does to words predicted later. Second, as the inﬂuence of the input on decoding declines, the inﬂuence
of the language model comes to dominate. We have
observed that ungrammatical segments tend to appear
in the later parts of the sentences, especially in long
sentences.
We adopt the most straightforward form of g(k)
by setting up a threshold (γ) by penalizing the ﬁrst γ
words where5
The objective in Equation 9 can thus be rewritten as:
log p(T|S) −λ log U(T)
where direct decoding is tractable.
Direct decoding from (1 −λ) log p(T|S) +
λ log p(S|T) is intractable, as the second part (i.e.,
p(S|T)) requires completion of target generation before p(S|T) can be effectively computed. Due to the
enormous search space for target T, exploring all
possibilities is infeasible.
For practical reasons, then, we turn to an approximation approach that involves ﬁrst generating N-best
lists given the ﬁrst part of objective function, i.e.,
4Attention models may offer some promise
of addressing this issue.
5We experimented with a smooth decay in g(k) rather than a
stepwise function, but this did not yield better performance.
standard SEQ2SEQ model p(T|S). Then we rerank
the N-best lists using the second term of the objective function.
Since N-best lists produced by
SEQ2SEQ models are generally grammatical, the
ﬁnal selected options are likely to be well-formed.
Model reranking has obvious drawbacks. It results in
non-globally-optimal solutions by ﬁrst emphasizing
standard SEQ2SEQ objectives. Moreover, it relies
heavily on the system’s success in generating a suf-
ﬁciently diverse N-best set, requiring that a long list
of N-best lists be generated for each message.
Nonetheless, these two variants of the MMI criterion work well in practice, signiﬁcantly improving
both interestingness and diversity.
Recent research has shown that deep LSTMs work
better than single-layer LSTMs for SEQ2SEQ tasks
 . We
adopt a deep structure with four LSTM layers for
encoding and four LSTM layers for decoding, each
of which consists of a different set of parameters.
Each LSTM layer consists of 1,000 hidden neurons,
and the dimensionality of word embeddings is set to
1,000. Other training details are given below, broadly
aligned with Sutskever et al. .
• LSTM parameters and embeddings are initialized from a uniform distribution in [−0.08,
• Stochastic gradient decent is implemented using
a ﬁxed learning rate of 0.1.
• Batch size is set to 256.
• Gradient clipping is adopted by scaling gradients when the norm exceeded a threshold of 1.
Our implementation on a single GPU processes at a
speed of approximately 600-1200 tokens per second
on a Tesla K40.
The p(S|T) model described in Section 4.3.1 was
trained using the same model as that of p(T|S), with
messages (S) and responses (T) interchanged.
MMI-antiLM
As described in Section 4.3.1, decoding using
log p(T|S) −λU(T) can be readily implemented
by predicting tokens at each time-step. In addition,
we found in our experiments that it is also important
to take into account the length of responses in decoding. We thus linearly combine the loss function with
length penalization, leading to an ultimate score for
a given target T as follows:
Score(T) = p(T|S) −λU(T) + γNt
where Nt denotes the length of the target and γ denotes associated weight. We optimize γ and λ using
MERT on N-best lists of response candidates. The N-best lists are generated using the decoder with beam size B = 200. We set a maximum
length of 20 for generated candidates. At each time
step of decoding, we are presented with B ×B candidates. We ﬁrst add all hypotheses with an EOS token
being generated at current time step to the N-best list.
Next we preserve the top B unﬁnished hypotheses
and move to next time step. We therefore maintain
beam size of 200 constant when some hypotheses
are completed and taken down by adding in more
unﬁnished hypotheses. This will lead the size of ﬁnal
N-best list for each input much larger than the beam
We generate N-best lists based on P(T|S) and
then rerank the list by linearly combining p(T|S),
λp(S|T), and γNt.
We use MERT to tune the
weights λ and γ on the development set.6
Experiments
Twitter Conversation Triple Dataset
We used an
extension of the dataset described in Sordoni et
al. , which consists of 23 million conversational snippets randomly selected from a collection
of 129M context-message-response triples extracted
from the Twitter Firehose over the 3-month period
from June through August 2012. For the purposes
of our experiments, we limited context to the turn in
the conversation immediately preceding the message.
In our LSTM models, we used a simple input model
in which contexts and messages are concatenated to
form the source input.
6As with MMI-antiLM, we could have used grid search instead of MERT, since there are only 3 features and 2 free parameters. In either case, the search attempts to ﬁnd the best tradeoff
between p(T|S) and p(S|T) according to BLEU (which tends
to weight the two models relatively equally) and ensures that
generated responses are of reasonable length.
# of training instances
distinct-1
distinct-2
SEQ2SEQ (baseline)
SEQ2SEQ (greedy)
MMI-antiLM: log p(T|S) −λU(T)
MMI-bidi: (1 −λ) log p(T|S) + λ log p(S|T)
SMT 
SMT+neural reranking 
Table 2: Performance on the Twitter dataset of 4-layer SEQ2SEQ models and MMI models. distinct-1 and distinct-2 are
respectively the number of distinct unigrams and bigrams divided by total number of generated words.
For tuning and evaluation, we used the development dataset (2118 conversations) and the test dataset
(2114 examples), augmented using information retrieval methods to create a multi-reference set, as
described by Sordoni et al. . The selection
criteria for these two datasets included a component
of relevance/interestingness, with the result that dull
responses will tend to be penalized in evaluation.
OpenSubtitles dataset
In addition to unscripted
Twitter conversations, we also used the OpenSubtitles (OSDb) dataset , a large,
noisy, open-domain dataset containing roughly 60M-
70M scripted lines spoken by movie characters. This
dataset does not specify which character speaks
each subtitle line, which prevents us from inferring
speaker turns. Following Vinyals et al. , we
make the simplifying assumption that each line of
subtitle constitutes a full speaker turn. Our models are trained to predict the current turn given the
preceding ones based on the assumption that consecutive turns belong to the same conversation. This
introduces a degree of noise, since consecutive lines
may not appear in the same conversation or scene,
and may not even be spoken by the same character.
This limitation potentially renders the OSDb
dataset unreliable for evaluation purposes. For evaluation purposes, we therefore used data from the
Internet Movie Script Database (IMSDB),7 which
explicitly identiﬁes which character speaks each line
of the script. This allowed us to identify consecutive
message-response pairs spoken by different characters. We randomly selected two subsets as development and test datasets, each containing 2k pairs, with
source and target length restricted to the range of
7IMSDB ( is a relatively
small database of around 0.4 million sentences and thus not
suitable for open domain dialogue training.
distinct-1
distinct-2
MMI-antiLM
Table 3: Performance of the SEQ2SEQ baseline and two
MMI models on the OpenSubtitles dataset.
Evaluation
For parameter tuning and ﬁnal evaluation, we used
BLEU , which was shown to
correlate reasonably well with human judgment on
the response generation task .
In the case of the Twitter models, we used multireference BLEU. As the IMSDB data is too limited to
support extraction of multiple references, only single
reference BLEU was used in training and evaluating
the OSDb models.
We did not follow Vinyals et al. in using
perplexity as evaluation metric. Perplexity is unlikely to be a useful metric in our scenario, since our
proposed model is designed to steer away from the
standard SEQ2SEQ model in order to diversify the
outputs. We report degree of diversity by calculating
the number of distinct unigrams and bigrams in generated responses. The value is scaled by total number
of generated tokens to avoid favoring long sentences
(shown as distinct-1 and distinct-2 in Tables 2 and 3).
Twitter Dataset
We ﬁrst report performance on
Twitter datasets in Table 2, along with results for
different models (i.e., Machine Translation and
MT+neural reranking) reprinted from Sordoni et
al. on the same dataset. The baseline is the
SEQ2SEQ model with its standard likelihood objective and a beam size of 200. We compare this base-
line against greedy-search SEQ2SEQ , which can help achieve higher diversity
by increasing search errors.8
Machine Translation is the phrase-based MT system described in . MT features
include commonly used ones in Moses , e.g., forward and backward maximum likelihood “translation” probabilities, word and phrase
penalties, linear distortion, etc. For more details,
refer to Sordoni et al. .
MT+neural reranking is the phrase-based MT system, reranked using neural models. N-best lists are
ﬁrst generated from the MT system. Recurrent neural models generate scores for N-best list candidates
given the input messages. These generated scores are
re-incorporated to rerank all the candidates. Additional features to score -gram matches between
context and response and between message and context (context and message match CMM features) are
also employed, as in Sordoni et al. .
MT+neural reranking achieves a BLEU score of
4.44, which to the best of our knowledge represents the previous state-of-the-art performance on
this Twitter dataset. Note that Machine Translation
and MT+neural reranking are trained on a much
larger dataset of roughly 50 million examples. A signiﬁcant performance boost is observed from MMIbidi over baseline SEQ2SEQ, both in terms of BLEU
score and diversity.
The beam size of 200 used in our main experiments
is quite conservative, and BLEU scores only slightly
degrade when reducing beam size to 20. For MMIbidi, BLEU scores for beam sizes of 200, 50, 20 are
respectively 5.90, 5.86, 5.76. A beam size of 20 still
produces relatively large N-best lists (173 elements
on average) with responses of varying lengths, which
offer enough diversity for the p(S|T) model to have
a signiﬁcant effect.
OpenSubtitles Dataset
All models achieve significantly lower BLEU scores on this dataset than on
the Twitter dataset, primarily because the IMSDB
data provides only single references for evaluation.
We note, however, that baseline SEQ2SEQ models
8Another method would have been to sample from the
p(T|S) distribution to increase diversity. While these methods have merits, we think we ought to ﬁnd a proper objective
and optimize it exactly, rather than cope with an inadequate one
and add noise to it.
Comparator
SMT 
[0.25, 0.32]
SMT+neural reranking
[0.25, 0.32]
SEQ2SEQ (baseline)
[0.07, 0.14]
SEQ2SEQ (greedy)
[0.04, 0.11]
Table 6: MMI-bidi gains over comparator systems, based
on pairwise human judgments.
yield lower levels of unigram diversity (distinct-1)
on the OpenSubtitles dataset than on the Twitter data
(0.0056 vs 0.017), which suggests that other factors
may be in play. It is likely that movie dialogs are
much more concise and information-rich than typical
conversations on Twitter, making it harder to match
gold-standard responses and causing the learned models to strongly favor safe, conservative responses.
Table 3 shows that the MMI-antiLM model yields
a signiﬁcant performance boost, with a BLEU score
increase of up to 36% and a more than 200% jump in
unigram diversity. Our interpretation of this huge performance improvement is that the diversity and complexity of input messages lead standard SEQ2SEQ
models to generate very conservative responses,9
which fail to match the more interesting reference
strings typical of this dataset. This interpretation is
also supported by the fact that the MMI-bidi model
does not produce as signiﬁcant a performance boost
as MMI-antiLM. In the case of MMI-bidi, N-best
lists generated using standard SEQ2SEQ models remain conservative and uninteresting, attenuating the
impact of later reranking. An important potential
limitation of MMI-bidi model is thus that its performance hinges on the initial generation of a highly
diverse, informative N-best list.
Qualitative Evaluation
We employed crowdsourced judges to provide evaluations for a random
sample of 1000 items in the Twitter test dataset. Table 6 shows the results of human evaluations between
paired systems. Each output pair was ranked by 5
judges, who were asked to decide which of the two
outputs was better. They were instructed to prefer
outputs that were more speciﬁc (relevant) to the message and preceding context, as opposed to those that
9The strings I don’t know, I don’t know what you are talking
about, I don’t think that is a good idea, and Oh my god constitute
32% percent of all generated responses.
MMI P(T|S) −λP(T)
I did not get the report from an mi-6
I don’t think that’s a good idea.
You did the right thing, did you?
You haven’t been given an assignment
in this case.
I don’t know what you are talking about.
I’ve been looking all over for you.
I’m losing my grip.
I don’t know what you are talking about.
I’m the only one in the world.
I am ready to help.
Come on, come on
I have something we need to talk about.
You programmed me to gather intelligence. That’s all I’ve ever done.
You know that, don’t you?
You do have fun, don’t you?
I mean, we’d have to talk to him.
I mean, I don’t know.
I mean, he’s a good guy.
This has nothing to do with him.
You don’t know anything about him, do
I know him as much.
How come you never say it?
I don’t know
Because I don’t want to hurt you
He is the one behind this scheme to crash
I don’t know what you are talking about
Yes, he is, isn’t he?
How much time do you have here?
I don’t know.
Not long enough. Sorry, sir.
Table 4: Responses from the SEQ2SEQ baseline and MMI-antiLM models on the OpenSubtitles dataset.
Ohh I’ve never seen that! How long does
it take you guys to learn the drill?
I don’t even know.
Like 2 weeks ago!!
You’ll know when we sign Heskey in 2
I’ll see what I can do
I sure hope so..
I’m waiting!! I have even got biscuits
waiting for you??
I have no idea what you’re talking about
I’ll send you a pic when I get home xx
My parents actually had touch too much
played at their wedding.
I have no idea what you’re talking about
How old are they??
Say anything you want... I know you
love me and I love you.
I love you so much.
I love you too, baby.
I am off all week next week
What time you going?
What time you going?
How are you doing?
I’m good, thanks.
I’m good, you?
Table 5: Responses from the SEQ2SEQ baseline and MMI-bidi models on the Twitter dataset.
Input: What are you doing?
1. I’ve been looking for you.
4. I told you to shut up.
2. I want to talk to you.
5. Get out of here.
3. Just making sure you’re OK.
6. I’m looking for a doctor.
Input: What is your name?
4. Daniel.
5. My name is John.
6. My name is Robert.
Input: How old are you?
1. Twenty-eight.
2. Twenty-four.
Table 7: Examples generated by the MMI-antiLM model
on the OpenSubtitles dataset.
were more generic. Ties were permitted. Identical
strings were algorithmically assigned the same score.
The mean of differences between outputs is shown as
the gain for MMI-bidi over the competing system. At
a signiﬁcance level of α = 0.05, we ﬁnd that MMIbidi outperforms both baseline and greedy SEQ2SEQ
systems, as well as the weaker SMT and SMT+RNN
baselines. MMI-bidi outperforms SMT in human
evaluations despite the greater lexical diversity of
MT output.
Separately, judges were also asked to rate overall
quality of MMI-bidi output over the same 1000-item
sample in isolation, each output being evaluated by
7 judges in context using a 5-point scale. The mean
rating was 3.84 (median: 3.85, 1st Qu: 3.57, 3rd Qu:
4.14), suggesting that overall MMI-bidi output does
appear reasonably acceptable to human judges.10
Table 7 presents the N-best candidates generated
using the MMI-bidi model for the inputs of Table 1.
10In the human evaluations, we asked the annotators to prefer
responses that were more speciﬁc to the context only when doing
the pairwise evaluations of systems. The absolute evaluation
was conducted separately (on different days) on the best system,
and annotators were asked to evaluate the overall quality of the
response, speciﬁcally Provide your impression of overall quality
of the response in this particular conversation.
We see that MMI generates signiﬁcantly more interesting outputs than SEQ2SEQ.
In Tables 4 and 5, we present responses generated
by different models. All examples were randomly
sampled (without cherry picking). We see that the
baseline SEQ2SEQ model tends to generate reasonable responses to simple messages such as How are
you doing? or I love you. As the complexity of the
message increases, however, the outputs switch to
more conservative, duller forms, such as I don’t know
or I don’t know what you are talking about. An occasional answer of this kind might go unnoticed in a
natural conversation, but a dialog agent that always
produces such responses risks being perceived as uncooperative. MMI-bidi models, on the other hand,
produce far more diverse and interesting responses.
Conclusions
We investigated an issue encountered when applying
SEQ2SEQ models to conversational response generation. These models tend to generate safe, commonplace responses (e.g., I don’t know) regardless of the
input. Our analysis suggests that the issue is at least
in part attributable to the use of unidirectional likelihood of output (responses) given input (messages).
To remedy this, we have proposed using Maximum
Mutual Information (MMI) as the objective function.
Our results demonstrate that the proposed MMI models produce more diverse and interesting responses,
while improving quality as measured by BLEU and
human evaluation.
To the best of our knowledge, this paper represents
the ﬁrst work to address the issue of output diversity in the neural generation framework. We have
focused on the algorithmic dimensions of the problem. Unquestionably numerous other factors such
as grounding, persona (of both user and agent), and
intent also play a role in generating diverse, conversationally interesting outputs. These must be left
for future investigation. Since the challenge of producing interesting outputs also arises in other neural
generation tasks, including image-description generation, question answering, and potentially any task
where mutual correspondences must be modeled, the
implications of this work extend well beyond conversational response generation.
Acknowledgments
We thank the anonymous reviewers, as well as Dan
Jurafsky, Alan Ritter, Stephanie Lukin, George Spithourakis, Alessandro Sordoni, Chris Quirk, Meg
Mitchell, Jacob Devlin, Oriol Vinyals, and Dhruv
Batra for their comments and suggestions.