Licensing the Mizar Mathematical Library⋆
Jesse Alama1, Michael Kohlhase2, Lionel Mamane3, Adam Naumowicz4, Piotr
Rudnicki5, and Josef Urban6⋆⋆
1 Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence; New University of Lisbon; 
2 Computer Science, Jacobs University; 
3 
4 Institute of Computer Science, University of Bialystok; 
5 Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta; 
6 Institute for Computing and Information Sciences; Radboud University Nijmegen
 
Abstract. The Mizar Mathematical Library (MML) is a large corpus
of formalised mathematical knowledge. It has been constructed over the
course of many years by a large number of authors and maintainers. Yet
the legal status of these eﬀorts of the Mizar community has never been
clariﬁed. In 2010, after many years of loose deliberations, the community decided to investigate the issue of licensing the content of the MML,
thereby clarifying and crystallizing the status of the texts, the text’s
authors, and the library’s long-term maintainers. The community has
settled on a copyright and license policy that suits the peculiar features
of Mizar and its community. In this paper we discuss the copyright and
license solutions. We oﬀer our experience in the hopes that the communities of other libraries of formalised mathematical knowledge might take
up the legal and scientiﬁc problems that we addressed for Mizar.
Keywords: free culture, open data, free licensing, formal mathematics, mizar
Introduction - Formal mathematics and its roots
The dream of formal thinking and formal mathematics (and its giant oﬀspring:
computer science) has a long and interesting history that we can hardly go into
in this paper. Brieﬂy, formal mathematics started to be produced in computer
understandable encoding in late 1960s. The ﬁrst signiﬁcant text of formal mathematics was van Benthem’s encoding of Landau’s Grundlagen der Analysis 
⋆The ﬁnal publication of this paper is available at www.springerlink.com
⋆⋆The ﬁrst author was funded by the FCT project “Dialogical Foundations of
Semantics” (DiFoS) in the ESF EuroCoRes programme LogICCC . The sixth author was supported by the NWO project “MathWiki
a Web-based Collaborative Authoring Environment for Formal Proofs”. The authors
have worked together as members of the SUM Licensing Committee. Special thanks
for advice to: Stephan Schulz, David Wheeler, Michael Spiegel, Petr Pudlak, Bob
Boyer, Adam Pease, Timo Ewalds, Adam Grabowski, Czeslaw Bylinski, and Andrzej
in AUTOMATH . Since then, large bodies of formal mathematics have been
created within the ﬁelds of Interactive and Automated Theorem Proving (ITP,
ATP). (See for an extensive overview of the systems, formal languages, and
their libraries.)
As these libraries grow and their contents get re-used in new, possibly unimagined and unintended contexts, their legal status needs to be clariﬁed and formalised. In this paper we discuss how this problem was tackled in the case of
the Mizar Mathematical Library. In Section 2 we discuss formal mathematical
libraries in general and the target library of interest for us, the Mizar Mathematical Library (MML ), and the problem of classifying its content as code
vs. text. We discuss in Section 3 how some basic licensing problems were tackled
by other formal mathematics projects. In Section 4 we survey the main issues
we faced, and our (sometimes incomplete) solutions to them. We oﬀer further
problems and future work in Section 5. Our ﬁnal copyright/licensing recommendation is accessible online7, and the Mizar copyright assignment and licensing
policy are now parts of the Mizar distribution.8
What is a formal math library?
A library of formal mathematics is a collection of “articles” that contain formalised counterparts of everyday informal mathematics. Our interest here is on
the Mizar Mathematical Library (MML). Here we discuss some of the historical
background of this library and the problems it poses for the license designer.
Historical background of the MML
The year 1989 marks the start of a systematic collection of inter-referenced Mizar
articles. The ﬁrst three articles were included into a Mizar data base on January 1
— this is the oﬃcial date of starting the Mizar Mathematical Library — MML,
although this name appeared later.
The copyright for the MML has been owned by the Association of Mizar Users
(SUM, in Polish Stowarzyszenie Użytkowników Mizara) anchored in Białystok.
SUM is a registered Polish association whose statute9 states that the SUM’s aim
is popularizing, propagating and promoting the Mizar language. The copyright
assignment has been required from the authors (typically SUM members) by
SUM when submitting articles to MML. This was likely related to the early
decision to build a large re-usable library of formal mathematics, which would
presumably be re-factored many times by the core MML developers. Another
7 
8 
 
 
 
 
9 
reason speaking for the copyright centralization was the fact that the potential
uses of such a library were initially also quite unclear: note that MML was started
so early that it precedes the World Wide Web, Linux, Wikipedia, arXiv, and the
massive development of free software and free web resources like Wikipedia and
arXiv in the last two decades, and the related development of free licenses.
While the MML copyright owner was always clearly SUM, it was nowhere
stated what was covered by the copyright and there was no policy for licensing
the use of MML content should someone request a permission for use other than
contributing to the library. For example, Josef Urban was not sure whether it
was legal to include his translation of parts of the MML into the TPTP
library, which is used also for testing/benchmarking of ATPs — a process with
some potential for commercial use. As discussed in the next section, the ATP
translation also makes MML more executable in certain sense, in a similar way
as for example Prolog program can be viewed as a database and as a program
simultaneously. Such potential uses add to the need for a clear licensing policy.
Two aspects of formal mathematics: code and text
Formal mathematical libraries present a number of problems for the license designer. One crucial question for deciding upon a license for the Mizar Mathematical Library: Is a Mizar article more like a journal article, or is it more like a
piece of computer code, or is it both? And could existing law be suboptimal in
treating code diﬀerently from mathematical texts?
Although we are focused on Mizar, we note in passing that other interactive
proof assistants, whose communities might want to take up the problem of licensing their content, face this issue in diﬀerent ways. Deﬁnitions and proofs in
Coq, for instance, have originally been rather more like computer programs (at
least, prima facie) than Mizar texts10.
We also need to address the issue of what can be done with formal mathematical texts. There is considerable interest in extracting algorithms from proofs
of universal-existential theorems. What is the status of such extracted or derived
products? Mizar does not, on its face, permit such a straightforward, immediate extraction of algorithms from proofs. There are however several mechanisms
which bring Mizar very close to executable code:
1. Formal mathematical formulas (more precisely: clauses) immediately give
rise to very real computation in the Prolog language. For example, the Prolog
algorithm for reversing lists:
reverse_of([],[]).
reverse_of([H|T],Result):reverse_of(T,RevT),
append(RevT,[H],Result).
10 This is however also changing: Coq has become capable of handling mainstream
(not just constructive) mathematics recently, has gained a declarative proof mode
and one of the aspirations of the Math Components project is to make the Coq
presentations accessible to mathematicians.
is just two mathematical clauses (formulas):
rev_of([], [])∧
∀H, T, RevT, Result : rev_of(T, RevT ) ∧append(RevT, list(H, []), Result)
→rev_of(list(H, T ), Result)
The only diﬀerence between a Prolog program and a set of mathematical
clauses is that the order of clauses matters in the Prolog program.
2. In systems for automated theorem proving (ATPs), even this ordering difference typically no longer exists. Many ATPs would thus be really able to
“compute” the reverse of a particular list, just with the two formulas above,
given to them in arbitrary order. The MPTP system translates all Mizar
formulas into a format usable by ATPs, and thus allows such computations
to be made.
3. Mizar itself actually contains pieces of more procedural semantics, e.g. the
“registrations” mechanisms (a kind of limited Prolog mechanism). These
mechanisms add restricted Prolog-like directed search to otherwise less directed general Mizar proof search, in a similar spirit as the Prolog language
adds a particular restrictions to the order in which (Horn) clauses are traversed, as opposed to ATPs that work with arbitrary clauses and regardless
of ordering. Input to these mechanisms are again Mizar formulas in special
(Horn-like) from.
4. In principle, one could extract a mangled form of constructive content from
the classical content of the Mizar Mathematical Library by applying, say, the
Gödel-Gentzen translation from classical to intuitionistic logic. After that,
the Curry-Howard isomorphism between proofs and programs could again
be used to give procedural meaning to Mizar proofs (not formulas as in the
above cases).
In short, mathematics lends itself to executable interpretation not just via the
Curry-Howard proofs-as-programs interpretation of constructive mathematics
(reasonably well-known in the formal community), and extensions of it to classical mathematics, but also by implicit formulas-as-programs interpretations,
developed by the Prolog and ATP communities. It is a well known fact that
eﬃcient Prolog computation is just a restriction of ATP proof search, and ATP
proof search can be used as (typically less eﬃcient than Prolog) computation
too. These mechanisms are to a certain extent present already in Mizar, and are
fully available using a number of systems via the MPTP translation.
The formal/informal distinction cannot be straightforwardly based the ability
for a machine to extract content/meaning. For example, Wikipedia is today used
for data and algorithm extraction, used in advanced algorithms by, for example, IBM Watson system . With suﬃciently advanced extraction algorithms
(which we are clearly approaching), many “documents” can become “programs”.
(For an interactive demonstration, see .)
Various other factors make contributions to the Mizar Mathematical Library
like computer code. An entry in Wikipedia can stand alone as a sensible contribution. Mizar articles, however, do not stand alone (in general), because it
cannot be veriﬁed — or even parsed — in the absence of the background provided by other articles. With some background knowledge in mathematics, some
human-understandable meaning can be extracted from Mizar texts :
reserve n,m for Element of NAT;
reserve g for Element of COMPLEX;
reserve s for Complex_Sequence;
definition
attr s is convergent means
ex g st for p be Real st 0 < p
ex n st for m st n <= m holds |.s.m-g.| < p;
is evidently the conventional ∃∀∃∀-deﬁnition of a convergent sequence of complex
numbers. However, the exact meaning of this text can be speciﬁed only with
reference to the environment in which this text is evaluated. The environment
provides some type information, such as that 0 is a real number, < is a relation
among real numbers, the curious-looking |.s.m-g.| is a real number (it is the
absolute value of the diﬀerence of the nth term sn and g), etc.
Thus, libraries of formal mathematics are akin to libraries of software. Code
that calls a library function cannot function without the library. Similarly, a
formal mathematical article is not “formal” as it cannot be understood in the
absence of the other formal articles it imports. The background formal library is
used as a declarative and procedural knowledge to derive (not just “verify”) the
contents of a new formal mathematical article.
Code and text licenses
Because of the dual nature of the formal mathematical texts — they are both
human-readable (particularly when written in Mizar) and machine-processable
— it is possible that we are dealing with a new kind of object. The licensing situation in the world of free works11 within the two categories (executable
software code on the one hand, and documents for human consumption on the
other hand) has clear “winners”. On the code side, statistics based on
web scraping of contents of large free/open source software repositories (such as
SourceForge or freshmeat) show that slightly more than a half of FLOSS12 code
is under a variant of the GNU General Public License: Data from the FLOSSmole project as of March 2011 shows that out of a total of 43 470 FLOSS
projects tracked by freshmeat, 24 366 are licensed under a version of the GNU
11 “free” refers not (only) to zero price (Latin gratis), but to freedom (Latin liber;
however, the consecrated vernacular expression is “libre”, so we will use “libre”).
That is, a work that anybody is free to use, share and improve.
12 FLOSS for free/libre/open-source software.
GPL13. Of the projects hosted on SourceForge, 110412 use a variant of the GPL,
out of 174 227 that use a license approved by the Open Source Initiative.
On the document side, although we were not able to ﬁnd comparative usage
statistics, in our experience Creative Commons accounts for most of the mindshare, although domain-speciﬁc licenses have fair success within their domain.
See .
Be it only for this reason, it seemed prudent to us to allow for an eventual
future relicensing, and for this to keep central copyright ownership of the MML.
But also, the practice of licensing of free/libre electronic documents is rather
younger, and less mature, than free software licensing, thereby increasing the
“risk” that relicensing may be necessary in the future. For example, Wikipedia
migrated from a GNU Free Documentation license to a Creative Commons BY-
SA license as recently as in 2009, because a majority of other wikis had, by and
large, settled for a Creative Commons license, and Wikipedia wished to make
interchange of content between Wikipedia and other wikis legally possible (and
An additional uncertainty arises from the fact that MML articles can be
seen both as documents and as executable code; possibly diﬃculties could arise
at some point from this dual nature. For example, someone wanting to make a
use of the MML that sits squarely neither on the one side nor the other, but
makes use of the duality in some way. Possibly this use would neither be clearly
allowed by a license meant for executable code, nor clearly allowed by a license
meant for documents. It is thus prudent to have a central authority that can
authorise such uses on a case-by-case basis as they arise, or revise the license of
the MML once the issues are better understood.
Restrictions arising from patents are potentially just as lethal as copyright restrictions for keeping a work free to use and enhance by anybody for any purpose.
The expected content of the MML is however more of an abstract nature than of
a technical nature. However, ﬁrst, (theoretically) only technical ideas are subject
to patents, notwithstanding the situation concerning software patents. Second,
the kind of things that the MML is now typically used for would not infringe
on a patent, even if the idea expressed in an MML article would be covered by
a patent: a patent do not forbid the activity proper of studying or enhancing
upon the covered idea; for example, the RSA or IDEA algorithms being patented
does not forbid proving (formally or in paper mathematics) properties of these
algorithms, nor does it forbid teaching the algorithm publicly. On the contrary,
the usual justiﬁcation for the modern patent system is to encourage inventors to
make descriptions of their invention public, rather than keeping them as trade
secrets, so that such activities can take place, and eventually lead to a larger and
13 This count includes various versions of the GNU GPL, as well as the combination of
the GNU GPL with special linking exceptions; it does not include signiﬁcantly more
liberal licenses, such as the GNU Lesser/Library GPL.
better exploitation of the idea by society as a whole. The activity forbidden by
a patent is manufacturing, selling or using an implementation of the idea, a machine based on the idea. Eventual concrete advances in making a speciﬁcation of
an algorithm in Mizar executable could create interesting legal questions, but we
are not yet at this point14 although some preliminary experiments15 were quite
encouraging. Third, in the context of free software we take our inspiration from,
how to handle patents is — by far — not as consensual as copyright licensing.
Free documents, our other inspiration, usually don’t have to deal with patent
issues. For the combination of these three reasons, we did not address any patent
issue in our initial licensing recommendation to SUM.
However it is worth noting that in GPL version 3 the FSF has started to
address the issue of software patents more concretely, inserting following into
the GPL v3 preamble:
Finally, every program is threatened constantly by software patents.
States should not allow patents to restrict development and use of software on general-purpose computers, but in those that do, we wish to
avoid the special danger that patents applied to a free program could
make it eﬀectively proprietary. To prevent this, the GPL assures that
patents cannot be used to render the program non-free.
Section 11 of the GPL v3 text itself contains a blanket patent license from every
contributor in addition to the usual copyright license. In other words, GPL version 3 has the share-alike (transitive) aspect not only with respect to copyright,
but also with respect to patents. However our copyright assignment setup means
that a contributor not redistributing his MML modiﬁcations himself never agrees
to the GPL, and thus evades its patent license provisions. Additionally as the
Creative Commons license does not address patents, our dual-license model allows redistributors of modiﬁed versions to avoid giving a public patent license by
choosing CC-BY-SA. Addressing patent issues (if relevant at all) is thus possible
future work for us, probably subject to some discussions with the authors of the
FSFE Fiduciary License Agreement (copyright assignment contract).
Related licensing models
For detailed overview of formal systems’ licensing, see David Wheeler’s enumeration . The tendency in academic institutions over the last decade seems
14 A similar question of where the boundary between “implementation” and “human
speech” lies arose in the last years of the second millennium, concerning the CSS
algorithm used to scramble the contents of Video DVDs, although in this case the
problem did not originate from a patent, but from a then-new copyright metaprotection law, the USA Digital Millennium Copyright Act. See 
cmu.edu/~dst/DeCSS/Gallery/ for examples.
15 Michal Michaels ( added computational contents
to Mizar schemes and was extracting Lisp code for binary arithmetics in his MSc
thesis, University of Alberta 1996.
to go from closed/non-free/non-commercial/unclear licensing terms on formal
systems, towards open/free/clear ones. Two examples are the SPASS theorem
prover from MPI Saarbrücken, and the PVS veriﬁcation system from SRI. SPASS
went from a custom license allowing only non-commercial use (SPASS 1.0) to
GPL2 (SPASS 2.0) to FreeBSD license (SPASS 3.5). PVS has switched from
a former commercial license to GPL as of December 2006.16 One of the early
rules of the CADE ATP System Competition (CASC) has been that
“Winners are expected to provide public access to their system’s source code”,17
and that the systems’ sources are after the competition regularly published by
the CASC organisers. Note that the situation is quite diﬀerent in the world of
more applied formal tools like SAT and SMT solvers. For example, neither the
Z3 (Microsoft Research) nor the Yices (SRI) SMT solvers are FLOSS.
However, our particular interest are not the formal systems per se, but rather
the formal libraries associated with them. As discussed in Section 2, this distinction — between the systems and the mathematics formalised inside them
— might be (im)possible to various extents. For example, the HOL (Light) formalizations (and thus the large mathematical Flyspeck project formalizing the
proof of the Kepler conjecture) are written directly in the ML (OCaml) programming language. This is probably best captured as “proof programming” (the ML
code) over “mathematical terms” (specially parsed parts of the ML code). Obviously, arbitrary programs (ML functions) thus are part of the “procedural proofs”
written in HOL (Light).18 On the other hand, in Mizar, the distinction between
the system’s code (written in Pascal) and the formalization code (written in
Mizar) is very clear: no Pascal programming is allowed inside the declarative
mathematical proofs.
Licensing Models of Formal Libraries
All major formal libraries have so far used code licenses, while informal ones
like arXiv, PlanetMath and Wikipedia use document licenses. The GNU Free
Documentation License (GFDL) has been previously used by Wikipedia and
PlanetMath, however, as Stephan Schulz (a Wikipedia administrator) noted:
The GFDL certainly is a reasonable choice. However, it has some warts,
and large collaborative projects (in particular Wikipedia) have been
moving (with support from the Free Software Foundation) to the Creative Commons CC-BY-SA license. The CC-BY-SA license allows redis-
16 
17 
18 One might of course argue that the arbitrary ML functions in HOL (Light) serve not
as “parts of proofs” but rather as “proof generators”, i.e., that the “real proof” is just
the low-level HOL proof object (checked by HOL’s LCF-like microkernel), which the
user typically never sees. This is however a bit like saying that the Lisp (or C) macro
language is not really a part of Lisp (or C) programming, or even that Lisp (or C)
is just a “program generator”, and the “real program” is just the compiled machine
Table 1. Overview of licenses of selected (formal) mathematical libraries
Library (System)
Coq Standard Library (Coq)
Coq Repository at Nijmegen (Coq)
Math Components (Coq+ssreﬂect)
Not publicly available
Archive of Formal Proofs (Isabelle)
BSD or LGPL
Isabelle Standard Libraries (Isabelle)
HOL Light Standard Library (HOL Light) BSD/MIT-like license
Flyspeck (HOL Light)
MIT license?
Wikipedia, PlanetMath
GPL + additional restriction
CC-BY(-NC-SA) or public domain
or only arXiv allowed to distribute
tribution and changes, but requires maintaining the license and recognizing the contributors.
Table 1 summarises the licenses of several well-known formal mathematical libraries, together with some major informal ones like PlanetMath, Wikipedia,
and arXiv.
Also note that the licensing diﬀerences between the formal libraries can already now cause nontrivial problems. For example, the Coq Repository at Nijmegen (CoRN) is an advanced mathematical library, which however contains
also a number of items that can be generally useful to any Coq formalization.
Thus, a credible scenario is that pieces of CoRN might be gradually moved to
the Coq Standard Library (distributed with the Coq system). That however is
not automatically possible, since CoRN is licensed under GPL, which is stronger
(more restrictive) than LGPL (used by the Coq Standard Library). Similar situation might arise when moving the LGPL-licensed entries in the Isabelle Archive
of Formal Proofs (AFP) to the Isabelle standard libraries (BSD). So while our
initial idea was to possibly optimise the MML license(s) also with respect to
possible future transfers and translations between various formal and informal
libraries, a survey of the current situation revealed that this is hardly possible
in the existing chaos. This again leads us to the necessity of copyright centralization, in order to be able to adapt to the likely future changes of this chaotic
global state of aﬀairs.
Issues and their solutions
In this section we discuss some of the problems we faced when designing a license
and copyright mechanism for the MML and how we addressed them.
Features required from the license
For the number of reasons mentioned above we wanted our solution for the MML
copyright/license to give the SUM some control over the current and future
licensing, while at the same time not hindering legitimate “open science” use of
the MML, such as:
– translating its contents so that another proof assistant can use them;
– archiving the MML to record the state of human knowledge;
– allowing MML to be used for data-mining, mathematical search engines, and
general AI systems;
– benchmarking ATPs;
– writing formal mathematics and publishing articles about it.
At the same time, we did want the SUM to have the authority to object to
uses of the MML that do not adhere to the rules of “open science” and block the
free ﬂow of ideas and results contained in the library.
Our solution was to adopt a fairly restrictive open license, adhering to strong
copyleft principles, with SUM as a rather powerful central copyright owner. We
lay out a policy of “ask and you shall be allowed” when it comes to certain uses
of the MML that do not adhere to our restrictive license, but are within the
rules of “open science”.
Linking and adaptation
One consequence of viewing the MML as a collection of executable code concerns
the sensitive issue of linking. The MML is composed of a large number of items
that one can refer to, not unlike one using a subroutine deﬁned in some external
library. Thus, if someone has proved the Jordan curve theorem in some form, one
can use this theorem to prove some consequence, such as the four-color theorem.
Likewise, one can use earlier deﬁnitions (such as the deﬁnition of the power set
operation or topological spaces) in one’s own work. Such usage is analogous to
linking by virtue of the fact that one’s text is not functional (or even meaningful)
in the absence of these earlier deﬁnitions, and constitutes a derivative work of
the used articles, thereby triggering the share-alike mechanism of the GPL.
On the document side, the CC-BY-SA version 3.0 license share-alike mechanism is triggered by the analogous notion of adaptation.
A contribution to the MML naturally triggers the share-alike mechanism of
both licenses. However, to dispel any doubt about this, the MML licenses come
with a binding interpretation note19 that states that fact explicitly.
Why open-source copyleft license?
We settled upon a dual-licensing scheme based on the GPL version 3 and
CC-BY-SA version 3.0 .
19 
The decision to adopt such a scheme was made with some reservation; a duallicensing scheme is evidently more complicated than a single license. However,
the dual-license aspect does suit our situation nicely owing to the dual nature
of the MML as code and text. The intention is that the GNU GPL, which aims
to cover computer code, suits this aspect of the MML, whereas CC-BY-SA,
which is designed to cover texts (among other things) seems more appropriate
when the MML is considered as a collection of texts. The dual-license scheme
is good for adapting and copying parts of MML. For example, it allows to copy
a piece of an MML proof into Wikipedia or PlanetMath, which are licensed
under CC-BY-SA. In such a case, the person copying automatically chooses to
use MML under the CC-BY-SA license. In the same spirit, extraction of Prolog
(or other) programs from MML mentioned in Section 2.2 would be covered by
GPL. The disadvantage of the MML dual-licensing is that contributing to MML
gets diﬃcult: contributors have to agree both to GPL and CC-BY-SA. This was
a diﬃcult decision, however, once we got that far, it allowed us to think even
further and come up (after discussions with the Software Freedom Law Center20)
with copyright assignment (see Section 4.4) as the best of the bad solutions.
Our licenses feature strong copyleft protection: anything derived from one’s
contribution must be similarly freely redistributable and enhanceable. We believe
that such transitivity promotes public contribution, because a contributor can
engineer his work safe in the knowledge that his eﬀorts, and future enhancements
to it, cannot be taken away from him (or from society), and cannot be exploited
for private gain without contributing back to the common pot.
Why keep the copyright ownership with SUM?
In our licensing model, we require that contributor to the MML assign the copyright to their work to the SUM.
The main risk of mandatory copyright assignment is discouraging potential
contributors. But since the MML has been functioning with copyright assignment since its beginnings, the risk is mitigated. The community has already
adopted this model, and probably will continue to accept it. At worst, mandatory copyright assignment might stunt the future growth of the community.
To assuage this fear, following the models described in , we recommended that:21
– SUM be a relatively transparent association, and that it be open to contributors. One way in which SUM is open is through translation of its statutes into
the major languages used for science and technology (currently, English). We
also insisted that decisions taken by SUM be open to international members
(i.e., not requiring physical Polish presence).
– SUM pledges to maintain free (as in freedom) licensing of the assigned work.
– SUM pledges that any proﬁt made by the SUM from the work be used only
for the advancement of science.
20 
21 Note that the last three points are now part of the Mizar Copyright Assignment.
– The copyright grant to the SUM is automatically rescinded if the SUM breaks
the above pledges.
Enforcing FLOSS
Free/libre licenses had, and to a degree still have, a reputation for being diﬃcult,
if possible at all, to enforce, or the expose the licensor to abuse from the licensee.
This reputation, in our opinion, comes more from the fact that enforcement
(mainly by the FSF) used to happen behind closed doors rather than in a public
forum, and the ﬁnal settlement typically would include a “no shaming” clause
that kept the polite ﬁction that the violator voluntarily complied with the GPL,
and never imagined doing otherwise, much less did otherwise. Eben Moglen, the
general legal counsel for the FSF, and Richard Stallman, the leader of the FSF,
used to say (publicly, during conferences) something to the eﬀect of:
The reason the GNU GPL has not been “tested in court” is that each
time the FSF threatens to sue over a GPL violation, the oﬀender chooses
to comply with the GPL rather than go to court. This, in essence, means
that their legal counsel estimates their losing in court too probable to
More recently, some of the enforcement has become far more public, and sometimes the public shaming is the main force behind the eﬀort. The pioneer of
this change is gpl-violations.org, created in 2004 by Harald Welte to give
GPL enforcement a faster and more dynamic pace than the FSF’s usual way of
proceeding : the FSF usually let violators continue their infringements for an
interim period of time, while the process of bringing them into compliance was
More strongly, far from making the contents of the MML more vulnerable
to theft, or limiting the freedom of the Mizar community, adopting a FLOSS
license such as the one we settled upon gives the community greater strength.
There are cases where having a FLOSS license made a crucial diﬀerence. One
of the earlier examples is the one of g++, the C++ compiler in GCC, the GNU
Compiler Collection :
Consider GNU C++. Why do we have a free C++ compiler? Only
because the GNU GPL said it had to be free. GNU C++ was developed
by an industry consortium, MCC, starting from the GNU C compiler.
MCC normally makes its work as proprietary as can be. But they made
the C++ front end free software, because the GNU GPL said that was
the only way they could release it. The C++ front end included many
new ﬁles, but since they were meant to be linked with GCC, the GPL
did apply to them. The beneﬁt to our community is evident.
Consider GNU Objective C. NeXT initially wanted to make this front
end proprietary; they proposed to release it as .o ﬁles, and let users link
them with the rest of GCC, thinking this might be a way around the
GPL’s requirements. But our lawyer said that this would not evade the
requirements, that it was not allowed. And so they made the Objective
C front end free software.
It is not inconceivable, as formal methods become more widely used, that analogous cases could arise concerning the use of formalised mathematical knowledge.
What are reasonable conditions for copyright ownership?
We settled for a copyright ownership agreement modeled on the FSFE ﬁduciary
license agreement (FLA) . The FLA “allows one entity to safeguard all of the
code created for a project by consolidating copyright (or exclusive exploitation
rights) to counteract copyright fragmentation.” In our case, the entity is SUM.
We opted for this kind of agreement to permit possible future changes of the
open-source licenses22 and also selected commercial activities beneﬁting scientiﬁc
progress. There already are projects (e.g., the NICTA L4 project23) that are
sensitive to future commercial uses, while clearly beneﬁting the development of
formal methods. We chose the FSFE’s FLA rather than the similar paperwork
used by e.g. the FSF mainly because the FSFE’s FLA is speciﬁcally written for
European jurisdictions.
The main substantive change we made to the FLA is allowing the SUM to
sell commercial licenses to the MML, when doing so is beneﬁcial to progress in
science and technology, subject to the restriction that proceedings must be used
to advance the SUM’s goals, namely popularising, propagating and promoting
the Mizar language. We see this way of proceeding as a tax levied on people that
want to beneﬁt from science’s production and advancement, without playing
by the rules of science of free interchange of ideas and results. In other words,
people that want to use the results of science without contributing their further
enhancements back to the common pot. This is somewhat similar to the “polluter pays” principle that is becoming widespread in European and international
environmental law.
The fact that we set things up legally so that the SUM is allowed to do so
does not mean it has to; if a majority of members (contributors) opposes it, it
won’t happen and the MML will be, by and large, unavailable to people not
willing to contribute their enhancements to the common pot.
Conclusion and Future Work
In order to produce a suitable copyright and licensing model for the MML, we
delved into the question of what formal mathematics truly is. We did not settle
on a deﬁnitive answer yet, and it may well be that (as often with legal concepts) the existing legal concepts and preconceptions need to be updated as
scientiﬁc progress is being made. The diﬀerence between executable code and
(formal) mathematics seems to be extremely tenuous, if it exists at all. It is
22 The Wikipedia relicensing trouble being a strong motivation.
23 
safe to say that formal mathematical texts straddle a boundary between human readability/consumability and machine readability/consumability. An even
deeper question: what is formal knowledge, and what is informal knowledge?
Even when we handle this dilemma by dual licensing, there is no clear winner
with respect to the goal of making the MML compatible with as many formal and
informal mathematical libraries as possible. The situation in this ﬁeld seems quite
chaotic, and we hope that this paper will be of some help to the developers of
other formal libraries. In particular, our recommendation in this chaotic situation
is to centralise the copyright ownership with trusted user associations, so that
the situation can be gradually improved by these bodies.
Although the MML has been licensed in a free way, the programs that operate
on these texts remain closed-source. Ideally, both the MML and these programs
would be free/libre. The license problem here is simpler than the problem of
licensing the MML, since we are dealing simply with programs. The process
may end up being gradual, starting with the Mizar parser. It is essential that
such a problem be tackled; the lack of any kind of open license for the whole
of Mizar (its programs and its library), from a political standpoint of scientiﬁc
research being done for the general good of humanity and available to all, can
push away some potential contributors toward other proof assistants and other
libraries.24
For reasons discussed in Section 2.4, we avoided the problem of patents. This
is largely because we are not aware now of how patents could play a role in
formal mathematics. In the future, though, we may ﬁnd that the subject needs
to be revisited.