UC Davis Previously Published Works
Timecourse of neural signatures of object recognition
 
Journal of Vision, 3(7)
Johnson, Jeffrey S
Olshausen, Bruno A
Publication Date
2003-08-28
10.1167/3.7.4
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org
Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California
Journal of Vision 3, 499-512
 
Timecourse of neural signatures of object recognition
Jeffrey S. Johnson
Center For Neuroscience, UC Davis, Davis, CA, USA
Bruno A. Olshausen
Center For Neuroscience, UC Davis, Davis, CA, USA and
Redwood Neuroscience Institute, Menlo Park, CA, USA
How long does it take for the human visual system to recognize objects? This issue is important for understanding visual
cortical function as it places constraints on models of the information processing underlying recognition. We designed a
series of event-related potential (ERP) experiments to measure the timecourse of electrophysiological correlates of object
recognition. We find two distinct types of components in the ERP recorded during categorization of natural images. One is
an early presentation-locked signal arising around 135 ms that is present when there are low-level feature differences
between images. The other is a later, recognition-related component arising between 150-300 ms. Unlike the early
component, the latency of the later component covaries with the subsequent reaction time. In contrast to previous studies
suggesting that the early, presentation-locked component of neural activity is correlated to recognition, these results imply
that the neural signatures of recognition have a substantially later and variable time of onset.
Keywords: object recognition, visual cortex, electrophysiology, ERP, ERPimage
Introduction
In the real world, survival is contingent upon the
rapid, accurate recognition of objects. Despite extensive
research in both neuroscience and computer science, how
this task is accomplished remains a mystery.
One view is that object recognition constitutes a
chicken-egg type problem between lower and higher levels
of image analysis. The low-level shape features that are
useful for identifying an object - edges, contours, surface
curvature and the like - are typically ambiguous in natural
scenes, so they cannot be computed directly based on a
local analysis of the image. Rather, they must be inferred
based on global context and higher-level knowledge.
However, the global context itself will not be clear until
there is some degree of certainty about the presence of
low-level shape features. A number of theorists have thus
argued that recognition depends on information
circulating through cortico-cortical feedback loops in
order to disambiguate representations at both lower and
higher levels in parallel .
However, a large body of both neurophysiological and
psychophysical data suggests that recognition is
performed so rapidly that it must be accomplished in one
feedforward sweep of activity propagated through the
visual system . For example, rapid serial
visual presentation (RSVP) techniques 
and other masking paradigms reveal
behavioral selectivity to images presented for 100 ms or
less. Single unit recordings in macaque superior temporal
sulcus show that face-selective activity can be elicited by
masked images presented for as little as 14 ms and human functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies have shown
activations in object recognition areas to be correlated
with masked image presentations as brief as 40 ms . This sort of
result is difficult to reconcile with models requiring
feedback because the original image should be replaced by
a subsequent one by the time signals from higher level
areas are fed back to lower levels.
Further, it has been argued based on known
biophysical and anatomical constraints (e.g. speed of
spike propagation, number of cortical processing stages)
that the earliest responses in macaque higher-level, object
recognition areas must be based on one or at most two
spikes per neuron in the pathways leading up to them
 . This hypothesis is supported by
latencies of about 100 ms reported for neurons in
macaque inferotemporal cortex (IT) . Response latencies and reaction times in
recognition tasks are a bit later in humans than macaques
 , so that in
humans, intracranial EEG studies show the earliest
response latencies in the facial recognition areas of the
fusiform gyrus to be 130-140 ms . This 30-40 ms delay is presumably
due to the increased conduction times associated with
larger head size.
A study of the timecourse of object recognition in
humans has revealed a component in the
electroencephalogram (EEG) arising approximately 150
ms after image presentation that is related to the
detection of objects in complex natural scenes . Importantly, this signal is
presentation-locked, meaning that the timing of its onset
is constant across trials and is not correlated with the
subsequent reaction time. The latency of this component
is also constant for both novel and previously learned
images .
Thus, EEG differences seen in object recognition tasks
are nearly as fast as the earliest known responses in
higher-level areas. These results seem to leave little or no
opportunity for recurrent activity in cortical feedback
loops to have an effect on the earliest responses in IT, and
suggest that object recognition is performed in a rapid,
feedforward manner without regard to the particular
object present, the context, or familiarity.
One difficulty in using methods such as EEG or
other physiological signals to measure the timecourse of
object recognition arises from the fact that various visual
features are not equally probable across image categories.
For example, certain spatial frequencies, textures, colors,
and simple spatial patterns may be associated with a given
category of images without necessarily being diagnostic for
the objects themselves. Low-level features such as these
could be detected in parallel and might give rise to a
purely stimulus-related pre-recognition EEG signal that
varies across categories of images. This sort of signal could
be easily confused with target-related signals that depend
upon the completion of object recognition. As such,
when comparing the average EEG waveforms obtained
from different categories of images, any differences could
be due to non-specific visual processing as well as the task
relevance of the stimuli. Interestingly, experiments that
control for featural differences by mixing together images
from different categories 
also show differences in the EEG which rise to
significance around 150 ms, but the topographical
distribution and overall timecourse of these difference
signals are not the same as those obtained when different
categories are compared. This raises the question as to
whether there are different underlying neural processes at
work in the two cases.
Here we address this question by examining the
nature of the EEG signals obtained in two types of
categorization tasks. In the first task, subjects categorize
stimuli into animal and nonanimal categories, so that
there are potential low-level feature differences between
target and nontarget images, similar to previous
experiments . In the second
task, the target categories change from trial to trial and
the images assigned to these categories are arranged so as
to ensure that the pool of target and nontarget images is
identical across subjects. Thus, any EEG differences
between targets and nontargets in the second task must
be contingent upon recognition rather than due to image
features. We show that the earliest differences reliably
contingent upon recognition appear between 152 and
300 ms after presentation and have an onset which
covaries with the subsequent reaction time. Earlier
differences, which appear by 137 ms and are presentationlocked, only occur when comparing signals evoked by
images with featural differences, suggesting that they are
due to differences in early visual processing rather than
the result of recognition. These results suggest that the
timecourse of object recognition, while still quite rapid, is
not as fast as previously thought. We discuss the
implications of these results for models of recognition.
Participants
A total of thirty-nine adult subjects (10 males and 29
females, aged 18 to 41 years) participated in the four
experiments reported in this study. Seven subjects
participated in Experiment 1, twelve in Experiment 2,
twelve in Experiment 3, and eight in Experiment 4. All
participants had normal or corrected to normal vision.
All participants gave informed consent and the UC Davis
Human Subjects IRB approved all studies.
Sample images used in the four experiments
described here are shown below (Figure 1). Images used in
Experiment 1 were taken from a commercially available
collection (Corel Photo CDs, out of production) and
included images of animals, flowers, and other outdoor
scenes. The images used in Experiments 2 and 4 were
created by digitally centering a cutout image of an object
(Hemera Photo-Objects) against one of thirty artificially
created backgrounds. The backgrounds were created to
match the images from Experiment 1 in terms of both
their spatial and color second order statistics (pairwise
correlations) by generating 1/f noise for each of the
principal components in color space and scaling each by
the square root of the variance along each component.
Experiment 2 also used these background images without
a superimposed object (“Background-Only”). Images from
Experiment 3 were collected from the internet. The
following links provide additional, full-sized examples of
the images used in Experiment 1, Experiments 2 and 4,
and Experiment 3.
Experimental Procedures
Two types of experiments were used in this study, a
“single-category” experiment and three “cued-target”
experiments.
In the single-category case, subjects were given one
category (“animal”) which served as the target for the
duration of the experiment. Images were presented for 40
ms and were not masked. There was a delay of 3300-3700
ms between images (Figure 2). The timing of the image
Johnson & Olshausen
Experiment 1
Experiments 2,4
Experiment 3
Figure 1. Sample images. Images in Experiment 1 subtended 15x10˚ or 10x15˚ of visual angle. Images from Experiments 2 and 4
subtended 15x15˚. Images from Experiment 3 subtended an average of 11.4x13.0˚. The hyperlinks in the legend lead to web pages
with full-sized examples.
sequence did not depend on the subject’s responses.
Subjects were asked to make button-press responses as
quickly as possible and to delay their blinks for about 2
seconds after each image presentation.
In the cued-target case, a word (target cue) was
presented on the screen before each image to inform
subjects of the target category for that trial. The target cue
remained on the screen until the subject was ready to go
and performed a button press to initiate the trial. After an
additional 500-700 ms delay, the image was presented for
40 ms, not masked. The next target cue appeared 1700
ms after the previous image (Figure 2). Subjects were
asked to make button-press responses as quickly as
possible and to delay their blinks after each image until
the subsequent target cue appeared.
All images were centrally presented on a CRT
monitor. Image presentation was controlled by a PC
running the software Presentation (NeuroBehavioral
Systems). Viewing distance was 75 cm except for
Experiment 3 where the viewing distance was 65 cm.
Until button press
500-700 ms
Single Category
Cued Target
Figure 2. Schematic of task. Single-category Task:
Participants were informed of a target category (“animal”)
before the experiment. Cued-target Task: Participants were
informed of a target category, which varied widely, before each
image presentation by means of a word presented on screen.
Experiment 1: Single-category experiment. This
experiment had two conditions: “forced choice”, where
subjects pressed one button if the image contained a
target and another button if the image contained no
target, and “go/no-go”, where subjects pressed one button
if the image contained a target and did nothing if the
image contained no target. Counterbalances were made
across subjects for button presses and for given image
appearance in the forced choice or go/no-go condition.
Six subjects viewed 500 images in the forced choice
condition and 500 images in the go/no-go condition.
One subject viewed 1000 images in the forced choice
condition only. Targets and nontargets appeared equally
in both forced choice and go/no-go conditions. Results
Johnson & Olshausen
from nontarget images containing flowers were analyzed
separately and are not included in this study.
Experiment 2: Cued-target, 1/f Backgrounds
experiment. Target cues were all formulated for entry
level classification .
Subjects viewed 990 images and made a forced choice
response. Target objects, nontarget objects, and
background-only images (which required a ‘nontarget’
response) appeared equally frequently. Counterbalances
were made across subjects for button presses and target
status of individual images (except background-only
images). Results from background-only images were
analyzed separately and are not included in this study.
Experiment 3: Cued-target, Natural Backgrounds
experiment. Target cues were presented at two levels of
abstraction, entry level and superordinate level. Cues of
both levels of abstraction were randomly interleaved.
Subjects viewed a total of 1000 images. Superordinate
level targets, superordinate level nontargets, entry level
targets, and entry level nontargets appeared equally
frequently. Because some superordinate categories were
less intuitive than others, subjects were briefed on the
superordinate categories before the experiment.
Counterbalances were made across subjects for target
status and required level of classification of individual
Experiment 4: Cued-target, Motor Related Control
experiment. 1/f background images used in Experiment 4
all contained objects; no background-only images were
used. This experiment had two conditions, Respond-
Target and Respond-Nontarget. Both conditions were
go/no-go and consisted of 500 images. Targets and
nontargets appeared equally frequently. The Respond-
Target condition was run in its entirety before the
Respond-Nontarget condition. Subjects were not
informed of the upcoming change in condition until it
occurred. Counterbalances were made across subjects for
target status and response mode condition (forced choice
or go/no-go) of individual images.
The following links provide full lists of the target cues
used in Experiment 2 (entry level) and Experiment 3
(entry level and superordinate level), along with some
associated data including number of times used, and
average reaction time. The target cues used in Experiment
4 were identical to those in Experiment 2, and are not
EEG Recording and Data Analysis
Subjects were fitted with a 19-channel electrode cap
(Electro-Cap International, Eaton, Ohio) and were
prepared for EEG recording according to standard
techniques. Recorded channels (FP1, FP2, F7, F3, FZ, F4,
F8, T7, C3, CZ, C4, T8, P7, P3, PZ, P4, P8, O1, O2) were
selected from the International 10-20 set of electrode
positions . In addition to the cap electrodes, facial electrodes
were attached to record horizontal and vertical
electrooculogram (EOG). All recordings were referenced
to the right mastoid. Subjects performed the experiment
in a darkened, sound-dampened, electrically shielded
booth. EEG signals were amplified (SA Instrumentation,
San Diego) with a high-pass cutoff of 100 Hz and a lowpass cutoff of 0.01 Hz, then sent through an analog-todigital converter before being recorded at 256
samples/sec on a PC running Digitize (Arthur Jones,
Raw data were normalized, artifact rejected, and
analyzed using Matlab software developed in-house.
Software for the display of scalp topographies was
developed by Scott Makeig (Salk Institute, San Diego).
Data were artifact rejected on a trial-by-trial basis for
eyeblink and on a channel-by-channel basis for drift,
blocking and excessive alpha wave.
To create the ERPimages, individual correct-response
EEG trials were assigned to 3.9 ms (one sample) wide bins
on the basis of reaction time (RT) and an average was
calculated for each bin. Bins with RTs between 300 and
600 ms were sorted by RT. Each averaged bin was then
vertically expanded, with an expansion factor
proportional to the number of EEG trials underlying the
average. In the case of the difference ERPimages, the
averaged nontarget bin was subtracted from the averaged
target bin to create one difference wave at each RT. These
difference waves were then sorted by RT and expanded,
with an expansion factor proportional to the lesser of the
number of EEG trials, target or nontarget, underlying the
original RT bins before subtraction. All ERPimages were
then smoothed vertically with a Gaussian filter having a
standard deviation of 1/50 the height (number of
expanded trials) of the plot.
To perform the spatial frequency image analysis, the
center 512x512 pixel region of each image was extracted
and windowed with a 1-cycle cosine function (to remove
boundary artifacts). The power spectrum of each
windowed image was calculated by the discrete Fourier
transform, and then averaged over all images for a
particular class. The average power spectrum was then
bandpass filtered into 9 one-octave bands spaced by 1/2
octave, at 8 orientations each. This resulted in an 8x9
element array containing the power in each band, which
was then interpolated in 2D with a cubic spline.
Image Statistics
In the "single-category" paradigm, target and
nontarget categories were composed of different sets of
images – “animal” images and “nature” images. These two
sets of images could potentially differ in terms of low-level
image statistics. For instance, textures or shapes associated
Johnson & Olshausen
Target Minus Nontarget Signals
with fur, eyes and other animal parts, the horizon, sky,
trees, land terrain, water and other image features are
likely to be unevenly distributed across the animal and
nature categories. This could potentially give rise to
measurable neural processing differences unrelated to
object recognition in striate or early extrastriate cortex.
The trial-averaged EEG waveform – known as the
event-related potential (ERP) – was computed separately
for target and nontarget stimuli. These two ERPs were
directly compared by subtracting the nontarget ERP from
the target ERP. For both single-category and cued-target
tasks, the resulting difference waveform shows an early
positive divergence centered around frontal and central
electrodes.
While there are a host of potential differences in lowlevel features and textures between the two sets of images,
differences in the power spectrum are the easiest to
demonstrate. A spatial-frequency analysis of the animal
and nature images (excluding images containing flowers)
used in our single-category experiment reveals substantial
differences in the power spectrum – namely, scenes
containing animals have approximately equal power in all
directions whereas those without animals have much
more power in the vertical spatial frequencies (Figure 3).
Similar differences in the average power spectra between
major categories of images have been shown previously
 .
The grand average ERP waveforms for the forced
choice, single-category task at electrode FZ are plotted in
Figure 4a. The first differences between targets and
nontargets arise in the first positive deflection, which
begins about 100 ms after image onset. The ERP
difference waveform for this task (Figure 4f, black) has
two separate peaks, an early peak rising before 150 ms
and a late peak starting around 300 ms. Both peaks have
a maximum amplitude of about 4 µV. To determine
when the ERPs recorded for targets and nontargets first
significantly differ, we used a two-sample t-test for
difference of means. In order to avoid counting spurious
deflections from baseline, we considered the onset of
difference to be the first sample point for which the
calculated p-value was less than 0.01 and for which the
following 9 samples (10 consecutive points) also reached
the same criterion. By this definition, targets and
nontargets differed as early as 137 ms after presentation.
The timecourse of this difference signal is similar, but
slightly earlier than that reported in previous singlecategory studies .
The design of the "cued-target" paradigm ensured that
each image appeared equally in both the target and
nontarget conditions, across subjects. Since the set of
target images and the set of nontarget images were
identical, there were no differences in low-level features,
spatial frequency or otherwise, between the images. The
only difference between target and nontarget images was
in their conceptual status, not in their featural content.
Two types of images were used in the cued-target
experiments, one with cutout photos of objects digitally
placed atop an artificial 1/f background (“1/f BG”), and
another with objects in their natural context (Figure 1).
Spatial frequency (cy/pic)
Orientation (degrees)
Spatial frequency (cy/pic)
Orientation (degrees)
Normalized power
Animal images
Nature images
Figure 3. Power spectrum of animal and nature images. Each plot shows the average power spectrum (in log-polar coordinates) for
100 randomly selected images from each class (see methods). The animal images have a more even distribution of power among
different orientations. The strong anisotropy in the nature images is most likely due to the presence of the horizon, which produces
strong power at 90 degrees orientation in the spatial-frequency domain. Both plots are normalized to the same scale.
Johnson & Olshausen
Single Category, forced choice
Target n=1698
Nontarget n=1045
Cued Target, entry level (natural BGs)
Target n=2706
Nontarget n=2771
Cued Target, superordinate level (natural BGs)
Target n=2496
Nontarget n=2648
Difference Waves
Cued Target, 1/f BGs
Target n=3135
Nontarget n=3307
Single Category, go/no-go
Target n=1167
Nontarget n=631
Single Category, forced choice
Cued Target, 1/f BGs
Cued Target, entry level
Cued Target, superordinate
Single Category, go/no-go
Figure 4. Difference ERPs for Cued-target tasks have a slower rise and higher amplitude than difference ERPs for Single-category
tasks. All potentials calculated at electrode FZ. In (a)-(e), green bar below indicates timepoints where waveforms differ significantly (p
< 0.01). (a) Single-category task, forced choice. (b) Single-category task, go/no-go. (c) Cued-target task, 1/f BGs. (d) Cued-target,
entry-level task, natural BGs. (e) Cued-target, superordinate-level task, natural BGs. (f) Difference waves. Black trace (target minus
nontarget, single-category, forced choice task) has two peaks, one early (~150-250 ms) and one late (>300 ms). Dark blue trace
(single-category, go/no-go task) also has two peaks. The earliest difference is quite similar for both single-category conditions. Red
trace, (cued-target task, 1/f BGs), green trace (cued-target, natural BGs, entry-level task) and light blue trace (cued-target, natural BGs,
superordinate-level task) have only one, later peak. The amplitude of the differences during entry level categorization are much greater
than those in the single-category task (a superordinate categorization), but the amplitude of difference in the superordinate condition of
the cued-target task is similar to the amplitude of second difference peak in the single-category task. Time of first differences (p < 0.01,
two sample t-test, ten consecutive samples): Black trace = 137 ms, dark blue trace = 148 ms, red trace = 187 ms, green trace = 171
ms, light blue trace = 207 ms.
Johnson & Olshausen
Because previous single-category studies were done
with go/no-go responses instead of forced choice
responses, we also ran the single-category experiment in a
go/no-go response mode. The waveforms for the go/nogo experiment are shown in Figure 4b and the
corresponding difference between targets and nontargets
in Figure 4f, dark blue. The ERPs and difference
waveforms are quite similar, especially in the first 300 ms,
to those from the forced choice version of the singlecategory task. Here, targets and nontargets first differed
148 ms after presentation.
The ERPs for the cued-target task using 1/f
backgrounds (Figure 4c) show that the first positive
deflection has a much lower amplitude than in the singlecategory condition. Moreover, while targets and
nontargets are clearly different by the peak of the first
positivity in the single-category task, they are only
beginning to differ at the corresponding time in the cuedtarget task. The difference waveform obtained in this task
(Figure 4f, red trace) rises much more slowly (first
significance 187 ms) than those in the single-category
task, and has only one clear peak with a much higher late
maximal amplitude of 10 µV. This positive, posterior
signal during target detection is similar in latency, though
not in amplitude, to previous reports of target-related
signals , and bears
similarity to those found in many other target detection
studies . In this case, both the ERPs (Figure 4d) and
the difference waveforms (Figure 4f, green) resemble the
1/f BG cued-target task. They feature a single peak with a
maximal amplitude of 7.75 µV and the difference is first
statistically significant 172 ms after presentation. Despite
the disparity of the image backgrounds in the two
versions of the cued-target task no qualitative differences
are evident between the two, suggesting that the signals
that we are recording are relatively insensitive to the
nature of the image background.
A second change between the single-category and 1/f
BG cued-target experiments was the level of abstraction of
the requested categorization. In the single-category
experiment, the target category was at a superordinate
level of abstraction (“animal”), whereas in the 1/f BG
cued-target experiment, the target categories were at a
lower, entry level of abstraction (e.g. “cat”, “chair”)
 . In
the natural image cued-target experiment, participants
also categorized some images at the superordinate level
(e.g. “animal”, “furniture”) to match the categorizations
made in the single-category task. Again, the ERPs for
these trials resembled those in the 1/f BG cued-target
condition (Figure 4e). The difference waveforms (Figure
4f, light blue) maintain the single peak typical of cuedtarget tasks, and have an even slower onset (first
significance 207 ms). However, the maximal amplitude of
the difference drops to 3.5 µV, similar to that of the
single-category difference.
Scalp topographies reveal dramatic differences
between the distribution of these potentials across both
space and time. The scalp topography of the singlecategory (forced choice) difference captures the two peaks
seen in the ERP difference waveform (Figure 5a). The first
peak consists of a frontal positivity coupled with a strong
Figure 5. Earliest differences in Single-category Task and Cued-target task differ in ERP scalp topography. Time series of topography
plots from 117-398 ms. (a) Single-category task, target minus nontarget. The early difference peak shows a frontal positivity and
occipito-temporal negativity. The late difference peak shows central positivity with little occipito-temporal negativity. (b) Cued-target
task, 1/f BGs, target minus nontarget. One peak, with a timecourse similar to the late peak in (a) shows central positivity with little
occipito-temporal negativity.
Johnson & Olshausen
bilateral occipito-temporal negativity, while the second
peak is a central positivity and lacks the negative occipitotemporal component. The single peak of the 1/f BG
cued-target experiment (Figure 5b) has a time course and
scalp distribution which closely resemble those of the
second peak of the single-category experiment, and lacks
the bilateral occipito-temporal negativity characteristic of
the first peak.
Presentation-Locked and Reaction-
Time Dependent Signals
To further investigate the differences between the
single-category and cued-target conditions, we utilized a
modified version of the ERPimage . The ERPimage shows
the EEG waveforms from all trials sorted by reaction
time, and thus clearly reveals the presentation-locked and
reaction-time related components contributing to the
ERP. Individual EEG trials were separated by target
status, and each group was sorted and binned by reaction
time to create an ERPimage. We then compared the
binned ERPimages for targets and nontargets by
subtracting the latter from the former. This difference
ERPimage reveals the trial-by-trial differences in the EEG
for trials having the same reaction time (see methods for
more detail on ERPimage creation). ERPimages were
created for both the single-category (forced choice)
experiment and the 1/f BG cued-target experiment.
The target and nontarget ERPimages at electrode FZ
(Figures 6a, 6b) show presentation-locked activity as
vertical structure. Activity that is correlated with the
reaction time has a diagonal structure, often closely
following the displayed reaction time (RT) curve (solid
black line).
The difference ERPimage for the single-category task
(Figure 6c, left) shows that the earliest differences arise
from presentation-locked components. The dashed
vertical line indicates the onset of statistical significance
for these trials (see Figure 4) and the target minus
nontarget positivity is evident at the onset of statistical
significance regardless of reaction time. Difference ERPs
(Figure 6d, left) created for fast-RT trials (300-400 ms
response) and slow-RT trials (400-500 ms response) do
not differ greatly in amplitude or onset time in the singlecategory task.
The difference ERPimage for the 1/f BG cued-target
task (Figure 6c, right) shows that the earliest differences
are not only slower but are also dependent on the
reaction time for a given trial rather than presentationlocked. The target minus nontarget differences on fast-RT
trials rise more quickly than on slow-RT trials. In contrast
to the single-category task where all trials appeared to
contribute equally to the statistical significance, in the
cued-target task only the fastest trials appear to be
responsible for the earliest statistically significant
differences. In fact, in the slowest trials shown in Figure
6c (right), the difference does not appear to arise before
300 ms. Difference ERPs for fast- and slow-RT trials
(Figure 6d, right) also reflect the RT-dependent
component of this difference.
We calculated the time of first statistical significance
for fast- and slow-RT trials for both the single-category
and cued-target tasks shown in Figure 6d. Using the same
statistical criterion as before (p < 0.01, ten consecutive
samples) we see a time lag for first significance in the
cued-target task, with fast-RT trials first differing at 187
ms and the slow-RT trials first differing at 219 ms, a delay
of 32 ms. If we adopt a stricter statistical criterion (p < 10–
4, five consecutive samples), this delay extends to 63 ms
(fast-RT = 195 ms, slow-RT = 258 ms). There was a small
11 ms delay in the single-category results under the
original criterion (fast-RT = 137 ms, slow-RT = 148 ms)
that disappeared using the stricter criterion (fast-RT =
slow-RT = 152 ms).
The onsets of the earliest differences seen in the cuedtarget case are correlated with the subsequent reaction
time, while the onsets of those in the single-category case
are, if anything, only marginally correlated with RT. The
development of RT-dependence, taken together with
changes in overall latency, number of peaks, peak
amplitude, and scalp topography, very strongly suggest
that the earliest ERP differences in the cued-target case
are not simply a delayed form of the same signal seen in
the single-category case. Since the fast, presentationlocked differences are seen only in the single-category case
- where the images contain demonstrable low-level feature
differences - but not in the balanced cued-target case, it
seems likely that they are due to differences in early visual
processing rather than the completion of object
recognition.
Motor-Related Control
In order to determine if the target-related signal we
found could be due to motor effects (motor planning,
motor execution, motor countermand) rather than target
awareness, we performed a task swapping experiment.
Subjects were given a cued-target task with 1/f BG images,
but asked to respond in a go/no-go fashion only to targets
for the first half of the experiment, then only to
nontargets for the second half. Subjects were not
informed of the impending reversal in response mode
until the time came to change. The target minus
nontarget difference in the first half of the experiment
corresponded to a response minus no-response condition.
In the second half of the experiment, the target minus
nontarget difference corresponded to the reverse case: a
no-response minus response condition. If the signals we
see are due to differences in motor preparation or output
Johnson & Olshausen
Single Category
Cued Target
Nontargets
Difference
Difference ERPs
Figure 6. ERP Images show presentation-locked and RT-dependent activity in target minus nontarget comparisons. Black curve
indicates reaction time on each trial. All plots are at electrode FZ. (a) Target ERP Images. Early activity is presentation-locked, later
activity has some correlation with RT. (b) Nontarget ERP Images. (c) Target minus Nontarget differences. Vertical dashed line shows
first time of significance (see Figure 3). Vertical solid lines (blue = 300-400 ms, red = 400-500 ms) identify trials used in fast-RT and
slow-RT ERPs in (d) below. The first difference in the single-category condition is presentation-locked. The first difference in the cuedtarget condition rises more quickly on fast-RT trials than slow-RT trials. (d) Difference ERPs, split by RT. Blue traces, RT = 300 – 400
ms. Red traces, RT = 400 – 500 ms. The first differences for fast-RT and slow-RT trials are identical for the single-category condition.
In the cued-target condition, the fast-RT differences rise more quickly than slow-RT differences.
Johnson & Olshausen
between target and nontarget responses, we should expect
them to reverse in sign and follow the motor response
rather than the target status of the image in the second
half of the experiment. The ERP waveforms and
difference waveforms (Figure 7) are similar to those for
cued-target conditions in duration, amplitude, and scalp
topography. They clearly do not reverse sign as would be
expected for a motor-related signal suggesting that they
are not due to motor effects but rather to the conceptual
status of the image as target or nontarget.
In the respond-target condition, the difference
becomes significant 152 ms after presentation. This is the
earliest difference seen in any cued-target task in this
study. The difference waveforms rise somewhat later
during the more difficult respond-nontarget condition,
becoming significant at 176 ms.
Reaction Times and Accuracy
One possible concern in comparing results from the
single-category and cued-target tasks is that the cued-target
task, with its switching targets, may be inherently more
difficult that the single-category task. A comparison of the
reaction times and accuracy for targets in the singlecategory task (Table 1, 427 ms, 94.1%) and the
corresponding superordinate categorizations in the cuedtarget task (520 ms, 86.9%) might suggest that the cuedtarget response mode is more difficult than the singlecategory response mode. While this could be due to the
switching of target category, another possibility is that the
required categorizations are more difficult in the cuedtarget case. However, if we look only at cued-target trials
for which the target cue was “animal”, target responses
(438 ms, 95.8%) are slightly more accurate and only 11
ms slower than those seen in the single-category
experiment. This suggests that the cued-target paradigm
per se is not significantly more difficult than the singlecategory paradigm, but rather that the single-category
target of “animal”, though nominally superordinate, is
easier than the other superordinate categorizations it was
grouped with in Experiment 3. In addition, when the
same images are categorized at both superordinate and
entry levels, we find a 56 ms delay for superordinate
categorization, similar to reports of a 50 ms delay in a
similar task using line drawings . This
suggests that the superordinate categories we chose were
not unusually difficult ones.
Table 1. Accuracy and Reaction Time.
Experiment
1, Forced Choice
1, Go/No-Go
3, Superordinate
3, “Animal”
4, Go Target
4, Go Nontarget
Separated by target and nontarget. Experiment 1 separated
into forced choice and go/no-go conditions. Experiment 3
separated into entry-level and superordinate-level
categorizations. Trials from Experiment 3 where the
superordinate category was “animal”, most similar to
Experiment 1, are included in Experiment 3, superordinate but
also shown separately. Experiment 4 separated into go-ontarget and go-on-nontarget conditions.
Respond Target
Target n=1744
Nontarget n=1745
Respond Nontarget
Target n=1544
Nontarget n=1641
Difference
Target–nontarget, respond target
Target–nontarget, respond nontarget
Figure 7. Differences in cued-target task are not due to motor or motor-related activity. ERPs for motor control experiment, electrode
FZ. In (a) and (b), green bar below indicates timepoints where waveforms differ significantly (p < 0.01). Subjects responded with a
button press to only targets or nontargets, depending on condition. (a) Respond-target task. (b) Respond-nontarget task. (c)
Difference waves, target minus nontarget. Blue trace, respond-target task. From a motor point of view, the blue trace is response
minus no-response. Red trace, respond-nontarget task. From a motor point of view, the red trace is no-response minus response.
The major activity does not invert in the no-response minus response condition, as would be the case for motor-related activity. Time of
first differences: Respond-target = 152 ms, respond-nontarget = 176 ms (p < 0.01, two sample T-test, ten consecutive samples).
Johnson & Olshausen
Two other observations merit comment. First, go/nogo categorizations appear to be easier than forced choice
categorizations, as we would expect from the easier
mapping of task to motor output. This change in
difficulty seems to be manifested mostly in reaction time
in the single-category case (399 ms vs. 427 ms) and in
accuracy in the cued-target case (97.3% vs. 90.1%).
Second, there is a difference between performance in the
entry level cued-target task for natural images (464 ms,
93.9%) and images with artificial backgrounds (432 ms,
90.1%). This might be accounted for by a speed/accuracy
tradeoff, but certain characteristics of the natural images
(potential ‘distractor’ objects, object not always centered
at fixation, etc.) may also play a part in the slower reaction
times in this case.
Discussion
We have shown that the earliest components in the
EEG that are correlated with recognition have an onset
that varies between 150 and 300 ms and is correlated
with the subsequent reaction time. These results stand in
stark contrast to previous EEG studies showing early,
fixed latency components correlated with object
recognition arising around 150 ms . These previous studies are equivalent to our
"single-category" paradigm, in which we show that the
early, fixed-latency components (in our case, arising ~135
ms) are most likely due to low-level feature differences in
the images. We therefore conclude that the early 135-150
ms onset, fixed-latency component in the EEG
corresponds to differences in early visual processing
among images, and that the neural signatures actually
corresponding to object recognition occur later and with
variable latency.
These studies also demonstrate that a populationwide p-value of the ERP is not necessarily representative
of the average signal latency. While the population-wide
p-value is useful for determining the latency of a stimuluslocked signal, as seen in the single-category experiment, it
appears from our data to be highly biased by the fastest
reaction time trials when estimating the latency of an RTdependent signal. As such, it is difficult to draw
conclusions about the correspondence of ERP differences
across experiments on the basis of p -value latencies alone.
The ERPimage has the advantage of
showing both stimulus-locked and RT-dependent
components simultaneously, making it more valuable
than a simple global p-value for the analysis and
interpretation of EEG components that may not have a
constant latency.
It should be noted that although we have attributed
the earliest differences in neural activity in the singlecategory case to low-level feature differences, this does not
preclude these features playing a role in recognition. For
instance, Ullman has argued that pictorial image features of “intermediate
complexity” are the most useful features for the
discrimination of objects. In addition, it has been shown
that natural images can be classified into animal and
nonanimal categories at a success rate of 80% using
nothing but measures of global image statistics such as the
power spectrum (Torralba & Oliva, In Press), suggesting
that some low-level features are fairly consistent within
categories of images. Thus, the visual system might be
able to build a good template of the features associated
with a category and use this template to make preemptive
categorizations with reasonable accuracy. This sort of
template could range from a simple list of features which
are expected to be present to a complex mental image of
the object in question. If such a template is created, the
early differences we ascribe to low-level visual processing
may in fact represent an interaction between the bottomup processing of the image and a top-down target
The results from this study can be interpreted to
support a top-down template model if it is assumed that
in the cued-target case, subjects were not able to
adequately create the necessary template. The subjects
were forced to change their target for every image in the
cued-target experiments, but had only one target for the
duration of the single-category experiment. Although the
cued-target trials were self-paced (i.e., the subjects were
not rushed into a subsequent image presentation before
they deemed themselves ready), it is possible that topdown template priming requires a longer time - on the
order of tens to hundreds of seconds - to establish.
Alternatively, in the single-category case the visual system
might learn, over the course of many animal and nature
scenes, its own template of features which are commonly
associated with each category. This sort of learning would
be difficult in the cued-target case because of the large
number of different target categories and the low number
and non-consecutive presentations of each. If either of
these scenarios holds, it is possible that the earliest target
minus nontarget differences in single-category tasks
represent a special form of recognition based on low-level
features of the images rather than simply processing of
the image features themselves. However, this sort of
feature-based recognition would require a long-term
preparatory strategy (as evidenced by the lack of
differences in the cued-target case) that is unlikely to be of
use in everyday object recognition.
The experiments reported here also provide new
insights into the neural signatures of superordinate level
categorization. We find that the amplitude of targetrelated differences in the cued-target, natural images
experiment depends greatly on the requested level of
categorization, with the amplitude of entry level
differences on the order of twice as great as that of
superordinate level differences. The amplitudes of these
differences compare well with those seen at the same
Johnson & Olshausen
levels of categorization in Experiments 1 and 2 (Figure
4f), and may reflect a greater level of certainty of
categorization. Another possibility is that the entry level
cues allow a more precise target template to be created,
leading to a better match (as discussed above, albeit this
time applying to the later, RT-dependent signal, not the
earlier stimulus-locked signal). Previous
electrophysiological studies have suggested that superordinate level
categorization occurs as late as 340 ms after image
presentation. Given that entry level categorization appears
to occur in as little as 152 ms, this would imply that the
additional processing required for superordinate
categorization might take as much as 200 ms. However,
we have found evidence of target/nontarget differences at
the superordinate level arising as early as 207 ms, which
suggests that superordinate processing takes much less
time than previously reported.
While is it not possible to discern whether the
recognition-related component we observe in the EEG
reflects the act of object recognition, the target decision
or yet another process, it seems clear that this component
can arise only after the target status of the image is
known. Since the knowledge of target status is dependent
on successful recognition, our measurements serve as an
upper bound for the time of recognition itself. Thus,
there is a variable 20-170 ms delay between the
hypothetical physiological lower bound of 130 ms in a
purely feedforward scheme and our measured upper bound of
150-300 ms.
One hypothesis for this delay is that it reflects the
extra time needed for recurrent activity to circulate in
cortico-cortical feedback loops. A number of theorists
have argued that recurrent processing between higher and
lower levels of visual cortex is a necessary aspect of
perception. Some have emphasized the role of binding of
features ,
while others have proposed that it sends the predictions
of higher levels to lower levels to “explain away” , or disambiguate representations at lower
levels. There are numerous examples from
neurophysiological studies in animals , human event related potentials
 and fMRI
 
suggesting that cortico-cortical feedback loops play an
active role in perception. Our results, while not a direct
demonstration of feedback processes at work, imply that
there is at least enough time for considerable recurrent
activity to occur prior to recognition. The fact that targetrelated differences are correlated with the subsequent
reaction time suggests that the first feedforward wave of
activity through cortex may not always be sufficient to
perform reliable recognition and that the routine use of
feedback information could be a fundamental component
of everyday visual processing.
Yet another possibility is that the delay reflects the
extra time required to simply integrate weak or
ambiguous signals at various stages along the feedforward
pathway. For example, evidence has been shown for
neural signals that ramp up during the decision process
with a rate that depends on the strength of the stimulus
 , suggesting a neural mechanism
for integrating evidence. Although such integration would
involve recurrent activity, it is typically hypothesized to
occur only within each level of cortical hierarchy, not
between them.
One problem for both of these temporal-integration
hypotheses, however, is the fact that behavioral
performance remains good under strictly masked
conditions . A mask that
wipes clean the cortical or LGN image should disrupt any
obligatory feedback or integrative processes. However, if
representations are sufficiently sparse , it may be possible for the
representation of the mask or subsequent image to coexist with the previous activity pattern without destructive
interference. This idea is supported by the fact that masks
must be individually tailored to different types of images
for maximum effectiveness. Thus, it is possible that
feedback processes could still operate on persistent, sparse
activity left untouched by subsequent visual information.
Despite the somewhat slower timecourse for
recognition measured in our experiments, it should be
emphasized that the speed with which recognition occurs
is still quite impressive. If cortico-cortical feedback
processes are indeed a necessary prerequisite to
recognition, then the number of iterations in these loops
must be fairly small. The real challenge, however, is to
understand what exactly is happening in these feedback
loops at the level of neuronal representation and how
they operate in more realistic, dynamic situations where
both the eye and objects in the world are moving. In
order to properly design experiments to investigate this, it
will be necessary to develop more detailed,
neurobiologically-based models of feedback and its role in
scene analysis.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grant MH57921 (B.A.O.)
from the National Institutes of Health. A preliminary
version of this work was presented at the 2002 Annual
Meeting of the Vision Sciences Society, May 10-15, 2002,
Sarasota, FL. Thanks to Charan Ranganath and Scott
Murray for draft comments.
Commercial relationships: none.
Johnson & Olshausen
Jung, T.-P., Makeig, S., Westerfield, M., Townsend, J.,
Courchesne, E. & Sejnowski, T. J. . Analyzing
and Visualizing Single-trial Event-related Potentials.
In Kearns, M. S., Solla, S. A. & Cohn, D. A. (Eds.),
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 11
(pp. 118-124). Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.