North Clin Istanbul 2015;2(1):81-86
doi: 10.14744/nci.2015.97269
An overview of Ebola virus disease
Ayten Kadanali, Gul Karagoz
Department of Infectious Diseases and Clinical Microbiology, Umraniye Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey
Ebola virus disease (EVD), formerly known as Ebola hemorrhagic fever, is a severe, often fatal illness in humans.
Ebola virus (EBOV) is transmitted through contact with blood or body fluids of a person who contracted or died
from EVD, contaminated objects like needles and infected animals or bush meat. EVD has an incubation period
of 2 to 21 days, and the infection has an acute onset without any carrier status. Currently, there is no standard
treatment for EVD, so it is important to avoid infection or further spreading of the virus. Although historically the
mortality of this infection exceeded 80%, modern medicine and public health measures have been able to lower
this figure and reduce the impact of EBOV on individuals and communities. Its treatment involves early, aggressive
supportive care with rehydration. Clinicians should consider the possibility of EVD in persons with travel or exposure history with the incubation period presenting constitutional symptoms in order to promptly identify diseased
patients, and prevent further spreading of the disease.
Key words: Ebola virus disease; epidemiology; diagnosis; treatment.
bola virus disease (EVD) first appeared in
1976 in 2 simultaneous outbreaks in Nzara,
Sudan, and in Yambuku, Democratic Republic of Congo. The latter occurred in a village near
the Ebola River, from which the disease takes its
name. The mortality rate was around 90 percent.
Although medical facilities have improved over the
years, case fatality rates have varied from 25% to
90% in past outbreaks. EVD outbreak that began
in February 2014 in Guinea, is the most prevalent
EVD outbreak recorded in the history which spred
to Liberia, Sierra Leone, Nigeria, Senegal, Spain,
and the United States. It had common features with
the outbreak in 1976. Zaire Ebola virus was isolated in both outbreaks with the disease onset in rural
forest communities. The outbreaks were worsened
because critically ill patients with severe systemic
symptoms were brought to hospitals which infected hospital staff was unaware of the risks of being
exposed to patient blood and body fluids without
proper protection. Due to the common travel and
general international contacts implicit in globalization, as well as the popularity of tourism, EVD is
most certainly a threat to the people all over the
world . In this review article, we planned
to discuss the epidemiological, clinical and laboratory features and patient management of EVD
based on literature.
Revised: February 06, 2015 Accepted: April 09, 2015 Online: April 24, 2015
Correspondence: Dr. Ayten Kadanalı. Umraniye Egitim ve Arastirma Hastanesi, Enfeksiyon Hastaliklari Bolumu,
Istanbul, Turkey.
Tel: +90 216 - 632 18 18 / 1675 e-mail: 
© Copyright 2015 by Istanbul Northern Anatolian Association of Public Hospitals - Available online at www.kuzeyklinikleri.com
REVIEW Infectious Diseases and Microbiology
The virus family Filoviridae includes 3 genera: Cuevavirus, Marburgvirus, and Ebolavirus (EBOV).
There are 5 species that have been identified: Zaire,
Bundibugyo, Sudan, Reston and Tai Forest in Ebolavirus. Zaire, Bundibugyo, and Sudan ebolaviruses
have been associated with large outbreaks in Africa.
The virus causing the 2014 West African outbreak
belongs to the Zaire species. Fruit bats of the family Pteropodidae are the recognized reservoir of
the virus. The EBOV genome is a negative-sense
single-stranded RNA and contain viral envelope,
matrix, and nucleocapsid components. It encodes
seven structural proteins: nucleoprotein (NP),
polymerase cofactor (VP35, VP40, GP), transcription activator (VP30, VP24), and RNA-dependent
RNA polymerase (L) . EBOV is listed as an
agent included in WHO Risk Group 4 Pathogen
requiring biosafety level 4-equivalent containment
requiring Biosafety Level 4-equivalent containment,
because of its high mortality rate.
Epidemiology
The initial outbreak of EVD occurred in Yambuku
in the Northern Zaire. Disease had spred by close
personal contact. This was the first recognition of
the disease and the subtype was named Zaire Ebola
Virus . In the same year, another unrelated virus,
which resulted in epidemics in South Sudan, was
identified as Sudan Ebola Virus . Of interest,
some researchers suggested that EBOV outbreaks
might be related to certain confluences of environmental and climatic conditions .
Up to date, 25 outbreaks have been reported
including the current outbreak in March 2014. As of
March, 18 2015, 24.754 suspect cases and 10.236
deaths had been reported . The case-fatality rate
is between 20% and 90% depending on the virus
species .
Zaire Ebola virus species has the highest mortality rate (60%-90%) followed by the Sudan Ebola
virus species (40%-60%). The Bundibugyo virus
species has caused only one outbreak to date, with
a 25% mortality rate. In the current outbreak, when
the first 9 months of data were reviewed case-fatality rate was reported as 70.8% . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends
that travelers to Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone
protect themselves by avoiding contact with the
blood and body fluids of the diseased people. Nigeria, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Ghana,
Angola, Togo, United Republic of Tanzania, Ethiopia, Mozambique, Burundi, Madagascar and Malawi are also at risk for spread of the EVD.
Clinical manifestations
EVD is an acute hemorrhagic fever, that has an incubation period of 2 to 21 days (mean 4-10) which
is characterized by ‘flu-like’ symptoms like fever,
chills, malaise, and myalgia. The febrile state may be
mild during the initial phase of the illness, but may
manifest with an acute, and very worse onset with
associated chills and rigors. The most commonly
described symptoms are fever in combination with
a maculopapular rash around the face, neck, trunk,
and arms usually appearing by day 5-7 of the illness. The most common symptoms were fever, fatigue, vomiting, diarrhea, and anorexia in current
North Clin Istanbul – NCI
Kadanali et al., An overview of Ebola virus disease
urea nitrogen and creatinine are observed due to excessive fluid loss from diarrhea and vomiting without adequate volume replacement. Prolonged prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time
(PTT), or bleeding and disseminated intravascular
coagulation (DIC) can be seen .
Antigen-capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) testing, IgM ELISA, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and virus isolation
tests are used as diagnostic tests to confirm infection. Laboratory diagnosis for EVD should be performed in a well-equipped laboratory with up to
biosafety level 4 bio- contaminant facilities for viral
culturing. WHO Risk Group 4 Pathogen requiring
biosafety level 4-equivalent containment requiring
Biosafety Level 4-equivalent containment, because
of its high mortality rate.
There is no biosafety level 4 bio- contaminant
facilities in Turkey so there is a need to establish a
biosafety level-4 laboratory for further studies in
Case definitions for evd
According to the World Health Organization
(WHO) and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), a suspected case was defined as
Any person, alive or dead, had or having a sudden onset of high fever and had contact with a patient who is suspected, probable or confirmed or a
dead or sick animal from Ebola; or if any person
with sudden onset of high fever with at least three
of the following findings: severe headache, fatigue,
anorexia/loss of appetite, lethargy, breathing difficulties, muscle pain, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal
pain, unexplained hemorrhage or any sudden death
without any cause.
A probable case was defined as any suspected
case who has had direct contact with the blood and
body fluids of an individual diagnosed with Ebola
or who has had close physical contact with an individual diagnosed with Ebola or who lived with
or visited an Ebola-diagnosed patient while the
patient was ill within the previous 21 days with no
laboratory confirmation.
A confirmed case was defined as a suspected or
probable case with a positive laboratory result.
outbreak in Africa.
A person who has fever or symptoms as severe
headache, fatigue, muscle pain, vomiting, diarrhea,
abdominal pain, or unexplained hemorrhage; and
an epidemiologic risk factor within the 21 days before the onset of symptoms must be kept under observation.
Viral hemorrhagic fever is the main finding. Because of thrombocythemiamucosal hemorrhage
(especially in the conjunctiva), petechiae, ecchymosis, can be observed in patients with EVD. Massive
hemorrhage, is usually observed only in fatal cases
especially in the gastrointestinal system .
Other than the blood system, there are also cardiac,
renal, pulmonary, neurological, gastrointestinal, and
hepatic involvements. Cardiac manifestations might
be due to the hemodynamic changes due to severe
hemorrhage or direct viral involvement of the heart.
But the cardiopathy in Ebola virus infection is not
clear and needs further study. Profound fluid losses from the gastrointestinal tract result in volume
depletion, metabolic abnormalities such as hyponatremia, hypokalemia, and hypocalcemia, shock,
and organ failure. The patients who have respiratory, neurological, or hemorrhagic symptoms have
higher risk of death . Patients who survive from
Ebola infection have been reported to show clinical
improvement by the middle of the second week.
EVD usually presents with an acute viral prodrome.
It is difficult to distinguish EVD from other infectious diseases such as malaria, typhoid fever, meningitis, shigellosis, leptospirosis and yellow fever.
Therefore, travel and exposure history is very important when approaching a suspected patient returning from an endemic area.
As laboratory findings, leukopenia with lymphocytes and an increased percentage of granulocytes
are common signs at the time of clinical presentation As the disease progresses, leukocytosis can develop with an increase in immature granulocytes.
Thrombocytopenia is a persistent feature until
death. Mildly elevated serum levels of alanine and
aspartate aminotransferase (ALT, AST) are common findings. Jaundice is not commonly seen, and
serum total bilirubin level is either normal or elevated in the early phase of the illness. Elevated blood
On 27 October 2014, the CDC updated the
case definitions and included the category of “Person Under Investigation (PUI)” described as: A
person who has fever or symptoms, including severe
headache, fatigue, muscle pain, vomiting, diarrhea,
abdominal pain, or unexplained hemorrhage; and
an epidemiologic risk factor within the 21 days before the onset of symptoms.
A confirmed case was defined as a PUI with a
positive laboratory confirmation of EBOV .
The main strategies that is being offered to infected
patients are symptomatic and supportive care, such
as hydration, replacement of electrolytes, nutritional
support, maintaining oxygen status and blood pressure and treating other infections. Currently there
is no approved vaccine and standard treatment for
EVD that has been validated in humans .
Up to date there are two notable Ebola vaccine
efforts. The first one is cAd3-ZEBOV and the second is the rVSV. Both vaccines are effective in nonhuman primates, but confirmation of effectiveness
against the Ebola virus in humans requires further
studies .
As a result of quick recovery of one of the Dallas (Texas USA) nurses following the transfer of
plasma from Ebola survivors; passive immunity has
become a potential treatment for EVD .
Because of the high mortality rate of EVD, many
investigational treatments are underway. ZMapp,
is an experimental biopharmaceutical drug under
development for treatment of EVD. It contains
three “humanized” monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)
against the EBOV GP protein. These antibodies
are produced in plants, specifically Nicotiana benthamiana .
This drug was first used experimentally in humans during the 2014 West Africa EVD outbreak,
but there is no randomized controlled trial to determine whether it works or it is safe enough to bring
it on the market . In early August 2014,
“ZMapp”, was used to treat two American medical
workers and one Spanish priest and three African
doctors who had contracted the deadly EBOV. Except for the 75-year-old Spanish priest who died
despite the ZMapp treatment, the other five were
reportedly improved significantly after receiving
ZMapp. This is the first time that a drug has shown
therapeutic efficacy against EVD in human.
Favipiravir is a new antiviral drug. It can be used
for the treatment of patients with Ebola virus, but
it is teratogenic, embryotoxic and any clinical trial
of favipiravir has not been performed in patients infected with the Ebola virus. It is approved by The
Minister of Health, Welfare and Labor of Japan due
to the epidemic in West Africa .
Melatonin is a natural substance, which is synthesized at night by the pineal gland and intestinal
cells among many other cell types. It has no known
side effects, even at very high concentrations. Melatonin has significant and curative effects on all the
relevant cells and systems and decreases the symptoms and increases the survival of those infected
with the Ebola virus. It is expected that melatonin
will help maximize the benefit of soon available
treatments .
Prevention
Since Ebola virus infection is highly infectious and
there are no standard treatments for EVD, isolation of infected individuals is very important. If a
diagnosis of Ebola is being suspected, then, the patient should be isolated in a single room (with a private bathroom or covered bedside commode), and
healthcare personnel should follow standard, contact, and droplet precautions, including the use of
appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE).
PPE should include double gloves, gown or coverall and apron, face mask, eye protection (goggles or
face shield) head cover, and boots. when performing
aerosol-generating procedures, the wearing N95 of
or higher respirators is also suggested.
Before contact with patients, washing hands
with soap and water or an alcohol-based hand
sanitizer and wearing appropriate personal protective equipment are recommended. Once exposed
to blood or body fluids of the unprotected patient,
healthcare workers should thoroughly wash the exposure site with water and soap. Safety needles are
recommended for venipuncture or blood samples.
A minimum volume of 4 mL of whole blood preserved with EDTA is preferred for Ebola testing.
Specimens for shipment should be packaged following the basic triple packaging system that consists
North Clin Istanbul – NCI
Kadanali et al., An overview of Ebola virus disease
soutbreak-qa.html?_r=1
8. Chowell G, Simonsen L, Viboud C, Kuang Y. Is West Africa Approaching a Catastrophic Phase or is the 2014 Ebola Epidemic
Slowing Down? Different Models Yield Different Answers for
Liberia. PLoS Curr 2014;6. CrossRef
9. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2014 Ebola Outbreak in West Africa - Case Counts. CDC; (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention). 2014.
10. Polonsky JA, Wamala JF, de Clerck H, Van Herp M, Sprecher
A, Porten K, et al. Emerging filoviral disease in Uganda: proposed explanations and research directions. Am J Trop Med Hyg
2014;90:790-3. CrossRef
11. World Health Organization. Ebola Hemorrhagic Fever. Geneva,
Switzerland: WHO; 2010. Available at who.int/
mediacentre/factsheets/fs103/en/.
12. WHO Ebola Response Team. Ebola virus disease in West Africa--the first 9 months of the epidemic and forward projections.
N Engl J Med 2014;371:1481-95. CrossRef
13. Kortepeter MG, Bausch DG, Bray M. Basic clinical and laboratory features of filoviral hemorrhagic fever. J Infect Dis 2011;204
Suppl 3:810-6. CrossRef
14. West TE, von Saint André-von Arnim A. Clinical presentation
and management of severe Ebola virus disease. Ann Am Thorac
Soc 2014;11:1341-50. CrossRef
15. Kortepeter MG, Bausch DG, Bray M. Basic clinical and laboratory features of filoviral hemorrhagic fever. J Infect Dis 2011;204
Suppl 3:810-6. CrossRef
16. Joffe S. Evaluating novel therapies during the Ebola epidemic.
JAMA 2014;312:1299-300. CrossRef
17. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Case Definition for
Ebola Virus Disease (EVD). Atlanta, GA, USA: CDC; 2014.
Available at 
18. Kanapathipillai R, Henao Restrepo AM, Fast P, Wood D, Dye
C, Kieny MP, et al. Ebola vaccine--an urgent international priority. N Engl J Med 2014;371:2249-51. CrossRef
19. Butler D. Ebola drug trials set to begin amid crisis. Nature
2014;513:13-4. CrossRef
20. Bacon J, Owens M. Infected Dallas nurse ID’d; gets transfusion
from Ebola survivor. 2014. 2014. Oct 28, [Last accessed on 2014
Oct 28]. Available from: 
nation/2014/10/13/ebola-nurse-who/17182599/
21. Zhang Y, Li D, Jin X, Huang Z. Fighting Ebola with
ZMapp: spotlight on plant-made antibody. Sci China Life Sci
2014;57:987-8. CrossRef
22. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Ebola virus disease
Information for Clinicians in U.S. Healthcare Settings. CDC
USA Website. 
23. Nagata T, Lefor AK, Hasegawa M, Ishii M. Favipiravir: a new
medication for the ebola virus disease pandemic. Disaster Med
Public Health Prep 2015;9:79-81. CrossRef
24. Anderson G, Maes M, Markus RP, Rodriguez M. Ebola virus:
of a primary sealable container wrapped with absorbent material, secondary container (watertight,
leak-proof), and an outer shipping package and
should be shipped at 2-8°C or frozen on cold-packs.
The defined case should be isolated till two negative results within a single 48 hour period are obtained. If death occurs from a suspect case of EVD,
dead body should be burned within 24 hours.
In hospitals, transport and movement of the patients out of the room should be limited to medically-necessary purposes. If transport or movement
outside the room is necessary, patients sould wear a
surgical mask .
After returning from epidemic area, body temperature should be monitored for 21 days.
The Ebola virus is susceptible to many chemical
agents. According to the WHO recommendations,
environment contaminated with blood spill or body
fluid can be cleaned up with 1:10 dilution and for
surfaces 1:100 dilution of 5.25% household bleach
applied for 10 minutes is required .
Conflict of Interest: No conflict of interest was declared by
the authors.
Financial Disclosure: The authors declared that this study
has received no financial support.