Psychological Review
VOLUME 90 NUMBER 4 OCTOBER 1983
Extensional Versus Intuitive Reasoning:
The Conjunction Fallacy in Probability Judgment
Amos Tversky
Daniel Kahneman
Stanford University
University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada
Perhaps the simplest and the most basic qualitative law of probability is the conjunction rule: The probability of a conjunction, P(A&B), cannot exceed the probabilities of its constituents, P(A) and .P(B), because the extension (or the possibility
set) of the conjunction is included in the extension of its constituents. Judgments
under uncertainty, however, are often mediated by intuitive heuristics that are not
bound by the conjunction rule. A conjunction can be more representative than
one of its constituents, and instances of a specific category can be easier to imagine
or to retrieve than instances of a more inclusive category. The representativeness
and availability heuristics therefore can make a conjunction appear more probable
than one of its constituents. This phenomenon is demonstrated in a variety of
contexts including estimation of word frequency, personality judgment, medical
prognosis, decision under risk, suspicion of criminal acts, and political forecasting.
Systematic violations of the conjunction rule are observed in judgments of lay
people and of experts in both between-subjects and within-subjects comparisons.
Alternative interpretations of the conjunction fallacy are discussed and attempts
to combat it are explored.
Uncertainty is an unavoidable aspect of the
the last decade . Much of this research
of such uncertain events as the guilt of a de-
has compared intuitive inferences and probfendant, the result of an election, the future
ability judgments to the rules of statistics and
value of the dollar, the outcome of a medical
the laws of-probability. The student of judgoperation, or the response of a friend. Because
ment uses the probability calculus as a stanwe normally do not have adequate formal
dard of comparison much as a student of permodels for computing the probabilities of such
ception might compare the perceived sizes of
events, intuitive judgment is often the only
objects to their physical sizes. Unlike the corpractical method for assessing uncertainty.
rect size of objects, however, the "correct"
The question of how lay people and experts
probability of events is not easily defined. Beevaluate the probabilities of uncertain events
cause individuals who have different knowlhas attracted considerable research interest in
edge or who hold different beliefs must be allowed to assign different probabilities to the
This research was supported by Grant NR197-058 from
same event> no sing!e value can be correct for
the U.S. Office of Naval Research. We are grateful to friends
all people. Furthermore, a correct probability
and colleagues, too numerous to list by name, for their
cannot always be determined even for a single
useful comments and suggestions on an earlier draft of person Outside the domain of random sam-
'Xuets for reprints should be sent to Amos Tversky,
PlinS> Probability theory does not determine
Department of Psychology, Jordan Hall, Building 420, the probabilities of uncertain events—it merely
Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305.
imposes constraints on the relations among
Copyright 1983 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
AMOS TVERSKY AND DANIEL KAHNEMAN
them. For example, if A is more probable than
B, then the complement of A must be less
probable than the complement of B.
The laws of probability derive from extensional considerations. A probability measure
is defined on a family of events and each event
is construed as a set of possibilities, such as
the three ways of getting a 10 on a throw of
a pair of dice. The probability of an event
equals the sum of the probabilities of its disjoint outcomes. Probability theory has traditionally been used to analyze repetitive chance
processes, but the theory has also been applied
to essentially unique events where probability
is not reducible to the relative frequency of
"favorable" outcomes. The probability that the
man who sits next to you on the plane is unmarried equals the probability that he is a
bachelor plus the probability that he is either
divorced or widowed. Additivity applies even
when probability does not have a frequentistic
interpretation and when the elementary events
are not equiprobable.
The simplest and most fundamental qualitative law of probability is the extension rule:
If the extension of A includes the extension
of B (i.e., A D B) then P(A) > P(B). Because
the set of possibilities associated with a conjunction A&B is included in the set of possibilities associated with B, the same principle
can also be expressed by the conjunction rule
/•(A&B) < P(B): A conjunction cannot be
more probable than one of its constituents.
This rule holds regardless of whether A and
B are independent and is valid for any probability assignment on the same sample space.
Furthermore, it applies not only to the standard probability calculus but also to nonstandard models such as upper and lower probability , belief
function , Baconian probability
 , rational belief (Kyburg, in
press), and possibility theory .
In contrast to formal theories of belief, intuitive judgments of probability are generally
not extensional. People do not normally analyze daily events into exhaustive lists of possibilities or evaluate compound probabilities
by aggregating elementary ones. Instead, they
commonly use a limited number of heuristics,
such as representativeness and availability
 . Our conception of
judgmental heuristics is based on natural assessments that are routinely carried out as part
of the perception of events and the comprehension of messages. Such natural assessments
include computations of similarity and representativeness, attributions of causality, and
evaluations of the availability of associations
and exemplars. These assessments, we propose,
are performed even in the absence of a specific
task set, although their results are used to meet
task demands as they arise. For example, the
mere mention of "horror movies" activates
instances of horror movies and evokes an assessment of their availability. Similarly, the
statement that Woody Allen's aunt had hoped
that he would be a dentist elicits a comparison
of the character to the stereotype and an assessment of representativeness. It is presumably the mismatch between Woody Allen's
personality and our stereotype of a dentist that
makes the thought mildly amusing. Although
these assessments are not tied to the estimation
of frequency or probability, they are likely to
play a dominant role when such judgments
are required. The availability of horror movies
may be used to answer the question, "What
proportion of the movies produced last year
were horror movies?", and representativeness
may control the judgment that a particular
boy is more likely to be an actor than a dentist.
The term judgmental heuristic refers to a
strategy-whether deliberate or not—that relies
on a natural assessment to produce an estimation or a prediction. One of the manifestations of a heuristic is the relative neglect of
other considerations. For example, the resemblance of a child to various professional stereotypes may be given too much weight in
predicting future vocational choice, at the expense of other pertinent data such as the baserate frequencies of occupations. Hence, the
use of judgmental heuristics gives rise to predictable biases. Natural assessments can affect
judgments in other ways, for which the term
heuristic is less apt. First, people sometimes
misinterpret their task and fail to distinguish
the required judgment from the natural assessment that the problem evokes. Second, the
natural assessment may act as an anchor to
which the required judgment is assimiliated,
even when the judge does not intend to use
the one to estimate the other.
Previous discussions of errors of judgment
have focused on deliberate strategies and on
PROBABILITY JUDGMENT
misinterpretations of tasks. The present treatment calls special attention to the processes
of anchoring and assimiliation, which are often
neither deliberate nor conscious. An example
from perception may be instructive: If two
objects in a picture of a three-dimensional
scene have the same picture size, the one that
appears more distant is not only seen as
"really" larger but also as larger in the picture.
The natural computation of real size evidently
influences the (less natural) judgment of picture size, although observers are unlikely to
confuse the two values or to use the former
to estimate the latter.
The natural assessments of representativeness and availability do not conform to the
extensional logic of probability theory. In particular, a conjunction can be more representative than one of its constituents, and instances of a specific category can be easier to
retrieve than instances of a more inclusive category. The following demonstration illustrates
the point. When they were given 60 sec to list
seven-letter words of a specified form, students
at the University of British Columbia (UBC)
produced many more words of the form
ing than of the form
although the latter class includes the former.
The average numbers of words produced in
the two conditions were 6.4 and 2.9, respectively, *(44) = 4.70, p < .01. In this test of
availability, the increased efficacy of memory
search suffices to offset the reduced extension
of the target class.
Our treatment of the availability heuristic
 suggests that
the differential availability of ing words and
of _ n _ words should be reflected in judgments
of frequency. The following questions test this
prediction.
In four pages of a novel (about 2,000 words), how many
words would you expect to find that have the form
i n g (seven-letter words that end with "ing")? Indicate your best estimate by circling one of the values
1-2 3-4 5-7
A second version of the question requested
estimates for words of the form
The median estimates were 13.4 for ing words
(n = 52), and 4.7 for _ n _ words (n = 53, p <
.01, by median test), contrary to the extension
rule. Similar results were obtained for the
comparison of words of the form
with words of the form
/ _; the median estimates were 8.8 and 4.4, respectively.
This example illustrates the structure of the
studies reported in this article. We constructed
problems in which a reduction of extension
was associated with an increase in availability
or representativeness, and we tested the conjunction rule in judgments of frequency or
probability. In the next section we discuss the
representativeness heuristic and contrast it
with the conjunction rule in the context of
person perception. The third section describes
conjunction fallacies in medical prognoses,
sports forecasting, and choice among bets. In
the fourth section we investigate probability
judgments for conjunctions of causes and effects and describe conjunction errors in scenarios of future events. Manipulations that
enable respondents to resist the conjunction
fallacy are explored in the fifth section, and
the implications of the results are discussed
in the last section.
Representative Conjunctions
Modern research on categorization of objects and events has shown that
information is commonly stored and processed
in relation to mental models, such as prototypes and schemata. It is therefore natural and
economical for the probability of an event to
be evaluated by the degree to which that event
is representative of an appropriate mental
model . Because
many of the results reported here are attributed
to this heuristic, we first briefly analyze the
concept of representativeness and illustrate its
role in probability judgment.
Representativeness is an assessment of the
degree of correspondence between a sample
and a population, an instance and a category,
an act and an actor or, more generally, between
an outcome and a model. The model may refer
to a person, a coin, or the world economy, and
the respective outcomes could be marital status, a sequence of heads and tails, or the current price of gold. Representativeness can be
investigated empirically by asking people, for
example, which of two sequences of heads and
tails is more representative of a fair coin or
AMOS TVERSKY AND DANIEL K.AHNEMAN
which of two professions is more representative
of a given personality. This relation differs from
other notions of proximity in that it is distinctly directional. It is natural to describe a
sample as more or less representative of its
parent population or a species (e.g., robin,
penguin) as more or less representative of a
superordinate category (e.g., bird). It is awkward to describe a population as representative
of a sample or a category as representative of
an instance.
When the model and the outcomes are described in the same terms, representativeness
is reducible to similarity. Because a sample
and a population, for example, can be described by the same attributes (e.g., central
tendency and variability), the sample appears
representative if its salient statistics match the
corresponding parameters of the population.
In the same manner, a person seems representative of a social group if his or her personality resembles the stereotypical member
of that group. Representativeness, however, is
not always reducible to similarity; it can also
reflect causal and correlational beliefs .
A particular act (e.g., suicide) is representative
of a person because we attribute to the actor
a disposition to commit the act, not because
the act resembles the person. Thus, an outcome
is representative of a model if the salient features match or if the model has a propensity
to produce the outcome.
Representativeness tends to covary with
frequency: Common instances and frequent
events are generally more representative than
unusual instances and rare; events. The representative summer day is warm and sunny,
the representative American family has two
children, and the representative height of an
adult male is about 5 feet 10 inches. However,
there are notable circumstances where representativeness is at variance with both actual
and perceived frequency. First, a highly specific
outcome can be representative but infrequent.
Consider a numerical variable, such as weight,
that has a unimodal frequency distribution in
a given population. A narrow interval near the
mode of the distribution is generally more
representative of the population than a wider
interval near the tail. For example, 68% of a
group of Stanford University undergraduates
(jV = 105) stated that it is more representative
for a female Stanford student "to weigh between 124 and 125 pounds" than "to weigh
more than 135 pounds". On the other hand,
78% of a different group (N = 102) stated that
among female Stanford students there are
more "women who weigh more than 135
pounds" than "women who weigh between
124 and 125 pounds." Thus, the narrow modal
interval (124-125 pounds) was judged to be
more representative but less frequent than the
broad tail interval (above 135 pounds).
Second, an attribute is representative of a
class if it is very diagnostic, that is, if the relative frequency of this attribute is much higher
in that class than in a relevant reference class.
For example, 65% of the subjects (N = 105)
stated that it is more representative for a Hollywood actress "to be divorced more than 4
times" than "to vote Democratic." Multiple
divorce is diagnostic of Hollywood actresses
because it is part of the stereotype that the
incidence of divorce is higher among Hollywood actresses than among other women.
However, 83% of a different group (N = 102)
stated that, among Hollywood actresses, there
are more "women who vote Democratic" than
"women who are divorced more than 4 times."
Thus, the more diagnostic attribute was judged
to be more representative but less frequent
than an attribute (voting Democratic) of lower
diagnosticity. Third, an unrepresentative instance of a category can be fairly representative
of a superordinate category. For example,
chicken is a worse exemplar of a bird than of
an animal, and rice is an unrepresentative vegetable, although it is a representative food.
The preceding observations indicate that
representativeness is nonextensional: It is not
determined by frequency, and it is not bound
by class inclusion. Consequently, the test of
the conjunction rule in probability judgments
offers the sharpest contrast between the extensional logic of probability theory and the
psychological principles of representativeness.
Our first set of studies of the conjunction rule
were conducted in 1974, using occupation and
political affiliation as target attributes to be
predicted singly or in conjunction from brief
personality sketches . The studies
described in the present section replicate and
extend our earlier work. We used the following
PROBABILITY JUDGMENT
personality sketches of two fictitious individuals, Bill and Linda, followed by a set of occupations and avocations associated with each
Bill is 34 years old. He is intelligent, but unimaginative,
compulsive, and generally lifeless. In school, he was strong
in mathematics but weak in social studies and humanities.
Bill is a physician who plays poker for a hobby.
Bill is an architect.
Bill is an accountant. (A)
Bill plays jazz for a hobby. (J)
Bill surfs for a hobby.
Bill is a reporter.
Bill is an accountant who plays jazz for a hobby. (A&J)
Bill climbs mountains for a hobby.
Linda is 31 years old, single, outspoken and very bright.
She majored in philosophy. As a student, she was deeply
concerned with issues of discrimination and social justice,
and also participated in anti-nuclear demonstrations.
Linda is a teacher in elementary school.
Linda works in a bookstore and takes Yoga classes.
Linda is active in the feminist movement. (F)
Linda is a psychiatric social worker.
Linda is a member of the League of Women Voters.
Linda is a bank teller. (T)
Linda is an insurance salesperson.
Linda is a bank teller and is active in the feminist movement. (T&F)
As the reader has probably guessed, the description of Bill was constructed to be representative of an accountant (A) and unrepresentative of a person who plays jazz for a hobby
(J). The description of Linda was constructed
to be representative of an active feminist (F)
and unrepresentative of a bank teller (T). We
also expected the ratings of representativeness
to be higher for the classes defined by a conjunction of attributes (A&J for Bill, T&F for
Linda) than for the less representative constituent of each conjunction (J and T, respectively).
A group of 88 undergraduates at UBC
ranked the eight statements associated with
each description by "the degree to which Bill
(Linda) resembles the typical member of that
class." The results confirmed our expectations.
The percentages of respondents who displayed
the predicted order (A > A&J > J for Bill;
F > T&F > T for Linda) were 87% and 85%,
respectively. This finding is neither surprising
nor objectionable. If, like similarity and prototypicality, representativeness depends on
both common and distinctive features , it should be enhanced by the addition of shared features. Adding eyebrows to
a schematic face makes it more similar to another schematic face with eyebrows . Analogously, the addition of
feminism to the profession of bank teller improves the match of Linda's current activities
to her personality. More surprising and less
acceptable is the finding that the great majority
of subjects also rank the conjunctions (A&J
and T&F) as more probable than their less
representative constituents (J and T). The following sections describe and analyze this phenomenon.
Indirect and Subtle Tests
Experimental tests of the conjunction rule
can be divided into three types: indirect tests,
direct-subtle tests and direct-transparent tests.
In the indirect tests, one group of subjects
evaluates the probability of the conjunction,
and another group of subjects evaluates the
probability of its constituents. No subject is
required to compare a conjunction (e.g.,
"Linda is a bank teller and a feminist") to its
constituents. In the direct-subtle tests, subjects
compare the conjunction to its less representative constituent, but the inclusion relation
between the events is not emphasized. In the
direct-transparent tests, the subjects evaluate
or compare the probabilities of the conjunction
and its constituent in a format that highlights
the relation between them.
The three experimental procedures investigate different hypotheses. The indirect procedure tests whether probability judgments
conform to the conjunction rule; the directsubtle procedure tests whether people will take
advantage of an opportunity to compare the
critical events; the direct-transparent procedure tests whether people will obey the conjunction rule when they are compelled to
compare the critical events. This sequence of '
tests also describes the course of our investigation, which began with the observation of
violations of the conjunction rule in indirect
tests and proceeded—to our increasing surprise—to the finding of stubborn failures of
that rule in several direct-transparent tests.
Three groups of respondents took part in
the main study. The statistically naive group
consisted of undergraduate students at Stan-
AMOS TVERSKY AND DANIEL KAHNEMAN
ford University and UBC who had no background in probability or statistics. The informed group consisted of first-year graduate
students in psychology and in education and
of medical students at Stanford who were all
familiar with the basic concepts of probability
after one or more courses in statistics. The
sophisticated group consisted of doctoral students in the decision science program of the
Stanford Business School who had taken several advanced courses in probability, statistics,
and decision theory.
Subjects in the main study received one
problem (either Bill or Linda) first in the format of a direct test. They were asked to rank
all eight statements associated with that problem (including the conjunction, its separate
constituents, and five filler items) according
to their probability, using 1 for the most probable and 8 for the least probable. The subjects
then received the remaining problem in the
format of an indirect test in which the list of
alternatives included either the conjunction or
its separate constituents. The same five filler
items were used in both the direct and the
indirect versions of each problem.
Table 1 presents the average ranks (R) of
the conjunction R(A&B) and of its less representative constituents R(B), relative to the
set of five filler items. The percentage of violations of the conjunction rule in the direct
test is denoted by V. The results can be summarized as follows: (a) the conjunction is
ranked higher than its less likely constituents
in all 12 comparisons, (b) there is no consistent
difference between the ranks of the alternatives
in the direct and indirect tests, (c) the overall
incidence of violations of the conjunction rule
in direct tests is 88%, which virtually coincides
with the incidence of the corresponding pattern in judgments of representativeness, and
(d) there is no effect of statistical sophistication
in either indirect or direct tests.
The violation of the conjunction rule in a
direct comparison of B to A&B is called the
conjunction fallacy. Violations inferred from
between-subjects comparisons are called conjunction errors. Perhaps the most surprising
aspect of Table 1 is the lack of any difference
between indirect and direct tests. We had expected the conjunction to be judged more
probable than the less likely of its constituents
in an indirect test, in accord with the pattern
observed in judgments of representativeness.
However, we also expected that even naive respondents would notice the repetition of some
attributes, alone and in conjunction with others, and that they would then apply the conjunction rule and rank the conjunction below
its constituents. This expectation was violated,
not only by statistically naive undergraduates
but even by highly sophisticated respondents.
In both direct and indirect tests, the subjects
apparently ranked the outcomes by the degree
to which Bill (or Linda) matched the respective
stereotypes. The correlation between the mean
ranks of probability and representativeness was
.96 for Bill and .98 for Linda. Does the conjunction rule hold when the relation of inclusion is made highly transparent? The studies
described in the next section abandon all subtlety in an effort to compel the subjects to
Tests of the Conjunction Rule in Likelihood Rankings
Direct test
Indirect test
Sophisticated
Note. V = percentage of violations of the conjunction rule; R (A & B) and R (B) = mean rank assigned to A & B
and to B, respectively; N = number of subjects in the direct test; Total N = total number of subjects in the indirect
test, who were about equally divided between the two groups.
PROBABILITY JUDGMENT
detect and appreciate the inclusion relation
between the target events.
Transparent Tests
This section describes a series of increasingly
desperate manipulations designed to induce
subjects to obey the conjunction rule. We first
presented the description of Linda to a group
of 142 undergraduates at UBC and asked them
to check which of two alternatives was more
Linda is a bank teller. (T)
Linda is a bank teller and is active in the feminist movement. (T&F)
The order of alternatives was inverted for one
half of the subjects, but this manipulation had
no effect. Overall, 85% of respondents indicated that T&F was more probable than T, in
a flagrant violation of the conjunction rule.
Surprised by the finding, we searched for
alternative interpretations of the subjects' responses. Perhaps the subjects found the question too trivial to be taken literally and consequently interpreted the inclusive statement
T as T&not-F; that is, "Linda is a bank teller
and is not a feminist." In such a reading, of
course, the observed judgments would not violate the conjunction rule. To test this interpretation, we asked a new group of subjects
(N = 119) to assess the probability of T and
of T&F on a 9-point scale ranging from 1
(extremely unlikely) to 9 (extremely likely).
Because it is sensible to rate probabilities even
when one of the events includes the other, there
was no reason for respondents to interpret T
as T&not-F. The pattern of responses obtained
with the new version was the same as before.
The mean ratings of probability were 3.5 for
T and 5.6 for T&F, and 82% of subjects assigned a higher rating to T&F than they did
Although subjects do not spontaneously apply the conjunction rule, perhaps they can recognize its validity. We presented another group
of UBC undergraduates with the description
of Linda followed by the two statements, T
and T&F, and asked them to indicate which
of the following two arguments they found
more convincing.
Argument 1. Linda is more likely to be a bank teller than
she is to be a feminist bank teller, because every feminist
bank teller is a bank teller, but some women bank tellers
are not feminists, and Linda could be one of them.
Argument 2. Linda is more likely to be a feminist bank
teller than she is likely to be a bank teller, because she
resembles an active feminist more than she resembles a
bank teller.
The majority of subjects (65%, n = 58) chose
the invalid resemblance argument (Argument
2) over the valid extensional argument (Argument 1). Thus, a deliberate attempt to induce a reflective attitude did not eliminate the
appeal of the representativeness heuristic.
We made a further effort to clarify the inclusive nature of the event T by representing
it as a disjunction. (Note that the conjunction
rule can also be expressed as a disjunction rule
P(A or B) ^ P(B)). The description of Linda
was used again, with a 9-point rating scale for
judgments of probability, but the statement T
was replaced by
Linda is a bank teller whether or not she is active in the
feminist movement. (T*)
This formulation emphasizes the inclusion of
T&F in T. Despite the transparent relation
between the statements, the mean ratings of
likelihood were 5.1 for T&F and 3.8 for T*
(p < .01, by t test). Furthermore, 57% of the
subjects (n = 75) committed the conjunction
fallacy by rating T&F higher than T*, and
only 16% gave a lower rating to T&F than
The violations of the conjunction rule in
direct comparisons of T&F to T* are remarkable because the extension of "Linda is
a bank teller whether or not she is active in
the feminist movement" clearly includes the
extension of "Linda is a bank teller and is
active in the feminist movement." Many subjects evidently failed to draw extensional inferences from the phrase "whether or not,"
which may have been taken to indicate a weak
disposition. This interpretation was supported
by a between-subjects comparison, in which
different subjects evaluated T, T*, and T&F
on a 9-point scale after evaluating the common
filler statement, "Linda is a psychiatric social
worker." The average ratings were 3.3 for T,
3.9 for T*, and 4.5 for T&F, with each mean
significantly different from both others. The
statements T and T* are of course extensionally equivalent, but they are assigned different
probabilities. Because feminism fits Linda, the
AMOS TVERSKY AND DANIEL KAHNEMAN
mere mention of this attribute makes T* more
likely than T, and a definite commitment to
it makes the probability of T&F even higher!
Modest success in loosening the grip of the
conjunction fallacy was achieved by asking
subjects to choose whether to bet on T or on
T&F. The subjects were given Linda's description, with the following instruction:
If you could win $10 by betting on an event, which of the
following would you choose to bet on? (Check one)
The percentage of violations of the conjunction
rule in this task was "only" 56% (n - 60),
much too high for comfort but substantially
lower than the typical value for comparisons
of the two events in terms of probability. We
conjecture that the betting context draws attention to the conditions in which one bet
pays off whereas the other does not, allowing
some subjects to discover that a bet on T dominates a bet on T&F.
The respondents in the studies described in
this section were statistically naive undergraduates at UBC. Does statistical education eradicate the fallacy? To answer this question, 64
graduate students of social sciences at the University of California, Berkeley and at Stanford
University, all with credit for several statistics
courses, were given the rating-scale version of
the direct test of the conjunction rule for the
Linda problem. For the first time in this series
of studies, the mean rating for T&F (3.5) was
lower than the rating assigned to T (3.8), and
only 36% of respondents committed the fallacy.
Thus, statistical sophistication produced a
majority who conformed to the conjunction
rule in a transparent test, although the incidence of violations was fairly high even in this
group of intelligent and sophisticated respondents.
Elsewhere ,
we distinguished between positive and negative
accounts of judgments and preferences that
violate normative rules. A positive account
focuses on the factors that produce a particular
response; a negative account seeks to explain
why the correct response was not made. The
positive analysis of the Bill and Linda problems
invokes the representativeness heuristic. The
stubborn persistence of the conjunction fallacy
in highly transparent problems, however, lends
special interest to the characteristic question
of a negative analysis: Why do intelligent and
reasonably well-educated people fail to recognize the applicability of the conjunction rule
in transparent problems? Postexperimental
interviews and class discussions with many
subjects shed some light on this question. Naive
as well as sophisticated subjects generally noticed the nesting of the target events in the
direct-transparent test, but the naive, unlike
the sophisticated, did not appreciate its significance for probability assessment. On the
other hand, most naive subjects did not attempt to defend their responses. As one subject
said after acknowledging the validity of the
conjunction rule, "I thought you only asked
for my opinion."
The inverviews and the results of the direct
transparent tests indicate that naive subjects
do not spontaneously treat the conjunction
rule as decisive. Their attitude is reminiscent
of children's responses in a Piagetian experiment. The child in the preconservation stage
is not altogether blind to arguments based on
conservation of volume and typically expects
quantity to be conserved . What
the child fails to see is that the conservation
argument is decisive and should overrule the
perceptual impression that the tall container
holds more water than the short one. Similarly,
naive subjects generally endorse the conjunction rule in the abstract, but their application
of this rule to the Linda problem is blocked
by the compelling impression that T&F is
more representative of her than T is. In this
context, the adult subjects reason as if they
had not reached the stage of formal operations.
A full understanding of a principle of physics,
logic, or statistics requires knowledge of the
conditions under which it prevails over conflicting arguments, such as the height of the
liquid in a container or the representativeness
of an outcome. The recognition of the decisive
nature of rules distinguishes different developmental stages in studies of conservation; it
also distinguishes different levels of statistical
sophistication in the present series of studies.
More Representative Conjunctions
The preceding studies revealed massive violations of the conjunction rule in the domain
of person perception and social stereotypes.
Does the conjunction rule fare better in other
areas of judgment? Does it hold when the un-
PROBABILITY JUDGMENT
certainty regarding the target events is attributed to chance rather than to partial ignorance? Does expertise in the relevant subject
matter protect against the conjunction fallacy?
Do financial incentives help respondents see
the light? The following studies were designed
to answer these questions.
Medical Judgment
In this study we asked practicing physicians
to make intuitive predictions on the basis of
clinical evidence.1 We chose to study medical
judgment because physicians possess expert
knowledge and because intuitive judgments
often play an important role in medical decision making. Two groups of physicians took
part in the study. The first group consisted of
37 internists from the greater Boston area who
were taking a postgraduate course at Harvard
University. The second group consisted of 66
internists with admitting privileges in the New
England Medical Center. They were given
problems of the following type:
A 55-year-old woman had pulmonary embolism documented angiographically 10 days after a cholecystectomy.
Please rank order the following in terms of the probability
that they will be among the conditions experienced by the
patient (use 1 for the most likely and 6 for the least likely).
Naturally, the patient could experience more than one of
these conditions.
dyspnea and hemiparesis
syncope and tachycardia
hemiparesis (B)
pleuritic chest pain
hemoptysis
The symptoms listed for each problem included one, denoted B, which was judged by
our consulting physicians to be nonrepresentative of the patient's condition, and the conjunction of B with another highly representative symptom denoted A. In the above example of pulmonary embolism (blood clots
in the lung), dyspnea (shortness of breath) is
a typical symptom, whereas hemiparesis (partial paralysis) is very atypical. Each participant
first received three (or two) problems in the
indirect format, where the list included either
B or the conjunction A&B, but not both, followed by two (or three) problems in the direct
format illustrated above. The design was balanced so that each problem appeared about
an equal number of times in each format. An
independent group of 32 physicians from
Stanford University were asked to rank each
list of symptoms "by the degree to which they
are representative of the clinical condition of
the patient."
The design was essentially the same as in
the Bill and Linda study. The results of the
two experiments were also very similar. The
correlation between mean ratings by probability and by representativeness exceeded .95
in all five problems. For every one of the five
problems, the conjunction of an unlikely
symptom with a likely one was judged more
probable than the less likely constituent. The
ranking of symptoms was the same in direct
and indirect tests: The overall mean ranks of
A&B and of B, respectively, were 2.7 and 4.6
in the direct tests and 2.8 and 4.3 in the indirect
tests. The incidence of violations of the conjunction rule in direct tests ranged from 73%
to 100%, with an average of 91%. Evidently,
substantive expertise does not displace representativeness and does not prevent conjunction errors.
Can the results be interpreted without imputing to these experts a consistent violation
of the conjunction rule? The instructions used
in the present study were especially designed
to eliminate the interpretation of Symptom B
as an exhaustive description of the relevant
facts, which would imply the absence of
Symptom A. Participants were instructed to
rank symptoms in terms of the probability
"that they will be among the conditions experienced by the patient." They were also reminded that "the patient could experience
more than one of these conditions." To test
the effect of these instructions, the following
question was included at the end of the questionnaire:
In assessing the probability that the patient described has
a particular symptom X, did you assume that (check one)
X is the only symptom experienced by the patient?
X is among the symptoms experienced by the patient?
Sixty of the 62 physicians who were asked
this question checked the second answer, re-
1 We are grateful to Barbara J. McNeil, Harvard Medical
School, Stephen G. Pauker, Tufts University School of
Medicine, and Edward Baer, Stanford Medical School, for
their help in the construction of the clinical problems and
in the collection of the data.
AMOS TVERSKY AND DANIEL KAHNEMAN
jecting an interpretation of events that could
have justified an apparent violation of the conjunction rule.
An additional group of 24 physicians,
mostly residents at Stanford Hospital, participated in a group discussion in which they
were confronted with their conjunction fallacies in the same questionnaire. The respondents did not defend their answers, although
some references were made to "the nature of
clinical experience." Most participants appeared surprised and dismayed to have made
an elementary error of reasoning. Because the
conjunction fallacy is easy to expose, people
who committed it are left with the feeling that
they should have known better.
Predicting Wimbledon
The uncertainty encountered in the previous studies regarding the prognosis of a patient or the occupation of a person is normally
attributed to incomplete knowledge rather
than to the operation of a chance process. Recent studies of inductive reasoning about daily
events, conducted by Nisbett, Krantz, Jepson,
and Kunda , indicated that statistical
principles (e.g., the law of large numbers) are
commonly applied in domains such as sports
and gambling, which include a random element. The next two studies test the conjunction rule in predictions of the outcomes of a
sports event and of a game of chance, where
the random aspect of the process is particularly
A group of 93 subjects, recruited through
an advertisement in the University of Oregon
newspaper, were presented with the following
problem in October 1980:
Suppose Bjorn Borg reaches the Wimbledon finals in 1981.
Please rank order the following outcomes from most to
least likely.
A. Borg will win the match (1.7)
B. Borg will lose the first set (2.7)
C. Borg will lose the first set but win the match (2.2)
D. Borg will win the first set but lose the match (3.5)
The average rank of each outcome (1 = most
probable, 2 = second most probable, etc.) is
given in parentheses. The outcomes were chosen to represent different levels of strength for
the player, Borg, with A indicating the highest
strength; C, a rather lower level because it indicates a weakness in the first set; B, lower still
because it only mentions this weakness; and
D, lowest of all.
After winning his fifth Wimbledon title in
1980, Borg seemed extremely strong. Consequently, we hypothesized that Outcome C
would be judged more probable than Outcome
B, contrary to the conjunction rule, because
C represents a better performance for Borg
than does B. The mean rankings indicate that
this hypothesis was confirmed; 72% of the respondents assigned a higher rank to C than to
B, violating the conjunction rule in a direct
Is it possible that the subjects interpreted
the target events in a nonextensional manner
that could justify or explain the observed
ranking? It is well-known that connectives
(e.g., and, or, if) are often used in ordinary
language in ways that depart from their logical
definitions. Perhaps the respondents interpreted the conjunction (A and B) as a disjunction (A or B), an implication, (A implies
B), or a conditional statement (A if B). Alternatively, the event B could be interpreted in
the presence of the conjunction as B and not-
A. To investigate these possibilities, we presented to another group of 56 naive subjects
at Stanford University the hypothetical results
of the relevant tennis match, coded as sequences of wins and losses. For example, the
sequence LWWLW denotes a five-set match in
which Borg lost (L) the first and the third sets
but won (W) the other sets and the match. For
each sequence the subjects were asked to examine the four target events of the original
Borg problem and to indicate, by marking +
or —, whether the given sequence was consistent or inconsistent with each of the events.
With very few exceptions, all of the subjects
marked the sequences according to the standard (extensional) interpretation of the target
events. A sequence was judged consistent with
the conjunction "Borg will lose the first set
but win the match" when both constituents
were satisfied (e.g., LWWLW) but not when either one or both constituents failed. Evidently,
these subjects did not interpret the conjunction
as an implication, a conditional statement, or
a disjunction. Furthermore, both LWWLW and
LWLWL were judged consistent with the inclusive event "Borg will lose the first set," contrary
to the hypothesis that the inclusive event B is
PROBABILITY JUDGMENT
understood in the context of the other events
as "Borg will lose the first set and the match."
The classification of sequences therefore indicated little or no ambiguity regarding the
extension of the target events. In particular,
all sequences that were classified as instances
of B&A were also classified as instances of B,
but some sequences that were classified as instances of B were judged inconsistent with
B&A, in accord with the standard interpretation in which the conjunction rule should
be satisfied.
Another possible interpretation of the conjunction error maintains that instead of assessing the probability P(B/E) of Hypothesis
B (e.g., that Linda is a bank teller) in light of
evidence E (Linda's personality), subjects assess the inverse probability P(E/B) of the evidence given to the hypothesis in question. Because P(E/A&B) may well exceed P(E/B), the
subjects' responses could be justified under this
interpretation. Whatever plausibility this account may have in the case of Linda, it is
surely inapplicable to the present study where
it makes no sense to assess the conditional
probability that Borg will reach the finals given
the outcome of the final match.
Risky Choice
If the conjunction fallacy cannot be justified
by a reinterpretation of the target events, can
it be rationalized by a nonstandard conception
of probability? On this hypothesis, representativeness is treated as a legitimate nonextensional interpretation of probability rather than
as a fallible heuristic. The conjunction fallacy,
then, may be viewed as a misunderstanding
regarding the meaning of the word probability.
To investigate this hypothesis we tested the
conjunction rule in the following decision
problem, which provides an incentive to
choose the most probable event, although the
word probability is not mentioned.
Consider a regular six-sided die with four green faces and
two red faces. The die will be rolled 20 times and the
sequence of greens (G) and reds (R) will be recorded. You
are asked to select one sequence, from a set of three, and
you will win $25 if the sequence you chose appears on
successive rolls of the die. Please check the sequence of
greens and reds on which you prefer to bet.
Note that Sequence 1 can be obtained from
Sequence 2 by deleting the first G. By the conjunction rule, therefore, Sequence 1 must be
more probable than Sequence 2. Note also
that all three sequences are rather unrepresentative of the die because they contain more
Rs than Gs. However, Sequence 2 appears to
be an improvement over Sequence 1 because
it contains a higher proportion of the more
likely color. A group of 50 respondents were
asked to rank the events by the degree to which
they are representative of the die; 88% ranked
Sequence 2 highest and Sequence 3 lowest. Thus, Sequence 2 is favored by representativeness, although it is dominated by Sequence 1.
A total of 260 students at UBC and Stanford
University were given the choice version of the
problem. There were no significant differences
between the populations, and their results were
pooled. The subjects were run in groups of 30
to 50 in a classroom setting. About one half
of the subjects (N = 125) actually played the
gamble with real payoffs. The choice was hypothetical for the other subjects. The percentages of subjects who chose the dominated
option of Sequence 2 were 65% with real payoffs and 62% in the hypothetical format. Only
2% of the subjects in both groups chose Sequence 3.
To facilitate the discovery of the relation
between the two critical sequences, we presented a new group of 59 subjects with a (hypothetical) choice problem in which Sequence
2 was replaced by RGRRRG. This new sequence
was preferred over Sequence 1, RGRRR, by
63% of the respondents, although the first five
elements of the two sequences were identical.
These results suggest that subjects coded each
sequence in terms of the proportion of Gs and
Rs and ranked the sequences by the discrepancy between the proportions in the two sequences (1/5 and 1/3) and the expected value
It is apparent from these results that conjunction errors are not restricted to misunderstandings of the word probability. Our subjects followed the representativeness heuristic
even when the word was not mentioned and
even in choices involving substantial payoffs.
The results further show that the conjunction
fallacy is not restricted to esoteric interpretations of the connective and, because that
AMOS TVERSKY AND DANIEL KAHNEMAN
connective was also absent from the problem.
The present test of the conjunction rule was
direct, in the sense denned earlier, because the
subjects were required to compare two events,
one of which included the other. However, informal interviews with some of the respondents
suggest that the test was subtle: The relation
of inclusion between Sequences 1 and 2 was
apparently noted by only a few of the subjects.
Evidently, people are not attuned to the detection of nesting among events, even when
these relations are clearly displayed.
Suppose that the relation of dominance between Sequences 1 and 2 is called to the subjects' attention. Do they immediately appreciate its force and treat it as a decisive argument
for Sequence 1? The original choice problem
(without Sequence 3) was presented to a new
group of 88 subjects at Stanford University.
These subjects, however, were not asked to
select the sequence on which they preferred
to bet but only to indicate which of the following two arguments, if any, they found correct.
Argument 1: The first sequence (RGRRR) is more probable
than the second (GRGRRR) because the second sequence
is the same as the first with an additional G at the beginning.
Hence, every time the second sequence occurs, the first
sequence must also occur. Consequently, you can win on
the first and lose on the second, but you can never win
on the second and lose on the first.
Argument 2: The second sequence (GRGRRR) is more
probable than the first (RGRRR) because the proportions
of R and G in the second sequence are closer than those
of the first sequence to the expected proportions of R and
G for a die with four green and two red faces.
Most of the subjects (76%) chose the valid
extensional argument over an argument that
formulates the intuition of representativeness.
Recall that a similar argument in the case of
Linda was much less effective in combating
the conjunction fallacy. The success of the
present manipulation can be attributed to the
combination of a chance setup and a gambling
task, which promotes extensional reasoning
by emphasizing the conditions under which
the bets will pay off.
Fallacies and Misunderstandings
We have described violations of the conjunction rule in direct tests as a fallacy. The
term fallacy is used here as a psychological
hypothesis, not as an evaluative epithet. A
judgment is appropriately labeled a fallacy
when most of the people who make it are disposed, after suitable explanation, to accept the
following propositions: (a) They made a nontrivial error, which they would probably have
repeated in similar problems, (b) the error was
conceptual, not merely verbal or technical, and
(c) they should have known the correct answer
or a procedure to find it. Alternatively, the
same judgment could be described as a failure
of communication if the subject misunderstands the question or if the experimenter misinterprets the answer. Subjects who have erred
because of a misunderstanding are likely to
reject the propositions listed above and to
claim (as students often do after an examination) that they knew the correct answer all
along, and that their error, if any, was verbal
or technical rather than conceptual.
A psychological analysis should apply interpretive charity and should avoid treating
genuine misunderstandings as if they were fallacies. It should also avoid the temptation to
rationalize any error of judgment by ad hoc
interpretations that the respondents themselves
would not endorse. The dividing line between
fallacies and misunderstandings, however, is
not always clear. In one of our earlier studies,
for example, most respondents stated that a
particular description is more likely to belong
to a physical education teacher than to a
teacher. Strictly speaking, the latter category
includes the former, but it could be argued
that teacher was understood in this problem
in a sense that excludes physical education
teacher, much as animal is often used in a
sense that excludes insects. Hence, it was unclear whether the apparent violation of the
extension rule in this problem should be described as a fallacy or as a misunderstanding.
A special effort was made in the present studies
to avoid ambiguity by denning the critical
event as an intersection of well-defined classes,
such as bank tellers and feminists. The comments of the respondents in postexperimental
discussions supported the conclusion that the
observed violations of the conjunction rule in
direct tests are genuine fallacies, not just misunderstandings.
Causal Conjunctions
The problems discussed in previous sections
included three elements: a causal model M
PROBABILITY JUDGMENT
(Linda's personality); a basic target event B,
which is unrepresentative of M (she is a bank
teller); and an added event A, which is highly
representative of the model M (she is a feminist). In these problems, the model M is positively associated with A and is negatively associated with B. This structure, called the
M —> A paradigm, is depicted on the left-hand
side of Figure 1. We found that when the sketch
of Linda's personality was omitted and she
was identified merely as a "31-year-old
woman," almost all respondents obeyed the
conjunction rule and ranked the conjunction
(bank teller and active feminist) as less probable than its constituents. The conjunction error in the original problem is therefore attributable to the relation between M and A,
not to the relation between A and B.
The conjunction fallacy was common in the
Linda problem despite the fact that the stereotypes of bank teller and feminist are mildly
incompatible. When the constituents of a conjunction are highly incompatible, the incidence
of conjunction errors is greatly reduced. For
example, the conjunction "Bill is bored by
music and plays jazz for a hobby" was judged
as less probable (and less representative) than
its constituents, although "bored by music"
was perceived as a probable (and representative) attribute of Bill. Quite reasonably, the
incompatibility of the two attributes reduced
the judged probability of their conjunction.
The effect of compatibility on the evaluation
of conjunctions is not limited to near contradictions. For instance, it is more representative
(as well as more probable) for a student to be
in the upper half of the class in both mathematics and physics or to be in the lower half
of the class in both fields than to be in the
upper half in one field and in the lower half
in the other. Such observations imply that the
judged probability (or representativeness) of
a conjunction cannot be computed as a function (e.g., product, sum, minimum, weighted
average) of the scale values of its constituents.
This conclusion excludes a large class of formal
models that ignore the relation between the
constituents of a conjunction. The viability of
such models of conjunctive concepts has generated a spirited debate 
which is depicted on the right-hand side of
Figure 1. Conjunction errors occur in the
A —> B paradigm because of the direct connection between A and B, although the added
event, A, is not particularly representative of
the model, M. In this section of the article we
investigate problems in which the added event,
A, provides a plausible cause or motive for
the occurrence of B. Our hypothesis is that
the strength of the causal link, which has been
shown in previous work to bias judgments of
conditional probability , will also bias judgments of the
probability of conjunctions (see Beyth-Marom,
Note 2). Just as the thought of a personality
and a social stereotype naturally evokes an
assessment of their similarity, the thought of
an effect and a possible cause evokes an assessment of causal impact . The
natural assessment of propensity is expected
to bias the evaluation of probability.
To illustrate this bias in the A —> B paradigm
consider the following problem, which was
presented to 115 undergraduates at Stanford
University and UBC:
A health survey was conducted in a representative sample
of adult males in British Columbia of all ages and occupations.
Mr. F. was included in the sample. He was selected by
chance from the list of participants.
Which of the following statements is more probable? (check
Mr. F. has had one or more heart attacks.
Mr. F. has had one or more heart attacks and he is over
55 years old.
This seemingly transparent problem elicited
a substantial proportion (58%) of conjunction
AMOS TVERSKY AND DANIEL KAHNEMAN
errors among statistically naive respondents.
To test the hypothesis that these errors are
produced by the causal (or correlational) link
between advanced age and heart attacks, rather
than by a weighted average of the component
probabilities, we removed this link by uncoupling the target events without changing their
marginal probabilities.
A health survey was conducted in a representative sample
of adult males in British Columbia of all ages and occupations.
Mr. F. and Mr. G. were both included in the sample. They
were unrelated and were selected by chance from the list
of participants.
Which of the following statements is more probable? (check
Mr. F. has had one or more heart attacks.
Mr. F has had one or more heart attacks and Mr. G. is
over 55 years old.
Assigning the critical attributes to two independent individuals eliminates in effect the
A —> B connection by making the events (conditionally) independent. Accordingly, the incidence of conjunction errors dropped to 29%
The A —> B paradigm can give rise to dual
conjunction errors where A&B is perceived as
more probable than each of its constituents,
as illustrated in the next problem.
Peter is a junior in college who is training to run the mile
in a regional meet. In his best race, earlier this season,
Peter ran the mile in 4:06 min. Please rank the following
outcomes from most to least probable.
Peter will run the mile under 4:06 min.
Peter will run the mile under 4 min.
Peter will run the second half-mile under 1:55 min.
Peter will run the second half-mile under 1:55 min. and
will complete the mile under 4 min.
Peter will run the first half-mile under 2:05 min.
The critical event (a sub-1:55 minute second
half and a sub-4 minute mile) is clearly denned
as a conjunction and not as a conditional.
Nevertheless, 76% of a group of undergraduate
students from Stanford University (N = 96)
ranked it above one of its constituents, and
48% of the subjects ranked it above both constituents. The natural assessment of the relation between the constituents apparently
contaminated the evaluation of their conjunction. In contrast, no one violated the extension rule by ranking the second outcome
(a sub-4 minute mile) above the first (a sub-
4:06 minute mile). The preceding results indicate that the judged probability of a conjunction cannot be explained by an averaging
model because in such a model P(A&B) lies
between P(A) and P(B). An averaging process,
however, may be responsible for some conjunction errors, particularly when the constituent probabilities are given in a numerical
Motives and Crimes
A conjunction error in a motive-action
schema is illustrated by the following problem—one of several of the same general type
administered to a group of 171 students at
John P. is a meek man, 42 years old, married with two
children. His neighbors describe him as mild-mannered,
but somewhat secretive. He owns an import-export company based in New York City, and he travels frequently
to Europe and the Far East. Mr. P. was convicted once
for smuggling precious stones and metals (including uranium) and received a suspended sentence of 6 months in
jail and a large fine.
Mr. P. is currently under police investigation.
Please rank the following statements by the probability
that they will be among the conclusions of the investigation.
Remember that other possibilities exist and that more
than one statement may be true. Use 1 for the most probable statement, 2 for the second, etc.
Mr. P. is a child molester.
Mr. P. is involved in espionage and the sale of secret
documents.
Mr. P. is a drug addict.
Mr. P. killed one of his employees.
One half of the subjects (n = 86) ranked the
events above. Other subjects (n = 85) ranked
a modified list of possibilities in which the last
event was replaced by
Mr. P. killed one of his employees to prevent him from
talking to the police.
Although the addition of a possible motive
clearly reduces the extension of the event (Mr.
P. might have killed his employee for other
reasons, such as revenge or self-defense), we
hypothesized that the mention of a plausible
but nonobvious motive would increase the
perceived likelihood of the event. The data
PROBABILITY JUDGMENT
confirmed this expectation. The mean rank of
the conjunction was 2.90, whereas the mean
rank of the inclusive statement was 3.17 (p <
.05, by / test). Furthermore, 50% of the respondents ranked the conjunction as more
likely than the event that Mr. P. was a drug
addict, but only 23% ranked the more inclusive
target event as more likely than drug addiction.
We have found in other problems of the same
type that the mention of a cause or motive
tends to increase the judged probability of an
action when the suggested motive (a) offers a
reasonable explanation of the target event, (b)
appears fairly likely on its own, (c) is nonobvious, in the sense that it does not immediately come to mind when the outcome is
mentioned.
We have observed conjunction errors in
other judgments involving criminal acts in
both the A —» B and the M —» A paradigms.
For example, the hypothesis that a policeman
described as violence prone was involved in
the heroin trade was ranked less likely (relative
to a standard comparison set) than a conjunction of allegations—that he is involved in
the heroin trade and that he recently assaulted
a suspect. In that example, the assault was not
causally linked to the involvement in drugs,
but it made the combined allegation more
representative of the suspect's disposition. The
implications of the psychology of judgment to
the evaluation of legal evidence deserve careful
study because the outcomes of many trials
depend on the ability of a judge or a jury to
make intuitive judgments on the basis of partial and fallible data .
Forecasts and Scenarios
The construction and evaluation of scenarios of future events are not only a favorite
pastime of reporters, analysts, and news
watchers. Scenarios are often used in the context of planning, and their plausibility influences significant decisions. Scenarios for the
past are also important in many contexts, including criminal law and the writing of history.
It is of interest, then, to evaluate whether the
forecasting or reconstruction of real-life events
is subject to conjunction errors. Our analysis
suggests that a scenario that includes a possible
cause and an outcome could appear more
probable than the outcome on its own. We
tested this hypothesis in two populations: statistically naive students and professional forecasters.
A sample of 245 UBC undergraduates were
requested in April 1982 to evaluate the probability of occurrence of several events in 1983.
A 9-point scale was used, defined by the following categories: less than .01%, .1%, .5%,
1%, 2%, 5%, 10%, 25%, and 50% or more.
Each problem was presented to different subjects in two versions: one that included only
the basic outcome and another that included
a more detailed scenario leading to the same
outcome. For example, one half of the subjects
evaluated the probability of
a massive flood somewhere in North America in 1983, in
which more than 1000 people drown.
The other half of the subjects evaluated the
probability of
an earthquake in California sometime in 1983, causing a
flood in which more than 1000 people drown.
The estimates of the conjunction (earthquake
and flood) were significantly higher than the
estimates of the flood (p < .01, by a Mann-
Whitney test). The respective geometric means
were 3.1% and 2.2%. Thus, a reminder that a
devastating flood could be caused by the anticipated California earthquake made the conjunction of an earthquake and a flood appear
more probable than a flood. The same pattern
was observed in other problems.
The subjects in the second part of the study
were 115 participants in the Second International Congress on Forecasting held in Istanbul, Turkey in July 1982. Most of the subjects were professional analysts, employed by
industry, universities, or research institutes.
They were professionally involved in forecasting and planning, and many had used
scenarios in their work. The research design
and the response scales were the same as before. One group of forecasters evaluated the
probability of
a complete suspension of diplomatic relations between the
USA and the Soviet Union, sometime in 1983.
The other respondents evaluated the probability of the same outcome embedded in the
following scenario:
a Russian invasion of Poland, and a complete suspension
of diplomatic relations between the USA and the Soviet
Union, sometime in 1983.
AMOS TVERSKY AND DANIEL KAHNEMAN
Although suspension is necessarily more
probable than invasion and suspension, a Russian invasion of Poland offered a plausible scenario leading to the breakdown of diplomatic
relations between the superpowers. As expected, the estimates of probability were low
for both problems but significantly higher for
the conjunction invasion and suspension than
for suspension (p < .01, by a Mann-Whitney
test). The geometric means of estimates were
.47% and .14%, respectively. A similar effect
was observed in the comparison of the following outcomes:
a 30% drop in the consumption of oil in the US in 1983.
a dramatic increase in oil prices and a 30% drop in the
consumption of oil in the US in 1983.
The geometric means of the estimated probability of the first and the second outcomes,
respectively, were .22% and .36%. We speculate
that the effect is smaller in this problem (although still statistically significant) because the
basic target event (a large drop in oil consumption) makes the added event (a dramatic
increase in oil prices) highly available, even
when the latter is not mentioned.
Conjunctions involving hypothetical causes
are particularly prone to error because it is
more natural to assess the probability of the
effect given the cause than the joint probability
of the effect and the cause. We do not suggest
that subjects deliberately adopt this interpretation; rather we propose that the higher conditional estimate serves as an anchor that
makes the conjunction appear more probable.
Attempts to forecast events such as a major
nuclear accident in the United States or an
Islamic revolution in Saudi Arabia typically
involve the construction and evaluation of
scenarios. Similarly, a plausible story of how
the victim might have been killed by someone
other than the defendant may convince a jury
of the existence of reasonable doubt. Scenarios
can usefully serve to stimulate the imagination,
to establish the feasibility of outcomes, or to
set bounds on judged probabilities . However, the
use of scenarios as a prime instrument for the
assessment of probabilities can be highly misleading. First, this procedure favors a conjunctive outcome produced by a sequence of
likely steps (e.g., the successful execution of a
plan) over an equally probable disjunctive
outcome (e.g., the failure of a careful plan),
which can occur in many unlikely ways .
Second, the use of scenarios to assess probability is especially vulnerable to conjunction
errors. A detailed scenario consisting of
causally linked and representative events may
appear more probable than a subset of these
events . This effect contributes to the appeal of
scenarios and to the illusory insight that they
often provide. The attorney who fills in guesses
regarding unknown facts, such as motive or
mode of operation, may strengthen a case by
improving its coherence, although such additions can only lower probability. Similarly,
a political analyst can improve scenarios by
adding plausible causes and representative
consequences. As Pooh-Bah in the Mikado
explains, such additions provide "corroborative details intended to give artistic verisimilitude to an otherwise bald and unconvincing
narrative."
Extensional Cues
The numerous conjunction errors reported
in this article illustrate people's affinity for
nonextensional reasoning. It is nonetheless
obvious that people can understand and apply
the extension rule. What cues elicit extensional
considerations and what factors promote conformity to the conjunction rule? In this section
we focus on a single estimation problem and
report several manipulations that induce extensional reasoning and reduce the incidence
of the conjunction fallacy. The participants in
the studies described in this section were statistically naive students at UBC. Mean estimates are given in parentheses.
A health survey was conducted in a sample of adult males
in British Columbia, of all ages and occupations.
Please give your best estimate of the following values:
What percentage of the men surveyed have had one or
more heart attacks? I
What percentage of the men surveyed both are over 55
years old and have had one or more heart attacks? (30%)
This version of the health-survey problem
produced a substantial number of conjunction
errors among statistically naive respondents:
65% of the respondents (N = 147) assigned a
strictly higher estimate to the second question
PROBABILITY JUDGMENT
than to the first.2 Reversing the order of the
constituents did not significantly affect the results.
The observed violations of the conjunction
rule in estimates of relative frequency are attributed to the A —> B paradigm. We propose
that the probability of the conjunction is biased
toward the natural assessment of the strength
of the causal or statistical link between age
and heart attacks. Although the statement of
the question appears unambiguous, we considered the hypothesis that the respondents
who committed the fallacy had actually interpreted the second question as a request to
assess a conditional probability. A new group
of UBC undergraduates received the same
problem, with the second question amended
as follows:
Among the men surveyed who are over 55 years old, what
percentage have had one or more heart attacks?
The mean estimate was 59% (N = 55). This
value is significantly higher than the mean of
the estimates of the conjunction (45%) given
by those subjects who had committed the fallacy in the original problem. Subjects who violate the conjunction rule therefore do not
simply substitute the conditional P(B/A) for
the conjunction ,P(A&B).
A seemingly inconsequential change in the
problem helps many respondents avoid the
conjunction fallacy. A new group of subjects
(N = 159) were given the original questions
but were also asked to assess the "percentage
of the men surveyed who are over 55 years
old" prior to assessing the conjunction. This
manipulation reduced the incidence of conjunction error from 65% to 31%. It appears
that many subjects were appropriately cued
by the requirement to assess the relative frequency of both classes before assessing the relative frequency of their intersection.
The following formulation also facilitates
extensional reasoning:
A health survey was conducted in a sample of 100 adult
males in British Columbia, of all ages and occupations.
Please give your best estimate of the following values:
How many of the 100 participants have had one or more
heart attacks?
How many of the 100 participants both are over 55
years old and have had one or more heart attacks?
The incidence of the conjunction fallacy was
only 25% in this version (N= I I 7 ) . Evidently,
an explicit reference to the number of individual cases encourages subjects to set up a
representation of the problems in which class
inclusion is readily perceived and appreciated.
We have replicated this effect in several other
problems of the same general type. The rate
of errors was further reduced to a record 11%
for a group (N = 360) who also estimated the
number of participants over 55 years of age
prior to the estimation of the conjunctive category. The present findings agree with the results of Beyth-Marom (Note 2), who observed
higher estimates for conjunctions in judgments
of probability than in assessments of frequency.
The results of this section show that nonextensional reasoning sometimes prevails even
in simple estimates of relative frequency in
which the extension of the target event and
the meaning of the scale are completely unambiguous. On the other hand, we found that
the replacement of percentages by frequencies
and the request to assess both constituent categories markedly reduced the incidence of the
conjunction fallacy. It appears that extensional
considerations are readily brought to mind by
seemingly inconsequential cues. A contrast
worthy of note exists between the effectiveness
of extensional cues in the health-survey problem and the relative inefficacy of the methods
used to combat the conjunction fallacy in the
Linda problem (argument, betting, "whether
or not"). The force of the conjunction rule is
more readily appreciated when the conjunctions are denned by the intersection of concrete
classes than by a combination of properties.
Although classes and properties are equivalent
from a logical standpoint, they give rise to
different mental representations in which different relations and rules are transparent. The
formal equivalence of properties to classes is
apparently not programmed into the lay mind.
Discussion
In the course of this project we studied the
extension rule in a variety of domains; we
tested more than 3,000 subjects on dozens of
2 The incidence of the conjunction fallacy was considerably lower (28%) for a group of advanced undergraduates
at Stanford University (N = 62) who had completed one
or more courses in statistics.
AMOS TVERSKY AND DANIEL KAHNEMAN
problems, and we examined numerous variations of these problems. The results reported
in this article constitute a representative
though not exhaustive summary of this work.
The data revealed widespread violations of
the extension rule by naive and sophisticated
subjects in both indirect and direct tests. These
results were interpreted within the framework
of judgmental heuristics. We proposed that a
judgment of probability or frequency is commonly biased toward the natural assessment
that the problem evokes. Thus, the request to
estimate the frequency of a class elicits a search
for exemplars, the task of predicting vocational
choice from a personality sketch evokes a
comparison of features, and a question about
the co-occurrence of events induces an assessment of their causal connection. These assessments are not constrained by the extension
rule. Although an arbitrary reduction in the
extension of an event typically reduces its
availability, representativeness, or causal coherence, there are numerous occasions in
which these assessments are higher for the restricted than for the inclusive event. Natural
assessments can bias probability judgment in
three ways: The respondents (a) may use a
natural assessment deliberately as a strategy
of estimation, (b) may be primed or anchored
by it, or (c) may fail to appreciate the difference
between the natural and the required assessments.
Logic Versus Intuition
The conjunction error demonstrates with
exceptional clarity the contrast between the
extensional logic that underlies most formal
conceptions of probability and the natural assessments that govern many judgments and
beliefs. However, probability judgments are not
always dominated by nonextensional heuristics. Rudiments of probability theory have become part of the culture, and even statistically
naive adults can enumerate possibilities and
calculate odds in simple games of chance . Furthermore, some real-life
contexts encourage the decomposition of
events. The chances of a team to reach the
playoffs, for example, may be evaluated as follows: "Our team will make it if we beat team
B, which we should be able to do since we
have a better defense, or if team B loses to
both C and D, which is unlikely since neither
one has a strong offense." In this example, the
target event (reaching the playoffs) is decomposed into more elementary possibilities that
are evaluated in an intuitive manner.
Judgments of probability vary in the degree
to which they follow a decompositional or a
holistic approach and in the degree to which
the assessment and the aggregation of probabilities are analytic or intuitive . At one extreme
there are questions (e.g., What are the chances
of beating a given hand in poker?) that can be
answered by calculating the relative frequency
of "favorable" outcomes. Such an analysis
possesses all the features associated with an
extensional approach: It is decompositional,
frequentistic, and algorithmic. At the other
extreme, there are questions (e.g., What is the
probability that the witness is telling the truth?)
that are normally evaluated in a holistic, singular, and intuitive manner . Decomposition and calculation provide some protection against conjunction errors and other biases, but the intuitive element cannot be entirely eliminated
from probability judgments outside the domain of random sampling.
A direct test of the conjunction rule pits an
intuitive impression against a basic law of
probability. The outcome of the conflict is determined by the nature of the evidence, the
formulation of the question, the transparency
of the event structure, the appeal of the heuristic, and the sophistication of the respondents. Whether people obey the conjunction
rule in any particular direct test depends on
the balance of these factors. For example, we
found it difficult to induce naive subjects to
apply the conjunction rule in the Linda problem, but minor variations in the health-survey
question had a marked effect on conjunction
errors. This conclusion is consistent with the
results of Nisbett et al. , who showed
that lay people can apply certain statistical
principles (e.g., the law of large numbers) to
everyday problems and that the accessibility
of these principles varied with the content of
the problem and increased significantly with
the sophistication of the respondents. We
found, however, that sophisticated and naive
respondents answered the Linda problem similarly in indirect tests and only parted company
PROBABILITY JUDGMENT
in the most transparent versions of the problem. These observations suggest that statistical
sophistication did not alter intuitions of representativeness, although it enabled the respondents to recognize in direct tests the decisive force of the extension rule.
Judgment problems in real life do not usually present themselves in the format of a
within-subjects design or of a direct test of the
laws of probability. Consequently, subjects'
performance in a between-subjects test may
offer a more realistic view of everyday reasoning. In the indirect test it is very difficult
even for a sophisticated judge to ensure that
an event has no subset that would appear more
probable than it does and no superset that
would appear less probable. The satisfaction
of the extension rule could be ensured, without
direct comparisons of A&B to B, if all events
in the relevant ensemble were expressed as
disjoint unions of elementary possibilities. In
many practical contexts, however, such analysis is not feasible. The physician, judge, political analyst, or entrepreneur typically focuses
on a critical target event and is rarely prompted
to discover potential violations of the extension
Studies of reasoning and problem solving
have shown that people often fail to understand
or apply an abstract logical principle even
when they can use it properly in concrete familiar contexts. Johnson-Laird and Wason
 , for example, showed that people who
err in the verification of if then statements in
an abstract format often succeed when the
problem evokes a familiar schema. The present
results exhibit the opposite pattern: People
generally accept the conjunction rule in its
abstract form (B is more probable than A&B)
but defy it in concrete examples, such as the
Linda and Bill problems, where the rule conflicts with an intuitive impression.
The violations of the conjunction rule were
not only prevalent in our research, they were
also sizable. For example, subjects' estimates
of the frequency of seven-letter words ending
with ing were three times as high as their estimates of the frequency of seven letter words
ending with _ n _. A correction by a factor of
three is the smallest change that would eliminate the inconsistency between the two estimates. However, the subjects surely know that
there are many _ n _ words that are not ing
words (e.g., present, content). If they believe,
for example, that only one half of the _ n _
words end with ing, then a 6:1 adjustment
would be required to make the entire system
coherent. The ordinal nature of most of our
experiments did not permit an estimate of the
adjustment factor required for coherence.
Nevertheless, the size of the effect was often
considerable. In the rating-scale version of the
Linda problem, for example, there was little
overlap between the distributions of ratings
for T&F and for T. Our problems, of course,
were constructed to elicit conjunction errors,
and they do not provide an unbiased estimate
of the prevalence of these errors. Note, however, that the conjunction error is only a symptom of a more general phenomenon: People
tend to overestimate the probabilities of representative (or available) events and/or underestimate the probabilities of less representative events. The violation of the conjunction
rule demonstrates this tendency even when
the "true" probabilities are unknown or unknowable. The basic phenomenon may be
considerably more common than the extreme
symptom by which it was illustrated.
Previous studies of the subjective probability
of conjunctions focused primarily on
testing the multiplicative rule P(A&B) =
P(B)P(A/B). This rule is strictly stronger than
the conjunction rule; it also requires cardinal
rather than ordinal assessments of probability.
The results showed that people generally overestimate the probability of conjunctions in the
sense that P(A&B) > /)(B)JP(A/B). Some investigators, notably Wyer and Beyth-Marom,
also reported data that are inconsistent with
the conjunction rule.
Conversing Under Uncertainty
The representativeness heuristic generally
favors outcomes that make good stories or
good hypotheses. The conjunction feminist
bank teller is a better hypothesis about Linda
than bank teller, and the scenario of a Russian
invasion of Poland followed by a diplomatic
crisis makes a better story than simply diplomatic crisis. The notion of a good story can
be illuminated by extending the Gricean concept of cooperativeness to con-
AMOS TVERSKY AND DANIEL KAHNEMAN
versations under uncertainty. The standard
analysis of conversation rules assumes that the
speaker knows the truth. The maxim of quality
enjoins him or her to say only the truth. The
maxim of quantity enjoins the speaker to say
all of it, subject to the maxim of relevance,
which restricts the message to what the listener
needs to know. What rules of cooperativeness
apply to an uncertain speaker, that is, one who
is uncertain of the truth? Such a speaker can
guarantee absolute quality only for tautological
statements (e.g., "Inflation will continue so
long as prices rise"), which are unlikely to
earn high marks as contributions to the conversation. A useful contribution must convey
the speaker's relevant beliefs even if they are
not certain. The rules of cooperativeness for
an uncertain speaker must therefore allow for
a trade-off of quality and quantity in the evaluation of messages. The expected value of a
message can be defined by its information
value if it is true, weighted by the probability
that it is true. An uncertain speaker may wish
to follow the maxim of value: Select the message that has the highest expected value.
The expected value of a message can sometimes be improved by increasing its content,
although its probability is thereby reduced.
The statement "Inflation will be in the range
of 6% to 9% by the end of the year" may be
a more valuable forecast than "Inflation will
be in the range of 3% to 12%," although the
latter is more likely to be confirmed. A good
forecast is a compromise between a point estimate, which is sure to be wrong, and a 99.9%
credible interval, which is often too broad.
The selection of hypotheses in science is subject
to the same trade-off: A hypothesis must risk
refutation to be valuable, but its value declines
if refutation is nearly certain. Good hypotheses
balance informativeness against probable truth
 . A similar compromise obtains
in the structure of natural categories. The basic
level category dog is much more informative
than the more inclusive category animal and
only slightly less informative than the narrower
category beagle. Basic level categories have a
privileged position in language and thought,
presumably because they offer an optimal
combination of scope and content . Categorization under uncertainty is a
case in point. A moving object dimly seen in
the dark may be appropriately labeled dog,
where the subordinate beagle would be rash
and the superordinate animal far too conservative.
Consider the task of ranking possible answers to the question, "What do you think
Linda is up to these days?" The maxim of
value could justify a preference for T&F over
T in this task, because the added attribute
feminist considerably enriches the description
of Linda's current activities, at an acceptable
cost in probable truth. Thus, the analysis of
conversation under uncertainty identifies a
pertinent question that is legitimately answered
by ranking the conjunction above its constituent. We do not believe, however, that the
maxim of value provides a fully satisfactory
account of the conjunction fallacy. First, it is
unlikely that our respondents interpret the request to rank statements by their probability
as a request to rank them by their expected
(informational) value. Second, conjunction
fallacies have been observed in numerical estimates and in choices of bets, to which the
conversational analysis simply does not apply.
Nevertheless, the preference for statements of
high expected (informational) value could
hinder the appreciation of the extension rule.
As we suggested in the discussion of the interaction of picture size and real size, the answer to a question can be biased by the availability of an answer to a cognate questioneven when the respondent is well aware of the
distinction between them.
The same analysis applies to other conceptual neighbors of probability. The concept of
surprise is a case in point. Although surprise
is closely tied to expectations, it does not follow
the laws of probability . For example, the message that a tennis
champion lost the first set of a match is more
surprising than the message that she lost the
first set but won the match, and a sequence
of four consecutive heads in a coin toss is
more surprising than four heads followed by
two tails. It would be patently absurd, however,
to bet on the less surprising event in each of
these pairs. Our discussions with subjects provided no indication that they interpreted the
instruction to judge probability as an instruction to evaluate surprise. Furthermore, the
surprise interpretation does not apply to the
conjunction fallacy observed in judgments of
frequency. We conclude that surprise and in-
PROBABILITY JUDGMENT
formational value do not properly explain the
conjunction fallacy, although they may well
contribute to the ease with which it is induced
and to the difficulty of eliminating it.
Cognitive Illusions
Our studies of inductive reasoning have focused on systematic errors because they are
diagnostic of the heuristics that generally govern judgment and inference. In the words of
Helmholtz , "It is just those cases
that are not in accordance with reality which
are particularly instructive for discovering the
laws of the processes by which normal perception originates." The focus on bias and illusion is a research strategy that exploits human error, although it neither assumes nor
entails that people are perceptually or cognitively inept. Helmholtz's position implies that
perception is not usefully analyzed into a normal process that produces accurate percepts
and a distorting process that produces errors
and illusions. In cognition, as in perception,
the same mechanisms produce both valid and
invalid judgments. Indeed, the evidence does
not seem to support a "truth plus error"
model, which assumes a coherent system of
beliefs that is perturbed by various sources of
distortion and error. Hence, we do not share
Dennis Lindley's optimistic opinion that "inside every incoherent person there is a coherent
one trying to get out," (Lindley, Note 3) and
we suspect that incoherence is more than skin
deep .
It is instructive to compare a structure of
beliefs about a domain, (e.g., the political future of Central America) to the perception of
a scene (e.g., the view of Yosemite Valley from
Glacier Point). We have argued that intuitive
judgments of all relevant marginal, conjunctive, and conditional probabilities are not likely
to be coherent, that is, to satisfy the constraints
of probability theory. Similarly, estimates of
distances and angles in the scene are unlikely
to satisfy the laws of geometry. For example,
there may be pairs of political events for which
P(A) is judged greater than P(B) but /'(A/B)
is judged less than /"(B/A)—see Tversky and
Kahneman . Analogously, the scene may
contain a triangle ABC for which the A angle
appears greater than the B angle, although the
BC distance appears to be smaller than the
AC distance.
The violations of the qualitative laws of geometry and probability in judgments of distance and likelihood have significant implications for the interpretation and use of these
judgments. Incoherence sharply restricts the
inferences that can be drawn from subjective
estimates. The judged ordering of the sides of
a triangle cannot be inferred from the judged
ordering of its angles, and the ordering of marginal probabilities cannot be deduced from
the ordering of the respective conditionals. The
results of the present study show that it is even
unsafe to assume that P(B) is bounded by
P(A&B). Furthermore, a system of judgments
that does not obey the conjunction rule cannot
be expected to obey more complicated principles that presuppose this rule, such as Bayesian updating, external calibration, and the
maximization of expected utility. The presence
of bias and incoherence does not diminish the
normative force of these principles, but it reduces their usefulness as descriptions of behavior and hinders their prescriptive applications. Indeed, the elicitation of unbiased
judgments and the reconciliation of incoherent
assessments pose serious problems that presently have no satisfactory solution . Berkeley: University of California, 1982.
2. Beyth-Marom, R. The subjective probability of conjunctions (Decision Research Report No. 81-12). Eugene, Oregon: Decision Research, 1981.
3. Lindley, Dennis, Personal communication, 1980.
4. Shafer, G., & Tversky, A. Weighing evidence: The design
and comparisons of probability thought experiments.
Unpublished manuscript, Stanford University, 1983.