Challenges in Building Intelligent Open-domain Dialog
MINLIE HUANG and XIAOYAN ZHU, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Institute for
Artificial Intelligence, Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China
JIANFENG GAO, Microsoft Research, WA, USA
There is a resurgent interest in developing intelligent open-domain dialog systems due to the availability
of large amounts of conversational data and the recent progress on neural approaches to conversational
AI . Unlike traditional task-oriented bots, an open-domain dialog system aims to establish long-term
connections with users by satisfying the human need for communication, affection, and social belonging.
This paper reviews the recent work on neural approaches that are devoted to addressing three challenges
in developing such systems: semantics, consistency, and interactiveness. Semantics requires a dialog system
to not only understand the content of the dialog but also identify user’s emotional and social needs during
the conversation. Consistency requires the system to demonstrate a consistent personality to win users trust
and gain their long-term confidence. Interactiveness refers to the system’s ability to generate interpersonal
responses to achieve particular social goals such as entertainment and conforming. The studies we select to
present in this survey is based on our unique views and are by no means complete. Nevertheless, we hope
that the discussion will inspire new research in developing more intelligent open-domain dialog systems.
CCS Concepts: • Information systems →Information systems applications; Users and interactive
retrieval; • Computing methodologies →Natural language processing; Machine learning;
Discourse, dialogue and pragmatics; Natural language generation; Neural networks.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: dialog system, chatbot, social bot, conversation generation, response
generation, conversational AI
ACM Reference Format:
Minlie Huang, Xiaoyan Zhu, and Jianfeng Gao. 2020. Challenges in Building Intelligent Open-domain Dialog
Systems. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 1, 1, Article 1 , 33 pages. 
1145/3383123
INTRODUCTION
Building intelligent open-domain dialog systems that can converse with humans coherently and
engagingly has been a long-standing goal of artificial intelligence (AI). Early dialog systems such
as Eliza , Parry , and Alice , despite being instrumental to significantly advancing
machine intelligence, worked well only in constrained environments. An open-domain social bot
remains an elusive goal until recently. The Microsoft XiaoIce (‘Little Ice’ literally in Chinese) system,
since its release in May, 2014, has attracted millions of users and can converse with users on a wide
Authors’ addresses: Minlie Huang; Xiaoyan Zhu, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Institute for Artificial
Intelligence, Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084,
Beijing, China, ; Jianfeng Gao, Microsoft Research , Redmond, WA, USA, .
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from .
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
1046-8188/2020/1-ART1 $15.00
 
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2020.
 
Huang et al.
variety of topics for hours . In 2016, the Alexa Prize challenge was proposed to advance
the research and development of social bots that are able to converse coherently and engagingly
with humans on popular topics such as sports, politics, and entertainment, for at least 20 minutes
 1 . The evaluation metric, inspired by the Turing Test , is designed to test the social
bots’ capacity of delivering coherent, relevant, interesting, free-form conversations and keeping
users engaged as long as possible. However, the general intelligence demonstrated by these systems
is still far behind humans. Building open-domain dialog systems that can converse on various
topics like humans remains extremely challenging .
In this paper we focus our discussion on three challenges in developing neural-based open-domain
dialog systems, namely semantics, consistency and interactiveness. The rest of the paper is structured
as follows. In the rest of Section 1, we compare open-domain dialog bots with traditional taskoriented bots and elaborate the three challenges. In Section 2, we survey three typical approaches to
building neural-based open-domain dialog systems, namely, retrieval-based, generation-based, and
hybrid methods. In Sections 3, 4, and 5, we review the approaches that have been proposed to address
the three challenges, respectively. In Section 6, we discuss recent work on open-domain dialog
evaluation. In Section 7, we present an incomplete survey of frequently-used or recently-proposed
benchmarks for open-domain conversation modeling. We conclude the paper by presenting several
future research trends in Section 8.
Open-Domain Dialog vs. Task-Oriented Dialog
Generally speaking, there are two types of dialog systems: task-oriented and open-domain dialog.
Task-oriented dialog systems are designed for specific domains or tasks, such as flight booking,
hotel reservation, customer service, and technical support, and have been successfully applied in
some real-world applications. Open-domain dialog systems, however, are much more challenging
to develop due to its open-ended goal.
As outlined by Gao et al. , although both task-oriented dialog and open-domain dialog can
be formulated as an optimal decision making process with the goal of maximizing expected reward,
the reward in the former is better-defined and much easier to optimize than the latter. Consider a
ticket-booking bot. It is straightforward to optimize the bot to get all necessary information to have
the ticket booked in minimal dialog turns. The goal of an open-domain dialog agent is to maximize
the long-term user engagement. This is difficult to optimize mathematically because there are many
different ways (known as dialog skills) to improve the engagement (e.g., providing entertainment,
giving recommendations, chatting on an interesting topic, providing emotional comforting) and it
requires the systems to have a deep understanding of dialog context and user’s emotional needs
to select the right skill at the right time, and generate interpersonal responses with a consistent
personality.
Open-domain dialog systems also differ from task-oriented bots in system architecture. A taskoriented bot is typically developed based on a pre-defined task-specific schema2 and is designed
as a modular system which consists of domain-specific components like language understanding,
dialog management3, and language generation4. These components can be either hand-crafted
based on domain knowledge or trained on task-specific labeled data. On the other hand, due to
1Even though the dialog systems in this challenge are very complicated, they are more informational systems where user
emotion need is less considered.
2A task schema typically defines a set of user intents, and for each intent defines a set of dialog acts, slot-value pairs.
3Dialog management performs both dialog state tracking and response selection via policy .
4Recently, there are end-to-end methods that output a response given the previous dialog history. But in
general, domain knowledge about the task needs to be explicitly considered, which differs significantly from open-domain
dialog systems.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2020.
Challenges in Building Intelligent Open-domain Dialog Systems
the open-ended nature, open-domain dialog systems need to deal with open-domain knowledge
without any pre-defined task-specific schemas or labels. In recent years, there has been a trend
towards developing fully data-driven, end-to-end systems that map user’s input to system’s response
using neural networks. Since the primary goal of open-domain dialog bots is to be AI companions
to humans with an emotional connection rather than completing specific tasks, they are often
developed to mimic human conversations by training neural response generation models on large
amounts of .
Unlike task-oriented bots, most neural response generation models developed for open-domain
dialog systems are not grounded in real world, which prevents these systems from effectively
conversing about anything that relates to the user’s environment. Only recently have researchers
begun to explore how to ground open-domain dialog systems in real-world entities and knowledge
 . Knowledge grounding is also crucial for the system to provide interpersonal responses.
For instance, the conversations between friends are quite different from those between strangers.
So the system needs to be grounded in the personas of the speaker and addressee, respectively .
The tone of system responses needs to be adjusted according to user’s emotional states and affect
by grounding in affect or emotion of the user .
Interactiveness
Consistency
Named Entity
Recognition
Entity Linking
Domain/Topic/
Intent Detection
Knowledge &
Semantic Reasoning
Context Modeling &
Dialog Planning
Natural Language
Generation
Sentiment/Emo
tion Detection
Personalization
Behavior &
Personality
Fig. 1. Key issues (the middle block), key factors (the upper block), and key technologies (the bottom block)
in open-domain dialog systems.
Three Challenges
Thanks to the recent success of neural approaches to natural language processing and conversational
AI, there have been substantial advancements on open-domain dialog systems.
Most neural approaches formulate conversation as a task of generating output response given
user input and dialog context. Almost all neural response generation models follow the neural
text generation frameworks, such as sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq) , conditional
variational autoencoder (CVAE) , and generative adversarial network (GAN) . These
models are trained on large-scale conversational data, and can deliver plausible responses to any
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2020.
Huang et al.
topic that users are interested in. However, these neural-based systems often fail to establish
long-term emotional connections with users due to many issues as illustrated by the examples in
Table 1 and summarized in Figure 1. In what follows, we elaborate three key issues which we will
discuss in the rest of the paper 5.
Semantics Issue
I come from Shanghai.
Cool! I am from Beijing, we come from the same city!
Back to Beijing now. It is so cold but I am very happy!
When will you come to Beijing?
Consistency Issue
Are a boy or a girl?
I am a boy.
Are you a girl?
Yes, I am a girl.
Interactiveness Issue
Terrible breakfast today.
How about together tomorrow morning?
Sure. Would be great with your recommendation.
Table 1. Examples for demonstrating the semantics, consistency, and interactiveness issues. The first two
examples show semantic conflicts between user post and machine response, the third session shows bad
consistency within the dialog context due to the lack of a coherent personality, and the last session has bad
interactiveness due to the lack of grounding. The results in the first two blocks are from a standard Seq2Seq
model with an attention mechanism, and the last session is from a commercial system.
Semantics. Semantics is the heart of any dialog system because conversation is a semantic activity
 . It requires not only to understand the content of the conversation, which is often in multimodality including text, image and video, but also to understand users by identifying information
beyond the dialog content such as a user’s personality and persona6, emotion, sentiment, and the
user’s profile and background. From the technical perspective, semantics mainly involves the key
techniques of natural language understanding and user understanding, including named entity recognition, entity linking, domain detection, topic and intent detection, user sentiment/emotion/opinion
detection, and knowledge/ commonsense reasoning.
Consistency. In order to gain user’s long-term confidence and trust, it is crucial for a dialog system
to present consistent behaviors and respond consistently given user’s input and dialog history
 . For instance, a social bot should not deliver a response that conflicts with her
pre-set persona, or her previous responses in temporal dependency, causality, or logic. Specifically,
the system’s response needs to be consistent in three dimensions. First is persona consistency
where the response needs to fit the pre-defined personality of the dialog system. Second is stylistic
consistency where a consistent speaking style is presented. Third is contextual consistency in
which the response needs to be coherent and consistent with respect to the dialog context. From
the technical perspective, consistency mainly involves personalization, stylistic generation, and
multi-turn context modeling.
5Note that the challenges discussed in this section are also fundamental to traditional, non-neural dialog systems.
6Personality is someone’s character or nature while a persona is a superficial identity of the character or nature.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2020.
Challenges in Building Intelligent Open-domain Dialog Systems
Interactiveness. As mentioned above, meeting user’s social needs, such as emotional affection
and social belonging, is the primary design goal of an open-domain dialog system. Interactiveness
refers to the system’s ability to achieve complex social goals such as entertainment and conforming by
optimizing its behaviors and dialog strategies in multi-turn conversation. To improve interactiveness, it
is important to understand the user’s emotion state or affect , to respond not only reactively
but also proactively , to control the topic maintenance or transition , and to
optimize the interaction strategy (i.e., dialog policy) in multi-turn conversations to maximize longterm user engagement. From the technical perspective, interactiveness mainly involves sentiment
and emotion detection, dialog state tracking, topic detection and recommendation, dialog policy
learning, and controllable response generation.
We summarize the techniques required to address the three issues in Figure 1, including named
entity recognition, entity linking, domain/topic/intent detection, and sentiment/emotion detection.
As demonstrated in the Alexa Prize challenge which targets at developing dialog systems for
conversing coherently and engagingly with humans on various popular topics, the winning dialog
systems are composed of different modules that are developed based on these techniques,
including language understanding, dialog management, and natural language generation. In such
modular designs, the semantic issue is mainly related to the understanding module which is
intended to understand the dialog (e.g., content, entity, topic, etc.) and user (e.g., opinion, personality,
emotional needs). The other two issues are mainly related to the dialog management and generation
modules, aiming to generate responses that are not only consistent in content and personality, but
also interactive so as to increase the long-term user engagement. These issues are highly interleaved.
For example, understanding dialog and user (semantics) is fundamental to generating consistent
and interactive responses.
FRAMEWORKS FOR BUILDING OPEN-DOMAIN DIALOG SYSTEMS
As discussed in Section 1.1, open-domain dialog systems are typically implemented using an
end-to-end architecture, rather than a modular architecture used by task-oriented bots for which
task-specific schemas and labels are available for the development of these dialog modules. At the
heart of an open-domain dialog system is a response generation engine, which takes user input at
t-th dialog turn Xt = xt
n and dialog context Ct, which will be explained in a minute, and
generates response Yt = yt
ˆYt = arg max
Pθ(Y |Xt,Ct)
where Ωdenotes the set of all candidate responses, Pθ is a learned model of scoring candidate
responses, parameterized by θ, and argmax the search algorithm to find among all candidates the
best one with the highest score.
This formulation unifies three typical methods of building open-domain dialog systems: retrievalbased, generation-based, and hybrid. In retrieval-based methods, the search space Ωis obtained
by retrieving candidate responses from a pre-collected human conversational dataset consisting
of input-context-response pairs. Pθ(Y |Xt,Ct) is implemented as a matching or ranking function
which scores the relevance of each candidate given Xt and Ct. In generation-based methods, the
search space Ωis very large, namely Y ∈V m where V is the vocabulary size and m is the response
length, and Pθ(Y |Xt,Ct) is typically implemented as an auto-regressive model that generates a
sentence word by word. In the hybrid methods, it is typical to first retrieve prototype responses
from a dataset and then generates a response by utilizing prototype responses.
Note that the introduction of contextCt offers a lot of flexibility to model various aspects of dialog.
For instance, when Ct = , it models single-turn dialog; Setting Ct = X1Y1X2Y2 · · ·Xt−1 models
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2020.
Huang et al.
multi-turn dialogs. Ct can also encode other (non-content) contexts such as persona 
for personalized dialog generation, emotion labels for emotional response generation, and
knowledge graphs for knowledge-aware response generation.
Retrieval-based Methods
Algorithms
Context: 𝐶
Input-Output
Retrieved candidates
Repository
Fig. 2. Framework of retrieval-based methods. The online process finds the most relevant output from the
retrieved candidate with a matching model while the offline process trains the matching model with the
auto-constructed data.
Given a dialog corpus and the user’s post, IR-based systems can use any retrieval algorithm to
choose an appropriate response from the corpus . In such a setting, the system retrieves
the most similar post to the given user post, and the response to the retrieved post is returned as
the response to the user’s post. Traditional learning-to-rank methods were introduced by Ji et al.
 for response selection from a large-scale post-response repository. Afterwards, many neural
models have been proposed. Figure 2 illustrates the process of retrieval-based response generation
methods. Using input X ⊕C 7 as a query, such methods first retrieve a list of candidates from a
large repository which consists of input-context-output pairs, and choose the top-scored candidate
as output response Y using the matching function Pθ(Y |X,C), which can be implemented using
either traditional learning-to-rank algorithms , or modern neural matching models .
The model parameters θ is commonly learned by minimizing the margin-based pair-wise ranking
loss as follows8:
L = max(0,γ + matchθ(Y−,X ⊕C) −matchθ(Y+,X ⊕C))
where γ is a margin (a hyper-parameter), Y+ is a ground-truth (positive) response, Y−is a negative
response which can be randomly sampled from the dataset or generated by corrupting Y+, and
matchθ(Y,X ⊕C) is the matching function to be learned.
Alternatively, we can also use a likelihood loss defined as:
L = −log Pθ(Y+|X ⊕C)
P(Y+|X ⊕C) =
exp{matchθ(Y+,X ⊕C)}
exp{matchθ(Y+,X ⊕C)} + Ík
i=1 exp{matchθ(Y i−,X ⊕C)}
7Hereafter, we will use X ⊕C to denote the input query that combines the current user input X and the dialog context C.
8 Note that the method of pair-wise ranking is widely used in the literature, but other ways such as point-wise and list-wise
ranking methods are also feasible.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2020.
Challenges in Building Intelligent Open-domain Dialog Systems
Modern neural models of match(Y,X ⊕C) can be roughly grouped into two categories, shallow
and deep interaction networks9, as illustrated in Figure 3. In shallow interaction networks, candidate
Y and input X ⊕C are first encoded independently into the two vectors which then have some
shallow interactions such as subtraction or element-wise multiplication before being fed to the
classification layer. In deep interaction networks, Y and X ⊕C interact via an interaction network
to form a fused representation, which is then fed to the classification layer.
𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ𝜃(𝑌, 𝑋⨁𝐶)
Input: 𝑋⨁𝐶
Representation
Candidate: 𝑌
Input: 𝑋⨁𝐶
Candidate: 𝑌
Interaction
𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ𝜃(𝑌, 𝑋⨁𝐶)
Classification
Classification
Interaction
Interaction
Representation
Representation
Fig. 3. Frameworks of shallow and deep interaction networks. In shallow interaction network, the feature
vectors of input X ⊕C and candidate Y are obtained independently, and there may be shallow interactions
such as subtraction or element-wise multiplication between the two vectors before the classification layer. In
deep interaction network, the input and candidate make interactions in the early stage to obtain a feature
vector for the classification layer.
For shallow interaction networks, many efforts have been devoted to learning good representations for query and candidate independently. Huang et al. proposed to use deep structured
similarity models (DSSMs) to extract semantic features from query and document independently
before computing their relevance. DSSM is further augmented by introducing Convolutional layers and recurrent layers with Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) units . To
effectively incorporate dialog history, Yan et al. reformulated input query X, and combined
matching scores computed based on the reformulated and original queries, and retrieved queries
and responses, respectively. Zhou et al. used a hierarchical Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
to encode a candidate and the utterance sequence in context, respectively, before computing their
matching score. These shallow models are simple to implement and efficient to execute.
For deep interaction networks, query X ⊕C and response Y interact via a neural network to
generate a single feature vector that preserves all query-response interaction information at different levels of abstraction. The matching score is then derived from the vector using another neural
network. Hu et al. extracted matching features from all n-gram combinations of input X and
response Y to obtain low-level feature maps with a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). Afterwards, the feature maps are transformed with multiple CNN layers to form the final representation
for classification. Wu et al. proposed a sequential matching network (SMN) for multi-turn
9Shallow or deep is regarding interaction, namely whether the learned representations are obtained by early-stage interactions
(deep), or late-stage (sometimes no) interactions (shallow). The two words are not referring to whether the model structure
is deep or not.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2020.
Huang et al.
dialog where each contextual utterance in X ⊕C is encoded conditioned on Y, and these utterances
are connected sequentially by GRUs. The matching score is computed on top of the weighted sum
of the GRUs’ states. Zhou et al. proposed a deep attention matching network. The query
and its candidate response are firstly represented with self-attention inspired by the transformer
network , and then the interactions between them were made with cross-attention to obtain
word-by-word matching matrices, and finally the matching score is computed by aggregating all
the matching information with a 3D matching tensor. Yang et al. extended SMN with external
knowledge in information-seeking conversation systems. The method first expands response candidates using pseudo-relevance feedback, and then makes the candidates interact with the query
to obtain word-by-word matching matrices. The subsequent operations are very similar to SMN.
Zhang et al. proposed a deep utterance aggregation model which shares a similar structure
with SMN. The difference lies in that gated self-attention was used to obtain the representations
of the query and a response candidate, and the subsequent operations are almost the same to
SMN. Wu et al. proposed to consider topic clues for query-response matching. The authors
first extracted topical words for the query and response respectively using LDA. Then, a query
representation is conditioned not only on the response representation but also on the attentive read
of the topical words of the response. A response representation is computed similarly conditioned
on the message’s topical words and the query representation. Other matching models that were
proposed originally for non-dialog tasks such as paraphrase detection, language inference, and
reading comprehension , have also been adapted and applied to dialog response ranking.
One of the most notable deep interaction networks for learning the matching function (as defined
by Eq. 2) is BERT , which achieves state-of-the-art performance on many NLP tasks, including
response selection. Xt ⊕Ct and a candidate response y, normally separated by a special token [SEP],
form the input of a multi-layer Transformer blocks (12-48 blocks). Each block consists of multihead a self-attention module, layer normalization, a feed forward layer, and residual connections.
The vectors at the output layer are fed to a fine-tuned classifier to determine whether the response
y is appropriate for the input. This structure has been widely adopted in retrieval-based methods
There is a short review on deep retrieval-based dialogue systems where the authors discussed
existing work with respect to single-turn matching models, multi-turn matching models, and
ensemble models. In comparison, we summarize existing work from the interaction perspective:
whether a candidate response makes deep matching with the input (post, or along with the context)
at early or late stage. In general, deep interaction networks usually work better than shallow
interaction networks .
Generation-based Methods
Neural generative models have been widely applied to open-domain dialog generation. Inspired by
the early template-based generation method and statistical machine translation (SMT) ,
sequence-to-sequence (Seq2seq) models have become the most popular choice
for dialog generation. Other frameworks, including conditional variational autoencoder (CVAE)
 and generative adversarial network (GAN) , are also applied to
dialog generation. Very recently, Transformer-based language models pretrained with large-scale
corpora are another popular choice , which obtains strong performance in dialog
generation .
Generation-based models usually formulate P(Y |Xt ⊕Ct) as:
P(Y |Xt ⊕Ct) =
P(yi |y<i;Xt ⊕Ct).
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2020.
Challenges in Building Intelligent Open-domain Dialog Systems
where y<i = y1y2 · · ·yi−1. Typically, the output response is generated word by word, e.g., at each
time step a word is sampled according to P(y|y<i;Xt ⊕Ct). Using RNNs, during the course of
generation, the generated prefix is autoregressively encoded into the input to generate the next
Most neural generation models adopt an encoder-decoder framework. The encoder transforms
the input Xt ⊕Ct into semantic vectors as
Xt ⊕Ct = Encoder(Xt ⊕Ct).
Then, at each i-th step of generation, the decoder updates its state vector si and samples a word
from distribution oi as follows:
yi ∼oi = P(y|y<i;Xt ⊕Ct)
= softmax(Wosi)
where Wo is the weight matrix of the decoder. The decoder’s state is updated by
si = Decoder(si−1, [Att(Xt ⊕Ct; si−1); yi−1])
where Att(Xt ⊕Ct; si−1) is an attentive read of the encoded input conditioned on state si−1, typically
using attention mechanism ; and yi−1 is the vector representation of the previously generated
word yi−1.
The formulation of generation-based models mentioned above is auto-regressive in that these
models generate a target sequence word by word, each word conditioned on the words that
are previously generated. To make the decoding parallelizable, non-autoregressive models based
on Transformer have been proposed to generate all the tokens simultaneously . Nonautoregressive modeling factorizes the distribution over a target sequence given a query into a
product of conditionally independent per-step distributions, as follows:
P(Y |Xt ⊕Ct) =
P(yi |Xt ⊕Ct).
Though the performance of such non-autoregressive models is still not as good as their autoregressive counterparts, it opens new opportunities for fast training using very large scale datasets
Input: 𝑋"⨁𝐶"
y&~P(y|𝑦.&; 𝑿1 ⨁𝑪1)
𝐴𝑡𝑡(𝑿"⨁𝑪"; 𝒔&'()
Softmax(Wosi)
Fig. 4. Typical encoder-decoder framework for generation-based models. The input Xt ⊕Ct is encoded into
vectors Xt ⊕Ct . In the decoder, a word yi is sampled from P(y|y<i,Xt ⊕Ct ) = sof tmax(Wosi) and the
decoder’s state is updated with yi−1 and Att(Xt ⊕Ct ; si−1) as input.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2020.
Huang et al.
Noticeably, the large-scale pre-trained models, such as BERT and GPT-2 , can be easily
applied in the above encoder-decoder framework. The encoder can be a pre-trained BERT model or
a GPT-2 model, the decoder a GPT-2 model. Both the parameters of the encoder and the decoder are
initialized using the pre-trained models and then fine-tuned on a dialog corpus .
The fine-tuning process is often tailored to the dialog scenario via encoding with dialog state
embeddings , classifying golden and negatively sampled responses given the same dialog
context , designing dialog-specific pre-training tasks , and so on. These models have
shown strong performance in the NeurIPS Conversational Intelligence Challenge 2 (ConvAI 2)10 and
were used in the TREC Conversational Assistance Track (Conversational Information Seeking)11.
Notably, Zhang et al. released the DialoGPT model that was trained on 147M conversation-like
exchanges extracted from on Reddit comment threads, providing a good starting point for future
Hybrid Methods
Retrieval-based methods retrieve an output response from a repository of human-human conversations. Such human-produced conversations are fluent, grammatical, and of high quality. However,
the scale of the repository is critical to the success of the methods, which unfortunately is never
large enough for open-domain dialog systems. Moreover, retrieval-based methods cannot generate
unseen responses. On the other hand, generation-based methods can produce novel responses.
But they often generate undesirable responses that are either ungrammatical or irrelevant. Hybrid
methods combine the strengths of both and usually adopt a two-stage procedure . In
the first stage, some relevant conversations, known as prototype responses in , are retrieved
from a dataset using input X ⊕C as a query. Then, prototype responses are used to help generate
new responses in the second stage.
Based on the Seq2Seq architecture, Song et al. used additional encoders to represent the
set of retrieved responses, and applied the attention and copy mechanism in decoding
to generate new responses. Pandey et al. first retrieved similar conversations from training
data using a TF-IDF model. The retrieved responses were used to create exemplar vectors that
were used by the decoder to generate a new response. Wu et al. first retrieved a prototype
response from training data and then edited the prototype response according to the differences
between the prototype context and current context. The motivation is that the retrieved prototype
provides a good start-point for generation because it is grammatical and informative, and the
post-editing process further improves the relevance and coherence of the prototype. Zhang et al.
 proposed an adversarial learning framework to enhance a retrieval-generation ensemble
model. Their model consists of a language-model-like generator, a ranker generator, and a ranker
discriminator. This model encourages the two generators to generate responses that are scored
higher by the discriminative ranker, while the discriminator down-weighs adversarial samples and
selects those responses that are favored by the two generators.
A typical symptom of a dialog system that suffers from the semantics issue is that it often generates
bland and generic responses, such as “I don’t know”, “thank you”, “OK” , or simply repeats whatever
a user says . We observe similar phenomena in human conversations. When we
don’t understand what the other party is talking about but have to respond, we often pick those
safe but bland responses.
10 
11 
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2020.
Challenges in Building Intelligent Open-domain Dialog Systems
To make an engaging conversation, the dialog system needs to produce contentful, interesting,
and interpersonal responses based on its understanding of the dialog content, user’s sentiment and
emotion, and real-world knowledge that is related to the dialog. In this section, we review some of
the most prominent neural approaches that have been proposed recently to address the semantics
issue. We first describe the ways of improving the encoder-decoder framework to generate diverse
and informative responses by improving the understanding (embedding) of dialog context and
users. Then, we describe the methods of grounding dialog in real-world knowledge to make system
responses more contentful.
Improving Diversity and Informativeness in Neural Response Generation
Most state of the art neural response generation models are based on the encoder-decoder framework
which consists of four components: (1) an encoder that encodes user input and dialog context, (2)
an intermediate representation, (3) an decoder that generates candidate responses, and (4) a ranker
that picks the best candidate as the response. In what follows, we review the proposed methods in
four categories, each focusing on improving one of the four components.
Encoder. Encoding richer information from query X ⊕C, such as longer dialog history ,
persona , hidden topics , has proved to be helpful for generating more informative responses. Xing et al. extracted topic words, rather than hidden topic vectors, using LDA, and
encoded such words in a topic-aware model. The model generates a response by jointly attending to
query X ⊕C and the topic words. Topic words are also used to model topic transition in multi-turn
conversations . The hybrid methods described in Section 2.3 encode the retrieved
prototype responses to help generate more informative responses.
Intermediate Representation. Instead of encoding X ⊕C using a fixed-size vector as in ,
methods have been proposed to use more flexible intermediate representations (e.g., additional
latent variables) to enhance the representation capability to address the one-to-many issue in dialog,
and to improve the interpretability of the representation in order to better control the response
generation. Zhao et al. introduced CVAE for dialogue generation and adopted a Gaussian
distribution, rather than a fixed-size vector, as the intermediate representation, thus obtaining
more diverse responses via sampling the latent variable. Du et al. introduced a sequence of
continuous latent variables to model response diversity, and demonstrated empirically that it is
more effective than using a single latent variable. Zhao et al. proposed an unsupervised
representation learning method to use discrete latent variables, instead of dense continuous ones,
which improves the interpretability of representation. Zhou et al. assumed that there
exist some latent responding mechanisms, each of which can generates different responses for a
single input post. These responding mechanisms are modeled as latent embeddings, and can be
used to encode the input into mechanism-aware context to generate responses with the controlled
generation styles and topics. Gao et al. proposed a SpaceFusion model which induces a latent
space that fuses the two latent spaces generated by Seq2Seq and auto-encoder, respectively, in such
a way that after encoding X ⊕C into a vector in the space, the distance and direction from the
predicted response vector given the context roughly match the relevance and diversity, respectively.
Decoder. Assigning additional probability mass to desirable words in decoder is a commonly used
method to gain some control of what to generate. Mathematically, this can be implemented by
adjusting the output word distribution as follows:
Pnew(yi |y<i;X,C) = Normalize(P(yi |y<i;X,C) + Pbias(yi |y<i;X,C))
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2020.
Huang et al.
where y<i = y1y2 · · ·yi−1 is the generated prefix; Pbias assigns additional probability mass to
the desirable words to be generated; and Normalize(·) is a normalization function to ensure a
probability distribution. Many existing controllable decoding methods essentially fall into this
formulation. The most notable example is CopyNet , which copies desirable but infrequent
words from the input to the output, thus assigning higher probabilities to those words. In ,
Pbias is formulated as a Gaussian distribution, which assigns higher probabilities to rare words to
control the specificity of a response, where the specificity score of a word is proportional to its IDF
(inverse document frequency) score.
Candidate Ranker. To obtain more diverse responses, beam search is commonly used to generate
multiple candidates, which (together with retrieved candidates in hybrid dialog systems) are then
ranked by another model, which uses information that is not available in decoding (e.g., mutual
information between input and response) or is too expensive to use in decoding (e.g., a large
pre-trained language model such as BERT ) to select the final response. Li et al. proposed
to use Maximum Mutual Information (MMI) as the objective to rank candidates to promote the
diversity of generated responses. As the standard beam search often produces near-identical results,
recent work addresses it by encouraging the diversity among (partial) hypotheses in the beam. For
example, Li et al. penalized lower-ranked siblings extended from the same parents, so that the
N-best hypotheses in the beam at each time step are more likely to expand from different parents,
and thus more diverse. Vijayakumar et al. divided the hypotheses into several groups and
applied beam search group-by-group. The model favours the hypotheses that are dissimilar to the
ones in the previous groups. Constrained beam search was also proposed to generate desirable
responses by constraining a generated response to obey the input structure.
Knowledge Grounded Dialog Models
Knowledge is crucial for language understanding and generation. To build effective human-machine
interactions, it is indispensable to ground the concepts, entities, and relations in text in commonsense
knowledge or real-world facts such as those stored in Freebase and Wikipedia. An knowledgegrounded open-domain dialog system should be able to identify the entities and topics mentioned
in user input, link them into real-world facts, retrieve related background information, and thereby
respond users in a proactive way e.g., by recommending new, related topics to discuss.
Knowledge has been shown useful in both retrieval-based and generation-based dialog systems.
A well-known example of the former is Microsoft XiaoIce . XiaoIce relies on a large knowledge
graph (KG) to identify the topics and knowledge related to user input for both response generation
and topic management. In , a Tri-LSTM model is proposed to use commonsense knowledge as
external memories to facilitate the model to encode commonsense assertions for response selection.
An early example of using knowledge for generating responses is , where manually crafted
templates are used to generate responses which are filled with relevant knowledge triples. In
 , a knowledge-grounded model is proposed to generate a response by incorporating some
retrieved posts that are relevant to the input. However, the quality of these unstructured posts is
mixed. Pre-compiled structured knowledge, which is in the form of fact triples, is believed to be
of higher quality and has been shown to more helpful in conversation generation . Zhu
et al. dealt with a scenario where two speakers are conversing based on each other’s private
knowledge base in the music domain. The generation model can generate a word in response from
the context or the knowledge base. In , a knowledge diffusion model is proposed to not only
answer factoid questions based on a knowledge base, but also generate an appropriate response
containing knowledge base entities that are relevant to the input. Zhou et al. exploited the use
of large-scale commonsense knowledge for conversation generation. First, a one-hop subgraph is
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2020.
Challenges in Building Intelligent Open-domain Dialog Systems
retrieved from ConceptNet for each word in an input post. Then, the word vectors, along with
the graph vectors which extend the meaning of the word via its neighboring entities and relations,
are used to encode the input post. During decoding, a graph attention mechanism is applied in
which the model first attends to a knowledge graph and then to a triple within each graph, and
the decoder chooses a word to generate from either the graph or the common vocabulary. Qin
et al. presented a new end-to-end approach that jointly models response generation and
on-demand machine reading for generating contentful conversations. The key idea is to provide
the model with relevant long-form text on the fly as a source of external knowledge. The model
performs QA-style reading comprehension on this text in response to each conversational turn,
thereby allowing for more focused integration of external knowledge than prior approaches.
We summarize the aforementioned knowledge-grounded dialog systems in Table 2. Most these
studies focus on two problems: (1) knowledge selection – selecting appropriate knowledge to be
incorporated in the next response given the dialog context and previously-selected knowledge
 , and (2) knowledge-aware generation – injecting the required knowledge into
a generated response . In addition, zero-shot adaptation to updated, unseen
knowledge graphs without conversational data is worth more comprehensive exploration in
the future. solving the problem would allow dialog systems to generate proper responses with
selected knowledge even though the knowledge has never been used.
Recently, there is a significant burst in constructing document or knowledge grounded dialog
corpora , which will be described in Section 7 in details.
CONSISTENCY
A human-like dialog system needs to embody consistent behaviors, so that it can gain the user’s
confidence and trust . The consistency issue refers to generating responses that are
consistent in persona, style, and context (with respect to topic, logic, causality, etc.). We group
existing studies into three lines: (1) persona consistency modeling including implicit and explicit
methods, (2) stylistic response generation, and (3) contextual consistency.
Persona Consistency
Existing dialog models that address persona consistency can be roughly grouped into two catetories: implicit personalization and explicit personalization. In the former, the persona is implicitly
represented by a persona vector. For instance, Kim et al. proposed a ranking-based approach to
integrate a personal knowledge base and user interests in dialogue system. Bang et al. extended
the user input by exploiting examples retrieved from her personal knowledge base to help identify
the candidate responses that fit her persona. Li et al. , Zhang et al. used an embedding
vector to represent a user (speaker) persona and fed the user embedding into each decoding position of the decoder. Such models need to be trained using conversational data labeled by user
identifiers, which is expensive to collect for large quantities. Thus, Wang et al. proposed to
train personalized models with only group attributes (e.g., male or female). The group attributes
are embedded to vectors and then fed into the decoder for response generation. Zhang et al. 
proposed a neural conversation model that generates consistent responses by maintaining certain
features related to topics and personas throughout the conversation. Unlike other work that requires external supervision such as user identities, which are often unavailable, this approach trains
topic and persona feature extractors in a self-supervised way by utilizing the natural structure of
dialogue data. Although Ouchi and Tsuboi , Zhang et al. showed that user embedding is
an effective technique to distinguish roles of speakers and addressees in multi-party conversation,
personalization in these models are handled in an implicit way and thus not easy to interpret and
control in generating desired responses.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2020.
Huang et al.
Knowledge modality Grounding method
Issues focused
Zhou et al. 
Knowledge graph
Knowledge-aware generation Seq2Seq+Graph Attention
Ghazvininejad et al. 
Unstructured text
Knowledge-aware generation Memory Networks
Zhu et al. 
Knowledge base
Knowledge-aware generation Seq2Seq+
Knowledge Retriever
Liu et al. 
Knowledge base
Knowledge-aware generation HRED+
Knowledge Retriever
Qin et al. 
Unstructured text
Knowledge-aware generation SAN + Generator
Chen and Lee 
Knowledge graph
Multi-hop reasoning Knoweldge-aware generation
+Zero-shot adaptation
Multi-hop Reasoning
Dinan et al. 
Unstructured text
Knowledge-aware generation Transformer
Gopalakrishnan et al. Unstructured text
Knowledge-aware generation Transformer
Moghe et al. 
Unstructured text+
Fact table
Grounding label
Knowledge-aware generation HRED/GTTP/BiDAF
Moon et al. 
Knowledge graph
Grounding label
Knowledge selection
KG path decoder
Wu et al. 
Unstructured text+
Knowledge graph
Grounding label
Proactive conversation
BERT/PostKS
Zhou et al. 
Unstructured text
Grounding label
Knowledge-aware generation Seq2Seq
Lian et al. 
Unstructured text
Grounding label
Knowledge selection
Liu et al. 
Unstructured text+
Knowledge graph
QA+Grounding label Knowledge selection
Ren et al. 
Unstructured text
Grounding label
Knowledge selection
BiDAF+GTTP
Zhang et al. 
Unstructured text
Grounding label
Knowledge selection
BiDAF+Seq2Seq
Li et al. 
Unstructured text
Grounding label
Knowledge-aware generation Incremental Transformer+
Two-pass Decoder
Table 2. Survey on existing knowledge-grounded studies. Grounding method refers to the means of a grounded knowledge linking to
an utterance. Retrieval means that the grounded knowledge is retrieved based on key words in utterances. QA means the knowledge is
extracted using machine reading comprehension methods. Grounding label means the knowledge used in the conversation is explicitly
annotated by hand. In the last column, PostKS means selecting knowlege by mininizing the KL loss between a prior and a posterior
distribution over knowledge ; SAN refers to the Stochastic Answer Network for machine reading comprehension model proposed in
 ; GTTP (Get To The Point) refers to the hybrid pointer generator network for abstractive summarization proposed in ; HRED refers
to the hierarchical neural response generation model ; and BiDAF refers to the Bi-Directional Attention Flow network for reading
comprehension .
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2020.
Challenges in Building Intelligent Open-domain Dialog Systems
In , an explicit persona model is proposed to generate personality-coherent responses given
a pre-specified user profile. The chatbot’s persona is defined by a key-value table (i.e., profile) which
consists of name, gender, age, hobbies, and so on. During generation, the model first chooses a
key-value from the profile and then decodes a response from the chosen key-value pair forward
and backward. This model can be trained on generic dialogue data without user identifier. XiaoIce
also uses an explicit persona model .
We have discussed two categories of methods for modeling persona consistency: implicit modeling
 which utilizes learned user persona features to capture user-level consistency implicitly,
and explicit modeling which controls the conversation generation using explicitly-defined
user profile. However, most existing methods are insufficient in modeling the user’s psychological
personality. For instance, we do not yet have a dialog system that can exhibit extrovert or introvert
personality. Building such an intelligent dialog system requires breakthroughs in multi-disciplined
research on psychology, cognitive, and social science.
Stylistic Response Generation
Stylistic response generation can be viewed as a form of personalization in conversation.
There are two main challenges: how to disentangle content and style in representation, and how to
construct training data containing pairs of responses that are of the same content but in different
styles. Wang et al. utilized a small-scale stylistic data and proposed a topic embedding model to
generate responses in specific styles and topics simultaneously. Oraby et al. demonstrated that
it is possible to automate the construction of a parallel corpus where each meaning representation
can be realized in different styles with controllable stylistic parameters.
Stylistic conversation generation is closely related to domain adaptation and transfer learning
 . The idea is to first train a general conversation model on a large corpus in source
domain and then to transfer the model to a new speaker or target domain using small amounts of
personalized (or stylistic) data in target domain. Casanueva et al. proposed to automatically
gather conversations from similar speakers to improve the performance of policy learning of
personalized dialogue systems. Zhang et al. proposed a two-phase transfer learning approach,
namely initialization then adaptation, to generate personalized responses. They also proposed a
quasi-Turing test method to evaluate the performance of the generated responses. Yang et al. 
presented a transfer learning framework similar to Zhang et al. , but proposed to use a new
adaptation mechanism based on reinforcement learning. Luan et al. proposed a multi-task
learning approach where the response generation and utterance representation are treated as two
sub-tasks for speaker role adaptation.
Contextual Consistency
Unlike the studies on persona consistency, the work on modeling contextual consistency is yet
to be explored. Early work has focused on better representing dialog contexts using
hierarchical models, which can be viewed as implicit modeling of contextual consistency. Recently,
Welleck et al. and Dziri et al. characterized the contextual consistency as a natural
language inference (NLI) problem . In this setting, a response is considered consistent if it
can be inferred from the dialog context or the given persona. Welleck et al. constructed a
dialog NLI dataset based on Persona-Chat . Zhang et al. proposed to learn topic features
from dialog context on-the-fly and utilize controllable response generation techniques to generate
topic-consistent responses.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2020.
Huang et al.
INTERACTIVENESS
This issue is mainly about how to optimize the behaviors and strategies of a dialog system to
maximize long-term user engagement and accomplish long-term, complex goals such as providing
emotional comfort, or even psychological counseling . To improve interactiveness, it
is important to understand user’s emotion and affect, in addition to dialog content, and to optimize
the system’s behavior and interaction strategy in multi-turn conversations.
Modeling User Emotion
Emotion perception and expression is vital for building a human-like dialog system. Earlier attempts
to building emotional dialog systems are mostly inspired by psychology findings. Those systems
are either rule-based or trained on small-scale data, and work well only in a controlled environment.
Thanks to the availability of large-scale data and the recent progress on neural conversational AI,
many neural response generation models have been proposed to perceive and express emotions in
an open-domain dialog setting. Zhou et al. proposed Emotional Chatting Machine (ECM) to
generate emotional responses given a pre-specified emotion. ECM consists of three components: (1)
an emotion category embedding which is fed into each decoding position, (2) an internal emotion
state which assumes that the emotion state decays gradually and finally to zero during decoding,
and (3) an external memory which allows the model to choose emotional (e.g., lovely) or generic (e.g.,
person) words explicitly at each decoding step. The authors also presented some typical emotion
interaction patterns in human-human conversations such as empathy and comfort, which would
inspire more fine-grained design of emotion interaction between human and machine. Asghar et al.
 developed a method of affective response generation that consists of three components: (1)
the affective vectors based on Valence/Arousal/Dominance dimensions , which serve as
a supplement to word vectors; (2) the affective loss functions which maximize or minimize the
affective consistency between a post and a response; and (3) the affective beam search algorithm for
seeking affective responses. In , a conditional variational autoencoder is proposed to generate
more emotional responses conditioned on an input post and some pre-specified emojis. Huber et al.
 studied how emotion can be grounded in an image to generate more affective conversations. In
addition to text, the decoder takes as input the scene, sentiment, and facial coding features extracted
from a given image. Recently, an empathetic dialog corpus is developed to facilitate the research on
modeling empathetic interactions in conversation . We will present dialog datasets in Section
Controlling the emotion or sentiment has become a popular topic in language generation
 . In , an RNN-based language model is trained on large-scale review data where
some neurons are reported to be highly correlated with sentiment expression. Ghosh et al. 
proposed an affective language model which generates an affective sequence from a leading context.
At each decoding position, the model estimates an affective vector of the already generated prefix
by keyword spotting using the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) dictionary . The
vector is then used to generate the next word. In , to generate the reviews of a particular
polarity, the authors proposed a multi-class generative adversarial network which consists of
multiple generators for multi-class polarities and a multi-class discriminator.
Despite the research effort reviewed, it is still challenging for a dialog system to express complex
emotions in natural language. One difficulty is emotion representation. A simple approach is to
project an emotion label to a vector , which is implicit, unexplainable, and subtle. A more
sophisticated method is to use Valence/Arousal/Dominance representations: the emotion of each
word, sentence, and user state can be represented as V-A-D vectors , which is intended
to capture psychological and linguistic clues beyond the emotion vector. Another issue of most
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2020.
Challenges in Building Intelligent Open-domain Dialog Systems
existing work is that the user’s emotion transition during a conversation is not explicitly
modeled. This is crucial for a dialog system to establish a long-term connection with a user because
the user is more willing to engage with the system if the system can always detect negative change
of her emotion during the conversation and cheer her up through e.g., shifting to new topics that
are more comfortable for both parties.
Modeling Conversation Behavior and Strategy
As pointed out in , an open-domain dialog system needs to have enough social skills to have
engaging conversations with users and eventually establish long-term emotional connections with
users. These social skills include topic planning and dialog policy which can determine whether
to drive the conversation to a new topic when e.g., the conversation has stalled, or whether or
not to be actively listening when the user herself is engaged in the conversation. Nothdurft et al.
 elucidated the challenges of proactiveness in dialogue systems and how they influence the
effectiveness of turn-taking behaviour in multimodal and unimodal dialogue systems. Yu et al.
 proposed several generic conversational strategies (including grounding on entities and OOV
words, topic switch, activity initiation, and joke telling) to handle possible system breakdowns
in non-task-oriented dialog systems, and designed policies to select these strategies according to
dialog context. Zhang et al. addressed the problem of predicting from the very beginning of a
conversation whether it will get out of hand. The authors developed a framework for capturing
pragmatic devices, such as politeness strategies and rhetorical prompts, used to start a conversation,
and analyzed their relation to its future trajectory. Applying this framework in a controlled setting,
it is possible to detect early warning signs of antisocial behavior in online discussions.
The above studies inspire researchers to devise new methods of incorporating social skills into
an open-domain dialog system. In , a retrieval-based method is proposed to first detect the sign
of stalemate using rules, and then retrieve responses that contain the entities that are relevant to
the input, assuming that a proactive reply should contain the entities that can be triggered from the
ones in the input. Yan and Zhao proposed a proactive suggestion method where a look-ahead
post for a user is decoded in addition to the system response, conditioned on the context and
the previously generated response. The user can use the generated post directly, or type a new
one during conversation. Wang et al. argued that asking good questions in conversation is
shown to be an important proactive behavior. A typed decoder is proposed to generate meaningful
questions by predicting a type distribution over topic words, interrogatives, and ordinary words at
each decoding position. The final output distribution is modeled by the type distribution, leading to a
strong control over the question to be generated. Rao and Daumé III also argued that question
asking is fundamental to communication, and that a good question is the one whose expected answer
will be useful. They built a neural network model for ranking clarification questions, evaluated on a
dataset of clarification questions (post-question pairs) extracted from StackExchange. Ke et al. 
conducted a systematic study of generating responses with different sentence functions, such as
interrogative, imperative, and declarative sentences. These sentence functions play different roles
in conversations. For instance, imperative responses are used to make requests, give directions
and instructions, or elicit further interactions while declarative responses make statements or
explanations. Tang et al. proposed a new dialog planning task in which the conversation
should eventually reach a target (defined by a topical keyword) from any initial topics. In such a
task, it is required to plan proactively the topic path to the final target.
There are two important directions for future research. First is the comprehensive investigation
of conversation behaviors in human-human dialog. This is still largely ignored, possibly due to
the lack of real-world conversations. The dialog data in online forums and psychological
counseling are of high value for this research. But the data in a wide variety of
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2020.
Huang et al.
scenarios are still in significant shortage. Second is to create a more sophisticated real-world dialog
setting for system development and evaluation. Existing work largely targets at modeling atomic
strategy in dialog systems, namely, single strategy for emotion interaction , topic control
 , question asking , and so on. Most of the studies are merely evaluated with the
single-turn setting. However, to accomplish more complex social goals such as emotional comfort
or counseling, it is necessary to design composite strategies that consider emotion, topic, and
proactivity comprehensively in multi-turn conversation. Therefore, there is increasing demand
for collecting or constructing more complex dialog data with well-designed task goals, and for
developing more sophisticated dialog policy models.
OPEN-DOMAIN DIALOG EVALUATION
Evaluating the quality of an open-domain dialog system is challenging because open-domain
conversations are inherently open-ended . For example, if a user asks the question "what do
you think of Michael Jackson?", there are hundreds of distinct but plausible responses. Evaluation
of a dialog system can be performed manually or in an automatic way. In manual evaluation,
human judges are hired to assess the generated results in terms of predefined metrics, with welldocumented guidelines and exemplars. Evaluation is conducted by either scoring each individual
result (point-wise) or comparing two competing results (pair-wise). In some dialog evaluation
challenges, manual evaluation is commonly adopted in the final-stage competition . For
instance, the second conversational intelligence challenge adopted manual evaluation by paid
workers from Amazon Mechanical Turk and unpaid volunteers, and the organizers reported the
rating difference between the two user groups: the volunteers’ evaluation had relatively fewer good
(i.e. long and consistent) dialogues, while paid workers tended to rate the models higher than the
volunteers.
Since manual evaluation is expensive, time-consuming, and not always reproducible, automatic
evaluation is more frequently used, especially at the early stage of development. For retrieval-based
methods, traditional information retrieval evaluation metrics such as precision@k, mean average
precision (MAP), and normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (nDCG) are applicable. For
generation-based models, metrics such as perplexity, BLEU , and distinct-n , are widely
used. Perplexity measures how well a probabilistic model fits the data, and is a strong indicator
whether the generated text is grammatical. BLEU, adopted from machine translation, measures the
lexical overlap between the generated responses and the reference ones. Distinct-n measures the
diversity by computing the proportion of unique n-grams in a generated set. However, argued
that automatic metrics such as BLEU, ROUGE , and METEOR all have low correlation with
manual evaluation. But as pointed out in , the correlation analysis in is performed at the
sentence level while BLEU is designed from the outset to be used as a corpus-level metric. 
showed that the correlation of string-based metrics (BLEU and deltaBLEU) significantly increases
with the units of measurement bigger than a sentence. Nevertheless, in open-domain dialog systems,
the same input may have many plausible responses that differ in topics or contents significantly.
Therefore, low BLEU (or other metrics) scores do not necessarily indicate low quality as the number
of reference responses is always limited in test set. Therefore, there has been significant debate
as to whether such automatic metrics are appropriate for evaluating open-domain dialog systems
Recently, trainable metrics for open-domain dialog evaluation have attracted some research
efforts. Lowe et al. proposed a machine-learned metric, called ADEM, for open-domain dialog
evaluation. They presented a variant of the VHRED model that takes context, user input,
gold and system responses as input, and produces a qualitative score between 1 and 5. The authors
claimed that the learned metric correlates better with human evaluation than BLEU and ROUGE.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2020.
Challenges in Building Intelligent Open-domain Dialog Systems
 proposed an evaluation model, called RUBER, which does not rely on human judged scores.
RUBER consists of a referenced component to measure the overlap between a system response
and a reference response, and an unreferenced component to measure the correlation between the
system response and the input utterance. However, as pointed out in , ADEM can be easily
fooled with a variation as simple as reversing the word order in the text. Their experiments on
several such adversarial scenarios draw out counter-intuitive scores on the dialogue responses. In
fact, any trainable metrics lead to potential problems such as overfitting and “gaming of the metric”
12 , which might explain why none of the previously proposed machine-learned evaluation
metrics [2, 20, 38, 58, 72, 94, 131, etc.] is used in official machine translation benchmarks. Readers
refer to for a detailed discussion.
These research attempts indicate that what makes a good conversation is a challenging question
to answer. See et al. discussed four attributes that are associated with the control of opendomain dialog generation: repetition, specificity, response-relatedness, and question-asking. They
argued that existing work has ignored the importance of the conversational flow, because existing
models repeat or contradict previous statements, fail to balance specificity with genericness, and
are unable to balance asking questions with other dialogue acts. Experiments on Persona-Chat
 show that higher engagingness scores in human judgement can be obtained by optimizing the
control of the four attributes in multi-turn conversations. Therefore, considering these attributes in
automatic evaluation, implicitly or explicitly, is expected to lead to new evaluation metrics that
correlate well with human evaluation.
Recently, there are research attempts to combine human evaluation and automatic evaluations
for natural language generation systems. Hashimoto et al. argued that human evaluation
captures quality but not diversity while statistical evaluation (i.e., perplexity) captures diversity
but not quality. They proposed a unified framework which evaluates both in terms of the optimal
error rate of predicting whether a sentence is human- or machine-generated. As mentioned above,
automatic metrics such as sentence-level BLEU correlates poorly with human judgement, thereby
easily leading to systematic bias against model improvements. On the other hand, the average of
human judgements is unbiased but is very expensive to collect. Therefore, Chaganty et al. 
combined automatic metrics with human evaluation to obtain an unbiased estimator with lower
cost than using solely human evaluation.
All of the above research suggests that automatic evaluation of dialog systems is by no means
a solved problem. We argue that, for open-domain dialog evaluation, the major difficulty derives
from in the one-to-many essence: in any given dataset, the number of observable responses for the
same input post is limited, yet there are many appropriate responses not presented in the dataset.
Therefore, automatic metrics that are trained on a dataset will be inherently questionable because
the topic coverage and the number of observable outputs are largely limited by the dataset. Thus,
uncovering those underlying outputs for an input post is an interesting area for future research.
OPEN-DOMAIN DIALOG CORPORA
Recently, the availability of dialog corpora has largely advanced the development of neural models for open-domain conversation generation. An incomplete survey on these dialog datasets is
12In discussing the potential pitfalls of machine-learned evaluation metrics, Albrecht and Hwa argued for example that it
would be “prudent to defend against the potential of a system gaming a subset of the features.” In the case of deep learning,
this gaming would be reminiscent of making non-random perturbations to an input to drastically change the network’s
predictions, as it was done, e.g., with images in to show how easily deep learning models can be fooled. Readers refer
to Chapter 5 in Gao et al. for a detailed discussion.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2020.
Huang et al.
presented in Table 313. These corpora differ in topic, source (where or how the data is collected),
language, data scale, and the design features.
Short Text Conversation (STC) : This corpus is collected from a Chinese social media,
Weibo. There are 219,905 posts and 4,308,211 responses in the training data. It can be used for
studying the one-to-many problem in dialog modeling since each post has multiple responses. On
top of this corpus, Zhou et al. proposed an emotional STC dataset (ESTC) in which each
utterance is tagged in terms of six emotion classes by an emotion classifier with an accuracy of
62.3%. ESTC is frequently used in building empathetic dialog systems .
Twitter Triple Corpus : This corpus contains 29M context-message-response triples from the
Twitter FireHose, covering the 3-month period from June 2012 through August 2012. Additionally,
the validation and test sets have 4,232 triples which are scored no less than 4 in 5-point scale by
human annotators. However, this corpus is not publicly available.
PersonalDialog : This corpus is constructed toward building personalized conversation
models. The data is collected from a Chinese social media, Weibo. Each dialogue is composed of a
post and its following replies from different users. The personal profile of each user is collected,
which includes five personality traits: Gender, Age, Location, Interest Tags, and Self Description.
This dataset contains 20.83M conversations and 8.47M user profiles. The total number of utterances
are 56.25M and each utterance contains 9.35 tokens. A considerable amount of dialogues (3.43M
sessions) in this dataset have multiple turns (more than 4 utterances). This corpus is the first
dialogue corpus that contains real social conversations and diversified personality traits for each
DailyDialog : This corpus contains multi-turn dialogs on daily life topics. The raw data were
crawled from several websites which serve for English learner to practice English. The dataset
contains 13,118 dialogs, with an average of 7.9 turns per dialog and 14.6 words per turn. The
appealing feature of this corpus is that it provides manual annotation on intent (Inform, Questions,
Directives, and Commissive) and emotion (Anger, Disgust, Fear, Happiness, Sadness, and Surprise),
which may support the research on emotion interaction and dialog act modeling.
Ubuntu Dialog Corpus : This corpus contains two-party conversations that solve technical
issues with Ubuntu. The data were extracted from online conversation logs in Ubuntu-related chat
rooms on the Freenode Internet Relay Chat (IRC) network. In each log, a user may ask a technical
question to be solved and other users can respond to the question. The log session will terminate
until the problem is solved. A two-party conversation will be extracted from the chat log14. The
corpus contains 930,000 human-human dialogs and 7,100,000 utterances, with an average of 7.71
turns per dialog and 10.34 words per utterance. Strictly speaking, this dataset is task-specific instead
of open-domain conversation. This corpus is commonly used to evaluate retrieval-related models.
Persona-Chat : This crowdsourced corpus is designed for personalized dialog modeling. In
each conversation, each worker is given a persona which is defined by up to 5 sentences describing
personal hobby or state (e.g., I like swimming, or I need to lose weight). Two workers are instructed
to know each other through interaction. During the conversation, each worker should follow her
own persona and try to know the partner’s information. The dataset consists of 10,981 dialogs with
164,356 utterances.
CMU Document-grounded conversation (CMU DOG) : This corpus, designed for document or knowledge grounded dialog modeling, contains crowd-sourced conversations that are
13Readers may refer to an old survey published in 2015, which covers datasets for both open-domain and task-oriented
dialog models . We only list the corpora that are frequently used or recently proposed in the literature, most of which
are not covered by .
14Each chat log is a multi-party conversation, but only two-party sub-conversations which involve the same two users are
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2020.
Challenges in Building Intelligent Open-domain Dialog Systems
talking about 30 movies. The information about each movie is given through a correspondent
Wikipedia article. There are two modes for data collection: only one worker has the movie document
and both workers have the movie document during conversation. The dataset consists of 4,112
conversations with an average of 31.6 utterances per dialog and 10.8 words per utterance.
 : The corpus can be viewed as an expanded version of CMU DOG. The conversations discuss
about 921 movies, and the knowledge about each movie is composed of a fact table15, the plot
description, and reviews and comments on the movie. The corpus contains 9,071 conversations and
90,810 utterances with an average of 10 utterances per dialog and 15.3 words per utterance. The
corpus is useful for studying the use of heterogeneous knowledge in conversation generation.
Wizard of Wikipedia : This corpus contains conversations that are grounded with knowledge
retrieved from Wikipedia. The dataset covers 1,365 topics, each linked to a Wikipedia article.
These topics include commuting, Gouda cheese, music festivals, podcasts, bowling, and Arnold
Schwarzenegger. Each conversation is made between a knowledge expert and a curious learner, and
the expert has full access to the Wikipedia article of a topic but the learner does not. The corpus
consists of 22,311 dialogues and 201,999 utterances, with an average of 9 utterances per dialog.
Each utterance is grounded to a selected knowledge sentence or indicated by that no knowledge is
Grounded Response Generation at DSTC7 : The dataset, which is first released for the
"sentence generation" task at the 7th Dialog System Technology Challenges (DSTC7) , is
developed for grounded conversation modeling. It consists of conversation threads extracted from
Reddit data. Each conversation contains exactly one URL to a web page (grounding) that defines the
topic of the conversation. The dataset contains 2.8M conversation instances respectively divided
into train, validation, and test based on date ranges: years 2011-2016 for train, Jan-Mar 2017 for
validation, and the rest of 2017 for test, which consists of 2,208 conversational turns, each with
6 human responses. To access the human performance using the test set, one of the 6 human
responses is set aside, and the remaining 5 responses serve as ground truths for evaluating different
Topical-Chat : This corpus is designed towards building dialog systems that can converse
with humans on various topics. It covers 300 popular topic entities spanning 8 domains including
fashion, politics, books, and sports. For each entity, the authors fetched the Wikipedia lead section,
and crowdsourced 8-10 fun facts. Furthermore, they fetched Washington Post articles in 2018 that
each referenced 3 or more of the 300 entities. The authors then created a set of reading sets, each
containing the wiki-information, several fun facts, and a Washington Post article. Workers were
partnered up to converse, with symmetric or asymmetric settings where symmetric means two
workers have the same reading set, and asymmetric with different sets. The dataset contains 11,319
conversations and 248,014 utterances with an average of 22 turns per dialog and 19.8 words per
OpenDialKG : In this corpus, each dialog is paired with its corresponding "knowledge graph
(KG) paths" that weave together the KG entities and relations. It was collected with a Wizard-of-Oz
setting by connecting two crowd-workers to engage in a chat session. The first worker is given a
seed entity and asked to initiate a conversation about that entity. The second worker is provided
with a list of facts relevant to that entity, and asked to choose the most natural and relevant facts
and use them to frame a free-form conversational response. After the second worker sends her
response, new multi-hop facts from KG are surfaced to include paths initiating from new entities
introduced in the latest message. The circle continues for several rounds, which simulates a random
walk over the knowledge graph. The dataset covers four domains (movies, books, sports and music),
15 which contains box office collection, similar movies (for recommendation), awards, and tag-lines.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2020.
Huang et al.
with a KG of total 1,190,658 fact triples. It contains 15,673 dialogs and 91,209 turns with an average
of 5.8 turns per dialog. This corpus is useful in studying conversational reasoning, while it is not
yet publicly available.
DuConv : This corpus covers topics on movies and film stars whose related knowledge was
crawled from the Web. Then, two linked entities were randomly sampled to construct a conversation
goal like "[start]→entitya →entityb" where entityb is the final target of the conversation. Two
annotators were asked to conduct knowledge-driven conversations with a leader-follower mode.
The leader needs to change the conversation topics following the conversation goal and meanwhile
keeps the conversation as engaging as possible. The dataset contains 29,858 dialogs and 270,399
utterances with an average of 9.1 turns per dialog and 10.6 words per turn. This corpus is useful in
constructing knowledge-driven proactive dialogue systems.
DyKgChat : This corpus is collected for knowledge-grounded conversation modeling. The
conversations are from the scripts of a Chinese palace drama (Hou Gong Zhen Huan Zhuang, with
76 episodes and hundreds of characters), and an English sitcom "Friends" (with 236 episodes and
six main characters). The paired knowledge graphs are manually constructed. The corpus contains
1,247/3,092 dialogs, with 13.76/18.68 turns per dialog and 27.0/16.5 words per turn for the Chinese
and English TV series, respectively. The most interesting feature of this corpus is that it contains
evolving knowlege graphs.
EmpatheticDialogues : This corpus is constructed toward building empathetic open-domain
conversation models. The data is collected by crowd workers with a speaker-listener mode. The
speaker starts the conversation from a pre-set emotion state (e.g., afraid) and a personal situation
description (e.g., Speaker felt afraid when she has been hearing noises around the house at night),
and the listener becomes aware of the underlying situation through what the Speaker says and
responds. The corpus contains 24,850 conversations, and the average number of utterances per
conversation and words per turn is 4.31/15.2 respectively. The corpus is useful in modeling emotion
interactions in multi-turn conversation.
Target-Guided Conversation : This corpus is constructed towards building target-guided
open-domain conversation models. It’s derived from Persona-Chat without the persona
information. The keywords of each utterance, which indicate the targets in this task, are automatically extracted by a rule-based keyword extractor. The corpus contains 8,939/500/500 dialogs,
101,935/5,602/5,317 utterances and 2,678/2,080/1,571 keywords in the training/validation/test set,
respectively. The average number of keywords in each utterance is about 2.0. This corpus is expected
to model the turn-level keyword transition and the discourse-level target-guided dialogue strategy.
PERSUASION-FOR-GOOD : This corpus contains persuasion conversations for charity
donation where each speaker’s psychological profile attributes and sociodemographic backgrounds
such as age and income were also collected. The data is collected with a persuader-persuadee mode
in four steps. First, workers were asked to complete a pre-task survey to assess their psychological
profile variables. Second, two workers were randomly assigned the roles of persuader and persuadee
where the persuader needed to persuade the persuadee to donate part of his/her task earning to
the charity, and the persuader could also choose to donate. Third, both the persuader and the
persuadee were asked to input the intended donation amount privately though a text box when
the conversation was ended. Last, workers were asked to complete a post-survey to assess their
sociodemographic backgrounds. The corpus contains 1,017 dialogs, with an averge of 10.43 turns
per dialog and 19.36 words per utterances. It also provides manual annotation in terms of persuasion
strategy and dialog act for each sentence. This dataset is interesting for studying personalized
dialog and complex strategy modeling.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2020.
Challenges in Building Intelligent Open-domain Dialog Systems
DISCUSSIONS AND FUTURE TRENDS
In this paper, we review the recent progress in developing open-domain dialog systems. We focus
the discussion on neural approaches that have been proposed to deal with three key challenges:
semantics, consistency, and interactiveness. We review open-domain dialog evaluation metrics for
both manual and automatic evaluation, and share our thoughts on how to develop better automatic
evaluation metrics. We survey frequently-used and recently-proposed corpora for the development
of evaluation of open-domain dialog systems.
Differing from early generations of dialog assistants which are designed for simple tasks that
require only short, domain-specific conversations, such as making reservation or asking for information, open-domain dialog systems are design to be AI companions that are able to have long,
free-form social chats with human users. . Despite the recent progress as reviewed in
this paper, achieving sustained, coherent, and engaging open-domain conversations remains very
challenging. We conclude this paper by discussing some future research trends
Topic and Knowledge Grounding. To deliver contentful conversations, it is important to ground
conversations in real-world topics and entities (e.g., in knowledge bases). This is part of the semantics
challenge we have discussed in Section 3. Since natural language understanding in open-domain
dialog systems is extremely challenging, knowledge grounding provides to some degree the ability
of understanding language in dialog context, as shown in several preliminary studies .
Even though an open-domain dialog system has no access to annotated dialog acts (which are
available only for task-oriented dialog) to learn to explicitly detect an user’s intents (labeled by
dialog acts), the system can still play a proactive role of leading the conversation by for example
suggesting new topics, if the key concepts and entities are correctly recognized and linked to a
knowledge base . Several recently proposed corpora, as described in Section 7,
provide new test beds for this research.
Empathetic Computing. Sentiment and emotion form a key factor for making effective social
interactions, and is crucial for building an empathetic social bot. Existing studies in this direction are still in the infant stage, as they only deal with superficial expression of
emotion. A future empathetic machine should be able to perceive a user’s emotion state and change,
deliver emotionally influential conversations, and evaluate the emotional impact of its action, much
of which should be tightly aligned with psychological studies. These become more important
in more complicated scenarios such as psychological treatment, mental health, and emotional
comforting. Moreover, it is insufficient for an empathetic machine to use only text information.
The signals from other modalities such as facial expression and speech prosody should also be
leveraged . To foster the research, Saha et al. developed a conversational dataset
consisting of multi-modal dialog sessions in a fashion domain where each turn contains a textual
utterance, one or more images, or a mix of text and images.
Personality of a Social Bot. A coherent personality is important for a social bot to gain human
trust, thereby improving the consistency and interactiveness of human-machine conversations.
Personality (e.g., Big five traits) has been well-defined in psychology . However, existing
studies are yet to be significantly extended by incorporating the results of
multidiscipline research covering psychology, cognitive science, computer science, etc. The central
problem is how to ensure personality-coherent behaviors in conversations and evaluate such
behaviors from the perspectives of multidisciplines, particularly via psychological studies.
Controllability of dialog generation. Most existing open-domain dialog systems are based on
neural response generation models. Due to the essence of probabilistic sampling used in language
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2020.
Huang et al.
generation, controllability is a challenging issue as repetitive, bland, illogical or even unethical
responses are frequently observed. Controllability is closely related to the interpretability and
robustness of neural network models. Achieving controllability requires new breakthroughs in
modeling, such as the hybrid approaches that combine the strengths of both neural and symbolic
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61936010/61876096),
and the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2018YFC0830200). We would like to thank
THUNUS NExT Joint-Lab for the support.
We would like to thank Pei Ke, Qi Zhu, Chujie Zheng, Yaoqin Zhang, Hao Zhou, Chris Brockett,
Bill Dolan, and Michel Galley for their discussions and contributions to this paper. We truly thank
anonymous reviewers for their valuable reviews and comments.