AUTOMATIC HEART ISOLATION FOR CT CORONARY VISUALIZATION USING
GRAPH-CUTS
G. Funka-Lea1, Y. Boykov3, C. Florin1, M.-P. Jolly1, R. Moreau-Gobard1, R. Ramaraj1 and D. Rinck2
1Imaging & Visualization Dept., Siemens Corporate Research, Princeton, USA
2Siemens Medical Solutions CT, Forchheim, Germany
3University of Western Ontario, London, Canada
We describe a means to automatically and efﬁciently isolate
the outer surface of the entire heart in Computer Tomography (CT) cardiac scans. Isolating the entire heart allows the
coronary vessels on the surface of the heart to be easily visualized despite the proximity of surrounding organs such as the
ribs and pulmonary blood vessels. Numerous techniques have
been described for segmenting the left ventricle of the heart
in images from various types of medical scanners but rarely
has the entire heart been segmented. We make use of graphcuts to do the segmentation and introduce a novel means of
initiating and constraining the graph-cut technique for heart
isolation. The technique has been tested on 70 patient data
sets. Results are compares with hand labeled results.
1. INTRODUCTION
Cardiac Computer Tomography is a fast, non-invasive, submillimeter resolution, volumetric medical imaging modality.
The development of Multi-slice CT has made it an important
tool for imaging the coronary arteries. Nevertheless, 3D visualization of the coronary arteries has required human interaction to prepare the volume by removing structures that do not
belong to the heart (lungs, liver, ribs, etc.). To dramatically
speed the clinician’s work, an automatic heart isolation technique has been developed. For this method to be effective it
needs to be fast enough for casual use and robust enough to
handle different kinds of pathologies. This paper presents the
heart isolation technique and its evaluation on a large number
of real clinical cases.
A typical technical approach for blood vessel visualization has been ﬁrst to remove bones (examples include ).
With the bones removed, a maximum intensity project (MIP)
will make most blood vessels readily visible. However, this
approach is not sufﬁcient for visualization of the coronary
vessels because the contrast agent in the blood in the chambers of the heart obscures the coronaries in a MIP. A study
by reports a method to unfold a thin surface of the heart
for better MIP visualization, but signiﬁcant distortions result
from this unfolding procedure. Our approach for the visualization of the coronary arteries relies on volume rendering instead of MIP. Volume rendering allows the coronary arteries
to be seen in their three-dimensional context with the structures of the heart and the major blood vessels.
A very large body of work exists on segmenting the left
ventricle of the heart in 2D or 3D data sets from various imaging modalities. These studies focus on ﬁnding the blood pool
of a chamber and sometimes the muscle that encloses the
chamber. Some researchers have looked at segmenting both
the left and right ventricles of the heart but the goal is again to
ﬁnd the blood pools and muscle as separate regions. Much of
the work done on 3D cardiac segmentation has been modelbased (see for a review or for more recent work).
Some of the latest studies attempt to segment all four chambers of the heart using a model . This work is not generally relevant to the case we are interested in, where all the
chambers of the heart must be segmented together as a single
object, separated from the surrounding physiology. Our work
efﬁciently segments the blood pools and muscle of the heart
as a single 3D region.
2. METHODS
There are three important aspects of our approach to automatic heart isolation. The ﬁrst is the use of the graph-cut
technique to perform the segmentation step. Second, a
seed-region is automatically found so the segmentation can be
run automatically. Third, an additional constraint was added
to the graph-cut formulation to prefer a shape whose edges
are oriented perpendicular to the direction toward the center
of the seed-region. We call this the ”blob” constraint. This
helps prevent leaking into the aorta or pulmonary vessels.
2.1. Segmentation initialization
The type of graph-cut segmentation we use requires as an initialization that some points be known to lie within the region
of interest and some points be known to lie outside of the
region of interest. Automatic determination of such seed re-
0-7803-9577-8/06/$20.00 ©2006 IEEE
gions begins by computing the volumetric barycenter weighted
by intensity. Because we are working with contrast CT studies where the brightest regions are bone and blood, the location of this point is most affected by the distribution of these
tissues. The distribution of bone in the chest is relatively symmetric about the heart. The largest concentrations of blood are
generally within the chambers of the heart. Consequently in
nearly all cases tested the point found is within the heart (see
Figure 3).
Given a point within the heart, the pre-segmentation step
consists of determining the ellipsoid of maximum volume contained within the heart. This ellipsoid provides a stable initialization for the graph-cut algorithm. To this end, an ellipsoid is
progressively grown starting from the entry point, just as if a
balloon were blown into the heart. When the balloon touches
the heart wall, it keeps on growing in the direction opposite to
the contact point, just as if a balloon that touches a wall were
blown (see Figure 1). This initialization step stops when the
balloon touches several walls and cannot be inﬂated anymore.
A limited number of reasonable assumptions have to be made
on the detection of contact points. The blood pool and myocardium are characterized by for the most part by intensities
larger than -224 (Hounsﬁeld units) and any intensity below is
considered as part of the out-of-heart structures.
This technique has several advantages: its simplicity keeps
the needed computation time low, and the balloon’s form (ellipsoidal with speciﬁc X, Y and Z radii) is close to the actual
heart’s surface shape, giving a good shape prior for the segmentation. If the result of the balloon expansion is a region
that is too small to be a region within the heart then the algorithm terminates and no heart isolation is produced.
2.2. Graph-cut based segmentation
We consider a segmentation algorithm driven by the graph
optimization technique with an additional “blob” constraint. The idea lying behind this graph-cut segmentation is
to minimize an energy function that is deﬁned on a graph, according to the cut of minimum weight. The energy is written
as the sum of two terms : Esmooth(f) that imposes smoothness constraints on the segmentation map, and Edata(f) measuring how the label f is adapted to the data:
Esmooth(f) =
Vpq(fp, fq),
Edata(f) =
Vpq in (1) is the interaction function between the (directed)
pair of neighboring pixels (p, q) for a given neighborhood
system N, and Dp(fp) is a likelihood of label fp for given
pixel p. It is known (e.g. ) that graph cuts provide a
global optimal solution for the case of binary valued fp.
Graph-cut segmentation for object extraction was proposed
in where the likelyhoods Dp were used to set hard or soft
Fig. 1: Top left: A balloon is expanded within the heart. The
heart wall pushes the balloon toward the heart center as the
balloon grows. Top right: volume rendering of original heart
volume. Bottom left: heart cropped based on segmentation
mask in a single MPR. Bottom right: volume rendering after
automatic heart isolation algorithm.
region-based constraints and interactions are based on binary
Potts model Vpq = wpq ∗T(fp ̸= fq) where discontinuity
costs wpq are normally computed from differences in intensity between pixels p and q.
Here we modify the energy equation to include a ”blob”
constraint:
E(f) = Esmooth(f) + Edata(f) + Eblob(f) ,
Eblob(f) =
Bpq(f(p), f(q); C),
Bpq in (1) is a Potts interaction with discontinuity penalty
depending on the angle between the line segments pq and pC
where C is the center of the seed-region. We use Bpq(fp, fq) =
cos2(pq, pC)∗T(fp ̸= fq) if cos(pq, pC) < 0 and Bpq(fp, fq) =
0 otherwise. Note that Bpq penalizes folds of a cut with respect to rays from center C. Thus, a blob energy term encourages cuts to look like convex blobs that are roughly centered
2.3. Isolation reﬁnement
The goal of isolating the surface of the heart to visualize the
coronaries is not strictly deﬁned in terms of a contrast boundary in the image. In order to ensure that the coronaries are
Fig. 2: Percentage of the automatically isolated heart surface
that lies within a given distance from the manually delineated
surface for 9 of the data sets. The dark line indicates the average of the results for the 9 cases.
considered as part of the heart, the volume isolation mask
needs to expand a little beyond the contrast boundary at the
surface of the heart. The results of graph-cut segmentation is
dilated to produce the ﬁnal results. Instead of using a uniform
dilation factor for the entire binary volume, the dilation factor
itself is varied linearly in the sagittal direction. This provides
more dilation at the base of the heart where the coronaries
branch from the aorta.
3. RESULTS
The presented algorithm has been tested on 70 CT data sets
from patients. These 70 data sets come from a range of Siemens
CT scanners: Sensation 16 (39 cases), Sensation 64 (25 cases),
Volume Zoom (3 cases), Somatom Plus 4 - VZ (2 cases), and
Siemens Sensation Cardiac (1 case). The cases also cover a
range of apparent pathology or normal subjects. In Figure 4
cases 1, 7, 12, and 15 have stents. Cases 20 shows no apparent
coronary pathology. In Figure 3 Case 3 has a bypass.
In only two of the 70 data sets did our algorithm fail to ﬁnd
the heart. In these two cases the algorithm failed to initialize
the segmentation correctly within the heart. In four of the 70
cases some part of the coronary arteries is missing from the
isolated heart. In Case 20 in Figure 4 the right coronary artery
has been truncated as part of the isolation. In ﬁve cases there
was too much of the ribs or sternum and so the surface of
the heart was partially obscured. In these cases the bone can
generally be removed with a single clipping plane. In case 15,
we see part of the sternum that actually occludes the lower
part of the stent and the RCA. In those cases where the results
were not ideal it is possible to use graph-cuts in an interactive
fashion to ﬁx the segmentation .
The automatically isolated heart surface was compared to
manual delineation of the heart surface for 9 cases (see Figure
2. The median error between the manually and automatically
Fig. 3: Comparison of automatic (left) and manual (right) segmentation for Case 3. Note that the coronary bypass is readily
visible in each but that the automatic results includes more of
the aorta and other major vessels.
generated surface was 4.1 mm and the average error was 5.5
mm. Figure 2 show what percentage of the automatic surface
lies within a given distance from the manually deﬁned surface. On average 80% of the automatic surface lies within 7.6
mm of the manually deﬁned surface. The major discrepancies
between the manual and automatic results occur at the base of
heart where the major blood vessels attach to the heart. This
area is not critical for visibility of the coronaries. For one
data set (Case 3) we had two experts manually delineate the
heart. The median difference between these manually deﬁned
surfaces was 1.2 mm and the average difference was 6.7 mm.
The balloon step takes less than a second (on a 2.4 GHz
processor, 1 GB RAM). The entire segmentation itself takes
about 20 seconds.
4. DISCUSSIONS
A variety of techniques are available now for doing medical
image segmentation . Level-sets have been applied in a
number of medical image scenarios (for example ). For
this application we chose to use graph-cuts over other methods of medical image segmentation for the following reasons.
The problem is one of object separation from background.
The topology of the object to be isolated is simple and ﬁxed.
Most but not all of the object can be isolated based on contrast
with the background. Only simple shape-prior information is
needed - the heart is a compact blob. We wanted to avoid a
shape-prior that would too tightly constrain the recoverable
shapes. The solution should take less that 30 seconds on a
CT volume with a standard PC. We prefer a solution that can
avoid local minima and provide numerical robustness.
The newly presented method offers the potential to give a
detailed overview about the coronary status without any user
interaction. The clinician can easily see if there is a suspicious coronary segment. Furthermore, it is possible to propagate the isolated heart mask to several heart phases to view the
coronary tree at different time points during the cardiac cycle.
Fig. 4: Results of automatic heart isolation for 6 of the seventy patients on which the algorithm was tested.
Based on the isolated heart, the clinician can intuitively work
with the 3D data of the coronary tree e.g. for vessel segmentation purposes. The overall workﬂow for coronary diagnostic
is strongly enhanced by this promising technique.
4.1. Acknowledgments
We wish to thank Christina Bell of Siemens Medical Solutions CT for help with testing and Mattias Rasch of Siemens
Corp. Research for help in realizing the product version.
5. REFERENCES
 M. Fiebich, C. M. Straus, V. Sehgal, B.C. Renger,
K. Doi, and K. R. Hoffmann,
“Automatic bone segmentation technique for CT angiographic studies,” J.
Comput. Assist. Tomogr., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 155–161,
January 1999.
 M. van Straten, H. W. Streekstra, C.B. Majoie, G. J. den
Heeten, and C. A. Grimbergen, “Removal of bone in
CT angiography of the cervical arteries by piecewise
matched mask bone elimination,” Med. Phys., vol. 31,
no. 10, pp. 2924–2933, October 2004.
 Charles Florin,
Romain Moreau-Gobard,
Williams, “Automatic heart peripheral vessels segmentation based on a normal MIP ray casting technique,” in
MICCAI, 2004, pp. 483–490.
 Alejandro F. Frangi, Wiro J. Niessen, and Max A.
Viergever, “Three-dimensional modeling for functional
analysis of cardiac images: a review,” IEEE Trans. on
Medical Imaging, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 2–25, January 2001.
 Steven C. Mitchell, Johan G. Bosch, Johan H. C. Reiber
Boudewijn P. F. Lelieveldt, Rob J. van der Geest, and
Milan Sonka, “3-D active appearance models: segmentation of cardiac MR and ultrasound images,”
Trans. on Medical Imaging, vol. 21, no. 9, pp. 1167–
1178, September 2002.
 M. Sermesant, C. Forest, X. Pennec, H. Delingette, and
N. Ayache, “Deformable biomechanical models: application to 4D cardiac image analysis,” Medical Image
Analysis, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 475–488, December 2003.
 Maria Lorenzo-Valdes, Gerardo I. Sanchez-Ortiz, Andrew G. Elkington, Raad H Mohiaddin, and Daniel
Rueckert, “Segmentation of 4D cardiac MR images using a probabilistic atlas and the EM algorithm,” Medical
Image Analysis, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 255–265, September
 Ting Chen, Dimitri Metaxas, and Leon Axel, “3D cardiac anatomy reconstruction using high resolution CT
data,” in MICCAI, 2004, pp. 411–418.
 Marcin
Wierzbicki,
Guiraudon, and Terry Peters,
“Mapping template
heart models to patient data using image registration,”
in MICCAI, 2004, pp. 671–678.
 Yuri Boykov and Marie-Pierre Jolly, “Interactive graph
cuts for optimal boundary & region segmentation of objects in N-D images,” in ICCV, July 2001, vol. 1, pp.
 D Greig, B. Porteous, and A. Seheult, “Exact minimization a posteriori estimation for binary images,” Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, vol. 51, no. 2,
pp. 271–279, 1989.
 Dzung L. Pham, Chenyang Xu, and Jerry L. Prince,
“Current methods in medical image segmentation,” Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering, vol. 2, no. 1,
pp. 315–337, August 2000.
 Nikos Paragios, “A level set approach for shape-drive
segmentation and tracking of the left ventricle,” IEEE
Trans. on Medical Imaging, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 773–776,
June 2003.