for each sector. Producers of low-carbon
goods should be allowed to document
their actual emissions with audited data.
The BCA should reflect the difference
in carbon con­
straints between
the imposing and
targeted econo­
mies. For example,
if aluminium in the
imposing country
faces an average
compliance cost of
$30 per tonne of
carbon emissions, and imported alumin­
ium is subject only to an average of $10 per
tonne in its country of origin, then the $20
difference would be imposed as a BCA.
Ensure the process is fair. Equity, trans­
parency and predictability are essential to
legal durability. Countries should notify
trade partners in advance and discuss the
details with them. An independent arbi­
ter could audit the plans before they are
adopted and determine whether they are
reasonable. The plan should include pro­
cedures for appealing.
The next few years will be a crucial time
for both trade and climate policy. Trump
plans to renegotiate the North American
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), having
already ended US participation in the
Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP). The
United Kingdom and EU must rewrite
their joint policies on trade and climate
change. Nations will review their Paris
pledges with a view to strengthening cli­
mate ambition. All these processes are
parts of a larger puzzle.
As the pieces of the jigsaw fall into
place, momentum must be sustained on
climate change. Rather than prolong­
ing the current spiral of tariff tit-fortat, countries should rally and turn this
incipient trade war into an opportunity
to ratchet up climate ambition. ■
Michael A. Mehling is deputy director of
the Center for Energy and Environmental
Policy Research, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Cambridge, USA; and
professor at the University of Strathclyde
School of Law, Glasgow, UK. Harro
van Asselt is senior research fellow at
the Stockholm Environment Institute;
and professor of climate law and policy,
University of Eastern Finland Law
School, Joensuu, Finland. Kasturi Das is
professor of economics and international
business, Institute of Management
Technology, Ghaziabad, India. Susanne
Droege is senior fellow, Global Issues
Research Division, German Institute
for International and Security Affairs,
Berlin, Germany.
e-mail: 
hen Google Translate converts
news articles written in Spanish
into English, phrases referring
to women often become ‘he said’ or ‘he
wrote’. Software designed to warn people
using Nikon cameras when the person they
are photographing seems to be blinking
tends to interpret Asians as always blink­
ing. Word embedding, a popular algorithm
used to process and analyse large amounts
of natural-language data, characterizes
European American names as pleasant
and African American ones as unpleasant.
These are just a few of the many
examples uncovered so far of artificial
intelligence (AI) applications systematically
discriminating against specific populations.
Biased decision-making is hardly unique
to AI, but as many researchers have noted1,
the growing scope of AI makes it particu­
larly important to address. Indeed, the
ubiquitous nature of the problem means
that we need systematic solutions. Here we
map out several possible strategies.
SKEWED DATA
In both academia and industry, computer
scientists tend to receive kudos (from publi­
cations to media coverage) for training ever
more sophisticated algorithms. Relatively
Design AI so
that it’s fair
Identify sources of inequity, de-bias training data and
develop algorithms that are robust to skews in data,
urge James Zou and Londa Schiebinger.
“Turn this
incipient trade
war into an
opportunity
to ratchet
up climate
ambition.”
3 2 4 | N A T U R E | V O L 5 5 9 | 1 2 J U L Y 2 0 1 8
little attention is paid to how data are
collected, processed and organized.
A major driver of bias in AI is the training
data. Most machine-learning tasks are
trained on large, annotated data sets. Deep
neural networks for image classification, for
instance, are often trained on ImageNet, a set
of more than 14 million labelled images. In
natural-language processing, standard algo­
rithms are trained on corpora consisting of
billions of words. Researchers typically con­
struct such data sets by scraping websites,
such as Google Images and Google News,
using specific query terms, or by aggregat­
ing easy-to-access information from sources
such as Wikipedia. These data sets are then
annotated, often by graduate students or
through crowdsourcing platforms such as
Amazon Mechanical Turk.
Such methods can unintentionally
produce data that encode gender, ethnic
and cultural biases.
Frequently, some groups are over-repre­
sented and others are under-represented.
More than 45% of ImageNet data, which
fuels research in computer vision, comes
from the United States2, home to only 4% of
the world’s population. By contrast, China
and India together contribute just 3% of
ImageNet data, even though these countries
represent 36% of the world’s population.
This lack of geodiversity partly explains why
computer vision algorithms label a photo­
graph of a traditional US bride dressed in
white as ‘bride’, ‘dress’, ‘woman’, ‘wedding’,
but a photograph of a North Indian bride as
‘performance art’ and ‘costume’2.
In medicine, machine-learning
predictors can be particularly vulnerable to
biased training sets, because medical data
are especially costly to produce and label.
Last year, researchers used deep learning
to identify skin cancer from photographs.
They trained their model on a data set of
129,450 images, 60% of which were scraped
from Google Images3. But fewer than 5% of
these images are of dark-skinned individu­
als, and the algorithm wasn’t tested on darkskinned people. Thus the performance of
the classifier could vary substantially across
different populations.
Another source of bias can be traced to
the algorithms themselves.
A typical machine-learning program will
try to maximize overall prediction accuracy
for the training data. If a specific group of
individuals appears more frequently than
others in the training data, the program will
optimize for those individuals because this
boosts overall accuracy. Computer scientists
evaluate algorithms on ‘test’ data sets, but
usually these are random sub-samples of
the original training set and so are likely to
contain the same biases.
Flawed algorithms can amplify biases
through feedback loops. Consider the
case of statistically trained systems such as
Google Translate defaulting to the mascu­
line pronoun. This patterning is driven by
the ratio of masculine pronouns to femi­
nine pronouns in English corpora being
2:1. Worse, each time a translation program
defaults to ‘he said’, it increases the relative
frequency of the masculine pronoun on
the web — potentially reversing hard-won
advances towards equity4. The ratio of
masculine to feminine pronouns has fallen
from 4:1 in the 1960s, thanks to large-scale
social transformations.
TIPPING THE BALANCE
Biases in the data often reflect deep and
hidden imbalances in institutional infra­
structures and social power relations. Wiki­
pedia, for example, seems like a rich and
diverse data source. But fewer than 18% of
the site’s biographical entries are on women.
Articles about women link to articles about
men more often than vice versa, which
makes men more visible to search engines.
They also include more mentions of roman­
tic partners and family5.
Thus, technical care and social aware­
ness must be brought to the building of data
sets for training. Specifically, steps should
be taken to ensure that such data sets are
diverse and do not under represent particular
groups. This means going beyond conveni­
ent classifications —‘woman/man’, ‘black/
white’, and so on — which fail to capture the
complexities of gender and ethnic identities.
Some researchers are already starting to
work on this .
For instance, computer scientists recently
revealed that commercial facial recogni­
tion systems misclassify gender much more
often when presented with darker-skinned
women compared with lighter-skinned men,
with an error rate of 35% versus 0.8% (ref. 6).
To address this, the researchers curated a
new image data set composed of 1,270 indi­
viduals, balanced in gender and ethnicity.
Retraining and fine-tuning existing faceclassification algorithms using these data
should improve their accuracy.
To help identify sources of bias, we
recommend that annotators systematically
label the content of training data sets with
standardized metadata. Several research
groups are already designing ‘datasheets’7
that contain metadata and ‘nutrition labels’
for machine-learning data sets ( 
nutrition.media.mit.edu/).
Every training data set should be
accompanied by information on how the
data were collected and annotated. If data
contain information about people,
Algorithms trained on
biased data sets often
recognize only the lefthand image as a bride.
1 9 J U L Y 2 0 1 8 | V O L 5 5 9 | N A T U R E | 3 2 5
LEFT: ISTOCK/GETTY; RIGHT: PRAKASH SINGH/AFP/GETTY
IMAGE POWER
Deep neural networks for image classiﬁcation
are often trained on ImageNet. The data set
comprises more than 14 million labelled
images, but most come from just a few nations.
United States 45.4%
Great Britain 7.6%
Italy 6.2%
Other 37.8%
14 million labelled images
then summary statistics on the geog­
raphy, gender, ethnicity and other demo­
graphic information should be provided
(see ‘Image power’). If the data labelling is
done through crowdsourcing, then basic
information about the crowd participants
should be included, alongside the exact
request or instruction that they were
As much as possible, data curators should
provide the precise definition of descriptors
tied to the data. For instance, in the case
of criminal-justice data, appreciating the
type of ‘crime’ that a model has been trained
on will clarify how that model should be
applied and interpreted.
BUILT-IN FIXES
Many journals already require authors to
provide similar types of information on
experimental data as a prerequisite for
publication. For instance, Nature asks
authors to upload all microarray data to the
open-access repository Gene Expression
Omnibus — which in turn requires authors
to submit metadata on the experimental
protocol. We encourage the organizers
of machine-learning conferences, such
as the International Conference on
Machine Learning, to request standard­
ized metadata as an essential component
of the submission and peer-review pro­
cess. The hosts of data repositories, such as
OpenML, and AI competition platforms,
such as Kaggle, should do the same.
Lastly, computer scientists should strive
to develop algorithms that are more robust
to human biases in the data.
Various approaches are being pursued.
One involves incorporating constraints
and essentially nudging the machinelearning model to ensure that it achieves
equitable performance across differ­
ent subpopulations and between similar
individuals8. A related approach involves
changing the learning algorithm to reduce
its dependence on sensitive attributes,
such as ethnicity, gender, income — and
any information that is correlated with
those characteristics9.
Such nascent de-biasing approaches are
promising, but they need to be refined and
evaluated in the real world.
An open challenge with these types of
solutions, however, is that ethnicity, gen­
der and other relevant information need to
be accurately recorded. Unless the appro­
priate categories are captured, it’s difficult
to know what constraints to impose on the
model, or what corrections to make. The
approaches also require algorithm design­
ers to decide a priori what types of biases
they want to avoid.
A complementary approach is to use
machine learning itself to identify and
quantify bias in algorithms and data. We
call this conducting an AI audit, in which
the auditor is an algorithm that systemati­
cally probes the original machine-learning
model to identify biases in both the model
and the training data.
An example of this is our recent work
using a popular machine-learning method
called word embedding to quantify his­
torical stereotypes in the United States.
Word embedding maps each English word
to a point in space (a geometric vector) such
that the distance between vectors captures
semantic similari­
ties between cor­
responding words.
It captures analogy
relations, such as
‘man’ is to ‘king’
as ‘woman’ is to
‘queen’. We devel­
oped an algorithm
— the AI auditor —
to query the word
embedding for
other gender analogies. This has revealed
that ‘man’ is to ‘doctor’ as ‘woman’ is to
‘nurse’, and that ‘man’ is to ‘computer pro­
grammer’ as ‘woman’ is to ‘homemaker’1.
Once the auditor reveals stereotypes
in the word embedding and in the origi­
nal text data, it is possible to reduce bias
by modifying the locations of the word
vectors. Moreover, by assessing how ste­
reotypes have evolved, algorithms that
are trained on historical texts can be debiased. Embeddings for each decade of
US text data from Google Books from
1910 to 1990, reveal, for instance, shock­
ing and shifting attitudes towards Asian
Americans. This group goes from being
described as ‘monstrous’ and ‘barbaric’ in
1910 to ‘inhibited’ and ‘sensitive’ in 1990
— with abrupt transitions after the Second
World War and the immigration waves of
the 1980s10.
“Biases in the
data often
reflect deep
and hidden
imbalances in
institutional
infrastructures
and social power
relations.”
GETTING IT RIGHT
As computer scientists, ethicists, social scien­
tists and others strive to improve the fairness
of data and of AI, all of us need to think about
appropriate notions of fairness. Should the
data be representative of the world as it is, or
of a world that many would aspire to? Like­
wise, should an AI tool used to assess poten­
tial candidates for a job evaluate talent, or the
likelihood that the person will assimilate well
into the work environment? Who should
decide which notions of fairness to prioritize?
To address these questions and evaluate
the broader impact of training data and
algorithms, machine-learning research­
ers must engage with social scientists, and
experts in the humanities, gender, medicine,
the environment and law. Various efforts are
under way to try to foster such collabora­
tion, including the ‘Human-Centered AI’
initiative that we are involved in at Stanford
University in California. And this engage­
ment must begin at the undergraduate level.
Students should examine the social context
of AI at the same time as they learn about
how algorithms work.
Devices, programs and processes shape
our attitudes, behaviours and culture. AI
is transforming economies and societies,
changing the way we communicate and work
and reshaping governance and politics. Our
societies have long endured inequalities. AI
must not unintentionally sustain or even
worsen them. ■
James Zou is assistant professor of
biomedical data science and (by courtesy)
of computer science and of electrical
engineering, Stanford University,
California, USA. Londa Schiebinger is the
John L. Hinds Professor of History of Science
and director of Gendered Innovations in
Science, Health & Medicine, Engineering,
and Environment, Stanford University,
California, USA.
e-mails: ;
 
1. Bolukbasi, T., Chang, K.-W., Zou, J., Saligrama,
V. & Kalai, A. Adv. Neural Inf. Proc. Syst. 2016,
4349–4357 .
2. Shankar, S. et al. Preprint at 
abs/1711.08536 .
3. Esteva, A. et al. Nature 542, 115–118 .
4. Schiebinger, L. et al. (eds) Gendered Innovations
in Science, Health & Medicine, Engineering and
Environment, Engineering, Machine Translation
 .
5. Wagner, C., Garcia, D., Jadidi, M. & Strohmaier, M.
Proc. 9th Int. AAAI Conf. Web Soc. Media 454–463
6. Buolamwini, J. & Gebru, T. Proc. Mach. Learn. Res.
81, 1–15 .
7. Gebru, T. et al. Preprint at 
abs/1803.09010 .
8. Dwork, C., Hardt, M., Pitassi, T., Reingold, O. &
Zemel, R. Proc. 3rd Innov. Theor. Comp. Sci. Conf.
2012, 214–226 .
9. Zemel, R., Wu, Y., Swersky, K., Pitassi, T. & Dwork,
C. Proc. 30th Int. Conf. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. 28,
III-325–III-333 .
10. Garg, N., Schiebinger, L., Jurafsky, D. & Zou, J. Proc.
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115, E3635–E3644 .
3 2 6 | N A T U R E | V O L 5 5 9 | 1 9 J U L Y 2 0 1 8
SOURCE: REF 2