Pseudopotentials for high-throughput DFT calculations
Kevin F. Garritya, Joseph W. Bennetta, Karin M. Rabea, David Vanderbilta
aDepartment of Physics & Astronomy, Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey
08854-8019, USA
The increasing use of high-throughput density-functional theory (DFT) calculations in the computational design and optimization of materials requires
the availability of a comprehensive set of soft and transferable pseudopotentials. Here we present design criteria and testing results for a new open-source
“GBRV” ultrasoft pseudopotential library that has been optimized for use
in high-throughput DFT calculations. We benchmark the GBRV potentials,
as well as two other pseudopotential sets available in the literature, to allelectron calculations in order to validate their accuracy. The results allow
us to draw conclusions about the accuracy of modern pseudopotentials in a
variety of chemical environments.
1. Introduction
The use of pseudopotentials for practical and eﬃcient electronic-structure
calculations has a long history in computational condensed-matter physics. In pseudopotential-based electronic structure calculations, the nuclear potential and core electrons of an atom are replaced by a much softer
eﬀective potential felt by the valence electrons, enabling the latter to be
described with a relatively small number of basis functions. Thus, the success and popularity of various ﬁrst-principles density-functional theory 
(DFT) codes using plane-wave basis sets (e.g.
VASP, QUANTUM-
ESPRESSO, ABINIT ) depend on the availability of high-quality pseudopotentials. While the publication and testing of entire pseudopotential
libraries also has a long history, the dominant mode of
Email address: (Kevin F. Garrity)
 
August 19, 2013
 
pseudopotential design and testing has been that of case-by-case construction, with authors typically creating and testing potentials only for a speciﬁc
application. This ad hoc method of pseudopotential design and testing is incompatible with the increasing use of ﬁrst-principles DFT calculations in materials design applications, especially those that make use of high-throughput
calculations to explore the properties of (possibly hypothetical) materials
constructed from atoms across the periodic table. Moreover, the pseudopotentials themselves (or the input data needed to construct them) are often not posted or published, and it
is even more rare for comprehensive pseudopotential testing data to be made
publicly available. Unfortunately, this state of aﬀairs creates practical dif-
ﬁculties in the duplication of previous studies and limits our understanding
of the accuracy and transferability of modern pseudopotentials in realistic
calculations. In addition, the lack of an open-source pseudopotential library
appropriate for high-quality high-throughput calculations likely limits the
adoption of this technique.
In this work we introduce a new “GBRV” open-source pseudopotential
library, explaining the design criteria used to construct it and providing
a suite of test results to verify its accuracy. The GBRV library, available
at consists of highly accurate ultrasoft 
pseudopotentials generated using the Vanderbilt pseudopotential generation
code. We provide input ﬁles for the pseudopotential generator as well as
ultrasoft pseudopotential ﬁles which can be used directly with QUANTUM
ESPRESSO and projector-augmented wave (PAW) ﬁles generated with
the uspp2abinit add-on which can be used directly with ABINIT. Our library has been designed and optimized for use in high-throughput DFT calculations, though it should be appropriate for many applications. In addition,
we test two other PAW libraries, the mature but proprietary VASP PAW
library version 5.2 and the still-under-development PSLIB 0.3.0 public
PAW library generated using the ATOMIC code of the QUANTUM
ESPRESSO package. Versions of the VASP library have been used in the
majority of previous pseudopotential-based high-throughput studies, usually
with little discussion of its accuracy. 
Testing three potential sets allows us to assess the accuracy of our library
relative to other choices and also provides some perspective on the limits
of current pseudopotential methodology. We have tested the potentials by
comparing with all-electron (AE) results from WIEN2k, which uses the
highly accurate full-potential linearized augmented plane-wave + local or-
bitals method (FLAPW+LO).
The manuscript is organized as follows. Our pseudopotential design criteria are presented and discussed in Sec. II. The tests of the GBRV, VASP
and PSLIB potentials in comparison with AE calculations are presented in
Sec. III. Our conclusions are summarized in Sec. IV.
Pseudopotential Design
2.1. Design criteria for high-throughput
High-throughput DFT studies of materials systems present a variety of
challenges for pseudopotential design which have informed our choices in
creating the GBRV pseudopotential library.
First, by their very nature,
high-throughput calculations include a wide variety of atoms and thus require
accurate potentials extending throughout the periodic table. Therefore, our
library includes all of the elements from H to Bi except for the noble gases
and the f-block elements.
Second, high-throughput calculations require signiﬁcant computational
resources, which should be minimized if possible. Therefore, we designed our
potential library so that all of the elements can be run at a relatively low
plane-wave cutoﬀof 40 Ry and a charge-density cutoﬀof 200 Ry. Using a single low cutoﬀgreatly simpliﬁes the use of our potentials in high-throughput
calculations. This contrasts with the normal procedure of allowing a variety
of plane-wave cutoﬀs in a single pseudopotential library. In that case, one
either has to use the highest cutoﬀin all calculations or else face diﬃculty in
comparing energies of structures containing diﬀerent combinations of atoms,
a procedure that is central to the kind of thermodynamic stability analysis
that is often required in high-throughput calculations.
Third, high-throughput calculations often place atoms in unusual or novel
chemical environments. Therefore, we required that our potentials be highly
transferable and able to reproduce metallic, ionic, and covalent bonding behavior. For the purposes of reliable high-throughput calculations, it is crucial
that the potential library produces consistently accurate results for all atoms
in all reasonable crystal structures. This requirement led us to include extra
semi-core states in normally borderline cases, as a high-throughput study
cannot verify whether the semicore states are necessary in every structure
Finally, on a more technical level, high-throughput calculations of bulk
materials typically require the use of variable unit-cell relaxation algorithms
to minimize the stress and optimize lattice parameters. These calculations
present numerical diﬃculties as they are normally run at a ﬁxed number of
plane-waves determined by the initial conﬁguration, rather than at a ﬁxed
plane-wave cutoﬀ, and they require accurate determination of stresses, which
can be expensive to converge. Therefore, we designed our potentials such that
when used with a smeared plane-wave cutoﬀthey both produce accurate
stresses and converge to an accurate ground state structure when using a
variable cell relaxation algorithm (given a reasonable starting structure).
2.2. Pseudopotential construction
Unfortunately, designing a set of pseudopotentials which meets all of the
above requirements is very diﬃcult, as the requirements are naturally in
conﬂict with each other. Highly transferable potentials generally require high
plane-wave cutoﬀs and many semi-core states, which is in direct conﬂict with
the requirement of a low plane-wave cutoﬀ. In addition, a comprehensive
set of potentials is both more diﬃcult to design with a single low planewave cutoﬀand allows for many chemical environments, making reliability
diﬃcult. Given these conﬂicts, one is naturally led to adopt either ultrasoft
or PAW potentials, which can provide both higher transferability and lower
plane-wave cutoﬀs than norm-conserving potentials. In the present work, we
have chosen to design a library of ultrasoft pseudopotentials. We describe
our procedure for optimizing potentials below; however, there remain atoms
which are particularly diﬃcult to pseudize given the above constraints, which
we discuss further when we present our testing data in section 3.3.
The process of construction of the potentials consisted of optimizing the
following parameters: (a) a reference atomic conﬁguration (neutral or slightly
ionic), (b) the number of core and valence states, (c) the cutoﬀradii for each
angular momentum channel, (d) a local potential and local cutoﬀradii, (e)
the inner pseudization and non-linear core correction radii, and (f) the energies of any extra projectors. We began our design by constructing initial potentials from previously-tested potentials if available, using periodic
trends to ﬁll in missing elements, and testing each atom ﬁrst in fcc and bcc
structures and then using the NaCl testing set (see section 3.2). We found
that expanding our testing to the perovskites and half-Heuslers required relatively little additional tuning. While the traditional transferability tests
provided by pseudopotential generators, such as comparing the logarithmic
derivatives to all-electron results and testing the pseudopotential in multiple
atomic conﬁgurations, were helpful in narrowing the choices of parameters
for our potentials, we found that these tests are rarely suﬃcient to design a
potential which meets the competing goals of our design criteria.
The various parameters of our potentials were adjusted by hand with
extensive use of solid-state testing to identify which atoms need improvement
and which aspects of those potentials must be modiﬁed. When a potential
performed poorly in tests, we ﬁrst adjusted the outer cutoﬀradii by deciding
if the potential was either too hard or too soft. A potential which is too
hard will improve its performance when tested with higher plane-wave and
charge-density cutoﬀs, and requires increasing the cutoﬀradii of the local
potential or non-local projectors, while an excessively soft potential must
be adjusted in the opposite direction. Cutoﬀradii tend to follow periodic
trends, with radii decreasing as one moves right across a row and increasing
as one moves down a column, although diﬀerences in numbers of semicore
states complicates this relation.
If an element had poor testing results which were found to be insensitive to the projector cutoﬀradii, there were several other options which we
considered.
First, we added any additional relevant semicore states or a
non-linear core correction if there was signiﬁcant valence/core overlap. Second, we looked in detail at the logarithmic derivatives and adjusted the local
potential and the energies of any extra projectors in order to improve agreement in the chemically relevant region. Almost all of our occupied angular
momentum channels have at least two projectors, and a few with semi-core
states have three. We found that potentials heavier than ﬂuorine generally
require a good description of the d channel and the bottom 1-2 rows of the
periodic table require a reasonable description of the f channel, especially
for atoms near La-Hf. Third, it was sometimes necessary to adjust the inner
pseudoization radius; magnetic moments are often particularly sensitive to
this parameter. For most elements, we were able to achieve potentials which
met all of our requirements after a few revisions, and small changes in the
parameters would not aﬀect the testing results noticeably. For a few problematic elements (Li, Be, F, Na, Ni, Hf) we were forced to systematically
vary and test certain parameters that were found to be particularly important in balancing the trade-oﬀbetween accuracy and hardness. In some cases
we also had to adjust the local potential or reference conﬁguration in order
to ﬁnd a region of parameter space which met our requirements as closely
as possible. Having a large solid state testing set was important to prevent
over-ﬁtting of these diﬃcult cases to any particular property. We discuss
some of these atoms further in section 3.3.
In order to gauge the transferability of a general-purpose pseudopotential library, it is necessary to test the potentials in chemical environments
that include ionic, covalent, and metallic bonding.
For this purpose, we
have chosen a testing regimen in which the pseudopotential calculations are
compared not with experiment, but with all-electron calculations performed
under conditions that are as identical as possible. This allows us to quantify
the accuracy of the pseudopotentials themselves, isolated from any complications having to do with actual experimental conditions (ﬁnite temperature,
zero-point motion, etc.) or with theoretical approximations that are common
to both the pseudopotential and all-electron calculations.
Thus, our pseudopotential and all-electron calculations are always carried
out with exactly the same choice of DFT exchange-correlation functional, the
same k-point sets, and the same smearing temperature. The PBE exchangecorrelation functional was used throughout. Both the AE calculations and
the pseudopotential constructions were scalar-relativistic, i.e., without
spin-orbit interactions.1 We ran all of our testing calculations as non-spinpolarized calculations, except for our calculation of the magnetic moments
of the transition metal oxides, which we ran at the all-electron non-spinpolarized lattice constants.
In the same spirit, we can reduce the computational load associated with
the test suite by making some common approximations that still allow systematic comparison. For example, we ran all of our calculations on an 8×8×8
k-point density and with 0.002 Ry Fermi-Dirac smearing. We note that this
k-point and temperature setting is not suﬃcient to fully converge many of
the properties we calculate and, as stated above, the results should not be
compared with experiment. However, by using the same setting for all calculations, we can nevertheless compare the results to each other on an equal
3.1. Testing procedure
Calculations with the GBRV pseudopotential set were run using QUAN-
TUM ESPRESSO at our target plane-wave cutoﬀof 40 Ry and a charge
density cutoﬀof 200 Ry.
The PSLIB set provides a variety of suggested
1WIEN2K treats core electrons fully-relativistically, while the pseudopotentials treat
the core electrons scalar-relativistically , which may result in small systematic errors.
plane-wave cutoﬀs which range up to 78 Ry, but most are below 50 Ry and
we ran all calculations with a cutoﬀof 50 Ry and a charge density cutoﬀof
450 Ry, also using QUANTUM ESPRESSO. This lower-than-recommended
cutoﬀmay bias results against PSLIB, but we think a relatively low cutoﬀis appropriate given our goal of testing potentials for high-throughput
applications.
VASP provides a variety of potentials for each atom; we chose the potentials with the largest number of semi-core states (we did not test the new
‘GW’ potentials). These potentials have cutoﬀs of up to 47 Ry, although
most are below 40 Ry. For cases such as O and F which include soft, normal,
and hard versions, we chose the normal version. We ran all VASP calculations using the ‘high’ precision setting, which increases the plane-wave cutoﬀ
25% above the suggested values, which is necessary to converge the stress for
variable cell calculations.
WIEN2K calculations were performed at RMTKMAX values of 8-10 as
necessary to converge the lattice constant. Calculations of lattice constants
and bulk moduli proceeded by ﬁrst performing a variable-cell relaxation with
the GBRV pseudopotential set to generate an initial guess for the lattice
constant, and then performing energy calculations with each of our testing
sets at nine points from −1% to 1% of the initial guess and ﬁtting the results
to a parabola.
3.2. Details of the testing sets
Our four testing sets all consist of cubic materials without free internal
parameters in order to reduce the computational demands associated with
structural relaxation. Our ﬁrst testing set consists of each of the elements
in simple fcc and bcc structures. This set was designed to test the potentials in a metallic bonding environment as well as to allow us to analyze
each potential separately, although we note that for many elements these
structures are highly unrealistic and represent very demanding test cases.2
The second testing set consists of rocksalt structures designed to test ionic
bonding. Main group elements are paired to put both elements in preferred
oxidation states; most of these structures are insulating. All of the transition
metal elements, which often have multiple oxidation states, are paired with
2We were unable to converge WIEN2K calculations of the fcc and bcc structures of N,
oxygen; many of these are metallic. The third testing set consists of members of the heavily-investigated perovskite family. This set also largely tests
ionic bonding, but includes tests of elements in higher oxidation states than
the rocksalt structures. Finally, we test a large set of half-Heusler structures
(MgAgAs structure type, space group F¯43m). Half-Heuslers display a
complicated combination of ionic, covalent, and metallic bonding, and should
give an indication of the accuracy of our potentials in a variety of realistic environments. Both half-Heuslers and perovskites were chosen for their simple
structure and their common inclusion of elements from throughout the periodic table. We include almost ninety previously synthesized half-Heuslers
plus additional hypothetical examples, bringing our half-Heusler test set to
138 compounds, which include all of the elements in our pseudopotential set
except H and the halogens.
3.3. Results
In Table 1, we present summary data for the overall performance the
three pseudopotential sets (see supplementary materials for more details).
Each line in the table summarizes either the root-mean-squared (RMS) error
relative to the AE calculations for a given type of test (excluding any cases in
which there was a convergence failure for any of the pseudopotentials), or the
percentage of structures in the testing set which have lattice constants errors
outside the range of ±0.2%. Given our goal of transferability and reliability
across a wide variety of structures as well as across the periodic table, this
last measure is important to assess the robustness of the pseudopotential sets,
rather than focusing only on averaged results, as reliable results require every
calculation to be accurate. In general, we ﬁnd that all three sets perform well,
with most lattice constants within 0.2% of the all-electron results, and most
bulk moduli within 5%. In fact, for many materials the diﬀerences between
the pseudopotentials and all-electron calculations are comparable to uncertainties in the all-electron results themselves. For the properties included in
our testing set, the aggregate performance of the GBRV pseudopotential set
is superior to the VASP PAW library, especially with regards to the robustness of results for structures containing multiple elements in covalent and
ionic environments. Both the GBRV and VASP sets give better lattice constants than PSLIB, but the bulk modulii and energy diﬀerences are similar
for all three testing sets. PSLIB gives highly accurate magnetic moments,
while VASP has a few elements which give poor magnetic moments.
Summary of pseudopotential testing results.
All testing data is presented
as either RMS errors relative to AE calculations or percent of lattice constants outside
±0.2% . Only compounds where all three pseudopotential sets converge are included in
RMS errors.
fcc latt. const. (%)
bcc latt. const. (%)
fcc bulk modulus (%)
bcc bulk modulus (%)
fcc-bcc Energy (meV)
rock salt latt. const. (%)
rock salt bulk modulus (%)
rock salt mag. mom. (µB)
perovskite latt. const. (%)
perovskite bulk modulus (%)
half-Heusler latt. const. (%)
half-Heusler bulk modulus (%)
fcc latt. const. > ±0.2% (%)
bcc latt. const. > ±0.2% (%)
rock salt latt. const. > ±0.2% (%)
perovskite latt. const. > ±0.2% (%)
half-Heusler latt. const. > ±0.2% (%)
% Error (PSP - AE)
(Color online) Percent diﬀerence in AE versus pseudopotential calculations for
fcc lattice constant. GBRV results in blue squares, VASP in red diamonds, and PSLIB
potentials are yellow triangles.
The results for all three sets are clearly superior to those for normconserving pseudopotential libraries such as the TM and HGH sets,
despite having signiﬁcantly softer plane-wave cutoﬀs. For example, Fig. 5
of Ref. compares the performance of some of these older comprehensive
norm-conserving libraries against a recently-developed “Bennett-Rappe” library, using a test of half-Heusler lattice constants similar to that shown in
the penultimate line of Table 1. The RMS lattice constant errors of 2.3%
and 2.8% for the TM and HGH sets respectively were reduced to only 0.76%
for the Bennett-Rappe set, with some of the most signiﬁcant improvements
occurring for transition-metal elements; this probably approaches the limit
of what can be achieved in a single-projector norm-conserving framework.
The results for the ultrasoft and PAW libraries in Table 1, however, provide
a dramatic additional reduction to less than 0.15% RMS error.
Graphical representations for some of the tests reported in Table 1 are
presented in Figs. 1-5. Interestingly, the largest average errors tend to be in
the simplest compounds, especially the fcc and bcc structures, and we note
that the lattice constant errors for these two structures are highly correlated
with each other (the correlation coeﬃcient between the fcc and bcc lattice
constant errors for the GBRV potential set is 0.95). In most cases the elements with large errors in fcc and bcc lattice constants and bulk moduli tend
to have similar errors for all three pseudopotential sets, which suggests that
the errors are related to the frozen-core approximation or some aspect of the
% Error (PSP - AE)
(Color online) Percent diﬀerence in AE versus pseudopotential calculations for
bcc lattice constant. GBRV results in blue squares, VASP in red diamonds, and PSLIB
potentials are yellow triangles.
meV/atom Error (PSP - AE)
(Color online) Error in energy diﬀerence (meV per atom) between fcc and
bcc structures. GBRV are in blue squares, VASP in red diamonds, and PSLIB in yellow
triangles. For context, the standard deviation of the AE energy diﬀerences is 0.21 eV.
% Error (PSP - AE)
(Color online) Percent diﬀerence in AE versus pseudopotential calculations for
rocksalt lattice constants. GBRV potentials are blue squares, VASP potentials are red
diamonds, PSLIB potentials are yellow triangles, and the Hf4+ potential is an isolated
green square (see text).
all-electron calculations rather than any speciﬁc problem with a speciﬁc potential. The worst performing potentials in this test tend to be from either
the alkaline metals or the halides, both of which tend to underestimate lattice
constants. F and Cl, as well as several other ﬁrst row elements including Li
and Be, can be improved by reducing the cutoﬀradii and accepting higher
plane-wave and charge density cutoﬀs; however, our current potentials perform suﬃciently well in most realistic compounds (see below). The errors in
the lattice constants of Rb and Cl may be related to the frozen-core approximation, as the errors were consistent across all of the pseudopotentials we
constructed for these elements. The errors in energy diﬀerence between the
fcc and bcc structures, shown in Fig. 3, tend to be small and highly correlated
across all three pseudopotential sets. We note that the largest errors tend to
be for elements with a large energy separation between the two structures,
and that all of the calculations agree on the more stable structure in all
cases except for Pd, where the calculated AE energy diﬀerence is only −1.5
All of the potentials show good overall performance on most compounds
in the rocksalt, perovskite, and half-Heusler testing sets, as shown in Figs. 4-
6 (see also supplementary materials).
Apparently the ionic and covalent
bonding of these compounds is relatively insensitive to either the frozencore approximation or the details of pseudopotential construction, at least
% Error (PSP - AE)
(Color online) Percent diﬀerence in AE versus pseudopotential calculations
for perovskite (and anti-perovskite) lattice constants. GBRV potentials are blue squares,
VASP potentials are red diamonds, PSLIB potentials are yellow triangles, and the Hf4+
potential is an isolated green square (see text).
for carefully tested potentials. The GBRV potentials have the advantage
that they show fewer “poor” cases (deﬁned as those showing lattice constant
errors exceeding ±0.2%), which makes them particularly useful for a robust
high-throughput study.
The GBRV potentials perform very well in the ionic NaCl and perovskite
structures, as shown in Figs. 4–5, with the most notable exceptions being
HfO and SrHfO3. Hf has a ﬁlled 4f orbital which overlaps strongly both
spatially and energetically with the valence and semicore s, p, and d orbitals,
and this 4f orbital would have to be included in any truly transferable Hf potential. Unfortunately, including such a localized orbital is impossible within
our convergence criteria. In order to treat these technologically important
oxides accurately, in the spirit of Ref. , we created a second Hf potential,
generated to reproduce a Hf4+ ionic conﬁguration. This potential gives improved performance in Hf oxides, as shown by the green square in Figs. 4-5;
however, it gives poor performance for metallic Hf (e.g., +0.71% lattice constant error in the fcc structure) and the errors reported in table 1 all refer
to the standard Hf potential. The remaining large errors in the ionic testing
sets mostly involve combinations of alkaline metals with halides (e.g., LiI or
CsCl), which we already noted are diﬃcult to pseudize.
The performance of the GBRV potentials is also excellent for the large
half-Heusler data set, as shown in Fig. 6. The lattice constant errors are ap-
% Error (PSP - AE)
Number of Structures
(Color online) Histogram of % error in lattice constants (PSP - AE) for the
half-Heusler test set. GBRV results in blue squares, VASP in red diamonds, and PSLIB
in yellow triangles.
proximately normally distributed, with a small bias of −0.07%, and only 5 out
of 128 structures (SbTaCo, MnSbOs, MnPdTe, LiAuS, and CdPLi) outside
of the ±0.2% lattice constant error range, and many of those barely outside.
We note that the compounds with large errors all contain large transition
metals, and that it is probably possible to improve Au, Cd, Pd, and Ta by
including additional semicore states if more accuracy is required. The ability
to modify potentials is an important feature of open-source libraries such as
GBRV. Fig. 6 also shows that the VASP and PSLIB potentials have tails of
underestimated and overestimated lattice constants, respectively, which contribute to their higher RMS errors. Despite these outliers, we note that the
remaining lattice constant errors are highly correlated across potential sets,
with a correlation coeﬃcient between the GBRV and VASP lattice constant
errors of 0.63 (0.36 for GBRV and PSLIB). This correlation, which can also
be seen in Figs. 1–5 for the previous testing sets, suggests that much of the
remaining error is due to the frozen-core approximation. The errors in bulk
modulus are even more highly correlated, with a correlation coeﬃcient for
the half-Heusler testing set of 0.92 between GBRV and VASP (0.84 between
GBRV and PSLIB).
As a reminder, all the results presented until now have been for non-spinpolarized calculations. In order to obtain some information about the ability
of the pseudopotentials to reproduce magnetic properties, we have carried
out calculations for the binary transition-metal oxides in the rock salt struc-
ture (Fig. 4), but now initialized in a ferromagnetic spin conﬁguration. For
those that converged to a ferromagnetic ground state, we compare the resulting magnetic moments with the AE values in Table 2. (All four calculations
agreed as to which materials remained ferromagnetic.) The PSLIB potentials reproduce the AE magnetic moments exceptionally well despite many
elements having fewer semicore states than the other potential sets, which
we attribute in part to their higher plane-wave and charge density cutoﬀs.
The largest errors for the GBRV set are for NiO and CoO. We found that
the magnetic properties of Ni in particular are very sensitive to its inner
cutoﬀradius. Unfortunately, there is no value for this parameter which both
reproduces the magnetic moment of NiO and is compatible with our convergence criteria; we had to compromise and choose the best value compatible
with our requirements. We recommend signiﬁcant testing before using any
pseudopotential in detailed magnetic calculations.
The strong correlation between the lattice constant errors in the fcc and
bcc structures, evident when comparing Figs. 1 and 2, suggests that it may be
possible to create an estimate of the lattice constant error of other structures
using this information. In other words, perhaps each element is consistently
too small or too large across all structures, and this error can be corrected
for. However, when we attempted to model the lattice constant errors of the
GBRV potential set as a linear combination of the average fcc and bcc errors
of the elements in each compound, we found little improvement in RMS
errors beyond the improvement which came from subtracting the overall bias
of −0.06%. Similarly, a model of the lattice constant error based on a global
least squares ﬁt to the testing sets, leaving out one compound at a time to
evaluate the ﬁt, improved RMS errors less than 0.01%. In other words, the
bias introduced by each pseudopotential depends too strongly on chemical
environment to be modeled with a single number.
Finally, note that we have been treating the AE results from WIEN2k
as essentially exact, but this point deserves futher investigation, as prelimiinary tests indicate that the diﬀerences between diﬀerent AE codes can
sometimes be signiﬁcant on the scale of our comparisons.
3.4. GBRV PAW Library
In order to achieve broader compatibility with open-source electronic
structure codes, speciﬁcally ABINIT, which can perform calculations with
PAWs but not with ultrasoft pseudopotentials, we use the uspp2abinit 
add-on to the Vanderbilt ultrasoft code to generate PAW versions of the
Testing data for magnetic moments of transition metal oxides with non-zero
magnetic moments at the AE non-spin polarized lattice constant. All magnetic moments
in µB per primitive cell.
GBRV library. While closely related, the formalism of PAW and ultrasoft
potentials are not the same , which results in diﬀerences between the two
GBRV potential sets which are larger than the diﬀerences between QUAN-
TUM ESPRESSO and ABINIT when run with identical norm-conserving
potentials. For some elements which are particularly sensitive to generation
parameters, especially those with many semicore states or core states which
are close in energy to valence states, we had to alter the generation parameters in order to make a PAW of equal accuracy to the ultrasoft version .
We ﬁnd that the GBRV PAW and ultrasoft libraries, tested with ABINIT
and QUANTUM ESPRESSO respectively, have the same overall accuracy
relative to all-electron calculations, and their errors in lattice constant are
highly correlated (e.g. the correlation coeﬃcient between the perovskite lattice constant errors is 0.73).
4. Conclusions
In conclusion, we have presented design criteria and testing results for
the new GBRV pseudopotential library optimized for high-throughput DFT
calculations. We ﬁnd that our potentials are both accurate and transferable,
performing well in tests of metallic, ionic, and covalent bonding. In addition,
we have compiled testing results for two PAW libraries, which also perform
well and demonstrate the reliability of carefully designed pseudopotentials
in electronic-structure calculations. While calculations using either ultrasoft
pseudopotentials or PAWs are more complicated to implement than those using norm-conserving potentials, almost all modern electronic-structure codes
are now capable of using such potentials, with current code development efforts continually expanding the set of features that are compatible with them.
In particular, the GBRV potentials, available at 
can be used directly with the actively-developed open-source QUANTUM
ESPRESSO and ABINIT packages.
For the properties investigated in this work, the GBRV potential set provides better accuracy and robustness than the VASP or PSLIB PAW sets,
and at lower computational cost. In particular, the GBRV potentials are
designed to run at a plane-wave cutoﬀof 40 Ry and a charge-density cutoﬀ
of 200 Ry, which are at least 25% lower than many of the PSLIB PAWs as
well as lower than three VASP PAWs when using the ‘high’ precision setting
recommended for variable cell relaxations.
The GBRV potentials (like the PSLIB potentials) also have the advantage of being open-source, which allows calculations to be easily replicated
and enables the potentials to be modiﬁed and improved as needed by the
electronic structure community. Furthermore, open-source potentials can be
used with open-source electronic structure packages, which have active development communities and, like the potentials themselves, can be improved
and expanded upon as necessary.
We hope that both the GBRV potential library itself, as well as the design
criteria and testing methodology presented here, will improve the use and
reliability of pseudopotential-based high-throughput DFT calculations for a
variety of materials design applications.
This work work was supported by NSF Grant DMR-10-05838 and ONR
Grants N00014-09-1-0302 and N00014-12-1-1040. We wish to thank D.R. Hamann
for valuable discussions.