effects on human
)nal Journal on
& D.M.Mark
i!!formation
and com utational
foundations
information
EI:;~~tsS~ft;~.od
Route Directions in Familiar
and Unfamiliar Environments
ence, 73, 31-68.
imes) worth ten
Kristin L. Lovelace 1, Mary Hegarty 1
and Daniel R. Montello2
A review of]!.
;ally validating
.n (editors).
1 University of California Dept. of Psychology, Santa Barbara, CA 93106
 ,
 
2 University of California, Dept. of Geography, Santa Barbara, CA 93106
 
h ten thousand
graphical representa:'
5, 185-213.
-:aphical and i.
nts perceive in
Route directions are instructions,
primarily verbal, that
explain how to get from one place to another.
The current study
examines several methods for assessing the quality of verbal route
directions by characterizing them in terms of the number of elements
(such as landmarks, segments or turns) and by subjective ratings of their
goodness. Route directions for routes which were both familiar and
unfamiliar to the participant were studied. Subjective ratings of the
quality of route directions were reliable and consistent across
individuals.
More complete route directions were rated as being of
higher quality. For both routes, inclusion of more segment and turn
mentions were correlated with higher quality route directions.
route descriptions for familiar versus unfamiliar routes differed in terms
of the types of landmarks included.
naps: Layers of
1S. In F. T. ~
iattis (Editor),
uage. In C. Freksa,
isciplinary approach
75. Berlin:
Keywords: Spatial language, Route directions, Familiarity
In H. Mandl and J. R.
Pp.125-143.
f graphic communica-
1. Introduction
Route directions are responses to a query of the type 'how can I get from A to
B1'. What does it mean to give someone "good" route directions? The issue of
how to recognize and/or produce 'good' route directions is of great importance for
many practical applications (e.g. navigational information for the disabled,
personalized or automated tourist information, in-vehicle navigation systems) as
well as of theoretical interest. A characterization of what constitutes high quality
route directions, and how this differs with level of environmental familiarity, are
the broad goals of the current study.
To date there have been few studies on route directions. Most of the earliest
research was by linguists , but the issue has also ,been studied by psychologists, computer scientists
and geographers proposed a model with
four phases: Initiation, Route Description, Securing and Closure. All but the
second phase are interactions between the route direction producer and the
'questioner'.
Couclelis' model has five major stages: Initiation,
Representation, Transfonnation, Symbolization, and Termination. The flfst and
last stages are relevant.to the interpersonal communication of a request for route
directions. The third, fourth and fifth stages involve the translation of a spatial
representation into verbal output to solve the given problem.
Allen's model has four phases!: Initiation, Route Description, Securing
and Closure. Again the first, third and fourth stages deal mainly with the rituals
of the route direction exchange, while the actual production of information occurs
in the Route Description phase.. Allen's model does not allude to underlying
spatial or verbal representations or abilities, but rather focuses on the elements or
attributes of the route directions themselves. The fourth model, formulated by
Denis , is composed of three 'cognitive operations':
activating relevant spatial knowledge, determining a route through the activated
representation, and formulating procedural verbal output. These three steps are
very similar to the third, fourth and fifth steps of the Couclelis model.
A simplified theoretical model of route direction production, consistent with the
four models described above, consists of 3 major steps (see Figure 1). The first
step is activation of a representation, the s12atial
knowledge of the environment to
be described, at the appropriate scale for the route. This knowledge is presumed
by most researchers to be stored in a non-linguistic format. The second step
requires the choice of a s12ecific route through that environment. This choice
process could be based on one or more criteria, such as the mode of travel (e.g.
walking or driving), desired route characteristics (e.g. fastest or most scenic), and
the expected level of knowledge of the receiver of the route directions. The third
step is a translation of the chosen route through the environment into a set of
verbal instructions. These three steps are the central part of a discourse which
usually occurs between the giver and seeker of route directions. Because we use
written directions in the current research, the initiation and termination activities
are not relevant, and are not included in the model. We focus on the third step in
Figure 1: the verbal output..
To approach the question of what characterizes good route directions, we
examine quality of route directions both subjectively, via a rating scale, and
quantitatively, via frequencies of route direction elements. We also explore
differences in route directions produced about familiar versus unfamiliar
environments.
The phase names are identical to Wunderlich and Reinelt's but the content is different.
96; Mark, 1987;
anetti and Allen,
n proposed, with
sed a model with
Ire. All but the
Jroducer and the
.ges: Initiation,
>n. The first aJKi
.request for route
ation of a spatial
K."lOWLEDGE
Fig. 1. Simplified model of stages in route direction production
;ription, Securing
y with the rituals
lfonnation occurs
Ide to underlying
1 the elements or
~l, fonnulated by
itive operations':
llgb7the activated
.e three steps are
nsistent with the
Jre 1). The first
~ environment to
edge is presumed
The second step
:nt. This choice
de of travel (e.g.
nost scenic), atrl
;tions. The third
~nt into a set of
discourse which
Because we use
ination activities
the third step in
1.1 Quality of Route Directions
Quality of route directions can be measured in a number of ways. First, the
quality may be a function of the absolute number of various elements included in
the verbal output (e.g. landmarks, turns, descriptive information), which are
presumed to aid interpretation or route following. Second, good route directions
can also be measured subjectively, by asking people to rate the directions with a
rating scale. Finally, route direction quality may be measured functionally, in
terms of how well the directions facilitate completion of the wayfinding taSk they
were produced for."All of these types of measures have been used in the past, arrl
it is the convergence of the methods which is most useful in determining quality.
The current study focuses on the fIrst and second methods.
~ directions, we
ating scale, and
¥e also explore
rsus unfamiliar
1.2 Quantifying quality: Characteristics of route directions
There are a large number of elements in verbal route directions which may be
potentially relevant to their quality.
Route directions usually consist of a
sequential description of the route, including physical elements and basic motor
activities (walk, turn [left], etc.). Kuipers calls these 'view-action pairs',
and considers each view-actio~ pair the most basic building block of route
mtent is different.
directions1
knowledge.
Similarly, Allen breaks route direction elements into
directives (movement or state-of-being verbs) and descriptives (environmental
features: paths, choice points, and landmarks).
The route itself is broken down into segments, verbally represented as one or
more phrases . There is no consensus on what these phrases
should include (perhaps due to the variety of environments and research questions
asked) . The organization of written route directions is most commonly
linear --the transformation of potentially 3-D environmental knowledge into a 2-
D sequentially experienced route --although survey-type description is also
possible. The correct ordering of segments is their most important organizational
There is also no accepted definition of what constitutes 'good route directions'.
Several researchers 
have made suggestions about important aspects of route direction components, for
the most part based on functional criteria. These aspects include a) priming the
traveler for upcoming choice points, b) mentioning landmarks at choice points, c)
giving "you've gone too far if' statements in case a choice point is missed, d)
giving landmarks rather than street names, e) giving distances between choice
points, f) telling the traveler which way to proceed at a choice point, g) providing
information to allow recovery from errors, h) providing clearly linear information
(e.g. using 'then', and focusing on a sequential rather than global view), and i)
providing a limited amount of redundant information. Some of these suggestions
are based on empirical evidence, while others are based on thought experiments,
intuition or are lists of common-sense ideas which have not been tested. While
we believe that intuition can be a very powerful tool for subjectively recognizing
route direction quality, we also wish to examine the empirical relationship
between route direction quality and objective measures of route direction elements.
1.3 Spatial Knowledge:
and Unfamiliar
environments
The first stage of the simple model of route directions (Figure 1) is the Snatial
Knowledge which an individual brings to bear on the production (or
comprehension) of route directions.
Familiarity with an area is probably
positively correlated with the completeness of this internal spatial representation.
The quality and detail of this representation is also crucial to Route Choice, stage
2 of the proposed model.
As familiarity (and therefore spatial knowledge) increases, spatial description
tasks (such as production of route directions) should become easier. Unfamiliar
areas are likely to have simplified, incomplete, incorrect or even non-existent
spatial representations; and should result in route directions of significantly lower
completeness, detail and correctness. We tested this hypothesis by asking people
to describe routes in both familiar and unfamiliar locations of campus.
tion elements into
ives 
5 (best) scale. No explicit definitions or criteria were given for 'quality'; the
were based on the rater's subjective impression.
A small subset of
directions were scored by 5 raters, with 86% agreement among the raters2. All 36
sets were then rated by two raters, with an inter-rater agreement of 75%.
Based on these findings, an experiment was designed to answer several further
questions about 'good' route directions. First, what are the characteristics of good
route directions? Second, in what ways are route directions for familiar and
unfamiliar routes different? To answer these questions, we a) collected route
descriptions for both a familiar and unfamiliar route, b)" subjectively rated both
sets of route directions, and 3) quantitatively measured elements of the route
descriptions and correlated the frequency of each element with the route description
)d route directions'.
, 1987; Mark and
and Reinelt, 1982)
)n components, for
ude a) priming the
it choice points, c)
'oint is missed, d)
es between choice
)oint, g) providing
linear information
Jbal view), and i).
.these suggestions
ught experiments,
een tested. While
:tively recognizing
irical relationship
lirection elements.
vironments
1) is the Spati,al
production (or
area is probably
al representation.
lie Choic~, stage
TO LIBR-\.RY
JatiaI description
sier. Unfamiliar'
yen non-ex.istent
~nificantly lower
.y asking people
Familiar Route with Landmark Types. Choice Point: Bike Path. On-
Route (not at Choice Point): ATM. Potential Choice Point: Kiosk. Off Route: Ocean
2 Interrater reliability for the 5 raters is the mean of the IRR for each pair of raters.
Compared to previous studies this study includes a more thorough exploration of the
kinds and locations of landmarks included in 'route directions. In the past,
landmarks have been defined as 1) 'at a choice point' (at any point where a
potential change of direction exists) or 2) non-choice point landmarks. In the
current research we will make a distinction between landmarks that are located at
potential turning points but are nQ1 used on the route being described (called here
'potential choice point'landmarks), and landrriarks that are located at choice points
which ~ used on the route described (called here 'choice point' landmarks). Nonchoice point landmarks are similarly broken down into those 'on route' (along the
path of travel but not at a potential or used choice point) and those 'off-route' (not
contiguous to the path followed but of some orientation value, whether visible or
not, such as mountains, ocean, or out of view buildings). Examples of these 4
types are shown in Figure 2.
Three specific claims from previous route direction research will be addressed.
Intuitively, it would seem that more complete information is necessarily better.
However, Denis et al. has questioned this, finding instead that route
directions rated as best are of moderate length, containing neither too much nor
too little information. These conflicting hypotheses will be examined. A second
claim is that the only landmarks that are important to route direction quality are
those at choice points (re-orientation points on the path, whether used or not)
 . A third claim is that the density of landmarks mentioned
increases near the end of the route description in order to allow identification of
the correct end point of the route .
As a pretest, prior to the main experiment, 64 participants rated their
familiarity with areas of campus. Two routes were chosen in areas of low
familiarity. Average time on campus was 1.3 quarters for those who knew the
area of neither route, so participation in the main study was limited to freshmen.
2.1 Method
Thirty one freshmen (17 males, 14 females) from an introductory psychology
and an introductory human geography course completed two testing sessions for
course credit. The mean age of participants was 18.7 years.
In the first session a number of spatial and verbal psychometric tasks were
administered and route directions were collected between two familiar campus
locations (see schematic in Figure 3a).
Only the results for the route direction
task will be reported here.
Materials for the second session consisted of blank paper for writing route
directions (for unfamiliar route number one, the Description Route), a set of
twenty photographs, and an enlarged map of a section of campus (for unfamiliar
route number two, the Retrace Route). Two routes in an infrequently used area of
the campus were created by the pretest explained above. The Description Route
(schematic in Figure 3b) included 14 segments and 13 turns (with 11
>enis et al.,
exploration of
1S. In the
ndmarks. In
;ribed (called
j at choice
route' (along
)e 'off-route'
-hether visible
mples of these
turns; that is, turns where 2+ choices were available). The Retrace
18 segments and 17 turns (with 15 unconstrained turns).
of twenty 4"x 6" color photographs were used for a scene recognition
the Retrace Route. The photographs were of 10 locations along the
Route, and 10 photographs of similar locations on the campus.
were mounted in a photograph album, with one photograph per
the first session, lasting about 50 minutes, the participants completed the
tasks in small groups in the laboratory. In the second session, the
the participants individually at the laboratory, then led them to
of an adjacent building to the beginning of the first unfamiliar route.
participants were told that they would be guided along a walk of about 8
duration. They were asked to follow behind the experimenter on the
Participants were told that at the end of the route, they would be given a
'to test their spatial knowledge of the route traversed. After any questions
~ssarily better.
lstead that
~r too much
~ction quality
Jer used or
identification
lnts rated
[l areas of
j to freshmen.
)ry psychology
Ig sessions for
:ric tasks were
route direction
, At the end of the route, the participants were asked to write directions for the
just walked, imagining they were starting at the beginning of the route.
were instructed to write the directions for someone who didn't know the
very well, and to include information about sections of the route, the
and any landmark information they thought would be helpful.
When the participants were finished writing they were led a short distance to
route. They were given the same instructions,
they would be given a different test of route
.Again the participants followed the experimenter along the route. At
route the participants were ask~ to look at each of the 20
experimenter if they had seen the view shown in the
on the route they had just walked.
For the final task, participants were asked to retrace the second route: they were
to walk from the end of the route back to the beginning, using the same
route they had just followed. Participants were told that if they felt lost or
confused they could ask, and they would be told the correct way to go, and if they
went off the route the experimenter would stop them after 10 steps and return
them to the route. During the retrace the experimenter followed the participant
and noted the following relevant behaviors of the participants: 1) number of steps
off the route, 2) number of times off the route, and 3) wrong turns at choice
Finally, the participant was debriefed, and any further questions were answered.
The average time to complete the second session was 50 minutes.
writing route
ute), a set
y used area of-
:ription Route
2.1.1 Route Direction
A group of three naive raters rated all familiar and unfamiliar route directions
for quality on a 1-5 scale as in the pilot experiment. These raters had 69%
agreement on the familiar route directions, and 73% agreement on the unfamiliar
route directions.
Both sets of directions were also cooed for the inclusion of ten elements (e.g.
landmarks, segments, turns, overall length and errors). Inter-rater reliability of
the coding of these variables showed an average 83% agreement between two
trained coders (the first and second authors).
There were four landmark variables: 1) choice point landmarks (landmarks at
any turn along the path which was used in this route), 2) potential choice point
landmarks ( landmarks at a potential turn along the path which was not used for
this route), 3) on route landmarks (landmarks along the route and not at any
choice point) and 4) off route landmarks (distant, often non-visible objects such as
the ocean, mountain range or student housing area).
There were three choice point variables: 1) the number of turn statements (e.g.
those that include the word "turn"), 2) the number of choice points at which
landmarks were mentioned, and 3) the number of turn statements for which a
descriptor was used (right/left, north/south, or towards an environmental feature).
We also counted the number of segments mentioned (use of terms such as
'walk along, follow the path, keep going', etc.) and the number of errors in the
content of the route directions given (such as wrong names for buildings, or
telling someone to turn the wrong direction, misplacing a landmark on the route).
Omission of information was not considered an error. Finally, the number of
words was counted.
3. Results
There are several main questions of interest. Most basically, what are the
general characteristics of route directions in terms of their elements (e.g. turns,
landmarks)? In what ways do the elements of route directions for familiar and
unfamiliar routes differ? And which elements are used in highly rated route
directions?
3.1 General Route Direction Characteristics
Although there are a number of different ways to walk between the two
endpoints of the familiar route (see Figure 2), 74% (23) of the participants chose
to describe the route in Figure 3a. This route was used for the following analysis.
Examination of the frequency of mention of specific turns and segments in the
two sets of route directions (Figures 3a & 3b) shows that longer segments are
more frequently mentioned than shorter ones, and turns towards the end of the
route appear to be less frequently mentioned. Some possible reasons for the
mention of a turn or segment are addressed in the discussion. Both the familiar and
unfamiliar route directions were quite incomplete, shown by the percentage of
turns and segments included (see Table 1).
ten elements (e.g.
ater reliability of
(lent between two
31 ~/O :\IE:'ITIONED
rks (landmarks at
ntial choice point
was not used for
e and not at any
,Ie objects such as
87~/O :\IE~TIONED
100% ~IE:'ITIONED
1 statements (e.g.
points at which
tents for which a .,
1Inental feature).
of terms such as
:r of errors in the
for buildings, or
ark on the route).
" tbe number of
SEG"'IE~TS:
50-60~/Q ME:'ITIONED
100°,1. :l;IE~TIO",ED
Fig. 3a. Frequency of Segment and Turn Mention, Familiar Route
:\IE:\'TION
~9-8~u~. ME:\'TION
85-1 OO~~I
lly, what are the'
lents (e:g. turns,
; for familiar and
ghly rated route
)etween the two
'articipants chose
llowing analysis.
segments in the
~er segments are
s the end of the
reasons for the
1 the familiar and
he percentage of
:\I(E~TION
39-5-4",/0 :\I(E~TION
55-85",~. :\IE:'ITION
Fig.3b. Frequency of Segment and Turn Mention, Unfamiliar Route
Characteri
Landmarks.
Rank Order
the other mea
The percentag
Fig. 4. Frequency of Mention of All Landmarks, Unfamiliar Route
There is no easy way to assess the potential number of landmarks along the
route. However, 119 different landmarks were mentioned along the unfamiliar
route by the 31 participants, with only a small number (16) being mentioned by
30% or more of the participants. The frequency of mention of all 119 landmarks
is given in Fi,gure 4; the frequency of mel1tion decreases steadily, and is relatively
flat after the fIrst 25 landmarks.
The distribution of landmark mention for the unfamiliar route along the
segments and at the choice points is shown in Figure 5. Landmarks appear to be
LANDMARKS o~ SEG;\IE~TS:
:\IE:'iTJO:'iS
:1-60 \IE:'iTJO~S
Number of V
Retrace Me2
AT TUR.~S:
THA:i 10 ~IE~TIO~S
\IE:\'TIO~S
~1-3S 'IE~TIO:\'S
Fig. 5. Distribution of Landmarks Mentioned. Unfamiliar Route
mentioned on the longer segments, and they are rarely used at choice
one choice of which way to turn. The pattern
seen here does not support the previous claim that
increases near the end of the route, but perhaps this is due to
of the terrain.
unfamiliar
directions
Subjective
directions
unfamiliar
variability.
Percentages
comparison;
percentages
calculated.
percentages
landmarks,
1dmarks along
JOg the ng mentioned by
E.QY!e Description Rou~:
r route along
larks appear to
Mean (s.d.)
Mean (s.d.)
44.9 (23.7)
36.0 (20.0)
67.7 (18.1)
18.6 (6.7)
64.4 (27.5)
49.7 (29.2)
75.0 (20.4)
10.0 (3.2)
; Subjective Rating,'~~.Percentage
of Turns Mentioned
44.1 (18.5)
50.5 (21.5)
185.0 (77.3)
29.8 (10.7)
29.8 (16.1)
36.7 (23.1)
97.2 (31.4)
15.4 (2.0)
,. Percentage of Segments Mentioned
.Total Number of Landmarks
;rPercentage of Mentioned Landmarks
at Choice Points of Route
at Potential Choice Points
on Route, not at Choice Point
Number of Errors
Number of Words
Retrace Route has discounted their importance in favor of ..landmarks at
choice points. Surprisingly, the correlation between the subjective ratings for the
familiar and unfamiliar route directions for each participant was only 0.088 (n.s.).
This low correlation of the familiar and unfamiliar route direction ratings suggests
that the familiar and unfamiliar route directions may be tapping different cognitive
processes.
In terms of our model (Figure 1) the two routes differ in the quality of Spatial
Knowledge and in the need to make a Route Choice (for familiar only). As the
retrace task suggests (see Table 3), spatial knowledge may be a limiting factor in
route directions for unfamiliar routes.
3.3 Route Direction
Characteristics
& Route Direction
and 29% (9
Correlations of the 10 route direction elements with subjective ratings of
unfamiliar and familiar route directions are shown in Table 2. Six of the route
direction elements had significant correlations with both the unfamiliar and
familiar subjective ratings4. The unfamiliar route directions ratings were --for the
Table 2. Correlations of Route Direction Coml2onents with Sub)ective Ratings
Route Direction Rating
Unfamiliar
Percentage of Turns Mentioned
Percentage of Turns with
Percentage of Segments Mentioned
Total Number of Landmarks
Percentage of Landmarks at:
Route Choice Points
Potential Choice Points
On Route, not at Choice Point
Number of Errors
Number of Words
3. Correlr
* p<.O5, ** p<.Ol
3 The average number of landmarks mentioned is larger for the unfamiliar route
(unfamiliar = 19, familiar = 10) however the unfamiliar path is about 3 times longer.
4 Note that several significant correlations are interdependent (e.g. turn measures).
numbers are
ages of the
n unexpectedly
as prevIOus
vor of ~landmarks ctive ratings for the
IS only 0.088 (n.
tion ratings
g different
Ie quality of Spatial
"liar only). As the
a limiting factor in
ction Quality
bjective ratings of
of the route
he unfamiliar
:ings were
with landmarks at choice points, while the familiar route
The familiar route directions ratings were significantly
with landmarks at potential choice points, while unfamiliar route
were not. This may reflect the role of choice point landmarks in 'being
there' and the role of landmarks at potential choice points in
choosing between alternative routes (which is not a factor when describing a
learned route). The significant correlation of both kinds of route
with on-route (not at choice point) landmarks is not consistent with the
" landmarks at choice points are important to quality route directions
The scene recognition and retrace tasks measured ability to form a spatial
representation of an unfamiliar environment. Participants correctly responded to
J average of 77.1 % of the scene recognition photographs (15.42 of 20).
three retrace measures (steps off the route, times off the route and wrong turns) all
had quite small average errors, given the complexity of the route (Table 1).
During the retrace task, 13% (4) of participants went off of the route more than
once, and 29% (9) left the route one time. Only 29% (9) of the participants made
a wrong turn at any of the 17 choice points (an average of 0.021 errors/turn).
Table 3 shows the correlations between the subjective ratings for the
unfamiliar and familiar routes and the retrace and recognition measures. The
retrace measures have a significant negative correlation with the quality of route
: the unfamiliar route, but not the familiar route. Route memory (as
by retrace ability) is a measure of Spatial Knowledge in the simple
model (Figure 1). This supports the premise that spatial knowledge (as measured
retrace ability) is the limiting factor in the production of good route directions
areaS: The scene recognition task was not significantly correlated
set of route directions.
~ctive Rati figS
~ction Rating
Table 3. Correlations between Subiective Route Directions Ratin~s and Retrace and
Recognition
Familiar Route Directions
Subjective Rating
Unfamiliar Route Directions
Subjective Rating
'4. Discussion
e unfamiliar route
out 3 times longer.
turn measures). "
In the current study we have addressed the measurement of route direction
quality, the elements of route, directions and their contribution to route direction
quality. and the differences in route directions produced about familiar
unfamiliar environments.
4.1 Measurement
of Route Direction
Our pilot study showed that reliable subjective ratings of route directions are
possible. The inter-rater correlations ranged from. 73 to .86. It appears that even
with very minimal instructions, both informed and naive raters are using similar
criteria to assign ratings to route directions for both familiar and unfamiliar
4.2 General Route Direction
Characteristics
The coding scheme for route directions in the current study improves on those
used in the past by breaking landmarks down into more categories than simply at choice
points vs. not at choice points. Previous research has
suggested that mention of landmarks should occur only at choice points.
However, the current study show~ that _m_ore
than 50% of the l~dm~~
unfamiliar routes, and more than 40% of landmarks on familiar routes aIoe
mentioned at places other than choice points. Landmarks on route (not a choice
points) are fully half of the landmarks mentioned in unfamiliar route directions,
and 30% of those mentioned even in familiar environments. These on route
landmarks are significantly correlated with route direction quality for both familiar
and unfamiliar routes. These results are inconsistent with earlier claims that only choice point landmarkS are important to good route
directions.
For both the familiar and unfamiliar routes, longer route directions were rated
as higher quality. This result is contrary to the previous finding that route directions of moderate length are rated most highly. This may be
due to differences between route directions given orally (as in most previous
studies) versus in written form (in the current study). When route directions are
given or used orally, too much detail may pose a problem for the receiver, and
more concise directions may be better. However, with written route directions the
potential for overload on the receiver is less of a problem, and so longer route
directions may be given.s
A second possible reason for the difference in Denis' findings an~ .~_~se of the
current study concerns the difficulty of the route used. Denis et al.'s routes
only 2 to 4 segments, and 1 to 3 turns, whereas the current study used an
unfamiliar route with 14 segments and 13 turns.6 Because Denis' routes were
5 Alternately, written directions may be more concise than oral directions, due to the
ability to take as much time as necessary to plan what will be written
6 Our familiar route, however, had only 4 segments and 3 turns.
Jut familiar
Ite directions
)pears that
al., 1999)
iar routes
, good descriptions likely included all of the turns and s.egments, and
words were likely excess detail. In this case it would make sense
that route directions of moderate length were best. However, in the current
all of the turns and segments were nQ.t mentioned. Even for the familiar
only 64% of turns and 75% of segments were mentioned. Perhaps due to
of the routes in the current study, the longest descriptions were
because they were the most complete.
some consistency in the characteristics of segments and turns that are
along both the familiar and unfamiliar routes (see Figure 3a and 3b).
the familiar route (Ij'igure 3a),the central two segments of the route are
100% of the time. In contrast, the shorter end segments are mentioned
In addition the final turn and segment may not be mentioned as
because the destination is visible from the end of the third segment.
, if appears that places where there are incomplete mentions of turns or
be those where such information is unnecessary because of cues in
actual environment. Therefore, it may be that the location of mentioned
is more important than the absolute number mentioned.
characterization becomes clearer when considering the unfamiliar route
Again, the longest segments are most frequently mentioned.
, in places where there are constraints on the path (e.g. walls, bushes,
.), the turns and segments are less frequently mentioned. For the unfa111iliar
,this occurs on segments 6, 7, and 11-13, and the turns within those areas
and 11-13) all of which are very infrequently mentioned. Finally, Figure
provides further evidence that mentions of any route information decreases in
the constrained sections of the route mentioned above, there
at all mentioned.
landmark information given by Figure 5 is inconsistent with the claim
mention of landmarks increases as the end of the route approaches (Allen,
.There is no evidence that more landmarks are mentioned close to the end
, in fact there are 2 segments and a choice point virtually at the end of
the route where no landmarks are mentioned at all. Again, the location of the
landmarks seems to be related to both availability of landmarks, and the
constraints or potential choices of the specific route to be described, and possibly
to the landmarks available in the spatial representation.
(Denis et.,
This may be
directions are
4.3 Familiar versus Unfamiliar Route Directions
Higher levels of spatial knowledge of an area should be correlated with more
more accurate route directions for that area. We have evidence for
this in the higher percentages of turn and segment statements and larger number
of landmarks per unit distance included in route directions for familiar routes.
There are also significantly fewer errors in familiar route directions, attesting to
the higher quality of the underlying representation in the familiar area.
IS, due to
. ~""',~-",.,'
Different types of landmarks are related to quality in directions for familiar
unfamiliar routes. For both familiar and unfamiliar route directions,
on route (but not at a choice point) are significantly correlated with quality of
route directions and are included in the largest numbers. For only the familiar
route, landmarks at potential choice points are correlated with quality and quite
frequent (Table 2). For the unfamiliar route, landmarks at choice points were
most highly correlated with quality and quite frequent.
This difference in landmark type use may stem from experience with the
environment, and the spatial representation available when producing the route
directions. In the familiar environment, it is likely that the participants had used
many of the potential choice points in the past when using alternate routes. They
would therefore have been aware of the landmarks at potential choice points.
contrast, the participants giving route directions for the unfamiliar environment
had a relatively impoverished representation to work from.
In their case,
remembering the choice points actually taken, and which way to turn at these
choice points was perhaps all they could remember after one exposure. It is
possible that potential choice points are not represented at all in an unfamiliar
environment, and do not become part of a spatial representation until much more
experience is gained, or until the potential choice point is used as part of some
other route.
The general model of route direction production (Figure-- 1) proposed that
familiarity with an area is important to route direction production, since route
directions are created by drawing on an underlying spatial representation. The
current study supports this model: greater ability to retrace a newly learned route
(a measure of spatial representation ability) is significantly correlated with higher
quality route directions for a newly learned (e.g. unfamiliar) route. However, after
longer exposure to an environment, the spatial representation may become rich
enough that differing spatial abilities which originally created it are no longer the
most important factor. This is supported by the finding that route retracing
ability is not significantly correlated with the quality of route directions for a
familiar setting.
4.4 Future Directions .for Research
This research raises new questions about quality of route directions. One
question is whether route directions rated as higher quality are actually more
functional in getting people to their goals. That is, are the same elements of the
route directions important to raters and wayfinders when assessing quality?
Second, are functional measurements of quality (how well route directions
facilitate the wayfinding task) reliably related to the inclusion of certain elements?
This question expands the scope of the research from route direction production to
include route direction comprehension issues!
7 We are currently comparing functionality of good and poor directions for the
unfamiliar route to see if the raters appear to be using functional criteria.
for familiar and
ions, landmarks
with quality of
Ily the familiar
llality and quite
ice points were
Third, how might the elements necessary for achieving a 'high quality' set of
route directions be affected by changes in characteristics of the route itself? To
determine the generalizability of the current findings, it is important to test
whether the differences between the kind and frequency of elements included in
good route directions for familiar versus unfamiliar routes is stable across routes
of varying lengths, locations, complexity, etc. rather than idiosyncratic to the
routes chosen here and in previous studies. This seems a real possibility given
that none of the previous claims which were examined (e.g. density of landmarks
near end of route, length of 'best' route directions, and importance of landmarks
.not at choice points) were supported by the current data. One suggestion is to
create a number of widely varied routes using immersive or desktop virtual
environments. This would provide great freedom in designing routes to test
hypotheses such as the importance of constrained portions of routes to subsequent
route descriptions, although there will be some loss of ecological validity. The
use of both real and virtual environments can best inform a comprehensive
research program on route direction quality.
ience with the
ucing the route
ipants had used
te routes. They
ice points.
ar environment
In their case,
) turn at these
xposure. It is
l an unfamiliar
Itil much more
LS part of some
proposed that
In, since route
ientation. The
y learned route
ed with higher
However, after
y become rich
: no longer the
route retracing
.irections for a
ections. One
actually more
lements of the
ssing quality?
,ute directions
rain elements?
production to