SUSSEX-AST 95/8-3
FERMILAB-Pub-95/280-A
astro-ph/9508078
Reconstructing the Inﬂaton Potential — an Overview
James E. Lidsey1, Andrew R. Liddle2, Edward W. Kolb3,4, Edmund J. Copeland2,
Tiago Barreiro2 and Mark Abney4
1Astronomy Unit,
School of Mathematical Sciences,
Queen Mary and Westﬁeld College,
Mile End Road, London E1 4NS,
2Division of Physics and Astronomy,
University of Sussex,
Falmer, Brighton BN1 9QH,
3NASA/Fermilab Astrophysics Center,
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory,
Batavia, Illinois 60510,
4Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics,
Enrico Fermi Institute
University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637,
We review the relation between the inﬂationary potential and the spectra of density
(scalar) perturbations and gravitational waves (tensor perturbations) produced, with
particular emphasis on the possibility of reconstructing the inﬂaton potential from observations. The spectra provide a potentially powerful test of the inﬂationary hypothesis; they are not independent but instead are linked by consistency relations reﬂecting
their origin from a single inﬂationary potential. To lowest-order in a perturbation expansion there is a single, now familiar, relation between the tensor spectral index and
the relative amplitude of the spectra. We demonstrate that there is an inﬁnite hierarchy
of such consistency equations, though observational diﬃculties suggest only the ﬁrst is
ever likely to be useful. We also note that since observations are expected to yield much
better information on the scalars than on the tensors, it is likely to be the next-order
version of this consistency equation which will be appropriate, not the lowest-order
one. If inﬂation passes the consistency test, one can then conﬁdently use the remaining
observational information to constrain the inﬂationary potential, and we survey the general perturbative scheme for carrying out this procedure. Explicit expressions valid to
next-lowest order in the expansion are presented. We then brieﬂy assess the prospects
for future observations reaching the quality required, and consider simulated data sets
motivated by this outlook.
Introduction
Inﬂationary Cosmology and Scalar Fields
The fundamentals of inﬂationary cosmology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Scalar ﬁeld dynamics in inﬂationary cosmology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Quantum Generation of Perturbations
Qualitative discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Quantitative analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Scalar perturbations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gravitational waves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lowest-Order Reconstruction
The consistency equation and generic predictions of inﬂation
. . . . . . . .
Reconstructing the potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Next-Order Reconstruction
The consistency equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Reconstruction of the potential to next-order
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Perturbative Reconstruction Framework
A variety of expansions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The consistency equation hierarchy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Worked Examples of Reconstruction
Prospects for reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Toy model reconstructions with simulated data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
VIII Other Ways to Constrain the Potential
To the end of inﬂation and the area law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Local detection of primordial gravitational waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Primordial black holes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spectral distortions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Conclusions
Introduction
Observational cosmology is entering a new era where it is becoming possible to make detailed
quantitative tests of models of the early universe for the ﬁrst time.
Such observations
are presently the most plausible route towards learning some of the details of physics at
extremely high energies, and the possibility of testing some of the speculative ideas of recent
years has generated much excitement.
One of the most important paradigms in early universe cosmology is that of cosmological inﬂation, which postulates a period of accelerated expansion in the universe’s distant
past .
Although originally introduced as a possible
solution to a host of cosmological conundrums such as the horizon, ﬂatness and monopole
problems, by far the most useful property of inﬂation is that it generates spectra of both
density perturbations and gravitational waves . These extend from extremely short scales to scales considerably
in excess of the size of the observable universe.
During inﬂation the scale factor grows
quasi-exponentially, while the Hubble radius remains almost constant. Consequently the
wavelength of a quantum ﬂuctuation – either in the scalar ﬁeld whose potential energy
drives inﬂation or in the graviton ﬁeld – soon exceeds the Hubble radius. The amplitude
of the ﬂuctuation therefore becomes ‘frozen’. Once inﬂation has ended, however, the Hubble radius increases faster than the scale factor, so the ﬂuctuations eventually reenter the
Hubble radius during the radiation- or matter-dominated eras. The ﬂuctuations that exit
around 60 e-foldings or so before reheating reenter with physical wavelengths in the range
accessible to cosmological observations. These spectra provide a distinctive signature of
inﬂation. They can be measured in a variety of diﬀerent ways including the analysis of microwave background anisotropies, velocity ﬂows in the universe, clustering of galaxies and
the abundances of gravitationally bound objects of various types ; Liddle and Lyth ).
Until the measurement of large angle microwave background anisotropies by the COsmic
Background Explorer (COBE) satellite for a general discussion of the microwave
background), such observations covered a fairly limited range of scales, and it was satisfactory to treat the prediction of a generic inﬂationary scenario as giving rise to a scale-invariant
(Harrison–Zel’dovich) spectrum of density perturbations 
and a negligible amplitude of gravitational waves ). Since the detection by
COBE, however, the spectra are now constrained over a range of scales covering some four
orders of magnitude from one megaparsec up to perhaps ten thousand megaparsecs. Moreover, shortly after the COBE detection, a number of authors reexamined the possibility
that a signiﬁcant fraction of the signal could be due to gravitational waves .
Thus, the inﬂationary prediction must now be considered with much greater care, even
in order to deal with present observations. At the next level of accuracy, one ﬁnds that
diﬀerent inﬂation models make diﬀerent predictions for the spectra, which can be viewed
as diﬀering magnitudes of variation from the scale-invariant result. In the simplest approximation the spectra are taken to be power-laws. Hence, modern observations discriminate
between diﬀerent inﬂationary models, and are already suﬃcient to rule out some models
completely and substantially constrain the parameter space
of others . Future observations will make even stronger demands
on theoretical precision, and will certainly tightly constrain inﬂation.
These deviations from highly symmetric situations such as a scale-invariant spectrum
provide an extremely distinctive way of probing inﬂation. This is considerably more powerful than employing historically emphasised predictions such as a spatially ﬂat universe.
Although a spatially ﬂat universe is indeed a typical ; Bucher, Goldhaber, and Turok ) outcome of inﬂation, it appears unlikely that this feature will be unique to inﬂation. Moreover, the power that observations
such as microwave background anisotropies provides may be suﬃcient to override the rather
subjective arguments often made against inﬂation models because of their apparent ‘unnaturalness’. Regardless of whether a model appears natural or otherwise, it should be the
observations which decide whether it is correct or not.
In a wide range of inﬂationary models, the underlying dynamics is simply that of a
single scalar ﬁeld — the inﬂaton — rolling in some underlying potential. This scenario is
generically referred to as chaotic inﬂation in reference to its choice of
initial conditions. This picture is widely favored because of its simplicity and has received by
far the most attention to date. Furthermore, many superﬁcially more complicated models
can be rewritten in this framework. In view of this we shall concentrate on such a type of
model here.
The generation of spectra of density perturbations and gravitational waves has been
extensively investigated in these theories. The usual strategy is an expansion in the deviation from scale-invariance, formally expressed as the slow-roll expansion . At the simplest
level of approximation, the spectra can be expressed as power-laws in wavenumber; further
accuracy entails calculation of the deviations from this power-law approximation.
A crucial aspect of the two spectra is that they are not independent. In a general sense,
this is clear since they correspond at the formal level to two continuous functions that
both have an origin in the single continuous function expressing the scalar ﬁeld potential.
Such a link was noted in the simplest situation, where the spectra are approximated by
power-laws, by Liddle and Lyth ; the general situation where the two are linked
by a consistency equation was expounded in Copeland et al. ,
and an explicit higher-order version of the simplest equation was found by Copeland et al.
 . If one had complete expressions for the entire problem, the
consistency relation would be represented as a diﬀerential equation relating the two spectra.
However, we shall argue that it is preferable to express the spectra via an order-by-order
expansion. In this case one obtains a ﬁnite set of algebraic expressions which represent
the coeﬃcients of an expansion of the full diﬀerential equation.
The familiar situation
is a single consistency equation that relates the gravitational wave spectral index to the
relative amplitudes of the spectra.
This is a result of the lowest-order expansion.
general situation of multiple consistency equations does not seem to have been expounded
before, though a second consistency equation did appear in Kosowsky and Turner .
In practice, the observational diﬃculties associated with measurements of the details of the
gravitational wave spectrum make it extremely unlikely that any but the ﬁrst consistency
equation shall ever be needed.
Given a particular set of observations of some accuracy, one can attempt the bold task
of reconstructing the inﬂaton potential from the observations. In fact, the situation one
hopes for is stronger than a simple reconstruction, the language of which suggests the possibility of ﬁnding a suitable potential regardless of the observations. With suﬃciently good
observations, one can ﬁrst test whether the consistency equation is satisﬁed; in situations
where observations make this test non-trivial it provides a very convincing vindication of the
inﬂationary scenario. Thus emboldened, one could then go on to use the remaining, nondegenerate, information to constrain features of the inﬂaton potential. Figure 1 illustrates
this procedure schematically.
The main obstacle in reconstruction is the limited range of scales accessible. Although
the observations may span up to four orders of magnitude, the expansion of the universe
is usually so fast during inﬂation that this typically translates into only a brief range of
scalar ﬁeld values. One should therefore not overexaggerate the usefulness of this approach
in determining the detailed structure of physics at high energy, but one should bear in mind
that this may be the only observational information available of any kind at such energies.
A second obstacle is that one doesn’t observe the primordial spectra directly, but rather
after they have evolved considerably.
Although this is a linear problem (except on the
shortest scales) and hence computationally tractable, the evolution necessarily depends on
the various cosmological parameters, such as the expansion rate and the nature of any dark
matter. The form of the initial spectra must be untangled from their inﬂuence. We shall
discuss this in some detail in Section VII.
Earlier papers discuss two possible ways of treating observational data.
The bolder
strategy is to use estimates of the spectra as functions of scale . In practice, however, this approach founders
through the lack of theoretically derived exact expressions for the spectra produced by an
arbitrary potential. We shall therefore argue in this review in favor of the alternative approach, which is usually called perturbative reconstruction . In this approach, the
consistency equation and scalar potential are determined as an expansion about a given
point (regarded either as a single scale in the spectra or as a single point on the potential),
allowing reconstruction of a region of the potential about that point. This has the considerable advantage that one can terminate the series when either theoretical or observational
knowledge runs out.
The outline of this review is as follows. We devote two Sections to a review of the in-
ﬂation driven by a (slowly) rolling scalar ﬁeld. We begin by considering the classical scalar
ﬁeld dynamics and then proceed to discuss the generation of the spectra of density perturbations and gravitational waves. Because an accurate derivation of the predicted spectra is
crucial to this programme, we provide a detailed account of the most accurate calculation
presently available, due to Stewart and Lyth . In Section IV we consider the simplest possible scenario allowing reconstruction, and introduce the notion of the consistency
equation. Section V reviews the present state-of-the-art, where next–order corrections are
incorporated into all expressions. One hopes that observational accuracy will justify this
more detailed analysis, though this depends upon which (if any) inﬂation model proves
correct. Section VI then expands on this by describing the full perturbative reconstruction
framework, illustrating how much information can be obtained from which measurements
and demonstrating that one can write a hierarchy of consistency equations. We then brieﬂy
illustrate worked examples on simulated data in Section VII. Before concluding, we devote a
section to an examination of other proposals for constraining the inﬂaton potential, without
using large-scale structure observations.
Inﬂationary Cosmology and Scalar Fields
The fundamentals of inﬂationary cosmology
Observations indicate that the density distribution in the universe is nearly smooth on
large scales, but contains signiﬁcant irregularities on small scales. These correspond to a
hierarchy of structures including galaxies, clusters and superclusters of galaxies. One of
the most important questions that modern cosmology must address is why the observable
universe is almost, but not quite exactly, homogeneous and isotropic on suﬃciently large
The hot big bang model is able to explain the current expansion of the universe, the
primordial abundances of the light elements and the origin of the cosmic microwave background radiation; for a review of all these successes see Kolb and Turner . However,
this model as it stands is unable to explain the origin of structure in the universe. This
problem is related to the well known ﬂatness problem and is essentially a problem of initial data. It arises because the entropy in the universe is so large,
S ≈1088 . One expects this quantity to be of order unity since
it is a dimensionless constant.
This paradox can be made more quantitative in the following way. The dynamics of a
Friedmann–Robertson–Walker (FRW) universe containing matter with density ρ and pressure p is determined by the Einstein acceleration equation
the Friedmann equation
and the mass conservation equation
˙ρ + 3H(ρ + p) = 0,
where a(t) is the scale factor of the universe, H ≡˙a/a is the Hubble expansion parameter,
a dot denotes diﬀerentiation with respect to cosmic time t, mPl is the Planck mass and
k = 0, −1, +1 for spatially ﬂat, open, or closed cosmologies, respectively. Units are chosen
such that c = ¯h = 1.
The Friedmann equation (2.2) may be expressed in terms of the Ω–parameter. This
parameter is deﬁned as the ratio of the energy density of the universe to the critical energy
density ρc that is just suﬃcient to halt the current expansion:
The current observational values for these parameters are ρc = 1.88h2 × 10−29
and H0 = 100h km s−1 Mpc−1 where conservatively we have 0.4 ≤h ≤0.8. Eq. (2.2)
simpliﬁes to
and this implies that
Now, for a radiation–dominated universe, the equation of state is given by ρ = 3p =
π2gρT 4/30 at some temperature T, where gρ = O(102) represents the total number of
relativistic degrees of freedom in the matter sector at that time.
Thus the scale factor
grows as a(t) ∝t1/2 when k = 0 and the expansion rate is given by
H = 1.66g1/2
Eq. (2.7) yields the useful expression
and substituting Eqs. (2.7) and (2.8) into Eq. (2.6) implies that
where S ≈1088 is the entropy contained within the present horizon. The large amount of
entropy in the universe therefore implies that Ωmust have been very close to unity at early
times. Indeed, we ﬁnd that Ω= 1 ± 10−16 just one second after the big bang, the time of
nucleosynthesis.
The ﬂatness problem is therefore a problem of understanding why the (classical) initial
conditions corresponded to a universe that was so close to spatial ﬂatness.
In a sense,
the problem is one of ﬁne–tuning and although such a balance is possible in principle, one
nevertheless feels that it is unlikely. On the other hand, the ﬂatness problem arises because
the entropy in a comoving volume is conserved. It is possible, therefore, that the problem
could be resolved if the cosmic expansion was non–adiabatic for some ﬁnite time interval
t ∈[ti, tf] during the early history of the universe.
This point was made explicitly by Guth in his seminal paper of 1981. He postulated
that the entropy changed by an amount
during this time interval, where Z is a numerical factor. In Guth’s original model, this
entropy production occurred at, or just below, the energy scale TGUT = O(1017) GeV
associated with the Grand Uniﬁed (GUT) phase transition. This corresponds to a timescale
t ≈10−40 s. Eq. (2.9) then implies that the ﬂatness problem is solved, in the sense that
−1| = O(1), if Z ≥1028. It can be shown that the other problems of the big bang
model, such as the horizon and monopole problems are also solved if Z satisﬁes this lower
bound .
Guth called this process of entropy production inﬂation, because the volume of the
universe also grows by the factor Z3 between t = ti and t = tf. Indeed, the expansion of
the universe during the inﬂationary epoch is very rapid. Further insight into the nature of
this expansion may be gained by considering Eq. (2.6). This expression implies that the
quantity (Ω−1 −1)ρa2 is conserved for an arbitrary equation of state. It follows, therefore,
i ρi = 
−1| ≈10−56ρfa2
Since our current observations imply that |Ω−1
−1| = O(1), the ﬂatness problem is solved
i . However, Eq. (2.2) implies that the quantity 3˙a2 −(8π/m2
Pl)ρa2 is also
conserved. Consequently, this inequality is satisﬁed if ˙af > ˙ai. Thus, a necessary condition
for inﬂation to proceed is that the scale factor of the universe accelerates with respect to
cosmic time:
¨a(t) > 0 .
This is in contrast to the decelerating expansion that arises in the big bang model.
The question now arises as to the nature of the energy source that drives this accelerated
expansion. It follows from Eq. (2.1) that Eq. (2.13) is satisﬁed if ρ + 3p < 0 and this is
equivalent to violating the strong energy condition . The simplest
way to achieve such an antigravitational eﬀect is by the presence of a homogeneous scalar
ﬁeld, φ, with some self–interaction potential V (φ) ≥0. In the FRW universe, such a ﬁeld
is equivalent to a perfect ﬂuid with energy density and pressure given by
˙φ2 + V (φ)
˙φ2 −V (φ) ,
respectively. Other matter ﬁelds play a negligible role in the evolution during the inﬂation,
so their presence will be ignored. In this case, Eqs. (2.2) and (2.3) are given by
˙φ2 + V (φ)
¨φ + 3H ˙φ = −V ′(φ),
where here and throughout a prime denotes diﬀerentiation with respect to φ. Hence, −ρ ≤
p ≤ρ and we have the inﬂationary requirement ¨a > 0 as long as ˙φ2 < V . Inﬂation is thus
achieved when the matter sector of the theory applicable at some stage in the early universe
is dominated by vacuum energy.
Recently, an alternative inﬂationary scenario — the pre–big bang cosmology — has been
developed whereby the accelerated expansion is driven by the kinetic energy of a scalar ﬁeld
rather than its potential energy . If the ﬁeld is
non–minimally coupled to gravity in an appropriate fashion, this kinetic energy can produce
a suﬃciently negative pressure and a violation of the strong energy condition .
Such couplings arise naturally within the context of the
string eﬀective action. However, models of this sort inherently suﬀer from a ‘graceful exit’
problem due to the existence of singularities in both the curvature and the scalar ﬁeld motion
 .
Moreover, a satisfactory mechanism for generating
structure formation and microwave background anisotropies in these models has yet to be
developed, although it is possible that such inhomogeneities may be generated by quantum
ﬂuctuations in the electromagnetic ﬁeld .
In view of this, we shall restrict our discussion to potential-driven models.
focus in this work on some of the general features of the chaotic inﬂation scenario . Although Linde’s original paper considered a speciﬁc potential (a quartic
one), the theme was much more general. We adopt the modern usage of chaotic inﬂation
to refer to any model where inﬂation is driven by a single scalar ﬁeld slow-rolling from
a regime of extremely high potential energy. The phrase does not imply any particular
choice of potential. Most, though not quite all, modern inﬂationary models fall under the
umbrella of this deﬁnition. Since the precise identity of the scalar ﬁeld driving the inﬂation
is unknown, it is usually referred to as the inﬂaton ﬁeld.
In the chaotic inﬂation scenario, it is assumed that the universe emerged from a quantum
gravitational state with an energy density comparable to that of the Planck density. This
implies that V (φ) ≈m4
Pl and results in a large friction term in the Friedmann equation
(2.16). Consequently, the inﬂaton will slowly roll down its potential, i.e., |¨φ| ≪H| ˙φ| and
˙φ2 ≪V . The condition for inﬂation is therefore satisﬁed and the scale factor grows as
a(t) = ai exp
The expansion is quasi–exponential in nature, since H(φ) ≈8πV (φ)/3m2
Pl is almost constant, and the curvature term k/a2 in Eq. (2.16) is therefore rapidly redshifted away. The
kinetic energy of the inﬂaton gradually increases as it rolls down the potential towards the
global minimum. Eventually, its kinetic energy dominates over the potential energy and
inﬂation comes to an end when ˙φ2 ≈V (φ). The ﬁeld then oscillates rapidly about the
minimum and the couplings of φ to other matter ﬁelds then become important. It is these
oscillations that result in particle production and a reheating of the universe.
The simplest chaotic inﬂation model is that of a free ﬁeld with a quadratic potential,
V (φ) = m2φ2/2, where m represents the mass of the inﬂaton. During inﬂation the scale
factor grows as
a(t) = aie2π(φ2
and inﬂation ends when φ = O(1) mPl. If inﬂation begins when V (φi) ≈m4
Pl, the scale factor
grows by a factor exp(4πm2
Pl/m2) before the inﬂaton reaches the minimum of its potential
 . One can further show that the mass of the ﬁeld should be m ≈10−6mPl
if the microwave background constraints are to be satisﬁed. This implies that the volume
of the universe will increase by a factor of Z3 ≈103×1012 and this is more than enough
inﬂation to solve the problems of the hot big bang model.
It is important to emphasize that in this scenario the initial value of the scalar ﬁeld is
randomly distributed in diﬀerent regions of the universe. On the other hand, one need only
assume that a small, causally connected, region of the pre–inﬂationary universe becomes
dominated by the potential energy of the inﬂaton ﬁeld. Indeed, if the original domain is
only one Planck length in extent, its ﬁnal size will be of the order 101012 cm; for comparison,
the size of the observable universe is approximately 1028 cm.
In conclusion, therefore, the chaotic inﬂationary scenario represents a powerful framework within which speciﬁc inﬂationary models can be discussed. The essential features of
each model — such as the ﬁnal reheat temperature and the amplitude of scalar and tensor
ﬂuctuations — are determined by the speciﬁc form of the potential function V (φ). This in
turn is determined by the particle physics sector of the theory.
Unfortunately, however, there is currently much theoretical uncertainty in the correct
form of the uniﬁed ﬁeld theory above the electroweak scale. This has resulted in the development of a large number of diﬀerent inﬂationary scenarios and the identity of the inﬂaton
ﬁeld is therefore somewhat uncertain. Possible candidates include the Higgs bosons of grand
uniﬁed theories, the extra degrees of freedom associated with higher metric derivatives in
extensions to general relativity, the dilaton ﬁeld of string theory and, more generally, the
time–varying gravitational coupling that arises in scalar–tensor theories of gravity.
It is not the purpose of this review to discuss the relative merits of diﬀerent models, since
this has been done elsewhere . Traditionally, a speciﬁc potential with a given set of coupling constants
is chosen. The theoretical predictions of the model are then compared with large–scale
structure observations. The region of parameter space consistent with such observations
may then be identiﬁed . However, it is diﬃcult to select a unique
inﬂationary model by this procedure due to the large number of plausible models available.
In view of the above uncertainties and motivated by recent and forthcoming advances in
observational cosmology, our aim will be to address the question of whether direct insight
into the nature of the inﬂaton potential may be gained by studying the large–scale structure
of the universe. We therefore assume nothing about the potential except that it leads to an
epoch of inﬂationary expansion.
We will proceed in the remainder of this Section by reviewing a formalism that allows
the classical dynamics of the scalar ﬁeld during inﬂation to be studied in full generality.
This formalism may then be employed to discuss the generation of quantum ﬂuctuations in
the inﬂaton and gravitational ﬁelds.
Scalar ﬁeld dynamics in inﬂationary cosmology
In view of the discussion in the previous Subsection, we will assume throughout this work
that the universe was dominated during inﬂation by a single scalar ﬁeld φ with a self-
interaction potential V (φ), the form of which it is our aim to determine. We shall further
assume that gravity is adequately described by Einstein’s theory of general relativity. We
shall therefore employ the four-dimensional action
2 (∇φ)2 + V (φ)
where R is the Ricci curvature scalar of the space–time with metric gµν and g ≡detgµν.
Actually, these restrictions are not as strong as they seem. For example, even theories
such as hybrid inﬂation, which feature multiple scalar ﬁelds, are usually dynamically dominated by only one degree of freedom . Many other models invoke extensions to general
relativity, and much eﬀort has been devoted to studying inﬂation in the Bergmann-Wagoner
class of generalized scalar-tensor theories and higherorder pure gravity theories in which the Einstein-Hilbert lagrangian is replaced with some
analytic function f(R) of the Ricci curvature. Such theories can normally be rewritten via
a conformal transformation as general relativity plus one or more scalar ﬁelds, again with
the possibility that only one such ﬁeld is dynamically relevant .
We are unable to discuss models where more than one ﬁeld is dynamically important
in the reconstruction context. While considerable progress has been made recently in understanding the perturbation spectra from these models , the extra freedom of the second ﬁeld thwarts any attempt at ﬁnding a unique
reconstruction, though it is possible to ﬁnd some general inequalities relating the spectra
 . These problems arise both because there is no longer a unique
trajectory, independent of initial conditions, into the minimum of the potential, and because with a second ﬁeld one can generate isocurvature perturbations as well as adiabatic
ones. Fortunately, it appears that it is hard, though not impossible, to keep models of this
kind consistent with observation, as the density perturbations tend to be large whatever
the energy scale of inﬂation . A completely different way of using two ﬁelds is to drive successive periods of inﬂation, as in the double
inﬂation scenario . This can impose very
sharp features in the spectra which, although rather distinctive, are not amenable to the
perturbative approach that reconstruction requires.
As we saw above, the accelerated expansion during inﬂation causes the spatial hypersurfaces to rapidly tend towards ﬂatness. Moreover, any initial anisotropies and inhomogeneities in the universe are washed away beyond currently observable scales by the rapid
expansion. Since only the ﬁnal stages of the accelerated expansion are important from an
observational point of view, we can assume that the space-time metric may be described as
a spatially ﬂat FRW metric, given by
ds2 = L2(t)dt2 −e2α(t)[dx2 + dy2 + dz2] ,
where L(t) represents the lapse function and a(t) = eα(t) is the scale factor of the universe.
By taking this metric, we prevent ourselves from studying reconstruction in the recently
discovered versions of inﬂation giving an open universe . In fact
these models have not yet been developed suﬃciently to provide the information we need
— in particular the gravitational wave spectrum has not been predicted — and the generalization of the reconstruction program to these models must await further developments.
Our analysis will however apply in full to low-density cosmological models where the
spatial geometry is kept ﬂat by the introduction of a cosmological constant (or similar mechanism). Our discussion is entirely focussed on the initial spectra, which are independent
of the material composition of the universe at late times. Of course, in such a cosmology
the details of going between these spectra and actual observables will be changed, and the
impact of this on reconstruction has been studied by Turner and White .
Substitution of the metric ansatz Eq. (2.21) into the theory given by Eq. (2.20) leads to
an Arnowitt, Deser and Misner (ADM) action of the form
R d3x is the comoving volume of the universe and a dot denotes diﬀerentiation
with respect to t. Without loss of generality we may normalize the comoving volume to
In recent years, considerable progress in the treatment of scalar ﬁelds within the environment of the very early universe has been made. The approach we adopt in this work
is to view the scalar ﬁeld itself as the dynamical variable of the system . This allows
the Einstein-scalar ﬁeld equations to be written as a set of ﬁrst-order, non-linear diﬀerential
equations.
The Hamiltonian constraint H = 0 is derived by functionally diﬀerentiating the action
Eq. (2.22) with respect to the non-dynamical lapse function. One arrives at the Hamilton-
Jacobi equation
+ 2e6αV (φ) = 0 ,
where the momenta conjugate to α and φ are pα = ∂S/∂α = −3m2
Ple3α ˙α/4πL and pφ =
∂S/∂φ = e3α ˙φ/L, respectively.
This equation follows from the invariance of the theory
under reparametrizations of time. The classical dynamics of this model is determined by
the real, separable solution
4π e3αH(φ) ,
where H(φ) satisﬁes the diﬀerential equation 
H2(φ) = −32π2
In the gauge L = 1, substitution of ansatz Eq. (2.24) into the expressions for the conjugate
momenta implies that
Thus, H(φ) represents the Hubble expansion parameter expressed as a function of the
scalar ﬁeld φ. It follows immediately from the second of these expressions that ˙H < 0.
Consequently, the physical Hubble radius H−1 increases with time as the inﬂaton ﬁeld
rolls down its potential. The Hubble radius can only remain constant if the inﬂaton ﬁeld
is trapped in a meta-stable false vacuum state; this is forbidden in the context of ‘old’
inﬂation as it can never successfully escape this state, but may be possible in the context
of single-bubble open inﬂationary models which are outside the scope of this paper .
The solution to Eq. (2.25) depends on an initial condition, the value of H at some initial
φ . If we are to obtain unique results, the late-time evolution
(that is, the evolution during which the perturbations we see are generated) of H in terms
of the scalar ﬁeld must be independent of the initial condition chosen, and fortunately one
can easily show that this is the case ; the
late-time behavior is governed by an inﬂationary ‘attractor’ solution, which is approached
exponentially quickly during inﬂation.
The Hamilton–Jacobi formalism we have outlined is equivalent to the more familiar
version of the equations of motion given by Eqs. (2.16) and (2.17) (for k = 0). Eq. (2.25)
is equivalent to the time–time component of the Einstein ﬁeld equations and therefore
represents the Friedmann equation (2.16). In the form given by Eqs. (2.16) and (2.17), ˙φ
is an initial condition at some value of t; in the Hamilton-Jacobi formalism the equivalent
freedom allows one to specify H at some initial value of φ.
The above analysis of the Hamilton–Jacobi formalism assumes implicitly that the value
of the scalar ﬁeld is a monotonically varying function of cosmic time. In particular, it breaks
down if the ﬁeld undergoes oscillations (though one can attempt to patch together separate
solutions). As a result, this formalism is not directly suitable for investigating the dynamics
of a ﬁeld undergoing oscillations in a minimum of the potential, for example. However, the
scalar and tensor ﬂuctuations relevant to large-scale structure observations are generated
when the ﬁeld is still some distance away from the potential minimum. Moreover, the piece
of the potential corresponding to these scales is relatively small, so it is reasonable to assume
that the potential is a smoothly decreasing function in this regime. The scalar ﬁeld will
therefore roll down this part of the potential in an unambiguous fashion. In the following,
we will assume, without loss of generality, that ˙φ > 0, so that H′(φ) < 0. This choice allows
us to ﬁx the sign of any prefactors that arise when square roots appear.
In principle, the Hamilton–Jacobi formalism enables us to treat the dynamical evolution
of the scalar ﬁeld exactly, at least at the classical level. In practice, however, the separated
Hamilton-Jacobi equation, Eq. (2.25), is rather diﬃcult to solve. On the other hand, the
analysis can proceed straightforwardly once the functional form of the expansion parameter
H(φ) has been determined. This suggests that one should view H(φ) as the fundamental
quantity in the analysis . This is in contrast to the more traditional
approaches to inﬂationary cosmology, whereby the particle physics sector of the model —
as deﬁned by the speciﬁc form of the inﬂaton potential V (φ) — is regarded as the input
parameter. In the reconstruction procedure, however, the aim is to determine this quantity
from observations, so one is free to choose other quantities instead. It proves convenient to
express the scalar and tensor perturbation spectra in terms of H(φ) and its derivatives.
Unfortunately, exact expressions for these perturbations have not yet been derived in full
generality. All calculations to date have employed some variation of the so-called ‘slow-roll’
approximation . It is important to emphasize that there are two diﬀerent versions
of the slow-roll approximation, with their attendant slow-roll parameters ǫ, η, etc, depending
on whether one is taking the potential or the Hubble parameter as the fundamental quantity
— the diﬀerences are described in considerable detail in Liddle et al. . Here we are
deﬁning them in terms of the Hubble parameter.
We represent the slow-roll approximation as an expansion in terms of quantities derived
from appropriate derivatives of the Hubble expansion parameter. Since at a given point each
derivative is independent, there are in general an inﬁnite number of these terms. Typically,
however, only the ﬁrst few enter into any expressions of interest. We deﬁne the ﬁrst three
ǫ(φ) ≡3 ˙φ2
H(φ) = ǫ −mPl ǫ′
H′(φ)H′′′(φ)
One need not be concerned as to the sign of the square root in the deﬁnition of ξ; it turns
out that only ξ2, and not ξ itself, will appear in our formulae . We
emphasize that the choice ˙φ > 0 implies that √ǫ = −
Pl/4π H′/H.
Modulo a constant of proportionality, ǫ measures the relative contribution of the ﬁeld’s
kinetic energy to its total energy density. The quantity η, on the other hand, measures
the ratio of the ﬁeld’s acceleration relative to the friction acting on it due to the expansion
of the universe. The slow-roll approximation applies when these parameters are small in
comparison to unity, i. e. {ǫ, |η|, ξ} ≪1; this corresponds to being able to neglect the ﬁrst
term in Eq. (2.25) and its ﬁrst few derivatives. Inﬂation proceeds when the scale factor
accelerates, ¨a > 0, and this is precisely equivalent to the condition ǫ < 1. Inﬂation ends
once ǫ exceeds unity.
It is interesting that the conditions leading to a violation of the
strong energy condition are uniquely determined by the magnitude of ǫ alone. In principle,
inﬂation can still proceed if |η| or |ξ| are much larger than unity, though normally such
values would drive a rapid variation of ǫ and bring about a swift end to inﬂation.
1Note that the deﬁnition of the third parameter is diﬀerent to that made in CKLL2, ξCKLL2 =
Pl/4π)H′′′/H′.
The two are related by ξ2 = ǫξCKLL2.
The former deﬁnition has proven awkward;
because of the derivative on the denominator it need not be small in the scale-invariant limit (though the
combination √ǫξCKLL2 must be). We choose to use this better deﬁnition, as introduced by Liddle et al.
 who give further details and a collection of useful formulae.
For speciﬁc results, we shall not go beyond these three parameters. However, in general
one can deﬁne a full hierarchy of slow-roll parameters :
−d ln H(i)
(H′)n−1 H(n+1)
where β1 ≡η, β2 ≡ξ, etc, and a superscript (m) indicates the m-th derivative with respect
to φ. The ǫ parameter has to be deﬁned separately, though it may be referred to as β0.
These slow-roll parameters, along with analogues deﬁned in terms of the potential, can
be used as the basis for a slow-roll expansion to derive arbitrarily accurate solutions given
a particular choice of potential. However, this formalism is not necessary when making
general statements about inﬂation without demanding a speciﬁc potential.
The amount of inﬂationary expansion within a given timescale is most easily parametrized in terms of the number of e-foldings that occur as the scalar ﬁeld rolls from a particular
value φ to its value φe when inﬂation ends:
N(φ, φe) ≡
H(t)dt = −4π
Thus, with the help of Eq. (2.31), we may relate the value of the scale factor a(φ) = eα(φ)
at any given epoch during inﬂation directly to the value of the scale factor at the end of
inﬂation, ae:
a(φ) = ae exp[−N(φ)] .
An extremely useful formula is that which connects the two epochs at which a given
scale equals the Hubble radius, the ﬁrst during inﬂation when the scale crosses outside and
the second much nearer the present when the scale crosses inside again. A comoving scale
k crosses outside the Hubble radius at a time which is N(k) e-foldings from the end of
inﬂation, where
N(k) = 62 −ln
−ln 1016GeV
+ ln V 1/4
3 ln V 1/4
The subscript ‘0’ indicates present values; the subscript ‘k’ speciﬁes the value when the
wave number k crosses the Hubble radius during inﬂation (k = aH); the subscript ‘end’
speciﬁes the value at the end of inﬂation; and ρreh is the energy density of the universe
after reheating to the standard hot big bang evolution.
This calculation assumes that
instantaneous transitions occur between regimes, and that during reheating the universe
behaves as if matter-dominated.
It is fairly standard to make a generic assumption about the number of e-foldings before
the end of inﬂation at which the scale presently equal to the Hubble radius crossed outside
during inﬂation; most commonly one sees this number taken as either 50 or 60. Within the
context of making predictions from a given potential this can have a slight eﬀect on results,
but it is completely unimportant as regards reconstruction.
What we do need for reconstruction is a measure of how rapidly scales pass outside
the Hubble-radius as compared to the evolution of the scalar ﬁeld; this is essential for
calculating such quantities as the spectral indices of scalar and tensor perturbations. The
formal deﬁnition we take of a scale matching the Hubble radius is that k = aH. Then one
k(φ) = aeH(φ) exp[−N(φ)] ,
where N(φ) is given by Eq. (2.31). Diﬀerentiating with respect to φ therefore yields
H′ (ǫ −1) .
This concludes our discussion on the classical dynamics of the scalar ﬁeld during in-
ﬂation. In the following Section, we will proceed to discuss the consequences of quantum
ﬂuctuations that arise in both the inﬂaton and graviton ﬁelds.
The Quantum Generation of Perturbations
During inﬂation, the inﬂaton and graviton ﬁelds undergo quantum-mechanical ﬂuctuations.
The most important observational consequences of the inﬂationary scenario derive from the
signiﬁcant eﬀects these perturbations may have on the large-scale structure of the universe
at the present epoch. In this Section we shall discuss how these ﬂuctuations arise and present
expressions for their expected amplitudes. Since the inﬂaton and gravitational perturbations
are produced in a similar fashion, we shall begin with a qualitative description of the eﬀects
of the former. We shall then proceed with an extensive account of the calculation of both
spectra by Stewart and Lyth , which is the most accurate analytic treatment presently
available.
Qualitative discussion
Fluctuations in the inﬂaton ﬁeld lead to a stochastic spectrum of density (scalar) perturbations . Physically, these arise because the inﬂaton ﬁeld reaches the global minimum of its potential at diﬀerent times in diﬀerent places in the universe. This results in
a time shift in how quickly the rollover occurs. Thus, constant δρ does not correspond to
a constant-time hypersurface; in other words, there is a density distribution produced by
the kinetic energy of the inﬂaton ﬁeld for a given constant-time hypersurface. It is widely
thought that these density perturbations result in the formation of large-scale structure in
the universe via the process of gravitational instability. They may also be responsible for
anisotropic structure in the temperature distribution of the cosmic microwave background
radiation.
Typically, the inﬂationary scenario predicts that the spectrum of density perturbations
should be gaussian and scale-dependent. This is certainly true for the class of models that
we shall be considering here, in which it is assumed that the inﬂaton ﬁeld is weakly coupled.
However, one should bear in mind that the prediction of gaussianity is not generic to all
inﬂationary models; it is possible to contrive models with nongaussian perturbations by
introducing features in just the right part of the inﬂationary potential .
The historical viewpoint on the scale-dependence of the ﬂuctuations was that they were
of scale-invariant (Harrison–Zel’dovich) form, though it had been recognized that the scaleinvariance was only approximate .
This is because the scalar ﬁeld must be undergoing some kind of evolution if inﬂation is to
end eventually, and this injects a scale-dependence into the spectra. As we shall see, this
eﬀect should be easy to measure.
To take advantage of accurate observations, it is imperative that the spectra be calculated as accurately as possible. However, let us ﬁrst make a qualitative discussion of the
generation mechanism.
In a spatially ﬂat, isotropic and homogeneous universe, the Hubble radius, H−1(t),
represents the scale beyond which causal processes cannot operate. The relative size of a
given scale to this quantity is of crucial importance for understanding how the primordial
spectrum of ﬂuctuations is generated. Quantities such as the power spectrum are deﬁned
via a Fourier expansion as functions of comoving wavenumber k, and the combination k/aH
appears in many equations. Diﬀerent physical behavior occurs depending on whether this
quantity is much greater or smaller than unity.
Inﬂation is deﬁned as an epoch during which the scale factor accelerates, and so the
comoving Hubble radius, (aH)−1, must necessarily decrease. This is an important feature
of the inﬂationary scenario, because it means that physical scales will grow more rapidly
than the Hubble radius. As a result, a given mode will start within the Hubble radius. In
this regime the expansion is negligible and the microphysics in operation at that epoch will
therefore be relevant. This is determined by the usual ﬂat-space quantum ﬁeld theory for
which the vacuum state of the scalar ﬁeld ﬂuctuations is well understood. As the inﬂationary
expansion proceeds, however, the mode grows much more rapidly than the Hubble radius
(in physical coordinates) and soon passes outside it. One can utilize a Heisenberg picture
of quantum theory to say that the operators obey the classical equations of motion, and
so the evolution of the vacuum state can be followed until it crosses outside the Hubble
radius. At this point the microphysics eﬀectively becomes ‘frozen’. It turns out that the
asymptotic state is not a zero-particle state — particles are created by the gravitational
ﬁeld. Corresponding perturbations in the gravitational ﬁeld itself are also generated, so a
spectrum of gravitational wave (tensor) ﬂuctuations is independently produced by the same
mechanism.
Once inﬂation is over, the comoving Hubble radius begins to grow. Eventually, therefore,
the mode in question is able to come back inside the Hubble radius some time after inﬂation.
The overall result is that perturbations arising from ﬂuctuations in the inﬂaton ﬁeld can be
imprinted onto a given length scale during the inﬂationary epoch when that scale ﬁrst leaves
the Hubble radius. These will be preserved whilst the mode is beyond the Hubble radius
and will therefore be present when the scale re-enters during the radiation-dominated or
matter-dominated eras.
Quantitative analysis
If one is to take full advantage of the observations to the extent one hopes, it is crucial
to have extremely accurate predictions for the spectra induced by diﬀerent inﬂationary
models. For example, microwave background theorists have set themselves the stringent
goal of calculating the radiation angular power spectrum (the Cl discussed later in this
paper) to within one percent , in the hope that satellite observations may
one day provide extremely accurate measurements of the anisotropies across a wide range of
angular scales . This involves a detailed treatment with a
host of subtle physical eﬀects. If inﬂationary models are to capitalize on this sort of accuracy,
it is essential to have as accurate a determination as possible of the initial spectra which
are to be input into such calculations. Given that the slow-roll parameters are typically at
least a few percent, that implies that a determination of the spectra to at least one order
beyond leading order in the slow-roll expansion is desired.
The calculations we make are based on linear perturbation theory. Since the observed
anisotropies are small, this approximation is considerably more accurate than the slow-roll
approximation, and we need not attempt to go beyond it, though it is possible to extend
calculations beyond linear perturbation theory .
Before proceeding, however, let us clarify a notational point. In earlier literature, especially CKLL2 and Liddle and Turner , orders were referred to as ﬁrst-order, secondorder etc.
However, we feel this can be misleading, because it might suggest that all
terms containing say two slow-roll parameters in any given expression are supposed to be
neglected. This is not the intention, because in many expressions the lowest-order term
already contains one or more powers of the slow-roll parameters. Because diﬀerentiation
respects the order-by-order expansion, while multiplying each term by a slow-roll parameter, it is always valid to take terms to the same number of orders, however many slow-roll
parameters the actual terms possess. Therefore, in order to clarify the meaning, we choose
to always employ the phrase lowest-order to indicate the term containing the least number
of powers of the slow-roll parameters, however many that may be for a speciﬁc expression.
The phrase next-to-lowest order, abbreviated to next-order, then indicates correction terms
to this which contain one further power of the slow-roll parameters than the lowest-order
The calculation of the spectra to next-order has been provided by Stewart and Lyth
 . Because of its crucial importance, we shall devote quite some time to describing
it. The basic principle is to start with the one known situation where the spectra can be
calculated exactly, that of power-law inﬂation. This corresponds to each of the slow-roll
parameters having the same constant value. To next-order, a general inﬂationary potential
can be considered via an expansion in (ǫ −η) about a power-law inﬂation model with the
same ǫ; as we shall see, it is an adequate approximation to treat ǫ and η as diﬀerent constant
In fact, the logic we develop is slightly diﬀerent to that of Stewart and Lyth . They
computed an exact solution for the situation where ǫ and η are treated as exactly constant
with diﬀerent values. Formally, this situation does not exist as ǫ precisely constant implies
ǫ = η. They then treated power-law inﬂation as an exact special case of this situation, and
a general inﬂation model to next-order as an expansion about their more general result.
Logically, it is more accurate to expand directly about the exact power-law inﬂation result,
but nevertheless the ﬁnal answer is guaranteed to be the same.
Scalar perturbations
Throughout the calculations to derive the spectra of scalar and tensor ﬂuctuations, the
space-time representing our universe is decoupled into two components, representing the
background and perturbation contributions. The background part is taken to be the homogeneous and isotropic FRW metric. This is a reasonable assumption to make in view of the
high degree of spatial uniformity in the temperature of the cosmic microwave background.
In this paper we assume the background is also spatially ﬂat with a line element given by
Eq. (2.21). The perturbed sector of the metric then determines by how much the actual
universe deviates from this idealization.
Four quantities are required to specify the general nature of a scalar perturbation.
These may be denoted by A, B, Ψ and E and these are functions of the space and time
coordinates. It has been shown by Bardeen and by Kodama and Sasaki that
the most general form of the line element for the background and scalar metric perturbations
is given by
ds2 = a2(τ)
(1 + 2A)dτ 2 −2∂iBdxidτ −[(1 −2Ψ)δij + 2∂i∂jE] dxidxji
R dt/a(t) is conformal time.
The perturbations can be measured by the intrinsic curvature perturbation of the comoving hypersurfaces, which has the form
during inﬂation, where δφ represents the ﬂuctuation of the inﬂaton ﬁeld and ˙φ and H are
calculated from the background ﬁeld equations Eqs. (2.25)-(2.26). To proceed, we follow
Mukhanov, Feldman and Brandenberger and introduce the gauge-invariant potential
It also proves convenient to introduce the variable
and it follows immediately that
The evolution of the perturbations is determined by the Einstein action.
The ﬁrstorder perturbation equations of motion are given by a second-order action.
Hence, the
gravitational and matter sectors are separated and each expanded to second-order in the
perturbations. The result for the gravitational component is simpliﬁed by employing the
ADM form of the action . The
action for the matter perturbations, on the other hand, can be calculated by expanding the
Lagrangian as a Taylor series about a ﬁxed value of the scalar ﬁeld, applying the background
ﬁeld equations and integrating by parts. Mukhanov et al. show that the full action
for linear scalar perturbations is given by
(∂τu)2 −δij∂iu∂ju + zττ
where a subscript τ denotes partial diﬀerentiation with respect to conformal time.
further details the reader is referred to Mukhanov and Makino and Sasaki .
Formally, this is equivalent to the action for a scalar ﬁeld in ﬂat space-time with a
time-dependent eﬀective mass m2 = −zττ/z. This equivalence implies that one can consider the quantum theory in an analogous fashion to that of a scalar ﬁeld propagating on
Minkowski space-time in the presence of a time-varying external ﬁeld . The time-dependence has its origin in the variation of the background
space-time .
The momentum canonical to u is given by
∂(uτ) = uτ(τ, x) ,
and the theory is then quantized by promoting u and its conjugate momentum to operators
that satisfy the following commutation relations on the τ = constant hypersurfaces:
[ˆu(τ, x), ˆu(τ, y)] = [ˆπ(τ, x), ˆπ(τ, y)] = 0 ,
[ˆu(τ, x), ˆπ(τ, y)] = iδ(3)(x −y) .
We expand the operator ˆu(τ, x) in terms of plane waves
ˆu(τ, x) =
uk(τ)ˆakeik.x + u∗
and the ﬁeld equation for the coeﬃcients uk is derived by setting the variation of the action
Eq. (3.6) with respect to u equal to zero. It is given by 
These modes are normalized so that they satisfy the Wronskian condition
and this condition ensures that the creation and annihilation operators ˆa†
k and ˆak satisfy
the usual commutation relations for bosons:
[ˆak, ˆal] = [ˆa†
l] = δ(3)(k −l) .
The vacuum is therefore deﬁned as the state that is annihilated by all the ˆak, i. e., ˆak|0⟩= 0.
The modes uk(τ) must have the correct form at very short distances so that ordinary
ﬂat space-time quantum ﬁeld theory is reproduced. Thus, in the limit that k/aH →∞,
the modes should approach plane waves of the form
In the opposite (long wavelength) regime where k can be neglected in Eq. (3.11), we see
immediately that the growing mode solution is
with no dependence on the behavior of the scale factor (except insofar as implicitly through
the deﬁnition of z).
Ultimately, the quantity in which we are interested is the curvature perturbation R. We
expand this in a Fourier series
(2π)3/2 Rk(τ)eik.x .
The power spectrum PR(k) can then be deﬁned in terms of the vacuum expectation value
k3 PRδ(3)(k −l) ,
where the prefactor is in a sense arbitrary but is chosen to obey the usual Fourier conventions. The left-hand side of this expression may be evaluated by combining Eqs. (3.5),
(3.13) and (3.16):
z2 |uk|2δ(3)(k −l) ,
For modes well outside the horizon, the growing mode of uk will dominate and so the
spectrum will approach a constant value. It is this value that we are aiming to calculate.
In order to provide a solution, we need an expression for zττ/z. This can be straightforwardly obtained as
dτ 2 = 2a2H2
2η + ǫ2 −2ǫη + 1
and despite its appearance as an expansion in slow-roll parameters, this expression is exact.
Exact solution for power-law inﬂation
So far, all the expressions we have written down have been exact. However, we have
reached the limit of analytic progress for general circumstances. The desired situation then
is to obtain an exact solution for some special case, about which a general expansion can be
applied in terms of the slow-roll parameters. Such an exact solution is the case of power-law
inﬂation, which we now derive2.
Power-law inﬂation, where the scale factor expands as a(t) ∝tp, corresponds to the
particularly simple case where the Hubble parameter is exponential in φ :
It follows that the slow-roll parameters are not only constant but equal; we are primarily
interested in
ǫ = η = ξ = 1
With a constant ǫ, an integration by parts
supplies the conformal time as
Thus, τ is negative during inﬂation, with τ = 0 corresponding to the inﬁnite future.
Since the slow-roll parameters in Eq. (3.20) are constant, Eq. (3.11) simpliﬁes to a Bessel
equation of the form
dτ 2 + k2 −(ν2 −1
The appropriately normalized solution with the correct asymptotic behavior at small scales
is therefore given by3
2 ei(ν+1/2)π/2(−τ)1/2H(1)
where H(1)
is the Hankel function of the ﬁrst kind of order ν.
Ultimately, we are interested in the asymptotic form of the solution once the mode is
well outside the horizon. Taking the limit k/aH →0 yields the asymptotic form
uk →ei(ν−1/2)π/22ν−3/2 Γ(ν)
(−kτ)−ν+1/2 ,
and substituting this into Eq. (3.19) gives the asymptotic form of the power spectrum
R (k) = 2ν−1/2 Γ(ν)
Γ(3/2)(ν −1/2)1/2−ν
2It is at this point that our construction of the expansion begins to diﬀer in logical construction from
Stewart and Lyth , though the ﬁnal result will agree.
3The choice of phase factor ensures that the behavior described by Eq. (3.14) is reproduced at short
scales, and the factor of √π/2 implies that condition Eq. (3.12) is satisﬁed.
where we have employed Eq. (3.24) to substitute for kτ. A subtle point is that, despite the
appearance of this equation, the calculated value for the spectrum is not the value when the
scale crosses outside the Hubble radius. Rather, it is the asymptotic value as k/aH →0,
but rewritten in terms of the values which quantities had at Hubble radius crossing.
This exact expression for the asymptotic power spectrum was ﬁrst derived in an earlier
paper by Lyth and Stewart . It is one of only two known exact solutions, and is the
only one for a realistic inﬂationary scenario. The other known exact solution, found by
Easther , arises in an artiﬁcial model designed to permit exact solution, and while of
theoretical interest is excluded by observations.
Slow-roll expansion for general potentials
Having obtained an exact solution, we can now make an expansion about it. The powerlaw inﬂation case corresponded to the slow-roll parameters being equal, and hence exactly
constant; we now wish to allow them to be diﬀerent which means they will pick up a time
dependence.
At this stage, there is no need to require that the parameter ǫ be small, for the exact
solution exists for all ǫ < 1. However, the deviation of all higher slow-roll parameters from
ǫ must indeed be small, since the diﬀerences vanish for the exact solution. Let us label the
ﬁrst of these as ζ = ǫ −η. There are in general an inﬁnite number of such small parameters
in the expansion but we shall only need this one.
The ﬁrst step is to ﬁnd a more general equation for τ. By integrating by parts in the
manner of Eq. (3.23) an inﬁnite number of times, one can obtain
aH + expansion in slow-roll parameters ζ etc. ,
where ǫ can now have arbitrary time dependence. This is all very well, but even via an
expansion in small ζ one cannot analytically solve Eq. (3.11) for a general time-dependent ǫ;
we must resort to a situation where aHτ can be taken as constant for each k-mode (though
not necessarily the same constant for diﬀerent k). The relevant equation to study is the
exact relation
˙ǫ/H = 2ǫζ .
What we are aiming to do is to shift the time dependence of ǫ to next-order in the expansion,
so that it can be neglected. This is achieved by assuming that ǫ is a small parameter as well
as ζ (that is, that both ǫ and η are small), in which case one can expand to lowest-order to
aH (1 + ǫ) .
We will return to the question of the error in assuming constant ǫ shortly.
Having this expression for τ, we can now immediately use Eq. (3.20), which must also
be truncated to ﬁrst-order. This gives the same Bessel equation Eq. (3.25), but now with ν
2 + 2ǫ −η .
The assumption that treats ǫ as constant also allows η to be taken as constant, but crucially,
ǫ and η need no longer be the same since we are consistent to ﬁrst-order in their diﬀerence.
The diﬀerences between further slow-roll parameters and ǫ lead to higher order eﬀects, and
so incorporating ǫ and η in this manner is applicable to an arbitrary inﬂaton potential to
next-order. The same solution Eq. (3.29) can be used with the new form of ν, but for
consistency it should be expanded to the same order. This gives the ﬁnal answer, which is
true for general inﬂation potentials to this order, of 
R (k) = [1 −(2C + 1)ǫ + Cη]
where C = −2 + ln 2 + γ ≃−0.73 is a numerical constant, γ being the Euler constant
originating in the expansion of the Gamma function. Since the slow-roll parameters are to
be treated as constant, they can also be evaluated at horizon crossing.
Let us now return to the question of the error in assuming ǫ is constant. The crucial
aspect is that the variation of ǫ is only important around k = aH. In either of the two
extreme regimes the evolution of uk (in relation to z) is independent of it (Eqs. (3.14)
and (3.15)). Assuming the variation of ǫ is only important for some unspeciﬁed but ﬁnite
number of e-foldings, Eq. (3.31) measures that change (per e-folding). As long as we are
assuming ǫ small as well as ζ, that change is next-order and can be neglected along with all
the other next-order terms we did not attempt to include.
Finally, one can see from the complexity of this calculation the obstacles to obtaining
general expressions which go to yet another higher order. This would involve ﬁnding some
way of solving the Bessel-like equation in the situation where its coeﬃcients could not be
treated as constant.
This concludes our discussion on the generation of scalar perturbations during inﬂation. In the remainder of this Section we will present the analogous result for the tensor
ﬂuctuations.
Gravitational waves
The propagation of weak gravitational waves on the FRW background was investigated by
Lifshitz . Quantum ﬂuctuations in the gravitational ﬁeld are generated in a similar
fashion to that of the scalar perturbations discussed above. A gravitational wave may be
viewed as a ripple in the background space-time metric Eq. (2.21) and in general the linear
tensor perturbations may be written as gµν = a2(τ)[ηµν + hµν], where |hµν| ≪1 denotes
the metric perturbation and ηµν is the ﬂat space-time metric . In the transverse-traceless gauge, we have h00 = h0i = ∂ihij = δijhij = 0,
and there are two independent polarization states . These are usually
denoted as λ = +, ×.
The gravitons are the propagating modes associated with these two states. The classical
dynamics of the gravitational waves is determined by expanding the Einstein-Hilbert action
to quadratic order in hµν and it can be shown that this action takes the form 
dτd3xa2(τ)∂µhij∂µhij .
It proves convenient to introduce the rescaled variable
P ij(x) ≡(m2
Pl/32π)1/2a(τ)hij(x) ,
and substitution of this expression into the action Eq. (3.35) implies that
where we have ignored a total derivative. This expression resembles the equivalent action
Eq. (3.6) for the scalar perturbations. Indeed, we may interpret Eq. (3.37) as the action
for two scalar ﬁelds in Minkowski space-time each with an eﬀective mass squared given by
aττ/a. This equivalence between the two actions implies that the procedure for quantizing
the tensor ﬂuctuations is essentially the same as in the scalar case.
We perform a Fourier decomposition of the gravitational waves by expanding P ij:
(2π)3/2 vk,λ(τ)ǫij(k; λ)eik.x .
In this expression ǫij(k; λ) is the polarization tensor and satisﬁes the conditions ǫij = ǫji,
ǫii = 0, kiǫij = 0 and ǫij(k, λ)ǫij∗(k, λ′) = δλλ′. The analysis is further simpliﬁed if we
choose ǫij(−k, λ) = ǫ∗
ij(k, λ), since this ensures that vk,λ = v∗
−k,λ. We may consider each
polarization state separately. The eﬀective graviton action during inﬂation therefore takes
(∂τ |vk,λ|)2 −
We quantize by interpreting vk,λ(τ) as the operator
ˆvk,λ(η) = vk(η)ˆak,λ + v∗
where the modes vk satisfy the normalization condition Eq. (3.12) and have the form given
by Eq. (3.14) as aH/k →0. This ensures that the creation and annihilation operators
l,σ] = δλσδ(3)(k −l),
and the spectrum of gravitational waves Pg(k) is then deﬁned by
k3 Pgδ(3)(k −l) .
The ﬁeld equation for uk, derived by varying the action Eq. (3.39), is
and the scale factor term can be written as
dτ 2 = 2a2H2
This puts us in a very similar situation to that for the density perturbations. The situation is
simpliﬁed since a appears directly in the equation of motion rather than z, but the strategy
is exactly the same.
For power-law inﬂation we can again solve exactly by writing
For power-law inﬂation ν and µ coincide, though in general they do not. The appropriate
solution for vk is given by Eq. (3.27), as before, after replacing ν with µ. It follows, therefore,
√π 2µ−1/2 Γ(µ)
Γ(3/2)(µ −1/2)1/2−µ
where Pg has been multiplied by a factor of 2 to account for the two polarization states.
This exact solution was ﬁrst obtained by Abbott and Wise and we note that for
power-law inﬂation
√p = 4√ǫ .
The ﬁnal step is to carry out the expansion in the same way as in the scalar case to
yield the slow-roll expression for the tensor spectrum. This gives
(k) = [1 −(C + 1)ǫ] 4
Lowest-Order Reconstruction
In the previous section we discussed the derivation of expressions for the two initial spectra
, which were accurate to next-order in the slow-roll parameters.
proceeding, let’s relate our notation to other notations that the reader may be familiar
with, which concern the present-day spectra. In order to derive these, one needs the transfer
functions T(k) and Tg(k) for both scalars and tensors respectively, which describe the suppression of growth on scale k relative
to the inﬁnite wavelength mode.
The transfer functions in general depend on a whole
range of cosmological parameters, as discussed later. The present-day spectrum of density
perturbations, denoted P(k), is given by
2π2 P(k) =
T 2(k) PR(k) ,
whle the energy density (per octave) in gravitational waves is
g (k) Pg(k) .
These expressions apply to a critical density universe; for models with a cosmological constant they require generalization . Note though that in the
following Sections, we shall always be working with (rescaled versions of) the initial spectra,
and not with the present-day spectra.
In this Section, we shall concentrate on the lowest-order situation, where all expressions
are truncated at the lowest-order. This is not equivalent to assuming that ǫ and η are zero,
for in some expressions, such as the spectral indices, the lowest-order terms contain ǫ and
η, as we shall see. This approximation can be regarded as being extremely useful for the
present state of observations. However, optimistically one hopes that future observations,
particularly satellite-based high resolution microwave background anisotropy observations,
will require a higher degree of accuracy as discussed in Section V.
The consistency equation and generic predictions of inﬂation
In the forthcoming analysis it will prove convenient to work with rescaled expressions for the
spectra P1/2
which we will use throughout the rest of the paper. To lowest-order
The speciﬁc choice of normalizations is arbitrary4.
The above choice ensures that AS
coincides precisely with the quantity δH as deﬁned by Liddle and Lyth ).
This parameter may be viewed as the density contrast at Hubble-radius-crossing.
normalization for the tensor spectrum is then chosen so that to lowest-order ǫ = A2
During inﬂation the scalar ﬁeld slowly rolls down its self-interaction potential.
causes the Hubble parameter to vary as a function of cosmic time and therefore with respect
to the scale at Hubble-radius crossing.
The expressions for the perturbations therefore
acquire a dependence on scale and it is conventional to express this variation in terms of
spectral indices. In general, these indices are themselves functions of scale and there appear
to be two ways in which they may be deﬁned. In the ﬁrst case, one may simply write the
power spectra as
T (k) = A2
4We remark that these expressions have diﬀerent prefactors to those contained in our original papers,
CKLL1 and CKLL2; while one normalization is as valid as any other, the normalizations chosen in those
papers were atypical of the literature. Those used here conform more readily with the conventions employed
in the existing literature and in particular with the Stewart and Lyth calculation.
In fact, the
numerical diﬀerence is only 0.3%. The ratio of the tensor and scalar amplitudes is unaﬀected by this change.
Although these deﬁnitions are completely general, they do require a speciﬁc choice of k0 to
be made. This feature implies that the deﬁnitions are non-local, a considerable drawback.
A more suitable alternative is to deﬁne the spectral indices diﬀerentially via
We shall adopt this second choice in this work. The two deﬁnitions coincide for power-law
spectra, where the indices are constant. In general, however, they are inequivalent.
At the level of approximation we are considering in this Section, the spectral indices
may be expressed directly in terms of the slow-roll parameters ǫ and η. One calculates the
ﬁrst derivatives of the amplitudes from Eqs. (4.3) and (4.4) with respect to φ and converts
to derivatives with respect to wavenumber with the help of Eq. (2.35). It is straightforward
to show that
The conventional statement attached to these expressions is that inﬂation predicts spectra which to the presently desired accuracy can be approximated as power-laws; that is,
that the slow-roll parameters can be treated as constants. While this statement is formally
correct, it requires some discussion. In particular it is important to realize that the powerlaw approximation has no direct connection to the slow-roll approximation, but rather is a
statement that the relevant observations cover only a limited range of scale and do so with
limited accuracy. As far as the derivations of the spectra are concerned, the approximation
is that for each scale the parameters can be treated as constant while that scale crosses
outside the Hubble radius. However, in this ‘adiabatic’ approximation, there is no need
for those constant values to remain the same from scale to scale. Thus, the expressions
for the spectra can be applied across the complete range of scales. Although they are an
approximation at each scale, the approximation does not deteriorate when one attempts to
study a wider range of scales. The feature that dictates whether the spectra can be treated
as power-laws is that the range of scales over which observations can be made is quite small,
in terms of the range of φ values, and taking additional derivatives of the spectra introduces
into the lowest-order result an extra power in the slow-roll parameters. For example, although diﬀerentiating Eq. (4.8) gives the correct lowest-order expression for dn/d ln k, this
will be of order ǫ2 and hence a small eﬀect over the short range of scales large-scale structure
samples. Were large-scale structure able to sample, for example, scales encompassing twenty
orders of magnitude rather than four, the approximation by power-law would be liable to
break down for typical inﬂation models. With high accuracy observations, the power-law
approximation represented by these lowest-order expressions may prove inadequate even
over the short range of accessible scales.
We emphasize that the spectral indices do not have to satisfy the exact power-law result
n −1 = nT at this level of approximation.
Each spectrum is uniquely speciﬁed by its
amplitude and spectral index. The overall amplitude is a free parameter determined by
the normalization of the expansion rate H during inﬂation (or equivalently the scalar ﬁeld
potential V ). On the other hand, the relative amplitude of the two spectra is given by
Thus, there exists a simple relationship between the relative amplitude and the tensor
spectral index:
This is the lowest-order consistency equation and represents an extremely distinctive signature of inﬂationary models. It is diﬃcult to conceive of such a relation occurring via any
other mechanism for the generation of the spectra.
Since it is possible for the spectra to have diﬀerent indices, the assumption that their
ratio is ﬁxed can be true only for a limited range of scales, but the correction enters at a
higher order in the slow-roll parameters.
This expression is often written in a slightly diﬀerent form in order to bring the right
hand side closer to observations. Since the spectra can be deﬁned with arbitrary prefactors,
they themselves have no deﬁnite signiﬁcance. The environment in which each spectrum
may have an eﬀect that allows direct comparison is in large angle microwave background
anisotropies. In this case the scalar and tensor ﬂuctuations each contribute independently
to the expected value of the microwave multipoles, Cl (deﬁned and discussed in more detail
in Section VII), and in the approximation where only the Sachs-Wolfe term is included
and perfect matter–domination at last scattering assumed, this enables one to write the
lowest-order consistency equation as 
= −6.2nT .
This equation applies for moderate values of l corresponding to scales that are suﬃciently
small for the curvature of the last scattering surface to be negligible and yet are large enough
to be well above the Hubble radius at decoupling5.
Eqs. (4.8), (4.9) and (4.10) contain all the information one requires to determine the
generic behavior of inﬂationary models at this order. Moreover, the current status of observational data is such that they are suﬃcient to allow a reasonable degree of precision to be
attained in the study of large-scale structure and microwave background anisotropies. In
the forthcoming years, however, data quality will inevitably improve and a higher degree
of accuracy in the theoretical calculations will therefore be required. Indeed, high precision
microwave anisotropy experiments are likely to be the ﬁrst type of observation demanding
just such an improvement in accuracy.
5The exact number in this relation is sometimes written in diﬀerent ways. It was ﬁrst evaluated exactly
as 25(1 + 48π2/385)/9 in the scale-invariant limit by Starobinsky . This is numerically equal to 6.2.
There is no regime where this strictly holds, as corrections from the ‘Doppler’ peak and from the Universe
being not perfectly matter dominated at last scattering intervene before the asymptote is reached. Other
authors evaluate only part of the expression to approximate it as 2π, or even 6. Finally, many authors
consider the ratio of contributions to the quadrupole l = 2. In this case there is a geometrical correction
from the curvature of the last scattering surface which make the factor close to 7.
In the next Section we shall show how these improvements may be implemented. For
the purposes of our present discussion, however, there are only two input parameters that
need to be determined before one can proceed to investigate inﬂation-inspired models of
structure formation .
The key points are that (a) the density
perturbation spectrum has a power-law form and that (b) some fraction of the large angle
microwave anisotropies might be due to gravitational waves. These conditions represent two
completely independent parameters, but fortunately, they are the only two new parameters
one requires in the lowest-order approximation. This is true even though one has complete
freedom in choosing the functional form of the underlying inﬂationary potential. A large
number of papers have now investigated the implications of these inﬂationary parameters
for structure formation models such as Cold Dark Matter and Mixed Dark Matter models.
Some only consider the possibility of tilt and some also allow for gravitational
waves .
One can classify the generic behavior of all inﬂationary models consistent with the
lowest-order approximation into six separate categories, as summarized in Table 1. Each
sector is characterized by the direction of the tilt away from scale invariant density perturbations and by the relative amplitude of the gravitational waves. In general, spectra with
n > 1 increase the short-scale power of the density perturbation spectrum. Such spectra
were named blue spectra by Mollerach et al. . Conversely, those spectra with n < 1
subtract short scale power6.
It is a general feature of inﬂation that n < 1 is easier to
produce than n > 1. The reason for this follows from the deﬁnition Eq. (4.8) for the scalar
spectral index. To lowest-order, a necessary and suﬃcient condition for the spectrum to be
blue is simply that η > 2ǫ. Since ǫ is positive by deﬁnition, this condition is not easy to
satisfy and this is particularly so during the ﬁnal stages of inﬂation where ǫ must necessarily
begin to approach unity. However, speciﬁc inﬂation models have been constructed for each
possibility, with the exception of a blue spectrum accompanied by a large gravitational
wave amplitude. This last possibility, while still technically possible, is particularly hard to
realize because it requires a large ǫ overpowered by a yet larger η.
Reconstructing the potential
In CKLL1 we developed a framework initiated by Hodges and Blumenthal that
one might call functional reconstruction. In this approach one views the observations as
determining the spectra explicitly as functions of scale. Hodges and Blumenthal 
considered only scalar perturbations, and then Grishchuk and Solokhin made an
investigation, considering only the tensors, with the aim of determining the time evolution
of the Hubble parameter. In CKLL1, we provided a uniﬁed treatment of both scalars and
tensors. The ultimate aim of such a procedure is to then process the functions through
the diﬀerential equations describing the evolution of the universe during inﬂation.
thereby determines the potential driving inﬂation as a function of the scalar ﬁeld. If such
a procedure could be carried out exactly, the quantities in the consistency equation would
also be functions of scale.
An important point worth emphasising here is that only by including the tensors can a
6We resist calling them red since the usual deﬁnition of red spectra is n < 0, not n < 1.
full reconstruction be achieved. The scalar perturbations only determine the potential up
to an unknown constant. As the underlying equations are non-linear, diﬀerent choices of
the constant lead not just to a rescaling of the potential but to an entirely new functional
form. Thus, there are many potentials which lead to the same scalar spectrum, and hence
no unique reconstruction of the potential from the scalar spectrum. Any piece of knowledge
concerning the tensors is enough to break this degeneracy.
From a practical point of view, one ﬁnds that the functional reconstruction procedure is
not very useful, although it does allow some theoretical insight to be gained. The reason is
that exact formulae for the amplitudes of the spectra do not exist for an arbitrary inﬂaton
potential.
Consequently, even though the classical dynamics of the scalar ﬁeld can be
accounted for exactly, one must input the information on the spectra using results that
depend directly on the slow-roll expansion. At some level, it is inconsistent to treat the
dynamics exactly and the perturbations approximately, so formally one should truncate
both at the same order of approximation. Indeed, the next-order calculations we provide
in the following Section show that this joint truncation is indeed preferable. In general,
the next-order correction to the magnitude of the potential arising from the spectra has an
opposite sign and is slightly larger than the correction to the dynamics. In eﬀect, therefore,
an exact treatment of the dynamics actually leads to a less accurate answer than that
obtained by treating the entire problem to lowest-order in slow-roll!
We therefore advocate an alternative approach that may be referred to as perturbative
reconstruction. The fundamental idea behind perturbative reconstruction follows directly
from the fact that the scalar ﬁeld must roll suﬃciently slowly down its potential if inﬂation
is to proceed at all.
This is important for the following reason.
Typically, the modes
that ultimately lead to observational eﬀects within our universe ﬁrst crossed the Hubble
radius somewhere between 50 and 60 e-foldings before inﬂation came to an end.
precise number of e-foldings depends on the ﬁnal reheating temperature, but this does
not aﬀect the general features of the argument). During these 10 e-foldings of inﬂationary
expansion, the change in the value of the inﬂaton ﬁeld is typically small. In eﬀect, therefore,
the position of the ﬁeld in the potential would have remained essentially ﬁxed at some
speciﬁc value φ0.
It follows, that cosmological and astrophysical observations can only
yield information regarding this small segment of the potential. Hence, it is consistent to
expand the underlying inﬂationary potential as a Taylor series about the point φ0. The
use of such a procedure to lowest-order was suggested by Turner , Copeland et al.
 and CKLL1. Turner then included a next-order term in the potential.
The formalism was then developed fully to next-order in CKLL2, including a next-order
term in the derivatives as well as the potential and outlining the framework for the general
expansion. This framework was recast into a more observationally-based language by Liddle
and Turner who further discussed the meaning of the order-by-order expansion.
Perturbative reconstruction can be performed in a controlled way using the slow-roll
expansion order-by-order. The dynamics can be treated to arbitrary order in this expansion
by employing the formalism developed by Liddle et al. . In contrast, however, the
treatment of perturbations is presently available only to next-order. In this case there seems
no obvious framework by which one can establish an order-by-order expansion, and even
just obtaining terms to one higher order is a very diﬃcult task.
Modulo questions of convergence, the perturbative reconstruction procedure successfully
encodes functional reconstruction in the sense that perturbative reconstruction performed
to inﬁnite order is formally equivalent to functional reconstruction. Perturbative reconstruction can also be rewritten as an expansion in the observed spectra. The advantage of
considering an expansion of this type is that it indicates exactly how the features in the
observed spectra yield information on the inﬂationary potential. Such an explicit account
of the observational expansion has not been given before.
Before launching into speciﬁc calculation, however, it will be helpful to identify each
observable quantity with some order in the slow-roll expansion.
This may be achieved
by considering which slow-roll parameters occur in the lowest-order term. Thus, one may
employ the lowest-order expressions for the spectra. One sees by direct diﬀerentiation that
the information associated with the accumulation of observables is as follows: H gives A2
ǫ gives A2
S and nT , η gives n and dnT /d ln k, ξ gives dn/d ln k and d2nT/d ln k2, and so on.
The key feature is that the tensor spectrum always remains one step above the scalar one.
Furthermore, we shall see that an additional derivative of the Hubble parameter for each
order is required to obtain a higher order expression for each observable.
We shall now proceed to derive expressions for the potential and its ﬁrst two derivatives
correct to lowest-order in the slow-roll expansion. We consider the Taylor series
V (φ) = V (φ0) + V ′(φ0)∆φ + 1
2V ′′(φ0)∆φ2 + · · · ,
about the point φ0. At this order, the Hamilton-Jacobi equation (2.25) reduces to V (φ) =
PlH2(φ)/8π, so the derivatives in this expansion may be expressed directly in terms of
the slow-roll parameters from Eqs. (2.27) and (2.28). It is only consistent to expand the
potential to quadratic order, because the third derivative will contain terms that are of
the same order as terms that were neglected in the original expressions for the amplitudes.
In other words, the lowest-order expressions do not permit any higher derivatives to be
It follows by direct substitution, therefore, that Eq. (4.13) may be written as
V (φ) = 3m2
1 −(16πǫ0)1/2 ∆φ
+ 4π(ǫ0 + η0)(∆φ)2
where a subscript 0 implies that quantities are to be evaluated at φ = φ0.
represents the expansion rate when the scale corresponding to this value of the scalar ﬁeld
ﬁrst crossed the Hubble radius during inﬂation.
We write the coeﬃcients that arise in this expansion in terms of the spectra by employing
the expressions Eqs. (4.3) and (4.4) for the amplitudes, the deﬁnition Eq. (4.8) for the scalar
spectral index and the deﬁnitions of the slow-roll parameters. We ﬁnd that
where k0 is the scale at which the amplitude and spectral indices are determined and n0
is the scalar spectral index at k0. As already implied by Eq. (4.8), if n exceeds one the
potential must be convex (V ′′ > 0) at the point being probed. However, n being less than
one says nothing deﬁnite about convexity or concavity.
Perturbative reconstruction can be possible even if it ultimately transpires that the observations necessary to test the consistency equation non-trivially cannot acquire suﬃcient
accuracy. Similar work on reconstruction to this level of approximation has been done by
Adams and Freese , Mielke and Schunck and Mangano, Miele, and Stornaiolo
However, it is clear that a determination of the gravitational wave amplitude on at least
one scale is essential for the reconstruction program to work. Presently, such a quantity has
not been directly determined, but we may nevertheless draw some interesting conclusions
from the above calculation. In particular, there are a number of limiting cases to Eq. (4.14)
that are of interest. Firstly, when ǫ = η, Eq. (4.14) is the expansion for the exponential
potential V ∝exp(−
16πǫ φ/mPl). (Without loss of generality we may perform a linear
translation on the value of the scalar ﬁeld such that φ0 = 0). Secondly, the potential has
1 + 2π(n −1)φ2/m2
in the limiting case where ǫ ≪1. This class of potentials produces a negligible amount of
gravitational waves, but a tilted scalar perturbation spectrum. The tilt arises because the
curvature of the potential is signiﬁcant. The direction of the tilt, as determined by the sign
of (n −1), depends on whether the eﬀective mass of the inﬂaton ﬁeld is real or imaginary.
The dynamics of inﬂation driven by a potential of the form Eq. (4.18) for n > 1 has an
interesting property. The kinetic energy of the inﬂaton ﬁeld is determined from H′(φ) via
the second expression in Eq. (2.26). As the ﬁeld rolls down the potential towards φ = 0,
H′ gradually decreases whilst H tends towards a positive constant. Hence, the ﬁeld slows
down as it approaches the minimum, but it loses kinetic energy in such a way that it can
never reach the minimum in a ﬁnite time. Hence, the de Sitter universe is a stable attractor
for this model and consequently the inﬂationary expansion can never end.
There are two ways of circumventing this diﬃculty.
Firstly, one can argue that the
potential only resembles Eq. (4.18) over the small region corresponding to cosmological
scales. This is rather unsatisfactory, however, since it requires ad-hoc ﬁne-tuning of the
potential and therefore goes against the overall spirit of inﬂation. A much more plausible
suggestion is that the ﬁrst term of Eq. (4.18) arises because a second scalar ﬁeld is being held
captive in a false vacuum state. This is the case, for example, in Linde’s Hybrid Inﬂation
scenario , and an associated instability can end
We end this section by quoting formulae appropriate to the situation where one is given
the potential and must calculate the predicted spectra; in general, one cannot analytically
ﬁnd the H(φ) corresponding to a given V (φ). In order to obtain the spectra, one uses
the Friedmann equation Eq. (2.25) and its derivatives in combination with the slow-roll
approximation. To lowest-order, the spectral indices were ﬁrst given by Liddle and Lyth
 , and are
−6ǫV + 2ηV ,
are slow-roll parameters deﬁned from the potential and diﬀer slightly from the deﬁnitions
made in terms of the Hubble parameter used in the rest of this paper for more details). It is also possible to write down next-order expressions for the
spectral indices in terms of the potential .
Expressions such as these written in terms of the potential only make sense because of the
existence of the inﬂationary attractor.
Next-Order Reconstruction
The level of accuracy discussed in the previous Section, while perfectly adequate at present,
is unlikely to be suﬃcient once high resolution microwave background anisotropy experiments are carried out.
The theoretical benchmark for calculating the radiation power
spectrum from a matter power spectrum has been set at one percent in order to cope with
such observations . If inﬂation is to take advantage of this level of accuracy,
it is vital that the initial power spectrum can be considered to at least a similar level of
accuracy. At the very least, this will require the next-order expressions for the spectra,
which represent the highest level of accuracy presently achieved.
For many potentials, the next-order corrections may be small, perhaps smaller than
the likely observational errors on the lowest-order terms. We shall see this in the simulated
example later in this paper. In such a case the next-order calculation is still useful, because it
serves as an estimate of the theoretical error bar on the calculation, which can be contrasted
with the observational error.
We devote this Section to describing the next-order results in detail.
The consistency equations
Let’s ﬁrst consider the next-order version of the lowest-order consistency equation Eq. (4.11).
The best available calculations of the perturbation spectra are those by Stewart and Lyth
 containing the next-order, which we reviewed extensively in Section III. To this
order, the amplitudes for the scalar and tensor ﬂuctuations are given by
[1 −(2C + 1)ǫ + Cη] H2
5√π [1 −(C + 1)ǫ] H
respectively, where we choose the same normalizations for AS and AT as in Section IV. We
recall that C ≃−0.73 is a constant. Once again, the right-hand sides of these expressions
are to be evaluated when the scale in question crosses the Hubble radius during inﬂation.
Throughout the remainder of this Section we shall be quoting results that feature a
leading term and a correction term, the next-order term, which is one order higher in the
slow-roll parameters. We shall utilize the symbol “≃” to indicate this level of accuracy.
The correction terms shall be placed in square brackets, so the lowest-order equations can
always be obtained by setting the square brackets equal to unity, except in Eqs. (5.3) and
(5.20) where it needs to be set to zero.
To next-order, the scalar and tensor spectral indices may be expressed in terms of
the ﬁrst three slow-roll parameters by diﬀerentiating Eqs. (5.1) and (5.2) with respect to
wavenumber k and employing Eq. (2.35). Some straightforward algebra yields 
8(C + 1)ǫ2 −(6 + 10C)ǫη + 2Cξ2i
−2ǫ [1 + (3 + 2C)ǫ −2(1 + C)η] .
A very useful relationship may be derived by considering the ratio of the tensor and
scalar amplitudes and replacing the derivative of the Hubble expansion rate with ǫ. We ﬁnd
[1 −2C(ǫ −η)] .
This relationship is the next-order generalization of Eq. (4.10). It plays a central role in
deriving the next-order expressions for the potential and its ﬁrst two derivatives in terms
of observables. Moreover, substitution of this expression into Eq. (5.4) implies that
[1 + 3ǫ −2η] .
Now, since all the quantities in the square brackets of this expression are accompanied
by a lowest-order prefactor, they may be converted into observables by applying the lowestorder expressions Eqs. (4.8) and (4.10). We conclude, therefore, that
This is the next-order version of the lowest-order consistency equation nT = −2A2
given ﬁrst in CKLL2 and translated into more observational language by Liddle and Turner
 . It is interesting to remark that the corrections entering at next-order depend only on
the relative amplitudes of the spectra and on n. They do not depend on nT or on any of the
derivatives of the indices, because they can be consistently removed using the lowest-order
version of the same equation. This has an important consequence that has only been implicit
in the literature thus far. We anticipate that n will be considerably easier to measure than
nT . It is reasonable to suppose, therefore, that if one has enough observational information
to test the lowest-order consistency equation, one will also have suﬃcient data to test the
next-order version as well. In other words, the situation where only the quantities in the
lowest-order consistency equation are known is unlikely to arise. Consequently, one should
employ the next-order consistency equation when testing the inﬂationary scenario, rather
than the more familiar version given by Eqs. (4.11) or (4.12).
Another new feature of extending the observables to allow reconstruction at this order
is that one has an entirely new consistency equation, being the lowest-order version of the
derivative of the original consistency equation. One calculates dnT /d ln k by diﬀerentiating
Eq. (5.4) with respect to scale k and employing Eqs. (2.27) and (2.35). One ﬁnds that
d ln k ≃−4ǫ(ǫ −η) .
Conversion of this expression into observables follows immediately by substituting in the
lowest-order results Eqs. (4.8) and (4.10), giving
d ln k ≃2A2
This equation was derived by Kosowsky and Turner , though they did not explicitly
recognize it as a new consistency equation. Unfortunately, the observables appearing in the
above expression are far from promising as regards using it.
Reconstruction of the potential to next-order
Now that we have discussed the formalism necessary for calculating the dynamics and
perturbation spectra up to next-order in the slow-roll expansion, we shall proceed to consider
the reconstruction of the inﬂationary potential at this improved level of approximation.
We begin by deriving expressions for the potential and its derivatives directly from the
ﬁeld equation Eq. (2.25) and the deﬁnitions Eqs. (2.27) – (2.29) for the slow-roll parameters.
Successive diﬀerentiation of Eq. (2.25) with respect to the scalar ﬁeld yields the exact
V ′ = −mPlH2
4π ǫ1/2(3 −η) ,
V ′′ = H2 
3ǫ + 3η −(η2 + ξ2)
Our immediate aim is to consider these expressions at a single point φ0 and rewrite them
in terms of observable quantities. The amplitude of the potential is derived by substituting
Eqs. (5.2) and (5.5) into Eq. (5.10):
1 + 0.21A2
At this stage, it is interesting to consider how this result would be altered if one treated
the scalar ﬁeld dynamics in full generality rather than truncating at next-order. It follows
from the general expression Eq. (5.10) for the potential that the numerical factor on the
next-order term in the last expression of Eq. (5.13) would become −1/3. What this means
is that the next-order correction to the potential that is due to the spectra dominates the
dynamical corrections. This is true for all inﬂationary models. Since the sign of the spectral
correction is opposite to that of the dynamical ones, the overall sign of the correction is
Since the potential’s ﬁrst derivative contains η, we need information regarding the value
of the scalar spectral index at k0 if we are to obtain V ′(φ). We replace the H2 term in
Eq. (5.11) by substituting the tensor amplitude Eq. (5.2) and collecting together the terms
containing {ǫ, η} to linear order. These may then be written in terms of the spectra via the
lowest-order expressions Eqs. (4.8) and (4.11). The result is
AS(k0) [1 + (C + 2)ǫ + (C −1/3)η] ,
AS(k0) [1 + 1.27ǫ −1.06η] ,
S(k0) + 0.53(1 −n0)
The calculation for V ′′(φ0) is much more involved.
A new observable is needed to
determine ξ; the easiest example being the rate of change of the scalar spectral index. This
will be substantially harder to measure, though, and it is fortunate that it only enters at
next-order. (However, it would enter at leading order in V ′′′(φ0), as mentioned in CKLL2
and derived fully in Liddle and Turner ). We can obtain the next-order correction
to V ′′(φ0) directly in terms of the slow-roll parameters by employing Eqs. (5.2) and (5.12).
We ﬁnd that
V ′′(φ0) ≃75π
T (k0) (ǫ + η)
1 + (2C + 2)ǫ −1
To proceed, we must convert the prefactor (ǫ + η) into observables, accurate to nextorder. To accomplish this we must employ the next-order result Eq. (5.3) for the scalar
spectral index. A straightforward rearrangement of this latter equation yields
3(C + 1)ǫ −
3(4 −2C)ǫ + 1
3(C −3)η + C
where the second expression follows after substitution of Eq. (5.5). Substituting this into
Eq. (5.16) yields
1 + 4C + 10
T (k0) (1 −n0) [1 + (2C + 2)ǫ] −25π
T (k0)(η2 + ξ2) ,
where the last term is entirely next-order. Note that there are two lowest-order terms. An
interesting case is η = −ǫ, corresponding to H ∝φ1/2, for which the lowest-order term
vanishes identically and the ﬁnal term of Eq. (5.16) is the only one to contribute. The
second derivative of the potential is the lowest derivative at which it is possible for the
expected lowest-order term to vanish.
The ﬁnal step is to convert the next-order terms into the observables.
As they are
already next-order, one only needs the lowest-order term in their expansion to complete
the conversion. From the lowest-order expression for the scalar spectral index, one ﬁnds to
lowest-order that
+ 5η −4ǫ .
Note that the derivative of the spectral index is of order ǫ2.
Finally, substitution of
Eqs. (4.8), (4.11) and (5.19) into Eq. (5.18) yields
2(1 −n0) +
(36C + 2)A4
4(1 −n0)2 −(12C −6)A2
S(k0)(1 −n0) −1
where the ﬁrst two terms in the curly brackets represent the lowest-order contribution.
Before we conclude this section, it is worth remarking on a point that has perhaps been
implicit in the existing literature but has not been stated explicitly before. A determination of each successive derivative of the potential requires an extra piece of observational
information. In particular, for the case of lowest-order perturbative reconstruction, we conclude that the ﬁrst term in the Taylor expansion requires only AT , but the second requires
both AS and AT . The third term, on the other hand, needs both of these together with
n0. The ability to make the observations therefore dictates how many derivatives we can
determine. On the other hand, a comparison of the lowest-order and next-order expressions
for the derivatives implies the following: the new piece of information necessary for the
derivation of the lowest-order term in V ′ is also suﬃcient to yield the next-order term in
V . Likewise, the next observation will give the lowest-order term in V ′′ and this is enough
to give the next-order term in V ′. Furthermore, it is also suﬃcient, in principle, to give
the third-order term in V . We stress in principle because the theoretical machinery has
not been developed to allow the calculation of a third-order term in the potential or its
derivatives to be performed. Hence, while observational limitations constrain how high a
derivative we can reach, it may be theoretical rather than observational limitations which
prevent higher accuracy in the lower derivatives. This will be the case even though the
necessary observational information may become available.
Table 2 lists the inﬂation parameters required for reconstruction of a given derivative
of the potential. Reconstruction requires the inﬂation parameters in terms of observables.
Relations between inﬂationary parameters and observables are given in Tables 3 and 4. A
combination of information from Table 2 and Table 4 results in Table 5, the observables
needed to reconstruct a given derivative of the potential to a certain order. Although we
know the information required for the next-to-next order given in Table 5, we don’t know
the coeﬃcients of the expansion.
The Perturbative Reconstruction Framework
Although the next-order results of the previous Section represents the theoretical state-ofthe-art, it is possible to see how the general pattern goes. We discuss this in this Section
and also introduce an expansion of the observations corresponding to perturbative reconstruction.
A variety of expansions
During reconstruction, there are three types of expansion being carried out. There is an
expansion in terms of observables, an expansion in terms of slow-roll parameters and an
expansion of the potential itself.
Since the underlying theme behind the reconstruction program is that one is driven by
observations, let us ﬁrst consider what information might be available. The reconstruction
program assumes some measurements of AS(k) and AT (k) are available over some range of
scales. In practice, the likely range of observations for the scalars will probably be no greater
than −5 < ln(k/k0) < 5, with a much shorter range for the tensors. In accordance with the
perturbative reconstruction strategy, the spectra should be expanded about some scale k0
which corresponds to the scale at horizon crossing when φ = φ0. The appropriate expansion
is in terms of ln(k/k0), and of course it makes best sense to carry out the expansion about
a wavenumber close to the middle of the available data.
In general, the expansions can be written as
S(k0) + (n(k0) −1) ln k
T (k0) + nT(k0) ln k
where the coeﬃcients continue as far as the accuracy of observations permit. There is no
obligation for the two series to be the same length. Indeed, we anticipate that information
associated with the scalars will be considerably easier to obtain in practice.
The range of ln k over which data are available leads to the range of φ over which the reconstruction converges well. Notice that since we believe ln(k/k0) can be somewhat greater
than unity, convergence of this type of series will only occur if the successive coeﬃcients
become smaller. Fortunately, we have already seen in Section IV that the lowest-order in-
ﬂationary predictions attach an extra slow-roll parameter to each higher derivative of the
spectra taken, so convergence can still occur as long as the slow-roll parameters are smaller
than 1/ max | ln(k/k0)|. This forms a good guide as to how wide a range of scales can be
addressed via perturbative reconstruction. The observation that the spectral index (at least
of the scalars) is not too far from unity suggests that the slow-roll parameters are small.
Hence, the observational expansion might continue to converge well outside the range of
ln k actually observed. The equivalent statement regarding the potential would be to say
that if it is reconstructed very smoothly for the range ∆φ corresponding to observations,
one should feel fairly conﬁdent in continuing the extrapolation of the potential beyond the
region where direct observations were available (though in a practical sense this does not
correspond to any extra information).
The observational expansion discussed above is closely related to the slow-roll expansion.
In particular, we may consider the expansion of the spectra at a given k in terms of slow-roll
parameters, as discussed in Section III. A qualitative comparison of the two expansions then
yields a general pattern. Each term from the scalars allows the determination of one extra
slow-roll parameter. With regard to the tensors, a single piece of information (presumably
the amplitude) is necessary before one can proceed at all, as we have discussed previously.
Beyond that, however, extra terms for the tensors do not provide new slow-roll parameters.
Instead, they lead to degenerate information and hence consistency relationships. If one has
the ﬁrst two terms for the tensors and the ﬁrst scalar term, one can test the single familiar
consistency equation nT = −2A2
S. Further tensor terms result in a whole hierarchy of
consistency equations, as we shall discuss further in the next Subsection.
By including terms consisting of products of more and more slow-roll parameters, one
builds up a more accurate answer. However, there are two separate factors that prevent
arbitrary accuracy from being obtained. The ﬁrst is observational limitations. For a practical observational data set with error bars, the observational expansion discussed above can
only be carried out to some term, beyond which the coeﬃcients are determined as being
consistent with zero within the errors. (If the error bars are still small when this happens, it
may still correspond to useful information). This reﬂects directly on the number of slow-roll
parameters ǫ, η, ξ, etc, that one can measure. In general, however, there are an inﬁnite
number of slow-roll parameters, and formally they are all of the same order (meaning that
for a ‘generic’ potential, one expects them all to be of similar size). This appears to be rather
problematic, since a ﬁnite number of terms in the observational expansion cannot constrain
an inﬁnite number of slow-roll parameters. Fortunately, however, only a ﬁnite (and usually
small) number of such terms ever appear when a speciﬁc expression is considered.
The second restriction is that current technical knowledge concerning the generation of
the spectra, as reviewed in Section III, only allows the calculation of a lowest-order term
plus a correction involving single slow-roll parameters. In general, one anticipates further
corrections including products of two or more slow-roll parameters, but that has not been
achieved. It follows, therefore, that the number of derivatives in the potential that may be
calculated is determined by observational restrictions, whilst the accuracy of each derivative
is also constrained by theoretical considerations.
It should be emphasized that once an expression written as an expansion in slow-roll
parameters has been found, it can be diﬀerentiated an arbitrary number of times. It is
interesting that the derivatives are accurate to the same number of orders in the slowroll parameters. This follows because diﬀerentiation respects the order-by-order expansion.
However, diﬀerentiation introduces higher and higher slow-roll parameters from the inﬁnite
hierarchy.
An important point here is that the ‘lowest-order’ can be a product of any
number of slow-roll parameters; the phrase is not synonymous with setting the slow-roll
parameters all to zero.
Having started with the observations, we now come round to the crux of the reconstruction process: the inﬂaton potential. In perturbative reconstruction, one aims to calculate
the potential and as many of its derivatives as possible at a single point to some level of accuracy in slow-roll parameters. The ultimate goal is to use this information to reconstruct
some portion of the potential about this point, by carrying out some expansion of V (φ)
about the point φ0. The simplest strategy is to use a Taylor series
V (φ) = V (φ0) + V ′(φ0)∆φ + 1
2V ′′(φ0)∆φ2 + · · · ,
and we shall only consider that case here.
The literature does include more ambitious
strategies such as Pad´e approximants and these may become useful when speciﬁc data are
available . The success of this expansion is governed by how far
away from φ0 one hopes to go, which ultimately arises from the range of observations one
has available, as well as on how accurately the individual derivatives are determined.
This expression shows us that perturbative reconstruction of the potential actually involves two expansions. We have already seen that the potential is obtained up to some
accuracy in the slow-roll expansion. However, for reconstruction to be successful, it is also
imperative to consider how accurate the expansion in ∆φ might be. Determining the coef-
ﬁcients of only the ﬁrst one or two terms may be completely useless if ∆φ turns out to be
The key to investigating this is to rewrite ∆φ in terms of ∆ln k, the range of scales
over which observations can realistically be expected to cover7.
Broadly speaking this
corresponds to the interval from 1 Mpc to about 104 Mpc, so assuming a center point in the
middle of this region implies a range for ∆ln k between ±5. This may be biased through
tensor data only being available on large scales, though it will also be of considerably lower
quality than the scalar data. The relationship that allows one to achieve the comparison
between ∆φ and ∆ln k is the exact formula Eq. (2.35) presented earlier
d ln k = m2
ǫ −1 = mPl
together with its derivatives. One can then expand ∆φ in terms of ∆ln k, expanding each
coeﬃcient up to some order in the slow-roll expansion. Such an expansion begins
√ǫ [1 + ǫ + · · ·] ∆ln k
√ǫ [ǫ −η + · · ·] (∆ln k)2 + · · · ,
where, for illustrative purposes, the ﬁrst coeﬃcient has been given to next-order in slow-roll
and the second one to lowest-order. The signs are chosen in accordance with our convention
that V ′ < 0.
For clarity we shall employ β to represent a generic slow-roll parameter.
then schematically represent the double expansion (one in ∆φ and one in the slow-roll
parameters), as
[1 + β + · · ·] ,
β∆ln k [1 + β + · · ·] {1 + β + β∆ln k + · · ·} ,
β2(∆ln k)2 [1 + β + · · ·] {1 + β + β∆ln k + · · ·} ,
7Turner and Liddle and Turner carried out a similar analysis using ∆N, the number
of e-foldings. This is perfectly valid but somewhat harder to interpret in terms of observable scales since
it is only formally equivalent in a lowest-order approximation. In this work, however, we desire a simple
interpretation of the next-order results.
where numerical constants have not been displayed.
The square brackets represent the
expansion of the potential and its derivatives at φ0, while the curly brackets represent the
∆φ, which itself is written as an expansion in ∆ln k with coeﬃcients expanded in slow-roll.
For the slow-roll expansion to make sense, we need β ≪1.
One can see from the
schematic layout of Eq. (6.6) that convergence of the expansion will fail unless β∆ln k ≪
1, as successively higher-order terms will otherwise become more and more important.
However, we have agreed that ∆ln k itself need not be small. In regions where it is, it is
clear that the best results are obtained by calculating the low derivatives of the potential
as accurately as possible. In regions where ∆ln k is not small, however, it is more fruitful
to calculate higher derivatives.
The consistency equation hierarchy
In the previous Subsection, we stated that there exists an inﬁnite hierarchy of consistency
equations. It is not diﬃcult to see why such a hierarchy should exist. Even though exact
expressions for the spectra as a function of scale are not presently available, one can imagine
having such expressions, at least in principle. In this case, one could then write down a
consistency equation in the full functional reconstruction framework that applied over all
available scales. This equation could then be represented in the perturbative reconstruction framework by performing a Taylor (or similar) expansion on both sides of it. The
perturbative consistency equations could then be derived by equating the coeﬃcients of the
expansions. The key idea here is that the full functional consistency equation and all its
derivatives must be satisﬁed at the point about which perturbative reconstruction is being
attempted. The equality of each derivative at this point, however, represents a separate
piece of information.
In Section IV we presented the consistency equation Eq. (4.11) for lowest-order perturbative reconstruction. The connection between the tensor–scalar ratio and the tensor
spectral index was ﬁrst presented by Liddle and Lyth and has been much discussed
in the literature. This consistency equation is simply the (unknown) full functional consistency equation applied at a single point, and moreover, it is the version of that equation
truncated to lowest-order in slow-roll. Indeed, it does not require a determination of n and
it corresponds to the lowest, non-trivial truncation of the expansion of the observed spectra.
The next order in slow-roll introduces n and dnT /d ln k. This not only supplies enough
information to impose a next-order version of the original consistency equation, but is also
enough to impose a lowest-order version of the derivative of the consistency equation. The
next-order versions of the original consistency equation were supplied by CKLL2 and Liddle
and Turner and we discussed these in Section V. We also discussed the lowest-order
version of the derivative of the consistency equation in that Section. This equation was ﬁrst
given by Kosowsky and Turner .
This pattern continues at all orders in the expansion. One can ask why this has not
been emphasised before. One reason is that until now a clear understanding has not been
established regarding the type of observational information that appears at each order in
the expansion. At the same stage that one introduces n in the slow-roll expansion, one
should also introduce the rate of change of the tensor spectral index. The latter does not
provide any new information regarding the reconstruction, in the same way that nT did
not provide new information at lowest-order in slow-roll. However, it is subject to the new
consistency equation. Researchers have not paid attention to the new consistency equation
because it requires dnT /d ln k and it seems very unlikely that this could ever be measured.
This concludes our discussion of the theoretical framework for perturbative reconstruction. In the following Section, therefore, we shall discuss whether the observations are likely
to reach an adequate level of sophistication in the foreseeable future and then consider a
worked example that illustrates how the reconstruction programme might be applied in
Worked Examples of Reconstruction
Prospects for reconstruction
In this Subsection, we shall consider the long-term prospects for reconstructing the inﬂaton
potential. It is clear that one must determine the amplitudes of the primordial power spectra
of scalar and tensor ﬂuctuations on at least one scale, together with the slope of the scalar
spectrum at that scale. Such information would provide enough information to reconstruct
the potential and its ﬁrst two derivatives to lowest–order. However, a measurement of nT is
also required if one is to test the inﬂationary hypothesis via the consistency equation. If such
information becomes available at all, it will probably be after AS, AT and n have themselves
been determined, so reconstructing to lowest-order should prove easier to accomplish than
testing the scenario via the consistency equation.
It is convenient to separate the full cosmological parameter space into two sectors.
The ﬁrst contains the inﬂationary parameters essential for reconstructing the potential and
testing the consistency equations. They are
(AS, r, n, nT , · · ·) ,
where all are evaluated at k0, and the list extends to as many derivatives of the spectra
as one wishes to consider. The tensor-scalar ratio r ≡12.4A2
S is deﬁned so that r = 1
corresponds to an equal contribution to large angle microwave anisotropies from the scalar
and tensor ﬂuctuations, as follows from Eqs. (4.11) and (4.12)).
The second set consists of the other cosmological parameters:
(Ω0, ΩΛ, ΩCDM, ΩHDM, ΩBh2, h, zR, . . .) ,
where the Ωrepresent the densities in matter of various sorts, respectively the total matter
density, cosmological constant, cold dark matter, hot dark matter and baryonic matter.
Here zR represents the redshift of recombination; it may be that this single parameter is
adequate or the full ionization history may have to be taken into account. In the standard cold dark matter (CDM) model these parameters take the values (AS(k0), 0, 1, 0)
and (1, 0, 0.95, 0, 0.0125, 0.5) respectively (further parameters concerning derivatives of the
spectral indices in the ﬁrst set being zero); that is, the scalar amplitude is the only free
parameter available to ﬁt to observations. The standard ionization history of the universe
is also assumed.
Experiments measuring microwave background anisotropies oﬀer the most promising
route towards acquiring such information to within the desired level of accuracy. Although
redshift surveys provide valuable insight into the nature of the scalar spectrum at the present
epoch, uncertainties in the mass–to–light ratio of galaxy distributions imply that it is very
diﬃcult to determine the primordial spectrum from these observations alone. There are
further complications associated with uncertainties in the type of non-baryonic dark matter
in the universe.
These can lead to signiﬁcant modiﬁcations in the form of the transfer
function. One crucial advantage that microwave background experiments have, however,
is that the level of anisotropy above 10 arcmin is almost independent of whether the dark
matter is hot or cold . Moreover, as we shall see in Section VIII, a
direct detection of the stochastic background of gravitational waves by laser interferometers
seems highly improbable. Thus, the microwave background anisotropies appear to be the
only practical route at present towards determining the gravitational wave amplitude.
It is conventional to expand the temperature distribution on the sky in terms of spherical
alm(r)Ylm(x) ,
where the monopole and dipole terms have been subtracted out and T0 = 2.726K is the
present mean background temperature. The l-th multipole corresponds loosely to an angular
scale of π/l, and a comoving length scale of 100h−1 Mpc at the last scattering surface
subtends an angle of about one degree (for Ω0 = 1).
Inﬂation predicts that the alm are gaussian random variables, with a rotational invariant
expectation value for their variance Cl ≡⟨|alm|2⟩. The radiation power spectrum is deﬁned
to be l(l+1)Cl; this is exactly constant in the case of a scale–invariant density perturbation
spectrum (n = 1, r = 0) when the Sachs–Wolfe eﬀect is the sole source of anisotropy
 . In general, both tensor and scalar
perturbations contribute to the observed radiation power spectrum, and for inﬂation these
contributions are independent, so Cl = CS
Accurate calculations of the Cl from both scalar and tensor modes require numerical
solutions using a Boltzmann code , and this can now be done
to an extremely high accuracy, of around one percent or so . A recent innovation is a new algorithm based on an integral solution of the Boltzmann equation , which obtains this level of accuracy at much less computational
expense. In principle high quality observations can approach this accuracy though the question of foreground remains a delicate one 
and so the true observational accuracy will be less. These types of numerical study seem
essential for high accuracy work, although they are complemented by analytical approaches,
which can be made both for scalars and for tensors. The latter
case is the easier for two reasons; ﬁrstly, only gravitational eﬀects need to be considered and
secondly, gravitational waves redshift away once they are inside the Hubble radius, so their
main inﬂuence is only on the lower multipoles, up to l ≃100. Analytic studies, of increasing
sophistication, have been made by Abbott and Wise , Starobinsky ,
Turner, White, and Lidsey , Atrio-Barandela and Silk , Allen and Koranda
 , Koranda and Allen and Wang . These results show good agreement
with the numerical calculations of Crittenden et al. and Dodelson, Knox, and Kolb
 , who evolve the photon distribution function by applying ﬁrst-order perturbation
theory to the general relativistic Boltzmann equation for radiative transfer.
With this calculational power in place, there are two main obstacles to determining the
primordial spectra. These are known as ‘cosmic variance’ and ‘cosmic confusion’, respectively.
Cosmic Variance: A given inﬂationary model predicts the quantities Cl = ⟨|alm|2⟩, but
the observed multipoles measured from a single point in space are a2
m=−l |alm|2/4π.
These only represent a single realization of the Cl. It is well known that a ﬁnite sampling
of events generated from a random process leads to an intrinsic uncertainty in the variance
even if the experiment is perfectly accurate; this is sometimes called sample variance. In
the limit of full sky coverage this uncertainty is known as cosmic variance.
More precisely, the a2
l are a sum of 2l +1 Gaussian random variables and therefore have
a probability distribution that is a χ2 distribution with 2l + 1 degrees of freedom. Thus,
for each multipole there are 2l + 1 samples, so the uncertainty in the Cl is given by
This implies that cosmic variance is proportional to l−1/2 and is therefore less signiﬁcant
on smaller angular scales. However, for any given experiment, the beam width limits how
high an l can be obtained before experimental noise intervenes, and anyway in standard
cosmological models the predicted signal cuts oﬀrapidly beyond l ∼1000 due to the ﬁnite
thickness of the last scattering surface. Thus, the information on the tensor components is
limited because there is very little signal in near–scale invariant models for l ≥200 where
the eﬀects of cosmic variance are less signiﬁcant.
Cosmic Confusion: The anisotropy below l ≤60 is essentially determined by the inﬂationary parameters in Eq. (7.1), and by Ω0 and ΩΛ, since it is dominated by the purely
gravitational terms rather than the details of the matter content of the universe. On the
other hand, the anisotropies are highly model dependent for l > 60 due to the complexity of
the operating physical processes. In particular, the precise level of anisotropy in this range
depends sensitively on the values of the cosmological parameters listed in Eq. (7.2). Bond et
al. have suggested that diﬀerent sets of values for these parameters sometimes lead
to power spectra which are extremely similar . This leads
to degeneracies in determined parameters, which Bond et al. refer to as ‘cosmic confusion’.
Cosmic confusion is problematic for the reconstruction program and the degeneracy must
be lifted before it can proceed. Fortunately, things have moved on since the Bond et al.
discussion, and it is now acknowledged that observations can be carried out at such a high
accuracy that the degeneracy is lifted . Tegmark
and Efstathiou have found that the microwave background anisotropies can be determined to very high precision even in the presence of multi-component foreground noise
by the COBRAS/SAMBA satellite.
It should also be noted that other methods are available for determining cosmological
parameters.
For example, the primordial light element abundances imply that 0.009 ≤
ΩBh2 ≤0.022 and these limits may become stronger as observations of deuterium in quasar
absorption lines improve .
Furthermore, an accurate measurement of h, certainly to within 10% , seems achievable with
the Hubble Space Telescope , whilst polarization of the microwave
background may provide insight into the ionization history of the universe . There has also recently been improved understanding of the
possibility of using polarization to probe gravitational waves . Because
gravitational waves typically contribute more (relative to density perturbations) to the polarization than to the total anisotropy, and indeed because one can identify a combination
of the polarization parameters which cannot be induced by density perturbations at all, it
may ultimately be possible to use polarization to do better than the cosmic-variance limited
studies of the temperature alone which we discuss below.
In view of this, it is important to consider to what degree the next generation of satellites
will be able to determine the inﬂationary parameters in Eq. (7.1). Knox and Turner 
have considered what might be deduced from two experiments A and B whose window
functions are centered around lA ≈55 and lB ≈200, respectively.
Experiment B only
measures anisotropy due to the scalar ﬂuctuations, whereas A will be sensitive to both
scalar and tensor ﬂuctuations. They considered ‘standard’ cosmological parameters h = 0.5,
ΩB ≈0.05, ΩΛ = 0 and a scale–invariant spectrum. They concluded that if the tensorscalar ratio r ≥0.14, one should be able to rule out r = 0 with 95% conﬁdence 95% of
the time. Thus, the gravitational wave amplitude should be quantitatively measurable for
r ≥0.14. If n is reduced, the limit is improved slightly to r ≥0.1. Knox and Turner 
further conclude that full–sky measurements on angular scales 0.5o and 3o should acquire
the sensitivity required for making such a detection.
For reconstruction to proceed at lowest–order, however, one also requires CS
l for some
l and also the spectral index n. Knox has simulated a set of microwave background
experiments within the context of chaotic inﬂation driven by a φ4 potential. This model
predicts n = 0.94, nT = −0.04 and r = 0.28. He considers a third measurement made on
a smaller angular scale than those of A and B. It is this measurement that determines CS
and this may be combined with the measurement at the intermediate scale lB to determine
the slope n. Finally, r is inferred by identifying the ‘excess power’ arising in measurement A
with the gravitational waves. He concludes that the quantity CS
2 1301−n could be measured
to an accuracy of ±0.3% and the error in the slope of the scalar spectrum could be as small
as ±0.02. If n ≈1, the error on r is ±0.1 and improves slightly for smaller n. A full–sky
experiment designed with current technology and with a 20′ beam should be able to achieve
such precision.
However, these results are derived on the assumption that the cosmological parameters
have been accurately determined by other means. Indeed, to achieve the above precision
on r and n, one requires the errors in ΩBh2 to be no more than 10 % and 6%, respectively
 . Furthermore, the Hubble parameter will have to be determined to within 6%
or 14% respectively if ΩΛ = 0.8 and the uncertainty in ΩΛ must be below 7%.
More recently, Jungman et al. have carried out an analysis where all inﬂationary and cosmological parameters are allowed to vary. They conﬁrm the expectation that
the estimates provided by Knox are very optimistic. If all the other cosmological
parameters are left completely free, it is impossible to get any useful information on the
gravitational waves at all — the required value of r is somewhat larger than mentioned
above, and nT would have to be extremely large. However, that represents a somewhat
pessimistic assessment, because certainly many of the cosmological parameters will be constrained by other types of observations, and more importantly one may also feel content to
live within a subset of cosmological parameter space (for example, critical density universes
with only cold dark matter).
The accuracy to which the above parameters can be observationally determined will
decide whether the information is good enough to push any of the expressions beyond
lowest-order. Another possibility is that a more sophisticated observable may become available; Kosowsky and Turner have considered the possibility that dn/d ln k might be
observable in the microwave background. For most models this seems unlikely as the effect will be small, but there do exist inﬂationary models leading to an eﬀect that is large
enough to be observable. Whether this parameter generates any degeneracies with other
inﬂationary or cosmological parameters in the shape of the Cl remains to be addressed.
Toy model reconstructions with simulated data
We devote this subsection to carrying out a worked example of reconstruction on a faked
data set, to indicate the kind of accuracy that might be possible. We have tried to make
the outcome of analyzing the simulated data at least reasonably indicative of the sort that
high resolution microwave background experiments might achieve, based on the analysis
by Knox [see also Jungman et al., 1996]. However, our approach is strictly a toy
model; it is not intended to bear any resemblance to what one might actually do with high
accuracy observations. It seems very unlikely that observations such as CMB anisotropies
might be used to directly estimate the k-space spectra (though such an approach is common
with galaxy redshift surveys); the expectation is that if suitable quality data are obtained
then the appropriate procedure will be to push the theory forward from the spectra rather
than try to calculate the primordial spectra directly from the observations. That is, some
analysis such as a likelihood analysis would be used to ﬁnd best ﬁtting parameters such
as the amplitude and spectral indices of the scalars and tensors directly. Knox has
taken some ﬁrst steps in this direction.
Perturbative reconstruction requires an expansion of the observations about a single
scale, which will end up corresponding to the location φ0 on the potential about which it is
to be reconstructed. As discussed earlier, an expansion of the logarithm of the spectra in
terms of the logarithm of the wavenumber is the best way to proceed. It will always make
the most sense to choose the scale k0 about which the expansion is done to be near the
‘central’ point of the logarithmic k-interval8. Thus we write
S(k0) + (n(k0) −1) ln k
8The word ‘central’ is in quotes to indicate that the eﬀective center point of the data may be biased
through tensors only being available on large scales, plus scale-dependent error bars on both scalars and
tensors. The word is intended to refer to the point best determined by the data assuming the type of ﬁt
attempted.
T (k0) + nT(k0) ln k
where we have written in explicitly the observational quantities to which the coeﬃcients of
the expansion correspond.
A given observational program produces some ﬁnite set of data with error bars, such
as a list of galaxy redshifts and sky positions, or a pixel map of the microwave sky. As
we said above, it is unlikely to be a useful strategy to try and obtain the power spectra
from these, and then use these to reconstruct. Rather, one should push the theory towards
the data by parametrizing the spectra and ﬁtting for those parameters, as has been done
so successfully with COBE. Other parameters which aﬀect the data interpretation, such as
the cosmological parameters, can be ﬁxed or simultaneously ﬁtted as required. The general
reconstruction framework we have described indicates an eﬃcient parametrization of the
spectra that could be used.
Despite the above, for our illustrative examples we have chosen to simulate data for
the spectra themselves, as it is the simplest thing to do. Enough is known about the capabilities of CMB satellites in particular to enable a
fairly realistic example (in terms of the observational uncertainties) to be constructed. To
do anything else would obscure the principal issues. Our aim therefore is to simulate a set
of data, with errors, for the spectra, which when ﬁtted give similar errors on parameters
to those expected had we carried out the full task of simulating say a microwave sky and
ﬁtting directly for the spectral parameters. It is well outside the scope of this paper to
attempt a realistic simulation of what future data might actually look like.
As a simple test, we have simulated fake data sets for two diﬀerent models, as follows:
1. A power-law inﬂation model with power-law index p = 21, chosen to yield n−1 = nT =
−0.1. Since power-law inﬂation can be solved exactly we know the precise amplitude
of the spectra corresponding to a given normalization of the spectra, Eqs. (3.29) and
(3.47). This particular model has been advocated by White et al. as providing
a good ﬁt to the current observational data.
2. An intermediate inﬂation model , which gives a scaleinvariant spectrum of density perturbations but still possesses signiﬁcant gravitational
waves. We choose a version where scalars and tensors contribute equally to COBE
(to be precise, their contributions to the tenth multipole are chosen to be the same).
In this case, a precise calculation of the spectra cannot be made, so we compromise
by using the next-order approximation to generate the spectra from the underlying
These models both have quite substantial gravitational waves. They have been chosen to be
compatible with present observational data, though they can be regarded as rather extreme
cases which maximize the chance of an accurate reconstruction.
The simulated data are constructed by the following procedure.
• The overall normalization reproduces the COBE result.
• The scalar error bars are consistent with cosmic variance limited microwave anisotropy
observations up to l = 200 (except that for simplicity we have modeled the errors by
a gaussian rather than the formally correct χ2
2l+1 distribution). Other cosmological
parameters, which aﬀect the microwave anisotropy spectrum, are assumed ﬁxed. The
COBRAS/SAMBA satellite can go to much higher l, but of course the other cosmological parameters will be uncertain which limits the estimation of the inﬂationary
parameters. By stopping at l = 200, we ﬁnd that the accuracy we obtain is similar
to that suggested by Jungman et al. for the full problem, so it serves as a
reasonable compromise.
• For the tensors, reasonable a priori estimates for the error bars are harder to establish. We have assumed data corresponding to l up to 40, which is where the tensor
contribution to Cl begins to cut oﬀ, and we have chosen error bars so as to reproduce
the observational uncertainty in the tensor amplitude suggested by Knox . We
then accept whatever uncertainty in the tensor spectral index this gives us, and it
happens to be in reasonable agreement with that suggested by Knox.
The simulated data for Model 1 are shown in Figure 2, along with the best ﬁt reconstructions. Since scalar data runs from l = 2 to 200, it covers two orders of magnitude in
wavenumber, corresponding to ∆ln k ≃4.6. The input and output parameters are shown in
Table 4. We performed two ﬁts, the ﬁrst being a power-law ﬁt and the second also allowing
for a variation in the scalar spectral index (though in fact the underlying spectrum has
none). The Figures and subsequent discussion use the former.
The results for Models 1 and 2 contain no particular surprises. Although this is intended
only to be indicative and certainly falls way short of the sophistication that can be brought
into play on realistic data, the error bars are probably fairly reasonable. As expected, the
tensor spectral index is the real stumbling block, but at least with these models one obtains
a strong handle on A2
T , thus allowing a unique reconstruction. For these reconstructions,
we ﬁnd that the lowest-order consistency equation Eq. (4.11) is indeed satisﬁed
0.108 ± 0.013 = 2A2
= −nT = 0.25 ± 0.10 ,
for Model 1 and
0.14 ± 0.02 = 2A2
= −nT = 0.12 ± 0.11 ,
for Model 2. The same is true for the next-order version Eq. (5.7). For Model 1 we obtain
0.114 ± 0.014 = 2A2
= −nT = 0.25 ± 0.10 ,
whereas for Model 2 we ﬁnd
0.13 ± 0.02 = 2A2
= −nT = 0.12 ± 0.11 .
While encouraging, we see that the test is not particularly strong due to the poorly
determined nT . In models where the tensors are even weaker than considered here, the task
of testing the consistency equation will be yet harder.
Proceeding on to the reconstruction, Table 5 shows lowest-order and next-order reconstructions, in comparison to the exact underlying potential for both Models. The consistency equation has been used to eliminate nT as it is the most poorly determined quantity.
A next-order version of V ′′(φ0) cannot be obtained without a value for dn/d ln k|k0, though
the size of the correction could be bounded from the error bars on the null result. The reconstructed potentials, both lowest-order and next-order, for Model 1 are shown in Figure 3
in comparison to the underlying potential. A Taylor series has been used to generate them,
and the range of φ shown corresponds to the range of observational data (a range of two
orders of magnitude in k) determined using Eq. (6.5).
We see that in both models the lowest-order reconstruction has been very successful.
The errors are dominated by those in measuring the tensor amplitude. However, in neither
case does the next-order result oﬀer a signiﬁcant improvement, given the observational error
bars. The main importance of the next-order result appears therefore to be in bounding the
theoretical error, rather than in providing improved accuracy in the overall reconstruction.
Figure 3 can be compared to a similar ﬁgure in Liddle and Turner , who investigated reconstruction of a similar exponential potential. However, they did not include any
observational errors, concentrating instead on the theoretical errors and on the eﬃcacy of
diﬀerent expansion techniques for the potential. They also assumed reconstruction over a
wider range of scales, and had somewhat poorer convergence of the reconstructed potential
through expanding about one end of the data (the quadrupole) rather than the center.
Other Ways to Constrain the Potential
Up until now we have concentrated, at least implicitly, on observations connected to largescale structure in the universe, including microwave background anisotropies. These certainly provide the best source of constraints on the inﬂationary potential, and one should
be very pleased at the prospect of obtaining such constraints. However, they do cover only
a small portion of the full inﬂationary potential. There is of course no way of uncovering information about the potential relevant to larger scales (beyond waiting the relevant
number of Hubble times!), but in principle there are a variety of ways of constraining the
potential appropriate to smaller scales. We shall discuss such possibilities in this Section.
In particular, one may constrain the potential from the fact that inﬂation must come to
an end some 50 e-foldings after the large-scale structure scales pass outside the Hubble radius. Further constraints are associated with the scalar and tensor perturbations on small
scales. In principle, laser interferometers could observe the tensor spectrum as a stochastic
background, though we shall see that this is not promising. The possible overproduction of
primordial black holes (PBHs) immediately after inﬂation places upper limits on the amplitude of the last scalar ﬂuctuation to cross the Hubble radius just before inﬂation ends,
while distortions to the microwave background spectrum limit scalar ﬂuctuations on mass
scales well below large-scale structure scales.
To the end of inﬂation and the area law
In traditional inﬂation models, inﬂation can come to an end in one of two ways. The ﬁrst
is via some drastic event, such as a quantum tunneling (for example in extended inﬂation)
or a sudden instability (probably connected to a second ﬁeld, as in hybrid inﬂation). If
this happened, probably little information can be drawn from the behavior approaching the
end of inﬂation. The second way inﬂation may come to an end is simply by the potential
becoming too (logarithmically) steep to sustain inﬂation any longer, as in generic chaotic
inﬂation models, so that ǫ reaches unity.
Let us see what one can conclude in the latter case. For deﬁniteness, let us assume
that 50 e-foldings are supposed to occur after the scale k0, about which reconstruction is
attempted, leaves the horizon. The modest dependence of this number on the details of
reheating will not be important. By assumption, inﬂation will end precisely when ǫ = 1.
The number of e-foldings which occur between two scalar ﬁeld values is given exactly by
For our purposes, this can be neatly written as an integral constraint 
This can most easily be thought of graphically. We have reconstructed the value of ǫ
and its derivative at φ0, and know ǫ(φend) = 1. As shown in Figure 4, if we plot the curve of
1/√ǫ against φ/mPl, it must be such that it reaches unity just as the area under it reaches
4π. While there remain many ways in which the curve may do this, it does exclude
some possibilities such as a sudden ﬂattening of the potential after observable scales leave
the horizon.9
Local detection of primordial gravitational waves
A number of authors have examined the possibility that the stochastic background of primordial gravitational waves produced during inﬂation could be detected locally . In general, the wavenumber of the gravitational waves is
related to the value of the inﬂaton ﬁeld during inﬂation via the relation ln(k/k0) = 60 −N,
where N is the number of e-foldings before the end of inﬂation and k0 = a0H0 ≈3×10−18h
Hz is the wavenumber of the mode that is just reentering the Hubble radius at the present
epoch. Thus, the modes with wavenumbers associated with the maximum sensitivity of typical beam-in-space experiments (∼10−3Hz) ﬁrst crossed the Hubble radius approximately
25 e-foldings before the end of inﬂation. A direct detection of such waves would therefore
provide unique insight into a region of the inﬂationary potential that cannot be probed by
large-scale structure observations. However, we shall see that this is unlikely to be possible.
9It appears that this can be used to derive an upper limit, albeit a weak one, on (φend −φ0), from
the knowledge that ǫ ≤1. In fact this is not the case, since H starts to exhibit strong variation when ǫ
approaches one. The number of e-foldings should then strictly be characterized by the increase in aH rather
than a alone for details). In principle, a yet weaker constraint may be derived by
using energy scale arguments to limit how much H can decrease in the late stages of inﬂation, but such a
constraint seems too weak to be worth pursuing.
There are a number of gravitational wave detectors currently under construction or
proposal . The ground-based Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO) should have a peak sensitivity of Ωg ≈10−11h−2 at 10
Hz , where Ωg is the energy density per logarithmic frequency interval.
The proposed space-based interferometers, the Laser Gravitational Wave Observatory in
Space and the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna probe lower frequencies, but with a sensitivity to ﬂat spectrum
stochastic sources which is less than that of LIGO.
After inﬂation, the evolution of the gravitational wave perturbation is determined by
Eq. (3.43). We have already studied the eﬀect of modes which have wavelengths greater
than the Hubble radius by the time of last scattering, which contribute to microwave background anisotropies. However, the scales which can be detected locally will have re-entered
the Hubble radius before the onset of matter domination. In this regime they behave as
radiation, so their energy density stays ﬁxed during the radiation era but falls during the
matter era. This suppression factor is directly measured by the radiation density today,
Ωrad = 4 × 10−5h−2. Thus the predicted amplitude on scales re-entering before matterradiation equality is 
× 4 × 10−5 .
For the inﬂation models we have been discussing, H always decreases with time, and
hence the primordial amplitude on short scales is always less than that on large scales10.
The quadrupole anisotropy already places an extremely stringent limit on the amplitude
of the spectrum at large scales, and this immediately translates into a conservative, but
robust, constraint across all short scales of 
Ωgh2 ≤4 × 10−15 .
This puts the inﬂationary signal well out of reach of any of the proposed experiments.
Primordial black holes
It has been conjectured that primordial black holes (PBHs) may form during the reheating phase immediately after inﬂation . While there are considerable theoretical uncertainties attached to this
possibility, if such formation does occur, it can constrain the scalar spectrum at very short
scales. During inﬂation the ﬁrst scales to leave the Hubble radius are the last to come back
in and this implies that the very last ﬂuctuation to leave will be the ﬁrst to return. In some
regions of the post-inﬂationary universe, the ﬂuctuation will be so large that one expects
that the collapse of a local region into a black hole will become inevitable. The higher the
rms amplitude the larger the fraction of the universe forming PBHs. The observational
10‘Superinﬂation’ models have been considered within the context of superstring motivated cosmologies,
and it appears that in that case the gravitational wave amplitude could rise suﬃciently on short scales to
be detectable . However, no complete model, demonstrating how superinﬂation might
successfully end, has been constructed thus far .
consequences of the evaporation of these black holes then leads to upper limits on the number that may form and hence on the magnitude of the spectrum on the relevant scales.
Thus, one may constrain the amplitude of the density spectrum on scales many orders of
magnitude smaller than those probed by large-scale structure observations and microwave
background experiments. These constraints lead to an upper limit on the spectral index
and may therefore provide insight into features of the inﬂationary potential towards the end
of inﬂation.
We parametrize the density spectrum in terms of the mass scale M associated with the
Hubble radius when a given mode reenters. Hence, δ(M) ∝M(1−n)/6 deﬁnes the scalar
spectral index. PBHs are never produced in suﬃcient numbers to be interesting if n < 1,
but they could be if the spectrum is ‘blue’ with n > 1.
When an overdense region with equation of state p = γρ stops expanding, it must have
a size greater than √γ times the horizon size in order to collapse against the pressure. The
probability of a region of mass M forming a PBH is 
β(M) ≈δ(M) exp
The constraints on β(M) in the range 1010g ≤M ≤1017g have been summarized
by Carr and Lidsey .
In particular, PBHs with an initial mass ∼1015g will be
evaporating at the present epoch and may therefore contribute appreciably to the observed
gamma-ray and cosmic-ray spectra at 100 MeV . On the other
hand, 1010g PBHs have a lifetime ∼1 sec and, if produced in suﬃcient numbers, would lead
to the photodissociation of deuterium immediately after the nucleosynthesis era . PBHs of mass slightly below 1010g could alter the photon–to–baryon ratio just prior
to nucleosynthesis. An upper limit therefore arises by requiring that evaporating PBHs do
not generate a photon–to–baryon ratio exceeding the current value S0 = 109 .
Carr et al. have considered the constraints on β(M) below 1010g. In this region
the strongest constraint arises if evaporating PBHs leave behind stable Planck mass relics
 .
The observational constraint
from the relics derives from the fact that they cannot have more than the critical density
at the present epoch, Ωrel < 1.
The upshot of this analysis is that the spectral index is typically constrained to be
less than about 1.5, depending weakly on assumptions as to the reheat temperature after
inﬂation and whether one takes into account the black hole relic constraint. Because the
constraint applies at the end of inﬂation, on scales greatly separated from the microwave
anisotropies, it is independent of the COBE normalization and also of the choice of dark
matter. However, in this form it relies on the spectral index being constant right across
those scales ). For
general inﬂation models it should be reinterpreted as a speciﬁc constraint on the amplitude
at the short scales being sampled.
Finally, a constraint on the amplitude of the spectrum at a scale corresponding to an
horizon mass ≈0.1M⊙can in principle be derived from the recent observations of massive compact halo objects (MACHOs) . The
estimated mass range of these objects suggests that they constitute about 0.1 per cent of
the critical density. Although the favored explanation for these microlensing events is that
they are due to substellar baryonic brown dwarfs, it is quite possible that MACHOs may
be primordial black holes and therefore non–baryonic in nature . Such PBHs could form from vacuum ﬂuctuations in the manner discussed above if the amplitude of spectrum is suﬃciently
high on the appropriate scale. This may be possible, for example, if the potential has a
suitable form . Alternatively, a spike may be imposed on the underlying
spectrum by the quantum ﬂuctuations of a second scalar ﬁeld . If the amplitude is too high on this particular
scale, however, it would lead to the overproduction of MACHO-PBHs. Consistency with
the observations therefore constrains both the spectrum and the inﬂationary potential.
Spectral distortions
A further constraint on δ(M) over mass scales considerably smaller than those corresponding
to large-scale structure may be derived by considering departures of the microwave spectrum
away from a pure blackbody. and
Sunyaev and Zel’dovich ). Above a redshift of zy ≈2.2 × 104  ΩBh2−1/2, Compton
scattering is able to establish local thermodynamic equilibrium whenever there is a sudden
redistribution or release of energy into the universe .
This produces a Bose–Einstein spectrum n ∝[exp(x + µ) −1]−1 that is characterized by a
chemical potential µ, where x = hν/kT. (A Planck spectrum corresponds to µ = 0). On the
other hand, equilibrium cannot be established for redshifts just below zy. The distribution
of energy at this time could therefore lead to observable spectral distortions (µ ̸= 0) in the
microwave background at the present epoch. The Far Infrared Absolute Spectrophotometer
(FIRAS) aboard COBE has constrained the spectral distortion to be |µ| < 3.3 × 10−4
 , whilst Hu, Scott, and Silk have strengthened this limit by
considering the COBE measurement of temperature ﬂuctuations on 10◦ . They ﬁnd that µ < 5.0 × 105(∆T/T)2
10◦≈6.3 × 10−5.
These limits imply that photon diﬀusion would have been the dominant mechanism
for producing spectral distortions . Silk ﬁrst showed that the damping
of adiabatic ﬂuctuations can proceed if their mass scales are below a characteristic mass
known as the Silk mass. At suﬃciently early times, the photons and baryons in the universe
are strongly coupled through Thomson scattering and they therefore behave as a single
viscous ﬂuid. When adiabatic ﬂuctuations reenter the Hubble radius, they set up pressure
gradients and these result in pressure waves that oscillate as sound waves. As the epoch
of recombination approaches, however, the mean–free–path of the photons increases and
the photons are able to diﬀuse out of the overdense regions into underdense regions. Thus,
the inhomogeneities in the photon–baryon ﬂuid are damped.
The energy stored in the
ﬂuctuations is redistributed by the diﬀusion of photons and it is this transfer of energy during
the epoch near to zy that produces the spectral distortions. The ﬂuctuations that lead to
these potentially observable eﬀects have mass scales in the range 10−3 < M/M⊙< 103
 .
The observational upper limit on µ implies an upper limit on the amplitude of the
pressure wave and therefore a limit on δ(M). The energy density in a linear sound wave is
ρu2, where u ≈c/
3 is the sound speed. Thus, the dimensionless energy release caused by
the damping is q ≈δ2/3. It can be shown that the spectral distortion is given by µ ≈1.4q
and it follows, therefore, that δ < 1.46√µ ≈0.01.
By normalizing the spectrum at COBE scales (∼1022M⊙), an upper limit on the spectral
index may be derived. Barrow and Coles and Daly assume that the distortion
is entirely due to the largest amplitude wave and deduce a limit of n < 1.8 for M ∼
10−3M⊙. (The limit becomes weaker for larger scales). Hu et al. have derived a
stronger constraint of n < 1.5 by reﬁning these calculations. This is comparable to the
PBH constraints we have just discussed (though somewhat weaker if one believes the PBH
relic constraint). However, it is probably more reliable because it is based on physics that
is relatively well understood and requires a less severe extrapolation to smaller scales.
Conclusions
In this paper, we have reviewed the relationship between observations of microwave anisotropies and of large-scale structure and the possibility of connecting them to the potential
energy of a scalar ﬁeld driving inﬂation. We have argued that, given suitable quality observations, the inﬂationary idea can be tested and then features of the inﬂationary potential
can be directly measured. In many ways this is remarkable, given that it is impossible, by
many orders of magnitude, for an Earth-based accelerator to pursue this task.
It is predicted that inﬂation produces both gravitational waves and density perturbations. Consequently, the employment of observations may be divided into two main parts.
The most challenging is the test of the inﬂationary consistency relations; if these prove
testable and are conﬁrmed, it will provide a powerful vindication of the chaotic inﬂation
paradigm. One could then feel conﬁdent in following the less observationally challenging
task of employing observations to discern information regarding the inﬂationary potential,
in the form of its value and that of its ﬁrst few derivatives at a single point.
We have indicated the diﬀerent approximation schemes that must be invoked.
paramount importance is the slow-roll expansion, but this must also be coupled to an
expansion of the observables. In the simplest instance this latter expansion corresponds to
the approximation of power-law spectra. The lowest levels of approximation are certainly
able to cope with present-day observations of both microwave anisotropies and large-scale
structure. However, in this work we have been forward looking, since the demands that
will be imposed on theoretical accuracy by future observations, especially satellite-based
microwave background anisotropy measurements, will be high. Indeed, they could in principle threaten the limits of present-day theoretical knowledge regarding the calculation of
the spectra.
We must emphasize that our calculations have all been implemented within the standard
paradigm for chaotic inﬂation. The vast majority of known viable models can be expressed
within this class, either trivially or by cunning manipulation, but one should bear in mind
that there exist some models of inﬂation for which this is not the case. In some examples,
such as old versions of the open inﬂationary scenario or some multi-ﬁeld theories, this is
because the predictions turn out to be dependent on initial conditions. Although such a
situation would be unfortunate it is not logically excluded. Other theories, such as the
recently investigated single-bubble open inﬂationary models, rely on dynamics that are
much more complicated than that of the standard scenario . They therefore lead to a more complicated relationship between
theory and observations. Furthermore, even if the inﬂationary hypothesis is indeed correct,
it may be the case that the actual model produces a very low amplitude of gravitational
waves . This would make them impossible to measure and such a situation would
remove the ability to make a consistency check and thus eliminate most of the potential for
reconstruction.
Finally, there remains every possibility that the entire inﬂationary idea is incorrect; if
so, one can at least hope that this is manifested in a failure of the consistency relations.
However, it may not prove possible to test the consistency relations; might one then blunder
into reconstructing a non-existent object? With suﬃciently good observations, such as a
CMB satellite will provide, the answer should be no. The Cl spectrum, when it is observed,
will contain huge amounts of degenerate information. If the correct underlying theory is
topological defects, , the spectral shape should
be very diﬀerent to any simple inﬂation model for any values of the cosmological parameters.
One can certainly reconstruct a ‘potential’ which would give the observed Cl, but it would
probably be of such a complex form as to have little particle physics motivation for it,
leaving people to search for other explanations.
In a standard inﬂation scenario, the Cl give a complete description of the gaussian
perturbations generated. This prediction can also be tested against the observations; present
observations are compatible with gaussianity though they are not strong enough to give a
convincing test. In the future we can expect such tests to be widely applied. While in
principle it is possible to construct inﬂation models giving non-gaussian perturbations, in
practice such models are so contrived that again, were such features detected, one would
quickly be looking for a more plausible theory for the origin of perturbations. It might well
also be that the shape of the power spectrum might be incompatible with the non-gaussian
nature, within the general context of inﬂation.
The bulk of this review has covered work already discussed in the literature. We have
given an extensive account of the Stewart and Lyth calculation of the perturbation
spectra, which provides the accuracy needed to discuss anticipated observations. The reconstruction framework has then been described to an accuracy which ought to be suﬃcient
for years to come. However, as well as the review material, we have brought to light a few
new results and viewpoints and we summarize these here.
• The consistency equation discussed in the present literature is just one of an inﬁnite
hierarchy of consistency equations, each of which can be taken (in principle) to arbitrary accuracy in the slow-roll expansion. Kosowsky and Turner have written
down the form for the second member and we have reproduced it here. However, it
is probable that only the ﬁrst consistency equation will ever be tested.
• We have indicated that since scalar perturbations are much easier to measure than
tensor ones, the appropriate form of the ﬁrst consistency equation to consider is not
the lowest-order version, but rather the next-order version. One requires nT to test the
lowest-order version and it is very unlikely that such observations would be available
without there also being the appropriate ones to include the next-order version as well.
(The only new ingredient in the next-order version over and above those quantities in
the lowest-order version is n).
• We have been more explicit than previous work as to how observations of the primordial spectra should be handled in terms of an expansion in ln k. We discussed how
this expansion relates to the slow-roll expansion. A worked example on simulated
data has illustrated these ideas in action.
In conclusion, therefore, the relationship between inﬂationary cosmology and large-scale
structure observations is well understood and the theoretical machinery necessary for taking
advantage of high accuracy observations is now in place.
These promise the possibility
of constraining physics at energies inaccessible to any other form of experiment.
observations are eagerly awaited.
Acknowledgments
JEL is supported by the Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council (UK). ARL is
supported by the Royal Society. EWK and MA are supported at Fermilab by the DOE
and NASA under Grant NAG 5–2788.
TB is supported by JNICT (Portugal). We are
grateful for many helpful discussions with John Barrow, Robert Caldwell, Bernard Carr,
Scott Dodelson, John Gilbert, Martin Hendry, Lloyd Knox, David Lyth, Douglas Scott,
Paul Steinhardt, Reza Tavakol, Michael Turner and Martin White.