Training Restricted Boltzmann Machines using Approximations to
the Likelihood Gradient
Tijmen Tieleman
 
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G4, Canada
A new algorithm for training Restricted
Boltzmann Machines is introduced. The algorithm, named Persistent Contrastive Divergence, is diﬀerent from the standard Contrastive Divergence algorithms in that it
aims to draw samples from almost exactly
the model distribution.
It is compared to
some standard Contrastive Divergence and
Pseudo-Likelihood algorithms on the tasks
of modeling and classifying various types of
data. The Persistent Contrastive Divergence
algorithm outperforms the other algorithms,
and is equally fast and simple.
1. Introduction
Restricted
et al., 2006; Smolensky, 1986) are neural network models for unsupervised learning, but have recently seen a
lot of application as feature extraction methods for
supervised learning algorithms .
The success of these models
raises the issue of how best to train them.
Most training algorithms are based on gradient descent, but the standard objective function (training
data likelihood) is intractable, so the algorithms differ in their choice of approximation to the gradient
of the objective function. At present, the most popular gradient approximation is the Contrastive Divergence (CD) approximation ; more speciﬁcally the CD-1 approximation. However, it is not obvious whether it is the best.
For example, the CD
algorithm has a parameter specifying the number of
Appearing in Proceedings of the 25 th International Conference on Machine Learning, Helsinki, Finland, 2008. Copyright 2008 by the author(s)/owner(s).
Markov Chain transitions performed, and although
the most commonly chosen value is 1, other choices
are possible and reasonable, too .
In this paper, a new gradient approximation algorithm
is presented and compared to a variety of CD-based algorithms. The quantitative measures of test data likelihood (for unsupervised learning) and classiﬁcation
error rate (for supervised learning) are investigated,
and the type of feature detectors that are developed
are also shown. We ﬁnd that the new algorithm produces more meaningful feature detectors, and outperforms the other algorithms.
The RBMs on which these experiments were done all
had binary units. However, this special case can easily
be generalized to other harmoniums in which the units have Gaussian,
Poisson, multinomial, or other distributions in the exponential family, and the training algorithms described
here require only minor modiﬁcations to work in most
of those models.
In Section 2, the RBM model and CD gradient estimator are discussed.
In Section 3, the Persistent
Contrastive Divergence algorithm is introduced.
Sections 4 and 5, the experiments and results are described, and Section 6 concludes with a discussion and
some plans for future work.
2. RBMs and the CD Gradient
Approximation
2.1. Restricted Boltzmann Machines
An RBM is an energy-based model for unsupervised
learning . It consists
of two layers of binary units: one visible, to represent
the data, and one hidden, to increase learning capacity. Standard notation is to use i for indices of visible
units, j for indices of hidden units, and wij for the
strength of the connection between the ith visible unit
and the jth hidden unit. If vi denotes the state of the
Training Restricted Boltzmann Machines using Approximations to the Likelihood Gradient
ith visible unit, and hj denotes the state of the jth
hidden unit, an energy function is deﬁned on states:
E(v, h) = −P
i,j vihjwij −P
j hjbj, where b
stands for the biases. Through these energies, probabilities are deﬁned as P(v, h) = e−E(v,h)
where Z is the
normalizing constant Z = P
x,y e−E(x,y). The probability of a data point (represented by the state v of
the visible layer) is deﬁned as the marginal: P(v) =
h P(v, h) =
h e−E(v,h)
Thus, the training data
likelihood, using just one training point for simplicity,
is φ = log P(v) = φ+−φ−where φ+ = log P
h e−E(v,h)
and φ−= log Z = log P
x,y e−E(x,y). The positive gradient
∂wij is simple:
∂wij = vi · P(hj = 1|v). The
negative gradient
∂wij = P(vi = 1, hj = 1), however,
is intractable. If we could get samples from the model,
we could Monte Carlo approximate it, but even getting
those samples is intractable.
2.2. The Contrastive Divergence Gradient
Approximation
To get a tractable approximation of
∂wij , one uses
some algorithm to approximately sample from the
model. The Contrastive Divergence (CD) algorithm
is one way to do this. It is designed in such a way
that at least the direction of the gradient estimate is
somewhat accurate, even when the size is not. CD-1
is, at present, the most commonly used algorithm for
training RBMs.
One of the algorithms we compare
is regular CD-1; another is CD-10, which is generally
considered to be better if the required computer time
is available.
A variation on CD is mean ﬁeld CD , abbreviated MF CD. This has the advantage of
being a deterministic gradient estimate, which means
that larger learning rates can be used.
We include
mean ﬁeld CD-1 in the comparison.
3. The Persistent Contrastive
Divergence Algorithm
CD-1 is fast, has low variance, and is a reasonable
approximation to the likelihood gradient, but it is
still signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the likelihood gradient when the mixing rate is low. This can be seen by
drawing samples from the distribution that it learns
(see Figure 4). Generally speaking, CD-n for greater
n is preferred over CD-1, if enough running time is
available. In Neal’s 1992 paper about Sigmoid Belief
Networks , a solution is suggested for such situations. In the context of RBMs, the idea is as follows
 ).
What we need for approximating ∂φ−
∂wij is a sample from
the model distribution. The standard way to get it
is by using a Markov Chain, but running a chain for
many steps is too time-consuming. However, between
parameter updates, the model changes only slightly.
We can take advantage of that by initializing a Markov
Chain at the state in which it ended for the previous model. This initialization is often fairly close to
the model distribution, even though the model has
changed a bit in the parameter update.
this approach with Sigmoid Belief Networks to approximately sample from the posterior distribution over
hidden layer states given the visible layer state. For
RBMs, the situation is a bit simpler: there is only one
distribution from which we need samples, as opposed
to one distribution per training data point. Thus, the
algorithm can be used to produce gradient estimates
online or using mini-batches, using only a few training data points for the positive part of each gradient
estimate, and only a few ’fantasy’ points for the negative part. The fantasy points are updated by one full
step of the Markov Chain each time a mini-batch is
processed.
Of course this still is an approximation, because the
model does change slightly with each parameter update. With inﬁnitesimally small learning rate it becomes exact, and in general it seems to work best with
small learning rates.
We call this algorithm Persistent Contrastive Divergence (PCD), to emphasize that the Markov Chain is
not reset between parameter updates.
4. Experiments
We did a variety of experiments, using diﬀerent data
sets (digit images, emails, artiﬁcial data, horse image
segmentations, digit image patches), diﬀerent models
(RBMs, classiﬁcation RBMs, fully visible Markov Random Fields), diﬀerent training procedures (PCD, CD-
1, CD-10, MF CD, pseudo likelihood), and diﬀerent
tasks (unsupervised vs. supervised learning).
4.1. Data Sets
The ﬁrst data set that we used was the MNIST dataset
of handwritten digit images (LeCun & Cortes, ). The
images are 28 by 28 pixels, and the data set consists
of 60,000 training cases and 10,000 test cases. To have
a validation set, we split the oﬃcial training set of
60,000 cases into a training set of 50,000 cases and a
validation set of 10,000 cases. To have binary data, we
treat the pixel intensities as probabilities. Each time a
binary data point is required, a real-valued MNIST im-
Training Restricted Boltzmann Machines using Approximations to the Likelihood Gradient
age is binarized by sampling from the given Bernoulli
distribution for each pixel. Thus, in eﬀect, our data
set is a mixture of 70,000 factorial distributions: one
for each of the data points in the MNIST data set.
Another data set was obtained by taking small patches
of 5 by 5 pixels, from the MNIST images.
have somewhat smooth-looking data, we binarized by
thresholding at 1/2. The 70,000 MNIST data points
were thus turned into 70,000 times (28 −5 + 1)2 is
4,032,000 patches. This data set was split into training (60%), validation (20%), and test (20%) sets.
A data set consisting of descriptions of e-mails was
made available by Sam Roweis. It describes 5,000 emails using a variety of binary features - mostly word
presence vs. absence features. The e-mails are labeled
as spam or non-spam.
An artiﬁcial data set was created by combining the
outlines of rectangles and triangles. Because this data
set is artiﬁcially generated, there is an inﬁnite amount
of it, which helps shed some light on the reasons for
using weight decay regularization.
Lastly, we used a data set of image segmentations: in
pictures of horses, the segmentation indicates which
pixels are part of the horse and which are background
 . By using only the segmentation, we have a binary data set.
4.2. Models
The ﬁrst model we used is an RBM, exactly as described above. For the MNIST and horse segmentation
data sets, we used 500 hidden units; for the artiﬁcial
data set we used 100.
One of the evaluations is how well the learned RBM
models the test data, i.e. log likelihood. This is intractable for regular size RBMs, because the time complexity of that computation is exponential in the size
of the smallest layer (visible or hidden). One experiment, therefore, was done using only 25 hidden units,
so that log likelihood could be calculated exactly in
about two hours. Another experiment uses an approximate assessment of the normalization constant Z, that
was developed recently in our group .
This algorithm works for any number of hidden units, but its reliability has not been
researched extensively. Nonetheless, it seems to give a
reasonable indication, and can be used to complement
other results.
RBMs, however, are models for unsupervised learning,
so for classiﬁcation we used a slightly diﬀerent model,
described in more detail in . We
used an RBM with one added visible unit, which represented the label. The training data points are then
combinations of inputs with their labels, and testing
is done by choosing the most likely label given the input, under the learned model. This model we call a
’classiﬁcation RBM’. Note that the label unit is not
necessarily binary (although in the spam classiﬁcation
task it is). In the MNIST classiﬁcation task it is multinomial: it can have 10 diﬀerent values. This, however,
does not signiﬁcantly change the algorithms . For MNIST classiﬁcation we used 500 hidden
units; for spam classiﬁcation we used 100.
The third model we tested is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent:
a fully visible, fully connected Markov Random Field (MRF) ).
One can use the PCD algorithm
on it, although it looks a bit diﬀerent in this case.
We compared its performance to the more commonly
used Pseudo-Likelihood optimization algorithm . To have exact test data log likelihood measurements, we used small models, with only 25 units.
4.3. The Mini-batch Optimization Procedure
We used the mini-batch learning procedure: we only
used a small number of training points for each gradient estimate. We used 100 training points in each
mini-batch for most data sets.
4.4. Algorithm Details
The PCD algorithm can be implemented in various
One could, for example, choose to randomly
reset some of the Markov Chains at regular intervals.
Initial tests showed that the best implementation is as
follows: no Markov Chains get reset; one full Gibbs
update is done on each of the Markov Chains for each
gradient estimate; and the number of Markov Chains
is equal to the number of training data points in a
mini-batch.
PCD for fully visible MRFs is a bit diﬀerent from PCD
for RBMs. A pleasant diﬀerence is that ∂φ+
is constant, so it can be precomputed for the entire training
set. Thus, no variance results from the use of minibatches, and the training set can be discarded after
is computed over it. An unpleasant diﬀerence is
that the Markov Chain deﬁned by Gibbs sampling has
slower mixing: MRFs with connections between the
visible units lack the pleasant property of RBMs that
all visible units can be updated at the same time.
A Pseudo-Likelihood (PL) gradient computation requires more work than a PCD gradient computation,
because it requires a logistic regression gradient esti-
Training Restricted Boltzmann Machines using Approximations to the Likelihood Gradient
mate for each of the units. As a result, we found that
using mini-batches of 50 training points instead of 100
took only a little bit more time per training point,
and did allow updating the model parameters almost
twice as often, which is preferable in the mini-batch
optimization procedure.
4.5. Other Technical Details
The learning rates used in the experiments are not
In practice, decaying learning rates often
work better. In these experiments, the learning rate
was linearly decayed from some initial learning rate to
zero, over the duration of the learning. Preliminary
experiments showed that this works better than the
t schedule suggested in theoretical work by , which is preferable when inﬁnitely
much time is available for the optimization.
Some experiment parameters, such as the number of
hidden units, and the size of the mini-batches, were
ﬁxed. However, the initial learning rate was chosen
using a validation set, as was weight decay for the
(shorter) experiments on the spam, horses, MNIST
patches, and artiﬁcial data sets. For each algorithm,
each task, and each training duration, 30 runs were
performed with evaluation on validation data, trying
to ﬁnd the settings that worked best. Then a choice of
initial learning rate and, for the shorter experiments,
weight decay, were made, and with those chosen settings, 10 more runs were performed, evaluating on test
This provided 10 test performance numbers,
which were summarized by their average and standard
deviation (shown as error bars).
5. Results
5.1. The three MNIST Tasks
The results on the three MNIST tasks are shown in
Figures 1, 2, and 3.
It is clear that PCD outperforms the other algorithms.
PCD, CD-1, and MF CD all take approximately the
same amount of time per gradient estimate, with MF
CD being a little bit faster because it does not have
to create random numbers. CD-10 takes about four
times as long as PCD, CD-1, and MF CD, but it is
indeed better than CD-1.
While CD-1 is good for some purposes, it is substantially diﬀerent from the true likelihood gradient. This
can be seen by drawing samples from an RBM that
was trained with CD-1. Figure 4 shows those next to
samples drawn from an RBM that was trained using
PCD. It is clear that PCD is a better approximation
128sec 4min
8min 17min 34min 68min
test data log likelihood per case
training time (logarithmic)
Figure 1. Modeling MNIST data with 25 hidden units (exact log likelihood)
8min 17min 34min 68min
test data log likelihood per case
training time (logarithmic)
Figure 2. Modeling MNIST data with 500 hidden units
(approximate log likelihood)
Training Restricted Boltzmann Machines using Approximations to the Likelihood Gradient
8min 17min 34min 68min
percentage correctly classified
training time (logarithmic)
Figure 3. Classiﬁcation of MNIST data
test data log likelihood per case
training time (logarithmic)
Figure 5. Modeling artiﬁcial data
to the likelihood gradient.
Classiﬁcation is a particularly interesting task because
it gives an indication of how well the model can extract
relevant features from the input. RBMs are most often used as feature detectors, and this ﬁnding suggests
that PCD creates feature detectors that give better
classiﬁcation than CD-1.
5.2. Modeling Artiﬁcial Data
In Figure 5 we see essentially the same as what happened on the MNIST tasks.
MF CD is clearly the
worst of the algorithms, CD-1 works better, and CD-
10 and PCD work best, with CD-10 being preferable
when little time is available and PCD being better if
more time is available.
percentage correctly classified
training time (logarithmic)
Figure 6. Classifying e-mail as spam versus non-spam
This data set was artiﬁcially generated, so there was
an inﬁnite amount of data available. Thus, one might
think that the use of weight decay serves no purpose.
However, all four algorithms did work best with some
weight decay. The explanation for this is that CD algorithms are quite dependent on the mixing rate of the
Markov Chain deﬁned by the Gibbs sampler, and that
mixing rate is higher when the parameters of the model
are smaller. Thus, weight decay keeps the model mixing reasonably well, and makes CD algorithms work
better. The eﬀect is strongest for MF CD, which performs only one Gibbs update and does so without introducing noise. MF CD worked best with a weight
decay strength of 10−3.
CD-1 does introduce some
noise in the update procedure, and required less weight
decay: 3 · 10−4. CD-10 performs more updates, and
is less dependent on the mixing rate. The best weight
decay value for CD-10 turned out to be approximately
1.3·10−4. Finally, the mixing mechanism used by PCD
is even better, but it is still based on the Gibbs sampler, so it, too, works better with some weight decay.
The best weight decay strength for PCD was approximately 2.5 · 10−5.
5.3. Classifying E-mail Data
In Figure 6 the results on the e-mail classiﬁcation task
are shown. Because this is a small data set (5,000 data
points in total, i.e. only 1000 test data points), we see
that the error bars on the performace are quite large.
Thus, we cannot carefully compare the performance of
CD-1, CD-10, and PCD. We only see that MF CD is,
again, not the best method.
However, we can conclude that RBMs can be used for
this task, too, with acceptable performance, and that
Training Restricted Boltzmann Machines using Approximations to the Likelihood Gradient
Figure 4. Samples from an RBM that was trained using PCD (left) and an RBM that was trained using CD-1 (right).
Clearly, CD-1 did not produce an accurate model of the MNIST digits. Notice, however, that some of the CD-1 samples
vaguely resemble a three.
128sec 4min
8min 17min 34min 68min
test data log likelihood per case
training time (logarithmic)
Figure 7. Modeling horse segmentation data
PCD is a reasonable choice of training algorithm.
5.4. Modeling Horse Contours
In Figure 7 we see a diﬀerent picture: PCD is not
the best algorithm here. The most plausible explanation is that although the same amount of training time
was used, the data is much bigger: 1024 visible units,
and 500 hidden units. Thus, there were 20 times as
many connections in the RBM to be learned, which
also means processing one mini-batch took more than
10 times as long as for the artiﬁcial data. Thus, we
are essentially looking at a short optimization. Above,
we already saw that CD-10 is better than PCD when
little time is available, and that is conﬁrmed here. We
conjecture that, given signiﬁcantly more training time,
PCD would perform better than the other algorithms.
5.5. PCD on Fully Visible MRFs
To verify that PCD also works well with other models, we did some experiments with fully visible, fully
connected MRFs. To be able to have exact test data
likelihood evaluation, we made the MRFs small, and
modeled 5 by 5 pixel patches from the MNIST digit
Pseudo-Likelihood (PL) training works reasonably
well on this data set, but it does not produce the best
probability models. Presumably this is simply because
PL optimizes a diﬀerent objective function. As a result, PL needed early stopping to prevent diverging
too much from the data likelihood objective function,
and the optimal learning rates are more or less inversely proportional to the duration of the optimization. Even with only a few seconds training time, the
best test data likelihood is already achieved: −5.35.
PCD training does go more in the direction of the data
likelihood function - asymptotically it gives its exact
gradient. Thus, PCD did proﬁt from having more time
to run. Figure 8 shows the performance. The asymptotic value of approximately −5.15 does seem to be
the best possible model: we also used exact gradient
Training Restricted Boltzmann Machines using Approximations to the Likelihood Gradient
test data log likelihood per case
training time (logarithmic)
Figure 8. Training a fully visible MRF
optimization (which is slow, but possible), and this
equally ended up with test data log likelihood of −5.15.
However, the entropy of the training data distribution
is signiﬁcantly less than 5.15 ’nats’: it is 4.78 nats.
This diﬀerence is probably due to the fact that the
model has insuﬃcient complexity to completely learn
the training data distribution.
Incidentally, the training data log likelihood is only
0.004 better than the test data log likelihood - presumably because this data set is quite large and the
model is quite small.
6. Discussion and Future Work
One issue not investigated is the use of weight decay. It
is quite possible that the more approximate algorithms
(such as CD-1 and MF CD) would beneﬁt more from
weight decay than CD-10 and PCD. In an RBM with
zero weights, CD-1 and MF CD give exactly the likelihood gradient, and in general, in RBMs with small
weights those algorithms give better approximations
to the likelihood gradient than in RBMs with large
weights. Weight decay keeps the weights small, and
thus enables gradient estimates that approximate the
likelihood gradient more closely. For many tasks, however, large weights may be required for good performance, so strong weight decay is undesirable if it can
be avoided.
Also, the amount of training time used in these experiments is insuﬃcient to ﬁnd the asymptotic performance. In Figure 3 one can see, for example, that
PCD clearly proﬁts from more training time. To ﬁnd
out what its performance would be with more training
time is future work, but we have seen runs (with more
training time and more hidden units) where as few
as 104 out of the 10,000 test cases were misclassiﬁed.
Clearly, this is worth investigating further.
Another issue suggesting future work is that the classiﬁcation RBMs in these experiments were not trained
to maximize classiﬁcation performance.
trained to accurately model the joint distribution over
images and labels. It is possible to train classiﬁcation
RBMs directly for classiﬁcation performance; the gradient is fairly simple and certainly tractable. A natural way to use this classiﬁcation error gradient is after
training the RBM for joint density modeling. However, in preliminary experiments we found that this
procedure begins to overﬁt very quickly (often after
improving performance by less than 0.1%), so we did
not include it in this paper. It is, however, still possible that combining the classiﬁcation gradient with the
density modeling gradient is a method that could yield
more improvements. This is future work.
The main limitation of PCD is that it appears to require a low learning rate in order to allow the ”fantasy”
points to be sampled from a distribution that is close to
the stationary distribution for the current weights. A
theoretical analysis of this requirement can be found in
 and . Some preliminary
experiments, however, suggest that PCD can be made
to work well even when the learning rate is much larger
than the one suggested by the asymptotic justiﬁcation
of PCD and we are currently exploring variations that
allow much larger learning rates.
Acknowledgements
I thank Geoﬀrey Hinton and Ruslan Salakhutdinov
for many useful discussions and helpful suggestions.
Nikola Karamanov and Alex Levinshtein helped by
providing data sets.
The anonymous reviewers also
provided many useful suggestions. This research was
supported by NSERC and Microsoft.