2003 Special Issue
Learning and inference in the brain
Karl Friston*
The Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology, University College London, 12 Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK
Received 16 December 2002; revised 26 June 2003; accepted 26 June 2003
This article is about how the brain data mines its sensory inputs. There are several architectural principles of functional brain anatomy that
have emerged from careful anatomic and physiologic studies over the past century. These principles are considered in the light of
representational learning to see if they could have been predicted a priori on the basis of purely theoretical considerations. We ﬁrst review the
organisation of hierarchical sensory cortices, paying special attention to the distinction between forward and backward connections. We then
review various approaches to representational learning as special cases of generative models, starting with supervised learning and ending
with learning based upon empirical Bayes. The latter predicts many features, such as a hierarchical cortical system, prevalent top-down
backward inﬂuences and functional asymmetries between forward and backward connections that are seen in the real brain.
The key points made in this article are: (i) hierarchical generative models enable the learning of empirical priors and eschew prior
assumptions about the causes of sensory input that are inherent in non-hierarchical models. These assumptions are necessary for learning
schemes based on information theory and efﬁcient or sparse coding, but are not necessary in a hierarchical context. Critically, the anatomical
infrastructure that may implement generative models in the brain is hierarchical. Furthermore, learning based on empirical Bayes can
proceed in a biologically plausible way. (ii) The second point is that backward connections are essential if the processes generating inputs
cannot be inverted, or the inversion cannot be parameterised. Because these processes involve many-to-one mappings, are non-linear and
dynamic in nature, they are generally non-invertible. This enforces an explicit parameterisation of generative models (i.e. backward
connections) to afford recognition and suggests that forward architectures, on their own, are not sufﬁcient for perception. (iii) Finally, nonlinearities in generative models, mediated by backward connections, require these connections to be modulatory, so that representations in
higher cortical levels can interact to predict responses in lower levels. This is important in relation to functional asymmetries in forward and
backward connections that have been demonstrated empirically.
q 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Inference; Predictive coding; Generative models; Information theory; Bayesian
1. Introduction
This article uses the relationship among computational
models of representational learning as a vehicle to illustrate
how theoretical approaches to neuronal information processing can help understand the structure of functional brain
architectures. We start by reviewing two principles of brain
organisation, namely functional specialisation and functional integration and how they rest upon the anatomy and
physiology of hierarchical cortico-cortical connections in
the brain. Section 3 deals with the nature and learning of
representations from a theoretical or computational perspective. This section reviews supervised (e.g. connectionist) approaches, information theoretic approaches and those
predicated on predictive coding. The review examines the
heuristics behind the various schemes using the framework
of generative models. We then introduce learning based on
empirical Bayes that is enabled by hierarchical generative
models. The key focus of this section is on the functional
architectures and assumptions implied by each model.
Representational learning based on information theory can,
in principle, proceed using only forward connections.
However, this is only tenable when processes generating
sensory inputs are invertible and independent. Invertibility
is precluded when the cause of a percept and its context
interact. These interactions create a problem of contextual
invariance that can only be resolved using internal or
generative models. Contextual invariance is necessary for
categorisation of sensory input (e.g. category-speciﬁc
responses) and represents a fundamental problem in
perceptual synthesis. Generative or forward models can
0893-6080/03/$ - see front matter q 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.neunet.2003.06.005
Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
www.elsevier.com/locate/neunet
* Tel.: þ44-207-833-7457; fax: þ44-207-813-1445.
E-mail address: (K. Friston).
solve this problem using predictive coding but only if the
distribution of causes is known a priori. Empirical Bayes
allows these priors to be learned, along with the model
itself, using hierarchies of backward and lateral projections
that prevail in the real brain. In short, hierarchical models of
representational learning are a natural choice for understanding real functional architectures and, critically, confer
a necessary role on backward connections.
2. Functional specialisation and integration
2.1. Background
The brain appears to adhere to two fundamental
principles of functional organisation, namely functional
integration and functional specialisation, where the integration within and among specialised areas is mediated by
effective connectivity. The distinction relates to that
between ‘localisationism’ and ‘(dis)connectionism’ that
dominated thinking about cortical function in the 19th
century. Since the early anatomic theories of Gall, the
identiﬁcation of a particular brain region with a speciﬁc
function has become a central theme in neuroscience.
However, functional localisation per se was not easy to
demonstrate. For example, a meeting that took place on
August 4th 1881 addressed the difﬁculties of attributing
function to a cortical area, given the dependence of cerebral
activity on underlying connections . This meeting was entitled ‘Localisation of
function in the cortex cerebri’. Goltz, although accepting the
results of electrical stimulation in dog and monkey cortex,
considered that the excitation method was inconclusive,
because the behaviours elicited might have originated in
related pathways, or current could have spread to distant
centres. In short, the excitation method could not be used to
infer functional localisation because localisationism discounted interactions, or functional integration among
different brain areas. It was proposed that lesion studies
could supplement excitation experiments. Ironically, it was
observed on patients with brain lesions some years later that led to the concept of
‘disconnection syndromes’ and the refutation of localisationism as a complete or sufﬁcient explanation of cortical
organisation. Since that time, there has been a great
endeavour to integrate electrophysiological ﬁndings and
those inspired by the lesion-deﬁcit model. This convergence
has led to an increasingly reﬁned understanding of the
segregation–integration axis. Much of this understanding
rests on the many-to-one and one-to-many mappings
between structure and function. For example, the functional
specialisation of motion-selective units in MT has been
characterised with remarkable ﬁnesse , yet lesions to MT alone are not sufﬁcient to produce
stable deﬁcits in motion perception. Results like these
suggest that several neuronal systems may support the same
function (i.e. degenerate many-to-one mappings). Conversely, one cortical system may contribute to many functions:
motion cues serve many purposes in primate vision.
Consequently, akinetopsia, a defect of movement perception due to cerebral lesions, may comprise a range of
motion-related defects. To address this issue Rizzo, Nawrot,
and Zihl explored the perceptual proﬁles in an
akinetopsia subject L.M. who had extensive bilateral lesions
of the dorsolateral visual association cortex that spared
primary visual cortex. “Surprisingly, L.M. also had trouble
perceiving 2-D shapes deﬁned by non-motion signals
including ‘on’ and ‘off’ transients, dynamic and static
binocular disparity, and static texture cues.” This sort of
ﬁnding speaks to a one-to-many structure–function
relationship.
Functional localisation implies that a function can be
localised in a cortical area, whereas specialisation suggests
that a cortical area is specialised for some aspects of
perceptual or motor processing, where this specialisation
can be anatomically segregated within the cortex. The
cortical infrastructure supporting a single function may then
involve many specialised areas whose union is mediated by
the functional integration among them. Functional specialisation and integration are not exclusive; they are complementary. Functional specialisation is only meaningful in
the context of functional integration and vice versa.
2.2. Functional specialisation and segregation
The functional role, played by any component (e.g.
cortical area, sub-area, neuronal population or neuron) of
the brain, is deﬁned largely by its connections. Certain
patterns of cortical projections are so common that they
could amount to rules of cortical connectivity. “These rules
revolve around one, apparently, overriding strategy that the
cerebral cortex uses—that of functional segregation” . Functional segregation demands that cells with
common functional properties be grouped together. There
are many examples of this grouping (e.g. laminar selectivity, ocular dominance bands and orientation domains in V1).
This architectural constraint necessitates both convergence
and divergence of cortical connections. Extrinsic connections, between cortical regions, are not continuous but occur
in patches or clusters. This patchiness has, in some
instances, a clear relationship to functional segregation.
For example, the secondary visual area V2 has a distinctive
cytochrome oxidase architecture, consisting of thick stripes,
thin stripes and inter-stripes. When recordings are made in
V2, directionally selective (but not wavelength or colour
selective) cells are found exclusively in the thick stripes.
Retrograde (i.e. backward) labelling of cells in V5 is limited
to these thick stripes. All the available physiological
evidence suggests that V5 is a functionally homogeneous
area that is specialised for visual motion. Evidence of this
nature supports the idea that patchy connectivity is
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
the anatomical infrastructure that underpins functional
segregation and specialisation.
The notion that connections underpin segregation scales
from the level of stripes in V2 to processing streams that
encompass many cortical areas. For example, current
models partition the primate visual system into dorsal
(magno) and ventral (parvo, konio) streams. Evidence for
this derives from the pattern of projections between V1 and
V2. Recently this evidence has been re-evaluated who demonstrate that “V1 output arises
from just two sources: patch columns and inter-patch
columns. Patch columns project to thin stripes and interpatch columns project to pale and thick stripes. Projection of
inter-patches to common V2 stripe types (pale and thick)
merges parvo and magno inputs, making it likely that these
functional channels are distributed strongly to both dorsal
and ventral streams.”
2.3. The anatomy and physiology of cortico-cortical
connections
If specialisation rests upon connectivity, then important
organisational principles should be embodied in the
neuroanatomy and physiology of extrinsic connections.
Extrinsic connections couple different cortical areas,
whereas intrinsic connections are conﬁned to the cortical
sheet. There are certain features of cortico-cortical connections that provide strong clues about their functional role. In
brief, there appears to be a hierarchical organisation that
rests upon the distinction between forward and backward
connections. The designation of a connection as forward or
backward depends primarily on its cortical layers of origin
and termination. Some characteristics of cortico-cortical
connections are presented below and are summarised in
Table 1. The list is not exhaustive, nor properly qualiﬁed,
but serves to introduce some important principles that have
emerged from empirical studies of visual cortex.
Hierarchical organisation. The organisation of the visual
cortices can be considered as a hierarchy of cortical levels
with reciprocal extrinsic cortico-cortical connections among
the constituent cortical areas . Forward connections run from lower to higher areas
and backward connections from higher to lower. Lateral
connections connect regions within a hierarchical level. The
notion of a hierarchy depends upon a distinction between
extrinsic forward and backward connections.
Reciprocal connections. Although reciprocal, forward
and backward connections show both a microstructural and
functional asymmetry. The terminations of both show
laminar speciﬁcity. Forwards connections (from a low to a
high level) have sparse axonal bifurcations and are
topographically organised, originating in supragranular
layers and terminating largely in layer IV. Backward
connections, on the other hand, show abundant axonal
bifurcation and a more diffuse topography, although they
can be patchy . Their origins are
bilaminar/infragranular and they terminate predominantly
in supragranular layers . Extrinsic connections show an orderly
convergence and divergence of connections from one
cortical level to the next. At a macroscopic level, one point
in a given cortical area will connect to a region 5–8 mm in
diameter in another. An important distinction between
forward and backward connections is that backward
connections are more divergent. For example, the divergence region of a point in V5 (i.e. the region receiving
backward afferents from V5) may include thick and interstripes in V2 whereas its convergence region (i.e. the
region providing forward afferents to V5) is limited to the
thick stripes . Furthermore, backward
connections are more abundant than forward connections
and transcend more levels. For example the ratio of
forward efferent connections to backward afferents in the
lateral geniculate is about 1:10/20. Another important
distinction is that backward connections will traverse a
number of hierarchical levels whereas forward connections
are more restricted. For example, there are backward
connections from TE and TEO to V1 but no monosynaptic
connections from V1 to TE or TEO 
The notion of a hierarchy depends upon a distinction between forward and backward extrinsic connections
This distinction rests upon different laminar speciﬁcity 
Backward connections are more numerous and transcend more levels
Backward connections are more diffuse than forward connections 
Forwards connections
Backwards connections
Sparse axonal bifurcations
Abundant axonal bifurcation
Topographically organised
Diffuse topography
Originate in supragranular layers
Originate in bilaminar/infragranular layers
Terminate largely in layer IV
Terminate predominantly in supragranular layers
Post-synaptic effects through fast AMPA (1.3–2.4 ms decay) and GABAA
(6 ms decay) receptors
Modulatory afferents activate slow (50 ms decay) voltage-sensitive NMDA
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
Functionally asymmetric forward and backward connections. Functionally, reversible inactivation and neuroimaging studies suggest that
forward connections are driving, always eliciting a
response, whereas backward connections can also be
modulatory. In this context, modulatory means backward
connections modulate responsiveness to other inputs. At the
single cell level “inputs from drivers can be differentiated
from those of modulators. The driver can be identiﬁed as the
transmitter of receptive ﬁeld properties; the modulator can
be identiﬁed as altering the probability of certain aspects of
that transmission” .
The notion that forward connections are concerned with
the promulgation and segregation of sensory information is
consistent with: (i) their sparse axonal bifurcation, (ii)
patchy axonal terminations, and (iii) topographic projections. In contradistinction, backward connections are
generally considered to have a role in mediating contextual
effects and in the co-ordination of processing channels. This
is consistent with: (i) their frequent bifurcation, (ii) diffuse
axonal terminations, and (iii) more divergent topography
 . Forward
connections meditate their post-synaptic effects through fast
AMPA (1.3–2.4 ms decay) and GABAA (6 ms decay)
receptors. Modulatory effects can be mediated by NMDA
receptors. NMDA receptors are voltage-sensitive, showing
non-linear and slow dynamics (,50 ms decay). They are
found predominantly in supragranular layers where backward connections terminate . These
slow time-constants again point to a role in mediating
contextual effects that are more enduring than phasic
sensory-evoked responses. The clearest evidence, for the
modulatory role of backward connections (that is mediated
by ‘slow’ glutamate receptors) comes from corticogeniculate connections. In the cat lateral geniculate nucleus,
cortical feedback is partly mediated by type 1 metabotropic
glutamate receptors, which are located exclusively on distal
segments of the relay-cell dendrites. Rivadulla, Martinez,
Varela, and Cudeiro have shown that these backward
afferents enhance the excitatory centre of the thalamic
receptive ﬁeld. “Therefore, cortex, by closing this corticofugal loop, is able to increase the gain of its thalamic input
within a focal spatial window, selecting key features of the
incoming signal” .
The asymmetry between forward and backward connections maps nicely onto the distinction between driving and
modulatory effects proposed by Sherman and Guillery
 . (i) Cross-correlograms from driving inputs have
sharper peaks than modulatory inputs, (ii) there are likely to
be few drivers but many modulators for any cell, and (iii)
drivers act through (fast) ionotropic receptors, whereas
modulators also activate metabotropic receptors with a slow
and prolonged post-synaptic effect.
In relation to the status of hierarchical cortical organisation, it should be noted that the hierarchical ordering of
areas is a matter of debate and may be indeterminate. On the
basis of computational neuroanatomic studies, Hilgetag,
O’Neill, and Young conclude laminar hierarchical
constraints that are presently available in the anatomical
literature are “insufﬁcient to constrain a unique ordering”
for any of the sensory systems analysed. However, basic
hierarchical principles were clearly evident. Indeed, the
authors note “All the cortical systems we studied displayed
a signiﬁcant degree of hierarchical organisation” with the
visual and somato-motor systems showing an organisation
that was “surprisingly strictly hierarchical”.
In what follows we will consider hierarchies as entities in
their own right. However, there are probably many
hierarchical brain systems that are interconnected. The
schematic in Fig. 1 shows how several hierarchical
structures could be organised in the brain. This schematic
is inspired by Mesulam’s notion of sensory-fugal
processing over “a core synaptic hierarchy, which includes
the primary sensory, upstream unimodal, downstream
unimodal, heteromodal, paralimbic and limbic zones of
the cerebral cortex” .
There are many mechanisms that are responsible for
establishing connections in the brain. Connectivity results
from interplay between genetic, epigenetic and activity- or
experience-dependent mechanisms. In utero, epigenetic
mechanisms predominate, such as the interaction between
the topography of the developing cortical sheet, cell
migration, gene expression and the mediating role of
gene–gene interactions and gene products such as cell
adhesion molecules (CAMs). Following birth, connections
are progressively reﬁned and re-modelled with a greater
emphasis on activity- and use-dependent plasticity. These
changes endure into adulthood with ongoing reorganisation
and experience-dependent plasticity that subserves behavioural adaptation and learning. In brief, there are two basic
determinants of connectivity. (i) Structural plasticity,
reﬂecting the interactions between the molecular biology
of gene expression, cell migration and neurogenesis in the
developing brain. (ii) Synaptic plasticity, activity-dependent
modelling of the pattern and strength of synaptic connections. This plasticity involves changes in the form,
expression and function of synapses that endure throughout
It is interesting to note that forward and backward
connections evidence a structural plasticity that is, neurodevelopmentally, quite distinct. The laminar organisation of
cortico-cortical projection neurons (reﬂected in the percentage of supragranular projecting neurons—SLN%) characterises cortical pathways as forward or backward. The
developmental reduction of SLN% is a widespread
phenomenon in the neocortex and is a distinctive feature
of backward pathways . Recent
studies by Batardiere et al. suggest that forward and
backward connections “exhibit different developmental
processes and patterns of connections linking cortical
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
areas and their hierarchical relations are established prenatally, independently of regressive phenomena”.
In the post-developmental period, synaptic plasticity is
an important functional attribute of connections in the brain
and is thought to subserve perceptual and procedural
learning and memory. This is a large and fascinating ﬁeld
that ranges from molecules to maps . Changing the strength of connections
between neurons is widely assumed to be the mechanism
by which memory traces are encoded and stored in the
central nervous system. In its most general form, the
synaptic plasticity and memory hypothesis states that.
“Activity-dependent synaptic plasticity is induced at
appropriate synapses during memory formation and is
both necessary and sufﬁcient for the information storage
underlying the type of memory mediated by the brain area in
which that plasticity is observed” . A key aspect of this
plasticity is that it is generally associative.
Associative plasticity. Synaptic plasticity may be transient (e.g. short-term potentiation STP or depression STD) or
enduring (e.g. long-term potentiation LTP or LTD) with
many different time constants. In contrast to short-term
plasticity, long-term changes rely on protein synthesis,
synaptic re-modelling and infrastructural changes in cell
processes (e.g. terminal arbours or dendritic spines) that are
mediated by calcium-dependent mechanisms. An important
aspect of NMDA receptors, in the induction of LTP, is that
they confer associativity on changes in connection strength.
This is because their voltage-sensitivity only allows calcium
ions to enter the cell when there is conjoint pre-synaptic
release of glutamate and sufﬁcient post-synaptic depolarisation (i.e. the temporal association of pre- and post-synaptic
events). Calcium entry renders the post-synaptic specialisation eligible for future potentiation by promoting
Fig. 1. Schematic illustrating hierarchical structures in the brain and the distinction between forward, backward and lateral connections.
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
the formation of synaptic ‘tags’ 
and other calcium-dependant intracellular mechanisms.
In summary, the anatomy and physiology of corticocortical connections suggest that forward connections are
driving and commit cells to a pre-speciﬁed response given
the appropriate pattern of inputs. Backward connections, on
the other hand, are less topographic and are in a position to
modulate the responses of lower areas to driving inputs from
either higher or lower areas (see Table 1). For example, in
the visual cortex Angelucci et al. used a
combination of anatomical and physiological recording
methods to determine the spatial scale and retinotopic logic
of intra-areal V1 horizontal connections and inter-areal
feedback connections to V1. ‘Contrary to common beliefs,
these (monosynaptic horizontal) connections cannot fully
account for the dimensions of the surround ﬁeld (of
macaque V1 neurons). The spatial scale of feedback circuits
from extrastriate cortex to V1 is, instead, commensurate
with the full spatial range of centre–surround interactions.
Thus these connections could represent an anatomical
substrate for contextual modulation and global-to-local
integration of visual signals.’
Finally, brain connections are not static but are changing
at the synaptic level all the time. In many instances this
plasticity is associative. Backwards connections are abundant in the brain and are in a position to exert powerful
effects on evoked responses, in lower levels, that deﬁne the
specialisation of any area or neuronal population. Modulatory effects imply the post-synaptic response evoked by
pre-synaptic input is modulated by, or interacts with,
another. By deﬁnition this interaction must depend on
non-linear synaptic or dendritic mechanisms. In Section 3
we describe a theoretical perspective, provided by generative models, that highlights the functional importance of
hierarchies, backward connections, with non-linear coupling and associative plasticity.
3. Representational learning
This section compares and contrasts the heuristics behind
three prevalent computational approaches to representational learning, supervised learning, and two forms of
self-supervised learning based on information theory and
predictive coding. This section concludes with the introduction of learning based on empirical Bayes. These
approaches are considered within the framework of
generative models. This section follows Dayan and Abbot
 to which the reader is referred for more
detailed background. A more heuristic discussion of these
issues can be found in Friston . The more
mathematical sections are divided into a conceptual overview and a computational subsection for the interested
We start with an overview of representations in which the
distinctions among various approaches can be seen clearly.
An important focus of this section is the interaction among
causes of sensory input. These interactions create a problem
of contextual invariance. In brief, it will be shown that this
problem points to the adoption of generative models where
interactions among causes of a percept are modelled
explicitly in backward connections. After establishing a
framework that covers representational learning in a general
way, speciﬁc examples are reviewed. Each example is
presented as a generalisation of the preceding example, by
successively relaxing assumptions or constraints under
which learning proceeds. We start with supervised learning
in which both the prior distribution of the underlying causes
of sensory inputs and the processes generating them are
known. We then consider self-supervised approaches in
which the generative processes are learned but under the
assumption of independent causes. Predictive coding is
presented as an example that relaxes the independence
assumption but still depends upon known priors. Finally, we
consider empirical Bayes in which both the generating
process and priors are learned. At this point neuronal
implementation is considered in sufﬁcient depth to make
predictions about the anatomical and functional architectures that would be needed to implement empirical Bayes in
the brain. We conclude by relating theoretical predictions
with the neurobiological principles listed at the end of the
previous section.
3.1. The nature of inputs, causes and representations
Here a representation is taken to be a neuronal event that
represents some ‘cause’ in the sensorium. Causes are simply
the states of processes generating sensory data or input. It is
not easy to ascribe meaning to these states without
appealing to the way that we categorise things, perceptually
or conceptually. High-level conceptual causes may be
categorical in nature, such as the identity of a face in the
visual ﬁeld or the semantic category a perceived object
belongs to. In a hierarchical setting, high-level causes may
induce priors on lower-level causes that are more parametric
in nature. For example, the perceptual cause ‘moving
quickly’ may show a one-to-many relationship with
representations of different velocities in V5 (MT) units.
Causes have relationships to each other (e.g. ‘is part of’) that
often have a hierarchical structure. This hierarchical
ontology is attended by ambiguous many-to-one and oneto-many mappings (e.g. a table has legs but so do horses; a
wristwatch is a watch irrespective of the orientation of its
hands). This ambiguity can render the problem of inferring
causes from sensory information under-determined or ill
Even though causes may be difﬁcult to describe, they are
easy to deﬁne operationally. Causes are quantities or states
that are necessary to specify the products of a process
generating sensory information. To keep things simple, let
us frame the problem of representing causes in terms of
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
a deterministic non-linear generative function
u ¼ Gðv; uÞ
where v is a vector (i.e. a list) of underlying causes in the
environment (e.g. the velocity of a particular object,
direction of radiant light, etc.), and u represents some
sensory inputs. Gðv; uÞ is a function that generates inputs
from the causes. u are the parameters of generative model.
Unlike the causes, they are ﬁxed quantities that have to be
learned. We shall see later that the parameters correspond to
connection strengths in the brain’s model of how inputs are
caused. Non-linearities in Eq. (1) represent interactions
among the causes. Second-order interactions are formally
identical to interaction terms in conventional statistical
models of observed data. These can often be viewed as
contextual effects, where the expression of a particular
cause depends on the context established by another. For
example, the extraction of motion from the visual ﬁeld
depends upon there being sufﬁcient luminance or wavelength contrast to deﬁne the surface moving. Another
ubiquitous example, from early visual processing, is the
occlusion of one object by another. In the absence of
interactions we would see a linear superposition of both
objects but the visual input, caused by the non-linear mixing
of these two causes, renders one occluded by the other. At a
more cognitive level the cause associated with the word
‘HAMMER’ will depend on the semantic context (that
determines whether the word is a verb or a noun). These
contextual effects are profound and must be discounted
before the representations of the underlying causes can be
considered veridical.
The problem the brain has to contend with is to ﬁnd a
function of the input that recognises or represents the
underlying causes. To do this, the brain must effectively
undo the interactions to disclose contextually invariant
causes. In other words, the brain must perform some form of
non-linear unmixing of causes and context without knowing
either. The key point here is that this non-linear mixing may
not be invertible and that the estimation of causes from input
may be fundamentally ill posed. For example, no amount of
unmixing can discern the parts of an object that are occluded
by another. The mapping u ¼ v2 provides a trivial example
of this non-invertibility. Knowing u does not uniquely
determine v; which could be negative or positive. The
corresponding indeterminacy, in probabilistic learning, rests
on the combinatorial explosion of ways in which stochastic
generative models can generate input patterns . The combinatorial explosion
represents another example of the uninvertible ‘many-toone’ relationship between causes and inputs.
In probabilistic learning, one allows for stochastic (i.e.
random) components in the generation of inputs and
recognising a particular cause becomes probabilistic. Here
the issue of deterministic invertibility is replaced by the
existence of an inverse conditional probability (i.e.
recognition) density that can be parameterised. Although
not a mathematical fundament, parameterisation is critical
for the brain because it has to encode the parameters of these
densities with biophysical attributes of its nervous tissue. In
what follows, we consider the implications of this problem.
In brief, we will show that one needs separate (approximate)
recognition and generative models that induces the need for
both forward and backward inﬂuences. Separate recognition
and generative models resolve the problem caused by
generating processes that are difﬁcult to invert and speak to
a possible role for backward connections in the brain.
3.2. Generative models and representational learning
3.2.1. Conceptual overview
In this subsection we introduce the basic framework
within which one can understand learning and inference. This
framework rests upon generative and recognition models,
which are simply functions that map causes to sensory input
or vice versa. The objective of learning is to build internal
models that can explain observed inputs in terms of some
inferred causes. Making inferences about causes (e.g. the
most likely cause, or how certain we are that the cause falls
within some interval) depends on some representation of the
relative probabilities of values the causes can take. This
entails representing the probability distribution or density of
the causes. The key density is the conditional or posterior
density that summarises the likelihood of any cause given the
input. This section establishes the nature of this density and
how it relates to the underlying models.
Generative models afford a generic formulation of
representational leaning in a supervised or self-supervised
context. There are many forms of generative models that
range from conventional statistical models (e.g. factor and
cluster analysis) and those motivated by Bayesian inference
and learning . The goal of generative models is “to learn
representations that are economical to describe but allow the
input to be reconstructed accurately” .
Representational learning is framed in terms of estimating
probability densities of the causes. This is referred to as
posterior density analysis in the estimation literature and
posterior mode analysis if the inference is restricted to
estimating the most likely cause. The mode of a distribution
is the location of its maximum. Although density learning is
formulated at a level of abstraction that eschews many
issues of neuronal implementation (e.g. the dynamics of
real-time learning), it provides a unifying framework that
connects the various schemes considered below. It is
important to appreciate the distinction between simply
estimating the most likely cause (i.e. mode) and the broader
problem of inference. Inference entails estimating the
conditional density not just its mode.
3.2.2. Inference vs. learning
Eq. (1) relates the unknown causes v and some unknown
parameters u; to observed inputs u: The objective is to make
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
inferences about the causes and learn the parameters.
Inference may be simply estimating the most likely causes
and is based on the products of learning. A useful way of
thinking about the distinction between inference and
learning is in terms of how one accounts for the patterns
or distribution of inputs encountered. Fig. 2 shows a very
simple example with a univariate cause and a bivariate
observation. Observations are denoted by dots in the right
hand panel and cluster around a curvilinear line. A
parsimonious way of generating dots like these would be
to move up and down the line and add a small amount of
observation error. The position on the line corresponds to
the state of the single cause and the probability of selecting a
particular position to the probability density of the causes on
the right. Inference means ascertaining the probability of
each potential cause given an observation. Estimation refers
to estimating the most likely cause, denoted in Fig. 2 by ^v:
This estimate is the closest point on the line to the
observation that a priori has a reasonable probability of
being selected. This simple example introduces the notion
of representing observations in terms of points that lie on a
low dimensional manifold in observation space, in this case
a line. The dimensions of this manifold are the causes. The
shape and position of the manifold depends on the
parameters u: These have to be known or learned before
inference about any particular observation can proceed. This
learning requires multiple observations so that the manifold
can be placed to transect the highest density of observations.
In short, representational learning can be construed as
learning a low dimensional manifold onto which data can be
projected with minimum loss of information. This manifold
is an essential component of generative models.
The goal of learning is to acquire a recognition model for
inference that is effectively the inverse of a generative
model. The generative model creates data from causes and
the inverse model recognises causes from data. Learning a
generative model corresponds to making the density of
inputs, implied by a generative model pðu; uÞ; as close as
possible to those observed pðuÞ: The generative model is
speciﬁed in terms of a prior distribution over the causes
pðv; uÞ and the generative distribution or likelihood of
the inputs given the causes pðulv; uÞ: Together, these deﬁne
the marginal distribution that has to be matched to the input
distribution
pðulv; uÞpðv; uÞdv
See Fig. 2. Once the parameters of the generative model
have been learned, through this matching, the posterior
density of the causes, given the inputs is given by the
recognition model, which is deﬁned in terms of the
recognition distribution
pðvlu; uÞ ¼ pðulv; uÞpðv; uÞ
However, as considered above, the generative model
may not be easily inverted and it may not be possible to
parameterise the recognition distribution. This is crucial
because the endpoint of learning is the acquisition of a
useful recognition model that can be applied to sensory
inputs. One solution is to posit an approximate recognition
distribution qðv; u; fÞ that is consistent with the generative
model and that can be learned at the same time. The
approximate recognition distribution has some parameters
f; for example, the strength of forward connections. The
ﬁrst question addressed in this section is whether forward
connections are sufﬁcient for representational leaning.
3.3. Density estimation and EM
3.3.1. Conceptual overview
In this subsection we introduce a general scheme for
representational learning using expectation maximisation.
Section 3.2 established that the objective is to estimate the
parameters of an approximate recognition density qðv; u; fÞ
for some generative model. This objective can be split into
two steps. First, ensure that the recognition density is
consistent with the generative model, noting one is the
inverse of the other. Second, adjust the parameters of the
generative model to fully account for the data. These two
steps correspond to the expectation and maximisation steps,
respectively. We will now look more closely at what these
steps entail and specify operationally what they are trying to
attain in terms of an objective function. An objective
function is a function of the parameters and speciﬁes how
‘good’ they are. As we will see below, the objective function
embodies both the internal consistency of the recognition
and generative models and the likelihood of the data given
the generative model.
A key point made in this subsection is that if the
generative model can be inverted easily, then there is no
need for the expectation step because internal consistency
between the generative and recognition models is assured.
From a neurobiological perceptive this means only one set
of (recognition) parameters is required. Conversely, if the
inversion is difﬁcult, both recognition and generative
Fig. 2. Schematic of a simple model with a univariate cause and a bivariate
observation. Observations are denoted by dots in the right hand panel and
cluster around a curvilinear line. A parsimonious way of generating dots
like these would be move up and down the line and add a small amount of
random error. The position on the line corresponds to the state of the single
cause and the probability of selecting a particular position the probability
density of the causes on the right.
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
parameters are needed. We will see later this means
backward connection become necessary.
3.3.2. The objective function
In density learning, representational learning has two
components that are framed in terms of expectation
maximisation .
Iterations of an E-step ensure the recognition approximates
the inverse of the generative model and the M-step ensures
that the generative model can predict the observed inputs.
Probabilistic recognition proceeds by using qðv; u; fÞ to
determine the probability that v caused the observed sensory
inputs. EM provides a useful procedure for density
estimation that helps relate many different models within
a framework that has direct connections with statistical
mechanics. Both steps of the EM algorithm involve
maximising a function of the densities that corresponds to
the negative free energy in physics
F ¼ klðuÞlu
qðv; u; fÞln pðv; u; uÞ
qðv; u; fÞ dv
¼ kln pðv; u; uÞlq 2 kln qðv; u; fÞlq
¼ ln pðu; uÞ 2 KL{qðv; u; fÞ; pðvlu; uÞ}
This objective function comprises two terms. The ﬁrst is
the expected log likelihood of the inputs under the
generative model. The second term is the Kullback–Leibler
(KL) divergence1 between the approximating and true
recognition densities. Critically, the KL term is always
positive, rendering F a lower bound on the expected log
likelihood of the inputs. Maximising F encompasses two
components of representational learning: (i) it increases the
likelihood of the inputs produced by the generative model
and (ii) minimises the discrepancy between the approximate
recognition model and that implied by the generative model.
The E-step increases F with respect to the recognition
parameters f; ensuring a veridical approximation to the
recognition distribution implied by the generative parameters u: The M-step changes u; enabling the generative
model to reproduce the inputs
There are a number of ways of motivating the free energy
formulation in Eq. (4). A useful one, in this context, rests
upon the problem posed by non-invertible models. This
problem is ﬁnessed by assuming it is sufﬁcient to match the
joint probability of inputs and causes under the generative
model pðu; v; uÞ ¼ pðulv; uÞpðv; uÞ with that implied by
recognising the causes of inputs encountered pðu; v; fÞ ¼
qðv; u; fÞpðuÞ: Both these distributions are well deﬁned even
when pðvlu; uÞ is not easily parameterised. This matching
minimises the divergence
KL{pðv; u; fÞ; pðv; u; uÞ}
qðv; u; fÞpðuÞln qðv; u; fÞpðuÞ
pðv; u; uÞ
¼ 2F 2 HðuÞ
This is equivalent to maximising F because the entropy
of the inputs HðuÞ is ﬁxed. This perspective is used in Fig. 3
to illustrate the E and M steps schematically. The E-step
adjusts the recognition parameters to match the two joint
distributions, while the M-step does exactly the same thing
but by changing the generative parameters. The dependency
of the generative parameters, on the input distribution, is
Fig. 3. Schematic illustrating the two components of EM. In the E-step the
joint distribution of causes and inputs under the recognition model changes
to approximate that under the generative model. This reﬁnes the recognition
model. In the M-step the joint distribution under the generative model
changes to approximate that under the recognition model. This reduces the
difference between the distribution of inputs implied by the generative
model and that observed.
1 A measure of the distance or difference between two probability
densities.
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
mediated vicariously in the M-step through the recognition.
In the setting of invertibility, where qðv; u; fÞ ¼ pðvlu; uÞ
the divergence in Eq. (6) reduces to KL{pðuÞ; pðu; uÞ}: As
above, the M-step then ﬁnds parameters that allow the
model to simply match the observed input distribution (i.e.
maximise the expected likelihood).
3.3.3. Invertibility
This formulation of representational leaning is critical
for the thesis of this section because it suggests that
backward and lateral connections, parameterising a generative model, are essential when the model is not invertible.
If the generative model is invertible then the KL term in Eq.
(4) can be discounted by setting qðv; u; fÞ ¼ pðvlu; uÞ with
Eq. (3) and learning reduces to the M-step (i.e. maximising
the expected likelihood).
F ¼ kln pðu; uÞlu
See Fig. 4 (upper panel). In principle, this could be done
using a feedforward architecture corresponding to the
inverse of the generative model. However, when processes
generating inputs are non-invertible (in terms of the
parameterisation of the recognition density) a generative
model and approximate recognition model are required that
are updated in M- and E-steps, respectively. In short, noninvertibility enforces an explicit parameterisation of the
generative model in representational learning. In the brain
this parameterisation may be embodied in backward and
lateral connections.
3.3.4. Deterministic recognition
Another special case arises when the recognition is
deterministic. The recognition becomes deterministic when
qðv; u; fÞ is a Dirac d-function over its mode vðu; fÞ (i.e.
reduces to a point). In this instance, posterior density
analysis reduces to a posterior mode analysis at which point
inference and estimation coincide. They are equivalent in
the sense that inferring the posterior distribution of causes is
the same as estimating the most likely cause given the inputs
(the maximum a posteriori or MAP estimator). Here the
integral in Eq. (4) disappears, leaving the joint probability of
the inputs and their cause to be maximised
F ¼klnpðvðuÞ;u;uÞlu ¼klnpðulvðuÞ;uÞþlnpðvðuÞ;uÞlu
Notice, again, that this objective function does not
require pðvlu;uÞ and eschews the inversion in Eq. (3). An
illustration of the E-step for deterministic recognition is
shown in Fig. 4 (lower panel). In this article the distinction
between deterministic and stochastic relates to inference
and refers to form of the recognition density. It should be
noted that learning could also employ a deterministic or
stochastic ascent on F: We will deal largely with
deterministic learning schemes.
EM enables exact and approximate maximum likelihood
density estimation for a whole variety of generative models
that can be speciﬁed in terms of prior and generative
distributions. Dayan and Abbot work though a series
of didactic examples from cluster analysis to independent
component analyses, within this unifying framework. For
example, factor analysis corresponds to the generative
pðv; uÞ ¼ Nðv : 0; 1Þ
pðulv; uÞ ¼ Nðu : uv; SÞ
Namely, the underlying causes of inputs are independent
normal variates that are mixed linearly and added to
Gaussian noise to form inputs. Nðu : uv; SÞ means a normal
distribution over u with a mean of uv and variance–
covariance S: In the limiting case of S ! 0 the ensuing
model become deterministic and conforms to PCA. By
simply assuming non-Gaussian priors one can specify
generative models for sparse coding of the sort proposed
Fig. 4. As for Fig. 2 but for two special cases of learning in which the
generative model is invertible (upper panel) and in which the recognition
model is deterministic (lower panel). When the model is invertible only the
generative parameters need to be learned in the M-step. This learning
reduces the difference between the distribution of inputs implied by the
generative model and that observed. In deterministic recognition the
recognition density reduces to a Dirac d-function (i.e. point) over the point
estimator of the causes vðu; fÞ:
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
by Olshausen and Field 
pðulv; uÞ ¼ Nðu : uv; SÞ
where pðvi; uÞ are chosen to be suitably sparse (i.e. heavytailed) with a cumulative density function that corresponds
to the squashing function in Section 3.5.5. The deterministic
equivalent of sparse coding is ICA that obtains when S ! 0:
The relationships among different models are rendered
apparent under the perspective of generative models. In
what follows we consider a series of models entailing
assumptions about the generation of sensory inputs that are
relaxed one by one. At each point we consider whether they
could be implemented plausibly in the brain.
3.4. Supervised learning
3.4.1. Conceptual overview
To start we will review brieﬂy supervised learning, using
connectionist models in cognitive science as a paradigm
example. Supervised learning deals with the simplest
problem in which the parameters of the generative model
are known, allowing one to generate simulated sensory
inputs from causes with a known prior distribution.
Although supervised learning schemes have an established
utility in helping understand some aspects of functional
architectures in the brain they are not candidates for models
of representational learning. This is because their supervised
aspect means the generative model is already known. From
the point of view of expectation maximisation, only the ﬁrst
step is required to ﬁnd the parameters of the recognition
density. In this subsection we place supervised learning in
the framework described above and touch upon some of
their useful applications in cognitive neuroscience.
3.4.2. Implementation
In supervised schemes the generative model is prespeciﬁed and only the recognition parameters need to be
learned. The generative model is known in the sense that
any cause determines the input, either deterministically or
stochastically. In this case only the E-step is required in
which the parameters f that specify qðv; u; fÞ change to
maximise F: The only term in Eq. (4) that depends on f is
the divergence term, such that learning reduces to minimising the expected difference between the approximate
recognition density and that required by the generative
f kKLðqðv; u; fÞ; pðvlu; uÞÞlu
This can proceed probabilistically or deterministically. In a deterministic setting,
the connection strengths f (usually connecting multiple
layers of nodes) are changed, typically using the delta rule,
such that the distance between the modes of the approximate
and desired recognition distributions are minimised over all
inputs. This distance is typically measured by the average
sum of squared difference between the recognised and true
causes (see Fig. 5, upper panel). Supervised learning, of this
sort, is equivalent to non-linear function approximation, a
perspective that can be adopted on all supervised learning of
deterministic mappings with neural nets. Note that any
scheme, based on supervised learning, requires the processes generating inputs to be known a priori and as such
cannot be used by the brain. However, supervised learning
has a substantial role in understanding some aspects of
functional anatomy.
3.4.3. Category speciﬁcity and connectionism
Supervised learning in the context of connectionism is an
approach that has proved very useful in relating putative
cognitive architectures to neuronal ones and, in particular,
modelling the impact of brain lesions on cognitive
performance. Semantic memory impairments can result
from a variety of pathophysiological insults, including
Alzheimer disease, encephalitis and cerebrovascular accidents . The
concept of category speciﬁcity stems from the work of
Warrington and colleagues and is based on the
observation that patients with focal brain lesions have
difﬁculties in recognising or naming speciﬁc categories of
Fig. 5. Schematic illustrating architectures with forward connections that
are sufﬁcient when the generative model is known (supervised learning) or
can be inverted (infomax). The circles represent nodes in a network and the
arrows represent a few of the connections. See the main text for an
explanation of the equations and designation of the variables each set of
nodes represents. The light grey boxes encompass connections and nodes
within the model. Connection strengths are determined by the free
parameters of the model f (forward connections).
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
objects. Patients can exhibit double dissociations in terms of
their residual semantic capacity. For example, some patients
can name artefacts but have difﬁculty with animals, whereas
others can name animals with more competence than
artefacts. These ﬁndings have engendered a large number
of studies, all pointing to impairments in perceptual
synthesis, phonological or lexico-semantic analysis that is
speciﬁc for certain categories of stimuli. There are several
theories that have been posited to account for category
speciﬁcity. Connectionist models have been used to
adjudicate among some of them.
Connectionist (e.g. parallel distributed processing or
PDP) techniques use model neuronal architectures that can
be lesioned to emulate neuropsychological deﬁcits. This
involves modelling semantic networks using connected
units or nodes and suitable learning algorithms to determine
a set of connection strengths . Semantic memory impairments are then simulated by
lesioning the model to establish the nature of the interaction
between neuropathology and cognitive deﬁcit . A compelling
example of this sort of approach is the connectionist model
of Farah and McClelland : patterns of categoryspeciﬁc deﬁcits led Warrington and McCarthy to
suggest that an animate/inanimate distinction could be
understood in terms of a differential dependence on
functional and structural (perceptual) features for recognition. For example, tools have associated motor acts
whereas animals do not, or tools are easier to discriminate
based upon their structural descriptions than four-legged
animals. Farah and McClelland incorporated this
difference in terms of the proportion of the two types of
semantic featural representations encoding a particular
object, with perceptual features dominating for animate
objects and both represented equally for artifacts. Damage
to visual features led to impairment for natural kinds and
conversely damage to functional features impaired the
output for artefacts. Critically the model exhibited categoryspeciﬁc deﬁcits in the absence of any category-speciﬁc
organisation. The implication here is that an anatomical
segregation of structural and functional representations is
sufﬁcient to produce category-speciﬁc deﬁcits following
focal brain damage. This example serves to illustrate how
the connectionist paradigm can be used to relate neuronal
and cognitive domains. In this example, connectionist
models were able to posit a plausible anatomical infrastructure wherein the speciﬁcity of deﬁcits, induced by lesions, is
mediated by differential dependence on either the functional
or structural attributes of an object and not by any (less
plausible) category-speciﬁc anatomical organisation per se.
In summary, connectionist models specify distributed
proﬁles of activity over (semantic) primitives that are
induced by (conceptual) causes and try to ﬁnd connection
parameters that emulate the inverse of these known
mappings. They have been used to understand how the
performance (storage and generalisation) of a network
responds to simulated damage, after learning is complete.
However, connectionism has a limited role in understanding
representational learning per se because the brain is not
given a generative model, it must be learned. Next we will
look at self-supervised approaches that do not require the
generative distribution to be known a priori.
3.5. Information theory and efﬁcient coding
3.5.1. Conceptual overview
In the previous section we had assumed both the
generative pðulv; uÞ and prior pðv; uÞ distributions were
known. In this section we consider self-supervised schemes
that can be regarded as a generalisation of supervised
learning and that do not require the parameters of the
generative distribution. We ﬁrst consider deterministic
models and then turn to stochastic models. This section
focuses on the links between the EM schemes and
information maximisation procedures. These rest on the
prior assumption that the causes are independent such that
pðv; uÞ ¼ Qpðvi; uÞ where vi represents the ith cause. This
equation simply states the prior probability of several causes
is the product of each considered alone. This factorisation
means the causes do not interact, or depend on each other, in
terms of their expression.
It transpires that the independence assumption renders
the objective function equivalent to a measure of how
efﬁciently inputs are encoded. This is reﬂected in the
average information (i.e. entropy) expressed by the inferred
causes. This is important because it connects density
learning with a large body of work that uses information
theory to understand how the brain might encode its sensory
inputs in an efﬁcient fashion with minimal loss of
information. In short, we will see that the principle of
maximum information transfer 
is exactly the same as expectation maximisation under the
prior assumption of independent causes.
3.5.2. Implementation
For invertible deterministic models the KL term in Eq. (4)
can be discounted and learning reduces to maximising
F ¼ kln pðu; uÞlu ¼ ln pðvðuÞ; uÞ
¼ kln pðvðuÞ; uÞlu þ ln
kln pðviðuÞ; uÞlu þ HðvðuÞ; fÞ 2 HðuÞ
The ﬁrst term of the last line serves to constrain the
marginal distribution of the estimated causes while the
second requires their entropy to be maximised under these
constraints. This is the essence of infomax procedures
 and can be understood as maximising the
mutual information between the estimated causes and inputs
as discussed below.
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
3.5.3. Infomax
There have been many compelling developments in
theoretical neurobiology that have used information theory
 .
Many appeal to the principle of maximum information
transfer . This principle has proven extremely
powerful in predicting some of the basic receptive ﬁeld
properties of cells involved in early visual processing . This
principle represents a formal statement of the common sense
notion that neuronal dynamics in sensory systems should
reﬂect, efﬁciently, what is going on in the environment
 . In the present context, the principle of
maximum information transfer 
suggests that a model’s parameters should maximise the
mutual information between the sensory input u and the
evoked responses or outputs vðu; fÞ: This maximisation is
usually considered in the light of some sensible constraints,
e.g. the presence of noise in sensory input or dimension reduction given the smaller
number of divergent outputs from a cortical area than
convergent inputs .
The mutual information between inputs and responses is
Iðu; vÞ ¼ HðuÞ þ HðvÞ 2 Hðu; vÞ ¼ HðvÞ 2 HðvluÞ
where HðvluÞ is the conditional entropy or uncertainty in the
response, given the input. For deterministic recognition
there is no such uncertainty and this term can be discounted
 . More generally
›f Iðu; v; fÞ ¼
›f Hðv; fÞ
It follows that maximising the mutual information is the
same as maximising the entropy of the responses. The
infomax principle (maximum information transfer) is
closely related to the idea of efﬁcient coding. Generally
speaking, redundancy minimisation and efﬁcient coding are
all variations on the same theme and can be considered as
the infomax principle operating under some appropriate
constraints or bounds. The key thing that distinguishes
among the various information theoretic schemes is the
nature of the constraints under which entropy is maximised.
One useful way of looking at constraints is in terms of
efﬁciency.
3.5.4. Efﬁciency and redundancy
The efﬁciency of a system can be considered as the
complement of redundancy , the less
redundant, the more efﬁcient a system will be. Redundancy
is reﬂected in the dependencies or mutual information
among the outputs 
Hðvi; fÞ 2 Hðv; fÞ
Here Hðvi; fÞ is the marginal entropy of the ith output.
Eq. (15) implies that redundancy is the difference between
the joint entropy and the sum of the marginal entropies.
Intuitively this expression makes sense if one considers that
the variability in activity of any single unit corresponds to
its entropy. Therefore, an efﬁcient neuronal system
represents its inputs with the minimal excursions from
baseline ﬁring rates. Another way of thinking about Eq. (15)
is to note that maximising efﬁciency is equivalent to
minimising the mutual information among the outputs. This
is the basis of approaches that seek to de-correlate or
orthogonalise the outputs. To minimise redundancy one can
either minimise the entropy of the output units or maximise
their joint entropy, while ensuring the other is bounded in
some way. Olshausen and Field present a nice
analysis based on sparse coding. Sparse coding minimises
redundancy using single units with low entropy. Sparse
coding implies coding by units that ﬁre very sparsely and
will, generally, not be ﬁring. Therefore, one can be
relatively certain about their (quiescent) state, conferring
low entropy on them.
The relationship between Eqs. (12) and (15) rests on the
nature of the prior distribution. If we relax constraints on the
form of the marginal distributions of viðuÞ such that
pðvðuÞ; uÞ ¼ QpðviðuÞÞ then F becomes a functional of the
recognition parameters
kln pðviðuÞÞlu þ Hðv; fÞ 2 HðuÞ
Hðvi; fÞ þ Hðv; fÞ 2 HðuÞ
¼ 2Iðv; fÞ 2 HðuÞ
This has exactly the same dependence on the parameters
as the objective function employed by infomax in Eq. (15).
In this context, the free energy and the information differ
only by the entropy of the inputs. In other words minimising
the free energy is the same as minimising the redundancy or
maximising the efﬁciency with which the causes of inputs
are encoded. This equivalence rests on use of maximum
entropy priors of the sort used in sparse coding. Although
the infomax and density learning approaches have the same
objective, their heuristics are complementary. Infomax is
motivated by maximising the mutual information between u
and vðu; fÞ under some constraints. The generative model
approach takes its heuristics from the assumption that the
causes of inputs are independent and possibly non-
Gaussian. This results in a prior with maximum entropy
pðv; uÞ ¼ Qpðvi; uÞ: The reason for adopting non-Gaussian
priors (e.g. sparse coding and ICA) is that the central limit
theorem implies mixtures of causes will have Gaussian
distributions and therefore something that is not Gaussian is
unlikely to be a mixture.
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
3.5.5. Invertible models
It is often the case that the constraints on the marginal
distributions are absorbed into the parameters of the
recognition function. In this instance learning reduces to
maximising Hðv; fÞ: A simple example of this is PCA,
which samples the subspace of the inputs that have the
highest entropy . PCA is conventionally
regarded as maximising Hðv; fÞ; for deterministic recognition vðu; fÞ ¼ fu where the sum of squared connections
in each row of f is constant. Similarly, ICA ﬁnds non-linear
functions of the inputs that maximise the joint entropy . The marginal
entropies are constrained by passing the outputs through a
sigmoid squashing function vðu; fÞ ¼ gðfuÞ so that the
outputs lie in a bounded interval (hypercube). Learning can
then proceed by maximising klnl›vðuÞ=dullu in Eq. (12). See
Eq. (10) for the implicit generative model, in which the
outputs are not bounded but forced to have cumulative
density functions that conform to the squashing function g:
As noted above, PCA and ICA are based on linear
deterministic generative models with independent Gaussian
and non-Gaussian priors, respectively. Generalising to nondeterministic models with Gaussian errors gives factor
analysis and sparse coding, respectively (see Eqs. (9) and
(10)). In principle, all these models are probabilistically
invertible. However, it is difﬁcult to parameterise the
inverse of the sparse coding model in Eq. (10) and a
deterministic approximating recognition density is used 
for binary stochastic systems and non-linear PCA for
parametric deterministic models . The latter schemes
typically employ a ‘bottleneck’ architecture that forces the
inputs through a small number of nodes. The output from
these nodes then diverges to produce the predicted inputs.
The approximate recognition model is implemented in
connections to the bottleneck nodes and the generative
model by connections from these nodes to the outputs. Nonlinear transformations, from the bottleneck nodes to the
output layer, recapitulate the non-linear mixing of the real
causes of the inputs. If such a scheme was implemented in
the brain, one would envisage the recognition to be
implemented in forward connections and learned in the Estep. Critically, the generative model would be mediated by
backward connections from the bottleneck nodes, so that the
output nodes were juxtaposed to the inputs being predicted
(see Fig. 6, upper panel). The backward connections are
updated in the M-step. After learning, the activity of the
bottleneck nodes can be treated as estimates of the causes.
These representations are obtained by projection of the input
onto a low-dimensional curvilinear manifold that is
encompassed by the activity of the bottleneck nodes (c.f.
3.5.7. Summary
In summary, ICA and like-minded approaches try to ﬁnd
some deterministic recognition function of the inputs that
maximises information transfer. Compared to supervised
schemes, this has the fundamental advantage that the
algorithm is unsupervised by virtue of the fact that the
causes and generating process are not needed for leaning.
This is shown in Fig. 5, which portrays the main difference
between supervised and self-supervised learning in terms of
whether F is a function of the true causes. An important
aspect of the infomax principle is that it goes a long way to
explain functional segregation in the cortex. One perspective on functional segregation is that each cortical area is
Fig. 6. Schematic illustrating architectures with forward and backward
connections that are necessary when the generative model is unknown and
cannot be inverted. This ﬁgure uses the same format as Fig. 4. Learning
involves changes in the free parameters of the model f (that correspond to
forward connections in the upper panel and neuronal states in the lower
panel) and u (backward connections). Non-linear effects are implied when
one arrow connects with another. The broken arrows represent forward
inﬂuences to the higher level from the input level.
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
segregating its inputs into relatively independent functional
outputs. This is exactly what infomax predicts. See Friston
 and references therein, for an example of how
infomax can be used to predict the segregation of processing
streams from V2 to specialised motion, colour and form
areas in extrastriate cortex.
Infomax assumes that the causes are independent. While
this may be sensible for simple systems, it is certainly not
appropriate for more realistic hierarchical processes that
generate sensory inputs (see below). This is because
correlations among causes at any level are induced by
changes at supraordinate levels. In Section 3.6 we will look
at a more general implementation of representational
learning that encompasses any speciﬁed form for the priors.
3.6. Predictive coding
3.6.1. Conceptual overview
In the previous section, we considered representational
learning from the infomax perspective afforded by independenceassumptionsaboutthepriordistributions.Inthissection
we relax the independence assumptions and relate predictive
coding to the free energy formulation of EM. Predictive
coding is based on minimising prediction error. This
prediction error is the difference between the observed input
and that predicted on the basis of the generative model and
inferred causes. It is relatively easy to show that maximising
the objective function above is equivalent to minimising
prediction error, under some constraints. The nature of these
constraints emerge naturally from the EM formulationandare
considered, usefully, in the light if ill-posed inverse problems
and regularisation (e.g. in machine vision).
This section introduces predictive coding as a general
implementation of EM that frees itself from the difﬁculties
of parameterising complicated recognition densities by
estimating the ﬁrst few moments (mean or expectation and
covariance) for each input. This leads to an E-step that can
be implemented ‘on-line’ and takes us a step closer to a
neurobiological implementation.
3.6.2. Implementation
To do this we consider how probabilistic, non-linear
generative models are learned, under Gaussian assumptions
about the stochastic components
pðv; uÞ ¼ Nðv : mp; SpÞ
pðulv; uÞ ¼ Nðu : Gðv; uÞ; SuÞ
where u includes the prior expectation, prior covariance and
observation error covariance (mp; Sp; Su). This can be
formulated as a non-linear observation model with two
u ¼ Gðv; uÞ þ 1u
v ¼ mp þ 1p
where Cov{1u} ¼ Su and Cov{1p} ¼ Sp: This perspective
will be useful in the next section when we generalise to
hierarchical models. In the previous section most of the
recognition models were deterministic which simpliﬁed
the parameterisation of the recognition density. Here the
approximate recognition density is taken to be probabilistic
and Gaussian
qðv; u; fÞ ¼ Nðu : f; SqÞ
Sq ¼ ðJTS21
J ¼ ›Gðf; uÞ
The covariance of the recognition density is approximated here by the inverse of the negative curvature of the
log posterior ln pðvlu; uÞ evaluated at its mode. Critically,
this covariance is a function of the mode or MAP estimator
f meaning that it does not have to be learned. From Eq. (4)
lðuÞ ¼ kln pðv;u;uÞlq 2 kln qðv;u;fÞlq
¼ kln pðulv;uÞlq þ kln pðv;uÞlq þ Hðq;fÞ
2 lnlSul 2 1
2 lnlSpl þ 1
ju ¼ S21=2
ðu 2 Gðf;uÞÞ
jp ¼ S21=2
with equality for linear models. The E-step corresponds to
maximising f with respect to the expectation F ¼ klðuÞlu: A
general solution to this is to ﬁnd fðuÞ that satisﬁes ›l=›f ¼ 0
for each input. This is the approach adopted by Olshausen
and Field in their implementation of sparse coding.
Assuming dynamics are fast, in relation to changes in input,
this can be implemented with gradient ascent. This gives,
ignoring time constants
E _f ¼ ›lðuÞ
3.6.3. The nature of predictive coding
There is a subtle but key departure from the previous
sections implied by this scheme. In previous schemes we
had treated f as the parameters of some static recognition
function of the inputs. Here, the recognition parameters are
input-speciﬁc and correspond to the mode of the recognition
distribution for each input. From a neuronal perspective this
means that fðuÞ are not forward connections (c.f. connectionist and infomax schemes) but are dynamically encoded
by the activity of units in the brain (c.f. predictive and sparse
coding). This distinction is illustrated schematically in
Fig. 6. An important consequence of this general solution to
learning the recognition parameters is that E-step learning
and inference become the same thing. This is because
ﬁnding the mode of the recognition distribution, for each
input, is the same as inferring its most likely cause. In other
words, f is both a parameter of the recognition density and
an estimate of the cause. This is nice because one does not
have to posit distinct neuronal mechanisms for inference
and learning. Both are implicit in the E-step, which can be
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
implemented using neuronal-like dynamics that conform to
some gradient ascent. In the current discussion, we will take
this to be the essence of predictive coding, namely any
scheme that ﬁnds the mode of the recognition density by
dynamically minimising prediction error in an input-speciﬁc
fashion. The advantages of predictive coding are that
inference is implicit in the E-step and the use of gradient
ascent provides a general solution to arbitrarily complicated
and non-linear generative models. Note that predictive
coding does not imply deterministic recognition; the
recognition density may have a covariance deﬁned by
Eq. (19), which is a function of Su and Sp: These can be
encoded by neuronal activity or, as shown later, the strength
of (lateral) connections.
Predictive coding, when deﬁned in this way refers to
learning and inference schemes that employ a particular
process in the E-step, based on minimising predictive error.
Consequently, predictive coding is not deﬁned by assumptions about the generative or prior densities (c.f. supervised
learning and infomax). Indeed predictive coding makes no
generic assumptions other than constraints on the manifolds
implicit in any generative functions. However, it should be
remembered predictive coding is essentially a process for,
as opposed to a category of, representational learning.
The E-step is trying to ﬁnd
uju þ VðfÞÞ
pjp 2 lnlSql
This can be regarded as a minimisation of (whitened)
prediction error ju subject to some constraints, here denoted
by the potential VðfÞ that does not depend on the input.
These constraints comprise a term that penalises deviations
from prior expectations and a second term whose dependency on f is mediated by non-linearities in the generative
model, through the conditional covariance, Eq. (19). For
linear models and non-linear models with deterministic
recognition, this second component disappears. These
constraints can be viewed in terms of regularisation, a
perspective that provided the heuristics for early generative
models in machine vision.
3.6.4. Predictive coding and the inverse problem
In predictive coding, the dynamics of units are trying to
predict the inputs. As with infomax schemes, the representational aspects of any unit emerge spontaneously as the
capacity to predict improves with learning. There is no a
priori ‘labelling’ of the units or any supervision in terms of
what a correct response should be (c.f. connectionist
approaches). The only correct response is one in which
the implicit internal model of the causes and their non-linear
mixing is sufﬁcient to predict the input with minimal error,
under some constraints.
Conceptually, predictive coding and generative models
are related to ‘analysis-by-synthesis’ . This
approach to perception, from cognitive psychology,
involves adapting an internal model of the world to match
sensory input and was suggested by Mumford as a
way of understanding hierarchical neuronal processing. The
idea is reminiscent of Mackay’s epistemological automata
 which perceive by comparing expected and
actual sensory input . These models emphasise
the role of backward connections in mediating the
prediction, at lower or input levels, based on the activity
of units in higher levels.
Predictive coding schemes can also be regarded as
arising from the distinction between forward and inverse
models adopted in machine vision .
Forward models generate inputs from causes (c.f. generative
models), whereas inverse models approximate the reverse
transformation of inputs to causes (c.f. recognition models).
This distinction embraces the non-invertibility of generating
processes and the ill-posed nature of inverse problems. As
with all underdetermined inverse problems the role of
constraints becomes central. In the inverse literature a priori
constraints usually enter in terms of regularised solutions.
For example: “Descriptions of physical properties of visible
surfaces, such as their distance and the presence of edges,
must be recovered from the primary image data. Computational vision aims to understand how such descriptions can
be obtained from inherently ambiguous and noisy data. A
recent development in this ﬁeld sees early vision as a set of
ill-posed problems, which can be solved by the use of
regularisation methods” .
The architectures that emerge from these schemes suggest
that “feedforward connections from the lower visual cortical
area to the higher visual cortical area provides an
approximated inverse model of the imaging process
(optics), while the backprojection connection from the
higher area to the lower area provides a forward model of
the optics” . See also Harth,
Unnikrishnan, and Pandya . The connection between
this perspective on forward inﬂuences and the error
minimisation can be seen by ﬁnessing the gradient decent
in the E-step using a Newton–Raphson scheme. For
deterministic recognition
p Þ21ðJTS21=2
ju 2 S21=2
When Su ! 1 and S21
! 0 this reduces to _f ¼ J2ju
where J2 the generalised inverse of J ¼ ›G=›v: In other
words, forward inﬂuences on the recognition parameters
correspond to passing the prediction error through the
inverse of the generative or forward model . The use of Eq. (23) in the posterior mode analysis of
non-linear dynamical systems is discussed in Friston
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
3.6.5. Summary
Predictive coding is a strategy that has some compelling
(Bayesian) underpinnings and embeds two concurrent
processes. (i) The parameters of the generative or forward
model change to emulate the real world mixing of causes,
using their current estimates (M-step) and (ii) these
estimates change to best explain the observed inputs,
using the current forward model (E-step). Both the
parameters and the estimates minimise prediction error.
To ﬁnesse the inverse problem, posed by non-invertible
generative models, constraints are required. These resolve
the problem of non-invertibility that confounds simple
infomax schemes but emphasise the dependency of
representational learning on priors. In the ﬁnal subsection
we consider representational learning when the parameters
of the prior distribution are unknown and must be learned.
This represents the last generalisation of representational
learning that eschews knowledge about the parameters of
both the generative and prior distributions. This generalisation speaks to hierarchical models and the notion of
empirical Bayes.
3.7. Cortical hierarchies and empirical Bayes
3.7.1. Conceptual overview
The problem with predictive coding is that the brain
cannot construct priors mp and Sp de novo. They have to be
learned along with the generative parameters. In Bayesian
estimation, priors are estimated from data using empirical
Bayes. Empirical Bayes harnesses the hierarchical structure
of a forward model, treating the estimates at one level as
prior expectations for the subordinate level . This provides a natural framework within
which to treat cortical hierarchies in the brain, each
providing constraints on the level below. This approach
models the world as a hierarchy of systems where
supraordinate causes induce, and moderate, changes in
subordinate causes. For example, the presence of a
particular object in the visual ﬁeld changes the incident
light falling on a particular part of the retina. A more
intuitive example is provided in Fig. 7. These priors offer
contextual guidance towards the most likely cause of the
input. Note that predictions at higher levels are subject to the
same constraints, only the highest level, if there is one in the
brain, is free to be directed solely by bottom-up inﬂuences
(although there are always implicit priors). If the brain has
evolved to recapitulate the causal structure of its environment, in terms of its sensory infrastructures, it is interesting
to reﬂect on the possibility that our visual cortices reﬂect the
hierarchical causal structure of our environment.
In this section we introduce hierarchical models and
extend the parameterisation of the ensuing generative model
to cover the priors. This means that the constraints required
by predictive coding and regularised solutions to inverse
problems in the previous section, are now embraced by the
learning scheme and are estimated in exactly the same way
as the parameters of the generative distribution. These new
parameters are refereed to as hyperparameters and are
absorbed into he M-step to maximise the same objective
function. This empirical approach to hyperparameter
estimation rests upon a hierarchical structure for the
generative model; indeed the term hyperparameter only
has meaning in a hierarchical context. Hierarchical models
are important because, as we will see, they encompass all
the observation models mentioned above. Furthermore,
hierarchical models may have a special standing in relation
to hierarchical cortical organisation in the brain.
3.7.2. The nature of hierarchical models
Consider any level i in a hierarchy whose causes vi are
induced by corresponding causes in the level above viþ1:
The hierarchical form of the implicit generative model is
u ¼ G1ðv2; u1Þ þ 11
v2 ¼ G2ðv3; u2Þ þ 12
v3 ¼ · · ·
with u ¼ v1 c.f. Eq. (18). Technically, these models fall into
the class of conditionally independent hierarchical models
when the stochastic terms are independent at each level
 . These models are also called
parametric empirical Bayes (PEB) models because the
obvious interpretation of the higher-level densities as priors
led to the development of PEB methodology (Efron &
Fig. 7. Schematic illustrating the role of priors in biasing towards one
representation of an input or another. Upper panel: On reading the ﬁrst
sentence ‘Jack and Jill went up the hill’ we perceive the word ‘event’ as
‘went’ despite the fact it is ‘event’ (as in the second sentence). However, in
the absence of any hierarchical inference the best explanation for the
pattern of visual stimulation incurred by the text is the grapheme ‘ev’. This
would correspond to the maximum likelihood estimate and would be the
most appropriate in the absence of prior information, from the lexical and
semantic context, about which is the most likely grapheme. However,
within hierarchical inference the semantics (provided by the sentence)
provide top-down predictions about the word, which in turn predicts the
graphemes and, ﬁnally, the visual input. The posterior estimate is
accountable to all these levels. When the semantic prior biases in favour
of ‘went’ and ‘w’ we tolerate a small error as a lower level of visual analysis
to minimise the overall prediction error. Lower panel: (left) The grapheme
‘ev’ is selected as the most likely cause of visual input; (right) The letter ‘w’
is selected, as it is (i) a reasonable explanation for the sensory input and (ii)
conforms to prior expectations induced by lexico-semantic context. The
bars represent prediction error, which is minimised over all levels to attain
the most likely cause.
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
Morris, 1973). Often, in statistics, these hierarchical models
comprise just two levels, which is a useful way to specify
simple shrinkage priors on the parameters of single-level
models. We will assume the stochastic terms are Gaussian
with covariance Si ¼ SðliÞ: Therefore, ui and li parameterise the means and covariances of the likelihood at each
pðvilviþ1; uÞ ¼ Nðvi : Giðviþ1; uiÞ; SiÞ
This likelihood of vi also plays the role of a prior on vi
that is jointly maximised with the likelihood of the level
below pðvi21lvi; uÞ: This is the key to understanding the
utility of hierarchical models. By learning the parameters of
the generative distribution of level i one is implicitly
learning the parameters of the prior distribution for level
i 2 1: This enables this learning of prior densities.
Although li are parameters of the forward model they are
sometimes referred to as hyperparameters and in classical
statistics correspond to variance components. We will
preserve the distinction between ui and li because they
may correspond to backward and lateral connections
strengths, respectively.
The hierarchical nature of these models lends an
important context-sensitivity to recognition densities not
found in single-level models. This is shown in Fig. 8, which
should be compared with Fig. 2. The key point here is that
high-level causes viþ1 determine the prior expectation of
causes vi in the subordinate level. This can completely
change the marginal pðvi21; uÞ and recognition pðvilvi21; uÞ
distributions upon which inference in based. From the
manifold perspective on inference, the part of the manifold
Gi21ðvi; ui21Þ highlighted by prior expectations, changes
from input to input in a context-dependent way (see Fig. 8).
The context established by priors is not determined by
preceding events but is immediate and conferred by higher
hierarchical levels. For example, in Fig. 7 the semantic
context induced by reading one of the sentences has a
profound effect on the most likely graphemic cause of the
visual input subtended by ‘ev’. The dual role of pðvilviþ1; uÞ
as a likelihood or generative density for level i and a prior
density for level i 2 1 is recapitulated by a dual role for
MAP estimates of vi: From a bottom-up perspective, these
correspond to parameters (modes) of the recognition
densities. However, from a top-down perspective they also
act as parameters of the generative model by interacting
with ui21 in Gi21ðvi; ui21Þ to give the prior expectation of
It may seem restrictive to make Gaussian assumptions
about the stochastic terms in Eq. (24). However, non-linearities in Giðviþ1; uiÞ can transform Gaussian distributions
into arbitrarily complicated non-Gaussian distributions. A
simple example is given in Fig. 9 in which a bimodal
marginal density, of a bivariate input, is induced by a
univariate Gaussian density at the level above. In short, nonlinear hierarchical models, under Gaussian assumptions are
equivalent to non-hierarchical models under non-Gaussian
assumptions. Perhaps the simplest example of this is the
three-level model
u ¼ u1v2 þ 11
v2 ¼ Gðv3; u2Þ þ 12
This is formally identical to the (non-Gaussian) sparse
coding model in Eq. (10) where Cov{11} ¼ S; Cov{12} ¼
0 and Cov{13} ¼ 1: Gðv3; u2Þ plays the role of a probability
integral transform that renders the cumulative distribution
of v2 the same as g in Section 3.5.5. When Cov{11} ! 0 Eq.
(24) reduces to the model adopted in ICA.
3.7.3. Implementation
The biological plausibility of the empirical Bayes in the
brain can be established fairly simply. To do this, a
hierarchical scheme is described in some detail. A more
Fig. 8. Hierarchical models embody context-sensitivity not found in singlelevel models (c.f. Fig. 2). High-level causes viþ1 determine the prior
expectation of causes vi in the subordinate level. Changes in viþ1 can
completely change the marginal pðvi21; uÞ and recognition pðvilvi21; uÞ
distributions upon which inference in based.
Fig. 9. Non-linearities in Giðviþ1; uiÞ can transform Gaussian distributions
of viþ1 into arbitrarily complicated non-Gaussian densities for vi ¼
Giðviþ1; uiÞ þ 1i: In this illustration a bimodal marginal density, of a
bivariate input, is induced by a univariate Gaussian density at the level
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
thorough account of this scheme, including simulations of
various neurobiological and psychophysical phenomena,
will appear in future publications. For the moment, we will
address neuronal implementation at a purely theoretical
level, using the framework developed above.
For simplicity, we will assume deterministic recognition
such that qðfðuÞ; uÞ ¼ 1: In this setting, with conditional
independence, F comprises a series of log likelihoods
‘ðuÞ ¼ kln pðu; v; uÞlq ¼ ln pðu; f2; …; uÞ
¼ ln pðulf2; uÞ þ lnðf2lf3; uÞ þ · · ·
2j2 2 · · · 2 1
2 lnlS1l 2 1
ji ¼ fi 2 Giðfiþ1; uiÞ 2 liji
¼ ð1 þ liÞ21ðfi 2 Giðfiþ1; uiÞÞ
c.f. Eq. (20). Here S1=2
¼ 1 þ li: In the setting of neuronal
models the (whitened) prediction error is encoded by the
activities of units denoted by ji: These error units receive a
prediction from units in the level above2 and connections
from the principal units fi being predicted. Horizontal
interactions among the error units serve to de-correlate them
 , where the symmetric lateral connection
strengths li hyper-parameterise the covariances of the errors
Si; which are the prior covariances for level i 2 1:
The estimators fi and the connection strength parameters
perform a gradient ascent on the compound log probability.
E _fiþ1 ¼ ›lðuÞ
M _ui ¼ ›F
2ð1 þ liÞ21
This is the simplest version of the most general learning
algorithm considered so far. It is general in the sense that is
does not require the parameters of either the generative or
prior distributions. It can model non-invertible, non-linear
generation of sensory inputs and encompasses complicated
hierarchical processes. Furthermore, each of the learning
components has a relatively simple neuronal interpretation
(see below)
When Gi models dynamical processes (i.e. is effectively
a convolution operator) this gradient ascent is more
complicated. In a subsequent paper we will show that,
with dynamical models, it is necessary to minimise
the prediction error and their temporal derivatives. An
alternative is to assume a simple hidden Markov model for
the dynamics and use Kalman ﬁltering . For the moment, we will assume the inputs change
sufﬁciently slowly for gradient ascent not to be confounded.
3.8. Theoretical implications for neuronal implementation
The scheme implied by Eq. (28) has four clear
implications or predictions about the functional architectures required for its implementation. We now review these
in relation to cortical organisation in the brain. A schematic
summarising these points is provided in Fig. 10. In short, we
arrive at exactly the same four points presented at the end of
the previous section.
Hierarchical organisation. Hierarchical models enable
empirical Bayesian learning of prior densities and provide a
plausible model for sensory inputs. Single-level models that
do not show any conditional independence (e.g. those used
by connectionist and infomax schemes) depend on prior
constraints for unique inference and do not call upon a
hierarchical cortical organisation. On the other hand, if the
causal structure of generative processes is hierarchical, this
will be reﬂected, literally, by the hierarchical architectures
trying to minimise prediction error, not just at the level of
sensory input but at all levels (notice the deliberate mirror
symmetry in Fig. 10). The nice thing about this architecture
is that the responses of units at the ith level fi depend only
on the error at the current level and the immediately
preceding level. This follows from conditional independence and is important because it permits a biologically
plausible implementation, where the connections driving
the error minimisation only run forward from one level to
Reciprocal connections. As established at the beginning
of this section, the non-invertibility of processes generating
sensory data induces a need for both forward and backward
connections. In the hierarchical model, the dynamics of
principal units fiþ1 are subject to two, locally available,
inﬂuences. A likelihood or recognition term mediated by
forward afferents from the error units in the level below and
an empirical prior conveyed by error units in the same level.
Critically, the inﬂuences of the error units in both levels are
mediated by linear connections with a strength that is
exactly the same as the [negative] effective connectivity of
the reciprocal connections from fiþ1 to ji and jiþ1:
Functionally, forward and lateral connections are reciprocated, where backward connections generate predictions of
lower-level responses. Effective connectivity is simply the
change in a neuronal unit (neuron, assembly or cortical area)
induced by inputs from another . In this case
›ji=›fiþ1 and ›jiþ1=›fiþ1:
Effective connectivity in the forward direction is the
reciprocal (negative transpose) of that in the backward
direction ›ji=›fiþ1 ¼ 2›Gi=ðfiþ1; biÞi=›viþ1 that is a function of the generative parameters. Lateral connections,
2 Clearly, in the brain, backward connections are not inhibitory but, after
mediation by inhibitory inter-neurons, their effective inﬂuence could be
rendered so.
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
within each level, mediate the inﬂuence of error units on the
principal units and intrinsic connections li among the error
units decorrelate them, allowing competition among prior
expectations with different precisions (precision is the
inverse of variance). In short, lateral, forwards and backward connections are all reciprocal, consistent with
anatomical observations.
Functionally asymmetric forward and backward connections. The forward connections are the reciprocal of the
backward effective connectivity from the higher level to the
lower level, extant at that time. However, the functional
attributes of forward and backward inﬂuences are different.
The inﬂuences of units fiþ1 on error units in the lower level
ji instantiate the forward model ji ¼ fi 2 Giðfiþ1; uiÞ 2
liji: These can be non-linear, where each unit in the higher
level may modulate or interact with the inﬂuence of others,
according to the non-linearities in Giðfiþ1; uiÞ: In contradistinction, the inﬂuences of units in lower levels do not
interact when producing changes at the higher level,
because their effects are linearly separable (see Eq. (28)).
This is a key observation because the empirical evidence,
reviewed in the previous section, suggests that backward
connections are in a position to interact (e.g. though NMDA
receptors expressed predominantly in the supragranular
layers receiving backward connections). Forward connections are not. It should be noted that, although the implied
forward connections 2›ji=›fT
iþ1 mediate linearly separable
effects of ji on fiþ1; these connections might be activityand time-dependent because of their dependence on fiþ1: In
summary, non-linearities, in the way sensory inputs are
produced, necessitate non-linear interactions in the generative model that are mediated by backward inﬂuences but
do not require forward connections to be modulatory.
Associative plasticity. Changes in the parameters correspond to plasticity in the sense that the parameters control
the strength of backward and lateral connections. The
backward connections parameterise the prior expectations
of the forward model and the lateral connections hyperparameterise the prior covariances. Together they parameterise the Gaussian densities that constitute the priors
Fig. 10. Upper panel: Schematic depicting a hierarchical extension to the predictive coding architecture, using the same format as Fig. 4. Here hierarchical
arrangements within the model serve to provide predictions or priors to representations in the level below. The open circles are the error units and the ﬁlled
circles are the states encoding the conditional expectation of causes in the environment. These change to minimise both the discrepancies between their
predicted value and the mismatch incurred by their own prediction of the level below. These two constraints correspond to prior and likelihood terms,
respectively (see main text). Lower panel: a more detailed picture of the inﬂuences on principal and error units.
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
(and likelihoods) of the model. The plasticity implied can be
seen more clearly with an explicit parameterisation of the
connections. For example, let Giðviþ1; uiÞ ¼ uiviþ1: In this
_ui ¼ ð1 þ liÞ21kjifT
_li ¼ ð1 þ liÞ21ðkjijT
This is just Hebbian or associative plasticity where the
connection strengths change in proportion to the product of
pre- and post-synaptic activity; for example, kjifT
intuition about Eq. (29) obtains by considering the conditions
under which the expected change in parameters is zero (i.e.
after learning). For the backward connections this implies
there is no component of prediction error that can be
explained by estimates at the higher level kjifT
iþ1l ¼ 0: The
lateral connections stop changing when the prediction error
has been whitened kjijT
Non-diagonal forms for li complicate the biological
interpretation because changes at any one connection
depend on changes elsewhere. The problem can be ﬁnessed
slightly by rewriting the equations as
_ui ¼ kjifT
iþ1lu 2 li _ui
_li ¼ kjijT
i lu 2 li _li 2 1
where the decay terms are mediated by integration at the cell
body in a fashion similar to that described by Friston, Frith,
and Frackowiak . Furthermore the expectations can
be approximated by a trace of the associative term. For
example, t _T ¼ jifT
iþ1 2 T; where the trace T may correspond to the accumulation of post-synaptic tags mentioned above. Finally, one should note
that changes in lateral and self-connections encoding
precision do not have to be mediated by long-term changes
in plasticity. They could change on a short time-scale,
through classical neuromodulatory effects. However, this
would entail a slightly different parameterisation that pooled
over error units.
It is evident that the predictions of the theoretical
analysis coincide almost exactly with the empirical aspects
of functional architectures in visual cortices highlighted by
the previous section (hierarchical organisation, reciprocity
functional asymmetry and associative plasticity). Although
somewhat contrived, it is pleasing that purely theoretical
considerations and neurobiological empiricism converge so
precisely.
3.9. Summary
In summary, predictive coding lends itself naturally to
a hierarchical treatment, which considers the brain as an
empirical Bayesian device. The dynamics of the units or
populations are driven to minimise error at all levels of
the cortical hierarchy and implicitly render themselves
posterior modes (i.e. most likely values) of the causes
contradistinction
supervised
learning, hierarchical prediction does not require any
desired output. Indeed predictions of intermediate outputs
at each level emerge spontaneously. Unlike information
theoretic approaches they do not assume independent
causes. In contrast to regularised inverse solutions (e.g.
in machine vision) they do not depend on a priori
constraints. These emerge spontaneously as empirical
priors from higher levels. Fig. 11 is a schematic that
reviews the issues covered in this section from the point
of view of model estimation.
The overall scheme implied by Eq. (28) relates
comfortably to the hypothesis , “on the
role of the reciprocal, topographic pathways between two
cortical areas, one often a ‘higher’ area dealing with more
abstract information about the world, the other ‘lower’,
dealing with more concrete data. The higher area attempts to
ﬁt its abstractions to the data it receives from lower areas by
sending back to them from its deep pyramidal cells a
template reconstruction best ﬁtting the lower level view.
The lower area attempts to reconcile the reconstruction of its
view that it receives from higher areas with what it knows,
sending back from its superﬁcial pyramidal cells the
features in its data which are not predicted by the higher
area. The whole calculation is done with all areas working
simultaneously, but with order imposed by synchronous
activity in the various top-down, bottom-up loops”. We
have seen that supervised, infomax and regularised models
require prior assumptions about the distribution of causes.
The ﬁnal section introduced empirical Bayes to show that
these assumptions are not necessary and that priors can be
learned in a hierarchical context. Furthermore, we have tried
to show that hierarchical prediction can be implemented in
brain-like architectures using mechanisms that are biologically plausible.
Clearly, there are many aspects of neuronal information
processing that have not been included in the theoretical
considerations above. For example, we have not speciﬁed
the detailed role of local neuronal circuits or the potentially
important role of horizontal connections within areas, or
lateral connections among areas. Furthermore, a number of
the dynamical aspects of neuronal interactions have been
ignored (e.g. timing of responses, conduction delays
synchrony, etc.). A number of these issues, particularly
the dynamic aspects are the subject of current work, in many
units, that represents an exciting conﬂuence of estimation
theory, statistics, computational neuroscience and neurobiology. See, for example, Pouget, Deneve, and Duhamel
 for a theoretical treatment of multimodal representations within a Bayesian framework.
4. Discussion
4.1. Representational leaning
The formulation of representational learning in terms of
generative models embodies a number of key distinctions,
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
(i) the distinction between invertible vs. non-invertible
models, (ii) deterministic vs. probabilistic recognition and
(iii) static vs. dynamic recognition. If the inverse of the
generative model cannot be parameterised an approximate
recognition is required. This invokes the need for an explicit
parameterisation of both the recognition and generative
densities and suggests an important role for forward and
backward connections in the brain. Invertible models can, in
principle, be implemented using only forward connections
because the recognition parameters are completely speciﬁed
by the generative model. However, non-linear, hierarchical
and dynamic aspects of the sensorium render easy inversion
highly unlikely. Most of the examples in this section have
focussed on deterministic recognition where neuronal
dynamics encode the most likely causes of the current
sensory input. The distinction between deterministic and
probabilistic representation addresses a deeper question
about whether neuronal dynamics represent the state of
the world or embody probability densities of those states.
Classically, patterns of activity have been treated as
encoding the value of the stimulus (e.g. the orientation of
a contour). Pouget, Dayan, and Zemel explore the
more recent suggestion “that neural computation is akin to a
Bayesian inference process, with population activity
patterns representing uncertainty about stimuli in the form
of probability distributions (e.g., the probability density
function over the orientation of a contour).”
Does the brain estimate or infer? From the point of view
of hierarchical models, the states of units encode the mode
of the posterior density at any given level. This can be
considered a point recognition density or an estimate.
However, the states of units at any level also induce a prior
density in the level below. This is because top-down
inﬂuences provide a prior expectation in the context of a
prior covariance that is encoded by the strength of lateral
connections. These covariances render the generative model
Fig. 11. A taxonomy of procedures for representational learning. The various schemes are organised to reﬂect their dependence on different assumptions about
generative and prior distributions that are necessary to learn a recognition distribution. See main text for a full discussion of the schemes and mathematical
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
probabilistic. By summarising densities in terms of their
modes, using neuronal activity, the posterior and prior
densities can change quickly with sensory inputs. However,
this does entail unimodal densities. From the point of view
of a statistician, this may be an impoverished representation
of the world that compromises inference, especially when
the posterior distribution is multimodal. However, it is
exactly this approximate nature of recognition that preoccupies psychophysicists and psychologists; the emergence of unitary, deterministic perceptual representations in
the brain is commonplace and is of special interest when the
causes are ambiguous 
that may be speciﬁed genetically or epigenetically.
However, predictive coding is likely to play a much more
prominent role at higher levels of processing for the reasons
detailed in the previous section.
In a similar way predictive coding, especially in its
hierarchical formulation, embraces PDP principles found in
connectionist schemes. The representation of any cause
depends upon internally consistent representations of
subordinate and supraordinate causes in lower and higher
levels. These representations induce and maintain themselves, across and within all levels of the sensory hierarchy,
through dynamic and reentrant interactions . The same PDP phenomena (e.g. lateral interactions
leading to competition among representations) can be
observed. For example, the lateral connection strengths
embody what has been learnt empirically about the prior
covariances among causes. A prior that transpires to be very
precise (i.e. low variance) will receive correspondingly low
strength inhibitory connections from its competing error
units (recall S1=2
¼ 1 þ li). It will therefore supervene over
other error units and have a greater corrective impact on the
estimate causing the prediction error. Conversely, top-down
expectations that are less informative will produce errors
that are more easily suppressed and have less effect on the
representations. In predictive coding, these dynamics are
driven explicitly by error minimisation, whereas in connectionist simulations the activity is determined solely by the
connection strengths established during training.
In addition to the theoretical bias toward generative
models and predictive coding, the clear emphases on
backward and recursive dynamics make it a more natural
framework for understanding neuronal infrastructures.
Figs. 5 and 6 show the fundamental differences among
supervised, infomax and predictive schemes. In the
supervised and infomax schemes the connections are
universally forward. In the predictive coding scheme the
forward connections (broken line) drive the prediction so as
to minimise lðuÞ whereas backwards connections (solid
lines) use these representations of causes to emulate mixing
enacted by the real world. The non-linear aspects of this
mixing imply that only backward inﬂuences interact in the
predictive coding scheme. Section 2 assembled some of the
anatomical and physiological evidence suggesting that
backward connections are prevalent in the real brain and
could support non-linear mixing through their modulatory
characteristics. Before turning to electrophysiological
evidence for backward connections we consider the
implications for classical views of receptive ﬁelds and the
representational capacity of neuronal units.
4.2. Context, causes and representations
The Bayesian perspective suggests something quite
profound for the classical view of receptive ﬁelds. If
neuronal responses encompass a bottom-up likelihood term
and top-down priors, then responses evoked by bottom-up
input should change with the context established by prior
expectations from higher levels of processing. Consider the
example in Fig. 7. Here a unit encoding the visual form of
‘went’ responds when we read the ﬁrst sentence at the top of
this ﬁgure. When we read the second sentence ‘The last
event was cancelled’ it would not. If we recorded from this
unit we might infer that our ‘went’ unit was, in some
circumstances, selective for the word ‘event’. This might be
difﬁcult to explain without an understanding of hierarchical
inference and the semantic context the stimulus was
presented in. In short, under a predictive coding scheme,
the receptive ﬁelds of neurons should be context-sensitive.
The remainder of this subsection deals with empirical
evidence for these extra-classical receptive ﬁeld effects.
Generative models suggest that the role of backward
connections is to provide contextual guidance to lower levels
through a prediction of the lower level’s inputs. When this
prediction is incomplete or incompatible with the lower
area’s input, an error is generated that engenders changes in
the area above until reconciliation. When, and only when, the
bottom-up driving inputs are in harmony with top-down
prediction, error is suppressed and a consensus between the
prediction and the actual input is established. Given this
conceptual model, a stimulus-related response or ‘activation’
corresponds to some transient error signal that drives the
appropriate change in higher areas until a veridical higherlevel representation emerges and the error is ‘cancelled’ by
backwards connections. Clearly the prediction error will
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
depend on the context and consequently the backward
connections confer context-sensitivity on the functional
speciﬁcity of the lower area. In short, the activation does not
just depend on bottom-up input but on the difference between
bottom-up input and top-down predictions.
The prevalence of non-linear or modulatory top-down
effects can be inferred from the fact that context interacts
with the content of representations. Here context is
established simply through the expression of causes other
than the one in question. Backward connections from one
higher area can be considered as providing contextual
modulation of the prediction from another area. Because the
effect of context will only be expressed when the thing
being predicted is present these contextual afferents should
not elicit a response by themselves. Effects of this sort,
which change the responsiveness of units but do not elicit a
response, are a hallmark of modulatory projections. In
summary, hierarchical models offer a scheme that allows for
contextual effects; ﬁrstly through biasing responses towards
their prior expectation and secondly by conferring a contextsensitivity on these priors through the modulatory component of backward projections. Next we consider the
nature of real neuronal responses and whether they are
consistent with this perspective.
4.3. Neuronal responses and representations
Classical models (e.g. classical receptive ﬁelds) assume
that evoked responses will be expressed invariably in the
same units or neuronal populations irrespective of the
context. However, real neuronal responses are not invariant
but depend upon the context in which they are evoked. For
example, visual cortical units have dynamic receptive ﬁelds
that can change from moment to moment ). A useful synthesis of data for the macaque
visual system that highlights the anatomical and physiological substrates of context-dependent responses can be
found in Angelucci, Levitt, and Lund . A key
conclusion of the authors is that “feedback from extrastriate
cortex (possibly together with overlap or inter-digitation of
coactive lateral connectional ﬁelds within V1) can provide a
large and stimulus-speciﬁc surround modulatory ﬁeld. The
stimulus speciﬁcity of the interactions between the centre
and surround ﬁelds, may be due to the orderly, matching
structure and different scales of intra-areal and feedback
projection excitatory pathways.”
There are numerous examples of context-sensitive
neuronal responses. Perhaps the simplest is short-term
plasticity. Short-term plasticity refers to changes in
connection strength, either potentiation or depression,
following pre-synaptic inputs . As noted by Fuhrmann, Segev, Markram,
and Tsodyks “Synaptic transmission in the neocortex
is dynamic, such that the magnitude of the post-synaptic
response changes with the history of the pre-synaptic
activity. Therefore each response carries information about
the temporal structure of the preceding pre-synaptic input
spike train.” In brief, the underlying connection strengths,
that deﬁne what a unit represents, are a strong function of
the immediately preceding neuronal transient (i.e. preceding
representation). A second, and possibly richer, example is
that of attentional modulation that can change the sensitivity
of neurons to different perceptual attributes . It has been shown, both in single unit
recordings in primates and
human functional fMRI studies ,
that attention to speciﬁc visual attributes can profoundly
alter the receptive ﬁelds or event-related responses to the
same stimuli.
These sorts of effects are commonplace in the brain and
are generally understood in terms of the dynamic modulation of receptive ﬁeld properties by backward and lateral
afferents. There is clear evidence that horizontal connections in visual cortex are modulatory in nature , speaking to an interaction between the
functional segregation implicit in the columnar architecture
of V1 and the neuronal dynamics in distal populations.
These observations suggest that lateral and backwards
interactions may convey contextual information that shapes
the responses of any neuron to its inputs to confer on the
brain the ability to make conditional inferences about
sensory input. See also McIntosh who develops the
idea from a cognitive neuroscience perspective “that a
particular region in isolation may not act as a reliable index
for a particular cognitive function. Instead, the neural
context in which an area is active may deﬁne the cognitive
function.” His argument is predicated on careful characterisations of effective connectivity using neuroimaging.
4.3.1. Examples from neurophysiology
Here we consider the evidence for contextual representations in terms of single cell responses, to visual stimuli, in
the temporal cortex of awake behaving monkeys. If the
representation of a stimulus depends on establishing
representations of subordinate and supraordinate causes at
all levels of the visual hierarchy, then information about the
high-order attributes of a stimulus must be conferred by topdown inﬂuences. Consequently, one might expect to see the
emergence of selectivity, for high-level attributes, after the
initial visually evoked response (although delays vary
greatly, it typically takes about 10 ms for spike volleys to
propagate from one cortical area to another and about a
100 ms to reach prefrontal areas). This is because the
representations at higher levels must emerge before backward afferents can reshape the response proﬁle of neurons in
lower areas. This temporal delay, in the emergence of
selectivity, is precisely what one sees empirically: Sugase,
Yamane, Ueno, and Kawano recorded neurons in
macaque temporal cortex during the presentation of faces
and objects. The faces were either human or monkey faces
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
and were categorised in terms of identity (whose face it was)
and expression (happy, angry, etc.). “Single neurones
conveyed two different scales of facial information in their
ﬁring patterns, starting at different latencies. Global
information, categorising stimuli as monkey faces, human
faces or shapes, was conveyed in the earliest part of the
responses. Fine information about identity or expression
was conveyed later”, starting on average about 50 ms after
face-selective responses. These observations demonstrate
representations for facial identity or expression that emerge
dynamically in a way that might rely on backward
connections. These inﬂuences imbue neurons with a
selectivity that is not intrinsic to the area but depends on
interactions across levels of a processing hierarchy.
A similar late emergence of selectivity is seen in motion
processing. A critical aspect of visual processing is the
integration of local motion signals generated by moving
objects. This process is complicated by the fact that local
velocity measurements can differ depending on contour
orientation and spatial position. Speciﬁcally, any local
motion detector can measure only the component of motion
perpendicular to a contour that extends beyond its ﬁeld of
view . This ‘aperture problem’ is
particularly relevant to direction-selective neurons early in
the visual pathways, where small receptive ﬁelds permit
only a limited view of a moving object. Pack and Born
 have shown “that neurons in the middle temporal
visual area (known as MT or V5) of the macaque brain
reveal a dynamic solution to the aperture problem. MT
neurons initially respond primarily to the component of
motion perpendicular to a contour’s orientation, but over a
period of approximately 60 ms the responses gradually shift
to encode the true stimulus direction, regardless of
orientation”.
Friston presented a number of examples from
functional neuroimaging that demonstrated the contextsensitivity of evoked brain responses and the use of effective
connectivity to establish interactions between bottom-up
and top-down inﬂuences. Recent neuroimaging studies have
addressed predictive coding explicitly, with some compelling results: Murray, Kersten, Olshausen, Schrater, and
Woods used functional MRI to measure responses in
V1 and a higher object processing area, the lateral occipital
complex, to visual elements that were either grouped into
objects or arranged randomly. They “observed signiﬁcant
activity increases in the lateral occipital complex and
concurrent reductions of activity in primary visual cortex
when elements formed coherent shapes, suggesting that
activity in early visual areas is reduced as a result of
grouping processes performed in higher areas. These
ﬁndings are consistent with predictive coding models of
vision that postulate that inferences of high-level areas are
subtracted from incoming sensory information in lower
areas through cortical feedback.”
Recent developments in functional mapping, at the
cellular level, may disclose more details about the speciﬁc
contribution of backward and lateral connections. These
advances involve the use of extra-cellular electrode
recordings, optical imaging and three-dimensional anatomical reconstruction cells in conjunction with the GABA
inactivation paradigm and related interventions . The predictions of the
empirical Bayesian model reviewed above are clear:
Disabling backward and lateral afferents should destroy
context sensitivity. Principal units should still be able to
‘recognise’ stimulus conﬁgurations but will simply attain
the ‘maximum likelihood’ estimate of their cause, unconstrained by priors or contextual information. Error units will
respond exuberantly, because prediction error cannot be
cancelled by constructs from higher levels of synthesis.
Learning-related deﬁcits may be expressed as a failure of
repetition suppression leading to an overall picture of
disinhibition and context-insensitive responses.
4.4. Perception and action
This paper has deliberately restricted its focus to
perceptual synthesis in (visual) cortical hierarchies. However, it is useful to note the close links between predictive
coding in perception and motor control. These links exist at
a number of levels. First, the conjoint use of forward
(generative or predictive) and inverse (recognition or
controller) models has been central to theories of motor
control and action for many years . Indeed the use of prediction error to drive changes is
probably more established in this context. Here, the
prediction error is used to adjust motor executive processes
to minimise the discrepancy between the consequences of
action and that predicted (by a forward model) given topdown signals. Hitherto, we have portrayed error units as
suppressing themselves, in a reentrant fashion, though
supraordinate principal units. In motor systems error signals
self-suppress, not through neuronally mediated effects, but
by eliciting movements that change bottom-up proprioceptive and sensory input. This unifying perspective on
perception and action suggest action is both perceived and
caused by its perception. The behaviour of co-evolving
forward and inverse models, embedded in the real world, is
a fascinating area that links perception and action and even
encompasses communication. For example, Wolpert, Doya,
and Kawato have examined the extent to which
motor commands acting on the body can be equated with
communicative signals acting on other people and suggest
that “computational solutions for motor control may have
been extended to the domain of social interaction.”
The behaviour of embodied agents, capable of empirical
Bayesian inference, is another area we have not considered.
It is interesting to reﬂect on what might happen if principal
units were connected to motor effectors. The activity of
principal units is directed by their ability to suppress
prediction error. In this paper we have only dealt with
neuronally mediated suppression through backward
K. Friston / Neural Networks 16 1325–1352
connections. However, it is perfectly possible for this
suppression to be mediated though the physical world by
changing the sensorium or the way it is sampled. This leads
to the interesting conjecture that much innate orientating
and tracking behaviour is simply a reﬂection of the brain’s
inherent tendency to maintain a predictable sensory input.
5. Conclusion
In conclusion, the representational capacity and inherent
function of any neuron, neuronal population or cortical area
in the brain is dynamic and context-sensitive. Functional
integration, or interactions among brain systems, that
employ driving (bottom-up) and backward (top-down)
connections, mediate this adaptive and contextual specialisation. We have seen that most models of representational
learning require prior assumptions about the distribution of
causes. However, empirical Bayes suggests that these
assumptions can be relaxed and that priors can be learned
in a hierarchical context. We have tried to show that this
hierarchical prediction can be implemented in brain-like
architectures and in a biologically plausible fashion.
A key point, made above, is that backward connections,
mediating internal or generative models of how sensory
inputs are caused, are essential if the processes generating
inputs are difﬁcult to invert. This non-invertibility demands
an explicit parameterisation of both the generative model
(backward connections) and approximate recognition (forward connections). This suggests that feedforward architectures are not sufﬁcient for representational learning or
perception. Moreover, non-linearities in generative models,
that make backward connections necessary, require these
connections to be modulatory, so that estimated causes in
higher cortical levels can interact to predict responses
in lower levels. This is important in relation to asymmetries
in forward and backward connections that have been
characterised empirically.
The arguments in this article were developed under
hierarchical models of brain function, where high-level
systems provide a prediction of the inputs to lower-levels.
Conﬂict between the two is resolved by changes in the highlevel representations, which are driven by the ensuing error in
lower regions, until the mismatch is ‘cancelled’. From this
perspective the specialisation of any region is determined
both by bottom-up driving inputs and by top-down predictions. Specialisation is therefore not an intrinsic property of
any region but depends on both forward and backward
connections with other areas. Because the latter have access
to the context in which the inputs are generated they are in a
position to modulate the selectivity or specialisation of lower
areas. The implications for classical models (e.g. classical
receptive ﬁelds in electrophysiology, classical specialisation
in neuroimaging and connectionism in cognitive models) are
severe and suggest these models may provide incomplete
accounts of real brain architectures. On the other hand,
representational learning, in the context of hierarchical
generative models not only accounts for extra-classical
phenomena seen empirically but enforces a view of the brain
as an inferential machine through its empirical Bayesian
motivation.
Acknowledgements
The Wellcome Trust funded this work. I would like to
thank my colleagues for help in writing this paper and
developing the ideas, especially Cathy Price for the
psychological components, Peter Dayan for the computational neuroscience and three anonymous reviewers for
extremely helpful suggestions.