Semi-supervised Subspace Co-Projection
for Multi-class Heterogeneous Domain
Adaptation
Min Xiao and Yuhong Guo(B)
Department of Computer and Information Sciences,
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA
{minxiao,yuhong}@temple.edu
Abstract. Heterogeneous domain adaptation aims to exploit labeled
training data from a source domain for learning prediction models in
a target domain under the condition that the two domains have different input feature representation spaces. In this paper, we propose a
novel semi-supervised subspace co-projection method to address multiclass heterogeneous domain adaptation. The proposed method projects
the instances of the two domains into a co-located latent subspace to
bridge the feature divergence gap across domains, while simultaneously
training prediction models in the co-projected representation space with
labeled training instances from both domains. It also exploits the unlabeled data to promote the consistency of co-projected subspaces from
the two domains based on a maximum mean discrepancy criterion. Moreover, to increase the stability and discriminative informativeness of the
subspace co-projection, we further exploit the error-correcting output
code schemes to incorporate more binary prediction tasks shared across
domains into the learning process. We formulate this semi-supervised
learning process as a non-convex joint minimization problem and develop
an alternating optimization algorithm to solve it. To investigate the
empirical performance of the proposed approach, we conduct experiments on cross-lingual text classiﬁcation and cross-domain digit image
classiﬁcation tasks with heterogeneous feature spaces. The experimental results demonstrate the eﬃcacy of the proposed method on these
heterogeneous domain adaptation problems.
Introduction
Domain adaptation is the task of exploiting labeled training data in a label-rich
source domain to train prediction models in a label-scarce target domain, aiming
to greatly reduce the manual annotation eﬀort in the target domain. Recently,
heterogeneous domain adaptation, which generalizes the standard domain adaptation into a more challenging scenario where the source domain and the target
domain have diﬀerent feature spaces, has attracted a lot attention in the research
community . Heterogeneous domain adaptation techniques have applications in many diﬀerent areas, including image classiﬁcation in computer vision
⃝Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
A. Appice et al. (Eds.): ECML PKDD 2015, Part II, LNAI 9285, pp. 525–540, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-23525-7 32
M. Xiao and Y. Guo
 , drug eﬃciency prediction in biotechnology , cross-language text classiﬁcation and cross-lingual text retrieval in natural language processing.
A fundamental challenge in heterogeneous domain adaptation lies in the disjoint feature representation spaces of the two domains; with the disjoint feature
spaces, a prediction model trained in the source domain cannot be applied in the
target domain. A number of representation learning methods have been developed in the literature to address this challenge, including the instance projection
methods which project instances in the two domains into a common feature space, and the instance transformation methods which transform
instances from one domain into the other one. These methods however conduct representation learning either in a fully unsupervised manner without
exploiting the label information, or in a fully supervised manner without exploiting the available unlabeled instances. Moreover, some works 
perform representation learning and prediction model training separately, leading to non-optimal representations for the target classiﬁcation task.
In this paper, we propose a novel semi-supervised subspace co-projection
method to address heterogeneous domain adaptation problems, which overcomes
the drawbacks of the previous methods mentioned above. The proposed method
projects instances in the source and target domains from domain-speciﬁc feature spaces to a co-located low-dimensional representation space, while simultaneously training prediction models in the projected feature space with labeled
instances from the two domains. Moreover, the unlabeled instances are exploited
to promote cross-domain instance co-projection by enforcing the empirical mean
distributions of the projected source instances and the projected target instances
to be similar. Furthermore, we exploit Error-Correcting Output Code (ECOC)
schemes to cast a cross-domain multi-class classiﬁcation task into a large
number of cross-domain binary prediction tasks, aiming to increase the stability and discriminative informativeness of the subspace co-projection and enhance
cross-domain multi-class classiﬁcation. The overall semi-supervised learning process is formulated as a joint minimization problem, and solved using an alternating optimization procedure. To evaluate the proposed learning method, we
conduct cross-lingual text classiﬁcation experiments on multilingual Amazon
product reviews and cross-domain digit image classiﬁcation experiments on the
UCI handwritten digits data. The experimental results demonstrate the eﬃcacy
of the proposed approach for multi-class heterogeneous domain adaptation.
Related Work
In this section, we provide a brief review over the related works on heterogeneous domain adaptation, including latent subspace learning methods, instance
transformation methods, and auxiliary resources assisted learning methods.
A group of works address heterogeneous domain adaptation by developing
latent subspace learning methods that project instances from the domain-speciﬁc
feature spaces into a common latent subspace . In particular,
Shi et al. proposed a heterogeneous spectral mapping (HeMap) method,
Semi-supervised Subspace Co-Projection for Multi-class Heterogeneous
which learns two projection matrices and projects instances via spectral transformation. Wang et al. proposed a manifold alignment (DAMA) method,
which learns projection matrices by using manifold alignment and similarity/
dissimilarity constraints constructed on pairs of instances with same/diﬀerent
labels. Duan et al. proposed a heterogeneous feature augmentation (HFA)
method, which ﬁrst projects instances into a common subspace and uses the
projected latent features to augment the original features of the instances, and
then trains a classiﬁcation model with the feature-augmented instances. Later,
Li et al. extended the HFA method into a semi-supervised HFA (SHFA)
method by incorporating unlabeled target training data. Wu et al. proposed
to address heterogeneous domain adaptation by performing heterogeneous transfer discriminant analysis of canonical correlations, which maximizes/minimizes
the intra/inter-class canonical correlations of the projected instances while simultaneously reducing the data distribution mismatch between the original data
and the projected data. Our proposed approach shares similarities with these
subspace learning methods on projecting original instances into common representation subspaces. But diﬀerent from these previous works, our approach
exploits both labeled and unlabeled instances and simultaneously learns the
projection matrices and the prediction models. Moreover, our approach can naturally exploit error-correcting output code schemes to promote label informative
subspace co-projection.
Another group of works developed instance transformation methods to
address heterogeneous domain adaptation, which learn asymmetric mapping
matrices to transform instances from the source domain to the target domain
or vice versa . Kulis et al. proposed an asymmetric regularized cross-domain transformation method that learns an asymmetric feature
transformation matrix by performing nonlinear metric learning with similarity/dissimilarity constraints constructed on all pairs of labeled instances. Wang
et al. proposed a two-step feature mapping method based on Hilbert-Schmidt
Independence Criterion (HSIC) for heterogeneous domain adaptation. It ﬁrst
selects features in each domain based on the HSIC between the instance feature
kernel matrix and the instance label kernel matrix, and then maps the selected
features across domains based on HSIC. Hoﬀman et al. proposed a Max-
Margin Domain Transforms (MMDT) method to learn domain-invariant image
representations. It transforms target instances into the source domain and trains
a prediction model in the source domain with the original labeled instances and
the transformed labeled instances. Xiao and Guo proposed a semi-supervised
kernel matching method for heterogeneous domain adaptation. It learns a prediction function on the labeled source data while mapping the target data points to
similar source data points by matching the target kernel matrix to a sub-matrix
of the source kernel matrix based on a Hilbert Schmidt Independence Criterion.
In addition to the two groups of methods mentioned above, some other works
exploit diﬀerent types of auxiliary resources to build connections between the
source features and the target features, including the ones that use bilingual
dictionaries , and the ones that use additional unlabeled image and doc-
M. Xiao and Y. Guo
uments . However, these auxiliary resource based learning methods are typically designed for speciﬁc applications and may have diﬃculty to be applied on
other application tasks.
Semi-supervised Multi-class Heterogeneous Domain
Adaptation
In this paper, we focus on multi-class heterogeneous domain adaptation problems. We assume in the source domain we have plenty of labeled instances while
in the target domain we only have a small number of labeled instances. The two
domains have disjoint input feature spaces, Xs = Rds and Xt = Rdt, where ds
is the dimensionality of the source domain feature space and dt is the dimensionality of the target domain feature space, but share the same multi-class
output label space Y = {−1, 1}L, where L is the number of classes. In particular, let Xs = [Xℓ
s ] ∈Rns×ds denote the data matrix in the source domain,
where each instance is represented as a row vector. Xℓ
s ∈Rℓs×ds is the labeled
source data matrix with a corresponding label matrix Ys ∈{−1, 1}ℓs×L, and
s ∈Rus×ds is the unlabeled source data matrix. Each row of the label matrix
contains only one positive 1, which indicates the class membership of the corresponding instance. Similarly, let Xt = [Xℓ
t ] ∈Rnt×dt denote the data matrix
in the target domain, where Xℓ
t ∈Rℓt×dt is the labeled target data matrix with
a corresponding label matrix Yt ∈{−1, 1}ℓt×L and Xu
t ∈Rut×dt is the unlabeled
target data matrix. The number of labeled target domain instances ℓt is small
and the number of labeled source domain instances ℓs is much larger than ℓt.
In this section, we present a semi-supervised subspace co-projection method
to address heterogeneous multi-class domain adaptation under the setting
described above. We formulate a co-projection based discriminative subspace
learning method to simultaneously project the instances from both domains
into a co-located subspace and train a multi-class classiﬁcation model in the
projected subspace, while exploiting the available unlabeled data to enforce a
maximum mean discrepancy criterion across domains in the projected subspace.
We further exploit ECOC schemes to enhance the discriminative informativeness of the projected subspace while directly addressing multi-class classiﬁcation
Semi-supervised Learning Framework
With the disjoint feature spaces across domains, traditional machine learning methods and homogeneous domain adaptation methods cannot be directly
applied in the heterogeneous domain adaptation setting. However, if we can
transform the two disjoint feature spaces Xs and Xt into a common subspace
Z = Rm with two transformation functions ψs : Xs −→Z and ψt : Xt −→Z,
we can then build a uniﬁed prediction model in the common subspace to adapt
information across domains. Since the same multi-class prediction task is shared
across the source domain and the target domain, i.e., the two domains have the
Semi-supervised Subspace Co-Projection for Multi-class Heterogeneous
same output label space, we can identify a useful common subspace representation of the data by enforcing the discriminative informativeness of the subspace
representation of the labeled data in both domains for the common multi-class
prediction task. Based on this motivation, we propose to project the instances
from the source domain and the target domain into a common subspace using
two projection matrices Us and Ut respectively such that ψs(Xs) = XsUs and
ψt(Xt) = XtUt, while simultaneously training shared cross-domain prediction
models using the projected data. This process can be formulated as the following minimization problem over the projection matrices and the prediction model
parameters
sUs, W), φ(Ys)
t Ut, W), φ(Yt)
2 R(Ut) + γ
where Us ∈Rds×m and Ut ∈Rdt×m are two projection matrices that transform
the input data in the source domain and target domain respectively to a common and low dimensional feature space, such that m < min(ds, dt); f(·, ·) is a
prediction function for both domains in the projected common feature space and
W ∈Rm×K is the prediction model parameter matrix; R(·) denotes a regularization function; φ(·) denotes a label transformation function, which transforms
the multi-class label vectors from the original space {−1, 1}L to a new space
{−1, 1}K; L(·, ·) is a loss function; and {β, αs, αt, γ} are trade-oﬀparameters.
We introduce the label transformation function φ(·) to provide a mechanism for
incorporating label encoding schemes later.
Since the same prediction model is shared across the two domains, we expect
that the discriminative subspace learning framework above can successfully identify a common subspace representation if there are suﬃcient labeled instances
in both domains to enforce the predictive consistency of the subspace projections. However, there are typically only a small number of labeled instances
in the target domain, which might lead to poor subspace identiﬁcation in the
target domain. To overcome this potential problem, we further incorporate unlabeled instances to assist the subspace co-projection across domains. Speciﬁcally,
we assume the empirical marginal instance distributions of the two domains
in the projected subspace should be similar, i.e., P(ψ(Xs)) and P(ψ(Xt)) are
similar, and hence the prediction model built in the projected subspace using
the labeled source domain instances can work well for the target domain. We
thus propose to minimize the distance between the means of the projected
instances (both labeled and unlabeled) in the two domains, D(ψ(Xs), ψ(Xt)).
The empirical mean vector ψ(Xs) in the source domain can be expressed as
nsXsUs, where 1ns denotes a column vector of 1s with length ns.
Similarly, the empirical mean vector ψ(Xt) in the target domain can be expressed
as ψ(Xt) =
ntXtUt, where 1nt denotes a column vector of 1s with length nt.
By incorporating the empirical mean vector distance measure into our formulation above, we produce the following semi-supervised heterogeneous domain
M. Xiao and Y. Guo
adaptation framework
sUs, W), φ(Ys)
t Ut, W), φ(Yt)
2 R(W) + η D
This framework will ensure the common subspace identiﬁed across domains to be
informative for the shared prediction model in the two domains, while enforcing
the two domains have similar marginal instance distributions in the projected
subspace to facilitate information adaptation across domains.
We expect the semi-supervised formulation above to provide a general framework for identifying discriminative common subspace representations for eﬀective
information adaptation across domains. Nevertheless, to produce a speciﬁc learning problem, we need to consider speciﬁc prediction functions, loss functions,
regularization functions and distance functions. In this work, we use a linear
prediction function f(x, w) = xw, a least squares loss function L(ˆy, y) = (ˆy−y)2,
and a squared L2-norm regularization function R(w) = ∥w∥2
2. We consider an
Euclidean distance function D(·, ·), which leads to a maximum mean discrepancy criterion . The maximum mean discrepancy criterion has been used in
the literature to induce similar marginal instance distributions across domains in
homogeneous domain adaptation setting, and it has been shown to be eﬀective
in bridging the domain divergence gaps . We expect such an empirical distribution based criterion can be useful for learning the common subspace across
heterogeneous domains in our setting. These speciﬁc components together lead
to the following semi-supervised learning problem
sUsW −φ(Ys)
t UtW −φ(Yt)
where ∥.∥F denotes the Frobenius norm, ∥.∥2 denotes the L2 norm, and {αs, αt,
β, γ, η} are trade-oﬀparameters.
The label transformation function φ(·) allows one to use diﬀerent multi-class
classiﬁcation schemes within the proposed framework above. For example, if we
use the standard one-vs-all (OVA) scheme to address multi-class classiﬁcation,
i.e., training one binary predictor for each label class, we then will have an
identical label transformation function φ(Y ) = Y , and set K = L for the size of
the prediction model parameter matrix W.
Semi-supervised Subspace Co-Projection for Multi-class Heterogeneous
Multi-class Classiﬁcation with ECOC Schemes
In addition to the one-vs-all (OVA) scheme for multi-class classiﬁcation, we
further exploit the general error-correcting output code (ECOC) schemes
for multi-class classiﬁcation. There are two reasons to use ECOC schemes in
our learning framework. First, ECOC schemes have the capacity of encoding
a multi-class classiﬁcation problem into many more binary classiﬁcation problems than the OVA scheme. More cross-domain binary classiﬁcation tasks can
help to increase the stability and prediction informativeness of the subspace
co-projection in the proposed approach above, and lead to more robust domain
adaptation performance. Second, ECOC schemes have been used in the literature
to robustly solve multi-class classiﬁcation problems with good empirical results
 . Incorporating an ECOC scheme in our learning framework will beneﬁt our
multi-class classiﬁcation task.
An ECOC scheme has two components: encoding process and decoding process. Given a L-class classiﬁcation problem, in the encoding process, an ECOC
scheme assigns a codeword from {−1, +1}K to each of the L classes, where K is
the length of the codeword. All the codewords for the L classes can then form
a codeword matrix M ∈{−1, +1}L×K, whose each row contains the codeword
for one of the L classes. Based on such a codeword matrix, the label transformation function φ(·) can transform any given label vector from the one-vs-all form
into a new label vector with length K, while converting the L-class classiﬁcation problem to K binary classiﬁcation problems, each of which corresponds to
one column of the codeword matrix M. In the decoding process, one can simply
compare the predicted codeword with the codewords in the codeword matrix M
to determine the predicted class (one of the L classes). In this work, we use the
Euclidean distance based loss decoding .
There are diﬀerent ECOC schemes proposed in the literature. One standard
scheme is the exhaustive ECOC , which constructs codewords with length K =
2L−1 −1. Dense random encoding is another simple ECOC encoding scheme.
For a given codeword length K, the random encoding constructs the codeword
vectors for the L classes by randomly ﬁlling the vectors with 1s and −1s, and
then selects the codeword matrix with the largest sum of column separation and
row separation from the results of multiple random repeats.
Training Algorithm
The semi-supervised learning problem in Eq (3) is a non-convex joint minimization problem over the three parameter matrices, Us, Ut, and W. But the problem
is convex in each individual parameter matrix given the other two ﬁxed, and has
closed-form solutions.
First, given ﬁxed Ut and W, the optimization problem over Us in Eq (3) is
simply a least squares minimization problem. By setting the derivative of the
objective function regarding Us to zeros, we obtain the following closed-form
(WW ⊤) ⊗As + I ⊗Bs
−1 vec(Qs)
M. Xiao and Y. Guo
where ⊗denotes the Kronecker product operator, vec(·) is the matrix vectorization operator, I is an identity matrix with proper size in the given context,
Bs = αsI + 2η
s φ(Ys)W ⊤+
Similarly, given ﬁxed Us and W, the optimization problem over Ut in Eq (3)
has the following closed-form solution
(WW ⊤) ⊗At + I ⊗Bt
−1 vec(Qt)
Bt = αtI + 2η
t φ(Yt)W ⊤+
Finally, the optimization problem over W given ﬁxed Us and Ut has the
following closed-form solution
sUs + βU ⊤
s φ(Ys) + βU ⊤
Given these closed-form solutions for each individual subproblem, we use an
alternating procedure to solve the optimization problem in Eq (3) in an iterative manner. After a random initialization over {Us, Ut, W}, in each iteration the
alternating procedure sequentially updates Us, Ut and W according to equations
(4), (5) and (6) respectively to minimize the objective function. We stop the iteration until a local optimal objective has been reached. On high-dimensional data,
where the closed-form solutions in (4) and (5) involve large matrix inversions,
we use a conjugate gradient descent algorithm to solve the subproblems over Us
and Ut to achieve scalability.
Experiments
We conducted experiments on cross-lingual text classiﬁcation tasks and digit
image classiﬁcation tasks with heterogeneous feature spaces. In this section we
report the experimental settings and the empirical results.
Semi-supervised Subspace Co-Projection for Multi-class Heterogeneous
Datasets and Methods
We conducted experiments on two types of data, text data and image data,
using Amazon product reviews and UCI handwritten digits respectively.
The Amazon product review dataset is a multilingual sentiment classiﬁcation
dataset. It contains reviews from three diﬀerent categories (Books, DVD and
Music), written in four diﬀerent languages (English (E) , French (F) , German
(G) and Japanese (J)), where each review is represented as a term-frequency
feature vector. With this dataset, we constructed 12 cross-lingual multi-class
classiﬁcation tasks with the three categories {Books, DV D, Music} as classes,
one for each source-target language pair. For example, the task E2F uses English
as the source language and French as the target language. For each task, there
are 4000 views for each class in each language domain.
The UCI handwritten digits dataset contains 2000 digit images, evenly distributed among ten digit classes (from zero to nine). We randomly split the
dataset into two subsets with equal size as two domains. Images in one domain
are represented using the feature set of the Zernike moments (Zer), while images
in the other domain are represented using the feature set of the proﬁle correlations (Fac). We then constructed two heterogeneous domain adaptation tasks,
Fac2Zer and Zer2Fac, one for each ordered source-target domain pair.
For each constructed heterogeneous domain adaptation task, we
compared the following methods: (1) TB - this is a target baseline method
that trains a classiﬁer using only the labeled instances in the target domain.
(2) HeMap - this is an unsupervised representation learning method for heterogeneous domain adaptation , which ﬁrst learns two projection matrices for the
two domains and then trains a classiﬁer using the projected labeled instances
from the two domains. (3) DAMA - this is a semi-supervised heterogeneous
domain adaptation method proposed in , which performs representation
learning and model training in separate steps. (4) MMDT - this is a maximum
margin domain transform method for heterogeneous domain adaptation .
(5) SHFA - this is a semi-supervised heterogeneous feature augmentation-based
domain adaptation method . (6) SCP-OVA - this is the proposed subspace
co-projection method with the one-verse-all (OVA) scheme for multi-class classiﬁcation. (7) SCP-ECOC - this is the proposed subspace co-projection method
with the exhaustive ECOC scheme for multi-class classiﬁcation. The DAMA
method cannot handle the original high-dimensional features of the review
data, we thus applied PCA to reduce the dimensionality of the input features in
each language domain to 1000, as suggested in the SHFA work . The alternating training algorithm for our proposed approaches is very eﬃcient, and it
typically converges within 30 iterations in our experiments.
Cross-lingual Text Classiﬁcation
For each of the 12 cross-lingual multi-class classiﬁcation tasks on Amazon product reviews, there are 4000 instances for each of the three classes in each domain.
M. Xiao and Y. Guo
Table 1. Average test accuracy (± standard deviations) (%) over 10 runs for crosslingual text classiﬁcation tasks.
73.8±0.5 73.8±0.4 74.2±0.5 78.2±0.5 78.4±0.4
72.4±0.5 76.5±0.5 77.0±0.4 79.2±0.4 79.4±0.4
66.8±0.5 67.3±0.5 67.6±0.5 72.7±0.5 70.6±0.8
72.8±0.6 79.3±0.6 80.3±0.5 82.2±0.4 82.4±0.4
72.4±0.5 76.3±0.4 77.7±0.6 79.4±0.4 79.5±0.4
66.8±0.5 67.9±0.8 68.4±0.4 72.6±0.5 70.5±0.8
72.8±0.6 79.8±0.4 80.6±0.6 82.2±0.4 82.4±0.4
73.8±0.5 73.9±0.4 75.0±0.5 78.2±0.5 78.4±0.4
66.8±0.5 65.8±1.0 67.5±0.6 72.6±0.5 70.5±0.8
72.8±0.6 81.0±0.4 81.2±0.4 82.2±0.4 82.5±0.5
73.8±0.5 74.8±0.3 75.1±0.7 78.3±0.5 78.3±0.4
72.4±0.5 76.4±0.4 77.1±0.6 79.2±0.4 79.3±0.4
We conducted experiments in the following way. In the source domain, we randomly selected 2000 instances from each class as labeled data and used the
remaining 2000 instances as unlabeled data. In the target domain, we randomly
selected 100 instances and 2900 instances from each class as labeled and unlabeled data respectively. We used all these selected instances for training, and used
the remaining 3000 instances (1000 for each class) in the target domain as testing
data. For the comparison approaches, HeMap, DAMA, SCP-OVA, SCP-ECOC,
which involve low dimensional subspaces, we set the dimension of the latent subspaces, m, as 100. Then we performed empirical parameter selection using the
ﬁrst task E2F with three runs. For the proposed approaches, SCP-OVA and SCP-
ECOC, we chose αs and αt from {0.01, 0.1, 1, 10, 100}, β from {1, 2, 5, 10, 100},
η from {0.01, 0.1, 1, 10, 100}, and chose γ from {0.01, 0.1, 1, 10, 100}. We picked
the parameter setting with the best test classiﬁcation accuracy for each approach, {αs = 0.1, αt = 0.1, β = 1, η = 10, γ = 0.1} for SCP-OVA and {αs =
10, αt = 0.1, β = 1, η = 10, γ = 0.1} for SCP-ECOC. We conducted parameter
selection for the other comparison approaches, HeMap, DAMA, MMDT, SHFA,
in the same way. Using the selected parameters, for each of the 12 tasks we then
repeatedly ran all the comparison methods for 10 times with diﬀerent random
selections of the training instances. The comparison results in terms of average
test accuracy in the target domain are reported in Table 1.
From Table 1, we can see that the TB baseline method performs poorly across
all the twelve tasks, which shows that the 100 labeled target training instances
from each class are far from enough to obtain a good classiﬁcation model in the
target language domain. By exploiting the labeled training data from the source
language domain, the HeMap method improves the prediction performance on
most tasks. However, its improvements over TB are very small on some tasks
and it even performs worse than TB on the task G2J. The DAMA method on
the other hand consistently outperforms both TB and HeMap. The explanation
Semi-supervised Subspace Co-Projection for Multi-class Heterogeneous
Fig. 1. Parameter sensitivity analysis over trade-oﬀparameters {η, β, γ, αs, αt}.
is that HeMap conducts representation learning in a fully unsupervised manner while DAMA learns more informative representations in a semi-supervised
manner with constraints constructed from the label information. By exploiting
the label information directly for representation learning and prediction model
training, the supervised method MMDT and semi-supervised method SHFA,
further outperform DAMA on all the twelve tasks. Nevertheless, our proposed
approaches, SCP-OVA and SCP-ECOC, outperform all the other comparison
methods across all the tasks. This suggests that the proposed learning framework, which exploits both labeled and unlabeled training data to simultaneously
perform subspace representation learning and prediction model training, is an
eﬀective model for heterogeneous domain adaptation. Between the two variants
of the proposed model, SCP-ECOC consistently outperforms SCP-OVA across
all the tasks, which suggests that the exhaustive error-correcting output coding
is more eﬀective than the one-vs-all coding scheme in our learning framework,
while our proposed learning framework has the nice property of naturally incorporating diﬀerent ECOC schemes.
Parameter Sensitivity Analysis
Next, we conducted parameter sensitivity analysis for the proposed SCP-ECOC
approach over the trade-oﬀparameters {η, β, γ, αs, αt} using the ﬁrst cross-lingual
text classiﬁcation task, E2F. We used the same experimental setting as above, and
empirically investigated how the values of the trade-oﬀparameters {η, β, γ, αs, αt}
aﬀect the heterogeneous cross-domain prediction performance. We ﬁrst conducted
sensitivity analysis over η, which controls the relative weight for the mean discrepancy term in the proposed objective function. We conducted experiments with different η values from {0.01, 0.1, 1, 10, 100}, while ﬁxing the other trade-oﬀparameters as the selected values in the section above. For each η value, we repeated the
M. Xiao and Y. Guo
Table 2. Average test accuracy (± standard deviations) (%) over 10 runs for digit
image classiﬁcation tasks.
Fac2Zer 71.9±0.7 72.0±1.0 72.5±0.6 73.4±1.0 73.8±0.6
Zer2Fac 83.8±0.9 84.2±0.9 85.4±0.6 87.0±1.1 87.6±0.7
experiment 10 times based on random partitions of the dataset and reported the
average test performance in the top left ﬁgure of Figure 1. We can see SCP-ECOC
produces the highest test accuracy when η equals 10. As η controls the contribution weight of the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) criterion across the two
domains, the good performance of the large value of η suggests that the MMD
term is helpful for improving the cross-domain prediction performance. Another
observation is that although the test accuracy varies as we change the value of η,
the changes are small and the test accuracies produced by SCP-ECOC across the
whole range of diﬀerent η values are all higher than the other comparison methods, TB, HeMap, DAMA, MMDT and SHFA (see both Figure 1 and Table 1).
This suggests that the proposed SCP-ECOC is not very sensitive to η within the
studied range of values.
We next studied how β aﬀects cross-lingual test classiﬁcation accuracy. Note
that β can be viewed as the relative weight ratio between a labeled target domain
instance and a labeled source domain instance regarding their contribution to
the training loss. As we have many more labeled training instances in the source
domain than in the target domain and we aim to learn a classiﬁcation model
that works well in the target domain, it is reasonable to give a target domain
instance larger (or equal) weight than a source domain instance and consider
β ≥1. In particular, we conducted experiments with diﬀerent β values from
{1, 2, 5, 10, 100} while ﬁxing all the other trade-oﬀparameters as the selected
values in the previous section. The average test classiﬁcation results over 10
repeated runs are reported in the top right ﬁgure of Figure 1. We can see that
the performance of SCP-ECOC is quite stable with β values changing from 1 to
10. However, if placing too much weights (e.g., β = 100) on the target instances,
the test performance degrades. These results suggest that the performance of the
proposed SCP-ECOC is quite robust to β within a range of reasonable values.
We ﬁnally investigated the three trade-oﬀparameters {γ, αs, αt} used for
the Frobenius norm regularization terms over W, Us, and Ut respectively. We
conducted experiments similarly as above. For each of the three parameters, we
repeated the experiment 10 times for each of its values in {0.01, 0.1, 1, 10, 100}
while ﬁxing all the other trade-oﬀparameters as previously selected values. We
reported the average test accuracy results in the bottom three ﬁgures of Figure 1
for the three parameters {γ, αs, αt} respectively. We can see although the performance of the proposed SCP-ECOC changes with the value change for each
of the three parameters, the performance variations are very small. The performance of SCP-ECOC is quite robust to the values of γ, αs, αt within the range
of values considered in the experiments.
Semi-supervised Subspace Co-Projection for Multi-class Heterogeneous
K: #of Binary Classifiers
Exhaustive
K: #of Binary Classifiers
Exhaustive
K: #of Binary Classifiers
Exhaustive
Fig. 2. Empirical comparison of diﬀerent ECOC schemes.
Experimental Results on UCI Dataset
We have also conducted experiments using the UCI handwritten digits dataset.
The two tasks we constructed on the UCI handwritten digits dataset have diﬀerent feature spaces across domains, and have 100 instances from each class, i.e.,
1000 instances in total, in each domain. For each task, in the source domain,
we randomly chose 50 instances from each class (500 in total) as the labeled
training data and used the remaining 500 instances as the unlabeled training data. In the target domain, we randomly chose 10 and 70 instances from
each class as the labeled and unlabeled training data respectively, and used the
remaining instances as the testing instances. For the approaches that involve
subspaces, we set the dimension of the subspace as 20. We then used the same
parameter selection procedure as before to select values for the trade-oﬀparameters of all the comparison methods using the task Fac2Zer. For our proposed
approaches, we got {αs = 0.1, αt = 0.1, β = 10, η = 0.1, γ = 10} for SCP-OVA
and {αs = 1, αt = 1, β = 1, η = 0.1, γ = 10} for SCP-ECOC. With the selected
parameters, for each task, we ran the comparison methods for 10 times with
diﬀerent random selections of the training and testing data. The average test
accuracy results are reported in Table 2.
We can see that by exploiting the existing labeled data from the auxiliary
source domain, all the heterogeneous domain adaptation methods outperform
the baseline method on learning prediction models in the target domain. This
again shows the importance of performing heterogeneous domain adaptation.
Nevertheless, these few methods used in our experiments also demonstrated different eﬃcacies on heterogeneous domain adaptation. HeMap displays similar
performance as in the cross-lingual text classiﬁcation experiments, with limited
improvements over the baseline TB. The methods DAMA, SHFA and MMDT
outperform HeMap, while our proposed two approaches outperform all the other
comparison methods. Between the two proposed approaches, again SCP-ECOC
outperforms SCP-OVA. All these results again veriﬁed the eﬃcacy of the proposed learning framework.
M. Xiao and Y. Guo
Impact of the ECOC Encoding Schemes
We also conducted experiments to further study the inﬂuence of diﬀerent ECOC
encoding schemes, especially the diﬀerent numbers of binary classiﬁers, on the
proposed heterogeneous domain adaptation framework. In particular, we compared the performance of one-vs-all (OVA) scheme, exhaustive ECOC scheme
and dense random ECOC encoding schemes . For a L-class classiﬁcation problem, the OVA scheme transforms the problem into a set of L binary classiﬁcation problems, the exhaustive ECOC scheme transforms the problem into a set
of (2L−1 −1) binary classiﬁcation problems, while the random ECOC encoding
scheme transforms the problem into a given number of K binary classiﬁcation
We conducted experiments on the ﬁrst cross-lingual text classiﬁcation task,
E2F and the two tasks on UCI digits dataset, Fac2Zer and Zer2Fac. The E2F is
a 3-class classiﬁcation task, and we tested the random encoding ECOC scheme
with diﬀerent K values from {3, 5, 7}. The Fac2Zer and Zer2Fac are 10-class classiﬁcation tasks, and we tested the random encoding ECOC scheme with diﬀerent
K values from {10, 50, 100, 200, 500}. The experimental results are reported in
Figure 2. We can see that the exhaustive ECOC encoding scheme demonstrates
the best performance on all the three tasks, even though its codeword length is
smaller than the random schemes in some cases on the E2F task where the class
number is small. This is reasonable since the codeword matrix generated by the
exhaustive ECOC scheme typically has much better row and column separations
than randomly generated codeword matrix. With the same codeword length,
even the OVA scheme produces better performance than the random scheme.
But with the increasing of the number of binary classiﬁers, i.e., the codeword
length K, the performance of the proposed approach based on random encoding ECOC improves quickly. In particular, on Fac2Zer and Zer2Fac, when K
increases from 10 to 100, the performance of the proposed approach increases
dramatically. Similar performance is observed on E2F as well. This observation
veriﬁes our hypothesis that incorporating more binary classiﬁcation tasks can
help to increase the stability and usefulness of the subspace co-projection in the
proposed learning framework and induce better domain adaptation performance.
Conclusion
In this paper, we developed a novel semi-supervised subspace co-projection approach to address multi-class heterogeneous domain adaptation problems, where
the source domain and the target domain have disjoint input feature spaces.
The proposed method projects instances in the two domains into a co-located
latent subspace, while simultaneously training prediction models in the projected
feature space. It also exploits the unlabeled data to promote the consistency of
subspace co-projection from the two domains. Moreover, the proposed learning
framework can naturally exploit error-correcting output codes for multi-class
classiﬁcation to enforce the informativeness of the subspace co-projection. We
formulated the overall semi-supervised learning process as a joint minimization
Semi-supervised Subspace Co-Projection for Multi-class Heterogeneous
problem, and solved it using an alternating optimization procedure. To investigate the empirical performance of the proposed approach, we conducted crosslingual text classiﬁcation experiments on the Amazon product reviews and crossdomain image classiﬁcation experiments on the UCI digits dataset. The empirical
results demonstrated the eﬀectiveness of the proposed approach comparing to a
number of state-of-the-art heterogeneous domain adaptation methods.
Acknowledgments. This research was supported in part by NSF grant IIS-1065397