Adversarial Examples for Graph Data: Deep Insights into Attack and Defense
Huijun Wu1,2 , Chen Wang2 , Yuriy Tyshetskiy 2 , Andrew Docherty2 ,
Kai Lu3 , Liming Zhu1,2
1University of New South Wales, Australia
2Data61, CSIRO
3National University of Defense Technology, China
{ﬁrst, second}@data61.csiro.au, 
Graph deep learning models, such as graph convolutional networks (GCN) achieve state-of-the-art
performance for tasks on graph data.
similar to other deep learning models, graph deep
learning models are susceptible to adversarial attacks. However, compared with non-graph data the
discrete nature of the graph connections and features provide unique challenges and opportunities
for adversarial attacks and defenses.
In this paper, we propose techniques for both an adversarial attack and a defense against adversarial attacks.
Firstly, we show that the problem of discrete graph
connections and the discrete features of common
datasets can be handled by using the integrated gradient technique that accurately determines the effect of changing selected features or edges while
still beneﬁting from parallel computations. In addition, we show that an adversarially manipulated
graph using a targeted attack statistically differs
from un-manipulated graphs. Based on this observation, we propose a defense approach which can
detect and recover a potential adversarial perturbation. Our experiments on a number of datasets
show the effectiveness of the proposed techniques.
Introduction
Graphs are commonly used to model many real-world
relationships, such as social networks [Newman et al.,
2002], citation networks, transaction networks [Ron and
Shamir, 2013], and the control-ﬂow graphs of computer programs [Allen, 1970]. Compared with the traditional machine
learning methods [Bhagat et al., 2011; Xu et al., 2013], graph
deep learning models have recently pushed forward the stateof-the-art for machine learning tasks on graph data
and Welling, 2017; Veliˇckovi´c et al., 2018; Cao et al., 2016;
Henaff et al., 2015]. In particular, graph convolutional networks (GCN) [Bruna et al., 2013; Edwards and Xie, 2016]
and its recent variants [Kipf and Welling, 2017] perform convolution operations in the graph domain by aggregating and
combining the information of neighboring nodes. In these
techniques, both node features and the graph structure (the
edges between nodes) are used by the model.
A common predictive task on graph data is node classiﬁcation: Given a graph, features for all nodes, and labels for
a subset of nodes, the goal is to predict the labels for the unlabelled nodes. The labels of the nodes can be, for example,
the topics of papers in citation networks, or customer types in
e-commerce networks.
Deep learning methods are often criticized for their lack of
robustness [Goodfellow et al., 2015]. This has been demonstrated by the ease of crafting adversarial examples that fool
the deep neural networks and give incorrect predictions by
adding small perturbations to the examples that are unnoticeable to humans. These perturbations are termed adversarial
attacks, and they are major obstacles for deep learning applications especially if they are to be used in safety-critical
scenarios. Graph neural networks are no exception: a malicious user can manipulate their proﬁle, connect to targeted
users, or connect to fake users they have created purposefully
in order to mislead a graph deep learning system. Similarly,
adding fake comments to speciﬁc products can fool the recommender systems of a website.
The key challenge that limits the simple adoption of existing adversarial attack techniques used in non-graph data
on graph convolutional networks is that the edges and the
features of the graph data are typically discrete.
To address this challenge, a recent work uses reinforcement learning or genetic algorithm based methods [Dai et al., 2018]
to ﬁnd the adversarial graph. Z¨ugner et al [Z¨ugner et al.,
2018] proposes to attack a simpliﬁed surrogate model and
exploit the transferability of adversarial attacks to attack the
graph convolutional networks. They also show that despite
the discreteness of graphs, gradient-based attacks such as
fast gradient sign method (FGSM) can also achieve attacks
in some cases. Nevertheless, the gradient-based approaches
may achieve sub-optimal attack performance due to the inaccurate gradients on discrete data. We note that in the case
of weighted graphs with continuous features attacks could be
aimed at the weights of the edges and may avoid this problem.
In this paper, we show that using integrated gradients we
can calculate the model change caused by ﬂipping a discrete
edge or feature accurately. Integrated gradients approximate
Shapley values [Hart, 1989; Lundberg and Lee, 2016] by integrating partial gradients with respect to input features from
a reference input to the input of interest. Integrated gradients
greatly improve the efﬁciency and accuracy of the node and
Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)
edge selection in comparison to iterative methods.
Compared with adversarial attacks, the defense against adversarial attacks in graph models has not been well-studied.
In this paper, we show that one key reason for the vulnerability of graph deep learning models, in particular GCNs, is
that these models use a weighted mean of the features of their
neighbors and therefore heavily rely on the aggregate information of their neighborhood when making predictions. We
have investigated the perturbations made by the existing attack techniques on GCNs and found that adding edges which
connect to nodes with very different features from those in
the original neighborhood plays a key role in all of the attack
methods. In this paper, we show that statistical analysis of the
node features can identify the edges inserted by adversarial
attacks. For nodes with bag-of-words (BOW) features we use
the Jaccard index to ﬁnd nodes with features that are highly
dissimilar to the other neighbors. We show that by removing
such edges we are able to defend against targeted adversarial
attacks without decreasing the accuracy of the GCN models.
Our results on a number of real-world datasets show the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the proposed attack and defense.
Preliminaries
Graph Convolutional Network
Given an attributed graph G = (A, X), A ∈ N×N is
the adjacency matrix and X ∈ N×D represents the Ddimensional binary node features, the indices for the nodes
are V = {1, 2, ..., N} and for the features F = {1, 2, ..., D}.
We now consider the task of semi-supervised or transductive node classiﬁcation where a subset of nodes VL ⊆V
are labelled with one class from the set of classes C =
{1, 2, ..., cK}. The aim is to predict the class for the unlabelled nodes given the labelled nodes.
In this work, we focus on graph convolutional networks
(GCN) [Kipf and Welling, 2017], a well-established method
for semi-supervised node classiﬁcations. For GCN, initially,
H0 = X; the GCN model then applies the following rule to
aggregate the neighboring features:
H(l+1) = σ( ˜D−1
2 H(l)W (l))
where ˜A = A + IN is the adjacency matrix of the graph
G with self connections added, ˆD is a diagonal matrix with
˜Di,i = Σj ˜Aij, and σ is the activation function to introduce
non-linearity. Each of the above equation corresponds to one
graph convolution layer. A fully connected layer with softmax loss is usually used after L layers of graph convolution
layers for the classiﬁcation. A two-layer GCN is commonly
used for semi-supervised node classiﬁcation tasks [Kipf and
Welling, 2017]. The model can, therefore, be described as:
Z = f(X, A) = softmax( ˆAσ( ˆAXW (0))W (1))
where ˆA = ˜D−1
ˆA is essentially the symmetrically normalized adjacency matrix. W (0) and W (1) are the
input-to-hidden and hidden-to-output weights, respectively.
Gradients Based Adversarial Attacks
Gradients are commonly used to construct adversarial attacks
deep learning models [Yuan et al., 2019]. One can either
use the gradients of the loss function or the gradients of the
model output with respect to (w.r.t.) the input to construct
the attacks. Two examples of these methods are Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) attack and Jacobian-based Saliency
Map Approach (JSMA) attack. Fast Gradient Sign Method
(FGSM) [Ian J. Goodfellow, 2014] generates adversarial examples by perturbing the input along the direction of the sign
of gradients of loss function w.r.t. each pixel for image data.
The adversarially perturbed input is given by:
′ = x + ϵsign(∇Jθ(x, l))
where ϵ is the magnitude of the perturbation. J is the loss of
the model, θ are the model parameters, x is the model input,
and l is the label of x.
The Jacobian-based Saliency Map Approach (JSMA) attack was ﬁrst proposed in [Papernot et al., 2016]. It uses perturbations that force the model to mis-classify the example
point into a speciﬁc target class. Speciﬁcally, given a feedforward neural network F and example point X, the Jacobian
is computed by:
∇F(X) = ∂F(X)
i∈1...N,j∈1...M
where the dimensions for the model output (number of
classes) and the input are M and N, respectively. The aim is
to maximize the output for the target class c, F (c)(X), whiles
minimizing the output for the other classes j ̸= c to decrease.
This is accomplished by exploiting the adversarial saliency
map which is deﬁned by:
0, if ∂Fc(X)
< 0 or Σj̸=t
|, otherwise
The adversarial attack is created by starting from a selected
example point and iteratively perturbing the example point in
the direction of S(X, c) a small amount until the predicted
label changes. For an untargeted attack, the prediction score
is minimized for the winning class in a similar fashion.
Defense for Adversarial Examples
Defense against adversarial attacks have been studied in the
context of convolutional neural networks for image classiﬁcation [Xu et al., 2018; Papernot and McDaniel, 2018]). For
images, the feature space is continuous and adversarial examples are crafted with small additive perturbations. Therefore, in some cases, adding some randomization to the images at the testing time can help defend against adversarial attacks [Xie et al., 2018]. Other forms of input pre-processing,
such as local smoothing [Xu et al., 2018] and image compression [Shaham et al., 2018] have also been used to defend
against attacks. These forms of pre-processing work due to
the fact that neighboring pixels of natural images are typically correlated. Adversarial training [Tram`er et al., 2018]
introduces generated adversarial examples to the training data
Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)
to enhance the robustness of the model. For graph convolutional networks, Dai et al. [Dai et al., 2018] brieﬂy introduces
the possibility of defending adversarial examples by dropping
some edges during the training. However, this method barely
improves the robustness of the model.
Integrated Gradients Guided Attack
Due to their assumption of continuous features in the input pixel space, FGSM and JSMA are not well-studied for
graph models. Furthermore, recent explorations into graph
adversarial attack techniques show that simply applying these
methods may not lead to successful attacks [Z¨ugner et al.,
2018; Dai et al., 2018]. These works have addressed this
problem by either attacking a simpliﬁed surrogate model or
reinforcement learning based methods which are typically
computationally expensive.
The node features in many graph datasets are often either
bag-of-words or categorical features which take on binary
values of 0 or 1. Furthermore, the edges in a graph are also
represented by binary values of 0 or 1 in the adjacency matrix. When attacking the model, the adversarial perturbations
are therefore limited to either changing 1 to 0 or vice versa.
The main issue of applying vanilla FGSM and JSMA in graph
models is the fact that the gradients are calculated locally at
the current example point. In particular, given a target node
t, for FGSM attack, ∇JW (1),W (2)(t) =
∂JW (1),W (2)(t)
measures the feature importance of all nodes to the loss function
value. Here, X is the feature matrix, each row of which describes the features for a node in the graph. For a speciﬁc
feature j of node n, a larger value of ∇JW (1),W (2)in indicates increasing the value of feature j locally will decrease
the conﬁdence of the predictions for the target node. However, changing the value of feature j to 1 may not help for
two reasons: ﬁrstly, the feature value might already be 1; secondly, the GCN model is not a linear function and therefore
the local gradient does not necessarily predict the result of a
large change in value. This argument applies to JSMA. For
example, a simple ReLU network f(x) = ReLU(x −0.5)
as an example, when x is increased from 0 to 1, the function
value increases by 0.5. However, computing the gradient at
x = 0 gives 0, which does not predict this increase. To address this, we propose an integrated-gradient based method.
Integrated gradients were initially proposed by [Sundararajan et al., 2017] to provide sensitivity and implementation
invariance for feature attribution in the deep neural networks,
particularly the convolutional neural networks for images.
The integrated gradient is deﬁned as follows: for a given
model F : Rn → , where x ∈Rn is the input, x
the baseline input (e.g., a black image for image data). The
integrated gradient is the path integral of the gradient along a
path from x
′ to the input x. Namely, for the ith feature of x,
the integrated gradients (IG) is given as follows:
IGi(F(x)) ::= (xi −x
′ + αx(x −x
For GCN on graph data, we propose a generic attack framework. Given the adjacency matrix A, feature matrix X, and
the target node t, we compute the integrated gradients for
function FW (1),W (2)(A, X, t) w.r.t. I where I is the input
for the attack. I = A indicates edge attacks while I = X
indicates feature attacks. When F is the loss function of the
GCN model, we call this attack technique IG-FGSM. Similarly, when F is the prediction output of the GCN model we
call the attack technique IG-JSMA. For a targeted IG-JSMA
or IG-FGSM attack, the optimization goal is to maximize the
value of F. Therefore, for the features with a value of 1 or
edges that exist in the graph, we select those which have the
lowest negative IG scores and either, for features, set their
value to 0 or, for edges, remove them. In contrast, the untargeted IG-JSMA attack aims to minimize F for the winning
class; therefore for features with a value of 1, we set those
which have the highest positive IG scores to 0, and similarly
for edges in the graph we remove those which have the highest positive IG scores.
For the baseline input We use either all-zero or all-one feature/adjacency matrices to represent the 1 →0 or 0 →1 perturbations. When removing a speciﬁc edge or changing a feature from 1 to 0, we set the adjacency matrix A or feature
matrix X respectively to all-zeros. On the contrary, to add
edges or features, we set either A or X respectively to an allone matrix. To keep the direction of gradients consistent and
ensure the computation is tractable, IG(F(X, A, t))[i, j] (for
edge attack) is approximated as follows:
m ×(Aij−0))
, removing edges
∂F (Aij+ k
m ×(1−Aij))
, adding edges
Algorithm 1 shows the pseudo-code for untargeted IG-
JSMA attack. We compute the integrated gradients of the
prediction score for the winning class c w.r.t. the entries of A
and X. The integrated gradients are then used as a measure
of the importance of changing speciﬁc features or edges in
the graph G. Note that we only compute the importance of
adding edges if the edge does not exist before and only compute the importance of changing a feature to 1 if it is currently
0 and vice versa. Therefore, for a feature or an edge with high
importance, we simply ﬂip the binary value.
While setting the number of steps m for computing integrated gradients, one size does not ﬁt all. Therefore, we enlarge the number of steps while attacking the nodes with low
classiﬁcation margins until the required accuracy is achieved.
Moreover, the calculation can be done in an incremental way
if we increase the number of steps by integer multiples.
To ensure the perturbations are unnoticeable, the graph
structure and feature statistics should be preserved. The speciﬁc properties to preserve depend on the application requirements.
For our IG based attacks, we check against these
application-level requirements while selecting an edge or a
feature for perturbation. In practice, this process can be ef-
ﬁcient as many statistics can be pre-computed and updated
incrementally [Z¨ugner et al., 2018].
Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)
Algorithm 1: IG-JSMA - Integrated Gradient Guided untargeted JSMA attack on GCN
Input: Graph G(0) = (A(0), X(0)), target node v0
F: the GCN model trained on G(0)
budget ∆: the maximum number of
perturbations.
Output: Modiﬁed graph G
1 Procedure Attack()
//compute the importance scores for edges and
se ←calculate edge importance(A)
sf ←calculate feature importance(X)
//sort nodes and edges according to their scores.
features ←sort by importance(s f)
edges ←sort by importance(s e)
f ←features.ﬁrst, e ←edges.ﬁrst
′ −A| + |X
′ −X| < ∆do
//decide which to perturb
if se[e] > sf[f] then
ﬂip feature f
ﬂip edge e
e = ←e.next
Defense for Adversarial Graph Attacks
In order to defend against adversarial targeted attacks on
GCNs, we ﬁrst assume that the GCN model is trained on a
graph modiﬁed by an adversarial attack. Adversarial attacks
on deep learning systems are transferable to models with similar architecture and trained on the same dataset, therefore any
model trained on the attacked graph will most likely show the
same behavior as the model used to craft the attack. A possible defense in this scenario is to make the adjacency matrix
trainable. By learning selected edge weights during the training process, there is the potential to change the graph structure enough to make the attack crafted using vanilla GCN on
the original graph not effective.
We verify this idea by making the edge weights trainable
in GCN models. For the CORA-ML dataset, we select a node
that is correctly classiﬁed by a trained model.
An adversarially modiﬁed graph was then constructed by using nettack [Z¨ugner et al., 2018]. Without any defense, the target
node is misclassiﬁed with the conﬁdence of 0.998 after the
attack. Our defense technique is then used. Starting with the
adversarially modiﬁed graph we train the GCN model without making any additional modiﬁcations on the loss function,
with the exception of adding selected trainable edge weight.
Interestingly, with such a simple defense method, the target
node is correctly classiﬁed with the conﬁdence of 0.912 after
the attack.
To explain why the defense works, we observe the following: ﬁrstly, perturbing edges is more effective than modifying
Jaccard similarity between nodes
percentage (%)
Jaccard similarity between nodes
percentage (%)
(b) Attacked
Figure 1: Histograms for the Jaccard similarities between connected
nodes before and after FGSM attack.
the features in all the attacks (i.e., FGSM, JSMA, nettack, and
IG-JSMA). We have observed that feature-only perturbations
generally fail to change the predicted class of the target node.
Moreover, the attack approaches tend to favor adding edges
over removing edges.
Secondly, nodes with more neighbors are more difﬁcult to
attack than those with fewer neighbors. This is also consistent
with the observations in [Z¨ugner et al., 2018] that nodes with
higher degrees have higher classiﬁcation accuracy in both the
clean and the attacked graphs.
Finally, the attacks tend to connect the target node to nodes
with considerably different features and labels. We have observed that this is the most effective way to perform attacks.
We verify this observation using the CORA-ML dataset using
the Jaccard similarity score. Given two nodes u and v with
n binary features, the Jaccard similarity score measures the
overlap that u and v share with their features. Each feature of
u and v can either be 0 or 1. The Jaccard similarity score is
then given by:
i=1 ui + vi −uivi
Note that our defense mechanism is generic, while the similarity measures may vary among different datasets, in particular for other types of features we may use different similarity
measures such as the cosine similarity or the correlation coefﬁcient.
We train a two-layer GCN on the CORA-ML dataset and
study the nodes that are classiﬁed correctly with high probability (i.e. ≥0.8). For these nodes, Figure 1 shows the histograms for the Jaccard similarity scores between connected
nodes before and after the FGSM attack. We note that the
adversarial attack signiﬁcantly increases the number of neighbors which have very low similarity scores to the target nodes.
This also holds for nettack [Z¨ugner et al., 2018]. For example, we enable both feature and edge attacks for nettack and
attack the node 200 in the GCN model trained on CORA-ML
dataset. Given the node degree of 3, the attack removes the
edge 200 →1582 because node 1582 and node 200 are similar (J1582,200 = 0.113). Meanwhile, the attacks add edge 200
→1762 and 200 →350, and node 200 shares no feature similarity with the two nodes. No features were perturbed in this
experiment.
This result is consistent with our observations.
Compared with deep convolutional neural networks (for image
Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)
data) which often have many more layers and parameters
than graph neural networks GCN models are relatively shallow. The GCN model essentially aggregates features from the
neighborhood of each node at each layer. For a target node,
an adversarially crafted graph attempts to connect the nodes
with different features and labels to maximally change the aggregated neighborhood features. Correspondingly, while removing edges, the attack tends to remove the edges connecting the nodes that are most similar to the target node. The
edge attacks are more effective due to the fact that adding or
removing one edge affects all the feature dimensions during
the aggregation. In contrast, modifying one feature only affects one dimension in the feature vector and the perturbation
can be easily masked by other neighbors of nodes with high
Based on these observations, we make another hypothesis
that the above defense approach works because the model assigns lower weights to the edges that connect the target node
to the nodes are dissimilar in terms of features. To verify this,
we plot the learned weights and the Jaccard similarity scores
of the end nodes for the edges starting from the target node
(see Figure 2). Note that for the target node we choose, the
Jaccard similarity scores between every neighbor of the target
node and itself are larger than 0 in the clean graph. The edges
with zero similarity scores are all added by the attack. As
expected, the model learns low weights for most of the edges
with low similarity scores so that the perturbations have much
lower inﬂuence to the prediction of the target node.
To make the defense more efﬁcient, we do not even need to
use trainable edge weights as the defense. Learning the edge
weights inevitably introduces extra parameters to the model,
which may affect the scalability and accuracy of GCN models. A simple approach that is potentially as effective can be
constructed by noting that in the majority of datasets nodes
generally do not connect to nodes that have no feature similarities. In addition, the learning-based defense technique
essentially assigns low weights to the edges connecting two
dissimilar nodes.
Our simple defense approach is pre-processing based. We
perform a pre-processing on a given graph before training.
We check the adjacency matrix of the graph and inspect the
Edges connecting the target node to its neighbors
Normalized edge weights/Jaccard similarity
Learned Edge Weights
Jaccard Similarity of End Nodes
Figure 2: The normalized learned edge weights and the Jaccard similarity scores for the end nodes of the edges. Each value of the x-axis
represents an edge in the neighborhood of the target node.
edges. All the edges that connect nodes with low similarity score (e.g., Ju,v = 0) are selected as candidates to remove. Although the clean graph may also have a small number of such edges, we ﬁnd that removing these edges does
little harm to the prediction of the target node. On the contrary, the removal of these edges may improve the prediction
in some cases. This is intuitive as aggregating features from
nodes that differ sharply from the target often over-smooths
the node representations. In fact, a recent study [Wu et al.,
2019] shows that the non-linearity and multiple weight matrices at different layers do not contribute much to the predictive
capabilities of GCN models but introduce unnecessary complexity. For example, [Z¨ugner et al., 2018] uses a simpliﬁed
surrogate model to achieve the attacks on GCN models for
the same reason.
The proposed defense is computationally efﬁcient as it only
makes one pass to the existing edges in the graph, thus having
the complexity of O(N) where N is the number of edges. For
large graphs, calculating the similarity scores can be easily
parallelized in implementation.
Finally, we note that this simple pre-processing defense
shares similarities with defense techniques in image classi-
ﬁcation which smooth the images. They both are based on
the assumption that the neighborhood of either the pixel in
image datasets or the node in graphs datasets are typically
highly correlated.
Evaluation
We use the widely used CORA-ML [McCallum et al., 2000],
CITESEER [Bojchevski and G¨unnemann, 2018] and Polblogs [Adamic and Glance, 2005] datasets. The overview of
the datasets is listed below.
We split each graph into a labeled (20%) set and an unlabeled set of nodes (80%). Among the labeled nodes, half
of them are used for training while the rest are used for validation. For the Polblogs dataset, since there are no feature
attributes, we set the attribute matrix to an identity matrix.
Transductive Attack
As mentioned, due to the semi-supervised or transductive setting, the models are not regarded as ﬁxed while attacking. After perturbing either features or edges, the model is retrained
for evaluating the attack effectiveness. To verify the effectiveness of the attack, we select the nodes with different prediction scores. Speciﬁcally, we select in total 40 nodes which
contain the 10 nodes with top scores, 10 nodes with the lowest scores and 20 randomly selected nodes. We compare the
proposed IG-JSMA with several baselines including random
attacks, FGSM, and nettack.
To evaluate the effectiveness of the attack, we calculate the
classiﬁcation margin. For a target node v, the classiﬁcation
Table 1: Statistics of the datasets.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)
Table 2: The ratio of correctly classiﬁed nodes under JSMA and
IG-JSMA attacks.
margin of v is Zv,c −maxc′̸=cZv,c′ where c is the ground
truth class, Zv,c is the probability of class c given to the node
v by the graph model. A lower classiﬁcation margin indicates better attack performance. Figure 3 shows the classi-
ﬁcation margins of nodes after re-training the model on the
modiﬁed graph. We found that IG-JSMA outperforms the
baselines. More remarkably, IG-JSMA is quite stable as the
classiﬁcation margins have much less variance. Just as stated
in [Z¨ugner et al., 2018], the vanilla gradient-based methods,
such as FGSM are not able to capture the actual change of
loss for discrete data.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of IG-JSMA, we also
compare it with the original JSMA method where the saliency
map is computed by the vanilla gradients.
Table 2 compares the ratio of correctly classiﬁed nodes after the JSMA and IG-JSMA attacks for 100 random sampled
nodes. A lower value is better as this indicates more nodes
are misclassiﬁed. We can see that IG-JSMA outperforms the
JSMA attack. This shows that the saliency map computed by
integrated gradients approximates the change patterns of the
discrete features/edges better.
Figure 4 gives an intuitive example of this. For a target
node in the graph, given a two-layer GCN model, the prediction of the target node only relies on its two-hop ego network.
We deﬁne the importance of a feature/an edge as follows: For
a target node v, The brute-force method to measure the importance of the nodes and edges is to remove one node or one
edge at a time in the graph and check the change of prediction
score of the target node.
Assume the prediction score for the winning class c is pc.
After removing the edge (i, j) by setting Aij to 0, pc changes
c. We deﬁne the importance of the edge by ∆pc = p
To measure the importance of a node, we remove all the edges
connected to the node and again see how the prediction scores
change. These values can be regarded as the ground truth
importance scores.
Both vanilla gradients and integrated gradients are approximations of the ground truth importance scores. The node importance can be approximated by the sum of the gradients of
the prediction score w.r.t. all the features of the node as well
as the gradients w.r.t. to the entries of the adjacency matrix.
In Figure 4, the node color represents the class of the node.
Round nodes indicate positive importance scores while diamond nodes indicate negative importance scores. The node
size indicates the value of the positive/negative importance
score: a larger node means higher importance. Similarly, red
edges are the edges which have positive importance scores
while blue edges have negative importance scores and thicker
edges correspond to more important edges in the graph. Finally, the pentagon represents the target node in the attack.
Figure 4a, 4b and 4c show the node importance results
no defense
w/ defense
80.7 ± 0.7
69.5 ± 0.7
69.6 ± 0.8
Table 3: Accuracy (%) of models on clean data with/without the proposed defense. We remove the outliers (i.e., accuracy ≤75%/65%
for CORA-ML/Citeseer) due to the high variance.
of brute-force, vanilla gradients and integrated gradients approach respectively (# of steps = 20). The vanilla gradients reveal little information about node/edge importance as almost
all the edges have non-zero importance scores and it is difﬁcult to see the relative node/edge inﬂuence. However, in the
brute-force case, we notice that the majority of edges are not
important for the target node. Compared to the brute-force
method the vanilla gradients underestimate the importance of
the nodes. The integrated gradients, as shown in Figure 4c is
consistent with the ground truth produced by brute-force approach shown in Figure 4a. With only 20 steps along the path,
integrated gradients provide accurate approximations for the
importance scores. This shows the integrated gradients approach as effective as the brute-force technique when used to
guide the adversarial attacks on graphs with discrete values.
In the following, we study the effectiveness of the proposed defense technique under different settings.
the CORA-ML and Citeseer datasets that have features for
the nodes. We ﬁrst evaluate whether the proposed defense
method affects the performance of the model. Table 4 shows
the accuracy of the GCN models with/without the defense.
We ﬁnd that the proposed defense was cheap to use as the
pre-processing of our defense method almost makes no negative impact on the performance of the GCN models. Moreover, the time overhead is negligible. Enabling defense on
the GCNs models for the two datasets increases the run time
of training by only 7.52s and 3.79s, respectively. Note that
run time results are obtained using our non-optimized Python
implementation.
For different attacks, we then evaluate how the classiﬁcation margins and accuracy of the attacked nodes change
with/without the defense. As in the experiments of transductive attack, we select 40 nodes with different prediction
scores. The statistics of the selected nodes are the followings: For CORA-ML and Citeseers datasets, we train the
Dataset/Attack
CM (w/ attack)
Accuracy (w/ attack)
w/ defense
no defense
w/ defense
no defense
0.299 ± 0.741
-0.833 ± 0.210
0.419 ± 0.567
-0.828 ± 0.225
CORA/nettack
0.242 ± 0.728
-0.839 ± 0.343
CORA/IG-JSMA
0.397 ± 0.553
-0.897 ± 0.114
Citeseer/FGSM
0.451 ± 0.489
-0.777 ± 0.279
Citeseer/JSMA
0.501 ± 0.531
-0.806 ± 0.186
Citeseer/nettack
0.421 ± 0.468
-0.787 ± 0.332
Citeseer/IG-JSMA
0.495 ± 0.507
-0.876 ± 0.186
Table 4: Classiﬁcation margins and error rates (%) for the GCN
models with different attacks.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)
netattack IG_JSMA
classification margin
netattack IG_JSMA
classification margin
(b) Citeseer
netattack IG_JSMA
classification margin
(c) polblogs
Figure 3: The classiﬁcation margin under different attack techniques.
(a) Ground Truth
(b) Vanilla Gradients
(c) Integrated Gradients
Figure 4: The approximations of node/edge importance.
GCN models on the clean graphs. The selected nodes have
classiﬁcation margins of 0.693 ± 0.340 and 0.636 ± 0.419,
respectively.
The results are given in Table 4. First of all, without defenses, most of the selected nodes are misclassiﬁed as the accuracy is always under 0.05 for any attacks. By enabling the
defense approach, the accuracy can be signiﬁcantly improved
regardless of the attack methods. This, to some degree, shows
that all the attack methods seek similar edges to attack and the
proposed defense approach is attack-independent. Although
a few nodes were still misclassiﬁed with the defense, the prediction conﬁdence for their winning class is much lower since
the classiﬁcation margins increase.
Therefore, it becomes
harder to fool the users because manual checks are generally involved in predictions with low conﬁdence. Overall, the
proposed defense is effective even though we only remove the
edges that connect nodes with Jaccard similarity score of 0.
Conclusions and Discussion
Graph neural networks (GNN) signiﬁcantly improved the analytic performance on many types of graph data. However,
like deep neural networks in other types of data, GNN suffers from robustness problems. In this paper, we gave insight into the robustness problem in graph convolutional networks (GCN). We proposed an integrated gradients based attack method that outperformed existing iterative and gradientbased techniques in terms of attack performance. We also
analyzed attacks on GCN and revealed the robustness issue
was rooted in the local aggregation in GCN. We give an effective defense method to improve the robustness of GCN
models. We demonstrated the effectiveness and efﬁciency of
our methods on benchmark data. Although we use the GCN
model as a case in this paper, both the attack and defense principles are applicable to other variations of GNNs due to the
fact that these models are also aggregation-based.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)