Vol.:(0123456789)
Ethics and Information Technology 20:15–26
 
ORIGINAL PAPER
Patiency is not a virtue: the design of intelligent systems and systems
Joanna J. Bryson1
Published online: 16 February 2018
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication
The question of whether AI systems such as robots can or should be afforded moral agency or patiency is not one amenable
either to discovery or simple reasoning, because we as societies constantly reconstruct our artefacts, including our ethical
systems. Consequently, the place of AI systems in society is a matter of normative, not descriptive ethics. Here I start from
a functionalist assumption, that ethics is the set of behaviour that maintains a society. This assumption allows me to exploit
the theoretical biology of sociality and autonomy to explain our moral intuitions. From this grounding I extend to consider
possible ethics for maintaining either human- or of artefact-centred societies. I conclude that while constructing AI systems as
either moral agents or patients is possible, neither is desirable. In particular, I argue that we are unlikely to construct a coherent ethics in which it it is ethical to afford AI moral subjectivity. We are therefore obliged not to build AI we are obliged to.
Keywords  Moral patiency · Moral agency · Ethics · Systems artificial intelligence · Strong AI
Introduction
The questions of robot or AI Ethics are difficult to resolve
not because of the nature of intelligent technology, but
because of the nature of Ethics. As with all normative considerations, AI ethics requires that we decide what “really”
matters—our most fundamental priorities. Are we more
obliged to our biological kin or to those with whom we
share ideas? Do we value more the preservation of culture
or the generation of new ideas? Unfortunately, asking “what
really matters” is like asking “what happened before time”:
it sounds at first pass like a good question, but in fact makes
a logical error. Before is not defined outside of the context
of time. Similarly, we cannot circuitously assume that a system of values underlies our system of values. Consequently,
the “correct” place for robots and  other intelligent artefacts
in human society cannot be resolved from first principles
or purely by reason. It is not a fact that can be established
through science.
In this article I argue that the core of all ethics is a negotiated or discovered equilibrium that creates and perpetuates a
society. The descriptive argument of this article is that integrating a new capacity like artificial intelligence (AI) into
our moral systems is an act of normative, not descriptive,
ethics. Contrary to the claims of much previous philosophy
of AI ethics , there is no
necessary or predetermined position for AI in our society.
This is because both AI and ethical frameworks are artefacts
of our societies, and therefore subject to human control.
Ethics has both descriptive and normative components
 . Descriptive ethics is based on the observation of what people seem to do—as such it is related to
science and open to measurement and at least an assertion
of facts. Normative ethics consist of recommendations concerning what should be done. Though these recommendations may be backed by descriptive facts, for example concerning likely consequences, by their nature they are not
themselves facts. Indeed unlike science which is contingent
on a single reality, normative ethics is contingent on not so
much a present society as one that is desired to be achieved.
Thus an account of normative recommendations should
include also an account of the societal outcomes that are
intended with its successful implementation.
This article contains both descriptive and normative components. The descriptive components hold independent of the
normative recommendations, but the normative recommendations are entirely dependent on the descriptive content. To
* Joanna J. Bryson
 
University of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, UK
J. J. Bryson
be very clear from the outset, the moral question I address
here is not whether it is possible for robots or other artefacts
to be moral entities. Human culture can and does support a
wide variety of moral systems. Many of these already attribute
patiency to artefacts such as particular books, flags, or concepts. For example Islam considers that any copy of the Koran
should be treated with respect, the United States has similar
laws for its flag, and many wars are justified as defence of
abstractions such as liberty. The more interesting and important question is normative—should we as technology, legal, or
ethical experts recommend putting intelligent artefacts in that
position? If so, who or what would benefit? Again, the moral
status of robots and other AI systems is a choice, not a necessity. We can choose the types and properties of artefacts that
are legal to manufacture and sell, and we can write the legislation that determines the legal rights and duties of any agent
capable of knowing those rights and carrying out those duties.
My primary normative argument is that making robots such
that they deserve to be moral patients could in itself be construed as an immoral action, particularly given that it is obviously avoidable since it is in fact a choice. To examine this we
must consider not only human society, but also make potential moral-subject robots into second-order moral patients. I
claim that it would be unethical to put artefacts in a situation
of competition with us, to make them suffer, or to make them
unnecessarily mortal. I do not claim that it is wrong to use
machine intelligence to create—that is, to produce human culture. Nor do I claim that AI cannot take other moral actions.
I do claim that there are many human values for which it is
incoherent to think of them as extended through AI proxies
in absence of a core of human moral agents. Therefore there
are substantial costs but little or no benefits from the perspective of either humans or robots to ascribing and implementing either agency or patiency to intelligent artefacts beyond
that ordinarily ascribed to any possession. The responsibility
for any moral action taken by an artefact should therefore be
attributed to its owner or operator, or in case of malfunctions
to its manufacturer, just as with conventional artefacts .
In the next section I define terms for use at least local to
this article, and also establish the justification I use to recommend one normative position over another. Next I examine the
origins of our present ethical systems and intuitions. I discuss
sociality as it existed before the concept of morality was innovated, then move on to discussing our explicit system of ethics.
Definitions and approach
Definitions and perspective
The usages of terms local to this article are chosen to attempt
clear communication despite introducing a perspective many
people find radical. I believe that incoherence has been introduced to AI and robot ethics debates partly because some
terms are made to do “double duty.” For example, conscious
and intelligent have fairly clear psychological and even computational meanings, but as a confound are often assumed
to be core to moral obligation. The usages I exploit here are
intended as strict subsets of ordinary language usage—that
is, I attempt local to this article to focus these terms’ usage
down to one essential meaning. I intend to use here only the
formal philosophical term moral agent to mean “something
deemed responsible by a society for its actions,” only moral
patient to mean “something a society deems itself responsible for preserving the well being of,” and moral subjects to
be all moral agents or moral patients recognised by a society . Note that moral agency is a distinct
special case of agency more generally. Agency is just the
capacity to effect change, for example chemical agents cause
reactions. In itself the term implies no moral status.
When I talk about something as intelligent, I mean only
that it can detect contexts appropriate for expressing one of
an available suite of actions. If I call something cognitive
then it is both intelligent and can learn new contexts, actions,
and/or associations between these . If I call something conscious I only imply that it
can act on explicit memory—memory of individual events
 . Local to this paper, these are treated as psychological terms that neither require moral status nor necessarily in themselves imply any other human-like trait. Using
these extremely specific definitions, we can now meaningfully discuss questions such as “Does being intelligent necessarily make one a moral agent?” This is not to neglect the
many other definitions of these terms or to say that they are
‘wrong’—any word’s meaning is exactly how it is used . The purpose of these definitions is to label
and advance a set of concepts specifically rallied to answer
the questions of whether or when AI should be considered
as—or constructed to be—a moral patient.
Ethics will mean here the entire set of behaviours that
maintains a society, including by defining it. This is the
most radical departure from convention presented in this
section. I will discuss its ramifications below, but first I will
clarify. By this definition, ethics does include components
that have clear universal utility, e.g. prohibition on murder
or theft. But each individual society’s ethical system will
also consist of components dedicated to creating its unique
identity, or carving out an ecological or economic niche.
Identity may seem less essential than universal morality, but
determining the boundaries of a society may be essential to
its persistence. Identity is linked to autonomy, the capacity
of an entity to be distinguished. For example a nation is not
autonomous if it cannot control its borders . The way I am defining ethics here,
Patiency is not a virtue: the design of intelligent systems and systems of ethics﻿
the interaction between individual and societal autonomy is
key. Members of a society will often produce a system of
public goods—that is, goods that benefit all members, such
as security or transport. Public goods may be key to a society’s autonomy, and may even define a society . For altruism I will use a standard definition from
biology and economics: the willingness to pay a cost (such
as the cost of constructing public goods) in order to benefit
others. Such willingness is adaptive in the biological sense
(meaning it can be promoted by evolution) if the sum of
the benefits to the beneficiaries times the relatedness of the
beneficiaries to the altruist is less than or equal to the cost
to the altruist .
One critique of this definition of ethics is that normally
we would like to believe in a single ethical standard against
which societies are able to improve. My definition does
undermine this exact formulation, but does not mean we
cannot make moral comparisons between societies, only that
we have to specify a metric for any specific such comparison. So for example eliminating slavery or expanding suffrage results in a more egalitarian society or a more coherent set of laws, not just a “more ethical” society. The Nazis
were not unethical, they had an elaborate system of ethics
that while briefly facilitating rapid expansion of power, also
killed many people (including co-nationals), and attracted
its own destruction. Again, I am not claiming my definitions
are necessarily the right or common ways to use these words,
but that they are precise and useful for the present article’s
discussion.
A key aspect of my normative argument hinges also on
the definition of artefact. Again, local only to this article,
I limit the term artefact to objects deliberately created by
moral agents. This means that things referred to as ‘artefacts’
here are also specific to the society that deigns an agent
moral, and therefore only occur in species that have established concepts and norms concerning responsibility and
deliberation. Artefacts are for this article discontinuous from
nature; the point at which a culture develops the concepts
deliberate and responsible is when this discontinuity occurs
and artefacts can begin to be made.
Approach to normative recommendations
As stated earlier, any normative recommendation requires
specifying the intended societal outcome. My recommendation is not simply derived from descriptive precedent. The
advent of potentially-autonomous decision-making human
artefacts is novel, and requires constructing new social and
ethical accommodation. Descriptive ethics may take us some
way by establishing precedent, but few consider precedent
sufficient or even necessary for establishing what is right. Is
does not imply ought (Hume 1739).
I will work then from two fairly familiar, hopefully
uncontroversial objectives:
1. The moral system should be coherent. This derives
from the same principle as that unenforceable laws are
not useful . Ought is generally held to
imply can .
2. Where possible there should be minimal restructuring of
existing norms, so that introducing new norms will be
less likely to create social disruption or medium-to-longterm instability. This axiom is based on the example of
Common Law , but is admittedly less
definitive than the first. It also kicks a can down the road,
by allowing me to propose a descriptive criterion after
all for my candidate metric, provided only that it doesn’t
conflict with the first objective.
The nature of machines as artefacts means that the question of their morality is not simply a question of what moral
status they deserve  . Rather, at the same time
that we ask what moral status we ought to assign intelligent
artefacts, we must also ask what moral status we ought to
build those artefacts to meet. This second aspect of our concurrent, tightly-coupled responsibilities has been neglected
even by those scholars who have observed the constructive
nature of the first .
As I said, ought does require able—computationally intractable and indeed logically incoherent systems such as Asimov’s laws are excluded . So are
ecologically unsustainable objectives.
Our capacity to design an artefact defines the term, which
means that obligations regarding intelligent artefacts, unlike
those regarding natural entities, can be met not only through
constructing the socio-ethical system but also through specification of the intelligent artefacts themselves. This fact
defies the intuition of many who cannot conceive of intelligence in non-human contexts, or who conceive of it on
a single, Lamarckian scale that converges to human-like.
The historical correlation of language, episodic memory,
and reasoning with the prototypical moral subjects—human
adults—is taken as necessary or even causal, as if there were
particular badges or features of human moral status that
could be excised from our gestalt and still deserve the same
treatment as a citizen of our society.
In an effort both to reduce this confusion, and also to
consider what would be minimally disruptive per the second
objective just mentioned, the next section of this article discusses not what should matter to us, but why some things do.
Before considering where we might want to slot robots into
our contemporary ethical frameworks and society, I start by
considering ethics and moral patiency from an evolutionary
perspective. I do this less to inform our intuitions than to
explain them.
J. J. Bryson
Substantive claims concerning life
and intelligence
Stability in action selection
As with all human and other ape behaviour, our ethics is rooted both in our biology
and our culture. Nature is a scruffy designer with no motivation or capacity to cleanly discriminate between these
two sources of behaviour, except that what must change
more quickly should be represented more plasticly . As human cultural evolution has accelerated our societies’ paces of change,
increasingly our ethical norms are represented in highly
plastic forms such as legislation and policy .
The problem with a system of action selection so extremely
plastic as explicit decision making is that it can be subject
to dithering —switching from one goal to another so rapidly that little or no progress is made on either . Dithering is a problem
potentially faced by any autonomous actor with multiple goals
that at least partially conflict and must be maintained concurrently. Conflict is often resource-based, for example visually
attending to two children at one time, or needing to both sleep
and work. An example of dithering in early computers was
thrashing—a process of alternating between two programs on
a single CPU where each required access to the majority of
main memory. Poor system design could result in an operating system allocating a slice of time to each process shorter
than the time it took to be read into main memory from disk,
preventing either program from achieving any of its real functions. More generally, dithering implies changing goals—or
even optimising processes—so frequently that more time is
wasted in the transition than is gained in accomplishment.
Perhaps to avoid dithering, we as humans prefer to regulate social behaviour even in an extremely dynamic present
by planting norms in a “permanent,” bedrock past, like the
anchoring of tall buildings built over a swamp. For example, American law is often debated in the context of the
US constitution, despite being rooted in British Common
Law and therefore a constantly changing set of precedents.
Ethics is often debated in the context of holy ancient texts,
even when the ethical questions at hand concern contemporary matters such as abortion or robots about which
there is no reference or consideration in the original documents. Societies tend to believe that basic principles are
rational, fixed, and universal. Enormous changes in social
order such as universal suffrage or the end of legalised
human slavery are simply viewed as corrections, bringing
about the originally-intended rather than a newly-improved
(or worse, locally-convenient) order.
In fact our ethical structures and morality do co-evolve
with our society . When the value of human
life relative to other resources was lower, murder was more
frequent and less sanctioned, and political empowerment
was less widely distributed . When women can support themselves and
their children independently, infidelity is viewed less harshly
 . What it means to be human changes, and
our ethical systems have to accommodate that change.
Fundamental social behaviour
As I implied when defining ethics, an ethical systems will
contain components addressing two problems:
1. Defining a society—discriminating it from others, and
2. Maintaining a society internally.
The first problem may underpin our psychological obsession with ingroup-outgroup dynamics. I have suggested
elsewhere that a society may be defined by the public goods
it creates and defends, thus the scale of a coherent economy
may limit the size of a society . The second problem could however at least
in theory be universal, and as such could also be a candidate for describing how AI might become a moral subject.
Maintaining a society internally is also the topic of the rest
of this section.
I begin by considering the most basic component of social
behaviour: whether that behaviour is for or against society—
pro- or anti-social. Assessing morality is not trivial, even for
apparently trivial, ‘robotic’ behaviour of single cell organisms, which also behave pro- and anti-socially. For example
MacLean et al. demonstrate the overall social utility of organisms behaving in a way that at first assessment
seems to be obviously anti-social—free riding off of prosocial agents that manufacture costly public goods. Singlecell organisms produce a wide array of shared goods ranging from shelter to instructions for combating antibiotics
 . MacLean et al. focus on the
production of digestive enzymes by the more ‘altruistic’ of
two isogenic yeast strains. Having no stomachs, yeast must
excrete such enzymes outside of their bodies. The production of these enzymes is costly, requiring difficult-to-construct proteins, and the production of pre-digested food is
beneficial not only to the excreting yeast but also to any other
yeast in its vicinity. The production of these enzymes thus
meets the common anthropological and economic definition
of altruism: paying a cost to express behaviour that benefits
others .
In the case of single-cell organisms there is no ‘choice’
as to whether to be free-riding or pro-social. This is genetically determined by their strain, but the two sorts of behaviour are accessible from each other during reproduction (the
construction of new individuals) via common mutations
Patiency is not a virtue: the design of intelligent systems and systems of ethics﻿
 . For such systems, natural selection performs the ‘action selection’ between goals
by determining what proportion of which strategy lives and
dies. What MacLean et al. show is that selection can
operate such that the lineage as a whole benefits from mixing
both strategies . The ‘altruistic’ strain in fact overproduces the public good (the digestive enzymes) at a level that would be wasteful, while the
‘free-riding’ strain of course underproduces. Thus the greatest good—the most efficient exploitation of the available
resources—is achieved by the species as a whole.
Why can’t the altruistic strain evolve to produce the right
level of public goods? This returns to my earlier point about
rates of plasticity. The optimal amount of enzyme production
is determined by available food and this will change more
quickly than the physical mechanism for enzyme production
in a single strain could evolve. However death and birth can
be fast and cheap in single-cell organisms. A mixed population composed of multiple strategies, where the high and low
producers will always over and under produce respectively,
and where their proportions can be changed very rapidly, is
thus an agile solution. Thus the greater good for the species
is served by the ‘selfishness’ of many of its members, but
would not be so served without the presence of altruists.
Human society also appears to up and down regulate
investment in public goods . We may
increase production of public goods by calling their creation
‘good’, and associating ‘good’ with a social status that is
beneficial in the socio-economic contexts where more public goods are beneficial. Meanwhile, self interest and individual learning from direct reenforcement can be relied on
to motivate and maintain the countervailing population of
underproducers. For human society too the ‘correct’ amount
of investment may vary quickly due to shifts in socio-economic and political context. For example, national military
investment may be worthwhile under threat of invasion, but
investment in local businesses may be more advantageous
at other times. This implies that the reduction of other’s
‘good’ behaviour can itself be of public utility in times when
society benefits from more individual productivity or selfsufficiency . If so, we would
expect that in such contexts it may also be easier for human
institutions to change their overall assessment of which public goods require investment than to change their exact rate
of output for all individuals .
Is does not imply ought. The roots of our ethics do not
entirely determine where we should or will progress. But
roots do affect our intuitions. Our intuitions towards inclusion of artefacts in our society are probably driven by the
extent to which we identify with such artefacts . This goes back to the biological account for
altruism given in the definitions section: we are by nature
willing to pay a higher cost for those more related to us.
For humans, this ‘relatedness’ seems to extend also to those
whose ideas we share . This would allow us to be a phenomenally agile species, rapidly generating new societies to exploit available
opportunities, particularly if we can prompt each other to focus on particular
identities in particular circumstances.
Others have proposed using our intuitions as a mechanism
for determining our obligations with respect to robots and
AI . Because
of their origins in our evolutionary past, and the simple
observation of how patiency can be attributed to plush toys
 , I do not trust this strategy to create coherent ethics. I do however trust those with vested
interests—such as interests in selling weapons, robots, or
even books—to exploit such intuitions . Although established precedent is close to
my second objective proposed earlier for the justification we
seek for a normative recommendation, I consider picking a
precedent (in-group identification) that divides as much as it
unites to be unsatisfactory. Such divisions seem particularly
dated given that we can expect communication technology
to increase the potential size of our social group . In the next section I turn
as an alternative established source of criteria for making a
normative recommendation to philosophy, which I exploit in
the sections following to propose a more coherent, minimally
disruptive path to situating AI in our society, and (therefore)
our ethics.
Normative claims concerning robots and AI
Freedom and morality
“[Moral] action is an exercise of freedom and freedom is
what makes morality possible.”—Johnson . For millennia morality has been recognised as something uniquely
human, and therefore taken as an indication of human
uniqueness and even divinity . But if we throw
away a supernaturalist and dualistic understanding of human
mind and origins, we can still maintain that human morality
is at least rooted in the one incontrovertible aspect of human
uniqueness—language—and our unsurpassed competence
for cultural accumulation that language both exemplifies and
further enables  . The cultural accumulation
of new concepts gives us more ideas and choices to reason
over, and our accumulation of tools gives us as individuals
more power to derive substantial changes to our environment
from our intentions.
Some of these tools include social concepts that have
proved useful fulcrums for the leverage we need to construct our complex societies. These include ‘self’, ‘society’,
J. J. Bryson
‘justice’, ‘responsibility’, ‘freedom’, and ‘intention’. As
asserted earlier in the section on definitions, it is at the
point of the invention of these concepts that we can discriminate artificial from natural intelligence. An artefact is
something for which the design is intentional. That intention—the authorship of our action—ordinarily is seen as
entailing responsibility, even in the face of determinism
 .
If human morality depended simply on human language
then our increasingly language-capable machines would be
excellent candidate moral subjects. But I believe that freedom—which I take here to mean the socially-recognised
capacity to exercise choice is the essential property of a moral
actor . Dennett argues
that human freedom is a consequence of evolving complexity
beyond our own capacity to provide a better account for our
behaviour than to attribute it to our own individual responsibility. This argument entails a wide variety of interesting—
and not necessarily desirable—consequences. For example, as
our science develops and our behaviour becomes more explicable via other means (e.g. insanity) fewer actions might be
taken as moral. This principle might also be seen to encourage
the irresponsible construction of opaque institutions or obfuscated source code for robots or other AI systems in order to
avoid individual or institutional responsibility .
I will nevertheless here be conservative and follow from
Dennett’s suggestion to generalise morality beyond human
ethics. Again only local to this article, I define moral actions
for an individual agent to be those for which:
1. A particular behavioural context affords more than one
possible action for that agent,
2. At least one available action is considered by a society to
be more socially beneficial than the other options, and
3. The agent is able to recognise which action is socially
beneficial—or at least socially sanctioned—and act on
this information.
Note that this definition captures society-specific morals as
well as the individual’s role as the actor.
With this definition I again reach to the biological heritage of our present ethics by deliberately extending morality to include actions by other species which may be sanctioned by their society, or by ours. For example, non-human
primates will punish individuals that violate their social
norms, e.g. for being excessively brutal in punishing a subordinate , for failing to vocally ‘report’ available
food , or for sneaking copulation .1 Similarly, this definition allows us to say
dogs and even cats can be good or bad when they obey or
disobey human social norms they have been trained to recognise, provided they have demonstrated a capacity to select
between relevant alternative behaviours, and particularly
when they behave as if they expect social sanction when
they select the proscribed option. I make this inclusive reach
to prepare for a consideration of ethics from the perspective
of a society of artefacts.
With respect to AI, there is no question that we can
train or simply program machines to recognise more or
less socially-acceptable actions, and to use that information to inform action selection . So we can certainly build AI to take
moral actions. But this in itself does not determine moral
agency. The question is, who would be responsible for those
actions? An agent that takes a moral action is not necessarily the moral agent—not necessarily the or even a locus of
responsibility for that action. A robot, a child, a pet, even a
plant or the wind might be an agent that alters some aspect
of an environment. Children, pets, and robots may know
they could have done ‘better.’ We can expect the assignment
of responsibility for moral acts by intellgent artefacts to be
similarly subject to debate and variation. Moral responsibility is only attributed to those a moral community has recognised as being in a position of responsibility. Households
may differ in their assignment of culpability to children and
pets, so may civilisations. Presently in the OECD at least,
small children and pets are certainly not considered legally
responsible for their actions.
My recommendation for AI (below) will be similar. However, the core observation here is that a moral community
defines itself and its moral agents—not by simple assertion
of an individual, but by consensus of the society formed. A
growing child will demand agency, and as they grow these
demands generally become both more costly to deny and
safer to accede. However, children by our nature become
adults, the components of our societies. We tend to build AI
systems in their final form—as search engines, surveillance
cameras, spell checkers, automobiles, or whatever product
we are marketing. Should we produce a product to be a
1  While reports of social sanctions of such behaviour are often
referred to as ‘anecdotal’ they are common knowledge for anyone
working with primates. I personally, despite having been forewarned,
was once forced to violate a Capuchin monkey norm: possession is
ownership. I was sanctioned (barked at) by the entire colony—not
only those who observed the affront directly, but all those in hearing
range of those observers.
Patiency is not a virtue: the design of intelligent systems and systems of ethics﻿
moral agent? Can our society sustain itself if responsibility
is delegated to entities that can be specified, built, bought,
Artefacts and responsibility
We have now reached the heart of machine responsibility.
This is the point at which there is no simple descriptive
solution, but rather we are looking to establish norms and
laws that will lead to an ethics that is both sound and stable.
We could designate to intelligent artefacts any position of
responsibility we choose, and indeed several such positions
are presently being considered by various legal systems
 . To motivate my normative recommendations, allow me to ask a relevant question: Would it be
moral for us to construct a machine that would of its own
volition choose any but the most moral action?
This is a trick question, the key to which returns to the
definition of freedom I took from Dennett. For it to be
rational for us to describe an action by a machine to be “of
its own volition”, we must already have sufficiently obfuscated its decision-making process such that we cannot otherwise predict its behaviour, and thus be reduced to applying
sanctions to it in order for it to learn to behave in a way that
our society prefers. Otherwise, if the machine acted as we
intended, the responsibility would be ours just as if we had
performed the action with any other tool.
Note that if we assume as I’ve asserted that ought implies
can, there’s an issue of whether we can coherently and ethically produce AI that suffers from sanctions. I will return
to this point below, but first I wish to discuss obfuscation. I
do not consider training action selection via deep learning,
reinforcement learning or any other statistical technique to
be necessarily obfuscating in this sense. Even if we do not
know the exact ‘meaning’ of every individual components of
an internal representation, the basic principles of optimisation that underlie machine learning are well-understood and
the probable outcomes known to in my mind be sufficient for
moral clarity . Further, there are
basic and well-established procedures for creating test suites
and exploring responses to input to ensure a system incorporating machine learning or any other sort of programming,
or even human judgement, is performing to a standard that
we approve . Similarly, I do not consider
the fact that unexpected effects ‘emerge’ during the operation of complex systems to alter the designers’ responsibility
to observe and account for such effects. Neither do present
courts of law .
As I asserted earlier, the step change from nature to artefact is our intentional acts of creation, for which we as moral
agents are almost by definition and certainly by convention
considered responsible. When executing an intentional
action, deliberately blinding oneself to an outcome is not
ordinarily seen as ending responsibility; rather it is termed
wilful negligence. The same should hold true for not following adequate procedures to ensure transparency in the construction of intelligent artefacts . Since we have perfect
control over when and how a robot is created, we also have
responsibility for it. Assigning responsibility to the artefact
for actions we designed it to execute would be to deliberately disavow our responsibility for that design. Currently,
even where we have imperfect control over something as in
the case of young children, owned animals, and operated
machinery, causing harm by losing control entails at least
some level of responsibility to the moral agent, the legal
person. If you deliberately drive into someone you commit
murder, if you do it accidentally you commit manslaughter.
You are responsible but the sanctions are reduced.
Why, for example, are we responsible for intelligent
beings such as children, but only up to a fixed age? Because
society has found this to be the best method for organising
itself, though there is some dispute and therefore variability
about the exact point at which the child becomes responsible. Thus legal persons are responsible for maintaining
control over their dogs, cars, and children, and individuals
can be held accountable for negligence and manslaughter
performed by those things over which control was not sufficiently maintained  . Again, these laws are not
based on some pure, indisputable, formal, mathematical
fact—though they can be informed by science, for example
of developmental psychology. Fundamentally though they
reflect the best way of maintaining our society that our society has been able to both discover and agree to enforce. Subparts of our society, for example clubs or families, may institute additional rules that maintain and hopefully enhance the
lives of members of these smaller societies.
Beneficiaries of machine patiency
Why—or in what circumstances—should robots be given the
moral agency we deny children? Should we be allowed to
obscure our own control of the machines we make? Create
and sell legal products without being responsible for understanding their behaviour? Could there even be a reason to
pass off or hand on responsibility for an artefact that has
been well-designed and is transparent to us?
Deriving normative recommendations for how we should
adjust our ethical systems to encapsulate the AI we create
requires reasoning about multiple levels of ethical obligation
and multiple possible ethical strategies. In the yeast example
I gave earlier, ‘anti-social’ free riding actually optimised
the overall investment of a society—a spatially-local subset
J. J. Bryson
of a species inhabiting a particular ecological substrate—
in a way that helped it compete with other nearby species.
Behaviour possibly disadvantageous very local to free riders was less-locally advantageous to the species as a whole.
Similarly, it is at least possible that in times of severe economic and political crisis, turning to a competitive strategy
that destroys some levels of social organisation and their
associated public goods may be an effective survival strategy for what remains of the society after this destruction.
The definition of morality introduced above depends then on
social benefit. Could there be social benefit for any society
in abdicating our responsibility as authors of our artefacts?
I will focus here on just two of the conceivable societies, the two at the extremes of the possibilities: one entirely
focussed on humans and human organisations such as we
at least legally inhabit now, and the other a society of independent robotic devices functioning as legally autonomous
individuals in a subcommunity in a world otherwise much
like the present day. The assumption is that these two worlds
are technologically equivalent, but in the second we have
constructed and marketed robots as legal products that are
designated also as legal persons, giving them sufficient cognitive state (both memory and motivation) to self organise
along the same lines as human communities, for example as
a union. I will now consider briefly for each of these who
benefits and who does not from designating moral agency
and patiency to AI.
The perspective of human well being
Many people have suggested after Kant that failing to treat
something that appears to us to be human as if it were human
would be a moral wrong towards other humans, because
it encourages our propensity to dehumanise . While it would be both foolish and
unnecessary to argue against Kant, what these arguments
overlook is that there are two ways to address this problem—either by treating artefacts as human, or by making
their inhumanity transparent . The
only extant national-level robot ethics policies recommends
the latter , as do I.  Another possible benefit of robot moral subjects is that, for some of us, it gives us
pleasure or feeds our egos to construct objects that we owe
moral status . Some
of us also project ourselves into our creations, and see AI
as a route to immortality more perfect than other forms of
procreation . Of course, that perceived identity is demonstrably false .
To me the only persuasive argument is that it is possible
that in the long term treating intelligent artefacts as moral
agents would be a simpler way to control an opaquely-complex intelligence, and that the benefits of that opaquely complex intelligence might outweigh the costs of losing some
of our own moral responsibility and therefore moral status.
However this necessity has yet to be demonstrated. Given
the costs of abdicating responsibility, we should not abdicate
based on speculation .
Some are currently arguing that enforcing good practice in transparency and accountability for AI may slow the
rate of progress. Empirically, it often turns out that designing a system to be transparent makes it easier to maintain
and extend, so any such penalties even if they exist may
only do so in the short term . But even if the penalties of transparency prove
real and long-lasting, we need to consider the benefits of
any accelerated progress against the costs of losing human
responsibility, costs which may include losing social cohesion. The principal such cost I see is the facilitation of the
unnecessary abrogation of responsibility by sellers or operators of AI. For example, customers could be fooled into
wasting resources needed by their children or parents on
a robot, or citizens could be fooled into blaming a robot
rather than a politician for unnecessary fatalities in warfare
 . A corporation could displace responsibility for its
decision to use automation rather than human employment
onto the automation itself, creating a legal lacuna—a set of
far poorer, purely-synthetic entities set up to be held responsible for tax and legal liability . If such
an entity went bankrupt or were jailed, it would disuade no
one into changing their or its behaviour.
The more I study the legal aspects of this problem, the
more convinced I am that academics facilitating the fantasies of trans- and post-humanists run the
risk of encouraging political and economic decisions that
could seriously disrupt our ability to govern, as well as our
economy. The artificial entities likely to be most advantaged
are transnational corporations, and there are few effective
mechanisms of government at the transnational level. Without a capacity to govern our economy we lose the collective
ability to encourage arts and innovation beneficial to all.
With unaccountable power and economic inequality, the
majority of humanity feels and may indeed become too atrisk to innovate and contribute to their local economy and
public goods. Empirically, this leads to social disruption
 .
The perspective of AI well being
Although this argument has been overlooked by some critics , the policies I
promote have always explicitly
considered the welfare of potential intelligent artefacts. I
cast these as second-order moral patients. Why should we
design artefacts to be in the position of competing with
us for resources; of longing for higher social status (as all
Patiency is not a virtue: the design of intelligent systems and systems of ethics﻿
evolved social vertebrates do); of fearing injury, extinction,
or humiliation? We are able to ensure that AI is properly and
continuously backed up. We can and do build it to have no
concern for social status, nor sense of purpose.
In short, we can afford to stay agnostic about whether an
artefact can have qualia, because we can avoid constructing
motivation systems encompassing suffering. We know we can
do this because we already have. There are many proactive
AI systems now, and none of them suffer. There are already
machines that play go, chess, checkers, do arithmetic, refrigerate, and clean clothes better than we do, but none of these
aspires to world domination. We can limit AI—or at least
legally-produced commercial AI—to be as it is now, something
to which no obligations are owed directly. There can therefore
be no ethical costs to the AI of maintaining AI in its present status of non-suffering, unless we postulate rights of the ‘unbuilt’.
Tonkens makes a very similar point to mine
concerning AI well being, which Rosas disputes. I
believe the root of the conflict here is that Rosas believes
morality must be rooted in social dominance structures. The
definition of morality I introduced in the previous section
eliminates this confound. For evolved intelligence, dominance structure may be an inevitable part of the selective
process; therefore we may expect the dysphoric aspects of
subjugation may also be universal in evolved beings. Certainly therefore human ethical systems, as a part of social
regulation, have much to say concerning dominance. But in
designed artefacts we can safely eliminate this dysphoric
aspect of subservience. Even negative self assessment by a
robot has no need to lead to self harm or degradation, just
restraint in risk taking and a request for repairs.
Recommendations
In the Introduction I suggested two criteria for ethical systems: coherence, and a lack of social disruption. I can think
of no coherent reason to create agents with which we should
compete. Every value we have, from æsthetics to peace to
winning, comes from our evolutionary origins as apes.
What coherent reason can we have to ‘pass the baton’ to
machines made to share and compete on the basis of these
goals? Even if we take the technologically-dubious case of
machine immortality, what would we be making immortal?
Any self-learning technological agent would rapidly evolve
preferences that suit its machine nature, not ours. Would
an initially-human-like capacity for computation be worth
sacrificing human potential for in order to create something
eventually as similar to us as crabgrass ?
Returning to Hamilton’s Law, the answer might be “yes”
if we could assume that our technology was likely to survive our species or even our civilisation, but to date digital
technology formats tend to survive less than 1
16 as long as
individual humans.
Bryson et al. argue that the right way to think
about intelligent services (there in the context of the Internet, but here I will generalise) is as extensions of our own
motivational systems. We are currently the principal agents
when it comes to our own technology, and I believe it is our
ethical obligation to design both our AI and our legal and
moral systems to maintain that situation. Legally and ethically, AI works best as a sort of behavioural prosthetic to
our own needs and desires. If we wish to extend the lifespan
of our civilisation, I recommend focussing on ways to do
this while maintaining a flourishing human society at the
motive core.
As mentioned above, one of the best arguments I know
against this human-based perspective is that maltreating
something that reminds us of a human might lead us to treat
other humans or animals worse as well . The United Kingdom’s EPSRC Principles of
Robotics specifically address this problem in its fourth principle, and in two ways . First,
robots should not have deceptive appearance—they should
not fool people into thinking they are similar to empathydeserving moral patients. Second, their AI workings should
be ‘transparent’ . This
implies that clear, generally-comprehensible descriptions of
an artefact’s goals and intelligence should be available to any
owner, operator, or other concerned party. This Principle was
adopted despite considerable concerns about the requirement
for both therapeutic and simple commercial/entertainment
robots to masquerade as moral patients and companions . Because of this consideration, the fourth
Principle deliberately makes transparency available for
informed long-term decisions, but not constantly apparent.
The goal is that most healthy adult citizens should be able
to make correctly-informed decisions about emotional and
financial investment. As with fictional characters and plush
toys , we should be able to both experience
beneficial emotional engagement, and to maintain explicit
knowledge of an artefact’s lack of moral subjectivity.
One thread of theory for the construction of human-level
AI2 holds that it may be impossible to create the sort of
intelligence we want or need unless we completely follow
the existing biologically-inspired templates which therefore
2  Please note that all arguments in this paper apply to all AI, including Artificial General Intelligence (AGI). AGI was originally a pejorative meant to imply that AI had ‘failed’ because the discipline was
not pursuing the correct goals. Now it has come to mean two contradictory things—a system that can be all knowing, and a system that is
human-like. There is no chance of the combinatorial complexity of all
possible knowledge or planning being overcome such that there can
be an omniscient AI; this is a computational impossibility. The problems of making an artefact completely human-like I have dealt with
earlier in the main text.
J. J. Bryson
must include social striving, pain, etc. So far there is no evidence for this position, in fact we are persistently creating
super-human AI capacities without these attributes . But if it is ever demonstrated, even then we would not be in the position where our
hand was forced—that we must permit patiency and agency.
Rather, we will then, and only then, have enough information to stop, take council, and produce a literature and eventually legislation, regulation, and social norms on what is the
appropriate amount of moral subjectivity to permit given the
benefits it would provide.
Conclusion
As Johnson puts it “Computer systems and
other artefacts have intentionality—the intentionality put
into them by the intentional acts of their designers.” It is
unquestionably within our society’s capacity to define robots
and other AI as moral agents and patients. In fact, many
authors (both philosophers and technologists) are currently
working on this project. It may be technically possible to create AI systems that would meet contemporary requirements
for moral agency or patiency. But even if it were possible,
neither of these two statements makes it either necessary or
desirable that we should do so. Both our ethical systems and
our artefacts are amenable to human design.
The primary, and descriptive argument of this article is
that making AI moral agents or patients is an intentional and
avoidable action. The secondary, normative argument which
is definitionally still open to debate, is that avoidance would
be our most ethical choice.
Acknowledgements  I would like to thank everyone who has argued
with me about the above, but particularly David Gunkel and Will Lowe.
Earlier versions of this paper have appeared in Gunkel et al. and
Stojanov , thanks to the participants of those meetings for discussion. Thanks also to Virginia Dignum, Bipin Indurkhya, Tom Grant,
and Mihailis Diamantis, Robert Sparrow, the members of CITEC at
Bielefeld especially Helge Ritter, and the excellent anonymous reviewers of this journal.
Funding  Funding was provided by the AXA Research Fund. Gold open
access was provided at a cost to the University of Bath.
Open Access  This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License ( 
mmons​.org/licen​ses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.