HAL Id: hal-03020417
 
Submitted on 24 Nov 2020
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Holographic MIMO Surfaces for 6G Wireless Networks:
Opportunities, Challenges, and Trends
Chongwen Huang, Sha Hu, George C. Alexandropoulos, Alessio Zappone,
Chau Yuen, Rui Zhang, Marco Di Renzo, Merouane Debbah
To cite this version:
Chongwen Huang, Sha Hu, George C. Alexandropoulos, Alessio Zappone, Chau Yuen, et al.. Holographic MIMO Surfaces for 6G Wireless Networks: Opportunities, Challenges, and Trends. IEEE
Wireless Communications, 2020, 27 (5), pp.118-125. ￿10.1109/MWC.001.1900534￿. ￿hal-03020417￿
Holographic MIMO Surfaces for 6G Wireless
Networks: Opportunities, Challenges, and Trends
Chongwen Huang, Member, IEEE, Sha Hu, Member, IEEE, George C. Alexandropoulos, Senior Member, IEEE,
Alessio Zappone, Senior Member, IEEE, Chau Yuen, Senior Member, IEEE, Rui Zhang, Fellow, IEEE, Marco Di
Renzo, Fellow, IEEE, and M´erouane Debbah, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Future wireless networks are expected to evolve
towards an intelligent and software reconﬁgurable paradigm
enabling ubiquitous communications between humans and mobile
devices. They will be also capable of sensing, controlling, and
optimizing the wireless environment to fulﬁll the visions of lowpower, high-throughput, massively-connected, and low-latency
communications. A key conceptual enabler that is recently
gaining increasing popularity is the Holographic Multiple Input
Multiple Output Surface (HMIMOS) that refers to a low-cost
transformative wireless planar structure comprising of subwavelength metallic or dielectric scattering particles, which is
capable of impacting electromagnetic waves according to desired
objectives. In this article, we provide an overview of HMIMOS
communications by introducing the available hardware architectures for reconﬁgurable such metasurfaces and their main
characteristics, as well as highlighting the opportunities and key
challenges in designing HMIMOS-enabled communications.
I. INTRODUCTION
Future wireless networks, namely beyond ﬁfth Generation
(5G) and sixth Generation (6G), are required to support
massive numbers of end-users with increasingly demanding
Spectral Efﬁciency (SE) and Energy Efﬁciency (EE) requirements – . In recent years, research in wireless communications has witnessed rising interests in massive Multiple
Input Multiple Output (MIMO) systems, where Base Stations
(BSs) are equipped with large antenna arrays, as a way to
address the 5G throughput requirements. However, it is still a
very challenging task to realize massive MIMO BSs with truly
large-scale antenna arrays (i.e., with few hundreds or more
antennas) mainly due to the high fabrication and operational
costs, as well as due to the increased power consumption.
Future 6G wireless communication systems are expected
to realize an intelligent and software reconﬁgurable paradigm,
where all parts of device hardware will adapt to the changes of
the wireless environment , , . Beamforming-enabled
antenna arrays, cognitive spectrum usage, as well as adaptive
modulation and coding are a few of the transceiver aspects that
are currently tunable in order to optimize the communication
efﬁciency. However, in this optimization process, the wireless environment remains an unmanageable factor; it remains
unaware of the communication process undergoing within it
 , – . Furthermore, the wireless environment has in
general a harmful effect on the efﬁciency of wireless links. The
signal attenuation limits the connectivity radius of nodes, while
multipath propagation resulting in fading phenomena is a wellstudied physical factor introducing drastic ﬂuctuations in the
received signal power. The signal deterioration is perhaps
one of the major concerns in millimeter wave and in the
forthcoming TeraHertz (THz) communications .
Although massive MIMO, three-Dimensional (3D) beamforming, and their hardware efﬁcient hybrid analog and digital
counterparts provide remarkable approaches to conquer
signal attenuation due to wireless propagation via softwarebased control of the directivity of transmissions, they impose
mobility and hardware scalability issues. More importantly,
the intelligent manipulation of the ElectroMagnetic (EM)
propagation is only partially feasible since the objects in
the deployment area, other than the transceivers, are passive
and uncontrollable. As a result, the wireless environment as
a whole remains unaware of the ongoing communications
within it, and the channel model continues to be treated as
a probabilistic process, rather than a nearly deterministic one
enabled through software-controlled techniques.
Following the recent breakthrough on the fabrication of
programmable metamaterials, reconﬁgurable intelligent surfaces have the potential to fulﬁll the challenging vision for
6G networks, and materialize seamless connections and intelligent software-based control of the environment in wireless
communication systems when coated on the otherwise passive
surfaces of various objects – . Holographic MIMO Surfaces (HMIMOS) aim at going beyond massive MIMO, being
based on low cost, size, weight, and low power consumption
hardware architectures that provide a transformative means of
the wireless environment into a programmable smart entity ,
 , , , , . In this article, we overview the different
emerging HMIMOS architectures and their core functionalities, and discuss their currently considered communication
applications as well as their future networking challenges.
II. HMIMOS DESIGN MODELS
In this section, we present available hardware architectures,
fabrication methodologies, and operation modes of HMIMOS
systems that render them a ﬂexibly integrable concept for
diverse wireless communication applications.
A. Categorization based on the Power Consumption
1) Active HMIMOS:
To realize reconﬁgurable wireless
environments, HMIMOS can serve as a transmitter, receiver,
or reﬂector. When the transceiver role is considered, and thus
energy-intensive Radio Frequency (RF) circuits and signal
processing units are embedded in the surface, the term active
HMIMOS is adopted , . On another note, active
HMIMOS systems comprise a natural evolution of conventional massive MIMO systems, by packing more and more
software-controlled antenna elements onto a two-Dimensional
(2D) surface of ﬁnite size. In , where the spacing between
adjacent surface elements reduces when their number increase,
 
Figure 1: The two generic steps of holographic training and holographic communication .
an active HMIMOS is also termed as Large Intelligent Surface
(LIS). A practical implementation of active HMIMOS can be
a compact integration of an inﬁnite number of tiny antenna
elements with reconﬁgurable processing networks realizing
a continuous antenna aperture. This structure can be used
to transmit and receive communication signals across the
entire surface by leveraging the hologram principle , .
Another active HMIMOS implementation is based on discrete
photonic antenna arrays that integrate active optical-electrical
detectors, converters, and modulators for performing transmission, reception, and conversion of optical or RF signals .
2) Passive HMIMOS: Passive HMIMOS, also known as
Reconﬁgurable Intelligent Surface (RIS) , – , , or
Intelligent Reﬂecting Surface (IRS) , , acts like a passive metal mirror or ‘wave collector,’ and can be programmed
to change an impinging EM ﬁeld in a customizable way ,
 . Compared with its active counterpart, a passive HMIMOS
is usually composed of low cost passive elements that do not
require dedicated power sources. Their circuitry and embedded
sensors can be powered with energy harvesting modules, an
approach that has the potential of making them truly energy
neutral. Regardless of their speciﬁc implementations, what
makes the passive HMIMOS technology attractive from an
energy consumption standpoint, is their capability to shape radio waves impinging upon them and forwarding the incoming
signal without employing any power ampliﬁer nor RF chain,
and also without applying sophisticated signal processing.
Moreover, passive HMIMOS can work in full duplex mode
without signiﬁcant self interference or increased noise level,
and require only low rate control link or backhaul connections.
Finally, passive HMIMOS structures can be easily integrated
into the wireless communication environment, since their
extremely low power consumption and hardware costs allow
them to be deployed into building facades, room and factory
ceilings, laptop cases, or even human clothing , .
B. Categorization based on the Hardware Structure
1) Contiguous HMIMOS: A contiguous HMIMOS integrates a virtually uncountably inﬁnite number of elements into
a limited surface area in order to form a spatially continuous
transceiver aperture , . For the better understanding of
the operation of contiguous surfaces and their communication
models, we commence with a brief description of the physical
operation of the optical holography concept. Holography is
a technique that enables an EM ﬁeld, which is generally the
result of a signal source scattered off objects, to be recorded
based on the interference principle of the EM wave. The
recorded EM ﬁeld can be then utilized for reconstructing the
initial ﬁeld based on the diffraction principle. It should be
noted that wireless communications over a continuous aperture
is inspired by the optical holography, which is sketched in
Fig. 1. In the training phase, the generated training signals
from an RF source are split via a beamsplitter into two waves,
the object and reference waves. The object wave is directed
to the object, and some of the reﬂected wave mixed together
with the reference wave beam that does not impinge on the
object, are fed to the HMIMOS. In the communication phase,
the transmitted signal is transformed into the desired beam to
the object user over the spatially continuous aperture of the
HMIMOS. Since the continuous aperture beneﬁts from the
integrated inﬁnite number of antennas that is the asymptotic
limit of Massive MIMO, its potential advantages are to achieve
higher spatial resolution, and enable the creation and detection
of EM waves with arbitrary spatial frequency components,
without undesired side lobes.
2) Discrete HMIMOS: The discrete HMIMOS is usually
composed of many discrete unit cells made of low power
software-tunable metamaterials. The means to electronically
modify the EM properties of the unit cells range from off
the shelves electronic components to using liquid crystals,
microelectromechanical systems or even electromechanical
switches, and other reconﬁgurable metamaterials. This structure is substantially different from the conventional MIMO antenna array. One embodiment of a discrete surface is based on
discrete ‘meta-atoms’ with electronically steerable reﬂection
properties . As mentioned earlier, another type of discrete
surface is the active one based on photonic antenna arrays.
Compared with contiguous HMIMOS, discrete HMIMOS have
Figure 2: The two operation modes of HMIMOS systems along with their implementation and hardware structures. A schematic
view of the HMIMOS functions of EM ﬁeld polarization, scattering, focusing, and absorption control is provided.
some essential differences from the perspectives of implementation and hardware, as will be described in the sequel.
C. Fabrication Methodologies
There are various fabrication techniques for HMIMOS
including electron beam lithography at optical frequencies,
focused-ion beam milling, interference and nanoimprint lithography, as well as direct laser writing or printed circuit board
processes at microwaves. Usually, these fabrication techniques
will be ascribed to produce two typical apertures, continuous
or discrete apertures, as shown in Fig. 2. A fabrication
approach leveraging programmable metamaterials for approximately realizing a continuous microwave aperture , 
is depicted in Fig. 2(a). This meta-particle structure uses the
varactor loading technique to broaden its frequency response
range, and achieves continuous aperture and controllable re-
ﬂection phase. It is a continuous monolayer metallic structure,
and comprises an inﬁnite number of meta-particles. Each metaparticle contains two metallic trapezoid patches, a central
continuous strip, and varactor diodes. By independently and
continuously controlling the bias voltage of the varactors, the
surface impedance of continuous HMIMOS can be dynamically programmed, and thus manipulate the reﬂection phase,
amplitude states, and the phase distribution at a wide range
of frequency bands . It should be highlighted that this
impedance pattern is a map of the hologram, and can be
calculated directly from the ﬁeld distribution of the provided
reference wave and reﬂected object wave, as discussed in
Fig. 1. Exploiting intelligent control algorithms, beamforming
can be accomplished by using the hologram principle.
In contrast to continuous aperture, another instance of
HMIMOS is the discrete aperture that is usually realized
with software-deﬁned metasurface antennas. A general logical structure (regardless of its physical characteristics) was
proposed in , as shown in Fig. 2(b). Its general unit cell
structure contains a metamaterial layer, sensing and actuation
layers, shielding layer, computing layer, as well as an interface
and communications layer with different objectives. Specifically, the meta-material layer is implemented by graphene
materials for delivering the desired EM behavior through a
reconﬁgurable pattern, while the objective of sensing and
actuation layer is to modify the behavior of the meta-material
layer. The shielding layer is made of a simple metallic layer
for decoupling the EM behavior of the top and bottom layers
to avoid mutual interferences. The computing layer is used
to execute external commands from the interface layer or
sensors. Finally, the interface and communications layer aims
at coordinating the actions of the computing layer and updating
other external wireless entities via the reconﬁgurable interface.
While HMIMOS is in its infancy, basic prototyping work
on different kinds of this technology is going on in the
world. A discrete HMIMOS was developed by the start-up
company named “Greenerwave”, and which shows the basic
feasibility and effectiveness of the HMIMOS concept using
the discrete metasurface antennas. In contrast, another startup company called “Pivotalcommware” with the investment
of Bill Gates capital is developing the initial commercial
products of the contiguous HMIMOS based on the lowcost and contiguous metasurfaces, which further veriﬁes the
feasibility of the HMIMOS concept as well as advancement of
holographic technologies. Continued prototyping development
is highly desired to both prove the HMIMOS concept with
even brand new holographic beamforming technologies and
discover potentially new issues that urgently need research.
D. Operation Modes
The following four operation modes for HMIMOS are
usually considered: 1) continuous HMIMOS as an active
transceiver; 2) discrete HMIMOS as a passive reﬂector; 3)
discrete HMIMOS as an active transceiver; and 4) continuous
HMIMOS as a passive reﬂector. Given the recent research
interests and due to space limitations, we next elaborate on
the ﬁrst two representative modes of operation, which are also
sketched within Fig. 2.
1) Continuous HMIMOS as Active Transceivers: According to this mode of operation, the continuous HMIMOS
performs as an active transceiver. The RF signal is generated
at its backside and propagates through a steerable distribution
network to the contiguous surface constituted by the inﬁnite
software-deﬁned and electronically steerable elements that
generate multiple beams to the intended users. A distinct
difference between active continuous HMIMOS and passively
reconﬁgurable HMIMOS is that the beamforming process of
the former is accomplished based on the holographic concept,
which is a new dynamic beamforming technique based on
software-deﬁned antennas with low cost/weight, compact size,
and a low-power hardware architecture.
2) Discrete HMIMOS as Passive Reﬂectors: Another operation mode of HMIMOS is the mirror or ‘wave collector,’
where the HMIMOS is considered to be discrete and passive.
In this case, the HMIMOS include reconﬁgurable unit cells, as
previously described, which makes their beamforming mode
resembling that of conventional beamforming , unlike
continuous transceiver HMIMOS systems. It is worth noting
that most of the existing works (e.g., , , ) focus on
this HMIMOS operation mode which is simpler to implement
and analyze.
III. FUNCTIONALITY, CHARACTERISTICS, AND
COMMUNICATION APPLICATIONS
Different fabrication methods of HMIMOS systems result
in a variety of functionalities and characteristics, with most
of them being very relevant to late expectations for future 6G
wireless systems (e.g., Tbps peak rates). In this section, we
highlight the HMIMOS functions and key characteristics, and
discuss their diverse wireless communications applications.
A. Functionality Types
Intelligent surfaces can support a wide range of EM interactions, termed hereinafter as functions. Ascribing to their
programmable features and depending on whether they are
realized via structures with discrete or continuous elements,
HMIMOS have four common function types as illustrated in
the bottom part of Fig. 2:
• F1: EM Field Polarization, which refers to the reconﬁgurable setting of the oscillation orientation of the wave’s
electric and magnetic ﬁelds.
• F2: EM Field Scattering, where the surface redirects an
impinging wave with a given direction of arrival towards
a desired or multiple concurrent desired directions.
• F3: Pencile-like Focusing, which takes place when a
HMIMOS acts as lens to focus an EM wave to a given
point in the near or far ﬁeld. The collimation (i.e., the
reverse functionality) also belongs in this general mode
of beamforming operation.
• F4: EM Field Absorption, which implements minimal
reﬂected and/or refracted power of the incoming EM
B. Characteristics
Compared with currently used technologies in wireless
networks, the most distinctive characteristics of the HMIMOS
concept lie in making the environment controllable by providing the possibility of fully shaping and controlling the
EM response of the environmental objects that are distributed
throughout the network. An HMIMOS structure is usually
intended to perform as a signal source or ‘wave collector’
with reconﬁgurable characteristics, especially for application
scenarios where it is used as a passive reﬂector with the
objective of improving the EE. The fundamental properties of
HMIMOS systems1 and their core differences with massive
MIMO and conventional multi-antenna relaying systems are
summarized as follows:
• C1: HMIMOS can be nearly passive. One signiﬁcant
merit of passive HMIMOS is that they do not require
any internally dedicated energy source to process the
incoming information-carrying EM ﬁeld.
• C2: HMIMOS can realize continuous apertures. Recent research activity focuses on low operational cost
methods for realizing spatially-continuous transmitting
and receiving apertures.
• C3: Receiver thermal noise is absent in HMIMOS.
Passive HMIMOS do not require to down-convert the
received waveform for baseband processing. Instead they
implement analog processing directly on the impinging
• C4: HMIMOS elements are tuned in software. Available architectures for metasurfaces enable simple reprogrammability of all settings of their unit elements.
• C5: HMIMOS can have full-band response. Due to
recent advances in meta-materials’ fabrication, reconﬁgurable HMIMOS can operate at any operating frequency,
ranging from the acoustic spectrum up to THz and the
light spectra.
• C6: Distinctive low latency implementation. HMIMOS
are based on rapidly reprogrammable meta-materials,
whereas conventional relaying and massive MIMO systems include antenna array architectures.
C. Communications Applications
The unique features of HMIMOS enabling intelligent and
rapidly reconﬁgurable wireless environments make them an
emerging candidate technology for the low-power, highthroughput, and low-latency vision of 6G wireless networks.
We next discuss representative communications applications
of HMIMOS for outdoor and indoor environments.
1It should be noted that not all HMIMOS architectures have all listed
attributes. Few of them are inherent to passive HMIMOS, but not to active
ones, and vice versa. However, we discuss HMIMOS properties here in a
broad scope, including all available types up to date.
Figure 3: Wireless communications applications of HMIMOS in outdoor and indoor environments.
1) Outdoor Applications: Consider the discrete passive
HMIMOS as an indicative example that comprises a ﬁnite
number of unit elements, and intended for forwarding suitably
phase-shifted versions of its impinging signals to users over
different outdoor scenarios, such as typical urban, shopping
malls, and international airports, as illustrated in the upper
part of Fig. 3. We assume that HMIMOS are planar structures
of few centimeters thickness and variable sizes that can be
easily deployed onto nearly all environmental objects.
• A1: Building connections. HMIMOS can extend the
coverage from outdoor BSs to indoor users, especially
in cases where there is no direct link between the users
and BS, or the link is severely blocked by obstacles.
• A2: Energy-efﬁcient beamforming. HMIMOS are capable of recycling ambient EM waves and focusing them
to their intended users via effective tuning of their unit
elements. In such cases, surfaces are deployed as relays
to forward the information bearing EM ﬁeld to desired
locations via efﬁcient beamforming that compensates
for the signal attenuation from the BS or co-channel
interference from neighboring BSs.
• A3: Physical-layer security. HMIMOS can be deployed
for physical layer security in order to cancel out reﬂections of the BS signals to eavesdroppers.
• A4: Wireless power transfer. HMIMOS can collect
ambient EM waves and direct them to power-hungry IoT
devices and sensors enabling also simultaneous wireless
information and power transfer.
2) Indoor Applications: Indoor wireless communication is
subject to rich multipath propagation due to the presence of
multiple scatters and signal blocking by walls and furniture, as
well as RF pollution due to the highly probable densiﬁcation
of electronic devices in conﬁned spaces. As such, providing
ubiquitous high throughput indoor coverage and localization
is a challenging task. HMIMOS has the potential of being
highly beneﬁcial in indoor environments, leveraging from its
inherit capability to reconﬁgure EM waves towards various
Table I: Some recent research results on HMIMOS-based wireless communication systems.
Related Works
Applications
Characteristics
Main Contributions
A1, A2, A5
Presented a HMIMOS-based approach to combat the distance limitation in millimeter wave and THz systems; simulation results for an
indoor set up corroborated the merits of proposed approach.
A2, A5, A6
Introduced an indoor signal propagation model and presented information theoretical results for active and continuous HMIMOS systems.
Introduced the concept of programmable indoor wireless environments
offering simultaneous communication and security; an indoor model
and a simulation set up for HMIMOS communication were presented.
Designed a 0.4m2 and 1.5mm thick planar metasurface consisting
of 102 controllable unit cells operating at 2.45GHz; demonstrated
increased received signal strength when deployed indoors.
A1, A2, A5
Proposed free space pathloss models using the EM and physical properties of a reconﬁgurable surface; indoor ﬁeld experiments validated
the proposed models.
Proposed HMIMOS for outdoor MIMO communications and presented
EE maximization algorithms; studied the fundamental differences
between HMIMOS and conventional multi-antenna relays.
Presented jointly active and passive beamforming algorithms for
HMIMOS-assisted MIMO communication; analyzed the interference
distribution and studied the power scaling law.
Derived the optimal HMIMOS phase matrix for the case of available
statistical channel information and presented a tight approximation for
the ergodic capacity.
Studied compressive sensing and deep learning approaches for HMI-
MOS channel estimation and online conﬁguration.
communication objectives. An illustrative general example is
sketched in the lower part of Fig. 3. In the left corner of this
example where a HMIMOS is absent, the signal experiences
pathloss and multipath fading due to refraction, reﬂection, and
diffusion, which deteriorates its sufﬁcient propagation to the
target user. However, in the right corner of Fig. 3, signal
propagation can be boosted using HMIMOS coated in the wall
so as to assist the signal from the access point to reach the
intended user with the desired power level.
• A5: Enhanced in-building coverage: As previously
discussed, indoor environments can be coated with HMI-
MOS to increase the throughput offered by conventional
Wi-Fi access points.
• A6: High accurate indoor positioning: HMIMOS has
increased potential for indoor positioning and localization, where the conventional Global Positioning System
(GPS) fails. Large surfaces offer large, and possibly continuous, apertures that enable increased spatial resolution.
There has been lately increasing research interest in wireless
communication systems incorporating HMIMOS. In Table I,
we list some of the recent works dealing with different
combinations among the functionalities of HMIMOS, their
characteristics, and communication applications.
IV. DESIGN CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
In this section, we present some main theoretical and practical challenges with HMIMOS-based communication systems.
A. Fundamental Limits
It is natural to expect that wireless communication systems
incorporating HMIMOS will exhibit different features compared with traditional communications based on conventional
multi-antenna transceivers. Recall that current communication
systems operate over uncontrollable wireless environments,
whereas HMIMOS-based systems will be capable of recon-
ﬁguring their EM propagation impact. This fact witnesses the
need for new mathematical methodologies to characterize the
physical channels in HMIMOS-based systems and analyze
their ultimate capacity gains over a given volume , as
well as for new signal processing algorithms and networking
schemes for realizing HMIMOS-assisted communication. For
example, continuous HMIMOS is used for the reception and
transmission of the impinging EM ﬁeld over its continuous
aperture using the hologram concept. Differently from the
currently considered massive MIMO systems, HMIMOS operation can be described by the Fresnel-Kirchhoff integral that
is based on the Huygens-Fresnel principle .
B. HMIMOS Channel Estimation
The estimation of possibly very large MIMO channels in
HMIMOS-based communication systems is another critical
challenge due to the various constraints accompanying the
available HMIMOS hardware architectures. Most of the few
currently available approaches mainly consider large time
periods for training all HMIMOS unit elements via pilots sent
from the BS and received at the user equipment via generic
reﬂection. Another family of techniques employs compressive
sensing and deep learning via online beam/reﬂection training
for channel estimation and design of the phase matrix .
However, this mode of operation requires large amounts of
training data, and employs fully digital or hybrid analog and
digital transceiver architectures for HMIMOS, which will results in increased hardware complexity and operational power
consumption.
C. Robust Channel-Aware Beamforming
Channel dependent beamforming has been extensively
considered in massive MIMO systems. However, realizing
Massive MIMO
Traditional MIMO
Figure 4: (a) CRLBs of positioning with an active HMIMOS of a radius R for the case where a single user is located z = 4m
away from the center of surface. The wavelength λ is 0.1m, and τ represents the normalized surface-area . (b) Average EE
with HMIMOS-assisted communication versus the maximum BS transmit power Pmax in dB.
environment-aware designs in HMIMOS-based communication systems is extremely challenging, since the HMIMOS unit
cells that are fabricated from metamaterials impose demanding
tuning constraints. The latest HMIMOS design formulations
(e.g., , ) include large numbers of reconﬁgurable parameters with non-convex constraints rendering their optimal
solution highly non-trivial. For the case of continuous HMI-
MOS, intelligent holographic beamforming is the objective
in order to smartly target and follow individual or small
clusters of devices, and provide them with high-ﬁdelity beams
and smart radio management. However, self-optimizing holographic beamforming technologies that depend on complex
aperture synthesis and low level modulation are not available
D. Distributed Conﬁguration and Resource Allocation
Consider a HMIMOS-based communication system comprising multiple multi-antenna BSs, multiple HMIMOS, and
massive number of users, where each user is equipped with
a single or multiple antennas. The centralized conﬁguration
of HMIMOS will require massive amounts of control information to be communicated to a central controller, which
is prohibitive both in terms of computational overhead and
energy consumption. Hence, distributed algorithms for the
EE-optimal resource allocation and beamforming, HMIMOS
conﬁgurations, and users’ scheduling need to be developed.
Additional optimization parameters complicating the network
optimization are anticipated to be the power allocation and
spectrum usage, as well as the users’ assignment to BSs and
distributed HMIMOS. Naturally, the more HMIMOS are incorporated in the network, the more challenging the algorithmic
design will becomes.
V. CASE STUDIES
In this section, we summarize the performance of HMIMOS
in two typical application scenarios: indoor positioning with
an active continuous HMIMOS and outdoor downlink communication assisted by a passive discrete HMIMOS.
A. Indoor Positioning with an Active Continuous HMIMOS
We assume an active HMIMOS where the distance between
any of each two adjacent unit elements is λ/2, with λ being the
carrier wavelength. In such a discretized manner, traditional
MIMO, massive MIMO, and HMIMOS are uniﬁed, and the
differences lie in the number of antenna elements used, i.e., the
surface area. It was shown in that the number of antennas
in a traditional massive MIMO system for a given surface area
πR2 is equal to πR2/(λ2/4)=πτz2/(λ2/4) ∼= 20106τ, when
z = 4m, λ = 0.1m, and τ ≜(R/z)2 (the normalized surface
area). A typical massive MIMO array comprising of N =200
antennas results in τ ≈0.01, while an active HMIMOS
typically increases the surface-area (so as τ) by 10 ∼20 .
In Fig. 4a, the Cram´er–Rao Lower Bounds (CLRBs) of user
positioning in the presence of phase uncertainty are sketched.
As depicted, the CRLB of positioning decreases linearly with
τ for traditional MIMO, while massive MIMO falls short in
reaching the cubic decreasing slope that is achieved by the
active HMIMOS, yielding signiﬁcant gains in user positioning.
B. EE Maximization with a Passive Discrete HMIMOS
We consider an outdoor 16-antenna BS simultaneously serving 16 single-antenna users in the downlink communication
using a discrete passive HMIMOS with 32 unit elements that
is attached to a surrounding building’s facade , and the
Table II: Simulation Parameters for the Average EE Performance Results in Fig. 4b.
Parameters
Parameters
HMIMOS central element placement:
(100m, 100m)
Circuit dissipated power at BS:
BS central element placement:
Circuit dissipated power coefﬁcients at BS and AF relay:
Small scale fading model:
Maximum transmit power at BS and AF relay Pmax:
Large scale fading model at distance d:
10−3.53d−3.76
Dissipated power at each user:
Transmission bandwidth:
Dissipated power at each HMIMOS element:
Algorithmic convergence parameter:
Dissipated power at each AF relay transmit-receive antenna:
simulation parameters are shown in Table II . The obtained EE performance using an approach based on Sequential
Fractional Programming (SFP), as well as a gradient descent
approach, to tune the HMIMOS system is sketched in Fig. 4b
as a function of the maximum BS transmit power Pmax.
We have also numerically evaluated the EE of conventional
Amplify-and-Forward (AF) relaying. It is shown that the
HMIMOS-assisted system achieves a three-fold increase in
EE compared to the AF relaying case when Pmax ≥32dBm.
When Pmax ≥32dBm, EE performance saturates, which
reveals that the excess BS transmit power should not be used
because it would decrease EE.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this article, we investigated the emerging concept of
HMIMOS wireless communication, and in particular the available HMIMOS hardware architectures, their functionalities
and characteristics, as well as their recent communication
applications. We highlighted their great potential as a key
enabling technology for the physical layer of future 6G wireless networks. HMIMOS technology offers huge advantages
in terms of SE and EE, yielding smart and reconﬁgurable
wireless environments. It reduces the cost, size, and energy consumption of network devices, providing ubiquitous
coverage and intelligent communication in both indoor and
outdoor scenarios. Beneﬁting from its merits, HMIMOS can
be compactly and easily integrated into a wide variety of applications. Representative use cases are the extension of coverage,
physical-layer security, wireless power transfer, and positioning. However, there are still challenges ahead to achieve the
full potential of this emerging technology. Among them belong
the realistic modeling of metasurfaces, the analysis of the
fundamental limits of wireless communications with multiple
HMIMOS, the implementation of intelligent environmentaware adaptation, and the channel estimation with nearly
passive surfaces. These challenges provide academic and industrial researchers with a gold mine of new problems and
challenges to tackle.