Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2016, pages 1480–1489,
San Diego, California, June 12-17, 2016. c⃝2016 Association for Computational Linguistics
Hierarchical Attention Networks for Document Classiﬁcation
Zichao Yang1, Diyi Yang1, Chris Dyer1, Xiaodong He2, Alex Smola1, Eduard Hovy1
1Carnegie Mellon University, 2Microsoft Research, Redmond
{zichaoy, diyiy, cdyer, hovy}@cs.cmu.edu
 
 
We propose a hierarchical attention network
for document classiﬁcation. Our model has
two distinctive characteristics: (i) it has a hierarchical structure that mirrors the hierarchical
structure of documents; (ii) it has two levels
of attention mechanisms applied at the wordand sentence-level, enabling it to attend differentially to more and less important content when constructing the document representation. Experiments conducted on six large
scale text classiﬁcation tasks demonstrate that
the proposed architecture outperform previous
methods by a substantial margin. Visualization of the attention layers illustrates that the
model selects qualitatively informative words
and sentences.
Introduction
Text classiﬁcation is one of the fundamental task in
Natural Language Processing.
The goal is to assign labels to text. It has broad applications including topic labeling , sentiment classiﬁcation , and spam detection .
Traditional approaches of text classiﬁcation represent documents with sparse lexical features, such
as n-grams, and then use a linear model or kernel
methods on this representation .
More recent approaches
used deep learning, such as convolutional neural networks and recurrent neural
networks based on long short-term memory (LSTM)
 to learn text
representations.
pork belly = delicious . || scallops? || I don’t even
like scallops, and these were a-m-a-z-i-n-g . || fun
and tasty cocktails. || next time I in Phoenix, I will
go back here. || Highly recommend.
Figure 1: A simple example review from Yelp 2013 that consists of ﬁve sentences, delimited by period, question mark. The
ﬁrst and third sentence delivers stronger meaning and inside,
the word delicious, a-m-a-z-i-n-g contributes the most in deﬁning sentiment of the two sentences.
Although neural-network–based approaches to
text classiﬁcation have been quite effective , in this paper we test the hypothesis that better representations can be obtained by
incorporating knowledge of document structure in
the model architecture. The intuition underlying our
model is that not all parts of a document are equally
relevant for answering a query and that determining
the relevant sections involves modeling the interactions of the words, not just their presence in isolation.
Our primary contribution is a new neural architecture (§2), the Hierarchical Attention Network
(HAN) that is designed to capture two basic insights
about document structure. First, since documents
have a hierarchical structure (words form sentences,
sentences form a document), we likewise construct a
document representation by ﬁrst building representations of sentences and then aggregating those into
a document representation. Second, it is observed
that different words and sentences in a documents
are differentially informative. Moreover, the impor-
tance of words and sentences are highly context dependent, i.e. the same word or sentence may be differentially important in different context (§3.5). To
include sensitivity to this fact, our model includes
two levels of attention mechanisms — one at the word level and
one at the sentence level — that let the model to
pay more or less attention to individual words and
sentences when constructing the representation of
the document. To illustrate, consider the example
in Fig. 1, which is a short Yelp review where the
task is to predict the rating on a scale from 1–5. Intuitively, the ﬁrst and third sentence have stronger
information in assisting the prediction of the rating; within these sentences, the word delicious,
a-m-a-z-i-n-g contributes more in implying
the positive attitude contained in this review. Attention serves two beneﬁts: not only does it often
result in better performance, but it also provides insight into which words and sentences contribute to
the classiﬁcation decision which can be of value in
applications and analysis .
The key difference to previous work is that our
system uses context to discover when a sequence of
tokens is relevant rather than simply ﬁltering for (sequences of) tokens, taken out of context. To evaluate
the performance of our model in comparison to other
common classiﬁcation architectures, we look at six
data sets (§3). Our model outperforms previous approaches by a signiﬁcant margin.
Hierarchical Attention Networks
The overall architecture of the Hierarchical Attention Network (HAN) is shown in Fig. 2.
It consists of several parts: a word sequence encoder, a
word-level attention layer, a sentence encoder and a
sentence-level attention layer. We describe the details of different components in the following sections.
GRU-based sequence encoder
The GRU uses a gating
mechanism to track the state of sequences without
using separate memory cells. There are two types of
gates: the reset gate rt and the update gate zt. They
together control how information is updated to the
Figure 2: Hierarchical Attention Network.
state. At time t, the GRU computes the new state as
ht = (1 −zt) ⊙ht−1 + zt ⊙˜ht.
This is a linear interpolation between the previous
state ht−1 and the current new state ˜ht computed
with new sequence information. The gate zt decides
how much past information is kept and how much
new information is added. zt is updated as:
zt = σ(Wzxt + Uzht−1 + bz),
where xt is the sequence vector at time t. The candidate state ˜ht is computed in a way similar to a traditional recurrent neural network (RNN):
˜ht = tanh(Whxt + rt ⊙(Uhht−1) + bh),
Here rt is the reset gate which controls how much
the past state contributes to the candidate state. If rt
is zero, then it forgets the previous state. The reset
gate is updated as follows:
rt = σ(Wrxt + Urht−1 + br)
Hierarchical Attention
We focus on document-level classiﬁcation in this
Assume that a document has L sentences
si and each sentence contains Ti words. wit with
t ∈[1, T] represents the words in the ith sentence.
The proposed model projects the raw document into
a vector representation, on which we build a classi-
ﬁer to perform document classiﬁcation. In the following, we will present how we build the document
level vector progressively from word vectors by using the hierarchical structure.
Word Encoder
Given a sentence with words
wit, t ∈[0, T], we ﬁrst embed the words to vectors
through an embedding matrix We, xij = Wewij.
We use a bidirectional GRU 
to get annotations of words by summarizing information from both directions for words, and therefore
incorporate the contextual information in the annotation. The bidirectional GRU contains the forward
GRU −→f which reads the sentence si from wi1 to
wiT and a backward GRU ←−f which reads from wiT
xit =Wewit, t ∈[1, T],
−→h it =−−−→
GRU(xit), t ∈[1, T],
←−h it =←−−−
GRU(xit), t ∈[T, 1].
We obtain an annotation for a given word wit by
concatenating the forward hidden state −→h it and
backward hidden state ←−h it, i.e., hit = [−→h it, ←−h it],
which summarizes the information of the whole sentence centered around wit.
Note that we directly use word embeddings. For
a more complete model we could use a GRU to get
word vectors directly from characters, similarly to
 . We omitted this for simplicity.
Word Attention
Not all words contribute equally
to the representation of the sentence meaning.
Hence, we introduce attention mechanism to extract
such words that are important to the meaning of the
sentence and aggregate the representation of those
informative words to form a sentence vector. Specifically,
uit = tanh(Wwhit + bw)
That is, we ﬁrst feed the word annotation hit through
a one-layer MLP to get uit as a hidden representation of hit, then we measure the importance of
the word as the similarity of uit with a word level
context vector uw and get a normalized importance
weight αit through a softmax function. After that,
we compute the sentence vector si (we abuse the notation here) as a weighted sum of the word annotations based on the weights. The context vector uw
can be seen as a high level representation of a ﬁxed
query “what is the informative word” over the words
like that used in memory networks . The word context
vector uw is randomly initialized and jointly learned
during the training process.
Sentence Encoder
Given the sentence vectors si,
we can get a document vector in a similar way. We
use a bidirectional GRU to encode the sentences:
−→h i =−−−→
GRU(si), i ∈[1, L],
←−h i =←−−−
GRU(si), t ∈[L, 1].
We concatenate −→h i and ←−h j to get an annotation of
sentence i, i.e., hi = [−→h i, ←−h i]. hi summarizes the
neighbor sentences around sentence i but still focus
on sentence i.
Sentence Attention
To reward sentences that are
clues to correctly classify a document, we again use
attention mechanism and introduce a sentence level
context vector us and use the vector to measure the
importance of the sentences. This yields
ui = tanh(Wshi + bs),
where v is the document vector that summarizes
all the information of sentences in a document.
Similarly, the sentence level context vector can be
randomly initialized and jointly learned during the
training process.
Document Classiﬁcation
The document vector v is a high level representation
of the document and can be used as features for doc-
ument classiﬁcation:
p = softmax(Wcv + bc).
We use the negative log likelihood of the correct labels as training loss:
where j is the label of document d.
Experiments
We evaluate the effectiveness of our model on six
large scale document classiﬁcation data sets. These
data sets can be categorized into two types of document classiﬁcation tasks: sentiment estimation and
topic classiﬁcation. The statistics of the data sets are
summarized in Table 1. We use 80% of the data for
training, 10% for validation, and the remaining 10%
for test, unless stated otherwise.
Yelp reviews are obtained from the Yelp Dataset
Challenge in 2013, 2014 and 2015 . There are ﬁve levels of ratings from 1 to
5 (higher is better).
IMDB reviews are obtained from . The ratings range from 1 to 10.
Yahoo answers are obtained from . This is a topic classiﬁcation task with 10
classes: Society & Culture, Science & Mathematics, Health, Education & Reference, Computers & Internet, Sports, Business & Finance,
Entertainment & Music, Family & Relationships and Politics & Government. The document we use includes question titles, question
contexts and best answers. There are 140,000
training samples and 5000 testing samples. The
original data set does not provide validation
samples. We randomly select 10% of the training samples as validation.
Amazon reviews are obtained from . The ratings are from 1 to 5. 3,000,000
reviews are used for training and 650,000 reviews for testing. Similarly, we use 10% of the
training samples as validation.
We compare HAN with several baseline methods, including traditional approaches such as linear methods, SVMs and paragraph embeddings using neural networks, LSTMs, word-based CNN,
character-based CNN, and Conv-GRNN, LSTM-
GRNN. These baseline methods and results are reported in .
Linear methods
Linear methods use the constructed statistics as features.
A linear classiﬁer
based on multinomial logistic regression is used to
classify the documents using the features.
BOW and BOW+TFIDF The 50,000 most frequent words from the training set are selected
and the count of each word is used features.
Bow+TFIDF, as implied by the name, uses the
TFIDF of counts as features.
n-grams and n-grams+TFIDF used the most frequent 500,000 n-grams (up to 5-grams).
Bag-of-means The average word2vec embedding
 is used as feature set.
SVMs-based methods are reported in , including SVM+Unigrams, Bigrams,
Text Features, AverageSG, SSWE. In detail, Unigrams and Bigrams uses bag-of-unigrams and bagof-bigrams as features respectively.
Text Features are constructed according to , including word and character n-grams, sentiment lexicon features etc.
AverageSG constructs 200-dimensional word vectors using word2vec and the average word embeddings of each document are used.
SSWE uses sentiment speciﬁc word embeddings
according to .
Neural Network methods
The neural network based methods are reported
in and .
CNN-word Word based CNN models like that of
 are used.
CNN-char Character level CNN models are reported in .
average #s
average #w
vocabulary
IMDB review
Yahoo Answer
Amazon review
Table 1: Data statistics: #s denotes the number of sentences (average and maximum per document), #w denotes the number of
words (average and maximum per document).
LSTM takes the whole document as a single sequence and the average of the hidden states of
all words is used as feature for classiﬁcation.
Conv-GRNN and LSTM-GRNN were
by .
They also explore
the hierarchical structure: a CNN or LSTM
provides a sentence vector, and then a gated
recurrent neural network (GRNN) combines
the sentence vectors from a document level
vector representation for classiﬁcation.
Model conﬁguration and training
We split documents into sentences and tokenize each
sentence using Stanford’s CoreNLP . We only retain words appearing more than
5 times in building the vocabulary and replace the
words that appear 5 times with a special UNK token.
We obtain the word embedding by training an unsupervised word2vec model
on the training and validation splits and then use the
word embedding to initialize We.
The hyper parameters of the models are tuned
on the validation set. In our experiments, we set
the word embedding dimension to be 200 and the
GRU dimension to be 50.
In this case a combination of forward and backward GRU gives us
100 dimensions for word/sentence annotation. The
word/sentence context vectors also have a dimension
of 100, initialized at random.
For training, we use a mini-batch size of 64 and
documents of similar length (in terms of the number
of sentences in the documents) are organized to be a
batch. We ﬁnd that length-adjustment can accelerate
training by three times. We use stochastic gradient
descent to train all models with momentum of 0.9.
We pick the best learning rate using grid search on
the validation set.
Results and analysis
The experimental results on all data sets are shown
in Table 2. We refer to our models as HN-{AVE,
MAX, ATT}.
Here HN stands for Hierarchical
Network, AVE indicates averaging, MAX indicates
max-pooling, and ATT indicates our proposed hierarchical attention model. Results show that HN-
ATT gives the best performance across all data sets.
The improvement is regardless of data sizes. For
smaller data sets such as Yelp 2013 and IMDB, our
model outperforms the previous best baseline methods by 3.1% and 4.1% respectively. This ﬁnding is
consistent across other larger data sets. Our model
outperforms previous best models by 3.2%, 3.4%,
4.6% and 6.0% on Yelp 2014, Yelp 2015, Yahoo Answers and Amazon Reviews. The improvement also
occurs regardless of the type of task: sentiment classiﬁcation, which includes Yelp 2013-2014, IMDB,
Amazon Reviews and topic classiﬁcation for Yahoo
From Table 2 we can see that neural network
based methods that do not explore hierarchical document structure, such as LSTM, CNN-word, CNNchar have little advantage over traditional methods
for large scale (in terms of document size) text classiﬁcation.
E.g. SVM+TextFeatures gives performance 59.8, 61.8, 62.4, 40.5 for Yelp 2013, 2014,
2015 and IMDB respectively, while CNN-word has
accuracy 59.7, 61.0, 61.5, 37.6 respectively.
Exploring the hierarchical structure only, as in
HN-AVE, HN-MAX, can signiﬁcantly improve over
LSTM, CNN-word and CNN-char.
For example, our HN-AVE outperforms CNN-word by 7.3%,
8.8%, 8.5%, 10.2% than CNN-word on Yelp 2013,
2014, 2015 and IMDB respectively.
HN-ATT that further utilizes attention mechanism
Yahoo Answer
Zhang et al., 2015
ngrams TFIDF
Bag-of-means
Tang et al., 2015
SVM + Unigrams
SVM + Bigrams
SVM + TextFeatures
SVM + AverageSG
SVM + SSWE
Zhang et al., 2015
Tang et al., 2015
Paragraph Vector
This paper
Table 2: Document Classiﬁcation, in percentage
combined with hierarchical structure improves over
previous models (LSTM-GRNN) by 3.1%, 3.4%,
3.5% and 4.1% respectively.
More interestingly,
in the experiments, HN-AVE is equivalent to using non-informative global word/sentence context
vectors and Figure 4(a). We can see that the distribution has a attention weight assigned to a word
from 0 to 1. This indicates that our model captures
diverse context and assign context-dependent weight
to the words.
For further illustration, we plot the distribution
when conditioned on the ratings of the review. Sub-
ﬁgures 3(b)-(f) in Figure 3 and Figure 4 correspond
to the rating 1-5 respectively.
In particular, Figure 3(b) shows that the weight of good concentrates
on the low end in the reviews with rating 1.
the rating increases, so does the weight distribution.
This means that the word good plays a more important role for reviews with higher ratings. We can
observe the converse trend in Figure 4 for the word
bad. This conﬁrms that our model can capture the
context-dependent word importance.
Figure 3: Attention weight distribution of good. (a) — aggregate distribution on the test split; (b)-(f) stratiﬁed for reviews
with ratings 1-5 respectively. We can see that the weight distribution shifts to higher end as the rating goes higher.
Figure 4: Attention weight distribution of the word bad. The
setup is as above: (a) contains the aggregate distribution, while
(b)-(f) contain stratiﬁcations to reviews with ratings 1-5 respectively. Contrary to before, the word bad is considered important for poor ratings and less so for good ones.
Visualization of attention
In order to validate that our model is able to select informative sentences and words in a document, we visualize the hierarchical attention layers in Figures 5
and 6 for several documents from the Yelp 2013 and
Yahoo Answers data sets.
Every line is a sentence (sometimes sentences
spill over several lines due to their length). Red denotes the sentence weight and blue denotes the word
weight. Due to the hierarchical structure, we normalize the word weight by the sentence weight to
make sure that only important words in important
sentences are emphasized.
For visualization purposes we display √pspw. The √ps term displays the
important words in unimportant sentences to ensure
that they are not totally invisible.
Figure 5 shows that our model can select the
words carrying strong sentiment like delicious,
amazing, terrible and their corresponding
sentences.
Sentences containing many words
like cocktails, pasta, entree are disregarded.
Note that our model can not only select
words carrying strong sentiment, it can also deal
with complex across-sentence context. For example,
there are sentences like i don’t even like
scallops in the ﬁrst document of Fig. 5, if looking purely at the single sentence, we may think this
is negative comment. However, our model looks at
the context of this sentence and ﬁgures out this is a
positive review and chooses to ignore this sentence.
Our hierarchical attention mechanism also works
well for topic classiﬁcation in the Yahoo Answer
For example, for the left document
in Figure 6 with label 1, which denotes Science
and Mathematics, our model accurately localizes
the words zebra, strips, camouflage,
predator and their corresponding sentences. For
the right document with label 4, which denotes
Computers and Internet, our model focuses on web,
searches, browsers and their corresponding
sentences. Note that this happens in a multiclass setting, that is, detection happens before the selection
of the topic!
Related Work
Kim use neural networks for text classiﬁcation. The architecture is a direct application of
CNNs, as used in computer vision , albeit with NLP interpretations. Johnson and
Zhang explores the case of directly using
a high-dimensional one hot vector as input. They
ﬁnd that it performs well. Unlike word level modelings, Zhang et al. apply a character-level
CNN for text classiﬁcation and achieve competitive
Socher et al. use recursive neural
networks for text classiﬁcation.
Tai et al. 
GT: 4 Prediction: 4
scallops , and these were a-m-a-z-i-n-g .
GT: 0 Prediction: 0
Figure 5: Documents from Yelp 2013. Label 4 means star 5, label 0 means star 1.
GT: 1 Prediction: 1
GT: 4 Prediction: 4
Figure 6: Documents from Yahoo Answers. Label 1 denotes Science and Mathematics and label 4 denotes Computers and Internet.
explore the structure of a sentence and use a treestructured LSTMs for classiﬁcation. There are also
some works that combine LSTM and CNN structure to for sentence classiﬁcation . Tang et al. use hierarchical structure in sentiment classiﬁcation. They ﬁrst
use a CNN or LSTM to get a sentence vector and
then a bi-directional gated recurrent neural network
to compose the sentence vectors to get a document
vectors. There are some other works that use hierarchical structure in sequence generation and language modeling .
The attention mechanism was proposed by in machine translation. The encoder decoder framework is used and an attention
mechanism is used to select the reference words in
original language for words in foreign language before translation. Xu et al. uses the attention
mechanism in image caption generation to select the
relevant image regions when generating words in the
captions. Further uses of the attention mechanism
include parsing , natural language question answering , and image question answering .
Unlike these works, we explore a hierarchical attention
mechanism (to the best of our knowledge this is the
ﬁrst such instance).
Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed hierarchical attention networks (HAN) for classifying documents. As a convenient side-effect we obtained better visualization
using the highly informative components of a document. Our model progressively builds a document
vector by aggregating important words into sentence
vectors and then aggregating important sentences
vectors to document vectors. Experimental results
demonstrate that our model performs signiﬁcantly
better than previous methods. Visualization of these
attention layers illustrates that our model is effective
in picking out important words and sentences.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by
Microsoft Research.