Spectral Biclustering of Microarray Data:
Coclustering Genes and Conditions
Yuval Kluger,1,2 Ronen Basri,3 Joseph T. Chang,4 and Mark Gerstein2,5,6
1Department of Genetics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA; 2Department of Molecular Biophysics
and Biochemistry, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA; 3Department of Computer Science and Applied
Mathematics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel; 4Department of Statistics, Yale University, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520, USA; 5Department of Computer Science, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA
Global analyses of RNA expression levels are useful for classifying genes and overall phenotypes. Often these
classification problems are linked, and one wants to find “marker genes” that are differentially expressed in
particular sets of “conditions.” We have developed a method that simultaneously clusters genes and conditions,
finding distinctive “checkerboard” patterns in matrices of gene expression data, if they exist. In a cancer context,
these checkerboards correspond to genes that are markedly up- or downregulated in patients with particular
types of tumors. Our method, spectral biclustering, is based on the observation that checkerboard structures in
matrices of expression data can be found in eigenvectors corresponding to characteristic expression patterns
across genes or conditions. In addition, these eigenvectors can be readily identified by commonly used linear
algebra approaches, in particular the singular value decomposition (SVD), coupled with closely integrated
normalization steps. We present a number of variants of the approach, depending on whether the normalization
over genes and conditions is done independently or in a coupled fashion. We then apply spectral biclustering to
a selection of publicly available cancer expression data sets, and examine the degree to which the approach is
able to identify checkerboard structures. Furthermore, we compare the performance of our biclustering
methods against a number of reasonable benchmarks . A major application of microarray technology is gene
expression profiling to predict outcome in multiple tumor
types . In a bioinformatics context, we can
apply various data-mining methods to cancer datasets in order to identify class distinction genes and to classify tumors.
A partial list of methods includes: (1) data preprocessing
(background elimination, identification of differentially expressed genes, and normalization); (2) unsupervised clustering and visualization methods (hierarchical, SOM, k-means,
and SVD); (3) supervised machine learning methods for classification based on prior knowledge (discriminant analysis,
support-vector machines, decision trees, neural networks, and
k-nearest neighbors); and (4) more ambitious genetic network
models (requiring large amounts of data) that are designed to
discover biological pathways using such approaches as pairwise interactions, continuous or Boolean networks (based on
a system of coupled differential equations), and probabilistic
graph modeling based on Bayesian networks .
Our focus here is on unsupervised clustering methods.
Unsupervised techniques are useful when labels are unavailable. Examples include attempts to identify (yet unknown)
subclasses of tumors, or work on identifying clusters of genes
that are coregulated or share the same function . Unsupervised methods have been
successful in separating certain types of tumors associated
with different types of leukemia and lymphoma . However, unsupervised (and even supervised) methods have had less success
in partitioning the samples according to tumor type or outcome in diseases with multiple subclassifications . In addition, the methods we
propose here are related to a method of Dhillon for
coclustering of words and documents.
Checkerboard Structures of Genes and Conditions
in Microarray Datasets
As a starting point in analyzing microarray cancer datasets, it
is worthwhile to appreciate the assumed structure of these
data (e.g., whether they can be organized in a checkerboard
pattern), and to design a clustering algorithm that is suitable
for this structure. In particular, in analyzing microarray cancer data sets we may wish to identify both clusters of genes
that participate in common regulatory networks and clusters
of experimental conditions associated with the effects of these
genes, for example, clusters of cancer subtypes. In both cases
we may want to use similarities between expression level patterns to determine clusters. Clearly, advance knowledge of
6Corresponding author.
E-MAIL ; FAX (360) 838-
Article and publication are at 
gr.648603.
13:703–716 ©2003 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ISSN 1088-9051/03 $5.00; www.genome.org
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
clusters of genes can help in clustering experimental conditions, and vice versa. In the absence of knowledge of gene and
condition classes, it would be useful to develop partitioning
algorithms that find latent classes by exploiting relations between genes and conditions. Exploiting the underlying twosided data structure could help the simultaneous clustering,
leading to meaningful gene and experimental condition clusters.
The raw data in many cancer gene-expression datasets
can be arranged in a matrix form as schematized in Figure 1.
In this matrix, which we denote by A, the genes index rows i
and the different conditions (e.g., different patients) index
the columns j. Depending on the type of chip technology
used, a value in this matrix Aij could either represent absolute
expression levels (such as from Affymetrix GeneChips) or relative expression ratios (such as from cDNA microarrays). The
methodology we will construct will apply equally well in both
contexts. However, for clarity in what follows, we will assume
that the values Aij in the matrix represent absolute levels and
that all entries are non-negative; in our numerical analyses we
removed genes that did not satisfy this criterion.
A specific assumption in tumor classification is that
samples drawn from a population containing several tumor
types have similar expression profiles if they belong to the
same type. Observing several experiments, each of which has
multiple tumor types, suggests a somewhat stronger assumption; for tumors of the same type there exist subsets of overexpressed (or underexpressed) genes that are not similarly
overexpressed (or underexpressed) in another tumor type.
Under this assumption, the matrix A could be organized in a
checkerboard-like structure with blocks of high-expression
levels and low-expression levels, as shown in Figure 1. A block
of high-expression levels corresponds to a subset of genes
(subset of rows) that are highly expressed in all samples of a
given tumor type (subset of columns). One of the numerous
examples supporting this picture is the CNS embryonal tumors dataset . However, this simple
checkerboard-like structure can be confounded by a number
of effects. In particular, different overall expression levels of
genes across all experimental conditions or of samples across
all genes in multiple tumor datasets can obscure the block
structure. Consequently, rescaling and normalizing both the
gene and sample dimensions could improve the clustering
and reveal existing latent variables in both the gene and tumor dimensions.
Uncovering Checkerboard Structures
Through Solving an Eigenproblem
In this work, we attempt to simultaneously cluster genes and
experimental conditions with similar expression profiles (i.e.
to “bicluster” them), examining the extent to which we are
able to automatically identify checkerboard structures in cancer datasets. Further, we integrate biclustering with careful
normalization of the data matrix in a spectral framework
model. This framework allows us to use standard linear algebra manipulations, and the resulting partitions are generated
using the whole dataset in a global fashion. The normalization step, which eliminates effects such as differences in experimental conditions and basal expression levels of genes, is
designed to accentuate biclusters if they exist.
Figure 1 illustrates the overall idea of our approach. It
shows how applying a checkerboard-structured matrix A to a
step-like classification vector for genes (x) results in a step-like
classification vector on conditions (y). Reapplying the transpose of the matrix AT to this condition classification vectors
results in a step-like gene classification vector with the same
step pattern as input vector x. This suggests that one might be
able to ascertain the checkerboard-like structure of A through
solving an eigenproblem involving AAT. More precisely, it
shows how the checkerboard pattern in a data matrix A is
reflected in the piecewise constant structures of some pair of
eigenvectors x and y that solve the coupled eigenvalue problems AT Ax = 2x and AAT y = 2y (where x and y have a common eigenvalue). This, in turn, is equivalent to finding the
singular value decomposition of A. Thus, the simple operation of identifying whether there exists a pair of piecewise
constant eigenvectors allows us to determine whether the
data have a checkerboard pattern. Simple reshuffling of rows
and columns (according to the sorted order of these eigenvectors) then can make the pattern evident. However, different
average amounts of expression associated with particular
genes or conditions can obscure the checkerboard pattern.
This can be corrected by initially normalizing the data matrix
A. We propose a number of different schemes, all built around
the idea of putting the genes on the same scale so that they
have the same average level of expression across conditions,
and likewise for the conditions. A graphic overview of our
method (in application to real data) is shown in Figure 8,
where one can see how the data in matrix A are progressively
transformed by normalization and shuffling to bring out a
checkerboard-like signal.
We note that our method implicitly exploits the effect of
clustering of experimental conditions on clustering of the
genes and vice versa, and it allows us to simultaneously identify and organize subsets of genes whose expression levels are
correlated and subsets of conditions whose expression level
profiles are correlated.
Technical Background
Data normalization
Preprocessing of microarray data often has a critical impact on
the analysis. Several preprocessing schemes have been proposed. For instance, Eisen et al. prescribes the following series of operations: Take the log of the expression data,
perform 5–10 cycles of subtracting either the mean or the
median of the rows (genes) and columns (conditions), and
then do 5–10 cycles of row-column normalization. In a similar fashion, Getz et al. first rescale the columns by their
means and then standardize the rows of the rescaled matrix.
The motivation is to remove systematic biases in expression
ratios or absolute values that are the result of differences in
RNA quantities, labeling efficiency and image acquisition parameters, as well as adjusting gene levels relative to their average behavior. Different normalization prescriptions could
lead to different partitions of the data. Choice of a normalization scheme that is designed to emphasize underlying data
structures or is rigorously guided by statistical principles is
desirable for establishing standards and for improving reproducibility of results from microarray experiments.
Singular Value Decomposition (SVD)
Principal component analysis is widely
used to project multidimensional data to a lower dimension.
PCA determines whether we can comprehensively present
Kluger et al.
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
(Continued on next page)
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
multidimensional data in d dimensions by inspecting
whether d linear combinations of the variables capture most
of the data variability. The principal components can be derived by using singular value decomposition, or “SVD” , a standard linear algebra technique that
expresses a real n  m matrix A as a product A = UVT, where
 is a diagonal matrix with decreasing non-negative entries,
and U and V are n  min(n,m) and m  min(n,m) orthonormal column matrices. The columns of the matrices U and V
are eigenvectors of the matrices AAT and AT A, respectively,
and the nonvanishing entries 1  2  … >0 in the matrix 
are square roots of the non-zero eigenvalues of AAT (and also
of AT A). Below we will denote the ith columns of the matrices
U and V by ui and vi, respectively. The vectors ui and vi are
called the singular vectors of A, and the values i are called the
singular values. The SVD has been applied to microarray experiment analysis in order to find underlying temporal and
tumor patterns .
Normalized Cuts Method
Spectral methods have been used in graph theory to design
clustering algorithms. These algorithms were used in various
fields , including for microarray data partitioning . A commonly used variant is
called the normalized cuts algorithm. In this approach the
items (nodes) to be clustered are represented as the vertex set
V. The degree of similarity (affinity) between each two nodes
is represented by a weight matrix wij. For example, the affinity
between two genes may be defined based on the correlation
between their expression profiles over all experiments. The
vertex set V together with the edges eij ∈
E and their corresponding weights wij define a complete graph G(V,E) that we
want to segment. Clustering is achieved by solving an eigen-
Overview of important parts of the biclustering process. (A) shows the problem: shuffling a gene expression matrix to reveal a
checkerboard pattern associating genes with conditions. (B) shows how this problem can be approached through solving an “eigenproblem.” If
a gene expression matrix A has a checkerboard structure, applying it to a step-like condition classification vector x will result in a step-like gene
classification vector y. Moreover, if one then applies AT to y, one will regenerate a step-like condition classification vector with the same partitioning
structure as x. This suggests one can determine whether A has a checkerboard structure through solving an eigenvalue problem. In other words,
if A has a (hidden) checkerboard structure, there exist some piecewise constant partition vectors x = v* and y = u* such that AT Av* = 2v* and
AATu* = 2u* (bottom quadrant of part B). Note that most eigenvectors v of the eigenvalue problem AT Av = 2v (symbolized by a zigzag structure)
are not embedded in the subspace of classification (step-like) vectors x possessing the same partitioning structure, as indicated by a gray arrow
protruding from this subspace (parallelogram). On the other hand, piecewise constant (step-like) partition eigenvectors v* are embedded in this
subspace and are indicated by a green arrow. To reveal whether the data have a checkerboard structure, one can inspect whether some of the pairs
of monotonically sorted gene and tumor eigenvectors vi and ui have an approximate stepwise (piecewise) constant structure. The outer product
T of the sorted partitioning eigenvectors gives a checkerboard structure. (C) shows how rescaling of matrix A can lead to improved copartitioning of genes and conditions.
Kluger et al.
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
system that involves the affinity matrix. These methods were
applied in the field of image processing, and have demonstrated good performance in problems such as image segmentation. Nevertheless, spectral methods in the context of clustering are not well understood . We note that the
singular values of the original dataset represented in the matrix A are related to the eigenvalues or generalized eigenvalues
of the affinity matrices AT A and AAT. These matrices represent similarities between genes and similarities between conditions, respectively.
Previous Work on Biclustering
The idea of simultaneous clustering of rows and columns of a
matrix goes back to . Methods for simultaneous clustering of genes and conditions were more recently
proposed . The goal was to find homogeneous
submatrices or stable clusters that are relevant for biological
processes. These methods apply greedy iterative search to find
interesting patterns in the matrices, an approach that is also
common in one-sided clustering . In contrast, our approach is more “global,”
finding biclusters using all columns and rows.
Another statistically motivated biclustering approach
has been tested for collaborative filtering of nonbiological
data . In
this approach, probabilistic models were proposed in which
matrix rows (genes in our case) and columns (experimental
conditions) are each divided into clusters, and there are link
probabilities between these clusters. These link probabilities
can describe the association between a gene cluster and an
experimental condition cluster, and can be found by using
iterative Gibbs sampling and approximated Expectation
Maximization algorithms .
A Spectral Approach to Biclustering
Our aim is to have coclustering of genes and experimental
conditions in which genes are clustered together if they exhibit similar expression patterns across conditions and, likewise, experimental conditions are clustered together if they
include genes that are expressed similarly. Interestingly, our
model can be reduced to the analysis of the same eigensystem
derived in Dhillon’s formulation for the problem of coclustering of words and documents . To apply
Dhillon’s method to microarray data, one can construct a
bipartite graph, where one set of nodes in this graph represents the genes, and the other represents experimental conditions. An arc between a gene and condition represents the
level of overexpression (or underexpression) of this gene under this condition. The bipartite approach is limited in that it
can only divide the genes and conditions into the same number of clusters. This is often impractical. As described below,
our formulation allows the number of gene clusters to be different from the number of condition clusters.
In addition, Dhillon’s optimal partitioning eigenvector
has a hybrid structure containing both gene and condition
entries, whereas in our approach we search for separate piecewise constant structure of the gene and corresponding sample
eigenvectors. Examining Dhillon’s and our partitioning approaches using data generated by the generating model discussed below shows the advantage of the latter.
Spectral Biclustering
We developed a method that simultaneously clusters genes
and conditions. The method is based on the following two
assumptions:
1. Two genes that are coregulated are expected to have correlated expression levels, which might be difficult to observe due to noise. We can obtain better estimates of the
correlations between gene expression profiles by averaging
over different conditions of the same type.
2. Likewise, the expression profiles for every two conditions
of the same type are expected to be correlated, and this
correlation can be better observed when averaged over sets
of genes of similar expression profiles.
These assumptions are supported by simple analyses of a
variety of typical microarray sets. For example, Pomeroy et al.
 presented a dataset on five types of brain tumors, and
then used a supervised learning procedure to select genes that
were highly correlated with class distinction. They based this
work on the absolute expression levels of genes in 42 samples
taken from these five types of tumors. Using these data, we
measured the correlation between the expression levels of
genes that are highly expressed in only one type of tumor,
(a) The outer product of the sorted eigenvectors u and v of the 2nd eigenvalue of the equal row- and column-sum bistochastic-like
matrix B applied to a dataset with three types of lymphoma: CLL (C), FL (F), and DLCL (D). Sorting of v orders the patients according to the different
diseases. (b) As in (a), the 2nd singular value contribution to the biclustering method (C1AT R1A) of lymphoma CLL (C), FL (F), DLCL (D)
partitioned the patients according to their disease, with one exception. We preselected all genes that had complete data along all experimental
conditions (samples).
Spectral Biclustering of Microarray Data
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
and found only moderate levels of correlation. However, if we
instead average the expression levels of each gene over all
samples of the same tumor type (obtaining vectors with five
entries representing the averages of the five types of tumors),
the partition of the genes based on correlation between the
five-dimensional vectors is more apparent.
This dataset well fits the specifications of our approach,
which is geared to finding a “checkerboard-like structure,”
indicating that for each type of tumor there may be few characteristic subsets of genes that are either upregulated or downregulated. To understand our method (Fig. 1), consider a situation in which an underlying class structure of genes and of
experimental conditions exists. We model the data as a composition of blocks, each of which represents a gene-type–
condition-type pairing, but the
block structure is not immediately
evident. Mathematically, the expression level of a specific gene i
under a certain experimental condition j can be expressed as a product
of three independent factors. The
first factor, which we called the hidden base expression level, is denoted
by Eij. We assume that the entries of
E within each block are constant.
The second factor, denoted i, represents the tendency of gene i to be
expressed under all experimental
conditions. The last factor, denoted
j, represents the overall tendency
of genes to be expressed under condition j. We assume the microarray
expression data to be a noisy version
of the product of these three factors.
Independent Rescaling of Genes
and Conditions
We assume that the data matrix A
represents an approximation of the
product of these three factors, Eij, i,
and j. Our objective in the simultaneous clustering of genes and
conditions is, given A, to find the
underlying block structure of E.
Consider two genes, i and k, which
belong to a subset of similar genes.
On average, according to this
model, their expression levels under each condition should be related by a factor of i/k. Therefore,
if we normalize the two rows, i and
k, in A, then on average they should
be identical. The similarity between
the expression levels of the two
genes should be more noticeable if
we take the mean of expression levels with respect to all conditions of
the same type. This will lead to an
eigenvalue problem, as is shown
next. Let R denote a diagonal matrix whose elements ri (where
i=1,…,n) represent the row sums of
A [R = diag(A·1n), 1n denotes the nvector (1,…,1)]. Let u = (u1,u2,…,
um) denote a “classification vector”
of experimental conditions, so that
u is constant over all conditions of
the same type. For instance, if there
are two types of conditions, then
uj =  for each condition j of the
first type and uj =  for each condition j of the second type. In
other words, if we reorder the conditions such that all conditions of the first type appear first, then u = (,…,,,…).
Then, v = R1Au is an estimate of a “gene classification vector,” that is, a vector whose entries are constant for all genes
of the same type (e.g., if there are two types of genes, then vi=
for each gene i of the first type and vi= for each gene i of the
second type). By multiplying by R1 from the left. we normalize the rows of A, and by applying this normalized matrix
to u, we obtain a weighted sum of estimates of the mean
expression level of every gene i under every type of experimental condition. When a hidden block structure exists for
every pair of genes of the same type, these linear combinations are estimates of the same value.
Lymphoma: Scatter plot of experimental conditions of the two best class partitioning
eigenvectors vi,vj. The subscripts (i,j) of these eigenvectors indicate their corresponding singular values.
CLL samples are denoted by red dots, DLCL by blue dots, and FL by green dots. (a) Bistochastization:
the 2nd and 3rd eigenvectors of BBT. (b) Biclustering: the 2nd and 3rd eigenvectors of R1AC1AT. (c)
SVD: the 2nd and 3rd eigenvectors of AAT. (d) Normalization and SVD: the 1st and 2nd eigenvectors
of A¯A¯T where A¯ is obtained by first dividing each column of A by its mean and then standardizing each
row of the column normalized matrix. (e) Normalized cut algorithm: 2nd and 3rd eigenvectors of the
row-stochastic matrix P. P is obtained by first creating a distance matrix S using Euclidean distance
between the standardized columns of A, transforming it to an affinity matrix with zero diagonal
elements and off diagonal elements defined as Wij = exp(Sij)/max(Sij) and finally normalizing each
row sum of the affinity matrix to one. (f) As in (c) but with an SVD analysis of the log interaction matrix
K instead of A.
Kluger et al.
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
The same reasoning applies to the columns. If we now
apply C1ATv, where C is the diagonal matrix whose components are the column sums of A[C = diag(1T
A)], we obtain
for each experimental condition j a weighted sum of estimates
of the mean expression level of genes of the same type. Consequently, the result of applying the matrix C1AT R1A to a
condition classification vector, v, should also be a condition
classification vector. We will denote this matrix by M1. M1 has
a number of characteristics: it is positive semidefinite, it has
only real non-negative eigenvalues, and its dominant eigenvector is (1⁄√m)1m with eigenvalue 1. Moreover, assuming E
has linearly independent blocks, its rank is at least min(nr,nc),
where nr denotes the number of gene classes and nc denotes
the number of experimental condition classes. (In general the
rank would be higher due to noise.) Note that for data with nc
classes of experimental conditions, the set of all classification
vectors spans a linear subspace of dimension nc. (This is because a classification vector may
have a different constant value for
each of the nc types of experimental
conditions.) Therefore, there exists
at least one vector that satisfies
M1u = u. (In fact, there are exactly
min(nr,nc) such vectors). One of
these eigenvectors is the trivial
vector (1⁄√m)1m. Similarly, there exists at least one gene classification
vector that satisfies M2v = v, with
M2 = R1AC1AT. (Note that M1
and M2 have the same sets of eigenvalues such that if M1u = u then
M2v = v with v = R1Au.) These
classification vectors can be estimated by solving the two eigensystems above. A roughly piecewise
constant structure in the eigenvectors indicates the clusters of both
genes and conditions in the data.
These two eigenvalue problems can be solved through a standard SVD of the rescaled matrix
R1/2 AC1/2, realizing that
the equation Aˆ T Aˆ w ≡
2ATR1AC1/2w = w that is used to
find the singular values of Aˆ is
equivalent to the above eigenvalue
problem C1AT R1Au=u with
C  1 / 2 w
s i m i l a r l y
Aˆ Aˆ Tz ≡
R1/2AC1ATR1/2z = z
implies v ≡
R1/2z). The outer product lnlT
m, which is a matrix containing only entries of one, is the contribution of the first singular value
to the rescaled matrix Aˆ. Thus, the
first eigenvalue contributes a constant background to both the gene
and the experimental condition dimensions, and therefore its effect
should be eliminated. Note that although our method is defined
through a product of A and AT it
does not imply that we multiply
the noise, as is evident from the
SVD interpretation.
Simultaneous Normalization of Genes
and Conditions
Because our spectral biclustering
approach includes the normalization of rows and columns as an integral part of the algorithm, it is natural to attempt to simultaneously normalize both genes and conditions. As described
below, this can be achieved by repeating the procedure described above for independent scaling of rows and columns
iteratively until convergence.
This process, which we call bistochastization, results in a
rectangular matrix B that has a doubly stochastic-like structure—all rows sum to a constant and all columns sum to a
different constant. According to Sinkhorn’s theorem, B can
then be written as a product B = D1AD2 where D1 and D2 are
diagonal matrices . Such a matrix
B exists under quite general conditions on A; for example, it is
sufficient for all of the entries in A to be positive. In general,
B can be computed by repeated normalization of rows and
columns (with the normalizing matrices as R1 and C1 or
R1/2 and C1/2). D1 and D2 then will represent the product of
all these normalizations. Fast methods to find D1 and D2 in-
Scatter plots as in Fig. 3 with another lymphoma dataset generated using Affymetrix chips
 instead of microarrays. DLCL samples are denoted by green dots, CLL by blue dots,
FL by yellow dots, and DLCL cell lines by magenta dots.
Spectral Biclustering of Microarray Data
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
clude the deviation reduction and balancing algorithms
 . Once D1 and D2 are found, we
apply SVD to B with no further normalization to reveal a
block structure.
We have also investigated an alternative to bistochastization that we call the log-interactions normalization. A common and useful practice in microarray analysis is transforming the data by taking logarithms. The resulting transformed
data typically have better distributional properties than the
data on the original scale—distributions are closer to Normal,
scatterplots are more informative, and so forth. The loginteractions normalization method begins by calculating the
logarithm Lij = log(Aij) of the given expression data and then
extracting the interactions between the genes and the conditions, where the term “interaction” is used as in the analysis
of variance (ANOVA).
As above, the log-interactions normalization is motivated by the idea that two genes whose expression profiles
differ only by a multiplicative constant of proportionality are really
behaving in the same way, and we
would like these genes to cluster together. In other words, after taking
logs, we would like to consider two
genes whose expression profiles differ by an additive constant to be
equivalent. This suggests subtracting a constant from each row so
that the row means each become 0,
in which case the expression profiles of two genes that we would like
to consider equivalent actually become the same. Likewise, the same
idea holds for the conditions (columns of the matrix). Constant differences in the log expression profiles between two conditions are
considered unimportant, and we
subtract a constant from each column so that the column means become 0. It turns out that these adjustments to the rows and columns
of the matrix to achieve row and
column means of zero can all be
done simultaneously by a simple
formula. Defining Li. = (1/m) ∑
to be the average of the ith row,
L.j = (1/n) ∑
i=1 Lij to be the average
of the jth column, and L.. = (1/mn)
j=1 Lij to be the average of the
whole matrix, the result of these adjustments is a matrix of interactions
K = (Kij), calculated by the formula
Kij = Lij  Li.  L.j + L... This formula
is familiar from the study of twoway ANOVA, from which the terminology of “interactions” is adopted.
The interaction Kij between gene i
and condition j captures the extra
(log) expression of gene i in condition j that is not explained simply
by an overall difference between
gene i and other genes or between
condition j and other conditions,
but rather is special to the combination of gene i with condition j.
Again, as described before, we apply
the SVD to the matrix K to reveal
block structure in the interactions.
The calculations to obtain the
interactions are simpler than bistochastization, as they are done by a simple formula with no
iteration. In addition, in this normalization the first singular
eigenvectors u1 and v1 may carry important partitioning information. Therefore we do not automatically discard them as
was done in the previously discussed normalizations. Finally,
we note another connection between matrices of interactions
and matrices resulting from bistochastization. Starting with a
matrix of interactions K, we can produce a bistochastic matrix
simply by adding a constant to K.
Postprocessing the Eigenvectors to Find Partitions
Each of the above normalization approaches (independent
scaling, bistochastization, or log interactions) gives rise, after
the SVD, to a set of gene and condition eigenvectors . Now in this section, we deal with the issues of how to
interpret these vectors. First recall that in the case of the first
Leukemia data presented in the same format as in Fig. 3. B-cell ALL samples are denoted
by red dots, T-cell ALL by blue dots, and AML by green dots. In this analysis we preselected all genes
that had positive Affymetrix average difference expression levels.
Kluger et al.
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
two normalizations we discussed (the independent and bistochastic rescaling), we discard the largest eigenvalue, which is
trivial in the sense that its eigenvectors make a trivial constant
contribution to the matrix, and therefore carry no partitioning information. In the case of the log-interactions normalization, there is no eigenvalue that is trivial in this sense. We
will use the terminology “largest eigenvalue” to mean the
largest nontrivial eigenvalue, which, for example, is the second largest eigenvalue for the independent and bistochastic
normalizations, whereas it is the largest eigenvalue for the
log-interactions normalization. If the dataset has an underlying “checkerboard” structure, there is at least one pair of
piecewise constant eigenvectors u and v that correspond to
the same eigenvalue. One would expect that the eigenvectors
corresponding to the largest eigenvalue would provide the optimal
partition in analogy with related
spectral approaches to clustering
 . In principle, the classification eigenvectors
may not belong to the largest eigenvalue, and we closely inspect a
few eigenvectors that correspond to
the first few largest eigenvalues. We
observed that for various synthetic
data with near-perfect checkerboard-like block structure, the partitioning eigenvectors are commonly associated with one of the
largest eigenvalues, but in a few
cases an eigenvector with a small
eigenvalue could be the partitioning one. (This occurs typically
when the separation between
blocks in E is smaller than the standard deviation within a block.) In
order to extract partitioning information from these eigensystems,
we examine all the eigenvectors by
fitting them to piecewise constant
vectors. This is done by sorting the
entries of each eigenvector, testing
all possible thresholds, and choosing the eigenvector with a partition
that is well approximated by a
piecewise constant vector. (Selecting one threshold partitions the entries in the sorted eigenvector into
two subsets, two thresholds into
three subsets, and so forth.) Note
that to partition the eigenvector
into two, one needs to consider
n1 different thresholds; to partition it into three, it requires inspection of (n1)(n2)/2 different
thresholds, and so on. This procedure is similar to application of the
k-means algorithm to the onedimensional eigenvectors. (In particular, in the experiments below
we performed this procedure automatically to the six most dominant
eigenvectors.) A common practice
in spectral clustering is to perform a
final clustering step to the data projected to a small number of eigenvectors, instead of clustering each
eigenvector individually . In our experiments we
too perform a final clustering step
by applying both the k-means and
the normalized cuts algorithms to the data projected to the
best two or three eigenvectors.
Our clustering method provides not only a division into
clusters, but also ranks the degree of membership of genes
(and conditions) to the respective cluster according to the
actual values in the partitioning-sorted eigenvectors. Each
partitioning-sorted eigenvector could be approximated by a
step-like (piecewise constant) structure, but the values of the
sorted eigenvector within each step are monotonically decreasing. These values can be used to rank or represent gradual
transitions within clusters. Such rankings may also be useful,
for example, for revealing genes related to premalignant conditions, and for studying ranking of patients within a disease
cluster in relation to prognosis.
Breast cell lines transfected with the CSF1R oncogene: Scatter plots as in Fig. 3 for mRNA
ratios of benign breast cells and wild-type cells transfected with the CSF1R oncogene causing them to
invade and metastasize (red), ratios of cells transfected with a mutated oncogene causing an invasive
phenotype and cells transfected with the wild-type oncogene (blue), and ratios of cells transfected with
a mutated oncogene causing a metastatic phenotype and cells transfected with the wild-type oncogene (green). In this case we preselected differentially expressed genes such that for at least one pair
of samples, the genes had a twofold ratio.
Spectral Biclustering of Microarray Data
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
In addition to the uses of biclustering as a tool for data
visualization and interpretation, it is natural to ask how to
assess the quality of biclusters, in terms of statistical significance, or stability. In general, this type of problem is far from
settled; in fact, even in the simpler setting of ordinary clustering new efforts to address these questions regularly continue to appear. One type of approach attempts to quantify
the “stability” of suspected structure observed in the given
data. This is done by mimicking the operation of collecting
repeated independent data samples from the same datagenerating distribution, repeating the analysis on those artificial samples, and seeing how frequently the suspected structure is observed in the artificial data. If the observed data
contain sufficient replication, then the bootstrap approach of
Kerr and Churchill may be applied to generate the
artificial replicated data sets. However, most experiments still
lack the sort of replication required to carry this out. For such
experiments, one could generate artificial data sets by adding
random noise 
or subsampling the given data.
We took an alternative approach to assess the quality of a biclustering by testing a null hypothesis of no structure in the data matrix. We first normalized the data
and used the best partitioning pair
of eigenvectors (among the six leading eigenvectors) to determine an
approximate 22 block solution.
We then calculated the sum of
squared errors (SSE) for the leastsquares fit of these blocks to the
normalized data matrix. Finally, to
assess the quality of this fit we randomly shuffled the data matrix and
applied the same process to the
shuffled matrix. For example, in the
breast cell oncogene data set described below, fitting the normalized dataset to a 22 matrix obtained by division according to the
second largest pair of eigenvectors
of the original matrix is compared
to fitting of 10,000 shuffled matrices (after bistochastization) to their
corresponding best 22 block approximations. The SSE for this
dataset is more than 100 standard
deviations smaller than the mean
of the SSE scores obtained from the
shuffled matrices, leading to a correspondingly tiny P value for the
hypothesis test of randomness in
the data matrix.
Probabilistic Interpretation
In the biclustering approach, the
normalization procedure, obtained
by constraining the row sums to be
equal to one constant and the column sums to be equal to another
constant, is an integral part of the
modeling that allows us to discern
bidirectional structures. This normalization can be cast in probabilistic terms by imagining first choosing a random RNA transcript from
all RNA in all samples (conditions),
and then choosing one more RNA
transcript randomly from the same
sample. Here, when we speak of choosing “randomly” we
mean that each possible RNA is equally likely to be chosen.
Having chosen these two RNAs, we take note of which sample
they come from and which genes they express. The matrix
entry (R1A)ij may be interpreted as the conditional probability ps|g(j|i) that the sample is j, given that the first RNA chosen
was transcribed from gene i. Similarly, (C1AT)jk may be interpreted as the conditional probability that the gene corresponding to the first transcript is k, given that the sample is j.
Moreover, the product of the row-normalized matrix and the
column-normalized matrix approximates the conditional probability pg|g(i|k) of choosing a transcript from gene i, given that we
also chose one from gene k. This is so because, under the assumption that k and i are approximately conditionally independent given j, which amounts to saying that the probability
of drawing a transcript from gene k, conditional on having
chosen sample j, does not depend on whether or not the other
RNA that we drew happened to be from gene i, we have
Central nervous system embryonal tumor: Data generated using Affymetrix chips of medulloblastoma (blue), malignant glioma (pink), normal cerebella (cyan), rhabdoid
(green), and primitive neuro-ectodermal (red) tumors. Scatter plots of experimental conditions projected onto the three best class partitioning eigenvectors using the same format as in Fig. 3.
Kluger et al.
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
pg|gk|i = 
ps|gj|ipg|sgk|j,i ≈
ps|gj|ipg|sk|j
R−1AC−1ATik.
This expression reflects the tendency of genes i and k to coexpress, averaged over the different samples. Similarly, the
product of the column and row-normalized matrices approximates the conditional probability ps|s(j|l) that reflects the similarity between the expression profiles of samples j and l. Note
that the probabilities pg|g(i|k) and ps|s(j|l) define asymmetrical
affinity measures between any pair (i,k) of genes and any pair
(j,l) of samples, respectively. This is very different from the
usual symmetrical affinity measures, for example, correlation,
used to describe the relationship between genes. However, for
bistochastizaton, the matrices BTB and BBT represent symmetrical affinities, pg|g(i|k) = pg|g(k|i) and ps|s(j|l) = ps|s(l|j), respectively.
Overall Format of the Results
We have performed a study in which we applied the above
spectral biclustering methods to five groups of cancer micro-
Optimal array partitioning obtained by the 1st singular vectors of the log-interaction matrix. The data consist of eight measurements
of mRNA ratios for three pairs of cell types: (A,a) benign breast cells and the wild-type cells transfected with the CSF1R oncogene causing them
to invade and metastasize; (C,c) cells transfected with a mutated oncogene causing an invasive phenotype and cells transfected with the wild-type
oncogene; and (D,d) cells transfected with a mutated oncogene causing a metastatic phenotype and cells transfected with the wild-type
oncogene. In this case we preselected differentially expressed genes such that for at least one pair of samples, the genes had a threefold ratio. The
sorted eigen-gene v1 and eigen-array u1 have gaps indicating partitioning of patients and genes, respectively. As a result, the outer product matrix
sort(u1 ) sort(v1)T has a “soft” block structure. The block structure is hardly seen when the raw data are sorted but not normalized. However, it is
more noticeable when the data are both sorted and normalized. Also shown are the conditions projected onto the first two partitioning
eigenvectors u1 and u2. Obviously, using the extra dimension gives a clearer separation.
Spectral Biclustering of Microarray Data
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
array data sets—lymphoma (microarray and Affymetrix), leukemia, breast cancer, and central nervous system embryonal
tumors. As explained above, we utilized SVD to find pairs of
piecewise constant eigenvectors of genes and conditions, that
reflect the degree to which the data can be rearranged in a
checkerboard structure. Our methods employ specific normalization schemes that highlight the similarity of both gene
and condition eigenvectors to piecewise constant vectors, and
this similarity, in turn, directly reflects the degree of biclustering. To assess our procedure, it is useful to see how well it
compares to several benchmarks, with respect to achieving
the goal of piecewise constant eigenvectors.
Our main results are presented in Figures 3–7. These
show consistently formatted graphs of the projection of each
dataset onto the best two eigenvectors. Each figure is laid out
in six panels, with the first two panels associated with our
biclustering methods and the next four panels showing the
benchmarks. In particular:
Bistochastization shows biclustering using the bistochastic normalization.
Biclustering shows standard biclustering with independent rescaling of rows and columns.
SVD shows SVD applied to the raw data matrix A.
Binormalization shows SVD applied to a transformed
matrix obtained by first rescaling its columns by
their means and then standardizing the rows of the
rescaled matrix as proposed in Getz et al. .
Normalized cuts shows a normalized cuts benchmark.
Here we apply the normalized cuts algorithm using
an affinity matrix obtained from a distance matrix,
which, in turn, was derived by calculating the
norms of the differences between the standardized
columns of A as proposed in Xing and Karp .
(See caption of Fig. 3 for more details.) Moreover, we
applied the normalized cuts algorithm to an affinity
matrix constructed from the column-rescaled rowstandardized matrix , as in panel
(d). We then examined whether a partition is visible
in the eigenvectors that correspond to the second
largest eigenvalue (which in the normalized cuts
case are supposed to provide approximation of the
optimal partition) and in the subspace spanned by
two or three eigenvectors with the best proximity to
piecewise constant vectors.
Log-interaction shows SVD applied to a matrix where
the raw expression data is substituted by the matrix
K described above.
Overall, by comparing the six panels in each of the five
different figures, we see that in the bistochastization method
(panel a) the distributions of the different samples have no or
minimal overlap between clusters as well as more tendency to
result in more compact clusters. The biclustering method
(panel b) results in slightly less separable clusters, but it tends
to separate the clusters along a single eigenvector. Straight
SVD of the different raw data (panel c) underperforms in comparison to our spectral methods, as can be seen from the intermingled distributions of tumors of different types or less
distinct clusters. Performing instead SVD on the loginteraction matrix of the raw expression data tends to produce results that are similar to those obtained with bistochastization (panel f). SVD of the column-rescaled rowstandardized matrix and the normalized cut
method result in better partitioning than SVD of the raw data
(panels d and e). However, in general, our spectral methods
consistently perform well.
In the following sections we discuss each of the five
datasets in detail.
Lymphoma Microarray Dataset
We first applied the methods to publicly available lymphoma
microarray data: chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma (DLCL), and follicular lymphoma (FL).
The clustering results are shown in Figures 2 and 3. In both
cases when we used the doubly stochastic-like matrix B or the
biclustering method (C1ATR1A) of the lymphoma dataset,
we obtained the desired partitioning of patients in the second
largest eigenvectors. The sorted eigenvectors give not only a
partition of patients, but also an internal ranking of patients
within a given disease. In addition, the outer product of the
gene and tumor (sorted) eigenvectors allows us to observe
which genes induce a partition of patients and vice versa. This
can be seen in Figure 2. Dividing the eigenvector that corresponds to the second largest eigenvalue (in both methods)
using the k-means algorithm (which is equivalent to fitting a
piecewise constant vector to each of the eigenvectors) led to a
clean partition between the DLCL patients and the patients
with other diseases. This is highlighted in the header of Figure
2 and the x-axis of Figure 3a,b. The published analysis did not
cluster two of the DLCL cases correctly .
Further partitioning of the CLL and the FL patients is obtained by using both the second- and third-largest eigenvectors. To divide the data we applied a recursive, two-way clustering using the normalized cuts algorithm to a two-column
matrix composed of the 2nd and 3rd eigenvectors of both
matrices. (Performing a final clustering step to the data projected to a small number of eigenvectors is a common practice
in spectral clustering.) Using the biclustering matrix with independent row and column normalizations, the patients were
correctly divided, with the exception of two of the CLL patients, who were clustered together with the FL patients. The
best partition was obtained using our doubly stochastic matrix that divided the patients perfectly according to the three
types of diseases.
Lymphoma Affymetrix Dataset
The above lymphoma data were generated by microarray
technology that provides relative measurements of expression
data. We repeated the lymphoma analysis using data from a
study relating B-CLL to memory B cells .
These data were generated using Affymetrix U95A gene chips,
which presumably allow measurements proportional to absolute mRNA levels. We selected samples taken from CLL, FL,
and DLCL patients, but in addition we also included samples
from DLCL cell lines. As can be seen in Figure 4a,b, the bistochastization method cleanly separates the four different
sample types, and the biclustering separates these samples
except for one DLCL sample that slightly overlaps with the FL
distribution. We note that the DLCL patient expression
patterns are closer to those of the FL patients than to
the expression profiles of the DLCL cell lines (and
pg|g(DLCL|FL) > pg|g(DLCL|DLCL-cell lines).
Leukemia Dataset
We applied our methods to public microarray data of acute
leukemia (B- and T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia [ALL] and
acute myelogenous leukemia [AML]). The patient distribu-
Kluger et al.
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
tions of the different diseases of the leukemia dataset become
separated in the two-dimensional graphs generated by projecting the patient expression profiles onto the 2nd and 3rd
gene class partition vectors of the biclustering method (Fig.
5b). The bistochastic method also partitions the patients well,
with only one ambiguous case that is close to the boundary
between ALL and AML (Fig. 5a). Application of k-means to a
matrix composed of the 2nd and 3rd biclustering eigenvectors
results in three misclassifications, which is a slight improvement over the four misclassifications reported by Golub et al.
 . Further partitioning of the ALL cases is obtained by
applying a normalized cuts clustering method to the biclustering eigenvectors, and produces a clear separation between
T- and B-cell ALL. This is a slight improvement over published
results . Another advantage over their methods is that biclustering does not require specification of the number of desired
clusters or lengthy searches for subsets of genes.
Dataset From Breast Cell Lines Transfected
With the CSF1R Oncogene
In another microarray experiment study ,
an oncogene encoding a transmembrane tyrosine kinase receptor was mutated at two different phosphorylation sites.
Benign breast cells were transfected with the wild-type oncogene, creating a phenotype that invades and metastasizes. The
benign cell line was then transfected with the two mutated
oncogenes, creating one phenotype that invades and another
one that metastasizes. RNA expression levels were measured
eight times for each phenotype. Transfection with a single
oncogene is expected to generate similar expression profiles,
presumably because only a few genes are biologically influenced. Therefore, it was desirable to see whether profiles of
the different phenotypes can be partitioned.
Figure 8 allows us to examine the extent to which the
data can be arranged in a checkerboard pattern. This is done
by taking the outer product of the cell type-sorted eigenvector
that has the most stepwise-like structure (and is associated
with the first largest singular value) with the corresponding
gene-sorted eigenvector. Due to noise in the data and similarity between the different samples, common clustering techniques such as hierarchical, k-means, and medoids did not
succeed in cleanly partitioning the data, but the relevant eigen-array obtained following bistochastization or loginteraction normalization partitioned the samples perfectly.
Expression levels of the four cell lines were measured in two
separate sets of four measurements. We chose to measure the
ratio of three of the cell lines: benign (a), invasive (c), and
metastatic (d) with respect to the cell line that invades and
metastasizes (b) in the first batch, and the corresponding ratios were similarly derived for the second batch. In Figure 8,
the ratios from the first and second batches are denoted by (a,
c, d) and (A, C, D), respectively. As can be seen, the simultaneous normalization methods partition the data such that all
the phenotypes are separated into clusters—that is, “a”s were
clustered with “A”s in one group, “c”s with “C”s in another
group, and “d”s with “D”s in yet another group, as expected.
Further exploration is required in order to relate those gene
clusters to biological pathways that are relevant to these conditions.
Central Nervous System Embryonal Tumor Dataset
Finally, we analyzed the recently published CNS embryonal
tumor dataset : Pomeroy et al. partitioned these five tumor types using standard principal component analysis, but did so after employing a preselection of
genes exhibiting variation across the data set . Using all genes, we find that the bistochastization method, and to a lesser degree the biclustering
method, partitioned the medulloblastoma, malignant glioma,
and normal cerebella tumors. As can be seen in Figure 7, the
remaining rhabdoid tumors are more widely scattered in the
subspace obtained by projecting the tumors onto the 2nd–4th
gene partitioning eigenvectors of the biclustering and bistochastization methods. Nonetheless, the rhabdoid tumor distribution does not overlap with the other tumor distributions
if we use the bistochastization method. The primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs) did not cluster and were difficult
to classify even using supervised methods.
DISCUSSION
Unsupervised clustering of genes and experimental conditions in microarray data can potentially reveal genes that participate in cellular mechanisms that are involved in various
diseases. In this paper we present a spectral biclustering
method that utilizes the information gained by clustering the
conditions to facilitate the clustering of genes, and vice versa.
The method incorporates a closely integrated normalization.
It also naturally discards the irrelevant constant background,
such that no additional arguments are needed to ignore the
contribution associated with the largest eigenvalue, as advocated in Alter et al. . In particular, our method is designed to cluster populations of different tumors assuming
that each tumor type has a subset of marker genes that exhibit
overexpression and that typically are not overexpressed in
other tumors. The main underlying assumption is that we can
simultaneously obtain better tumor clusters and gene clusters
by correlating genes averaged over different samples of the
same tumors. Likewise, the correlation of two tumors is more
apparent when averaged over sets of genes of similar expression profiles. In situations where the number of tumor types
(the number of clusters of experimental conditions) happens
to be equal to the number of typical gene profiles (the number
of gene clusters), the biclustering algorithm is related to the
modified normalized cuts objective function introduced by
Dhillon . In addition, in a situation where the data
have approximately a checkerboard structure with more than
two clusters on each side, there may be several eigenvectors
indicating a partitioning. In this case we may be able to determine the number of clusters by identifying all of these
eigenvectors, for example, using a pairwise measure such as
mutual entropy between all pairs of eigenvectors.
The methods presented in this paper, particularly those
incorporating simultaneous normalization of rows and columns, show consistent advantage over SVD spectral analysis
of the raw data, the logarithm of the raw data, other forms of
rescaling transformations of the raw data, and the normalized
cuts partitioning of the raw or rescaled data. Nevertheless, our
partitioning results are not perfect. Better results may be obtained by employing a generative model that better suits the
data. It has been shown that removal of irrelevant genes that
introduce noise can further improve clustering . Furthermore, if partitioning in the gene dimension is sharper than partitioning in the condition dimension or vice versa, we can organize the conditions or genes of
the blurrier dimension contiguously. Such arrangements perhaps give one a sense of the progression of disease states or
relevance of a gene to a particular disease.
Spectral Biclustering of Microarray Data
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Y.K. is supported by the Cancer Bioinformatics Fellowship
from the Anna Fuller Fund, and M.G. acknowledges support
from Human Genome array: Technology for Functional
Analysis (an NIH grant number P50 HG02357-01).
The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part
by payment of page charges. This article must therefore be
hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 USC
section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
REFERENCES
Alizadeh, A.A., Eisen, M.B., Davis, R.E., Ma, C., Lossos, I.S.,
Rosenwald, A., Boldrick, J.C., Sabet, H., Tran, T., Yu, X., et al.
2000. Distinct types of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma identified
by gene expression profiling. Nature 403: 503–511.
Alter, O., Brown, P.O., and Botstein, D. 2000. Singular value
decomposition for genome-wide expression data processing and
modeling. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 97: 10101–10106.
Bapat, R.B. and Raghavan, T.E.S. 1997. Non-negative matrices and
applications. Chapter 6. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
Ben-Hur, A., Elisseeff, A., and Guyon, I. 2002. A stability based
method for discovering structure in clustered data. Pac. Symp.
Biocomput.: 6–17.
Bittner, M., Meltzer, P., Chen, Y., Jiang, Y., Seftor, E., Hendrix, M.,
Radmacher, M., Simon, R., Yakhini, Z., Ben-Dor, A., et al. 2000.
Molecular classification of cutaneous malignant melanoma by
gene expression profiling. Nature 406: 536–540.
Brown, P.O. and Botstein, D. 1999. Exploring the new world of the
genome with DNA microarrays. Nat. Genet. 21: 33–37.
Brown, M.P.S., Grundy, W.N., Lin, D., Sugnet, C., Ares, J.M., and
Haussler, D. 2000. Knowledge-based analysis of microarray gene
expression data by using support vector machines. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 97: 262–267.
Cheng, Y. and Church, G.M. 2000. Biclustering of expression data.
In 8th International Conference on Intelligent Systems for
Molecular Biology, August 2000. UC San Diego, La Jolla, CA.
Dhillon, I.S. 2001. Coclustering documents and words using
bipartite spectral graph partitioning. In Proceedings of the Seventh
Association for Computing Machinery, Special Interest Group on
Knowledge Discovery in Data and Data Mining Conference, San
Francisco, CA.
Eisen, M., Spellman, P.T., Brown, P.O., and Botstein, D. 1998.
Cluster analysis and display of genome-wide expression patterns.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 95: 14863–14868.
Friedman, N., Linial, M., Nachman, I., and Pe’er, D. 2000. Using
Bayesian networks to analyze expression data. J. Comp. Biol.
7: 601–620.
Getz, G., Levine, E., and Domany, E. 2000. Coupled two-way
clustering analysis of gene microarray data. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
97: 12079–12084.
Golub, G.H. and Van Loan, C.F. 1983. Matrix computations. Johns
Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD.
Golub, T.R., Slonim, D.K., Tamayo, P., Huard, C., Gaasenbeek, M.,
Mesirov, J.P., Coller, H., Loh, M., Downing, J.R., Caligiuri, M., et
al. 1999. Molecular classification of cancer: Class discovery and
class prediction by gene expression monitoring. Science
286: 531–537.
Hartigan, J.A. 1972. Direct clustering of a data matrix. J. Am. Stat.
Assoc. 67: 123–129.
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., Eisen, M.B., Alizadeh, A., Levy, R., Staudt,
L., Chan, W.C., Botstein, D., and Brown, P.O. 2000. “Gene
shaving” as a method for identifying distinct sets of genes with
similar expression patterns. Genome Biol. 1: research0003.0001–
0003.0021.
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., Sherlock, G., Eisen, M., Brown, P.O., and
Botstein, D. 1999. Imputing missing data for gene expression
arrays. Stanford Statistics Department, Stanford, CA.
 
Hofmann, T. and Puzicha, J. 1999. Latent class models for
collaborative filtering. In Proceedings of the International Joint
Conference in Artificial Intelligence. IJCAI 1999: pp. 688–693. IJCAI
Inc., Somerset, NJ.
Holter, N.S., Mitra, M., Maritan, A., Cieplak, M., Banavar, J.R., and
Fedoroff, N.V. 2000. Fundamental patterns underlying gene
expression profiles: Simplicity from complexity. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. 97: 8409–8414.
Kerr, M.K. and Churchill, G.A. 2001. Bootstrapping cluster analysis:
Assessing the reliability of conclusions from microarray
experiments. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 98: 8961–8965.
Klein, U., Tu, Y., Stolovitzky, G.A., Mattioli, M., Cattoretti, G.,
Husson, H., Freedman, A., Inghirami, G., Cro, L., Baldini, L., et
al. 2001. Gene expression profiling of B cell chronic lymphocytic
leukemia reveals a homogeneous phenotype related to memory B
cells. J. Exp. Med. 194: 1625–1638.
Kluger, H., Kacinski, B., Kluger, Y., Mironenko, O., Gilmore-Hebert,
M., Chang, J., Perkins, A.S., and Sapi, E. 2001. Microarry analysis
of invasive and metastatic phenotypes in a breast cancer model.
In Poster presented at the Gordon Conference on Cancer, Newport,
Lazzeroni, L. and Owen, A. 2002. Plaid models for gene expression
data. Statistica Sinica 12: 61–86.
Lian, Z., Wang, L., Yamaga, S., Bonds, W., Beazer-Barclay, Y., Kluger,
Y., Gerstein, M., Newburger, P.E., Berliner, N., and Weissman,
S.M. 2001. Genomic and proteomic analysis of the myeloid
differentiation program. Blood 98: 513–524.
Lockhart, D.J. and Winzeler, E.A. 2000. Genomics, gene expression
and DNA arrays. Nature 405: 827–836.
Mateos, A., Dopazo, J., Jansen, R., Tu, Y., Gerstein, M., and
Stolovitzky, G. 2002. Systematic learning of gene functional
classes from DNA array expression data by using multilayer
perceptrons. Genome Res. 12: 1703–1715.
Pearson, K. 1901. On lines and planes of closest fit to systems of
points in space. The London, Edinburgh and Dublin Philosophical
Magazine and Journal of Science, Sixth Series 2: 559–572.
Pomeroy, S.L., Tamayo, P., Gaasenbeek, M., Sturla, L.M., Angelo, M.,
McLaughlin, M.E., Kim, J.Y., Goumnerova, L.C., Black, P.M., Lau,
C., et al. 2002. Prediction of central nervous system embryonal
tumour outcome based on gene expression. Nature
415: 436–442.
Raychaudhuri, S., Stuart, J.M., and Altman, R.B. 2000. Principal
components analysis to summarize microarray experiments:
Application to sporulation time series. In 2000 Pacific
Symposium on Biocomputing, pp. 452–463.
Shi, J. and Malik, J. 1997. Normalized cuts and image segmentation.
In IEEE Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
Stolovitzky, G., Califano, A., and Tu, Y. 2000. Analysis of gene
expression microarrays for phenotype classification. In 8th
International Conference on Intelligent Systems for Molecular
Biology, August 2000. UC San Diego, La Jolla, CA.
Tamayo, P., Slonim, D., Mesirov, J., Zhu, Q., Kitareewan, S.,
Dmitrovsky, E., Lander, E.S., and Golub, T.R. 1999. Interpreting
patterns of gene expression with self-organizing maps: Methods
and application to hematopoietic differentiation. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 96: 2907–2912.
Ungar, L. and Foster, A. 1998. A formal statistical approach to
collaborative filtering. In Conference on Automated Learning and
Discovery CONALD ’98, CMU.
van’t Veer, L.J., Dai, H., van de Vijver, M.J., He, Y.D., Hart, A.A.,
Mao, M., Peterse, H.L., van der Kooy, K., Marton, M.J.,
Witteveen, A.T., et al. 2002. Gene expression profiling predicts
clinical outcome of breast cancer. Nature 415: 530–536.
Weiss, Y. 1999. Segmentation using eigenvectors: A unifying view.
In Proceedings IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision,
pp. 975–982.
Xing, E.P. and Karp, R.M. 2001. CLIFF: Clustering of highdimensional microarray data via iterative feature filtering using
normalized cuts. In 9th International Conference on Intelligent
Systems for Molecular Biology, July 2001. Copenhagen,
Received July 22, 2002; accepted in revised form January 28, 2003.
Kluger et al.
Genome Research
www.genome.org
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
on March 26, 2025 . Published by
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from
10.1101/gr.648603
Access the most recent version at doi:
2003 13: 703-716
Genome Res.
Yuval Kluger, Ronen Basri, Joseph T. Chang, et al.
Conditions
Spectral Biclustering of Microarray Data: Coclustering Genes and