MobileNetV2: Inverted Residuals and Linear Bottlenecks
Mark Sandler
Andrew Howard
Menglong Zhu
Andrey Zhmoginov
Liang-Chieh Chen
Google Inc.
{sandler, howarda, menglong, azhmogin, lcchen}@google.com
In this paper we describe a new mobile architecture,
MobileNetV2, that improves the state of the art performance of mobile models on multiple tasks and benchmarks as well as across a spectrum of different model
sizes. We also describe efﬁcient ways of applying these
mobile models to object detection in a novel framework
we call SSDLite.
Additionally, we demonstrate how
to build mobile semantic segmentation models through
a reduced form of DeepLabv3 which we call Mobile
DeepLabv3.
is based on an inverted residual structure where
the shortcut connections are between the thin bottleneck layers.
The intermediate expansion layer uses
lightweight depthwise convolutions to ﬁlter features as
a source of non-linearity. Additionally, we ﬁnd that it is
important to remove non-linearities in the narrow layers
in order to maintain representational power. We demonstrate that this improves performance and provide an intuition that led to this design.
Finally, our approach allows decoupling of the input/output domains from the expressiveness of the transformation, which provides a convenient framework for
further analysis.
We measure our performance on
ImageNet classiﬁcation, COCO object detection ,
VOC image segmentation . We evaluate the trade-offs
between accuracy, and number of operations measured
by multiply-adds (MAdd), as well as actual latency, and
the number of parameters.
1. Introduction
Neural networks have revolutionized many areas of
machine intelligence, enabling superhuman accuracy for
challenging image recognition tasks. However, the drive
to improve accuracy often comes at a cost: modern state
of the art networks require high computational resources
beyond the capabilities of many mobile and embedded
applications.
This paper introduces a new neural network architecture that is speciﬁcally tailored for mobile and resource
constrained environments. Our network pushes the state
of the art for mobile tailored computer vision models,
by signiﬁcantly decreasing the number of operations and
memory needed while retaining the same accuracy.
Our main contribution is a novel layer module: the
inverted residual with linear bottleneck.
This module takes as an input a low-dimensional compressed
representation which is ﬁrst expanded to high dimension and ﬁltered with a lightweight depthwise convolution. Features are subsequently projected back to a
low-dimensional representation with a linear convolution. The ofﬁcial implementation is available as part of
TensorFlow-Slim model library in .
This module can be efﬁciently implemented using
standard operations in any modern framework and allows our models to beat state of the art along multiple
performance points using standard benchmarks.
Furthermore, this convolutional module is particularly suitable for mobile designs, because it allows to signiﬁcantly reduce the memory footprint needed during inference by never fully materializing large intermediate
tensors. This reduces the need for main memory access
in many embedded hardware designs, that provide small
amounts of very fast software controlled cache memory.
2. Related Work
Tuning deep neural architectures to strike an optimal
balance between accuracy and performance has been
an area of active research for the last several years.
Both manual architecture search and improvements in
training algorithms, carried out by numerous teams has
lead to dramatic improvements over early designs such
as AlexNet , VGGNet , GoogLeNet .
ResNet . Recently there has been lots of progress
in algorithmic architecture exploration included hyperparameter optimization as well as various
 
methods of network pruning and
connectivity learning . A substantial amount of
work has also been dedicated to changing the connectivity structure of the internal convolutional blocks such as
in ShufﬂeNet or introducing sparsity and others .
Recently, , opened up a new direction of bringing optimization methods including genetic
algorithms and reinforcement learning to architectural
search. However one drawback is that the resulting networks end up very complex. In this paper, we pursue the
goal of developing better intuition about how neural networks operate and use that to guide the simplest possible
network design. Our approach should be seen as complimentary to the one described in and related work.
In this vein our approach is similar to those taken by
 and allows to further improve the performance,
while providing a glimpse on its internal operation. Our
network design is based on MobileNetV1 . It retains its simplicity and does not require any special operators while signiﬁcantly improves its accuracy, achieving state of the art on multiple image classiﬁcation and
detection tasks for mobile applications.
3. Preliminaries, discussion and intuition
3.1. Depthwise Separable Convolutions
Depthwise Separable Convolutions are a key building block for many efﬁcient neural network architectures
 and we use them in the present work as well.
The basic idea is to replace a full convolutional operator with a factorized version that splits convolution into
two separate layers. The ﬁrst layer is called a depthwise
convolution, it performs lightweight ﬁltering by applying a single convolutional ﬁlter per input channel. The
second layer is a 1 × 1 convolution, called a pointwise
convolution, which is responsible for building new features through computing linear combinations of the input channels.
Standard convolution takes an hi × wi × di input tensor Li, and applies convolutional kernel K ∈
Rk×k×di×dj to produce an hi × wi × dj output tensor Lj. Standard convolutional layers have the computational cost of hi · wi · di · dj · k · k.
Depthwise separable convolutions are a drop-in replacement for standard convolutional layers.
Empirically they work almost as well as regular convolutions
but only cost:
hi · wi · di(k2 + dj)
which is the sum of the depthwise and 1 × 1 pointwise
convolutions. Effectively depthwise separable convolution reduces computation compared to traditional layers
by almost a factor of k21. MobileNetV2 uses k = 3
(3 × 3 depthwise separable convolutions) so the computational cost is 8 to 9 times smaller than that of standard
convolutions at only a small reduction in accuracy .
3.2. Linear Bottlenecks
Consider a deep neural network consisting of n layers
Li each of which has an activation tensor of dimensions
hi × wi × di. Throughout this section we will be discussing the basic properties of these activation tensors,
which we will treat as containers of hi × wi “pixels”
with di dimensions. Informally, for an input set of real
images, we say that the set of layer activations (for any
layer Li) forms a “manifold of interest”. It has been long
assumed that manifolds of interest in neural networks
could be embedded in low-dimensional subspaces. In
other words, when we look at all individual d-channel
pixels of a deep convolutional layer, the information
encoded in those values actually lie in some manifold,
which in turn is embeddable into a low-dimensional subspace2.
At a ﬁrst glance, such a fact could then be captured
and exploited by simply reducing the dimensionality of
a layer thus reducing the dimensionality of the operating space.
This has been successfully exploited by
MobileNetV1 to effectively trade off between computation and accuracy via a width multiplier parameter,
and has been incorporated into efﬁcient model designs
of other networks as well . Following that intuition,
the width multiplier approach allows one to reduce the
dimensionality of the activation space until the manifold of interest spans this entire space. However, this
intuition breaks down when we recall that deep convolutional neural networks actually have non-linear per coordinate transformations, such as ReLU. For example,
ReLU applied to a line in 1D space produces a ’ray’,
where as in Rn space, it generally results in a piece-wise
linear curve with n-joints.
It is easy to see that in general if a result of a layer
transformation ReLU(Bx) has a non-zero volume S,
the points mapped to interior S are obtained via a linear transformation B of the input, thus indicating that
the part of the input space corresponding to the full dimensional output, is limited to a linear transformation.
In other words, deep networks only have the power of
a linear classiﬁer on the non-zero volume part of the
1more precisely, by a factor k2dj/(k2 + dj)
2Note that dimensionality of the manifold differs from the dimensionality of a subspace that could be embedded via a linear transformation.
Output/dim=2
Output/dim=3
Output/dim=5
Output/dim=15
Output/dim=30
transformations
low-dimensional manifolds embedded in higher-dimensional
spaces. In these examples the initial spiral is embedded into
an n-dimensional space using random matrix T followed by
ReLU, and then projected back to the 2D space using T −1.
In examples above n = 2, 3 result in information loss where
certain points of the manifold collapse into each other, while
for n = 15 to 30 the transformation is highly non-convex.
(a) Regular
(b) Separable
(c) Separable with linear
bottleneck
(d) Bottleneck with expansion layer
Evolution of separable convolution blocks. The
diagonally hatched texture indicates layers that do not contain
non-linearities. The last (lightly colored) layer indicates the
beginning of the next block. Note: 2d and 2c are equivalent
blocks when stacked. Best viewed in color.
output domain. We refer to supplemental material for
a more formal statement.
On the other hand, when ReLU collapses the channel, it inevitably loses information in that channel. However if we have lots of channels, and there is a a structure
in the activation manifold that information might still be
preserved in the other channels. In supplemental materials, we show that if the input manifold can be embedded into a signiﬁcantly lower-dimensional subspace
of the activation space then the ReLU transformation
preserves the information while introducing the needed
complexity into the set of expressible functions.
To summarize, we have highlighted two properties
that are indicative of the requirement that the manifold
of interest should lie in a low-dimensional subspace of
the higher-dimensional activation space:
1. If the manifold of interest remains non-zero volume after ReLU transformation, it corresponds to
a linear transformation.
(a) Residual block
(b) Inverted residual block
Figure 3: The difference between residual block 
and inverted residual. Diagonally hatched layers do not
use non-linearities. We use thickness of each block to
indicate its relative number of channels. Note how classical residuals connects the layers with high number of
channels, whereas the inverted residuals connect the bottlenecks. Best viewed in color.
2. ReLU is capable of preserving complete information about the input manifold, but only if the input
manifold lies in a low-dimensional subspace of the
input space.
These two insights provide us with an empirical hint
for optimizing existing neural architectures: assuming
the manifold of interest is low-dimensional we can capture this by inserting linear bottleneck layers into the
convolutional blocks. Experimental evidence suggests
that using linear layers is crucial as it prevents nonlinearities from destroying too much information.
Section 6, we show empirically that using non-linear
layers in bottlenecks indeed hurts the performance by
several percent, further validating our hypothesis3. We
note that similar reports where non-linearity was helped
were reported in where non-linearity was removed
from the input of the traditional residual block and that
lead to improved performance on CIFAR dataset.
For the remainder of this paper we will be utilizing
bottleneck convolutions. We will refer to the ratio between the size of the input bottleneck and the inner size
as the expansion ratio.
3.3. Inverted residuals
The bottleneck blocks appear similar to residual
block where each block contains an input followed
by several bottlenecks then followed by expansion .
However, inspired by the intuition that the bottlenecks
actually contain all the necessary information, while an
expansion layer acts merely as an implementation detail
that accompanies a non-linear transformation of the tensor, we use shortcuts directly between the bottlenecks.
3We note that in the presence of shortcuts the information loss is
actually less strong.
Figure 3 provides a schematic visualization of the difference in the designs. The motivation for inserting shortcuts is similar to that of classical residual connections:
we want to improve the ability of a gradient to propagate
across multiplier layers. However, the inverted design is
considerably more memory efﬁcient (see Section 5 for
details), as well as works slightly better in our experiments.
Running time and parameter count for bottleneck
convolution
The basic implementation structure is illustrated in Table 1. For a block of size h × w, expansion factor t and kernel size k with d′ input channels and d′′ output channels, the total number of multiply add required is h · w · d′ · t(d′ + k2 + d′′). Compared with (1) this expression has an extra term, as indeed we have an extra 1 × 1 convolution, however the
nature of our networks allows us to utilize much smaller
input and output dimensions. In Table 3 we compare the
needed sizes for each resolution between MobileNetV1,
MobileNetV2 and ShufﬂeNet.
3.4. Information ﬂow interpretation
One interesting property of our architecture is that it
provides a natural separation between the input/output
domains of the building blocks (bottleneck layers), and
the layer transformation – that is a non-linear function
that converts input to the output. The former can be seen
as the capacity of the network at each layer, whereas the
latter as the expressiveness. This is in contrast with traditional convolutional blocks, both regular and separable, where both expressiveness and capacity are tangled
together and are functions of the output layer depth.
In particular, in our case, when inner layer depth
is 0 the underlying convolution is the identity function
thanks to the shortcut connection. When the expansion
ratio is smaller than 1, this is a classical residual convolutional block . However, for our purposes we
show that expansion ratio greater than 1 is the most useful.
This interpretation allows us to study the expressiveness of the network separately from its capacity and we
believe that further exploration of this separation is warranted to provide a better understanding of the network
properties.
4. Model Architecture
Now we describe our architecture in detail. As discussed in the previous section the basic building block
is a bottleneck depth-separable convolution with residuals. The detailed structure of this block is shown in
1x1 conv2d , ReLU6
h × w × (tk)
h × w × tk
3x3 dwise s=s, ReLU6
linear 1x1 conv2d
Table 1: Bottleneck residual block transforming from k
to k′ channels, with stride s, and expansion factor t.
Table 1. The architecture of MobileNetV2 contains the
initial fully convolution layer with 32 ﬁlters, followed
by 19 residual bottleneck layers described in the Table 2. We use ReLU6 as the non-linearity because of
its robustness when used with low-precision computation . We always use kernel size 3 × 3 as is standard
for modern networks, and utilize dropout and batch normalization during training.
With the exception of the ﬁrst layer, we use constant
expansion rate throughout the network. In our experiments we ﬁnd that expansion rates between 5 and 10 result in nearly identical performance curves, with smaller
networks being better off with slightly smaller expansion rates and larger networks having slightly better performance with larger expansion rates.
For all our main experiments we use expansion factor
of 6 applied to the size of the input tensor. For example,
for a bottleneck layer that takes 64-channel input tensor
and produces a tensor with 128 channels, the intermediate expansion layer is then 64 · 6 = 384 channels.
Trade-off hyper parameters
As in we tailor our
architecture to different performance points, by using
the input image resolution and width multiplier as tunable hyper parameters, that can be adjusted depending
on desired accuracy/performance trade-offs.
Our primary network (width multiplier 1, 224 × 224), has a
computational cost of 300 million multiply-adds and
uses 3.4 million parameters.
We explore the performance trade offs, for input resolutions from 96 to 224,
and width multipliers of 0.35 to 1.4. The network computational cost ranges from 7 multiply adds to 585M
MAdds, while the model size vary between 1.7M and
6.9M parameters.
One minor implementation difference, with is
that for multipliers less than one, we apply width multiplier to all layers except the very last convolutional layer.
This improves performance for smaller models.
bottleneck
bottleneck
bottleneck
bottleneck
bottleneck
bottleneck
bottleneck
conv2d 1x1
avgpool 7x7
1 × 1 × 1280
conv2d 1x1
Table 2: MobileNetV2 : Each line describes a sequence
of 1 or more identical (modulo stride) layers, repeated
n times. All layers in the same sequence have the same
number c of output channels. The ﬁrst layer of each
sequence has a stride s and all others use stride 1. All
spatial convolutions use 3 × 3 kernels. The expansion
factor t is always applied to the input size as described
in Table 1.
MobileNetV1
MobileNetV2
The max number of channels/memory (in
Kb) that needs to be materialized at each spatial resolution for different architectures.
We assume 16-bit
ﬂoats for activations. For ShufﬂeNet, we use 2x, g =
3 that matches the performance of MobileNetV1 and
MobileNetV2. For the ﬁrst layer of MobileNetV2 and
ShufﬂeNet we can employ the trick described in Section 5 to reduce memory requirement.
Even though
ShufﬂeNet employs bottlenecks elsewhere, the nonbottleneck tensors still need to be materialized due to the
presence of shortcuts between the non-bottleneck tensors.
5. Implementation Notes
5.1. Memory efﬁcient inference
The inverted residual bottleneck layers allow a particularly memory efﬁcient implementation which is very
important for mobile applications.
A standard efﬁ-
(a) NasNet 
Dwise 3x3,
stride=s, Relu6
conv 1x1, Relu6
(b) MobileNet 
(c) ShufﬂeNet 
Conv 1x1, Relu6
Dwise 3x3, Relu6
conv 1x1, Linear
Conv 1x1, Relu6
Dwise 3x3,
stride=2, Relu6
conv 1x1, Linear
Stride=1 block
Stride=2 block
(d) Mobilenet V2
Figure 4: Comparison of convolutional blocks for different architectures. ShufﬂeNet uses Group Convolutions and shufﬂing, it also uses conventional residual approach where inner blocks are narrower than output. ShufﬂeNet and NasNet illustrations are from respective papers.
cient implementation of inference that uses for instance
TensorFlow or Caffe , builds a directed acyclic
compute hypergraph G, consisting of edges representing the operations and nodes representing tensors of intermediate computation. The computation is scheduled
in order to minimize the total number of tensors that
needs to be stored in memory. In the most general case,
it searches over all plausible computation orders Σ(G)
and picks the one that minimizes
π∈Σ(G) max
A∈R(i,π,G)
+ size(πi).
where R(i, π, G) is the list of intermediate tensors that
are connected to any of πi . . . πn nodes, |A| represents
the size of the tensor A and size(i) is the total amount
of memory needed for internal storage during operation
For graphs that have only trivial parallel structure
(such as residual connection), there is only one nontrivial feasible computation order, and thus the total
amount and a bound on the memory needed for inference on compute graph G can be simpliﬁed:
M(G) = max
|B| + |op|
Or to restate, the amount of memory is simply the maximum total size of combined inputs and outputs across
all operations. In what follows we show that if we treat
a bottleneck residual block as a single operation (and
treat inner convolution as a disposable tensor), the total
amount of memory would be dominated by the size of
bottleneck tensors, rather than the size of tensors that are
internal to bottleneck (and much larger).
Bottleneck Residual Block
A bottleneck block operator F(x) shown in Figure 3b can be expressed as a
composition of three operators F(x) = [A ◦N ◦B]x,
where A is a linear transformation A : Rs×s×k →
Rs×s×n, N is a non-linear per-channel transformation:
N : Rs×s×n →Rs′×s′×n, and B is again a linear
transformation to the output domain: B : Rs′×s′×n →
Rs′×s′×k′.
For our networks N = ReLU6 ◦dwise ◦ReLU6 ,
but the results apply to any per-channel transformation.
Suppose the size of the input domain is |x| and the size
of the output domain is |y|, then the memory required
to compute F(X) can be as low as |s2k| + |s′2k′| +
O(max(s2, s′2)).
The algorithm is based on the fact that the inner tensor I can be represented as concatenation of t tensors, of
size n/t each and our function can then be represented
(Ai ◦N ◦Bi)(x)
by accumulating the sum, we only require one intermediate block of size n/t to be kept in memory at all times.
Using n = t we end up having to keep only a single
channel of the intermediate representation at all times.
The two constraints that enabled us to use this trick is
(a) the fact that the inner transformation (which includes
non-linearity and depthwise) is per-channel, and (b) the
consecutive non-per-channel operators have signiﬁcant
ratio of the input size to the output. For most of the traditional neural networks, such trick would not produce a
signiﬁcant improvement.
We note that, the number of multiply-adds operators needed to compute F(X) using t-way split is independent of t, however in existing implementations we
ﬁnd that replacing one matrix multiplication with several smaller ones hurts runtime performance due to in-
Multiply-Adds, Millions
Accuracy, Top 1, %
MobileNetV1
ShuffleNet
Performance curve of MobileNetV2 vs
MobileNetV1, ShufﬂeNet, NAS. For our networks we
use multipliers 0.35, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0 for all resolutions,
and additional 1.4 for for 224. Best viewed in color.
Step, millions
Top 1 Accuracy
Linear botleneck
Relu6 in bottleneck
(a) Impact of non-linearity in
the bottleneck layer.
Step, millions
Top 1 Accuracy
Shortcut between bottlenecks
Shortcut between expansions
No residual
(b) Impact of variations in
residual blocks.
Figure 6: The impact of non-linearities and various
types of shortcut (residual) connections.
creased cache misses. We ﬁnd that this approach is the
most helpful to be used with t being a small constant
between 2 and 5. It signiﬁcantly reduces the memory
requirement, but still allows one to utilize most of the ef-
ﬁciencies gained by using highly optimized matrix multiplication and convolution operators provided by deep
learning frameworks. It remains to be seen if special
framework level optimization may lead to further runtime improvements.
6. Experiments
6.1. ImageNet Classiﬁcation
TensorFlow .
We use the standard RMSPropOptimizer with both decay and momentum set to 0.9.
We use batch normalization after every layer, and the
standard weight decay is set to 0.00004.
MobileNetV1 setup we use initial learning rate of
0.045, and learning rate decay rate of 0.98 per epoch.
We use 16 GPU asynchronous workers, and a batch size
MobileNetV1,
ShufﬂeNet and NASNet-A models.
The statistics of a few selected models is shown in
Table 4 with the full performance graph shown in
6.2. Object Detection
We evaluate and compare the performance of
MobileNetV2 and MobileNetV1 as feature extractors
 for object detection with a modiﬁed version of the
Single Shot Detector (SSD) on COCO dataset .
We also compare to YOLOv2 and original SSD
(with VGG-16 as base network) as baselines. We do
not compare performance with other architectures such
as Faster-RCNN and RFCN since our focus is
on mobile/real-time models.
In this paper, we introduce a mobile
friendly variant of regular SSD. We replace all the regular convolutions with separable convolutions (depthwise
followed by 1 × 1 projection) in SSD prediction layers. This design is in line with the overall design of
MobileNets and is seen to be much more computationally efﬁcient. We call this modiﬁed version SSDLite.
Compared to regular SSD, SSDLite dramatically reduces both parameter count and computational cost as
shown in Table 5.
For MobileNetV1, we follow the setup in . For
MobileNetV2, the ﬁrst layer of SSDLite is attached to
the expansion of layer 15 (with output stride of 16). The
second and the rest of SSDLite layers are attached on top
of the last layer (with output stride of 32). This setup is
consistent with MobileNetV1 as all layers are attached
to the feature map of the same output strides.
MobileNetV1
ShufﬂeNet (1.5)
ShufﬂeNet (x2)
MobileNetV2
MobileNetV2 (1.4)
Table 4: Performance on ImageNet, comparison for different networks. As is common practice for ops, we
count the total number of Multiply-Adds. In the last
column we report running time in milliseconds (ms) for
a single large core of the Google Pixel 1 phone (using
TF-Lite). We do not report ShufﬂeNet numbers as efﬁcient group convolutions and shufﬂing are not yet supported.
Comparison of the size and the computational cost between SSD and SSDLite conﬁgured with
MobileNetV2 and making predictions for 80 classes.
SSD300 
SSD512 
YOLOv2 
MNet V1 + SSDLite
MNet V2 + SSDLite
Table 6: Performance comparison of MobileNetV2 +
SSDLite and other realtime detectors on the COCO
dataset object detection task. MobileNetV2 + SSDLite
achieves competitive accuracy with signiﬁcantly fewer
parameters and smaller computational complexity. All
models are trained on trainval35k and evaluated on
test-dev. SSD/YOLOv2 numbers are from . The
running time is reported for the large core of the Google
Pixel 1 phone, using an internal version of the TF-Lite
Both MobileNet models are trained and evaluated with Open Source TensorFlow Object Detection
API . The input resolution of both models is 320 ×
320. We benchmark and compare both mAP (COCO
challenge metrics), number of parameters and number
of Multiply-Adds. The results are shown in Table 6.
MobileNetV2 SSDLite is not only the most efﬁcient
model, but also the most accurate of the three.
Notably, MobileNetV2 SSDLite is 20× more efﬁcient and
10× smaller while still outperforms YOLOv2 on COCO
6.3. Semantic Segmentation
In this section, we compare MobileNetV1 and
MobileNetV2 models used as feature extractors with
DeepLabv3 for the task of mobile semantic segmentation. DeepLabv3 adopts atrous convolution , a powerful tool to explicitly control the resolution of computed feature maps, and builds ﬁve parallel heads including (a) Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling
module (ASPP) containing three 3 × 3 convolutions with different atrous rates, (b) 1 × 1 convolution
head, and (c) Image-level features . We denote by
output stride the ratio of input image spatial resolution
to ﬁnal output resolution, which is controlled by applying the atrous convolution properly. For semantic segmentation, we usually employ output stride = 16 or 8
for denser feature maps. We conduct the experiments
on the PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset , with extra annotated images from and evaluation metric mIOU.
To build a mobile model, we experimented with three
design variations: (1) different feature extractors, (2)
simplifying the DeepLabv3 heads for faster computation, and (3) different inference strategies for boosting the performance.
Our results are summarized in
We have observed that:
(a) the inference
strategies, including multi-scale inputs and adding leftright ﬂipped images, signiﬁcantly increase the MAdds
and thus are not suitable for on-device applications,
(b) using output stride = 16 is more efﬁcient than
output stride = 8, (c) MobileNetV1 is already a powerful feature extractor and only requires about 4.9 −5.7
times fewer MAdds than ResNet-101 (e.g., mIOU:
78.56 vs 82.70, and MAdds: 941.9B vs 4870.6B), (d)
it is more efﬁcient to build DeepLabv3 heads on top of
the second last feature map of MobileNetV2 than on the
original last-layer feature map, since the second to last
feature map contains 320 channels instead of 1280, and
by doing so, we attain similar performance, but require
about 2.5 times fewer operations than the MobileNetV1
counterparts, and (e) DeepLabv3 heads are computationally expensive and removing the ASPP module signiﬁcantly reduces the MAdds with only a slight performance degradation. In the end of the Table 7, we identify
a potential candidate for on-device applications (in bold
face), which attains 75.32% mIOU and only requires
2.75B MAdds.
6.4. Ablation study
Inverted residual connections.
The importance of
residual connection has been studied extensively . The new result reported in this paper is that
the shortcut connecting bottleneck perform better than
shortcuts connecting the expanded layers (see Figure 6b
for comparison).
Importance of linear bottlenecks. The linear bottleneck models are strictly less powerful than models with
non-linearities, because the activations can always operate in linear regime with appropriate changes to biases and scaling. However our experiments shown in
Figure 6a indicate that linear bottlenecks improve performance, providing support that non-linearity destroys
information in low-dimensional space.
ResNet-101
Table 7: MobileNet + DeepLabv3 inference strategy
on the PASCAL VOC 2012 validation set.
V2*: Second last feature map is used for DeepLabv3
heads, which includes (1) Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling (ASPP) module, and (2) 1 × 1 convolution as well
as image-pooling feature. OS: output stride that controls the output resolution of the segmentation map. MF:
Multi-scale and left-right ﬂipped inputs during test. All
of the models have been pretrained on COCO. The potential candidate for on-device applications is shown in
bold face. PASCAL images have dimension 512 × 512
and atrous convolution allows us to control output feature resolution without increasing the number of parameters.
7. Conclusions and future work
We described a very simple network architecture that
allowed us to build a family of highly efﬁcient mobile
Our basic building unit, has several properties that make it particularly suitable for mobile applications. It allows very memory-efﬁcient inference and
relies utilize standard operations present in all neural
frameworks.
For the ImageNet dataset, our architecture improves
the state of the art for wide range of performance points.
For object detection task, our network outperforms
state-of-art realtime detectors on COCO dataset both in
terms of accuracy and model complexity. Notably, our
architecture combined with the SSDLite detection module is 20× less computation and 10× less parameters
than YOLOv2.
On the theoretical side: the proposed convolutional
block has a unique property that allows to separate the
network expressiveness (encoded by expansion layers)
from its capacity (encoded by bottleneck inputs). Exploring this is an important direction for future research.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Matt
Streeter and Sergey Ioffe for their helpful feedback and
discussion.