Bayesian SegNet: Model Uncertainty in Deep Convolutional Encoder-Decoder
Architectures for Scene Understanding
Alex Kendall
Vijay Badrinarayanan
University of Cambridge
agk34, vb292, rc10001 @cam.ac.uk
Roberto Cipolla
We present a deep learning framework for probabilistic
pixel-wise semantic segmentation, which we term Bayesian
Semantic segmentation is an important tool for
visual scene understanding and a meaningful measure of
uncertainty is essential for decision making. Our contribution is a practical system which is able to predict pixelwise class labels with a measure of model uncertainty. We
achieve this by Monte Carlo sampling with dropout at test
time to generate a posterior distribution of pixel class labels. In addition, we show that modelling uncertainty improves segmentation performance by 2-3% across a number
of state of the art architectures such as SegNet, FCN and
Dilation Network, with no additional parametrisation. We
also observe a signiﬁcant improvement in performance for
smaller datasets where modelling uncertainty is more effective. We benchmark Bayesian SegNet on the indoor SUN
Scene Understanding and outdoor CamVid driving scenes
1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation requires an understanding of an
image at a pixel level and is an important tool for scene understanding. It is a difﬁcult problem as scenes often vary
signiﬁcantly in pose and appearance. However it is an important problem as it can be used to infer scene geometry
and object support relationships. This has wide ranging applications from robotic interaction to autonomous driving.
Previous approaches to scene understanding used low
level visual features . We are now seeing the emergence
of machine learning techniques for this problem .
In particular deep learning has set the benchmark on
many popular datasets . However none of these deep
learning methods produce a probabilistic segmentation with
a measure of model uncertainty.
Uncertainty should be a natural part of any predictive
system’s output. Knowing the conﬁdence with which we
Input Images
Bayesian SegNet Segmentation Output
Bayesian SegNet Model Uncertainty Output
Figure 1: Bayesian SegNet.
These examples show the performance of Bayesian SegNet on popular segmentation and scene
understanding benchmarks: SUN (left), CamVid (center column) and Pascal VOC (right). The system takes an
RGB image as input (top), and outputs a semantic segmentation
(middle row) and model uncertainty estimate, averaged across
all classes (bottom row). We observe higher model uncertainty
at object boundaries and with visually difﬁcult objects. An online demo and source code can be found on our project webpage
mi.eng.cam.ac.uk/projects/segnet/
can trust the semantic segmentation output is important for
decision making. For instance, a system on an autonomous
vehicle may segment an object as a pedestrian. But it is desirable to know the model uncertainty with respect to other
classes such as street sign or cyclist as this can have a strong
 
effect on behavioural decisions. Uncertainty is also immediately useful for other applications such as active learning
 , semi-supervised learning, or label propagation .
The main contribution of this paper is extending deep
convolutional encoder-decoder neural network architectures to Bayesian convolutional neural networks which
can produce a probabilistic segmentation output . In
Section 4 we propose Bayesian SegNet, a probabilistic deep
convolutional neural network framework for pixel-wise semantic segmentation. We use dropout at test time which
allows us to approximate the posterior distribution by sampling from the Bernoulli distribution across the network’s
weights. This is achieved with no additional parameterisation.
In Section 5, we demonstrate that Bayesian SegNet sets
the best performing benchmark on prominent scene understanding datasets, CamVid Road Scenes and SUN RGB-
D Indoor Scene Understanding . In particular, we ﬁnd
a larger performance improvement on smaller datasets such
as CamVid where the Bayesian Neural Network is able to
cope with the additional uncertainty from a smaller amount
Moreover, we show in section 5.4 that this technique is
broadly applicable across a number of state of the art architectures and achieves a 2-3% improvement in segmenation
accuracy when applied to SegNet , FCN and Dilation Network .
Finally in Section 5.5 we demonstrate the effectiveness
of model uncertainty. We show this measure can be used to
understand with what conﬁdence we can trust image segmentations.
We also explore what factors contribute to
Bayesian SegNet making an uncertain prediction.
2. Related Work
Semantic pixel labelling was initially approached with
TextonBoost , TextonForest and Random Forest
Based Classiﬁers . We are now seeing the emergence of
deep learning architectures for pixel wise segmentation, following its success in object recognition for a whole image
 . Architectures such as SegNet Fully Convolutional
Networks (FCN) and Dilation Network have been
proposed, which we refer to as the core segmentation engine. FCN is trained using stochastic gradient descent with
a stage-wise training scheme. SegNet was the ﬁrst architecture proposed that can be trained end-to-end in one step,
due to its lower parameterisation.
We have also seen methods which improve on these core
segmentation engine architectures by adding post processing tools.
HyperColumn and DeConvNet use
region proposals to bootstrap their core segmentation engine. DeepLab post-processes with conditional random
ﬁelds (CRFs) and CRF-RNN use recurrent neural networks. These methods improve performance by smoothing
the output and ensuring label consistency. However none
of these proposed segmentation methods generate a probabilistic output with a measure of model uncertainty.
Neural networks which model uncertainty are known as
Bayesian neural networks . They offer a probabilistic
interpretation of deep learning models by inferring distributions over the networks weights. They are often computationally very expensive, increasing the number of model
parameters without increasing model capacity signiﬁcantly.
Performing inference in Bayesian neural networks is a dif-
ﬁcult task, and approximations to the model posterior are
often used, such as variational inference .
On the other hand, the already signiﬁcant parameterization of convolutional network architectures leaves them particularly susceptible to over-ﬁtting without large amounts of
training data. A technique known as dropout is commonly
used as a regularizer in convolutional neural networks to
prevent overﬁtting and co-adaption of features . During
training with stochastic gradient descent, dropout randomly
removes units within a network. By doing this it samples
from a number of thinned networks with reduced width. At
test time, standard dropout approximates the effect of averaging the predictions of all these thinnned networks by using the weights of the unthinned network. This is referred
to as weight averaging.
Gal and Ghahramani have cast dropout as approximate Bayesian inference over the network’s weights. 
shows that dropout can be used at test time to impose
a Bernoulli distribution over the convolutional net ﬁlter’s
weights, without requiring any additional model parameters. This is achieved by sampling the network with randomly dropped out units at test time. We can consider these
as Monte Carlo samples obtained from the posterior distribution over models. This technique has seen success in
modelling uncertainty for camera relocalisation . Here
we apply it to pixel-wise semantic segmentation.
We note that the probability distribution from Monte
Carlo sampling is signiﬁcantly different to the ‘probabilities’ obtained from a softmax classiﬁer. The softmax function approximates relative probabilities between the class
labels, but not an overall measure of the model’s uncertainty
 . Figure 3 illustrates these differences.
3. SegNet Architecture
We brieﬂy review the SegNet architecture which we
modify to produce Bayesian SegNet.
SegNet is a deep
convolutional encoder decoder architecture which consists
of a sequence of non-linear processing layers (encoders)
and a corresponding set of decoders followed by a pixelwise classiﬁer.
Typically, each encoder consists of one
or more convolutional layers with batch normalisation and
a ReLU non-linearity, followed by non-overlapping maxpooling and sub-sampling. The sparse encoding due to the
Convolutional Encoder-Decoder
Segmentation
Model Uncertainty
Stochastic Dropout
Conv + Batch Normalisation + ReLU
Pooling/Upsampling
Figure 2: A schematic of the Bayesian SegNet architecture. This diagram shows the entire pipeline for the system which is trained
end-to-end in one step with stochastic gradient descent. The encoders are based on the 13 convolutional layers of the VGG-16 network
 , with the decoder placing them in reverse. The probabilistic output is obtained from Monte Carlo samples of the model with dropout
at test time. We take the variance of these softmax samples as the model uncertainty for each class.
pooling process is upsampled in the decoder using the maxpooling indices in the encoding sequence. This has the important advantage of retaining class boundary details in the
segmented images and also reducing the total number of
model parameters. The model is trained end to end using
stochastic gradient descent.
We take both SegNet and a smaller variant termed
SegNet-Basic as our base models. SegNet’s encoder is
based on the 13 convolutional layers of the VGG-16 network followed by 13 corresponding decoders. SegNet-
Basic is a much smaller network with only four layers each
for the encoder and decoder with a constant feature size of
64. We use SegNet-Basic as a smaller model for our analysis since it conceptually mimics the larger architecture.
4. Bayesian SegNet
The technique we use to form a probabilistic encoderdecoder architecture is dropout , which we use as approximate inference in a Bayesian neural network . We
can therefore consider using dropout as a way of getting
samples from the posterior distribution of models. Gal and
Ghahramani link this technique to variational inference
in Bayesian convolutional neural networks with Bernoulli
distributions over the network’s weights. We leverage this
method to perform probabilistic inference over our segmentation model, giving rise to Bayesian SegNet.
For Bayesian SegNet we are interested in ﬁnding the posterior distribution over the convolutional weights, W, given
our observed training data X and labels Y.
p(W | X, Y)
In general, this posterior distribution is not tractable, therefore we need to approximate the distribution of these
weights . Here we use variational inference to approximate it . This technique allows us to learn the distribution over the network’s weights, q(W), by minimising
the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between this approximating distribution and the full posterior;
KL(q(W) || p(W | X, Y)).
Here, the approximating variational distribution q(Wi) for
every K × K dimensional convolutional layer i, with units
j, is deﬁned as:
bi,j ∼Bernoulli(pi) for j = 1, ..., Ki,
Wi = Midiag(bi),
with bi vectors of Bernoulli distributed random variables
and variational parameters Mi we obtain the approximate
model of the Gaussian process in . The dropout probabilities, pi, could be optimised. However we ﬁx them to the
standard probability of dropping a connection as 50%, i.e.
pi = 0.5 .
In it was shown that minimising the cross entropy
loss objective function has the effect of minimising the
Kullback-Leibler divergence term. Therefore training the
network with stochastic gradient descent will encourage the
model to learn a distribution of weights which explains the
data well while preventing over-ﬁtting.
We train the model with dropout and sample the posterior distribution over the weights at test time using dropout
to obtain the posterior distribution of softmax class probabilities. We take the mean of these samples for our segmentation prediction and use the variance to output model
uncertainty for each class. We take the mean of the per class
variance measurements as an overall measure of model uncertainty.
We also explored using the variation ratio as
a measure of uncertainty (i.e. the percentage of samples
which agree with the class prediction) however we found
this to qualitatively produce a more binary measure of
model uncertainty. Fig. 2 shows a schematic of the segmentation prediction and model uncertainty estimate process.
(a) Input Image
(b) Semantic Segmentation
(c) Softmax Uncertainty
(d) Dropout Uncertainty
(e) Dropout Uncertainty
All Classes
Figure 3: Comparison of uncertainty with Monte Carlo dropout and uncertainty from softmax regression (c-e: darker colour
represents larger value). This ﬁgure shows that softmax regression is only capable of inferring relative probabilities between classes. In
contrast, dropout uncertainty can produce an estimate of absolute model uncertainty.
Monte Carlo
Probabilistic Variants
No Dropout
82.9 62.4 46.4
94.7 96.2 92.7
Dropout Encoder
80.6 68.9 53.4 81.6 69.4 54.0 90.6 92.5 86.3
Dropout Decoder
82.4 64.5 48.8 82.6 62.4 46.1 94.6 96.0 92.4
Dropout Enc-Dec
79.9 69.0 54.2 79.8 68.8 54.0 88.9 89.0 80.6
Dropout Central Enc-Dec 81.1 70.6 55.7 81.6 70.6 55.8 90.4 92.3 85.9
Dropout Center
82.9 68.9 53.1 82.7 68.9 53.2 93.3 95.4 91.2
Dropout Classiﬁer
84.2 62.6 46.9 84.2 62.6 46.8 94.9 96.0 92.3
Architecture Variants for SegNet-Basic on the
CamVid dataset .
We compare the performance of weight
averaging against 50 Monte Carlo samples. We quantify performance with three metrics; global accuracy (G), class average accuracy (C) and intersection over union (I/U). Results are shown as
percentages (%). We observe that dropping out every encoder and
decoder is too strong a regulariser and results in a lower training
ﬁt. The optimal result across all classes is when only the central
encoder and decoders are dropped out.
4.1. Probabilistic Variants
A fully Bayesian network should be trained with dropout
after every convolutional layer. However we found in practice that this was too strong a regulariser, causing the network to learn very slowly. We therefore explored a number
of variants that have different conﬁgurations of Bayesian
or deterministic encoder and decoder units. We note that
an encoder unit contains one or more convolutional layers
followed by a max pooling layer. A decoder unit contains
one or more convolutional layers followed by an upsampling layer. The variants are as follows:
• Bayesian Encoder. In this variant we insert dropout
after each encoder unit.
• Bayesian Decoder. In this variant we insert dropout
after each decoder unit.
• Bayesian Encoder-Decoder. In this variant we insert
dropout after each encoder and decoder unit.
• Bayesian Center. In this variant we insert dropout after the deepest encoder, between the encoder and decoder stage.
• Bayesian Central Four Encoder-Decoder.
variant we insert dropout after the central four encoder
and decoder units.
• Bayesian Classiﬁer. In this variant we insert dropout
after the last decoder unit, before the classiﬁer.
For analysis we use the smaller eight layer SegNet-Basic
architecture and test these Bayesian variants on the
CamVid dataset . We observe qualitatively that all four
variants produce similar looking model uncertainty output.
That is, they are uncertain near the border of segmentations
and with visually ambiguous objects, such as cyclist and
pedestrian classes. However, Table 1 shows a difference in
quantitative segmentation performance.
We observe using dropout after all the encoder and decoder units results in a lower training ﬁt and poorer test performance as it is too strong a regulariser on the model. We
ﬁnd that dropping out half of the encoder or decoder units
is the optimal conﬁguration. The best conﬁguration is dropping out the deepest half of the encoder and decoder units.
We therefore benchmark our Bayesian SegNet results on
the Central Enc-Dec variant. For the full 26 layer Bayesian
SegNet, we add dropout to the central six encoders and decoders. This is illustrated in Fig. 2.
In the lower layers of convolutional networks basic features are extracted, such as edges and corners . These
results show that applying Bayesian weights to these layers does not result in a better performance.
We believe
this is because these low level features are consistent across
the distribution of models because they are better modelled
with deterministic weights. However, the higher level features that are formed in the deeper layers, such as shape and
contextual relationships, are more effectively modelled with
Bayesian weights.
4.2. Comparing Weight Averaging and Monte Carlo
Dropout Sampling
Monte Carlo dropout sampling qualitatively allows us to
understand the model uncertainty of the result. However,
for segmentation, we also want to understand the quantitative difference between sampling with dropout and using
the weight averaging technique proposed by . Weight
Sign-Symbol
Pedestrian
Column-Pole
Class avg.
Global avg.
SfM+Appearance 
Boosting 
Structured Random Forests 
Neural Decision Forests 
Local Label Descriptors 
Super Parsing 
Boosting+Detectors+CRF 
SegNet-Basic (layer-wise training )
SegNet-Basic 
SegNet 
FCN 8 
DeconvNet 
DeepLab-LargeFOV-DenseCRF 
Bayesian SegNet Models in this work:
Bayesian SegNet-Basic
Bayesian SegNet
Table 2: Quantitative results on CamVid consisting of 11 road scene categories. Bayesian SegNet outperforms all other methods,
including shallow methods which utilise depth, video and/or CRF’s, and more contemporary deep methods. Particularly noteworthy are
the signiﬁcant improvements in accuracy for the smaller/thinner classes.
Number of Samples
Global Accuracy (%)
Monte Carlo Dropout Sampling
Weight Averaging
(a) SegNet Basic
Number of Samples
Global Accuracy (%)
Monte Carlo Dropout Sampling
Weight Averaging
(b) SegNet
Figure 4: Global segmentation accuracy against number of
Monte Carlo samples for both SegNet and SegNet-Basic. Results averaged over 5 trials, with two standard deviation error bars,
are shown for the CamVid dataset. This shows that Monte Carlo
sampling outperforms the weight averaging technique after approximately 6 samples. Monte Carlo sampling converges after
around 40 samples with no further signiﬁcant improvement beyond this point.
averaging proposes to remove dropout at test time and scale
the weights proportionally to the dropout percentage. Fig.
4 shows that Monte Carlo sampling with dropout performs
better than weight averaging after approximately 6 samples.
We also observe no additional performance improvement
beyond approximately 40 samples. Therefore the weight
averaging technique produces poorer segmentation results,
in terms of global accuracy, in addition to being unable to
provide a measure of model uncertainty. However, sampling comes at the expense of inference time, but when
computed in parallel on a GPU this cost can be reduced for
practical applications.
4.3. Training and Inference
Following we train SegNet with median frequency
class balancing using the formula proposed by Eigen and
Fergus . We use batch normalisation layers after every convolutional layer . We compute batch normalisation statistics across the training dataset and use these at
test time. We experimented with computing these statistics
while using dropout sampling. However we experimentally
found that computing them with weight averaging produced
better results.
We implement Bayesian SegNet using the Caffe library
 and release the source code and trained models for public evaluation 1. We train the whole system end-to-end using stochastic gradient descent with a base learning rate of
0.001 and weight decay parameter equal to 0.0005. We train
the network until convergence when we observe no further
reduction in training loss.
5. Experiments
We quantify the performance of Bayesian SegNet on
three different benchmarks using our Caffe implementation. Through this process we demonstrate the efﬁcacy of
Bayesian SegNet for a wide variety of scene segmentation
tasks which have practical applications. CamVid is a
1An online demo and source code can be found on our project webpage
mi.eng.cam.ac.uk/projects/segnet/
Liu et al. 
FCN 8 
DeconvNet 
DeepLab-LargeFOV-DenseCRF 
SegNet 
Bayesian SegNet (this work)
Liu et al. 
Ren et. al 
Table 3: SUN Indoor Scene Understanding. Quantitative comparison on the SUN RGB-D dataset which consists of 5050
test images of indoor scenes with 37 classes. SegNet RGB based
predictions have a high global accuracy and out-perform all previous benchmarks, including those which use depth modality.
road scene understanding dataset which has applications for
autonomous driving. SUN RGB-D is a very challenging and large dataset of indoor scenes which is important
for domestic robotics. Finally, Pascal VOC 2012 is a
RGB dataset for object segmentation.
5.1. CamVid
CamVid is a road scene understanding dataset with 367
training images and 233 testing images of day and dusk
scenes . The challenge is to segment 11 classes such as
road, building, cars, pedestrians, signs, poles, side-walk etc.
We resize images to 360x480 pixels for training and testing
of our system.
Table 2 shows our results and compares them to previous
benchmarks. We compare to methods which utilise depth
and motion cues. Additionally we compare to other prominent deep learning architectures. Bayesian SegNet obtains
the highest overall class average and mean intersection over
union score by a signiﬁcant margin. We set a new benchmark on 7 out of the 11 classes. Qualitative results can be
viewed in Fig. 5.
5.2. Scene Understanding (SUN)
SUN RGB-D is a very challenging and large dataset
of indoor scenes with 5285 training and 5050 testing images.
The images are captured by different sensors and
hence come in various resolutions. The task is to segment
37 indoor scene classes including wall, ﬂoor, ceiling, table,
chair, sofa etc. This task is difﬁcult because object classes
come in various shapes, sizes and in different poses with
frequent partial occlusions. These factors make this one of
the hardest segmentation challenges. For our model, we resize the input images for training and testing to 224x224
pixels. Note that we only use RGB input to our system.
FCN-32s RGB 
SegNet 
Bayesian SegNet (this work)
Gupta et al. 
FCN-32s RGB-D 
Eigen et al. 
FCN-16s RGB-HHA 
Table 4: NYU v2. Results for the NYUv2 RGB-D dataset 
which consists of 654 test images. Bayesian SegNet is the top
performing RGB method.
Parameters
Pascal VOC Test IoU
(Millions) Non-Bayesian Bayesian
Dilation Network 
FCN-8 
SegNet 
Table 5: Pascal VOC12 test results evaluated from the online
evaluation server. We compare to competing deep learning architectures. Bayesian SegNet is considerably smaller but achieves a
competitive accuracy to other methods. We also evaluate FCN
 and Dilation Network (front end) with Monte Carlo
dropout sampling. We observe an improvement in segmentation
performance across all three deep learning models when using
the Bayesian approach. This demonstrates this method’s applicability in general. Additional results available on the leaderboard
host.robots.ox.ac.uk:8080/leaderboard
Using the depth modality would necessitate architectural
modiﬁcations and careful post-processing to ﬁll-in missing
depth measurements. This is beyond the scope of this paper.
Table 3 shows our results on this dataset compared to
other methods. Bayesian SegNet outperforms all previous
benchmarks, including those which use depth modality. We
also note that an earlier benchmark dataset, NYUv2 ,
is included as part of this dataset, and Table 4 shows our
evaluation on this subset. Qualitative results can be viewed
in Fig. 6.
5.3. Pascal VOC
The Pascal VOC12 segmentation challenge consists
of segmenting a 20 salient object classes from a widely
varying background class. For our model, we resize the
input images for training and testing to 224x224 pixels. We
train on the 12031 training images and 1456 testing images,
with scores computed remotely on a test server. Table 5
shows our results compared to other methods, with qualitative results in Fig. 9.
Figure 5: Bayesian SegNet results on CamVid road scene understanding dataset . The top row is the input image, with the ground
truth shown in the second row. The third row shows Bayesian SegNet’s segmentation prediction, with overall model uncertainty, averaged
across all classes, in the bottom row (with darker colours indicating more uncertain predictions). In general, we observe high quality
segmentation, especially on more difﬁcult classes such as poles, people and cyclists. Where SegNet produces an incorrect class label we
often observe a high model uncertainty.
Figure 6: Bayesian SegNet results on the SUN RGB-D indoor scene understanding dataset . The top row is the input image, with
the ground truth shown in the second row. The third row shows Bayesian SegNet’s segmentation prediction, with overall model uncertainty,
averaged across all classes, in the bottom row (with darker colours indicating more uncertain predictions). Bayesian SegNet uses only RGB
input and is able to accurately segment 37 classes in this challenging dataset. Note that often parts of an image do not have ground truth
labels and these are shown in black colour.
Percentile
Pixel-Wise Classiﬁcation Accuracy
Table 6: Bayesian SegNets accuracy as a function of conﬁdence
for the 90th percentile (10% most conﬁdent pixels) through to the
0th percentile (all pixels). This shows uncertainty is an effective
measure of prediction accuracy.
This dataset is unlike the segmentation for scene understanding benchmarks described earlier which require learning both classes and their spatial context. A number of techniques have been proposed based on this challenge which
are increasingly more accurate and complex 2. Our efforts
in this benchmarking experiment have not been diverted
towards attaining the top rank by either using multi-stage
training , other datasets for pre-training such as MS-
COCO , training and inference aids such as object proposals or post-processing using CRF based methods
 . Although these supporting techniques clearly have
value towards increasing the performance it unfortunately
does not reveal the true performance of the deep architecture which is the core segmentation engine. It however does
indicate that some of the large deep networks are difﬁcult to
train end-to-end on this task even with pre-trained encoder
weights. Therefore, to encourage more controlled benchmarking, we trained Bayesian SegNet end-to-end without
other aids and report this performance.
5.4. General Applicability
To demonstrate the general applicability of this method,
we also apply it to other deep learning architectures trained
with dropout; FCN and Dilation Network . We
select these state-of-the-art methods as they are already
trained by their respective authors using dropout. We take
their trained open source models off the shelf, and evaluate them using 50 Monte Carlo dropout samples. Table 5
shows the mean IoU result of these methods evaluated as
Bayesian Neural Networks, as computed by the online evaluation server.
This shows the general applicability of our method. By
leveraging this underlying Bayesian framework our method
obtains 2-3% improvement across this range of architectures.
2See the full leader board at 
8080/leaderboard
Figure 7: Bayesian SegNet performance compared to mean
model uncertainty for each class in CamVid road scene understanding dataset. This ﬁgure shows that there is a strong inverse relationship between class accuracy and model uncertainty.
It shows that the classes that Bayesian SegNet performs better at,
such as Sky and Road, it is also more conﬁdent at. Conversely,
for the more difﬁcult classes such as Sign Symbol and Bicyclist,
Bayesian SegNet has a much higher model uncertainty.
5.5. Understanding Model Uncertainty
Qualitative observations. Fig. 5 shows segmentations
and model uncertainty results from Bayesian SegNet on
CamVid Road Scenes . Fig. 6 shows SUN RGB-D Indoor Scene Understanding results and Fig. 9 has Pascal
VOC results. These ﬁgures show the qualitative performance of Bayesian SegNet. We observe that segmentation
predictions are smooth, with a sharp segmentation around
object boundaries. These results also show that when the
model predicts an incorrect label, the model uncertainty is
generally very high. More generally, we observe that a high
model uncertainty is predominantly caused by three situations.
Firstly, at class boundaries the model often displays a
high level of uncertainty. This reﬂects the ambiguity surrounding the deﬁnition of deﬁning where these labels transition. The Pascal results clearly illustrated this in Fig. 9.
Secondly, objects which are visually difﬁcult to identify
often appear uncertain to the model. This is often the case
when objects are occluded or at a distance from the camera.
The third situation causing model uncertainty is when
the object appears visually ambiguous to the model. As an
example, cyclists in the CamVid results (Fig. 5) are visually
similar to pedestrians, and the model often displays uncertainty around them. We observe similar results with visually
similar classes in SUN (Fig. 6) such as chair and sofa, or
bench and table. In Pascal this is often observed between
cat and dog, or train and bus classes.
Quantitative observations. To understand what causes
the model to be uncertain, we have plotted the relationship
between uncertainty and accuracy in Fig. 7 and between
uncertainty and the frequency of each class in the dataset in
Figure 9: Bayesian SegNet results on the Pascal VOC 2012 dataset . The top row is the input image. The middle row shows
Bayesian SegNet’s segmentation prediction, with overall model uncertainty averaged across all classes in the bottom row (darker colours
indicating more uncertain predictions). Ground truth is not publicly available for these test images.
Shower curtain
Whiteboard
Night stand
SegNet 
Bayesian SegNet
Table 7: Class accuracy of Bayesian SegNet predictions for the 37 indoor scene classes in the SUN RGB-D benchmark dataset .
Fig. 8. Uncertainty is calculated as the mean uncertainty
value for each pixel of that class in a test dataset. We observe an inverse relationship between uncertainty and class
accuracy or class frequency. This shows that the model is
more conﬁdent about classes which are easier or occur more
often, and less certain about rare and challenging classes.
Additionally, Table 6 shows segmentation accuracies for
varying levels of conﬁdence. We observe very high levels
of accuracy for values of model uncertainty above the 90th
percentile across each dataset. This demonstrates that the
model’s uncertainty is an effective measure of conﬁdence
in prediction.
5.6. Real Time Performance
Table 5 shows that SegNet and Bayesian SegNet maintains a far lower parameterisation than its competitors.
Monte Carlo sampling requires additional inference time,
however if model uncertainty is not required, then the
weight averaging technique can be used to remove the need
for sampling (Fig. 4 shows the performance drop is modest). Our implementation can run SegNet at 35ms per frame
and Bayesian SegNet with 10 Monte Carlo samples at 90ms
per frame on Titan X GPU. However inference time will depend on the implementation.
6. Conclusions
We have presented Bayesian SegNet, the ﬁrst probabilistic framework for semantic segmentation using deep learning, which outputs a measure of model uncertainty for each
class. We show that the model is uncertain at object boundaries and with difﬁcult and visually ambiguous objects. We
quantitatively show Bayesian SegNet produces a reliable
measure of model uncertainty and is very effective when
modelling smaller datasets. Bayesian SegNet outperforms
shallow architectures which use motion and depth cues, and
other deep architectures. We obtain the highest performing result on CamVid road scenes and SUN RGB-D indoor
scene understanding datasets. We show that the segmentation model can be run in real time on a GPU. For future
work we intend to explore how video data can improve our
model’s scene understanding performance.
Figure 8: Bayesian SegNet class frequency compared to mean
model uncertainty for each class in CamVid road scene understanding dataset. This ﬁgure shows that there is a strong inverse relationship between model uncertainty and the frequency at
which a class label appears in the dataset. It shows that the classes
that Bayesian SegNet is more conﬁdent at are more prevalent in
the dataset. Conversely, for the more rare classes such as Sign
Symbol and Bicyclist, Bayesian SegNet has a much higher model
uncertainty.