Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 5065–5075
August 1–6, 2021. ©2021 Association for Computational Linguistics
ConSERT: A Contrastive Framework for Self-Supervised Sentence
Representation Transfer
Yuanmeng Yan1∗, Rumei Li2∗, Sirui Wang2, Fuzheng Zhang2, Wei Wu2, Weiran Xu1
1Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
2Meituan Inc., Beijing, China
{yanyuanmeng,xuweiran}@bupt.edu.cn
{lirumei,wangsirui,zhangfuzheng,wuwei30}@meituan.com
Learning high-quality sentence representations beneﬁts a wide range of natural language
processing tasks.
Though BERT-based pretrained language models achieve high performance on many downstream tasks, the native
derived sentence representations are proved to
be collapsed and thus produce a poor performance on the semantic textual similarity (STS)
In this paper, we present ConSERT,
a Contrastive Framework for Self-Supervised
SEntence Representation Transfer, that adopts
contrastive learning to ﬁne-tune BERT in an
unsupervised and effective way. By making
use of unlabeled texts, ConSERT solves the
collapse issue of BERT-derived sentence representations and make them more applicable
for downstream tasks. Experiments on STS
datasets demonstrate that ConSERT achieves
an 8% relative improvement over the previous
state-of-the-art, even comparable to the supervised SBERT-NLI. And when further incorporating NLI supervision, we achieve new stateof-the-art performance on STS tasks. Moreover, ConSERT obtains comparable results
with only 1000 samples available, showing its
robustness in data scarcity scenarios.
Introduction
Sentence representation learning plays a vital role
in natural language processing tasks . Good sentence representations beneﬁt
a wide range of downstream tasks, especially for
computationally expensive ones, including largescale semantic similarity comparison and information retrieval.
Recently, BERT-based pre-trained language
models have achieved high performance on many
∗Work done during internship at Meituan Inc. The ﬁrst
two authors contribute equally. Weiran Xu is the corresponding author.
the gold similarity score
the predicted cosine similarity
a) BERT derived sentence representation
the gold similarity score
the predicted cosine similarity
b) After applying our approach
Figure 1: The correlation diagram between the gold
similarity score (x-axis) and the model predicted cosine
similarity score (y-axis) on the STS benchmark dataset.
downstream tasks with additional supervision.
However, the native sentence representations derived from BERT1 are proved to be of low-quality
 . As
shown in Figure 1a, when directly adopt BERTbased sentence representations to semantic textual
similarity (STS) tasks, almost all pairs of sentences
achieved a similarity score between 0.6 to 1.0 ,
even if some pairs are regarded as completely unrelated by the human annotators. In other words, the
BERT-derived native sentence representations are
somehow collapsed , which
means almost all sentences are mapped into a small
area and therefore produce high similarity.
Such phenomenon is also observed in several
previous works . They ﬁnd the word representation
space of BERT is anisotropic, the high-frequency
words are clustered and close to the origin, while
low-frequency words disperse sparsely. When averaging token embeddings, those high-frequency
words dominate the sentence representations, inducing biases against their real semantics 2. As a
1Typically, we take the output of the [CLS] token or average token embeddings at the last few layers as the sentence
representations.
2We also empirically prove this hypothesis, please refer
to Section 5.1 for more details.
result, it is inappropriate to directly apply BERT’s
native sentence representations for semantic matching or text retrieval. Traditional methods usually
ﬁne-tune BERT with additional supervision. However, human annotation is costly and often unavailable in real-world scenarios.
To alleviate the collapse issue of BERT as well
as reduce the requirement for labeled data, we propose a novel sentence-level training objective based
on contrastive learning . By encouraging two augmented views
from the same sentence to be closer while keeping views from other sentences away, we reshape
the BERT-derived sentence representation space
and successfully solve the collapse issue (shown
in Figure 1b). Moreover, we propose multiple data
augmentation strategies for contrastive learning, including adversarial attack , token shufﬂing, cutoff and dropout ,
that effectively transfer the sentence representations to downstream tasks. We name our approach
ConSERT, a Contrastive Framework for SEntence
Representation Transfer.
ConSERT has several advantages over previous
approaches. Firstly, it introduces no extra structure or specialized implementation during inference. The parameter size of ConSERT keeps the
same as BERT, making it easy to use. Secondly,
compared with pre-training approaches, ConSERT
is more efﬁcient. With only 1,000 unlabeled texts
drawn from the target distribution (which is easy
to collect in real-world applications), we achieve
35% relative performance gain over BERT, and the
training stage takes only a few minutes (1-2k steps)
on a single V100 GPU. Finally, it includes several
effective and convenient data augmentation methods with minimal semantic impact. Their effects
are validated and analyzed in the ablation studies.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
1) We propose a simple but effective sentence-level
training objective based on contrastive learning.
It mitigates the collapse of BERT-derived representations and transfers them to downstream tasks.
2) We explore various effective text augmentation
strategies to generate views for contrastive learning
and analyze their effects on unsupervised sentence
representation transfer. 3) With only ﬁne-tuning on
unsupervised target datasets, our approach achieves
signiﬁcant improvement on STS tasks. When further incorporating with NLI supervision, our approach achieves new state-of-the-art performance.
We also show the robustness of our approach in
data scarcity scenarios and intuitive analysis of the
transferred representations.3
Related Work
Sentence Representation Learning
Supervised Approaches Several works use supervised datasets for sentence representation learning.
Conneau et al. ﬁnds the supervised Natural Language Inference (NLI) task is useful to
train good sentence representations. They use a
BiLSTM-based encoder and train it on two NLI
datasets, Stanford NLI (SNLI) and Multi-Genre NLI (MNLI) . Universal Sentence Encoder adopts a Transformer-based architecture and uses the SNLI dataset to augment the unsupervised training. SBERT proposes a siamese architecture with a shared
BERT encoder and is also trained on SNLI and
MNLI datasets.
Self-supervised Objectives for Pre-training
BERT proposes a bidirectional Transformer encoder for language
model pre-training. It includes a sentence-level
training objective, namely next sentence prediction (NSP), which predicts whether two sentences
are adjacent or not. However, NSP is proved to
be weak and has little contribution to the ﬁnal
performance . After that, various self-supervised objectives are proposed for
pre-training BERT-like sentence encoders. Cross-
Thought and CMLM are two similar objectives that recover
masked tokens in one sentence conditioned on the
representations of its contextual sentences. SLM
 proposes an objective that reconstructs the correct sentence ordering given the
shufﬂed sentences as the input. However, all these
objectives need document-level corpus and are thus
not applicable to downstream tasks with only short
Unsupervised Approaches BERT-ﬂow proposes a ﬂow-based approach that
maps BERT embeddings to a standard Gaussian
latent space, where embeddings are more suitable
for comparison. However, this approach introduces
3Our code is available at 
yym6472/ConSERT.
extra model structures and need specialized implementation, which may limit its application.
Contrastive Learning
Contrastive Learning for Visual Representation Learning Recently, contrastive learning has
become a very popular technique in unsupervised
visual representation learning with solid performance . They believe that good representation should be able to identify the same object while
distinguishing itself from other objects. Based on
this intuition, they apply image transformations
(e.g. cropping, rotation, cutout, etc.) to randomly
generate two augmented versions for each image
and make them close in the representation space.
Such approaches can be regarded as the invariance modeling to the input samples. Chen et al.
 proposes SimCLR, a simple framework
for contrastive learning. They use the normalized
temperature-scaled cross-entropy loss (NT-Xent)
as the training loss, which is also called InfoNCE
in the previous literature .
Contrastive Learning for Textual Representation Learning Recently, contrastive learning has
been widely applied in NLP tasks. Many works
use it for language model pre-training. IS-BERT
 proposes to add 1-D convolutional neural network (CNN) layers on top of
BERT and train the CNNs by maximizing the mutual information (MI) between the global sentence
embedding and its corresponding local contexts
embeddings. CERT adopts
a similar structure as MoCo and
uses back-translation for data augmentation. However, the momentum encoder needs extra memory
and back-translation may produce false positives.
BERT-CT uses two individual encoders for contrastive learning, which also
needs extra memory. Besides, they only sample 7
negatives, resulting in low training efﬁciency. De-
CLUTR adopts the architecture of SimCLR and jointly trains the model with
contrastive objective and masked language model
objective. However, they only use spans for contrastive learning, which is fragmented in semantics.
CLEAR uses the same architecture and objectives as DeCLUTR. Both of them are
used to pre-train the language model, which needs
a large corpus and takes a lot of resources.
Data Augmentation
BERT Encoder Layer
Average Pooling
maximize agreement
keep distant
Augmentation
Shared BERT
Contrastive
Loss Layer
Representations
A Batch of
Figure 2: The general framework of our proposed approach.
In this section, we present ConSERT for sentence
representation transfer. Given a BERT-like pretrained language model M and an unsupervised
dataset D drawn from the target distribution, we
aim at ﬁne-tuning M on D to make the sentence
representation more task-relevant and applicable
to downstream tasks. We ﬁrst present the general
framework of our approach, then we introduce several data augmentation strategies for contrastive
learning. Finally, we talk about three ways to further incorporate supervision signals.
General Framework
Our approach is mainly inspired by SimCLR . As shown in Figure 2, there are three
major components in our framework:
• A data augmentation module that generates
different views for input samples at the token
embedding layer.
• A shared BERT encoder that computes sentence representations for each input text. During training, we use the average pooling of the
token embeddings at the last layer to obtain
sentence representations.
• A contrastive loss layer on top of the BERT
encoder. It maximizes the agreement between
one representation and its corresponding version that is augmented from the same sentence
while keeping it distant from other sentence
representations in the same batch.
Embedding Matrix
No Augmentation
Adversarial Perturbations
Shuffled Position Ids
A) Adversarial Attack
B) Token Shuffling
Token Cutoff
Feature Cutoff
D) Dropout
unchanged elements
perturbed elements
zero-out elements
Figure 3: The four data augmentation strategies used in our experiments.
For each input text x, we ﬁrst pass it to the data
augmentation module, in which two transformations T1 and T2 are applied to generate two versions
of token embeddings: ei = T1(x), ej = T2(x),
where ei, ej ∈RL×d, L is the sequence length
and d is the hidden dimension. After that, both ei
and ej will be encoded by multi-layer transformer
blocks in BERT and produce the sentence representations ri and rj through average pooling.
Following Chen et al. , we adopt the normalized temperature-scaled cross-entropy loss (NT-
Xent) as the contrastive objective. During each
training step, we randomly sample N texts from
D to construct a mini-batch, resulting in 2N representations after augmentation. Each data point is
trained to ﬁnd out its counterpart among 2(N −1)
in-batch negative samples:
Li,j = −log
exp(sim(ri, rj)/τ)
k=1 1[k̸=i] exp(sim(ri, rk)/τ)
, where sim(·) indicates the cosine similarity function, τ controls the temperature and 1 is the indicator. Finally, we average all 2N in-batch classi-
ﬁcation losses to obtain the ﬁnal contrastive loss
Data Augmentation Strategies
We explore four different data augmentation strategies to generate views for contrastive learning, including adversarial attack , token shufﬂing, cutoff and dropout , as
illustrated in Figure 3.
Adversarial Attack Adversarial training is generally used to improve the model’s robustness.
They generate adversarial samples by adding a
worst-case perturbation to the input sample. We
implement this strategy with Fast Gradient Value
(FGV) , which directly uses the
gradient to compute the perturbation and thus is
faster than two-step alternative methods. Note that
this strategy is only applicable when jointly training with supervision since it relies on supervised
loss to compute adversarial perturbations.
Token Shufﬂing In this strategy, we aim to randomly shufﬂe the order of the tokens in the input
sequences. Since the bag-of-words nature in the
transformer architecture, the position encoding is
the only factor about the sequential information.
Thus, similar to Lee et al. , we implement
this strategy by passing the shufﬂed position ids to
the embedding layer while keeping the order of the
token ids unchanged.
Cutoff Shen et al. proposes a simple and
efﬁcient data augmentation strategy called cutoff.
They randomly erase some tokens (for token cutoff), feature dimensions (for feature cutoff), or token spans (for span cutoff) in the L × d feature
matrix. In our experiments, we only use token cutoff and feature cutoff and apply them to the token
embeddings for view generation.
Dropout Dropout is a widely used regularization method that avoids overﬁtting. However, in
our experiments, we also show its effectiveness as
an augmentation strategy for contrastive learning.
For this setting, we randomly drop elements in the
token embedding layer by a speciﬁc probability
and set their values to zero. Note that this strategy is different from Cutoff since each element is
considered individually.
Number of train samples
Number of valid samples
Number of test samples
Number of Unlabeled Texts
Table 1: The statistics of STS datasets.
Incorporating Supervision Signals
Besides unsupervised transfer, our approach can
also be incorporated with supervised learning. We
take the NLI supervision as an example. It is a sentence pair classiﬁcation task, where the model are
trained to distinguish the relation between two sentences among contradiction, entailment and neutral. The classiﬁcation objective can be expressed
as following:
f = Concat(r1, r2, |r1 −r2|)
Lce = CrossEntropy(Wf + b, y)
, where r1 and r2 denote two sentence representations.
We propose three ways for incorporating additional supervised signals:
• Joint training (joint) We jointly train the
model with the supervised and unsupervised
objectives Ljoint = Lce + αLcon on NLI
dataset. α is a hyper-parameter to balance
two objectives.
• Supervised training then unsupervised
transfer (sup-unsup) We ﬁrst train the model
with Lce on NLI dataset, then use Lcon to ﬁnetune it on the target dataset.
• Joint training then unsupervised transfer
(joint-unsup) We ﬁrst train the model with
the Ljoint on NLI dataset, then use Lcon to
ﬁne-tune it on the target dataset.
Experiments
To verify the effectiveness of our proposed approach, we conduct experiments on Semantic Textual Similarity (STS) tasks under the unsupervised
and supervised settings.
Dataset Following previous works ,
we evaluate our approach on multiple STS datasets,
including STS tasks 2012 - 2016 (STS12 - STS16)
 , STS
benchmark (STSb) and SICK-
Relatedness (SICK-R) (Marelli et al.). Each sample
in these datasets contains a pair of sentences as
well as a gold score between 0 and 5 to indicate
their semantic similarity. For our unsupervised
experiments, we mix the unlabeled texts from these
datasets to ﬁne-tune our model. We obtain all 7
datasets through the SentEval toolkit . The statistics is shown in Table 1.
For supervised experiments, we use the combination of SNLI (570k samples) 
and MNLI (430k samples) 
to train our model. In the joint training setting, the
NLI texts are also used for contrastive objectives.
Baselines To show our effectiveness on unsupervised sentence representation transfer, we mainly
select BERT-ﬂow for comparison,
since it shares the same setting as our approach.
For unsupervised comparison, we use the average
of GloVe embeddings, the BERT-derived native
embeddings, CLEAR (trained on
BookCorpus and English Wikipedia corpus), IS-
BERT (trained on unlabeled
texts from NLI datasets), BERT-CT (trained on English Wikipedia corpus). For
comparison with supervised methods, we select InferSent , Universal Sentence
Encoder , SBERT and BERT-CT as baselines. They are all trained with NLI
supervision.
Evaluation When evaluating the trained model,
we ﬁrst obtain the representation of sentences by
averaging the token embeddings at the last two
layers4, then we report the spearman correlation between the cosine similarity scores of sentence representations and the human-annotated gold scores.
When calculating spearman correlation, we merge
all sentences together (even if some STS datasets
have multiple splits) and calculate spearman correlation for only once5.
4As shown in Li et al. , averaging the last two
layers of BERT achieves slightly better results than averaging
the last one layer.
5Note that such evaluation procedure is different from
Unsupervised baselines
Avg. GloVe embeddings†
BERTlarge‡
CLEARbase†
IS-BERTbase-NLI†
BERTbase-CT†
BERTlarge-CT†
Using STS unlabeled texts
BERTbase-ﬂow†
BERTlarge-ﬂow†
ConSERTbase‡
ConSERTlarge‡
Table 2: The performance comparison of ConSERT with other methods in an unsupervised setting. We report the
spearman correlation ρ × 100 on 7 STS datasets. Methods with † indicate that we directly report the scores from
the corresponding paper, while methods with ‡ indicate our implementation.
Implementation Details Our implementation
is based on the Sentence-BERT6 . We use both the BERT-base
and BERT-large for our experiments. The max
sequence length is set to 64 and we remove the
default dropout layer in BERT architecture considering the cutoff and dropout data augmentation
strategies used in our framework. The ratio of token cutoff and feature cutoff is set to 0.15 and 0.2
respectively, as suggested in Shen et al. . The
ratio of dropout is set to 0.2. The temperature τ of
NT-Xent loss is set to 0.1, and the α is set to 0.15
for the joint training setting. We adopt Adam optimizer and set the learning rate to 5e-7. We use a
linear learning rate warm-up over 10% of the training steps. The batch size is set to 96 in most of our
experiments. We use the dev set of STSb to tune
the hyperparameters (including the augmentation
strategies) and evaluate the model every 200 steps
during training. The best checkpoint on the dev set
of STSb is saved for test. We further discuss the
inﬂuence of the batch size and the temperature in
the subsequent section.
Unsupervised Results
For unsupervised evaluation, we load the pretrained BERT to initialize the BERT encoder in
our framework. Then we randomly mix the unlabeled texts from 7 STS datasets and use them to
ﬁne-tune our model.
SentEval toolkit, which calculates spearman correlation for
each split and reports the mean or weighted mean scores.
6 
sentence-transformers
The results are shown in Table 2. We can observe
that both BERT-ﬂow and ConSERT can improve
the representation space and outperform the GloVe
and BERT baselines with unlabeled texts from
target datasets. However, ConSERTlarge achieves
the best performance among 6 STS datasets, signiﬁcantly outperforming BERTlarge-ﬂow with an
8% relative performance gain on average (from
70.76 to 76.45).
Moreover, it is worth noting
that ConSERTlarge even outperforms several supervised baselines (see Figure 3) like InferSent
(65.01) and Universal Sentence Encoder (71.72),
and keeps comparable to the strong supervised
method SBERTlarge-NLI (76.55). For the BERTbase
architecture, our approach ConSERTbase also outperforms BERTbase-ﬂow with an improvement of
3.17 (from 69.57 to 72.74).
Supervised Results
For supervised evaluation, we consider the three
settings described in Section 3.3. Note that in the
joint setting, only NLI texts are used for contrastive
learning, making it comparable to SBERT-NLI. We
use the model trained under the joint setting as the
initial checkpoint in the joint-unsup setting. We
also re-implement the SBERT-NLI baselines and
use them as the initial checkpoint in the sup-unsup
The results are illustrated in Table 3. For the
models trained with NLI supervision, we ﬁnd that
ConSERT joint consistently performs better than
SBERT, revealing the effectiveness of our proposed
contrastive objective as well as the data augmentation strategies. On average, ConSERTbase joint
Using NLI supervision
InferSent - GloVe†
Universal Sentence Encoder†
SBERTbase-NLI†
SBERTlarge-NLI†
SBERTbase-NLI (re-impl.)‡
SBERTlarge-NLI (re-impl.)‡
BERTbase-CT†
BERTlarge-CT†
ConSERTbase joint‡
ConSERTlarge joint‡
Using NLI supervision and STS unlabeled texts
BERTbase-ﬂow†
BERTlarge-ﬂow†
ConSERTbase sup-unsup‡
ConSERTlarge sup-unsup‡
ConSERTbase joint-unsup‡
ConSERTlarge joint-unsup‡
Table 3: The performance comparison of ConSERT with other methods in a supervised setting. We report the
spearman correlation ρ × 100 on 7 STS datasets. Methods with † indicate that we directly report the scores from
the corresponding paper, while methods with ‡ indicate our implementation.
achieves a performance gain of 2.88 over the reimplemented SBERTbase-NLI, and ConSERTlarge
joint achieves a performance gain of 2.70.
When further performing representation transfer with STS unlabeled texts, our approach
achieves even better performance. On average,
ConSERTlarge joint-unsup outperforms the initial
checkpoint ConSERTlarge joint with 1.84 performance gain, and outperforms the previous state-ofthe-art BERTlarge-ﬂow with 2.92 performance gain.
The results demonstrate that even for the models
trained under supervision, there is still a huge potential of unsupervised representation transfer for
improvement.
Qualitative Analysis
Analysis of BERT Embedding Space
To prove the hypothesis that the collapse issue is
mainly due to the anisotropic space that is sensitive
to the token frequency, we conduct experiments
that mask the embeddings of several most frequent
tokens when applying average pooling to calculate
the sentence representations. The relation between
the number of removed top-k frequent tokens and
the average spearman correlation is shown in Figure 4.
We can observe that when removing a few top
frequent tokens, the performance of BERT improves sharply on STS tasks.
When removing
Number of removed top-k frequent tokens
Average spearman correlation
ConSERT w/o removing
BERT w/o removing
ConSERT-base
Figure 4: The average spearman correlation on STS
tasks w.r.t. the number of removed top-k frequent tokens.
Note that we also considered the [CLS] and
[SEP] tokens and they are the 2 most frequent tokens.
The frequency of each token is calculated through the
test split of the STS Benchmark dataset.
34 most frequent tokens, the best performance is
achieved (61.66), and there is an improvement of
7.8 from the original performance (53.86). For
ConSERT, we ﬁnd that removing a few most frequent tokens only results in a small improvement
of less than 0.3. The results show that our approach
reshapes the BERT’s original embedding space, reducing the inﬂuence of common tokens on sentence
representations.
Effect of Data Augmentation Strategy
In this section, we study the effect of data augmentation strategies for contrastive learning. We consider 5 options for each transformation, including
None (i.e. doing nothing), Shufﬂe, Token Cutoff,
Average spearman correlation
Figure 5: The performance visualization with different
combinations of data augmentation strategies. The row
indicates the 1st data augmentation strategy while the
column indicates the 2nd data augmentation strategy.
Feature Cutoff, and Dropout, resulting in 5×5 combinations. Note that the Adversarial Attack strategy
is not considered here, since it needs additional supervision to generate adversarial samples. All these
experiments follow the unsupervised setting and
use the BERTbase architecture.
The results can be found in Figure 5. We can
make the following observations. First, Shufﬂe
and Token Cutoff are the two most effective strategies (where Shufﬂe is slightly better than Token
Cutoff), signiﬁcantly outperforming Feature Cutoff
and Dropout. This is probably because Shufﬂe and
Token Cutoff are more related to the downstream
STS tasks since they are directly operated on the
token level and change the structure of the sentence
to produce hard examples.
Secondly, Feature Cutoff and Dropout also improve performance by roughly 4 points when compared with the None-None baseline. Moreover, we
ﬁnd they work well as a complementary strategy.
Combining with another strategy like Shufﬂe may
further improve the performance. When combined
Shufﬂe with Feature Cutoff, we achieve the best
result. We argue that Feature Cutoff and Dropout
are useful in modeling the invariance of the internal
noise for the sentence encoder, and thus improve
the model’s robustness.
Finally, we also observe that even without any
data augmentation (the None-None combination),
our contrastive framework can improve BERT’s
performance on STS tasks (from 53.86 to 63.84).
This None-None combination has no effect on maximizing agreement between views since the repre-
10000 shot
full dataset
Number of unlabeled texts
Average spearman correlation
Unsupervised
Supervised (sup-unsup)
Figure 6: The few-shot experiments under the unsupervised and supervised settings. We report the average spearman correlation on STS datasets with 1, 10,
100, 1,000, and 10,000 unlabeled texts available, respectively. The full dataset indicates all 89192 unlabeled texts from 7 STS datasets.
sentations of augmented views are exactly the same.
On the contrary, it tunes the representation space
by pushing each representation away from others.
We believe that the improvement is mainly due to
the collapse phenomenon of BERT’s native representation space. To some extent, it also explains
why our method works.
Performance under Few-shot Settings
To validate the reliability and the robustness of
ConSERT under the data scarcity scenarios, we
conduct the few-shot experiments. We limit the
number of unlabeled texts to 1, 10, 100, 1000, and
10000 respectively, and compare their performance
with the full dataset.
Figure 6 presents the results. For both the unsupervised and the supervised settings, our approach
can make a huge improvement over the baseline
with only 100 samples available. When the training
samples increase to 1000, our approach can basically achieve comparable results with the models
trained on the full dataset. The results reveal the
robustness and effectiveness of our approach under the data scarcity scenarios, which is common
in reality. With only a small amount of unlabeled
texts drawn from the target data distribution, our
approach can also tune the representation space and
beneﬁt the downstream tasks.
Inﬂuence of Temperature
The temperature τ in NT-Xent loss (Equation 1) is
used to control the smoothness of the distribution
normalized by softmax operation and thus inﬂuences the gradients when backpropagation. A large
temperature smooths the distribution while a small
temperature sharpens the distribution. In our experiments, we explore the inﬂuence of temperature
The temperature of NT-Xent
Average spearman correlation
Figure 7: The inﬂuence of different temperatures in NT-
Xent. The best performance is achieved when the temperature is set to 0.1.
Batch Size
Avg. Spearman
Number of Steps
Table 4: The average spearman correlation as well as
the training steps of our unsupervised approach with
different batch sizes.
and present the result in Figure 7.
As shown in the ﬁgure, we ﬁnd the performance
is extremely sensitive to the temperature. Either
too small or too large temperature will make our
model perform badly. And the optimal temperature
is obtained within a small range (from about 0.08
to 0.12). This phenomenon again demonstrates the
collapse issue of BERT embeddings, as most sentences are close to each other, a large temperature
may make this task too hard to learn. We select 0.1
as the temperature in most of our experiments.
Inﬂuence of Batch Size
In some previous works of contrastive learning, it
is reported that a large batch size beneﬁts the ﬁnal performance and accelerates the convergence
of the model since it provides more in-batch negative samples for contrastive learning . Those in-batch negative samples improve
the training efﬁciency. We also analyze the inﬂuence of the batch size for unsupervised sentence
representation transfer.
The results are illustrated in Table 4. We show
both the spearman correlation and the corresponding training steps. We ﬁnd that a larger batch size
does achieve better performance. However, the
improvement is not so signiﬁcant. Meanwhile, a
larger batch size does speed up the training process,
but it also needs more GPU memories at the same
Conclusion
In this paper, we propose ConSERT, a selfsupervised contrastive learning framework for
transferring sentence representations to downstream tasks. The framework does not need extra
structure and is easy to implement for any encoder.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework
on various STS datasets, both our unsupervised and
supervised methods achieve new state-of-the-art
performance. Furthermore, few-shot experiments
suggest that our framework is robust in the data
scarcity scenarios. We also compare multiple combinations of data augmentation strategies and provide ﬁne-grained analysis for interpreting how our
approach works. We hope our work will provide a
new perspective for future researches on sentence
representation transfer.
Acknowledgements
We thank Keqing He, Hongzhi Zhang and all
anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments
and suggestions.
This work was partially supported by National Key R&D Program of China
2019YFF0303300 and Subject II No.
2019YFF0303302, DOCOMO Beijing Communications Laboratories Co., Ltd, MoE-CMCC “Artiﬁcal Intelligence” Project No. MCM20190701.
Broader Impact
Sentence representation learning is a basic task
in natural language processing and beneﬁts many
downstream tasks.
This work proposes a contrastive learning based framework to solve the collapse issue of BERT and transfer BERT sentence
representations to target data distribution. Our approach not only provides a new perspective about
BERT’s representation space, but is also useful in
practical applications, especially for data scarcity
scenarios. When applying our approach, the user
should collect a few unlabeled texts from target
data distribution and use our framework to ﬁnetune BERT encoder in a self-supervised manner.
Since our approach is self-supervised, no bias will
be introduced from human annotations. Moreover,
our data augmentation strategies also have little
probability to introduce extra biases since they are
all based on random sampling. However, it is still
possible to introduce data biases from the unlabeled
texts. Therefore, users should pay special attention
to ensure that the training data is ethical, unbiased,
and closely related to downstream tasks.