The 3A Personalized, Contextual and Relation-based
Recommender System
Sandy El Helou
(École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
 )
Christophe Salzmann
(École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
 )
Denis Gillet
(École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
 )
Abstract: This paper discusses the 3A recommender system that targets CSCL (computersupported collaborative learning) and CSCW (computer-supported collaborative work)
environments. The proposed system models user interactions in a heterogeneous graph. Then, it
applies a personalized, contextual, and multi-relational ranking algorithm to simultaneously
rank actors, activity spaces, and assets. The results of an empirical evaluation carried out on an
Epinions dataset indicate that the proposed recommendation approach exploiting the trust and
authorship networks performs better than user-based collaborative filtering in terms of recall.
Keywords: Recommender systems, CSCW, CSCL, trust, algorithms, design, pagerank
Categories: L.3.2, L.3.6, H.2.8, M.5
Introduction
We live in an age of information abundance best described as the “Information
Overload Age” [Ram, 2001]. It is an age distinguished by a rapidly changing
knowledge society [Burch, 2005], and fraught with information thanks to the rapidly
evolving technological advances, the Internet revolution, and the popular social media
that particularly facilitated the production, distribution and consumption of digital
content. Today, more than anytime before, people are challenged to constantly and
actively acquire knowledge in order to stay up-to-date. Moreover, the society is
confronted with the adverse effects of information overload such as stress, anxiety,
and reduced work efficiency at a personal as well as an organizational level
[Heylighen, 1999]. Personalized recommender systems are instrumental in
overcoming the problem of information overload as they help online users find
relatively interesting information, services and products [Im and Hars, 2007]. In
online formal and informal learning environments in particular, recommender systems
play a key role in recommending appropriate knowledge artifacts and learning
activities depending on learner interests [Drachsler et al., 2008; Koper and Tattersall,
2004; Tang and McCalla, 2009].
Journal of Universal Computer Science, vol. 16, no. 16 , 2179-2195
submitted: 31/3/10, accepted: 31/7/10, appeared: 28/8/10 © J.UCS
This paper discusses the 3A personalized, contextual and relation-based
recommender system. The proposed system serves two purposes. First, it can
recommend new actors, activities and knowledge assets depending on the target
user’s interest, hence triggering new collaboration and learning opportunities. Second,
it can recommend an ordering of existing entities in a workspace according to their
predicted importance to the target user and his or her context, thus increasing the
working efficiency. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents
the 3A recommender system. Section 3 discusses the results of an empirical validation
of the algorithm using an Epinions dataset. Section 4 reviews related work. Section 5
concludes the paper with hints on future work.
The 3A recommender system
The 3A recommender system ranks 3A entities (actors, assets, and activities)
according to their relative importance to a target actor and his or her context. The
proposed system unobtrusively leverages the entities’ relative importance by relying
on the 3A interaction model to identify and exploit significant user interactions,
established relations, and evaluation metadata. Evaluation metadata involve ratings,
bookmarks, tags, and reviews provided by users. Exploiting evaluation metadata is
particularly useful for recommender systems[Vuorikari et al. 2007]. The 3A
recommender system applies the 3A ranking algorithm to simultaneously rank actors,
activities, and assets based on their global popularity and more importantly their local
one. Local popularity refers to the popularity in the neighborhood of the target actor
and his or her context. In this section, the 3A interaction model is briefly described.
Then, the recommendation approach and the adopted ranking algorithm are presented.
3A Interaction Model
The 3A interaction model takes advantage of existing CSCW theories, namely
Activity Theory and Distributed Cognition [Halverson 2002], while positioning itself
at an adequate formalization level to ease implementation. The model is
domain-independent and involves three main constructs also referred to as entities:
Actors represent entities capable of initiating an event in a collaborative environment,
such as regular users or agents. Assets represent any kind of resource that is
produced, transformed, annotated, assessed and shared by actors. Assets can consist
for example of simple text files, RSS feeds, content of wikis, as well as video and
audio files. Activity spaces represent mediums created by actors to conduct
spontaneous or planned, individual or collaborative activities. A role consists of a
label and an associated set of rights granted to an actor within an activity space.
Activity spaces can have a concrete planning of expected assets (or deliverables) with
concrete submission and evaluation deadlines as well as predefined evaluators and
submitters. This is particularly useful in project management communities and online
educational environments.
The proposed model adopts social media design paradigms and explicitly
accounts for Web 2.0 evaluation metadata. More specifically, SALT (Share, Assess,
Link, Tag) is an acronym introduced to denote Web 2.0 features encouraging opinion
expression and active participation [El Helou et al., 2010]. Actors, activities, and
El Helou S., Salzmann C., Gillet D.: The 3A Personalized, Contextual ...
assets can be shared, assessed, linked and tagged. Quantitative assessment is done
through rating, while qualitative assessment is achieved by adding bookmarks and
comments. With respect to linking or relating entities together, actors can use default
relation types (i.e. “friends” for actors, and “sub-space” for activity spaces), but can
also define new bidirectional or unidirectional ones and share them with others. A
graphical representation of the 3A model and the relations between its entities is
presented in Figure 1. CRUD is an acronym used in relational databases or at the user
interface level to refer to the four main actions of Creating, Reading, Updating, and
Deleting that could be performed on actors, activities and assets.
Figure 1: 3A Model Graphical Representation
The Recommendation Approach
Studies have shown that when it comes to assessing and filtering the information at
hand, people are highly influenced by their trusted networks of friends and colleagues
[Borgatti and Cross, 2003; Geyer et al., 2008]. Previous research also reports that
people are not always ready to explicitly express their preferences and priorities.
People perceive such actions as extrinsic to their work and requiring extra effort
[Grudin, 1998]. Therefore, the 3A recommender system relies on past interactions
involving the target actor and other 3A entities in order to unobtrusively infer the
relative importance of a 3A entity for the target actor in a particular context.
The adopted recommendation approach consists of four main steps listed
hereafter: graph construction, context definition, importance computation, and ranked
lists extraction. These steps can be summarized as follows:
Graph Construction. The proposed recommender system models significant 3A
inter-relations in a heterogeneous and multi-relational directed graph. The graph is
formed taking as nodes the actors, activity spaces, and assets that the target actor is
allowed to access, and as edges the inter-relations between them. Intermediary entities
El Helou S., Salzmann C., Gillet D.: The 3A Personalized, Contextual ...
such as roles and tags are also incorporated in the graph as nodes, depending on the
relations considered and the level of granularity worth keeping track of. For instance,
it might be significant to give different importance weights for space owners and
regular members. For that, it is important to include “role” as an intermediary node
between spaces and actors, instead of connecting an activity space directly to its
members, loosing in the graph the information related to their role. Each bidirectional
relation (e.g. “friendship” between two actors) is translated into two directed edges.
Additionally, some initially unidirectional relations are complemented by another
edge going in the opposite direction, in such a way that the two nodes involved in the
relationship reinforce one another. For instance, transforming the initial one-way
authorship relation between an asset and its author into two directed edges in opposite
directions has two benefits. On the one hand, the edge going from the author to his or
her asset allows actors in the author’s network to reach this asset through its author.
On the other hand, the edge going in the opposite direction (i.e. from the asset to the
authors) allows actors that fall on the asset in question, to reach its author and from
there discover other potentially interesting assets of the same author. In the same way,
if an actor frequently participates in a community’s activity space, not only does this
imply the actor’s interest in the discussion space, but it also indicates the importance
of this actor for the community. In other words, if one would like to know what is
happening within the collaborative space, it is worth recommending this active
participant to him or her.
Context Definition. Whether the 3A ranking algorithm is used for ordering
entities already known to the target actor or recommending new ones, it is crucial to
take his or her context into account. Context is “any information that can be used to
characterize the situation of any entity”, an entity being a person, place or object
relevant to the user’s interaction with the application [Dey, 2001]. It can be measured
by relying on implicit interest parameters consisting of users’ activities and
interactions combined with explicit parameters such as tags [Vuorikari and Berendt,
2009]. Based on the above definitions and on the 3A model’s taxonomy, the target
actor’s context is represented at any point in time by a set of 3A main entities, in
addition to intermediary ones (e.g. tags) directly involved in an action performed by
the target actor. When an actor performs a search, all tags and entities having
attributes (e.g. title, description) that match the search keyword(s) are considered as
contextual nodes. Alternatively, when the target user chooses a specific actor, activity
space or asset to interact with, all directly related entities constitute the context. For
instance, when the selected entity is an activity space, then its members, assets, roles,
and directly related activities constitute its context. As it is explained in section 2.5,
the algorithm is then expected to bias results towards the context in such a way that
entities that have strong connections to contextual nodes get an important ranking.
This will lead to suggesting new relevant entities to the target actor depending on the
strength of their connection to contextual nodes.
Importance Calculation. Once the graph is formed and the context defined, the
3A ranking algorithm is applied [El Helou, 2009]. The 3A ranking algorithm is based
on the key idea of the original pagerank algorithm: a node is recursively important if
and only if many other important nodes point to it. With respect to our framework, the
idea can be extended and reformulated as follows: A node is recursively important to
a particular root set of nodes (representing the target user and the context) if and
El Helou S., Salzmann C., Gillet D.: The 3A Personalized, Contextual ...
only if many important nodes connected to the root set via important edge types point
Ranked List Extraction: Separate lists of actors, activities, and assets are extracted
whilst respecting their relative order in the original heterogeneous list. When the aim
is to recommend new entities rather than prioritizing existing entities in a workspace,
entities that already have a direct connection to the user are skipped. These already
related items are more likely to appear first in the recommendation list because they
are very close to the target user. Even though it is definitely not beneficial to include
them in the recommendation list, they help during the ranking process to reach related
nodes that the user is not aware of.
Original pagerank algorithm
The 3A ranking algorithm takes its roots from the original pagerank algorithm
developed by Page and Brin for ranking hypertext documents for Google [Page et al.,
1998]. Pagerank is based on the idea that if the owner of a page j links to a page i ,
he or she is implicitly indicating that page i is important. It follows that the more
incoming links a page i has, the more it is considered as “authoritative” or globally
important because many pages refer to it. It is not only the number of incoming links
that counts but also their quality; the more “authoritative” a page is, the more its
outgoing links are valued, and the more importance it can confer to the pages it links
The iterative probability equation that translates the algorithm’s key idea is
described hereafter. A node’s conferred importance is divided equally among all
nodes it points to. Let N denote the total number of Web pages, OutDegree(j) the total
number of outgoing links from a page (or node) j. A transition matrix T(N × N ) is
defined such that, each entry Tij is equal to 1/ Outdegree( j) if j points to i, and 0
otherwise. Dangling pages are pages with no outgoing links. These pages do not
confer any importance to other nodes. To solve this issue, dangling nodes are
considered to link to all nodes in the graph with an equal probability. For that, a
matrix D(N × N ) is defined such that all entries are 0 except for the dangling
columns whose entries are equal to 1 N . The damping factor d represents the
probability to follow page links. Since the damping factor d is less than 1, the further
the nodes are from one another, the less influence they will have on each other’s rank.
λ defines the probability of falling on a random page. Using λ avoids situations
where nodes of a graph component form an importance “sink”. λ ensures that no
page will have a zero rank and every page is reachable from every other one. Given
this, starting with an equal rank of 1 N to all nodes, the probability equation of
landing on a node i (or rank of a Web page i) at each iteration given the ranks of the
previous iteration k, is given by:
k ; λ, d > 0; λ + d = 1 Eq.1
Eq.1 can be understood as a Markov chain where states are pages and the transition
between states depends on the link structure of the Web. The equation can be
interpreted as the probability for a random surfer to land on a page or node i starting
El Helou S., Salzmann C., Gillet D.: The 3A Personalized, Contextual ...
at any node with an equal prior probability, following random links with a probability
of d, and randomly jumping on a page with a probability of λ .
Multi-Relational Ranking
Unlike the graph of hypertext documents of the original pagerank algorithm, the
social graph of the 3A model involves heterogeneous nodes (i.e. actors, activity
spaces, and assets) related by different types of edges that are not necessarily equally
important. In such a multi-relational graph, when the surfer falls on a node, he or she
can choose to follow different pathways. For instance, if an actor is looking for an
expert on a particular topic, he or she can search among his or her friends and “friends
of friends” for actors whose profiles match his or her interest. He or she can also
choose to traverse different activity spaces, choose one that is relevant to the topic,
and from there reach actors who have actively contributed to the space or posted
interesting resources. In the same way, given two papers that are equally relevant to a
topic, an actor might prefer to first check the one that has been posted or top-rated by
a related actor, than the one that have been simply accessed by the same trusted actor.
Clearly, the probability to fall on interesting nodes depends upon the probability that
the adopted way (combined ways) will lead to them.
To account for the existence of different link types with potentially different
importance weights, the original algorithm is modified as follows. The complete
multi-relational network is viewed as a combination of separate sub-networks each
connecting nodes with one specific edge or relation type. Let E denote the set of all
edge types. An inner transition matrix T e(N × N ) and a corresponding weight we
are defined for each edge type e ∈E , where we is interpreted as the probability for a
target actor to follow links within the sub-network e. we represents the probability to
fall on nodes connected by relations of type e. Nodes that do not have outgoing links
within a sub-network (locally dangling nodes) are considered as linking to all nodes in
the sub-network with an equal probability. For that, a matrix De(N × N ) is defined
for each type of relation e such that all entries are 0 except for the dangling node
columns where entries equal 1 N . Then, the iterative stationary probability equation
of landing on a node i , is given by:
= 1; λ,d > 0; λ + d = 1
The transition matrix T e is defined depending on the type of relation it corresponds
to. When it comes to relations representing one-time events such as joining a space,
T e is the same as in the original pagerank algorithm. Let Outdegreee(j) represent the
total number of edges of type e coming from j, then the entry Tij
e between i and j is
expressed as follows:
Outdegreee(j) ,
if j points to i
Relations resulting from events that can be repeated over time (e.g. updating an asset
or accessing an activity space) are treated in a slightly different way. Let Rij
the total number of events of type e involving i and j . Then, the probability to jump
El Helou S., Salzmann C., Gillet D.: The 3A Personalized, Contextual ...
from j to i is equal to Rij
e and normalized by the total number of outgoing relations
of type e having j as their source node.
if j points to i
The “rating” relation type is also handled differently. In this case, the probability to
fall on an item i rated by actor j is equal to the corresponding rating value divided
by the sum of all ratings issued by actor j and having a value higher than his or her
average rating value. In this way, poorly rated assets are not reachable from an actor.
Let v j denote the average rating given by j and vij the rating value given by j to
i , then Tij
e can be written as:
if vij ≥v j
Finally, in order to take into account the evolution of the graph over time, one can
define significant time frames, and then group relations not only according to their
type but also the time frame during which they occurred, giving a higher relative
weight to more recent ones.
Personalized and Contextual Ranking
In [White and Smyth, 2003], pagerank is extended to rank nodes according to their
relative importance to a root set of nodes. For that, the initial probability equation is
changed in such a way that the random surfer starts at the root set with adequate prior
probabilities, follows links with a probability of d, and goes back to the root set with a
probability of β (where it restarts again). This change leads to a bias towards the root
set and the nodes strongly connected with it (because of the iterative process). During
their experiment, authors used a value of 0.3 for β while acknowledging that the
choice is inherently subjective and dependent upon the objective, nature and structure
of the graphs considered.
Similarly, the 3A ranking algorithm is personalized and contextualized by biasing
rankings towards the target actor and the context. To do so, we introduce two
parameters βc and βu . βc represents the probability to jump back to the contextual
nodes and βu the probability to jump back to the target actor. Also, in order to speed
up the algorithm’s convergence to the stationary rank vector, the initial probability is
set to 0 except for contextual nodes. Let N ' be the number of contextual nodes, then
each of them receives an equal initial probability of 1 N ' . Also, let Rc represent the
set of contextual nodes, and pc a variable equal to 1 N ' for contextual nodes, and 0
otherwise. In addition, let u denote the target actor’s node and pu a variable defined
such that it is 0 for all nodes except u . To ensure that no node highly connected to the
target user but irrelevant (or not enough relevant) to the context gets a high rank, βu
should be considerably smaller than βc / N ' . This choice makes nodes that are
relevant to the context (i.e. contextual nodes and those strongly connected to them)
El Helou S., Salzmann C., Gillet D.: The 3A Personalized, Contextual ...
achieve top ranks, and those among them that are closer to the target actor achieve
better ranking than others. The complete iterative stationary probability equation of
landing on node i is given by:
N +βupu +βcpc + d
= 1; λ,d,βc,βu > 0; λ + d + βc + βu = 1;
Eq. 3 can be interpreted as the probability to fall on a node in the graph, starting
within a set of contextual nodes, following different types of links with a probability
of d (each with a probability of we ), jumping to random nodes with a probability of
λ , jumping back to the target actor with a probability of βu , then going back to one
of the contextual nodes with a probability of βc (and restarting again).
Rank Vector Existence, Uniqueness, and Computation
This section explains how the rank vector whose components are the importance
rankings of all graph nodes is obtained. Let C(N × N) be a matrix such that all row
elements are zero except those corresponding to contextual nodes where entries are
equal to 1 N ' , and U(N × N) a matrix having all rows equal to 0, except the one
corresponding to the target actor which is equal to 1. Also, let 1(N × N) denote a
matrix of 1s. Then, the complete matrix M representing the random walk can be
written as follows:
(T e +De) + βuU + βcC Eq.4
The rank vector I containing the importance rank of each node i can then be written
as follows:
I k+1 = MI k Eq.5
According to Eq.5, I is an eigenvector of M with eigenvalue 1. To prove the
existence and uniqueness of the rank vector I , important properties of the matrix M
are discussed hereafter. To start with, each column in M sums to 1 and all entries are
positive. This means that every node is reachable from every other one, thanks to the
random jump parameter. Thus M is stochastic, irreducible and primitive. As a result,
and according to the Perron-Frobenius theorem, M has one positive eigenvalue that
is greater (in absolute value) than all other eigenvalues, and one positive eigenvector
corresponding to it. Consequently, It is guaranteed that the matrix-free power method
will converge to I , the unique leading eigenvector corresponding to the dominant
eigenvalue and containing the importance rankings of all graph entities as it is the
case for the original pagerank algorithm [Langville and Meyer, 2003]. Authors of the
original pagerank algorithm report that with a value of d close to 0.85, only 50 to 100
iterations are enough to reach a good approximation of I for the Web graph involving
billions of hyperlinks [Page et al., 1998].
El Helou S., Salzmann C., Gillet D.: The 3A Personalized, Contextual ...
This paper does not address issues related to space and time complexity or graph
and rank update frequency. Still, a fully scalable future implementation can take
advantage of reported experiments and proposed solutions related to scaling
personalized pagerank [Fogaras et al., 2006; Haveliwala et al., 2003; Jeh and Widom,
Experimental Evaluation on Epinions dataset
This experiment aims at verifying whether the proposed recommendation approach
that represents different 3A inter-relations in a multi-layer graph, and computes
rankings based on a personalized and contextualized version of pagerank yields
relevant top-N recommendations.
Dataset description
evaluation
( To our best knowledge, it
is the only large and publicly available dataset with social networks information in
addition to authorship data. The original dataset is reduced to ensure a reasonable
validation taking into account the adopted evaluation methods and the ranking
approaches compared in this experiment. The evaluation method consists of randomly
withdrawing user ratings and trying to predict them. Since unrated reviews cannot be
evaluated in this way, they are excluded from the dataset along with their authorship
information. While these reviews could have enriched the 3A recommender system,
the collaborative filtering method used as a comparison basis cannot make any
prediction on them. Actors that share trust information but have not made any rating
are also not considered. Distrust information between actors is ignored since none of
the ranking approaches exploits them. Since the 3A recommender system considers
only ratings values greater or equal to the average, ratings with values less than 3 out
of 5 were ignored in the dataset used during the evaluation. Knowing that a bias
towards high rating values in Epinions rating distribution has already been reported in
 , and that in this dataset in particular, ratings that are
below the average only constitute 2.34% of the total number of ratings, removing
them is not expected to affect the performance of user-based collaborative filtering in
any substantial way. The resulting dataset involves 113,364 actors, 602,309 trust
statements, 744,075 rated reviews (47.6% of initial total reviews), 13,348,412 ratings
(97.7% of initial total ratings) and 102,652 different topics. Figure 2 shows a mapping
of the Epinions data into the 3A model, in which reviews are considered as assets, and
subjects or topics are treated as tags. The unidirectional or bi-directional relations
that are translated into bi-directional edges in the graph are displayed in italic.
Relationships between actors, assets and tags are shown along with their relative
weight. Weights were chosen empirically taking into account the importance of the
different relationships as well as the total number of edges in their corresponding subnetworks.
As noted earlier, the rank of the target user’s nodes and contextual nodes are
boosted at every step by βu and βc respectively. Consequently, and unlike the
original pagerank algorithm that only considers the nodes’ global popularity, nodes
El Helou S., Salzmann C., Gillet D.: The 3A Personalized, Contextual ...
that are directly and indirectly connected to the target user and the context are also
boosted. For instance, actors trusted by the target user will rank better than others
because they are directly connected to him/her, and they will in turn confer
importance to the actors they trust and the assets they authored, rated, and tagged. In
the same way, assets and actors linked with tags that are relevant to the context or
used by the target actor will also achieve higher ranks than others.
Figure 2: The Epinions network structure
Evaluation Method
Two different versions of the 3A recommender system are applied: the first exploits
trust and ratings relations while the second uses all available relations (trust, ratings,
authorship and topic information). The experiment does not involve contextualization.
In order to personalize rankings towards every target user, parameters were adjusted
as follows d= 0.75, λ = 0.05, βc = 0, and βu = 0.245. Ranks were obtained using the
power method with 5 iterations.
A user-based collaborative filtering method (referred hereafter as CF) is used as a
comparison basis. CF computes the similarity in rating behaviour between users. Then
CF predicts the rating of an asset unrated by a target user, based on how similar users
have rated it. In this experiment, the similarity in rating behaviour sim(x, y) between
two actors x and y is calculated using the cosine-based similarity measure
[Adomavicius and Tuzhilin, 2005]. Let Sxy denote the set of all items co-rated by x
and y, sim(x, y) is given by:
sim(x, y) =
The predicted rating rx,i of an item i unrated by a target actor x is computed
using the weighted average of all ratings given by users in Rx for item i . Let ry,i
denote the rating given by user y to item i respectively. The predicted rating rx,i
a target user x is given by:
El Helou S., Salzmann C., Gillet D.: The 3A Personalized, Contextual ...
sim(x,y) ry,i
In this experiment, items rated by the top 50 most similar actors to a target user
and unrated by the target actor are aggregated, and sorted according to their predicted
rating rx,i
and then their frequency of occurrence .
To compare the performance of the 3 top-N recommendation algorithms
described above in terms of results accuracy, we use an evaluation approach similar to
the one proposed in [Jamali and Ester, 2009]. The leave-one-out method is adopted. It
consists of withdrawing a rating and trying to predict its rank using the remaining
data. In our experiment, random ratings for 1500 randomly selected users are
withdrawn. Only top-rated assets by an actor are considered. Actors that have less
than 3 ratings are disregarded during the selection process, as user-based collaborative
filtering cannot make predictions on them, after one rating is withdrawn.
Recall (or hit-ratio) is used to measure the accuracy of a top-N recommended list
for a target user [Kim et al., 2007]. A hit occurs every time a withdrawn rating for a
user appears in top-N recommended list for that user. For each of the three
recommendation algorithms used in this experiment, recall is computed by dividing
the number of hits achieved by the total number of withheld ratings.
Figure 3 shows the average recall value achieved by the three different ranking
algorithms for different values of N. Evaluating the algorithm’s performance with also
big values of N is explained by the fact that the dataset involves more than 13 millions
ratings, and there are significantly more assets than actors in the dataset. For N=10,
CF performs slightly better than the 3A ranking algorithm when only rating and trust
relationships are taken into account, despite the fact that the latter uses more
information. A slight improvement of user-based collaborative filtering over
trust-based recommendation algorithms is also reported in other experiments and
explained by the fact that users do not necessarily rate the same reviews as the people
with whom they have issued trust statements [Jamali and Ester, 2009; Walter et al,
2009]. When the 3A ranking algorithm combines trust, authorship, rating and topic
information, it achieves a considerably better recall than CF for small as well as large
values of N.
El Helou S., Salzmann C., Gillet D.: The 3A Personalized, Contextual ...
Figure 3: Average recall achieved by the different recommendation approaches
Related Work
Many studies on recommender systems for Web applications can be found in the
literature. In particular, several recommender systems specifically dedicated to
learning environments are proposed [Anderson et al., 2003; Rafaeli et al., 2004;
Manouselis et al., 2007]. With respect to the adopted recommendation approaches,
most of the existing systems use traditional collaborative filtering where items are
recommended based on how “like minded” people rated them. Some combine
collaborative filtering with content-based filtering where items are recommended if
they are similar in content to items the target user has previously liked. Others use
ontology-based filtering that define sequencing rules, model the fine-grained learner’s
preferences and competences, and compare them against the characteristics of the
learning resource [Shen and Shen, 2004]. This approach is usually computationally
expensive and restricted to one domain. In addition, compared to the 3A model that
simultaneously ranks actors, activities and assets, most of these cited systems are
concerned with recommending learning resources only. Only a few also recommend
people such as Altered Vista and learning activities such as
Cyclades [Avancini et al., 2007]. The difference between Altered Vista and the 3A
recommender system is that the former requires explicit and active user input, while
the latter rely on user networks and previous actions as implicit preference indicators.
On the other hand, Cyclades recommends folders and users using content-based
filtering in addition to rating-based measures for finding similar folders. The 3A
recommender system proposes a more general framework that does not only rely on
ratings and folder ownerships but also exploits other 3A inter-relations and evaluation
metadata to leverage user preferences. In particular, relying on Web 2.0 evaluation
El Helou S., Salzmann C., Gillet D.: The 3A Personalized, Contextual ...
metadata such as tags, reviews, and ratings is not yet widely used in recommender
systems targeting learning environments.
As far as recommender systems targeting general-purpose Web 2.0 applications
as concerned, several rely on tagging and social bookmarking behaviour [Gulli et al.,
2009; Symeonidis et al., 2008]. For instance, TC-SocialRank [Hotho et al., 2006]
presents a link-based algorithm for folksonomy systems that ranks users, bookmarks
and shared resources taking into account temporal and user-clicks information. In
addition, several recommendation algorithms that rely on both user ratings and social
networks (e.g. friendship and/or trust network) are proposed in the literature [Walter
et al., 2009; Ben-Shimon et al., 2007]. The difference with the 3A ranking algorithm
is that its underlying graph is heterogeneous and multi-relational; it is not limited to
actors related by a monolithic relation but also incorporates different node types and
combines diverse relations. This is due to the fact that the 3A model targets
collaborative environments where users can undertake more actions than merely
tagging, bookmarking or rating and where recommendation is not limited to resources
such as movies or documents but also extends to people and activity spaces.
Therefore, more generalized interaction models and recommendation algorithms are
required to be able to infer user interests and preferences from significant
inter-relations between actors, activities and assets.
Recommender systems that adopt graph-based approaches and link analysis
algorithm already exist in the literature. [Huang et al., 2002] presents a graph-based
recommender system for digital libraries where a two-layer graph is used to represent
similarity in content between books, similarity in demographic information between
people as well as “purchase” relation connecting people to books. Then, the
recommendation task consists of traversing the graph to find weighted paths from the
target person to different books. Just as in the 3A recommendation model, first-degree
associations (in that case, books that users already purchased) are only used to lead to
other ones and are skipped in the final recommendation list. The difference with the
3A model is that the latter is applied in a different context and exploits social
networks and user interactions. In addition, the 3A model ranks entities by applying a
personalized and contextualized version of the original pagerank algorithm based on
global and local popularity measures rather than a graph-search technique. On the
other hand, [Wang et al., 2008] propose a graph-based approach that combines
different object types linked by diverse relations. It relies on a random walk algorithm
based on pagerank to compute the importance of objects in an educational portal. In
addition, a more general framework called fusion also based on a random-walk
algorithm and combining inter and intra-links among multiple-type objects is
introduced in [Xi et al., 2004]. None of these two papers addresses the issue of having
different weights for different relation types, neither do they personalize or
contextualize rankings. Finally, with respect to personalizing recommendations in
working and learning environments, a personalized activity prioritization approach
that identifies different types of users’ actions and exploits them using a Support
Vector Machine model is presented in [Li et al., 2007]. The 3A recommendation
algorithm also exploits user actions. However, it is not limited to activities. Finally, it
does not only recommend an ordering of existing entities but also recommends new
ones taking into account the target user’s context.
El Helou S., Salzmann C., Gillet D.: The 3A Personalized, Contextual ...
Conclusion and Future Work
This paper presented a personalized, contextual and multi-relational ranking system
that can simultaneously rank actors, activities, and assets in CSCW and CSCL
environments. The evaluation carried using a large Epinions dataset shows that the
presented approach outperforms a user-based collaborative filtering algorithm used as
a comparative basis. More evaluations will be carried out in the future using data from
social media sites offering public API’s such as LinkedIn ( 
Studies regarding the algorithm’s sensitivity to its different parameters will be
conducted. As far as the relation types linking 3A entities are concerned, further
experiments can help identify the significant relations that should be taken into
account to improve recommendations, and study the impact of different relation
weights’ distribution on the algorithm. Finally, future investigations will also address
different challenges related to how best to display recommendations, and how to
update them taking into account the user’s online feedback.
Acknowledgements
This research was partially funded through Projects (Palette, ROLE, STELLAR) that are part of
the Sixth and Seven Framework Program for Research and Technological Development of the
European Union in Information and Communication Technologies, as well as through the
Innovation Funds for educational projects (FIFO) of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
in Lausanne (EPFL).