A Wave Function approach
to dissipative processes
Yvan Castin and Jean Dalibard
Laboratoire de Spectroscopie Hertzienne de l’ENS ∗
24 rue Lhomond, F-75231 Paris Cedex 05, France
and Klaus Mølmer
Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Quantenoptik,
W-8046 Garching, Germany †
Abstract: We present a wave function approach to study the evolution of a
small system when it is coupled to a large reservoir. Fluctuations and dissipation
originate in this approach from quantum jumps occurring randomly during the
time evolution of the system. This approach can be applied to a wide class of
relaxation operators in the Markovian regime, and it is equivalent to the standard Master Equation approach.
 
H¨ansch, and B. Neizert.
The problem of dissipation plays a central role in Atomic Physics and Quantum Optics. The simplest example is the phenomenon of spontaneous emission,
where the coupling between an atom and the ensemble of modes of the quantized
electromagnetic ﬁeld gives a ﬁnite lifetime to all excited atomic levels. Usually
∗Unit´e de recherche de l’Ecole Normale Sup´erieure et de l’Universit´e Paris 6, associ´ee au
†Permanent address: Institute of Physics and Astronomy, Aarhus University, DK-8000
Aarhus C, Denmark
the dissipative coupling between a small system and a large reservoir can be
treated by a master equation approach ; one writes a linear equation for the time evolution of the reduced system density matrix ρS = Trres(ρ),
trace over the reservoir variables of the total density matrix. If we denote the
hamiltonian for the system HS, this equation can be written:
¯h[ρS, HS] + Lrelax(ρS) .
In (1), Lrelax is the relaxation superoperator, acting on the density operator ρS.
It is assumed here to be local in time, which means that ˙ρS(t) depends only
on ρS at the same time (Markov approximation). All the system dynamics can
be deduced from (1). One can calculate one time average values of a system
operator A: a(t) = ⟨A⟩(t) = Tr(ρS(t)A), and also, using the quantum regression
theorem , multi-time correlation functions such as ⟨A(t + τ)B(t)⟩.
We present here an alternative treatment based on a Monte-Carlo evolution of
wave functions of the small system (MCWF) . This evolution consists of
two elements: evolution with a non hermitian hamiltonian, and randomly decided
“quantum jumps”, followed by wave function normalization.
This approach,
which is equivalent to the master equation treatment, has two main interests.
First, if the relevant Hilbert space of the quantum system has a dimension N large
compared to 1, the number of variables involved in a wave function treatment (∼
N) is much smaller than the one required for calculations with density matrices
(∼N2). Second, new physical insight may be gained, in particular in the studies
of the behavior of a single quantum system.
The MCWF procedure
The class of relaxation operators that we consider here is the following:
Lrelax(ρS) = −1
mCmρS + ρSC†
This type of relaxation operators is very general and it is found in most of the
Quantum Optics problems involving dissipation. In (2), the Cm’s are operators
acting in the space of the small system. Depending on the nature of the problem
there can be one, a few or an inﬁnity of these operators.
For the particular case of spontaneous emission by a two-level system with
one stable ground state g and one excited state e with a lifetime Γ−1, there is
just a single operator C1 =
Γ|g⟩⟨e| in the relaxation operator (2), and one can
check that (2) indeed leads to the well known relaxation part of the optical Bloch
equations:
−(Γ/2)(ρS)eg
−(Γ/2)(ρS)ge .
We now present the procedure for evolving wave functions of the small system.
Consider at time t that the system is in a state with the normalized wave function
|φ(t)⟩. In order to get the wave function at time t + δt, we proceed in two steps:
1. First we calculate the wave function |φ(1)(t + δt)⟩obtained by evolving
|φ(t)⟩with the non hermitian Hamiltonian:
H = HS −i¯h
This gives for suﬃciently small δt:
|φ(1)(t + δt)⟩=
Since H is not hermitian, this new wave function is clearly not normalized.
The square of its norm is:
⟨φ(1)(t + δt)|φ(1)(t + δt)⟩
where δp reads:
¯h ⟨φ(t)|H −H†|φ(t)⟩=
δt ⟨φ(t)|C†
mCm|φ(t)⟩≥0 .
The magnitude of the step δt is adjusted so that this calculation at ﬁrst
order is valid; in particular it requires δp ≪1.
For the particular case of the two-level atom problem, the non hermitian
Hamiltonian is
H = HS −i¯hΓ
2 |e⟩⟨e| .
This amounts to adding the imaginary term −i¯hΓ/2 to the energy of the
unstable excited state, as usual in scattering theory.
✟✟✟✟✟✟✟✟✟✟✟
✏✏✏✏✏✏✏✏✏✏✏✏✏✏✏✏✏
Quantum Jumps:
probabilities δpm
No Quantum Jump:
probability 1 −
|φ(t + δt)⟩=
∥Cm|φ(t)⟩∥
|φ(t + δt)⟩=
|φ(1)(t + δt)⟩
∥|φ(1)(t + δt)⟩∥
Figure 1: The possible quantum jumps in the Monte-Carlo evolution
2. The second step of the evolution of |φ⟩between t and t + δt consists in a
possible “quantum jump” (Fig. 1). The various possible “directions” for
the jumps are given by the Cm operators, and the probability for making
a jump in the “direction” of a particular Cm is given by δpm given in (8).
The new normalized wave function after such a jump is given by:
with a probability δpm
|φ(t + δt)⟩=
∥Cm|φ(t)⟩∥.
Using (7), we ﬁnd that the total probability for making a jump is δp. In
the no-jump case, which occurs then with a probability 1 −δp, we take as
new normalized wave function at time t + δt:
with a probability 1 −δp = 1 −
|φ(t + δt)⟩=
|φ(1)(t + δt)⟩
∥|φ(1)(t + δt)⟩∥.
Consider again as an example the particular case of the spontaneous emission
of a two-level atom. The wave function at time t can be written as:
|φ(t)⟩= α(t)|e⟩+ β(t)|g⟩.
Since there is a single Cm operator in this case, there is only one possible type
of quantum jump. The probability for this quantum jump is:
δp = Γ|α|2δt
and the wave function after the jump is simply |φ(t+δt)⟩= |g⟩. If no jump occurs,
the wave function at time t+δt is similar to (12), with the coeﬃcients α(t+δt) and
β(t+ δt) deduced from α(t) and β(t) using the evolution with the non hermitian
hamiltonian (9). We see for this particular case that the Monte-Carlo evolution
can be understood as the stochastic evolution of the atomic wave function if a
continuous detection of the emitted photons is performed. The probability for
detecting a photon during a particular time step δt is indeed equal to δp given in
(13), and the new wave function after the detection, according to the standard
quantum measurement theory, corresponds to the atom in its ground state g.
It is actually quite a general result that the Monte-Carlo evolution outlined
above represents a possible history of the system wave function with a suitable
continuous detection process taking place . Although this procedure does
not make any reference to measurements on the system, it may be useful, in
order to get some physical understanding for the result of the simulation, to
refer to such a continuous detection process, as if it was really performed. We
note in this respect that one might possibly consider several diﬀerent continuous detection processes for a given quantum system. The various sets of Cm’s
associated to each of these detection schemes can be deduced from each other
by linear combinations, the relaxation equation (2) remaining then of course
unchanged .
Equivalence with the Master Equation
With this set of rules we can propagate a wave function |φ(t)⟩in time, and we
now show that this procedure is equivalent to the master equation (1). More
precisely we consider the quantity ¯σ(t) obtained by averaging σ(t) = |φ(t)⟩⟨φ(t)|
over the various possible outcomes at time t of the MCWF evolutions all starting
in |φ(0)⟩, and we prove that ¯σ(t) coincides with ρS(t) at all times t, provided
they coincide at t = 0.
Consider a given MCWF |φ(t)⟩at time t. At time t + δt, the average value
of σ(t + δt) is:
σ(t + δt) =
|φ(1)(t + δt)⟩
∥|φ(1)(t + δt)⟩∥
⟨φ(1)(t + δt)|
∥|φ(1)(t + δt)⟩∥
∥Cm|φ(t)⟩∥
∥Cm|φ(t)⟩∥
which gives, using (5),(6) and (10):
σ(t + δt) = σ(t) + iδt
¯h [σ(t), HS] + δt Lrelax(σ(t)).
We now average this equation over the possible values of σ(t) and we obtain:
¯h[¯σ, HS] + Lrelax(¯σ).
This equation is identical to the master equation (1). If we assume that ρS(0) =
|φ(0)⟩⟨φ(0)|, ¯σ(t) and ρS(t) coincide at any time, which demonstrates the equivalence between the two points of view. In the case where ρS(0) does not correspond to a pure state, one has ﬁrst to decompose it as a statistical mixture of
pure states, ρ(0) = P pi|χi⟩⟨χi| and then randomly choose the initial MCWFs
among the |χi⟩with the probability law pi.
As mentioned in the introduction, the master equation approach and the
reduced density matrix give access to one time average values a(t) = ⟨A⟩(t) =
Tr(ρS(t)A), which can now also be obtained with the MCWF method.
calculates, for several outcomes |φ(i)(t)⟩of the MCWF evolution, the quantum
average ⟨φ(i)(t)|A|φ(i)(t)⟩, and one takes the mean value of this quantity over the
various outcomes |φ(i)(t)⟩:
⟨A⟩(n)(t) = 1
⟨φ(i)(t)|A|φ(i)(t)⟩.
For n suﬃciently large, (16) implies that ⟨A⟩(n)(t) ≃⟨A⟩(t).
The ability to
provide expectation values for any system operator makes the MCWF method a
computational tool which may be much more eﬃcient than the numerical solution
of (1) .
As an example of the agreement between the master equation approach and
the MCWF approach, we have calculated by both methods the excited state
population of a two-level atom coupled to a coherent laser ﬁeld. The parameters
for this Rabi nutation are a zero detuning δ between the laser and atomic frequencies, and a Rabi frequency Ω= 3Γ. In Fig. 2a, we show the excited state
population for a single “history” for |φ(t)⟩. One ﬁnds a continuous evolution
for this population oscillating between 0 and 1, interrupted by random quantum
jumps projecting the atomic wave function into the ground state. In Fig. 2b, we
indicate the MCWF result obtained with the average of 100 wave functions. It
shows a damped oscillation as a result of the dephasing of the individual oscillations due to the randomness of the various quantum jumps. The MCWF result
is in good agreement with the one derived from the master equation (Optical
Bloch Equations). Note that the purpose of this example is to illustrate the
convergence of the two methods, and not to provide an eﬃcient way of treating
two-level atom problems. For such a small system, there is of course no gain in
computing time by using the MCWF method instead of the master equation.
Figure 2: (a) Time evolution of the excited-state population of a two-level atom
in the MCWF approach. The dashed lines indicate the projection of the atomic
wave function onto the ground state (quantum jump). (b) Excited state population averaged over 100 MCWF starting all in ground state at time 0. The dotted
line represents the master equation result.
It appears clearly that the equivalence of the Master Equation and MCWF
approaches does not depend on the particular value of the time step δt. From a
practical point of view, the largest possible δt is preferable, and one might beneﬁt
from using a generalization of (5) to a higher order in δt, as for example a 4th
order Runge-Kutta type calculation.
The only requirement on δt is that the
various |ηi|δt, where the ¯hηi are the eigenvalues of H, should be small compared
to 1. Of course we assume here that those eigenvalues have been simpliﬁed as
much as possible in order to eliminate the bare energies of the eigenstates of HS.
For instance, for a two-level atom with a transition frequency ωA coupled to a
laser ﬁeld with frequency ωL, one makes the rotating wave approximation in the
rotating frame so that the |ηi|’s are of the order of the natural width Γ, the Rabi
frequency Ωor the detuning δ = ωL −ωA; they are consequently much smaller
One might wonder whether there is a minimal size for the time step δt. In
the derivation presented above, it can be chosen arbitrarily small. However one
should remember that the derivation of (1) involves a coarse grain average of
the real density operator evolution. The time step of this coarse grain average
has to be much larger than the correlation time τc of the reservoir, which is
typically an optical period for the problem of spontaneous emission. Therefore
one should be cautious when considering any result derived from this MCWF
approach involving details with a time scale of the order of or shorter than τc,
and only δt larger than τc should be applied. This appears clearly if one starts
directly from the interaction Hamiltonian between the system and the reservoir
in order to generate the stochastic evolution for the system wave function .
The condition δt ≫τc is then required to prevent quantum Zeno type eﬀects
 . This restriction is discussed in detail in in connection with quantum
measurement theory.
MCWF and other stochastic approaches
The problem of stochastic wave function evolution in connection with the treatment of dissipative systems in quantum optics has recently received a lot of
attention. In the context of non classical ﬁeld generation, Carmichael has
proposed an approach named “quantum trajectories”, inspired by the theory
of photoelectron counting sequences and quite similar to the spirit of the
present work.
For simple atomic systems (2 or 3 levels) coupled to the electromagnetic ﬁeld,
the dynamics can be interpreted in terms of one or a few delay functions, which
give the probability distribution of the time intervals between the emission of two
successive photons . When these functions are known analytically,
they can generate a very eﬃcient Monte-Carlo analysis of the process: just after
the emission of the nth ﬂuorescence photon at time tn, the atom is in its ground
state and the choice of a single random number is suﬃcient to determine the
time tn+1 of emission of the n + 1st photon. This type of Monte-Carlo analysis
has been used in to simulate an atomic beam cooling experiment, and in
 to prove numerically the existence of dark periods in the ﬂuorescence of a 3level atom (quantum jumps). Very recently, laser cooling of atoms using velocity
selective coherent population trapping and lasing without inversion have
been analyzed by this type of Monte-Carlo method.
Unfortunately, the delay function cannot be calculated analytically for complex systems involving a large number of levels.
Nevertheless, it is possible
to generate a Monte-Carlo solution for this problem in which a single random
number determines the time of emission of each ﬂuorescence photon . The
evolution of the system between two quantum jumps has to be integrated step
by step numerically, so that the amount of calculation involved is similar to the
one required by the method presented in this paper.
Stochastic approaches have also been introduced in the context of either standard or quantum non demolition measurements of photon
number in a given mode of the electromagnetic ﬁeld. A sequence of random
quantum jumps resulting from successive measurements asymptotically leads to
a reduction of the ﬁeld state into a Fock state |n⟩, whose probability distribution is equal to the initial photon number distribution for the case of the non
demolition measurement. The main interest of these stochastic approaches, as
compared with the usual master equation treatment, is to give explicit individual
histories of the quantum ﬁeld state in a measurement sequence. This is particularly valuable if one wants to optimize the measurement sequence in order to get
a complete information on the ﬁeld state with a minimum number of measurement processes . On the other hand, these stochastic calculations still mostly
deal with density matrices and their authors do not seem to consider them as
more eﬃcient ways of computing than the master equation.
Another class of stochastic equations for system wave functions, which is also
equivalent to the master equation (1), has been introduced by Gisin and Percival
 (see also the work by Diosi ). In this approach, only continuous stochastic
equations are considered. The complex Itˆo stochastic process is given by:
where ⟨Cm⟩= ⟨φ|Cm|φ⟩, and where the dξm are independent complex Wiener
processes :
ℜ(dξm)ℜ(dξn) = ℑ(dξm)ℑ(dξn) = δm,ndt
ℜ(dξm)ℑ(dξn) = 0
Carmichael has shown that for the particular case of the homodyne detection
of the ﬂuorescence light, the Quantum Jump formalism can be transformed into
such a continuous stochastic equation . Actually this proof can be extended
to the most general case: the ﬁrst step is to write the relaxation operator Lrelax
Lrelax(ρS) = −1
m,εDm,ε ρS + ρS D†
Dm,ε ρS D†
where ε = ±1 and where the Dm,ε are deﬁned as:
Dm,ε = µ11 + εCm
One easily shows that Lrelax in (20) is identical with the one in (2). The coeﬃcient
µ is arbitrary at this stage; µ2 has the dimension of the inverse of a time, and
we just require in the following µ2 ≫|η|, where ¯hη is a typical eigenvalue for H
(for the two-level atom case, η ∼Γ, Ω, δ). Using the set of operators Dm,ε, we
can now perform a Monte-Carlo evolution of the wave function, equivalent to the
master equation (1). Because of the large magnitude of µ2, this simulation with
the Dm,ε operators involves much more quantum jumps in a given time interval
∆t than a simulation done with the Cm’s. But the change of the wave function
in a given quantum jump:
is very small since Dm,ε is nearly proportional to the identity operator 11. In the
limit of very large µ, the Monte-Carlo evolution of the wave function therefore
tends towards a continuous stochastic evolution.
In Carmichael’s homodyne
detection problem, the form (21) for the Dm,ε has a clear interpretation. These
jump operators correspond to the detection of a photon after one has mixed the
light emitted by the atomic system with a local oscillator ﬁeld. The parts in µ11
and Cm correspond respectively to the ﬁeld originating from the local oscillator
and the ﬁeld emitted by the atom.
The condition µ2 ≫|η| just states that
the intensity of the local oscillator is much larger than the intensity of the light
emitted by the atom, as usual in homodyne detection.
To prove the equivalence with (18), we choose a time interval ∆t such that
µ−2 ≪∆t ≪|η|−1 .
This implies that the number of jumps Nm,ε occurring with a given operator
Dm,ε during ∆t will be large compared to 1 since µ2 ∆t ≫1, but at the same
time we expect only a small change in the system wave function since |η|∆t ≪1.
The operator O describing the action of all those jumps during ∆t is a product
of the various Dm,ε and it can be approximated at order 1 in
∆t |η| by:
(Nm,+ −Nm,−) Cm
where N = P
m,ε Nm,ε is the total number of jumps occurring during ∆t. The
wave function at time t + ∆t can now be written before normalization:
|φ(t + ∆t)⟩=
Nm,+ −Nm,−
|φ(t)⟩(25)
where we have taken into account both the non-hermitian evolution during ∆t
and the eﬀect of the multiple quantum jumps. The numbers of jumps Nm,ε are
poissonian random variables with an average value and a standard deviation
where the average value ⟨Cm + C†
m⟩is taken in |φ(t)⟩. In the limit of large Nm,ε,
we can approximate the random variable Nm,+ −Nm,−appearing in (25) by:
Nm,+ −Nm,−
= ∆t⟨Cm + C†
where ∆ζm is a real gaussian random variable with zero mean and a standard
deviation equal to
∆t. Finally we normalize the wave function (25) and we
|∆φ(t + ∆t)⟩=
¯hHS|φ(t)⟩∆t
2Cm −⟨Cm + C†
|φ(t)⟩∆ζm .
In (29), we have kept terms linear in ∆ζm and ∆t, and we have replaced all the
quadratic terms ∆ζm∆ζm′ by their mean ∆t δm,m′. In the limit µ →+∞, ∆t →
0, this equation can be understood as a Itˆo stochastic equation, corresponding
to a real version of (18).
The exact form of (18) can be recovered by taking a slightly more complicated
set of Dm,ε operators:
Dm,ε = µ11 + εCm
ε = ±1, ±i
and by performing an appropriate global phase change of the wave function. The
continuous stochastic equation (18) is therefore a limiting case of the quantum
jump formalism presented here, and it also has an interpretation in terms of
a detection scheme: the information concerning the system is mixed with a
“classical ﬁeld” µ11, and the sequence of quantum jumps deduced from the whole
set of mixed components Dm,ε allows one to determine the subsequent system
evolution. Note that on the contrary, the jumps deduced from the action on the
system wave function of a single mixed component, such as the Dm,+’s, are not
suﬃcient to determine this system evolution.
Conclusion
We have presented a stochastic evolution for the wave function of a system coupled to a reservoir in the Markovian regime. Each time step in this stochastic
evolution consists in two parts: a Hamiltonian but non hermitian evolution and
a possible quantum jump. We have proved the equivalence of this Monte-Carlo
Wave function approach with the master equation treatment.
We have also
shown that this simulation with Quantum jumps can be transformed into a continuous stochastic evolution of the wave function, similar to the one of .
This approach provides a computational tool which is often more eﬃcient
than the standard master equation treatment for systems with a number of states
N ≫1 (for a detailed discussion see ). Indeed a wave function involves only
N components while a density matrix is described by N2 terms. This method
has already been applied successfully to problems such as the study of the limits
of laser cooling in 2 dimensions , or the calculation of the spectrum of the
light emitted by an assembly of cold atoms . Problems such as the study of
collisions between cold atoms, or non linear mixing of quantum ﬁelds may also
beneﬁt from such an approach.
We have emphasized that this simulation is in many practical cases directly
connected to a measurement sequence performed on the system. Each Monte-
Carlo trajectory is a possible history for the individual quantum system.
this respect, the noise appearing when one simulates with this method the measurement of a given observable A is also interesting.
The ﬂuctuations in the
number of occurrences of a given eigenvalue ai of A correspond to the quantum
noise that one would get in a real experiment, performing the relevant detection
scheme on an individual quantum system. Since more and more quantum optics
and atomic physics experiments are now performed with a single system (single ion or atom, single mode of a cavity), Monte-Carlo wave function methods
should therefore have many applications, since they lead to predictions closer to
actual experimental signals than the master equation, which rather deals with
ensemble averages.