TVM: An Automated End-to-End Optimizing Compiler for Deep Learning
Tianqi Chen1, Thierry Moreau1, Ziheng Jiang1,2, Lianmin Zheng3, Eddie Yan1
Meghan Cowan1, Haichen Shen1,
Leyuan Wang4,2,
Yuwei Hu5, Luis Ceze1,
Carlos Guestrin1,
Arvind Krishnamurthy1
1Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
2 AWS, 3Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 4UC Davis, 5Cornell
There is an increasing need to bring machine learning to a wide diversity of hardware devices.
frameworks rely on vendor-speciﬁc operator libraries
and optimize for a narrow range of server-class GPUs.
Deploying workloads to new platforms – such as mobile phones, embedded devices, and accelerators (e.g.,
FPGAs, ASICs) – requires signiﬁcant manual effort.
We propose TVM, a compiler that exposes graph-level
and operator-level optimizations to provide performance
portability to deep learning workloads across diverse
hardware back-ends.
TVM solves optimization challenges speciﬁc to deep learning, such as high-level operator fusion, mapping to arbitrary hardware primitives,
and memory latency hiding. It also automates optimization of low-level programs to hardware characteristics by
employing a novel, learning-based cost modeling method
for rapid exploration of code optimizations. Experimental results show that TVM delivers performance across
hardware back-ends that are competitive with state-ofthe-art, hand-tuned libraries for low-power CPU, mobile GPU, and server-class GPUs. We also demonstrate
TVM’s ability to target new accelerator back-ends, such
as the FPGA-based generic deep learning accelerator.
The system is open sourced and in production use inside
several major companies.
Introduction
Deep learning (DL) models can now recognize images,
process natural language, and defeat humans in challenging strategy games. There is a growing demand to deploy
smart applications to a wide spectrum of devices, ranging from cloud servers to self-driving cars and embedded devices. Mapping DL workloads to these devices is
complicated by the diversity of hardware characteristics,
including embedded CPUs, GPUs, FPGAs, and ASICs
(e.g., the TPU ). These hardware targets diverge in
Activation
implicitly managed
explicitly managed
Memory Subsystem Architecture
Compute Primitive
CPU, GPU and TPU-like accelerators require different on-chip memory architectures and compute primitives. This divergence must be addressed when
generating optimized code.
terms of memory organization, compute functional units,
etc., as shown in Figure 1.
Current DL frameworks, such as TensorFlow, MXNet,
Caffe, and PyTorch, rely on a computational graph intermediate representation to implement optimizations,
e.g., auto differentiation and dynamic memory management . Graph-level optimizations, however,
are often too high-level to handle hardware back-endspeciﬁc operator-level transformations.
Most of these
frameworks focus on a narrow class of server-class
GPU devices and delegate target-speciﬁc optimizations
to highly engineered and vendor-speciﬁc operator libraries. These operator-level libraries require signiﬁcant
manual tuning and hence are too specialized and opaque
to be easily ported across hardware devices. Providing
support in various DL frameworks for diverse hardware
back-ends presently requires signiﬁcant engineering effort. Even for supported back-ends, frameworks must
make the difﬁcult choice between: (1) avoiding graph
optimizations that yield new operators not in the prede-
ﬁned operator library, and (2) using unoptimized implementations of these new operators.
To enable both graph- and operator-level optimiza-
 
tions for diverse hardware back-ends, we take a fundamentally different, end-to-end approach.
TVM, a compiler that takes a high-level speciﬁcation of
a deep learning program from existing frameworks and
generates low-level optimized code for a diverse set of
hardware back-ends.
To be attractive to users, TVM
needs to offer performance competitive with the multitude of manually optimized operator libraries across diverse hardware back-ends. This goal requires addressing
the key challenges described below.
Leveraging Speciﬁc Hardware Features and Abstractions. DL accelerators introduce optimized tensor compute primitives , while GPUs and CPUs continuously improve their processing elements. This poses
a signiﬁcant challenge in generating optimized code for
a given operator description. The inputs to hardware instructions are multi-dimensional, with ﬁxed or variable
lengths; they dictate different data layouts; and they have
special requirements for memory hierarchy. The system
must effectively exploit these complex primitives to beneﬁt from acceleration. Further, accelerator designs also
commonly favor leaner control and ofﬂoad most
scheduling complexity to the compiler stack. For specialized accelerators, the system now needs to generate code that explicitly controls pipeline dependencies to
hide memory access latency – a job that hardware performs for CPUs and GPUs.
Large Search Space for Optimization Another challenge is producing efﬁcient code without manually tuning operators. The combinatorial choices of memory access, threading pattern, and novel hardware primitives
creates a huge conﬁguration space for generated code
(e.g., loop tiles and ordering, caching, unrolling) that
would incur a large search cost if we implement black
box auto-tuning.
One could adopt a predeﬁned cost
model to guide the search, but building an accurate cost
model is difﬁcult due to the increasing complexity of
modern hardware. Furthermore, such an approach would
require us to build separate cost models for each hardware type.
TVM addresses these challenges with three key modules.
(1) We introduce a tensor expression language
to build operators and provide program transformation
primitives that generate different versions of the program with various optimizations.
This layer extends
Halide ’s compute/schedule separation concept by
also separating target hardware intrinsics from transformation primitives, which enables support for novel accelerators and their corresponding new intrinsics. Moreover, we introduce new transformation primitives to address GPU-related challenges and enable deployment to
specialized accelerators. We can then apply different sequences of program transformations to form a rich space
of valid programs for a given operator declaration. (2)
We introduce an automated program optimization framework to ﬁnd optimized tensor operators. The optimizer is
guided by an ML-based cost model that adapts and improves as we collect more data from a hardware backend.
(3) On top of the automatic code generator, we
introduce a graph rewriter that takes full advantage of
high- and operator-level optimizations.
By combining these three modules, TVM can take
model descriptions from existing deep learning frameworks, perform joint high- and low-level optimizations,
and generate hardware-speciﬁc optimized code for backends, e.g., CPUs, GPUs, and FPGA-based specialized
accelerators.
This paper makes the following contributions:
• We identify the major optimization challenges in providing performance portability to deep learning workloads across diverse hardware back-ends.
• We introduce novel schedule primitives that take advantage of cross-thread memory reuse, novel hardware
intrinsics, and latency hiding.
• We propose and implement a machine learning based
optimization system to automatically explore and
search for optimized tensor operators.
• We build an end-to-end compilation and optimization stack that allows the deployment of deep learning
workloads speciﬁed in high-level frameworks (including TensorFlow, MXNet, PyTorch, Keras, CNTK) to
diverse hardware back-ends (including CPUs, server
GPUs, mobile GPUs, and FPGA-based accelerators).
The open-sourced TVM is in production use inside
several major companies.
We evaluated TVM using real world workloads on a
server-class GPU, an embedded GPU, an embedded
CPU, and a custom generic FPGA-based accelerator.
Experimental results show that TVM offers portable
performance across back-ends and achieves speedups
ranging from 1.2× to 3.8× over existing frameworks
backed by hand-optimized libraries.
This section describes TVM by using an example to walk
through its components.
Figure 2 summarizes execution steps in TVM and their corresponding sections in
the paper. The system ﬁrst takes as input a model from
an existing framework and transforms it into a computational graph representation. It then performs high-level
dataﬂow rewriting to generate an optimized graph. The
operator-level optimization module must generate efﬁcient code for each fused operator in this graph. Operators are speciﬁed in a declarative tensor expression lan-
Frameworks
High Level Graph Rewriting
Machine Learning Based
Automated Optimizer
Optimized Computational Graph
Computational Graph
Hardware-Aware
Optimization Primitives
Declarative
Tensor Expressions
Optimized Low Level Loop Program
CUDA/Metal/OpenCL
Accelerator Backend
Deployable Module
Operator-level Optimization and Code Generation
Figure 2: System overview of TVM. The current stack
supports descriptions from many deep learning frameworks and exchange formats, such as CoreML and
ONNX, to target major CPU, GPU and specialized accelerators.
guage; execution details are unspeciﬁed. TVM identiﬁes
a collection of possible code optimizations for a given
hardware target’s operators. Possible optimizations form
a large space, so we use an ML-based cost model to ﬁnd
optimized operators. Finally, the system packs the generated code into a deployable module.
End-User Example.
In a few lines of code, a user can
take a model from existing deep learning frameworks and
call the TVM API to get a deployable module:
import tvm as t
# Use keras framework as example, import model
graph, params = t.frontend.from_keras(keras_model)
target = t.target.cuda()
graph, lib, params = t.compiler.build(graph, target, params)
This compiled runtime module contains three components: the ﬁnal optimized computational graph (graph),
parameters (params). These components can then be used to
deploy the model to the target back-end:
import tvm.runtime as t
module = runtime.create(graph, lib, t.cuda(0))
module.set_input(**params)
module.run(data=data_array)
output = tvm.nd.empty(out_shape, ctx=t.cuda(0))
module.get_output(0, output)
TVM supports multiple deployment back-ends in languages such as C++, Java and Python. The rest of this
paper describes TVM’s architecture and how a system
programmer can extend it to support new back-ends.
Optimizing Computational Graphs
Computational graphs are a common way to represent
programs in DL frameworks . Figure 3 shows
dependency
channels=32,
kernel_size=(3,3),
padding=(1,1),
use_bias=0
example attributes
shape=(1,10)
Figure 3: Example computational graph of a two-layer
convolutional neural network. Each node in the graph
represents an operation that consumes one or more tensors and produces one or more tensors. Tensor operations
can be parameterized by attributes to conﬁgure their behavior (e.g., padding or strides).
an example computational graph representation of a twolayer convolutional neural network.
The main difference between this high-level representation and a lowlevel compiler intermediate representation (IR), such as
LLVM, is that the intermediate data items are large,
multi-dimensional tensors. Computational graphs provide a global view of operators, but they avoid specifying
how each operator must be implemented. Like LLVM
IRs, a computational graph can be transformed into functionally equivalent graphs to apply optimizations. We
also take advantage of shape speciﬁcity in common DL
workloads to optimize for a ﬁxed set of input shapes.
TVM exploits a computational graph representation to
apply high-level optimizations: a node represents an operation on tensors or program inputs, and edges represent
data dependencies between operations.
It implements
many graph-level optimizations, including: operator fusion, which fuses multiple small operations together;
constant-folding, which pre-computes graph parts that
can be determined statically, saving execution costs; a
static memory planning pass, which pre-allocates memory to hold each intermediate tensor; and data layout
transformations, which transform internal data layouts
into back-end-friendly forms. We now discuss operator
fusion and the data layout transformation.
Operator Fusion.
Operator fusion combines multiple
operators into a single kernel without saving the intermediate results in memory. This optimization can greatly
reduce execution time, particularly in GPUs and specialized accelerators.
Speciﬁcally, we recognize four
categories of graph operators: (1) injective (one-to-one
map, e.g., add), (2) reduction (e.g., sum), (3) complexout-fusable (can fuse element-wise map to output, e.g.,
conv2d), and (4) opaque (cannot be fused, e.g., sort). We
provide generic rules to fuse these operators, as follows.
Multiple injective operators can be fused into another injective operator. A reduction operator can be fused with
input injective operators (e.g., fuse scale and sum). Operators such as conv2d are complex-out-fusable, and we
conv+bn+relu
1x1x128x256
depthwiseconv+bn+relu
hidden:128
hidden:128
Relative Speedup
w/o fusion
Figure 4: Performance comparison between fused and
non-fused operations. TVM generates both operations.
Tested on NVIDIA Titan X.
can fuse element-wise operators to its output. We can
apply these rules to transform the computational graph
into a fused version. Figure 4 demonstrates the impact
of this optimization on different workloads. We ﬁnd that
fused operators generate up to a 1.2× to 2× speedup by
reducing memory accesses.
Data Layout Transformation.
There are multiple
ways to store a given tensor in the computational graph.
The most common data layout choices are column major
and row major. In practice, we may prefer to use even
more complicated data layouts. For instance, a DL accelerator might exploit 4×4 matrix operations, requiring
data to be tiled into 4 × 4 chunks to optimize for access
Data layout optimization converts a computational
graph into one that can use better internal data layouts
for execution on the target hardware. It starts by specifying the preferred data layout for each operator given
the constraints dictated by memory hierarchies. We then
perform the proper layout transformation between a producer and a consumer if their preferred data layouts do
not match.
While high-level graph optimizations can greatly improve the efﬁciency of DL workloads, they are only as
effective as what the operator library provides.
Currently, the few DL frameworks that support operator fusion require the operator library to provide an implementation of the fused patterns. With more network operators introduced on a regular basis, the number of possible
fused kernels can grow dramatically. This approach is
no longer sustainable when targeting an increasing number of hardware back-ends since the required number
of fused pattern implementations grows combinatorially
with the number of data layouts, data types, and accelerator intrinsics that must be supported. It is not feasible to handcraft operator kernels for the various operations desired by a program and for each back-end. To
for y in range(1024):
for x in range(1024):
C[y][x] = 0
for k in range(1024):
C[y][x] += A[k][y] * B[k][x]
for yo in range(128):
for xo in range(128):
C[yo*8:yo*8+8][xo*8:xo*8+8] = 0
for ko in range(128):
for yi in range(8):
for xi in range(8):
for ki in range(8):
C[yo*8+yi][xo*8+xi] +=
A[ko*8+ki][yo*8+yi] * B[ko*8+ki][xo*8+xi]
inp_buffer AL , BL 
acc_buffer CL 
for yo in range(128):
for xo in range(128):
vdla.fill_zero(CL)
for ko in range(128):
vdla.dma_copy2d(AL, A[ko*8:ko*8+8][yo*8:yo*8+8])
vdla.dma_copy2d(BL, B[ko*8:ko*8+8][xo*8:xo*8+8])
vdla.fused_gemm8x8_add(CL, AL, BL)
vdla.dma_copy2d(C[yo*8:yo*8+8,xo*8:xo*8+8], CL)
+ Cache Data on Accelerator Special Buﬀer
A = t.placeholder((1024, 1024))
B = t.placeholder((1024, 1024))
k = t.reduce_axis((0, 1024))
C = t.compute((1024, 1024), lambda y, x:
t.sum(A[k, y] * B[k, x], axis=k))
s = t.create_schedule(C.op)
transformation
corresponding
low-level code
+ Map to Accelerator Tensor Instructions
CL = s.cache_write(C, vdla.acc_buffer)
AL = s.cache_read(A, vdla.inp_buffer)
# additional schedule steps omitted …
s[CL].tensorize(yi, vdla.gemm8x8)
+ Loop Tiling
yo, xo, ko, yi, xi, ki = s[C].tile(y, x, k, 8, 8, 8)
Figure 5: Example schedule transformations that optimize a matrix multiplication on a specialized accelerator.
this end, we next propose a code generation approach
that can generate various possible implementations for a
given model’s operators.
Generating Tensor Operations
TVM produces efﬁcient code for each operator by generating many valid implementations on each hardware
back-end and choosing an optimized implementation.
This process builds on Halide’s idea of decoupling descriptions from computation rules (or schedule optimizations) and extends it to support new optimizations
(nested parallelism, tensorization, and latency hiding)
and a wide array of hardware back-ends. We now highlight TVM-speciﬁc features.
Tensor Expression and Schedule Space
We introduce a tensor expression language to support automatic code generation. Unlike high-level computation
graph representations, where the implementation of tensor operations is opaque, each operation is described in
Schedule primitives
used in various hardware backends
[Halide] Loop Transformations
[Halide] Thread Binding
[Halide] Compute Locality
[TVM] Special Memory Scope
[TVM] Tensorization
[TVM] Latency Hiding
Tensor Expression
Code Lowering
Select Schedule
Primitives
Final Schedule
Low level code
Figure 6: TVM schedule lowering and code generation
process. The table lists existing Halide and novel TVM
scheduling primitives being used to optimize schedules
for CPUs, GPUs and accelerator back-ends. Tensorization is essential for accelerators, but it can also be used
for CPUs and GPUs.
Special memory-scope enables
memory reuse in GPUs and explicit management of onchip memory in accelerators. Latency hiding is speciﬁc
to TPU-like accelerators.
an index formula expression language. The following
code shows an example tensor expression to compute
transposed matrix multiplication:
m, n, h = t.var('m'), t.var('n'), t.var('h')
A = t.placeholder((m, h), name='A')
B = t.placeholder((n, h), name='B')
k = t.reduce_axis((0, h), name='k')
C = t.compute((m, n), lambda y, x:
t.sum(A[k, y] * B[k, x], axis=k))
result shape
computing rule
Each compute operation speciﬁes both the shape of
the output tensor and an expression describing how to
compute each element of it.
Our tensor expression
language supports common arithmetic and math operations and covers common DL operator patterns. The
language does not specify the loop structure and many
other execution details, and it provides ﬂexibility for
adding hardware-aware optimizations for various backends. Adopting the decoupled compute/schedule principle from Halide , we use a schedule to denote a speciﬁc mapping from a tensor expression to low-level code.
Many possible schedules can perform this function.
We build a schedule by incrementally applying basic
transformations (schedule primitives) that preserve the
program’s logical equivalence. Figure 5 shows an example of scheduling matrix multiplication on a specialized accelerator. Internally, TVM uses a data structure
to keep track of the loop structure and other information
as we apply schedule transformations. This information
can then help generate low-level code for a given ﬁnal
Our tensor expression takes cues from Halide ,
Darkroom , and TACO . Its primary enhancements include support for the new schedule optimizations discussed below.
To achieve high performance
on many back-ends, we must support enough schedule
primitives to cover a diverse set of optimizations on different hardware back-ends.
Figure 6 summarizes the
operation code generation process and schedule primi-
Matrix Size
TVM w/o coop.
Figure 7: Performance comparison between TVM with
and without cooperative shared memory fetching on matrix multiplication workloads. Tested on an NVIDIA Titan X.
tives that TVM supports. We reuse helpful primitives
and the low-level loop program AST from Halide, and
we introduce new primitives to optimize GPU and accelerator performance. The new primitives are necessary to achieve optimal GPU performance and essential for accelerators. CPU, GPU, TPU-like accelerators
are three important types of hardware for deep learning.
This section describes new optimization primitives for
CPUs, GPUs and TPU-like accelerators, while section 5
explains how to automatically derive efﬁcient schedules.
Nested Parallelism with Cooperation
Parallelism is key to improving the efﬁciency of
compute-intensive kernels in DL workloads.
GPUs offer massive parallelism, requiring us to bake parallel patterns into schedule transformations. Most existing solutions adopt a model called nested parallelism, a
form of fork–join. This model requires a parallel schedule primitive to parallelize a data parallel task; each task
can be further recursively subdivided into subtasks to exploit the target architecture’s multi-level thread hierarchy
(e.g., thread groups in GPU). We call this model sharednothing nested parallelism because one working thread
cannot look at the data of its sibling within the same parallel computation stage.
An alternative to the shared-nothing approach is to
fetch data cooperatively. Speciﬁcally, groups of threads
can cooperatively fetch the data they all need and place
it into a shared memory space.
1 This optimization can
take advantage of the GPU memory hierarchy and en-
1 Halide recently added shared memory support but without general
memory scope for accelerators.
able data reuse across threads through shared memory
regions. TVM supports this well-known GPU optimization using a schedule primitive to achieve optimal performance. The following GPU code example optimizes
matrix multiplication.
Barrier inserted
automatically
by compiler
All threads cooperatively
load AS and BS in diﬀerent
parallel patterns
for thread_group (by, bx) in cross(64, 64):
for thread_item (ty, tx) in cross(2, 2):
local CL = 0
shared AS , BS 
for k in range(1024):
for i in range(4):
AS[ty][i*4+tx] = A[k][by*64+ty*8+i*4+tx]
for each i in 0..4:
BS[ty][i*4+tx] = B[k][bx*64+ty*8+i*4+tx]
memory_barrier_among_threads()
for yi in range(8):
for xi in range(8):
CL[yi][xi] += AS[yi] * BS[xi]
for yi in range(8):
for xi in range(8):
C[yo*8+yi][xo*8+xi] = CL[yi][xi]
Figure 7 demonstrates the impact of this optimization. We introduce the concept of memory scopes to the
schedule space so that a compute stage (AS and BS in the
code) can be marked as shared. Without explicit memory
scopes, automatic scope inference will mark compute
stages as thread-local. The shared task must compute
the dependencies of all working threads in the group.
Additionally, memory synchronization barriers must be
properly inserted to guarantee that shared loaded data is
visible to consumers. Finally, in addition to being useful to GPUs, memory scopes let us tag special memory
buffers and create special lowering rules when targeting
specialized DL accelerators.
Tensorization
DL workloads have high arithmetic intensity, which
can typically be decomposed into tensor operators like
matrix-matrix multiplication or 1D convolution. These
natural decompositions have led to the recent trend of
adding tensor compute primitives
 .
new primitives create both opportunities and challenges
for schedule-based compilation; while using them can
improve performance, the compilation framework must
seamlessly integrate them. We dub this tensorization: it
is analogous to vectorization for SIMD architectures but
has signiﬁcant differences. Instruction inputs are multidimensional, with ﬁxed or variable lengths, and each has
different data layouts. More importantly, we cannot support a ﬁxed set of primitives since new accelerators are
emerging with their own variations of tensor instructions.
We therefore need an extensible solution.
We make tensorization extensible by separating the
target hardware intrinsic from the schedule with a mechanism for tensor-intrinsic declaration. We use the same
tensor expression language to declare both the behavior
of each new hardware intrinsic and the lowering rule associated with it. The following code shows how to declare an 8×8 tensor hardware intrinsic.
w, x = t.placeholder((8, 8)), t.placeholder((8, 8))
k = t.reduce_axis((0, 8))
y = t.compute((8, 8), lambda i, j:
t.sum(w[i, k] * x[j, k], axis=k))
def gemm_intrin_lower(inputs, outputs):
ww_ptr = inputs .access_ptr(“r")
xx_ptr = inputs .access_ptr("r")
zz_ptr = outputs .access_ptr("w")
compute = t.hardware_intrin("gemm8x8", ww_ptr, xx_ptr, zz_ptr)
reset = t.hardware_intrin("fill_zero", zz_ptr)
update = t.hardware_intrin("fuse_gemm8x8_add", ww_ptr, xx_ptr, zz_ptr)
return compute, reset, update
gemm8x8 = t.decl_tensor_intrin(y.op, gemm_intrin_lower)
declare behavior
lowering rule to generate
hardware intrinsics to carry
out the computation
Additionally, we introduce a tensorize schedule primitive to replace a unit of computation with the corresponding intrinsics. The compiler matches the computation
pattern with a hardware declaration and lowers it to the
corresponding hardware intrinsic.
Tensorization decouples the schedule from speciﬁc
hardware primitives, making it easy to extend TVM
to support new hardware architectures. The generated
code of tensorized schedules aligns with practices in
high-performance computing: break complex operations
into a sequence of micro-kernel calls. We can also use
the tensorize primitive to take advantage of handcrafted
micro-kernels, which can be beneﬁcial in some platforms. For example, we implement ultra low precision
operators for mobile CPUs that operate on data types
that are one- or two-bits wide by leveraging a bit-serial
matrix vector multiplication micro-kernel. This microkernel accumulates results into progressively larger data
types to minimize the memory footprint. Presenting the
micro-kernel as a tensor intrinsic to TVM yields up to a
1.5× speedup over the non-tensorized version.
Explicit Memory Latency Hiding
Latency hiding refers to the process of overlapping memory operations with computation to maximize utilization
of memory and compute resources. It requires different
strategies depending on the target hardware back-end.
On CPUs, memory latency hiding is achieved implicitly with simultaneous multithreading or hardware
prefetching . GPUs rely on rapid context switching of many warps of threads . In contrast, specialized DL accelerators such as the TPU usually favor
leaner control with a decoupled access-execute (DAE)
architecture and ofﬂoad the problem of ﬁne-grained
synchronization to software.
Figure 9 shows a DAE hardware pipeline that reduces
runtime latency. Compared to a monolithic hardware design, the pipeline can hide most memory access overheads and almost fully utilize compute resources.
achieve higher utilization, the instruction stream must be
augmented with ﬁne-grained synchronization operations.
Without them, dependencies cannot be enforced, leading
to erroneous execution. Consequently, DAE hardware
pipelines require ﬁne-grained dependence enqueuing/dequeuing operations between the pipeline stages to guar-
Input: High-level Threaded Program
Final Single Instruction Stream
Inject Synchronization Instructions
for vthread tx in range(2):
acc_buffer CL 
inp_buffer AL 
for k in range(128):
ld.dma_copy2d(AL, AL[k][tx*8:tx*8+8])
ex.accumulate(AL, CL)
acc_buffer CL 
inp_buffer AL 
ex.push_dep_to(ld)
ex.push_dep_to(ld)
for k in range(128):
ld.pop_dep_from(ex)
ld.dma_copy2d(AL , AL[k][0:8])
ld.push_dep_to(ex)
ld.pop_dep_from(ex)
ld.dma_copy2d(AL , AL[k][8:16])
ld.push_dep_to(ex)
ex.pop_dep_from(ld)
ex.accumulate(AL , CL )
ex.push_dep_to(ld)
ex.pop_dep_from(ld)
ex.accumulate(AL , CL )
ex.push_dep_to(ld)
ld.pop_dep_from(ex)
ld.pop_dep_from(ex)
for vthread tx in range(2):
acc_buffer CL 
inp_buffer AL 
ex.push_dep_to(ld)
for k in range(128):
ld.pop_dep_from(ex)
ld.dma_copy2d(AL, AL[k][tx*8:tx*8+8])
ld.push_dep_to(ex)
ex.pop_dep_from(ld)
ex.accumulate(AL, CL)
ex.push_dep_to(ld)
ld.pop_dep_from(ex)
read after write (RAW) dependence
read after write (RAW) dependence
push RAW dependence
push WAR dependence
pop RAW dependence
pop WAR dependence
Figure 8: TVM virtual thread lowering transforms a virtual thread-parallel program to a single instruction stream; the
stream contains explicit low-level synchronizations that the hardware can interpret to recover the pipeline parallelism
required to hide memory access latency.
execution savings
Decoupled Access-Execute Pipeline
Monolithic Pipeline
write after read (WAR) dependence
read after write (RAW) dependence
ld.perform_action(ld0)
ld.push_dep_to(ex)
ld.perform_action(ld1)
ld.push_dep_to(ex)
ex.pop_dep_from(ld)
ex.perform_action(ex0)
ex.push_dep_to(ld)
ex.pop_dep_from(ld)
ex.perform_action(ex1)
ex.push_dep_to(ld)
ld.pop_dep_from(ex)
ld.perform_action(ld2)
ld.perform_action(ld0)
ex.perform_action(ex0)
ld.perform_action(ld1)
ex.perform_action(ex1)
Instruction Stream
Figure 9: Decoupled Access-Execute in hardware hides
most memory access latency by allowing memory and
computation to overlap.
Execution correctness is enforced by low-level synchronization in the form of dependence token enqueueing/dequeuing actions, which
the compiler stack must insert in the instruction stream.
antee correct execution, as shown in Figure 9’s instruction stream.
Programming DAE accelerators that require explicit
low-level synchronization is difﬁcult.
To reduce the
programming burden, we introduce a virtual threading
scheduling primitive that lets programmers specify a
high-level data parallel program as they would a hardware back-end with support for multithreading. TVM
then automatically lowers the program to a single instruction stream with low-level explicit synchronization,
as shown in Figure 8. The algorithm starts with a highlevel multi-threaded program schedule and then inserts
the necessary low-level synchronization operations to
guarantee correct execution within each thread. Next,
it interleaves operations of all virtual threads into a single instruction stream. Finally, the hardware recovers the
compute bound
memory bound
Figure 10: Rooﬂine of an FPGA-based DL accelerator running ResNet inference. With latency hiding enabled by TVM, performance of the benchmarks is
brought closer to the rooﬂine, demonstrating higher compute and memory bandwidth efﬁciency.
available pipeline parallelism dictated by the low-level
synchronizations in the instruction stream.
Hardware Evaluation of Latency Hiding.
demonstrate the effectiveness of latency hiding on a custom FPGA-based accelerator design, which we describe
in depth in subsection 6.4. We ran each layer of ResNet
on the accelerator and used TVM to generate two schedules: one with latency hiding, and one without.
schedule with latency hiding parallelized the program
with virtuals threads to expose pipeline parallelism and
therefore hide memory access latency. Results are shown
in Figure 10 as a rooﬂine diagram ; rooﬂine performance diagrams provide insight into how well a given
system uses computation and memory resources for different benchmarks.
Overall, latency hiding improved
performance on all ResNet layers. Peak compute utilization increased from 70% with no latency hiding to 88%
with latency hiding.
Automating Optimization
Given the rich set of schedule primitives, our remaining
problem is to ﬁnd optimal operator implementations for
each layer of a DL model. Here, TVM creates a specialized operator for the speciﬁc input shape and layout associated with each layer. Such specialization offers signiﬁcant performance beneﬁts (in contrast to handcrafted
code that would target a smaller diversity of shapes and
layouts), but it also raises automation challenges. The
system needs to choose the schedule optimizations –
such as modifying the loop order or optimizing for the
memory hierarchy – as well as schedule-speciﬁc parameters, such as the tiling size and the loop unrolling factor.
Such combinatorial choices create a large search space of
operator implementations for each hardware back-end.
To address this challenge, we built an automated schedule optimizer with two main components: a schedule explorer that proposes promising new conﬁgurations, and
a machine learning cost model that predicts the performance of a given conﬁguration. This section describes
these components and TVM’s automated optimization
ﬂow (Figure 11).
Schedule Space Speciﬁcation
We built a schedule template speciﬁcation API to let a
developer declare knobs in the schedule space. The template speciﬁcation allows incorporation of a developer’s
domain-speciﬁc knowledge, as necessary, when specifying possible schedules. We also created a generic master template for each hardware back-end that automatically extracts possible knobs based on the computation
description expressed using the tensor expression language. At a high level, we would like to consider as many
conﬁgurations as possible and let the optimizer manage
the selection burden. Consequently, the optimizer must
search over billions of possible conﬁgurations for the real
world DL workloads used in our experiments.
ML-Based Cost Model
One way to ﬁnd the best schedule from a large conﬁguration space is through blackbox optimization, i.e., autotuning. This method is used to tune high performance
computing libraries . However, auto-tuning requires many experiments to identify a good conﬁguration.
An alternate approach is to build a predeﬁned cost
model to guide the search for a particular hardware backend instead of running all possibilities and measuring
their performance.
Ideally, a perfect cost model considers all factors affecting performance: memory access
patterns, data reuse, pipeline dependencies, and thread-
Raspberry Pi
Nvidia GPU
Speciﬁcation
Schedule Space
Device Cluster
Schedule Explorer
ML Cost Model
FPGA Board
Figure 11: Overview of automated optimization framework. A schedule explorer examines the schedule space
using an ML-based cost model and chooses experiments
to run on a distributed device cluster via RPC. To improve its predictive power, the ML model is updated periodically using collected data recorded in a database.
Method Category
Blackbox auto-tuning
Predeﬁned cost model
ML based cost model
Table 1: Comparison of automation methods. Model bias
refers to inaccuracy due to modeling.
ing patterns, among others.
This approach, unfortunately, is burdensome due to the increasing complexity
of modern hardware. Furthermore, every new hardware
target requires a new (predeﬁned) cost model.
We instead take a statistical approach to solve the cost
modeling problem. In this approach, a schedule explorer
proposes conﬁgurations that may improve an operator’s
performance. For each schedule conﬁguration, we use
an ML model that takes the lowered loop program as input and predicts its running time on a given hardware
back-end. The model, trained using runtime measurement data collected during exploration, does not require
the user to input detailed hardware information. We update the model periodically as we explore more conﬁgurations during optimization, which improves accuracy
for other related workloads, as well. In this way, the quality of the ML model improves with more experimental
trials. Table 1 summarizes the key differences between
automation methods. ML-based cost models strike a balance between auto-tuning and predeﬁned cost modeling
and can beneﬁt from the historical performance data of
related workloads.
Machine Learning Model Design Choices.
consider two key factors when choosing which ML
model the schedule explorer will use: quality and speed.
The schedule explorer queries the cost model frequently,
which incurs overheads due to model prediction time
and model reﬁtting time. To be useful, these overheads
must be smaller than the time it takes to measure per-
Number of Trials
Relative Speedup
TVM: ML-based Model
TVM: Blackbox Genetic Algorithm
TVM: Random Search
Baseline: cuDNN
Figure 12: Comparison of different automation methods
for a conv2d operator in ResNet-18 on TITAN X. The
ML-based model starts with no training data and uses
the collected data to improve itself. The Y-axis is the
speedup relative to cuDNN. We observe a similar trend
for other workloads.
for yo in range(4):
for xo in range(4):
C[yo*2:yo*2+2][xo*2:xo*2+2] = 0
for ko in range(8):
for yi in range(2):
for xi in range(2):
C[yo*2+yi][xo*2+xi] +=
A[k][yo*2+yi] * B[k][xo*2+xi]
Feature Extraction
Query: Loop AST
cost prediction
e.g. touched memory size
Schedule Explorer
alternatively, we can feed AST to TreeRNN
Figure 13: Example workﬂow of ML cost models. XG-
Boost predicts costs based on loop program features.
TreeRNN directly summarizes the AST.
formance on real hardware, which can be on the order
of seconds depending on the speciﬁc workload/hardware
target. This speed requirement differentiates our problem
from traditional hyperparameter tuning problems, where
the cost of performing measurements is very high relative to model overheads, and more expensive models can
be used. In addition to the choice of model, we need
to choose an objective function to train the model, such
as the error in a conﬁguration’s predicted running time.
However, since the explorer selects the top candidates
based only on the relative order of the prediction (A runs
faster than B), we need not predict the absolute execution
times directly. Instead, we use a rank objective to predict
the relative order of runtime costs.
We implement several types of models in our ML optimizer. We employ a gradient tree boosting model (based
on XGBoost ), which makes predictions based on features extracted from the loop program; these features include the memory access count and reuse ratio of each
memory buffer at each loop level, as well as a one-hot
encoding of loop annotations such as “vectorize”, “unroll”, and “parallel.” We also evaluate a neural network
model that uses TreeRNN to summarize the loop
program’s AST without feature engineering. Figure 13
summarizes the workﬂow of the cost models. We found
that tree boosting and TreeRNN have similar predictive
quality. However, the former performs prediction twice
as fast and costs much less time to train. As a result, we
chose gradient tree boosting as the default cost model in
our experiments. Nevertheless, we believe that both approaches are valuable and expect more future research on
this problem.
On average, the tree boosting model does prediction
in 0.67 ms, thousands of times faster than running a real
measurement. Figure 12 compares an ML-based optimizer to blackbox auto-tuning methods; the former ﬁnds
better conﬁgurations much faster than the latter.
Schedule Exploration
Once we choose a cost model, we can use it to select
promising conﬁgurations on which to iteratively run real
measurements. In each iteration, the explorer uses the
ML model’s predictions to select a batch of candidates
on which to run the measurements. The collected data is
then used as training data to update the model. If no initial training data exists, the explorer picks random candidates to measure.
The simplest exploration algorithm enumerates and
runs every conﬁguration through the cost model, selecting the top-k predicted performers.
However, this
strategy becomes intractable with large search spaces.
Instead, we run a parallel simulated annealing algorithm . The explorer starts with random conﬁgurations, and, at each step, randomly walks to a nearby con-
ﬁguration. This transition is successful if cost decreases
as predicted by the cost model. It is likely to fail (reject)
if the target conﬁguration has a higher cost. The random
walk tends to converge on conﬁgurations that have lower
costs as predicted by the cost model. Exploration states
persist across cost model updates; we continue from the
last conﬁguration after these updates.
Distributed Device Pool and RPC
A distributed device pool scales up the running of onhardware trials and enables ﬁne-grained resource sharing
among multiple optimization jobs. TVM implements a
customized, RPC-based distributed device pool that enables clients to run programs on a speciﬁc type of device. We can use this interface to compile a program
on the host compiler, request a remote device, run the
depthwise conv2d
depthwise conv2d
depthwise conv2d
depthwise conv2d
depthwise conv2d
depthwise conv2d
depthwise conv2d
depthwise conv2d
depthwise conv2d
Conﬁgurations of all conv2d operators in
ResNet-18 and all depthwise conv2d operators in MobileNet used in the single kernel experiments.
denotes height and width, IC input channels, OC output channels, K kernel size, and S stride size. All ops
use “SAME” padding. All depthwise conv2d operations
have channel multipliers of 1.
function remotely, and access results in the same script
on the host. TVM’s RPC supports dynamic upload and
runs cross-compiled modules and functions that use its
runtime convention.
As a result, the same infrastructure can perform a single workload optimization and
end-to-end graph inference. Our approach automates the
compile, run, and proﬁle steps across multiple devices.
This infrastructure is especially critical for embedded devices, which traditionally require tedious manual effort
for cross-compilation, code deployment, and measurement.
Evaluation
TVM’s core is implemented in C++ (∼50k LoC). We
provide language bindings to Python and Java. Earlier
sections of this paper evaluated the impact of several individual optimizations and components of TVM, namely,
operator fusion in Figure 4, latency hiding in Figure 10,
and the ML-based cost model in Figure 12. We now focus on an end-to-end evaluation that aims to answer the
following questions:
• Can TVM optimize DL workloads over multiple
platforms?
• How does TVM compare to existing DL frame-
Tensorﬂow XLA
TVM w/o graph opt
Figure 14:
GPU end-to-end evaluation for TVM,
MXNet, Tensorﬂow, and Tensorﬂow XLA. Tested on the
NVIDIA Titan X.
works (which rely on heavily optimized libraries)
on each back-end?
• Can TVM support new, emerging DL workloads
(e.g., depthwise convolution, low precision operations)?
• Can TVM support and optimize for new specialized
accelerators?
To answer these questions, we evaluated TVM on four
types of platforms: (1) a server-class GPU, (2) an embedded GPU, (3) an embedded CPU, and (4) a DL accelerator implemented on a low-power FPGA SoC. The benchmarks are based on real world DL inference workloads,
including ResNet , MobileNet , the LSTM Language Model , the Deep Q Network (DQN) and
Deep Convolutional Generative Adversarial Networks
(DCGAN) .
We compare our approach to existing DL frameworks, including MxNet and Tensor-
Flow , that rely on highly engineered, vendor-speciﬁc
libraries. TVM performs end-to-end automatic optimization and code generation without the need for an external
operator library.
Server-Class GPU Evaluation
We ﬁrst compared the end-to-end performance of
deep neural networks TVM, MXNet (v1.1), Tensor-
ﬂow (v1.7), and Tensorﬂow XLA on an Nvidia Titan
X. MXNet and Tensorﬂow both use cuDNN v7 for convolution operators; they implement their own versions
of depthwise convolution since it is relatively new and
not yet supported by the latest libraries. They also use
cuBLAS v8 for matrix multiplications.
On the other
hand, Tensorﬂow XLA uses JIT compilation.
Figure 14 shows that TVM outperforms the baselines, with speedups ranging from 1.6× to 3.8× due to
both joint graph optimization and the automatic optimizer, which generates high-performance fused opera-
Relative Speedup
TensorComprehensions
Relative Speedup
Figure 15: Relative speedup of all conv2d operators in
ResNet-18 and all depthwise conv2d operators in MobileNet.
Tested on a TITAN X. See Table 2 for operator conﬁgurations.
We also include a weight pretransformed Winograd for 3x3 conv2d (TVM PT).
tors. DQN’s 3.8 x speedup results from its use of unconventional operators (4×4 conv2d, strides=2) that are
not well optimized by cuDNN; the ResNet workloads are
more conventional. TVM automatically ﬁnds optimized
operators in both cases.
To evaluate the effectiveness of operator level optimization, we also perform a breakdown comparison for
each tensor operator in ResNet and MobileNet, shown in
Figure 15. We include TensorComprehension (TC, commit: ef644ba) , a recently introduced auto-tuning
framework, as an additional baseline. 2 TC results include the best kernels it found in 10 generations × 100
population × 2 random seeds for each operator . 2D convolution, one of the
most important DL operators, is heavily optimized by
cuDNN. However, TVM can still generate better GPU
kernels for most layers.
Depthwise convolution is a
newly introduced operator with a simpler structure .
In this case, both TVM and TC can ﬁnd fast kernels compared to MXNet’s handcrafted kernels. TVM’s improvements are mainly due to its exploration of a large schedule space and an effective ML-based search algorithm.
Embedded CPU Evaluation
We evaluated the performance of TVM on an ARM Cortex A53 (Quad Core 1.2GHz). We used Tensorﬂow Lite
(TFLite, commit: 7558b085) as our baseline system.
Figure 17 compares TVM operators to hand-optimized
2According to personal communication , TC is not yet meant
to be used for compute-bound problems. However, it is still a good
reference baseline to include in the comparison.
Tensorﬂow Lite
TVM w/o graph opt
Figure 16: ARM A53 end-to-end evaluation of TVM and
C9 C10 C11 C12
Relative Speedup
Tensorflow Lite
Relative Speedup
Figure 17: Relative speedup of all conv2d operators in
ResNet-18 and all depthwise conv2d operators in mobilenet. Tested on ARM A53. See Table 2 for the con-
ﬁgurations of these operators.
ones for ResNet and MobileNet. We observe that TVM
generates operators that outperform the hand-optimized
TFLite versions for both neural network workloads. This
result also demonstrates TVM’s ability to quickly optimize emerging tensor operators, such as depthwise convolution operators. Finally, Figure 16 shows an end-toend comparison of three workloads, where TVM outperforms the TFLite baseline.3
Low-Precision
demonstrate
TVM’s ability to support ultra low-precision inference by generating highly optimized operators
for ﬁxed-point data types of less than 8-bits.
Lowprecision networks replace expensive multiplication with
vectorized bit-serial multiplication that is composed of
bitwise and popcount reductions . Achieving efﬁcient low-precision inference requires packing quantized
data types into wider standard data types, such as int8
or int32. Our system generates code that outperforms
hand-optimized libraries from Caffe2 (commit: 39e07f7)
3DCGAN and LSTM results are not presented because they are not
yet supported by the baseline.
Relative Speedup
Hand optimized
TVM single-threaded
TVM multi-threaded
Figure 18:
Relative speedup of single- and multithreaded low-precision conv2d operators in ResNet.
Baseline was a single-threaded, hand-optimized implementation from Caffe2 (commit: 39e07f7). C5, C3 are
1x1 convolutions that have less compute intensity, resulting in less speedup by multi-threading.
 . We implemented an ARM-speciﬁc tensorization
intrinsic that leverages ARM instructions to build an ef-
ﬁcient, low-precision matrix-vector microkernel.We then
used TVM’s automated optimizer to explore the scheduling space.
Figure 18 compares TVM to the Caffe2 ultra lowprecision library on ResNet for 2-bit activations, 1-bit
weights inference. Since the baseline is single threaded,
we also compare it to a single-threaded TVM version.
Single-threaded TVM outperforms the baseline, particularly for C5, C8, and C11 layers; these are convolution
layers of kernel size 1×1 and stride of 2 for which the ultra low-precision baseline library is not optimized. Furthermore, we take advantage of additional TVM capabilities to produce a parallel library implementation that
shows improvement over the baseline. In addition to the
2-bit+1-bit conﬁguration, TVM can generate and optimize for other precision conﬁgurations that are unsupported by the baseline library, offering improved ﬂexibility.
Embedded GPU Evaluation
For our mobile GPU experiments, we ran our end-to-end
pipeline on a Fireﬂy-RK3399 board equipped with an
ARM Mali-T860MP4 GPU. The baseline was a vendorprovided library, the ARM Compute Library (v18.03).
As shown in Figure 19, we outperformed the baseline on
three available models for both float16 and float32
(DCGAN and LSTM are not yet supported by the baseline). The speedup ranged from 1.2× to 1.6×.
FPGA Accelerator Evaluation
Vanilla Deep Learning Accelerator
We now relate
how TVM tackled accelerator-speciﬁc code generation
on a generic inference accelerator design we prototyped
on an FPGA. We used in this evaluation the Vanilla Deep
ARMComputeLib
TVM w/o graph opt
Figure 19:
End-to-end experiment results on Mali-
T860MP4. Two data types, ﬂoat32 and ﬂoat16, were
evaluated.
Learning Accelerator (VDLA) – which distills characteristics from previous accelerator proposals 
into a minimalist hardware architecture – to demonstrate
TVM’s ability to generate highly efﬁcient schedules that
can target specialized accelerators. Figure 20 shows the
high-level hardware organization of the VDLA architecture.
VDLA is programmed as a tensor processor to
efﬁciently execute operations with high compute intensity (e.g, matrix multiplication, high dimensional convolution). It can perform load/store operations to bring
blocked 3-dimensional tensors from DRAM into a contiguous region of SRAM. It also provides specialized onchip memories for network parameters, layer inputs (narrow data type), and layer outputs (wide data type). Finally, VDLA provides explicit synchronization control
over successive loads, computes, and stores to maximize
the overlap between memory and compute operations.
Methodology.
We implemented the VDLA design on a
low-power PYNQ board that incorporates an ARM Cortex A9 dual core CPU clocked at 667MHz and an Artix-7
based FPGA fabric. On these modest FPGA resources,
we implemented a 16×16 matrix-vector unit clocked at
200MHz that performs products of 8-bit values and accumulates them into a 32-bit register every cycle. The theoretical peak throughput of this VDLA design is about
102.4GOPS/s. We allocated 32kB of resources for activation storage, 32kB for parameter storage, 32kB for
microcode buffers, and 128kB for the register ﬁle. These
on-chip buffers are by no means large enough to provide
sufﬁcient on-chip storage for a single layer of ResNet and
therefore enable a case study on effective memory reuse
and latency hiding.
We built a driver library for VDLA with a C runtime
API that constructs instructions and pushes them to the
target accelerator for execution. Our code generation algorithm then translates the accelerator program to a series of calls into the runtime API. Adding the specialized
accelerator back-end took ∼2k LoC in Python.
MEMORY LOAD
MEMORY STORE
MICRO-OP SRAM
WEIGHT MEM
LOAD BUFFER
STORE BUFFER
REGISTER FILE
LOAD→EXE Q
EXE→LOAD Q
EXE→STORE Q
STORE→EXE Q
INSTRUCTION FETCH UNIT
controller
Figure 20: VDLA Hardware design overview.
End-to-End ResNet Evaluation.
We used TVM to
generate ResNet inference kernels on the PYNQ platform and ofﬂoaded as many layers as possible to VDLA.
We also used it to generate both schedules for the CPU
only and CPU+FPGA implementation. Due to its shallow convolution depth, the ﬁrst ResNet convolution layer
could not be efﬁciently ofﬂoaded on the FPGA and was
instead computed on the CPU. All other convolution layers in ResNet, however, were amenable to efﬁcient of-
ﬂoading. Operations like residual layers and activations
were also performed on the CPU since VDLA does not
support these operations.
Figure 21 breaks down ResNet inference time into
CPU-only execution and CPU+FPGA execution. Most
computation was spent on the convolution layers that
could be ofﬂoaded to VDLA. For those convolution layers, the achieved speedup was 40×. Unfortunately, due
to Amdahl’s law, the overall performance of the FPGA
accelerated system was bottlenecked by the sections of
the workload that had to be executed on the CPU. We
envision that extending the VDLA design to support
these other operators will help reduce cost even further.
This FPGA-based experiment showcases TVM’s ability
to adapt to new architectures and the hardware intrinsics
they expose.
Related Work
Deep learning frameworks provide convenient
interfaces for users to express DL workloads and deploy
them easily on different hardware back-ends. While existing frameworks currently depend on vendor-speciﬁc
tensor operator libraries to execute their workloads, they
can leverage TVM’s stack to generate optimized code for
a larger number of hardware devices.
High-level computation graph DSLs are a typical
way to represent and perform high-level optimizations. Tensorﬂow’s XLA and the recently introduced
DLVM fall into this category. The representations
ResNet18 Inference Time (s)
TVM ARM+FPGA
Figure 21: We ofﬂoaded convolutions in the ResNet
workload to an FPGA-based accelerator. The grayed-out
bars correspond to layers that could not be accelerated
by the FPGA and therefore had to run on the CPU. The
FPGA provided a 40x acceleration on ofﬂoaded convolution layers over the Cortex A9.
of computation graphs in these works are similar, and a
high-level computation graph DSL is also used in this
paper. While graph-level representations are a good ﬁt
for high-level optimizations, they are too high level to
optimize tensor operators under a diverse set of hardware back-ends. Prior work relies on speciﬁc lowering
rules to directly generate low-level LLVM or resorts to
vendor-crafted libraries. These approaches require signiﬁcant engineering effort for each hardware back-end
and operator-variant combination.
Halide introduced the idea of separating computing and scheduling. We adopt Halide’s insights and reuse
its existing useful scheduling primitives in our compiler.
Our tensor operator scheduling is also related to other
work on DSL for GPUs and polyhedralbased loop transformation . TACO introduces
a generic way to generate sparse tensor operators on
CPU. Weld is a DSL for data processing tasks. We
speciﬁcally focus on solving the new scheduling challenges of DL workloads for GPUs and specialized accelerators. Our new primitives can potentially be adopted
by the optimization pipelines in these works.
High-performance libraries such as ATLAS and
FFTW use auto-tuning to get the best performance. Tensor comprehension applied black-box
auto-tuning together with polyhedral optimizations to
optimize CUDA kernels.
OpenTuner and existing
hyper parameter-tuning algorithms apply domainagnostic search.
A predeﬁned cost model is used to
automatically schedule image processing pipelines in
Halide . TVM’s ML model uses effective domainaware cost modeling that considers program structure.
The based distributed schedule optimizer scales to a
larger search space and can ﬁnd state-of-the-art kernels
on a large range of supported back-ends. More importantly, we provide an end-to-end stack that can take descriptions directly from DL frameworks and jointly optimize together with the graph-level stack.
Despite the emerging popularity of accelerators for
deep learning , it remains unclear how a compilation stack can be built to effectively target these devices. The VDLA design used in our evaluation provides
a generic way to summarize the properties of TPU-like
accelerators and enables a concrete case study on how
to compile code for accelerators. Our approach could
potentially beneﬁt existing systems that compile deep
learning to FPGA , as well. This paper provides a
generic solution to effectively target accelerators via tensorization and compiler-driven latency hiding.
Conclusion
We proposed an end-to-end compilation stack to solve
fundamental optimization challenges for deep learning
across a diverse set of hardware back-ends. Our system
includes automated end-to-end optimization, which is
historically a labor-intensive and highly specialized task.
We hope this work will encourage additional studies of
end-to-end compilation approaches and open new opportunities for DL system software-hardware co-design
techniques.
Acknowledgement
We would like to thank Ras Bodik, James Bornholt, Xi
Wang, Tom Anderson and Qiao Zhang for their thorough
feedback on earlier versions of this paper. We would also
like to thank members of Sampa, SAMPL and Systems
groups at the Allen School for their feedback on the work
and manuscript. We would like to thank the anonymous
OSDI reviewers, and our shepherd, Ranjita Bhagwan, for
helpful feedbacks. This work was supported in part by a
Google PhD Fellowship for Tianqi Chen, ONR award
#N00014-16-1-2795, NSF under grants CCF-1518703,
CNS-1614717, and CCF-1723352, and gifts from Intel
(under the CAPA program), Oracle, Huawei and anonymous sources.