SO-Net: Self-Organizing Network for Point Cloud Analysis
Ben M. Chen
Gim Hee Lee
National University of Singapore
This paper presents SO-Net, a permutation invariant architecture for deep learning with orderless point clouds.
The SO-Net models the spatial distribution of point cloud
by building a Self-Organizing Map (SOM). Based on the
SOM, SO-Net performs hierarchical feature extraction on
individual points and SOM nodes, and ultimately represents
the input point cloud by a single feature vector. The receptive ﬁeld of the network can be systematically adjusted
by conducting point-to-node k nearest neighbor search. In
recognition tasks such as point cloud reconstruction, classiﬁcation, object part segmentation and shape retrieval, our
proposed network demonstrates performance that is similar
with or better than state-of-the-art approaches. In addition,
the training speed is signiﬁcantly faster than existing point
cloud recognition networks because of the parallelizability
and simplicity of the proposed architecture. Our code is
available at the project website.1
1. Introduction
After many years of intensive research, convolutional
neural networks (ConvNets) is now the foundation for
many state-of-the-art computer vision algorithms, e.g. image recognition, object classiﬁcation and semantic segmentation etc. Despite the great success of ConvNets for 2D
images, the use of deep learning on 3D data remains a
challenging problem. Although 3D convolution networks
(3D ConvNets) can be applied to 3D data that is rasterized
into voxel representations, most computations are redundant because of the sparsity of most 3D data. Additionally,
the performance of naive 3D ConvNets is largely limited
by the resolution loss and exponentially growing computational cost. Meanwhile, the accelerating development of
depth sensors, and the huge demand from applications such
as autonomous vehicles make it imperative to process 3D
data efﬁciently. Recent availability of 3D datasets including ModelNet , ShapeNet , 2D-3D-S adds on to
the popularity of research on 3D data.
1 
Figure 1. Our SO-Net applies hierarchical feature aggregation using SOM. Point clouds are converted into SOM node features and
a global feature vector that can be applied to classiﬁcation, autoencoder reconstruction, part segmentation and shape retrieval etc.
To avoid the shortcomings of naive voxelization, one option is to explicitly exploit the sparsity of the voxel grids
 . Although the sparse design allows higher grid
resolution, the induced complexity and limitations make it
difﬁcult to realize large scale or ﬂexible deep networks .
Another option is to utilize scalable indexing structures including kd-tree , octree . Deep networks based on
these structures have shown encouraging results. Compared
to tree based structures, point cloud representation is mathematically more concise and straight-forward because each
point is simply represented by a 3-vector.
Additionally,
point clouds can be easily acquired with popular sensors
such as the RGB-D cameras, LiDAR, or conventional cameras with the help of the Structure-from-Motion (SfM) algorithm. Despite the widespread usage and easy acquisition
of point clouds, recognition tasks with point clouds still remain challenging. Traditional deep learning methods such
as ConvNets are not applicable because point clouds are
spatially irregular, and can be permutated arbitrarily. Due
to these difﬁculties, few attempts has been made to apply
deep learning techniques directly to point clouds until the
very recent PointNet .
Despite being a pioneer in applying deep learning to
point clouds, PointNet is unable to handle local feature extraction adequately. PointNet++ is later proposed to address this problem by building a pyramid-like feature aggregation scheme, but the point sampling and grouping strategy
in does not reveal the spatial distribution of the input
point cloud. Kd-Net build a kd-tree for the input point
cloud, followed by hierarchical feature extractions from the
leaves to root. Kd-Net explicitly utilizes the spatial distri-
 
bution of point clouds, but there are limitations such as the
lack of overlapped receptive ﬁelds.
In this paper, we propose the SO-Net to address the
problems in existing point cloud based networks. Speciﬁcally, a SOM is built to model the spatial distribution
of the input point cloud, which enables hierarchical feature
extraction on both individual points and SOM nodes.
Ultimately, the input point cloud can be compressed into
a single feature vector.
During the feature aggregation
process, the receptive ﬁeld overlap is controlled by performing point-to-node k-nearest neighbor (kNN) search on
the SOM. The SO-Net theoretically guarantees invariance
to the order of input points, by the network design and
our permutation invariant SOM training.
Applications
of our SO-Net include point cloud based classiﬁcation,
autoencoder reconstruction, part segmentation and shape
retrieval, as shown in Fig. 1.
The key contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We design a permutation invariant network - the SO-
Net that explicitly utilizes the spatial distribution of
point clouds.
• With point-to-node kNN search on SOM, hierarchical
feature extraction is performed with systematically adjustable receptive ﬁeld overlap.
• We propose a point cloud autoencoder as pre-training
to improve network performance in various tasks.
• Compared with state-of-the-art approaches, similar or
better performance is achieved in various applications
with signiﬁcantly faster training speed.
2. Related Work
It is intuitive to represent 3D shapes with voxel grids because they are compatible with 3D ConvNets. use
binary variable to indicate whether a voxel is occupied or
free. Several enhancements are proposed in - overﬁtting is mitigated by predicting labels from partial subvolumes, orientation pooling layer is designed to fuse shapes
with various orientations, and anisotropic probing kernels
are used to project 3D shapes into 2D features. Brock et
al. propose to combine voxel based variational autoencoders with object recognition networks. Despite its simplicity, voxelization is able to achieve state-of-the-art performance. Unfortunately, it suffers from loss of resolution
and the exponentially growing computational cost. Sparse
methods are proposed to improve the efﬁciency.
However, these methods still rely on uniform voxel grids
and experience various limitations such as the lack of parallelization capacity . Spectral ConvNets are
explored to work on non-Euclidean geometries, but they are
mostly limited to manifold meshes.
Rendering 3D data into multi-view 2D images turns the
3D problem into a 2D problem that can be solved using
standard 2D ConvNets. View-pooling layer is designed
to aggregate features from multiple rendered images. Qi
et al. substitute traditional 3D to 2D rendering with
multi-resolution sphere rendering. Wang et al. further
propose the dominant set pooling and utilize features like
color and surface normal. Despite the improved efﬁciency
compared to 3D ConvNets, multi-view strategy still suffers
from information loss and it cannot be easily extended
to tasks like per-point labeling.
Indexing techniques such as kd-tree and octree are scalable compared to uniform grids, and their regular structures
are suitable for deep learning techniques. To enable convolution and pooling operations over octree, Riegler et al. 
build a hybrid grid-octree structure by placing several small
octrees into a regular grid. With bit string representation, a
single voxel in the hybrid structure is fully determined by
its bit index. As a result, simple arithmetic can be used to
visit the parent or child nodes. Similarly, Wang et al. 
introduce a label buffer to ﬁnd correspondence of octants at
various depths. Klokov et al. propose the Kd-Net that
computes vectorial representations for each node of the prebuilt balanced kd-tree. A parent feature vector is computed
by applying non-linearity and afﬁne transformation on its
two child feature vectors, following the bottom-up fashion.
PointNet is the pioneer in the direct use of point
clouds. It uses the channel-wise max pooling to aggregate
per-point features into a global descriptor vector. PointNet
is invariant to order permutation of input points because the
per-point feature extraction is identical for every point and
max pooling operation is permutation invariant. A similar
permutation equivariant layer is also proposed at almost the same time as , with the major difference that
the permutation equivariant layer is max-normalized. Although the max-pooling idea is proven to be effective, it suffers from the lack of ConvNet-like hierarchical feature aggregation. PointNet++ is later designed to group points
into several groups in different levels, so that features from
multiple scales could be extracted hierarchically.
Unlike networks based on octree or kd-tree, the spatial
distribution of points is not explicitly modeled in Point-
Net++. Instead, heuristic grouping and sampling schemes,
e.g. multi-scale and multi-resolution grouping, are designed
to combine features from multiple scales. In this paper, we
propose our SO-Net that explicitly models the spatial distribution of input point cloud during hierarchical feature extraction. In addition, adjustable receptive ﬁeld overlap leads
to more effective local feature aggregation.
3. Self-Organizing Network
The input to the network is a point set P = {pi ∈
R3, i = 0, · · · , N −1}, which will be processed into M
Figure 2. (a) The initial nodes of an 8 × 8 SOM. For each SOM
conﬁguration, the initial nodes are ﬁxed for every point cloud. (b)
Example of a SOM training result.
SOM nodes S = {sj ∈R3, j = 0, · · · , M −1} as shown
in Sec. 3.1. Similarly, in the encoder described in Sec. 3.2,
individual point features are max-pooled into M node features, which can be further aggregated into a global feature
vector. Our SO-Net can be applied to various computer vision tasks including classiﬁcation, per-point segmentation
(Sec. 3.3), and point cloud reconstruction (Sec. 3.4).
3.1. Permutation Invariant SOM
SOM is used to produce low-dimensional, in this case
two-dimensional, representation of the input point cloud.
We construct a SOM with the size of m × m, where m ∈
 , i.e. the total number of nodes M ranges from 25 to
121. SOM is trained with unsupervised competitive learning instead of the commonly used backpropagation in deep
networks. However, naive SOM training schemes are not
permutation invariant for two reasons: the training result is
highly related to the initial nodes, and the per-sample update
rule depends on the order of the input points.
The ﬁrst problem is solved by assigning ﬁxed initial
nodes for any given SOM conﬁguration. Because the input
point cloud is normalized to be within [−1, 1] in all three
axes, we generate a proper initial guess by dispersing the
nodes uniformly inside a unit ball, as shown in Fig. 2(a).
Simple approaches such as the potential ﬁeld can be used
to construct such a uniform initial guess. To solve the second problem, instead of updating nodes once per point, we
perform one update after accumulating the effects of all the
points. This batch update process is deterministic for a
given point cloud, making it permutation invariant. Another
advantage of batch update is the fact that it can be implemented as matrix operations, which are highly efﬁcient on
GPU. Details of the initialization and batch training algorithms can be found in our supplementary material.
3.2. Encoder Architecture
As shown in Fig. 3, SOM is a guide for hierarchical feature extraction, and a tool to systematically adjust the receptive ﬁeld overlap. Given the output of the SOM, we search
for the k nearest neighbors (kNN) on the SOM nodes S for
each point pi, i.e., point-to-node kNN search:
sik = kNN(pi | sj, j = 0, · · · , M −1).
Each pi is then normalized into k points by subtraction with
its associated nodes:
pik = pi −sik.
The resulting kN normalized points are forwarded into a
series of fully connected layers to extract individual point
features. There is a shared fully connected layer on each
level l, where φ is the non-linear activation function. The
output of level l is given by
The input to the ﬁrst layer p0
ik can simply be the normalized
point coordinates pik, or the combination of coordinates and
other features like surface normal vectors.
Node feature extraction begins with max-pooling the kN
point features into M node features following the above
kNN association. We apply a channel-wise max pooling
operation to get the node feature s0
j for those point features
associated with the same node sj:
j = max({pl
ik, ∀sik = sj}).
Since each point is normalized into k coordinates according
to the point-to-node kNN search, it is guaranteed that the
receptive ﬁelds of the M max pooling operations are overlapped. Speciﬁcally, M nodes cover kN normalized points.
k is an adjustable parameter to control the overlap.
Each node feature produced by the above max pooling
operation is further concatenated with the associated SOM
node. The M augmented node features are forwarded into
a series of shared layers, and then aggregated into a feature
vector that represents the input point cloud.
Feature aggregation as point cloud separation and assembly
There is an intuitive reason behind the SOM feature extraction and node concatenation.
Since the input
points to the ﬁrst layer are normalized with M SOM nodes,
they are actually separated into M mini point clouds as
shown in Fig. 3. Each mini point cloud contains a small
number of points in a coordinate whose origin is the associated SOM node. For a point cloud of size 2048, and
M = 64 and k = 3, a typical mini point cloud may consist of around 90 points inside a small space of x, y, z ∈
[−0.3, 0.3]. The number and coverage of points in a mini
point cloud are determined by the SOM training and kNN
search, i.e. M and k.
The ﬁrst batch of fully connected layers can be regarded
as a small PointNet that encodes these mini point clouds.
Figure 3. The architecture of the SO-Net and its application to classiﬁcation and segmentation. In the encoder, input points are normalized
with the k-nearest SOM nodes. The normalized point features are later max-pooled into node features based on the point-to-node kNN
search on SOM. k determines the receptive ﬁeld overlap. In the segmentation network, M node features are concatenated with the kN
normalized points following the same kNN association. Finally kN features are aggregated into N features by average pooling.
The concatenation with SOM nodes plays the role of assembling these mini point clouds back into the original point
cloud. Because the SOM explicitly reveals the spatial distribution of the input point cloud, our separate-and-assemble
process is more efﬁcient than the grouping strategy used in
PointNet++ , as shown in Sec. 4.
Permutation Invariance
There are two levels of feature
aggregation in SO-Net, from point features to node features,
and from node features to global feature vector. The ﬁrst
phase applies a shared PointNet to M mini point clouds.
The generation of these M mini point clouds is irrelevant
to the order of input points, because the SOM training in
Sec. 3.1 and kNN search in Fig. 3 are deterministic. Point-
Net is permutation invariant as well. Consequently,
both the node features and global feature vector are theoretically guaranteed to be permutation invariant.
Effect of suboptimal SOM training
It is possible that the
training of SOM converges into a local minima with isolated
nodes outside the coverage of the input point cloud. In some
situations no point will be associated with the isolated nodes
during the point-to-node kNN search, and we set the corresponding node features to zero. This phenomenon is quite
common because the initial nodes are dispersed uniformly
in a unit ball, while the input point cloud may occupy only
a small corner. Despite the existence of suboptimal SOM,
the proposed SO-Net still out-performs state-of-the-art approaches in applications like object classiﬁcation. The effect of invalid node features is further investigated in Sec. 4
by inserting noise into the SOM results.
Exploration with ConvNets
It is interesting to note that
the node feature extraction has generated an image-like feature matrix, which is invariant to the order of input points.
It is possible to apply standard ConvNets to further fuse
the node features with increasing receptive ﬁeld. However,
the classiﬁcation accuracy decreased slightly in our experiments, where we replaced the second batch of fully connected layers with 2D convolutions and pooling. It remains
as a promising direction to investigate the reason and solution to this phenomenon.
3.3. Extension to Segmentation
The extension to per-point annotations, e.g. segmentation, requires the integration of both local and global features. The integration process is similar to the invert operation of the encoder in Sec. 3.2. The global feature vector can
be directly expanded and concatenated with the kN normalized points. The M node features are attached to the points
that are associated with them during the encoding process.
The integration results in kN features that combine point,
node and global features, which are then forwarded into a
chain of shared fully connected layers.
The kN features are actually redundant to generate N
per-point classiﬁcation scores because of the receptive ﬁeld
overlap. Average or max pooling are methods to fuse the
redundant information. Additionally, similar to many deep
Figure 4. The architecture of the decoder that takes 5000 points and reconstructs 4608 points. The up-convolution branch is designed to
recover the main body of the input, while the more ﬂexible fully connected branch is to recover the details. The “upconv” module consists
of a nearest neighbor upsampling layer and a 3 × 3 convolution layer. The “conv2pc” module consists of two 1 × 1 convolution layers.
networks, early, middle or late fusion may exhibit different
performance . With a series of experiments, we found
that middle fusion with average pooling is most effective
compared to other fusion methods.
3.4. Autoencoder
In this section, we design a decoder network to recover
the input point cloud from the encoded global feature vector. A straightforward design is to stack series of fully connected layers on top of the feature vector, and generate an
output vector of length 3 ˆN, which can be reshaped into
ˆN × 3. However, the memory and computation footprint
will be too heavy if ˆN is sufﬁciently large.
Instead of generating point clouds with fully connected
layers , we design a network with two parallel branches
similar with , i.e, a fully connected branch and a convolution branch as shown in Fig. 4. The fully connected
branch predicts ˆN1 points by reshaping an output of 3 ˆN1
elements. This branch enjoys high ﬂexibility because each
coordinate is predicted independently. On the other hand,
the convolution branch predicts a feature matrix with the
size of 3 × H × W, i.e. ˆN2 = H × W points. Due to the
spatial continuity of convolution layers, the predicted ˆN2
point may exhibit more geometric consistency. Another advantage of the convolution branch is that it requires much
less parameters compared to the fully connected branch.
Similar to common practice in many depth estimation
networks , the convolution branch is designed as
an up-convolution (upconv) chain in a pyramid style. Instead of deconvolution layers, each upconv module consists
of a nearest neighbor upsampling layer and a 3 × 3 convolution layer. According to our experiments, this design is
much more effective than deconvolution layers in the case
of point cloud autoencoder. In addition, intermediate upconv products are converted to coarse reconstructed point
clouds and compared with the input. The conversion from
upconv products to point clouds is a 2-layer 1 × 1 convolution stack in order to give more ﬂexibility to each recovered
point. The coarse-to-ﬁne strategy produces another boost in
the reconstruction performance.
To supervise the reconstruction process, the loss function
should be differentiable, ready for parallel computation and
robust against outliers . Here we use the Chamfer loss:
d(Ps, Pt) = 1
y∈Pt∥x −y∥2
x∈Ps∥x −y∥2.
where Ps and Pt ∈R3 represents the input and recovered
point cloud respectively. The numbers of points in Ps and
Pt are not necessarily the same. Intuitively, for each point
in Ps, Eq. (5) computes its distance to the nearest neighbor
in Pt, and vice versa for points in Pt.
4. Experiments
In this section, the performance of our SO-Net is evaluated in three different applications, namely point cloud autoencoder, object classiﬁcation and object part segmentation. In particular, the encoder trained in the autoencoder
can be used as pre-training for the other two tasks. The
encoder structure and SOM conﬁguration remain identical
among all experiments without delicate ﬁnetuning, except
for the 2D MNIST classiﬁcation.
4.1. Implementation Detail
Our network is implemented with PyTorch on a NVIDIA
GTX1080Ti. We choose a SOM of size 8 × 8 and k = 3 in
most experiments. We optimize the networks using Adam
 with an initial learning rate of 0.001 and batch size of
8. For experiments with 5000 or more points as input, the
learning rate is decreased by half every 20 epochs, otherwise the learning rate decay is executed every 40 epochs.
Generally the networks converge after around 5 times of
learning rate decay. Batch-normalization and ReLU activation are applied to every layer.
4.2. Datasets
As a 2D toy example, we adopt the MNIST dataset 
in Sec. 4.4. For each digit, 512 two-dimensional points are
sampled from the non-zero pixels to serve as our input.
Two variants of the ModelNet , i.e. ModelNet10 and
ModelNet40, are used as the benchmarks for the autoencoder task in Sec. 4.3 and the classiﬁcation task in Sec. 4.4.
The ModelNet40 contains 13,834 objects from 40 categories, among which 9,843 objects belong to training set
and the other 3,991 samples for testing. Similarly, the ModelNet10 is split into 2,468 training samples and 909 testing
samples. The original ModelNet provides CAD models represented by vertices and faces. Point clouds are generated
by sampling from the models uniformly. For fair comparison, we use the prepared ModelNet10/40 dataset from ,
where each model is represented by 10,000 points. Various
sizes of point clouds, e.g., 2,048 or 5,000, can be sampled
from the 10k points in different experiments.
Object part segmentation is demonstrated with the
ShapeNetPart dataset . It contains 16,881 objects from
16 categories, represented as point clouds. Each object consists of 2 to 6 parts, and in total there are 50 parts in the
dataset. We sample ﬁxed size point clouds, e.g. 1,024, in
our experiments.
Data augmentation
Input point clouds are normalized
to be zero-mean inside a unit cube.
The following data
augmentations are applied at training phase: (a) Gaussian
noise N(0, 0.01) is added to the point coordinates and surface normal vectors (if applicable).
(b) Gaussian noise
N(0, 0.04) is added to the SOM nodes. (c) Point clouds,
surface normal vectors (if applicable) and SOM nodes are
scaled by a factor sampled from an uniform distribution
U(0.8, 1.2). Further augmentation like random shift or rotation do not improve the results.
4.3. Point Cloud Autoencoder
Figure 5. Examples of point cloud autoencoder results. First row:
input point clouds of size 1024. Second row: reconstructed point
clouds of size 1280. From left to right: chair, table, earphone.
In this section, we demonstrate that a point cloud can be
reconstructed from the SO-Net encoded feature vector, e.g.
a vector with length of 1024. The nearest neighbor search
in Chamfer distance (Eq. 5) is conducted with Facebook’s
faiss . There are two conﬁgurations for the decoder to
reconstruct different sizes of point clouds. The ﬁrst conﬁguration generates 64×64 points from the convolution branch
and 512 points from the fully connected branch. The other
one produces 32 × 32 and 256 points respectively, by removing the last upconv module of Fig. 4.
It is difﬁcult to provide quantitative comparison for the
point cloud autoencoder task because little research has
been done on this topic. The most related work is the point
set generation network and the point cloud generative
models . Examples of our reconstructed ShapeNetPart
point clouds are visualized in Fig. 5, where 1024 points recovered from the convolution branch are denoted in red and
the other 256 points in green. The overall testing Chamfer
distance (Eq. 5) is 0.033. Similar to the results in , the
convolution branch recovers the main body of the object,
while the more ﬂexible fully connected branch focuses on
details such as the legs of a table. Nevertheless, many ﬁner
details are lost. For example, the reconstructed earphone
is blurry. This is probably because the encoder is still not
powerful enough to capture ﬁne-grained structures.
Despite the imperfect reconstruction, the autoencoder
enhances SO-Net’s performance in other tasks by providing
a pre-trained encoder, illustrated in Sec. 4.4 and 4.5. More
results are visualized in the supplementary materials.
4.4. Classiﬁcation Tasks
To classify the point clouds, we attach a 3-layer multilayer perceptron (MLP) on top of the encoded global feature vector. Random dropout is applied to the last two layers with keep-ratio of 0.4. Table 1 illustrates the classiﬁcation accuracy for state-of-the-art methods using scalable 3D
representations, such as point cloud, kd-tree and octree. In
MNIST dataset, our network achieves a relative 13.7% error
rate reduction compared with PointNet++. In ModelNet10
and ModelNet40, our approach out-performs state-of-theart methods by 1.7% and 1.5% respectively in terms of instance accuracy. Our SO-Net even out-performs single networks using multi-view images or uniform voxel grids as input, like qi-MVCNN (ModelNet40 at 92.0%) and VRN
 (ModelNet40 at 91.3%). Methods that integrate multiple networks, i.e., qi-MVCNN-MultiRes and VRN Ensemble , are still better than SO-Net in ModelNet classiﬁcation, but their multi-view / voxel grid representations
are far less scalable and ﬂexible than our point cloud representation, as illustrated in Sec. 1 and 2.
Effect of pre-training
The performance of the network
can be improved with pre-training using the autoencoder in
Sec. 3.4. The autoencoder is trained with ModelNet40, using 5000 points and surface normal vectors as input. The
autoencoder brings a boost of 0.5% in ModelNet10 classi-
ﬁcation, but only 0.2% in ModelNet40 classiﬁcation. This
is not surprising because pre-training with a much larger
Representation
ModelNet10
ModelNet40
Error rate
PointNet, 
PointNet++, 
points + normal
DeepSets, 
Kd-Net, 
OctNet, 
O-CNN, 
Ours (2-layer)*
points + normal
Ours (2-layer)
points + normal
Ours (2-layer)
Ours (3-layer)
points + normal
Table 1. Object classiﬁcation results for methods using scalable 3D representations like point cloud, kd-tree and octree. Our network
produces the best accuracy with signiﬁcantly faster training speed. * represents pre-training.
Number of Points
ModelNet40
ModelNet10
ModelNet40
ModelNet10
SOM Noise Sigma
ModelNet40
ModelNet10
Figure 6. Robustness test on point or SOM corruption. (a) The network is trained with point clouds of size 2048, while there is random
point dropout during testing. (b) The network is trained with SOM of size 8 × 8, but SOMs of various sizes are used at testing phase. (c)
Gaussian noise N(0, σ) is added to the SOM during testing. (d) Example of SOM with Gaussian noise N(0, 0.2).
Hierarchical layer number
PointNet++
Hierarchical layer number
Figure 7. Effect of layer number on classiﬁcation accuracy with
ModelNet40 (left) and ModelNet10 (right).
dataset may lead to convergence basins that are more
resistant to over-ﬁtting.
Robustness to point corruption
We train our network
with point clouds of size 2048 but test it with point dropout.
As shown in Fig. 6(a), our accuracy drops by 1.7% with
50% points missing , and 14.2% with 75%
points missing . As a comparison, the accuracy of PN drops by 3.8% with 50% points (1024 to 512).
Robustness to SOM corruption
One of our major concern when designing the SO-Net is whether the SO-Net relies too much on the SOM. With results shown in Fig. 6,
we demonstrate that our SO-Net is quite robust to the noise
or corruption of the SOM results. In Fig. 6(b), we train a
network with SOM of size 8 × 8 as the noise-free version,
but test the network with SOM sizes varying from 5 × 5 to
11×11. It is interesting that the performance decay is much
slower if the SOM size is larger than training conﬁguration,
which is consistent with the theory in Sec. 3.2. The SO-Net
separates the input point cloud into M mini point clouds,
encodes them into M node features with a mini PointNet,
and assembles them during the global feature extraction. In
the case that the SOM becomes smaller during testing, the
mini point clouds are too large for the mini PointNet to encode. Therefore the network performs worse when the testing SOM is smaller than expected.
In Fig. 6(c), we add Gaussian noise N(0, σ) onto the
SOM during testing. Given the fact that input points have
been normalized into a unit cube, a Gaussian noise with
σ = 0.2 is rather considerable, as shown in Fig. 6(d). Even
in that difﬁcult case, our network achieves the accuracy of
91.1% in ModelNet40 and 94.6% in ModelNet10.
Effect of hierarchical layer number
Our framework
shown in Fig. 3 can be made to further out-perform state-ofthe-art methods by simply adding more layers. The vanilla
SO-Net is a 2-layer structure “grouping&PN(PointNet) -
PN”, where the grouping is based on SOM and point-tonode kNN. We make it a 3-layer structure by simply repeat-
Intersection over Union (IoU)
bag cap car
chair ear. gui. knife lamp lap. motor mug pistol rocket skate table
PointNet 
83.4 78.7 82.5 74.9 89.6 73.0 91.5 85.9 80.8 95.3 65.2
PointNet++ 
82.4 79.0 87.7 77.3 90.8 71.8 91.0 85.9 83.7 95.3 71.6
Kd-Net 
80.1 74.6 74.3 70.3 88.6 73.5 90.2 87.2 81.0 94.9 57.4
O-CNN + CRF 85.9
85.5 87.1 84.7 77.0 91.1 85.1 91.9 87.4 83.3 95.4 56.9
Ours (pre-trained)
82.8 77.8 88.0 77.3 90.6 73.5 90.7 83.9 82.8 94.8 69.1
81.9 83.5 84.8 78.1 90.8 72.2 90.1 83.6 82.3 95.2 69.3
Table 2. Object part segmentation results on ShapeNetPart dataset.
ing the SOM/kNN based “grouping&PN” with this protocol: for each SOM node, ﬁnd k′ = 9 nearest nodes and process the k′ node features with a PointNet. The output is a
new SOM feature map of the same size but larger receptive
ﬁeld. Shown in Table 1, our 3-layer SO-Net increases the
accuracy to 1.5% higher (relatively 19% lower error rate)
than PN++ on ModelNet40, and 1.7% higher (relatively
28% lower error rate) than Kd-Net on ModelNet10. The
effect of hierarchical layer number is illustrated in Fig. 7,
where too many layers may lead to over-ﬁtting.
Training speed
The batch training of SOM allows parallel implementation on GPU. Moreover, the training of
SOM is completely deterministic in our approach, so it can
be isolated as data preprocessing before network optimization. Compared to the randomized kd-tree construction in
 , our deterministic design provides great boosting during training. In addition to the decoupled SOM, the hierarchical feature aggregation based on SOM can be implemented efﬁciently on GPU. As shown in Table 1, it takes
about 3 hours to train our best network on ModelNet40 with
a GTX1080Ti, which is signiﬁcantly faster than state-ofthe-art networks that can provide comparable performance.
4.5. Part Segmentation on ShapeNetPart
Figure 8. Visualization of object part segmentation results. First
row: ground truth. Second row: predicted segmentation. From
left to right: chair, lamp, table.
We formulate the object part segmentation problem as a
per-point classiﬁcation task, as illustrated in Fig. 3. The networks are evaluated using the mean Intersection over Union
(IoU) protocol proposed in . For each instance, IoU is
computed for each part that belongs to that object category.
The mean of the part IoUs is regarded as the IoU for that
instance. Overall IoU is calculated as the mean of IoUs
over all instances, and category-wise IoU is computed as an
average over instances under that category. Similar with O-
CNN and PointNet++ , surface normal vectors are
fed into the network together with point coordinates.
By optimizing per-point softmax loss functions, we
achieve competitive results as reported in Table 2. Although
O-CNN reports the best IoU, it adopts an additional dense
conditional random ﬁeld (CRF) to reﬁne the output of their
network while others do not contain this post-processing
step. Some segmentation results are visualized in Fig. 8
and we further visualize one instance per category in the
supplementary material. Although in some hard cases our
network may fail to annotate the ﬁne-grained details correctly, generally our segmentation results are visually satisfying. The low computation cost remains as one of our advantages. Additionally, pre-training with our autoencoder
produces a performance boost, which is consistent with our
classiﬁcation results.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose the novel SO-Net that performs
hierarchical feature extraction for point clouds by explicitly
modeling the spatial distribution of input points and systematically adjusting the receptive ﬁeld overlap. In a series
of experiments including point cloud reconstruction, object classiﬁcation and object part segmentation, our network
achieves competitive performance. In particular, we outperform state-of-the-art deep learning approaches in point
cloud classiﬁcation and shape retrieval, with signiﬁcantly
faster training speed. As the SOM preserves the topological
properties of the input space and our SO-Net converts point
clouds into feature matrice accordingly, one promising future direction is to apply classical ConvNets or graph-based
ConvNets to realize deeper hierarchical feature aggregation.
Acknowledgment.
This work is supported partially by
a ODPRT start-up grant R-252-000-636-133 from the National University of Singapore.