Sampling algorithms for validation of supervised
learning models for Ising-like systems.
Nataliya Portman∗,† and Isaac Tamblyn∗,†,‡
†Department of Physics, University of Ontario Institute of Technology, Oshawa, Ontario,
L1H 7K4 Canada
‡National Research Council of Canada, 100 Sussex Drive, Ottawa, Ontario, K1A 0R6
E-mail: ; 
In this paper, we build and explore supervised learning models of ferromagnetic
system behavior, using Monte-Carlo sampling of the spin conﬁguration space generated by the 2D Ising model. Given the enormous size of the space of all possible Ising
model realizations, the question arises as to how to choose a reasonable number of
samples that will form physically meaningful and non-intersecting training and testing datasets. Here, we propose a sampling technique called “ID-MH” that uses the
Metropolis-Hastings algorithm creating Markov process across energy levels within the
predeﬁned conﬁguration subspace. We show that application of this method retains
phase transitions in both training and testing datasets and serves the purpose of validation of a machine learning algorithm. For larger lattice dimensions, ID-MH is not
feasible as it requires knowledge of the complete conﬁguration space.
As such, we
develop a new “block-ID” sampling strategy: it decomposes the given structure into
square blocks with lattice dimension N ≤5 and uses ID-MH sampling of candidate
blocks. Further comparison of the performance of commonly used machine learning
methods such as random forests, decision trees, k nearest neighbors and artiﬁcial neural networks shows that the PCA-based Decision Tree regressor is the most accurate
predictor of magnetizations of the Ising model. For energies, however, the accuracy of
prediction is not satisfactory, highlighting the need to consider more algorithmically
complex methods (e.g., deep learning).
Introduction
Machine learning has been gaining attention in materials research and accelerated material discovery. Recently, machine learning approaches have shown the power to eﬀectively
learn from the past data and ﬁrst principles materials characterization. Successful examples include fast prediction of phase diagrams1 and crystal structures,2 approximation of
density functionals3 and interatomic potentials4 for eﬃcient and accurate materials simulation and prediction of physical properties from knowledge of similar known materials that
avoids laborious computations.5–7 Most of these applications are based on supervised learning methods. In a supervised learning framework, a mapping is learned between predictor
and outcome variables describing a physical phenomenon under study in an algorithmic
way. Such an algorithm is trained on a large collection of observations or measurements
of predictors and their corresponding outcomes for the purpose of predicting the outcome
from a new instance. For a continuous outcome, regression algorithms are used to predict
electronic structure-property relationships (e.g., kernel ridge regression or regularized least
squares model of Density Functional Theory Hamiltonian, neural networks for prediction
of crystal structures8–12). For a categorical outcome, classiﬁcation algorithms are used to
classify crystal structures or to detect material defects such as decision trees, support vector
machines and neural networks.13
While machine learning has been making strides in condensed matter physics research,
discovering phase transitions14 and complex topological phases15 of the Ising model-based
ferromagnetic systems, other applications of supervised learning methods such as prediction
of Ising system physical observables, have received little, if any, attention. In,16 the authors
used a quantum annealing hardware designed according to the Ising model with local neighbor interactions to ﬁnd the global minimum and to sample Ising energy functions at zero
and ﬁnite temperatures, respectively. This is an alternative to running software that realizes
learning algorithms on classical computers.
To apply supervised learning to 2D Ising ferromagnetic systems, we need to create a
so-called training or representative dataset with various spin arrangements on a 2D lattice
(conﬁgurations) as predictor variables and their corresponding total energies, for example,
as outcome variables. Once the supervised learning model is trained on this dataset, we can
test it on the other dataset.
It seems straightforward to generate the representative dataset using Metropolis Monte-
Carlo simulations leading to Boltzmann probability distribution of spin conﬁgurations over
energy states. From a machine learning perspective, this approach suﬀers two major drawbacks:
1. Uneven Boltzmann distribution may lead to imbalance between energy classes in the
training dataset resulting in a biased prediction of energy values.
2. Metropolis Monte-Carlo simulations collect repeated spin conﬁgurations that typically
occur when the candidate conﬁguration is rejected or proposed again. As a result,
a traditional validation that involves repeated partitioning of the dataset may create
intersecting testing and training subsets, yielding 100% accuracy for “shared” conﬁgurations and underestimating overall error.
Thus, an unbiased sampling method is needed for training and testing data collection. This
paper focuses ﬁrst on the development of such sampling technique called “block-ID” (bID).
Next, bID-sampled training and testing datasets are used with diﬀerent machine learning
algorithms to determine the best performing algorithm for the speciﬁc case of 2D Ising model
of the ferromagnetic system.
More precisely, we address the question of machine learning of major physical quantities
described by the Hamiltonian H and Magnetization M operators as follows
Here σi are random spin variables assuming the values ±1 on the sites of a 2D square lattice
of size N × N directed either up or down. The ﬁrst term in (1) is the sum of the nearest
neighbor site interaction energies. The second term describes the interaction of the applied
magnetic ﬁeld h with the spin system. Without loss of generality, we assume no external
ﬁeld. The proposed validation method developed in this paper consists of two steps:
1. Generation of training and testing datasets using bID sampling algorithm,
2. Statistical measurement of the machine learning algorithm performance (via median
It is applicable to cases with a non-zero external ﬁeld. Python code realizing the proposed
sampling technique is included as a supplement to this paper.
Overall, this work enables further exploration and exploitation of supervised learning
techniques for other Ising model-based distinct physical systems than ferromagnetic ones.
Examples of such systems include binary alloys where the spin variables represent atoms
of type A or B and lattice gas where +1/−1 indicate the presence/absence of a molecule.
We believe that with the proposed validation method, new accurate and physically informed
predictive models of energy or other quantities of interest can be discovered and applied
to computationally challenging cases of molecular lattice-like structures on a larger length
scale (e.g., crystalline materials). For example, block-ID sampling algorithm allows to build
training and testing data models of binary aluminum-based systems with dopant elements
(e.g., titanium, silver, etc.) whose atoms are arranged in a 3D cubic lattice that is a unit
cell of size N = 1000 or more.
Paper organization
This paper is organized as follows.
First, we show the motivation for a novel sampling
technique from a machine learning perspective, and introduce an ID-MH (ID-Metropolis-
Hastings) algorithm for the Ising model of an N ×N lattice for N ≤5 (Sections Motivation
and ID-MH sampling algorithm). We then incorporate the ID-MH method into a so
called block-ID (bID) sampling scheme for the Ising model on a larger length scale equal to a
multiple of N (Section Block-ID sampling algorithm). We further investigate the structure of the datasets generated by bID sampling using PCA-based dimensionality reduction
and the qualitative behavior of the ferromagnetic system (Sections
“Physics” and structure of block-ID sampled datasets
and Comparison of datasets obtained by MMC and block-ID methods).
Section Machine learned operator performance comparison compares the performance
of common machine learning approaches, namely, k nearest neighbors, decision trees, random forests, artiﬁcial neural networks trained on raw Ising conﬁgurations (collected by bID
sampling) and on PCA-based features of the conﬁguration set. Also, we study the eﬀect of
energy distribution equalization on the performance of the algorithms. Section Conclusion
concludes the work and outlines future directions.
Motivation
Metropolis Monte-Carlo (MMC)17 sampling of representative conﬁgurations/microstates from
high-dimensional probability distributions provides the basis for calculation of equillibrium
properties of Ising model-based systems (e.g., internal energy, net magnetization). The ef-
ﬁciency of MMC method lies in sampling a small but important fraction of the system
microstate space, resulting in a narrow range of energies and other physically relevant quantities. Real systems connected to a thermal bath, will, at equillibrium, sample the microstates
according to the Boltzmann probability distribution (3) that determines a small number of
dominating energy states,
Here E(C) is the energy of microstate C, kB is Boltzmann constant and Z is the partition
function. For simplicity of notation, we use β =
kBT in the deﬁnition of Boltzmann weights
given by (3).
MMC has been an algorithm of choice for the study of equillibrium properties of manyparticle systems for the past 50 years. Compared to other Monte-Carlo variants of Markov
Chain type, the MMC algorithm samples Boltzmann distributions more eﬃciently due to its
rapid convergence to equillibrium. Microstates in the asymptotic part of the Markov chain
generated by Metropolis MC sampling form a canonical ensemble from which all macroscopic
properties of the system can be calculated.
In15 the authors created such canonical ensembles for diﬀerent temperatures combining
them into the training dataset for the purpose of machine learning phase transitions of the
classical Ising model. They demonstrated that Convolutional Neural Networks trained on
this dataset are capable of identifying various phase transitions including non-trivial Coulomb
and topological phases. The same canonical ensembles were also used in an unsupervised
setting to discover distinct phases and their salient features, showing the power of learning
techniques in the study of equillibrium behaviour of condensed matter systems.14
The success of machine learning implementations depends on the “right” training dataset
- it should be physically informed by the phenomenon under study. Carrasquilla et al. were
able to identify the ferromagnetic phase transition since it was implicitly built into the
temperature-dependent dataset of Ising conﬁgurations (canonical ensembles). In essence,
this training dataset represents the data model of ferromagnetic system behavior.
Using a supervised learning approach, can we accurately predict equillibrium macro-
scopic properties of the Ising model at any given temperature? We envision building such
a predictor with the application of Metropolis MC sampling of the space of Ising conﬁgurations/microstates where the energy of each newly accepted conﬁguration E(Ci) = H(Ci) is
forecasted via a machine learned Hamiltonian operator (1). Since Metropolis MC samples
Ising conﬁgurations Ci with Boltzmann weights exp (−βE(Ci))
, a physical observable of interest
⟨Q⟩is estimated as a simple arithmetic mean over the equillibrium ensemble C1, C2, ..., CM
In this approach, the accuracy of prediction of physical observables is greatly inﬂuenced by
the accuracy of prediction of Hamiltonian energies as they determine Boltzmann probabilities
of selecting microstates (3). Therefore, a highly accurate, machine learned Hamiltonian operator will enable prediction of a variety of thermodynamic and/or ferromagnetic observables
(magnetic susceptibility) depending on the system under study.
In this paper, we treat the Hamiltonian and Magnetization operators (1) in a supervised
learning paradigm, viewing them as mappings between an Ising conﬁguration and its total
energy and magnetization, respectively. We consider the Ising model with periodic boundary
conditions where spins directed upward or downward are placed on sites of a 2D square
With the task of supervised learning of microstate energies and magnetizations, inevitably
comes another task of algorithm validation. As a common practice, a statistical method
known as k-fold cross-validation has been used for the assessment of algorithm performance.
It repeatedly partitions the sample of observed data into training and testing (hold-oﬀ)
subsets containing at least 50% of examples and at most 50% of examples, respectively. At
each partition, these examples (for the Ising model, they are combinations of spins arranged
in a square lattice order) are sampled at random, and new training and testing datasets are
created. The error of prediction (the absolute diﬀerence between predicted and true values)
is then computed for each testing example and averaged over all testing data.
For a MMC-generated dataset comprised of approximately canonical ensembles for different temperatures, k-fold cross-validation is not adequate for the following reasons:
1. At low temperatures, the Ising spin system spends the majority of its time at the
lowest-energy state represented by two distinct conﬁgurations. This is reﬂected in a
large number of repeated conﬁgurations representing the lowest-energy state. As a
result, there is a high chance of the presence of these conﬁgurations appearing in both
training and testing datasets, leading to a signiﬁcant overall error underestimate (given
the dominant contribution of lowest energy testing samples).
2. Other repeated conﬁgurations naturally occur when new candidates are rejected at
each MMC step (acceptance of a new candidate with probability) when the Markov
chain has reached asymptotic equillibrium. Repeated conﬁgurations may appear in
training and testing datasets by means of random sampling, resulting in a further
underestimate of the overall error in energy/magnetization prediction.
Another issue with a MMC-generated dataset is the imbalanced distribution of microstate
representatives of energy states, yielding a bias in error estimates toward dominant, frequently visited energy states.
While MMC generates physically meaningful datasets (capturing ferromagnetic phase
transition phenomenon and important energy ranges for diﬀerent temperatures), its sampling
bias will render prediction of underrepresented energies inaccurate. From a machine learning
perspective, more variability should be built into these energy states in order to lessen the
imbalance eﬀect.
We set out to devise a sampling algorithm that satisﬁes the following
requirements:
1. Physically motivated:
(a) Qualitatively captures qualitatively the equillibrium behaviour of the Ising model,
(b) Samples a relevant energy range.
2. Generates non-intersecting and consistent training and testing datasets of Ising spin
conﬁgurations, where consistency means inclusion of all energy states of the testing
dataset into the energy range of the training dataset, and similarity of the probability
distributions of energies and magnetizations.
3. Oversamples underrepresented energy states obtained by Metropolis-MC.
4. Applies to the Ising Model on a 2D lattice of any dimension N.
We propose ID-MH and block-ID sampling algorithms that satisfy the above mentioned
requirements for N ≤5 and multiples of N, respectively.
ID-MH sampling algorithm
We start with the consideration of the Ising model with periodic boundary conditions on a
2D square lattice of size N2, where N is a small number and with a coupling coeﬃcient J = 1
for all pairs of interacting neighbors. The space of all possible combinations of spins, (1 for
upward direction and −1 for downward direction) contains 2N2 conﬁgurations and increases
exponentially with respect to N. For N = 4, our system has 65,536 unique conﬁgurations (see
Figure 1.a), and for N = 5 the number of conﬁgurations increases to 33,554,432 (see Figure
1.b). Figure 1 shows that all possible microstates deﬁned by energies and magnetizations
per site are enclosed by a triangle with vertices corresponding to lowest and highest energies
per site. For each energy state, we counted the number of representative conﬁgurations and
then normalized all obtained frequencies to the range [0.0, 1.0]. Color-coded plots of energy
frequencies in Figure 1 demonstrate symmetric distribution of microstates with respect to
energy peaked at the 0th energy level and evolution of magnetization into two branches as
energy decreases.
For N = 6 it would take
225 = 2048 times longer than the previous calculation to
generate the complete dataset. Therefore, in order to avoid spending a long time on computer
calculations of this kind, we limit ourselves to the case of the lattice dimension N ≤5. In
Figure 1: “Phase space” plots of (a) the complete dataset of microstates for 4 × 4 Ising
model and (b) 30 % of the complete dataset for 5 × 5 Ising model. All microstates deﬁned
by energies and magnetizations are enclosed in a triangle with vertices whose y- coordinates
correspond to lowest and highest energy values.
nature, we do not encounter such small size Ising systems. However, if we ﬁnd a clever
strategy for creating consistent and non-intersecting training and testing datasets for small
lattice sizes we can make it applicable to larger ones.
A straightforward approach is to partition the complete Ising dataset by random drawing
of its conﬁgurations and setting them aside for testing. However, this approach does not
scale linearly with the increase of N. Such an approach requires generation of the complete
dataset, which is impossible to do in a reasonable amount of time even for moderate values
of N. Moreover, the complete set of conﬁgurations is redundant. As mentioned earlier, for
the purpose of prediction of equillibrium behavior of the Ising system, we are interested only
in those conﬁgurations/microstates that the system is likely to visit at thermal equillibrium.
Such microstates constitute a small fraction of the entire dataset.
Leaving scalability issue aside, we focus on the development of the sampling algorithm
for small lattice dimension N ≤5 that will create non-intersecting and consistent training
and testing datasets of microstates representing “important” energy states. To ﬁx ideas, let
N = 4. Denote by χ a ﬁnite set of all energy states. Then χ contains the total of 15 energy
χ = {−32, −24, −20, −16, −12, −8, −4, 0, 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, 24, 32}
with the frequencies recorded in a Table 1 below.
Table 1: Frequencies of energy states in the complete space of 4 × 4 Ising conﬁgurations.
Table 1 shows the number of microstates having the same energy value Ei ∈χ for
i ∈N : 1 ≤i ≤15 and forming degenerate energy “decks”. For the simplicity of notation,
we enumerate the decks in the ascending order of their energy values from 1 to 15 (see Figure
2). To devise a sampling algorithm in Markov Chain Monte-Carlo fashion, we have to specify
transition and stationary probabilities of ﬁnding a conﬁguration with energy Ei.18 Denote
by p(i →j) the probability of moving from deck i to deck j. Setting up the transfer matrix
of the Markov Chain Monte-Carlo algorithm such that
p(i →i + 1) + p(i →i) + p(i →i −1) = 1 for i ∈N : 2 ≤i ≤14,
and for boundary decks
p(i →i) + p(i →i ± 1) = 1 for i ∈{1, 15}
hold in matrix columns i, we restrict the moves from the current deck i to the neighboring
decks i −1 and/or i + 1 only. We deﬁne these probabilities using a priori weights of energy
decks recorded in the frequency row of Table 1. For example, if walkers are located on deck
i with a larger number of representatives than those of the neighboring decks, then they are
most likely to stay there and pick a candidate conﬁguration from deck i (see Figure 2). If
walkers are on the deck with the lowest energy value, then they are most likely to move to
the deck with the second lowest value (as it has 16 times more microstates to choose from).
Let us choose deck i = 8 corresponding to 0th energy value. Given a priori probabilities of
energy states 7, 8, 9 in the complete space of Ising conﬁgurations equal to 0.207, 0.313, 0.207,
respectively, we normalize them to the unit sum and deﬁne the transition probabilities as
p(8 →7) = 0.284
p(8 →8) = 0.432
p(8 →9) = 0.284
Here, the transition probabilities of moving in the opposite direction, that is, from 9 →8 and
from 7 →8, are not equal, leading to Metropolis-Hastings Monte-Carlo algorithm formulation. While transition probabilities allow walkers to explore a vast variety of microstates,
we further restrict the walker moves such that, after a large number of steps, they collect
these conﬁgurations with Boltzmann probabilities. We deﬁne the stationary probability of
selecting a conﬁguration Ck from jth deck as
k) = exp (−βEj)
We have arrived at the following algorithm that produces a Markov chain of random energy
states on χ, collects their representative microstates, and converges to the distribution π:
1. Generate a random Ising conﬁguration Ci
l and let its energy Ei be an initial state of
the Markov chain.
2. Generate a candidate energy deck j from the distribution p(·|i), speciﬁed by the frequencies of energy states in the complete dataset of spin combinations.
3. Draw a random conﬁguration Cj
k from the candidate deck.
4. Calculate the acceptance ratio A = min(1, exp(−β(Ej −Ei)) p(i|j)
5. Generate a random variable u U(0, 1).
6. If u < A or Ej −Ei < 0, then accept Cj
k, otherwise stay at current conﬁguration of
energy deck i.
7. Repeat the process from step 2 to 6 until convergence and record last 1000 or more
conﬁgurations, labeled by their energies and magnetizations.
The diﬀerence between Metropolis-MC and Metropolis-Hastings-MC sampling lies in the
choice of a candidate conﬁguration. In Metropolis-Hastings, we have incorporated a priori
probability distribution of all energy states that deﬁnes the “proposal” probability p(·|i) on χ
from which the candidate conﬁguration is drawn. In Metropolis, a candidate conﬁguration is
formed by a ﬂip of a single spin that shifts the current energy state by 4 units up or down or
does not change the energy state at all. This is equivalent to its drawing from a neighboring
energy deck located below or above the current one or staying at the same energy deck.
No preference is given for the choice of the neighboring deck, and the“proposal” probability
p(·|i) is symmetric. We call the proposed Metropolis-Hastings (MH) algorithm an ID-MH
algorithm as it samples the space of unique Ising conﬁgurations that can be enumerated and
labeled by ID numbers.
For the purpose of generating non-intersecting datasets, we further restrict the ID-MH
Markov process to sample a certain subspace of Ising conﬁgurations. Indeed, if we sample
at random 50% of all Ising conﬁgurations and form two subspaces out of the sampled data
and the remaining 50%, then running ID-MH algorithms on each of these subspaces will
Figure 2: ID-MH sampling algorithm for the 4 × 4 Ising model. Microstates are sampled
through the Markov Chain Monte-Carlo process formed across the energy “decks” of the
complete dataset of Ising conﬁgurations.
Transition probabilities are deﬁned from an a
priori probability distribution of energy states.
yield two non-intersecting datasets. However, the way how we separate into two subspaces
is important to the success of machine learning algorithms. From Table 1, we observe that
“tail”, or boundary energy states contain only two representative conﬁgurations each. The
lowest energy conﬁgurations contain all 1s or −1s, and the highest energy ones contain 1s
and −1s arranged in a checkered pattern. This holds true for all lattice dimension values of
N. If the training dataset contains only one example in the boundary energy states, then
another representative example will not be recognized (by a trained predictive model) to have
the same lowest/highest energy value due to its dissimilarity to the training example (having
all spins in the opposite direction). Therefore, as a ﬁrst step in forming non-intersecting and
consistent datasets, we place the above mentioned representatives of boundary energy states
to the training dataset.
Next, it is important to realize that a simple split of the Ising dataset (without boundary
classes) by means of random drawing of 50 % of its microstates may lead to a signiﬁcant
imbalance in numbers of representatives of the same energy class in testing and training
datasets. For example, if the number of conﬁgurations in some energy state in the training
dataset turns out to be small, then a trained predictive model will not generalize well to other
conﬁgurations found in that energy state. In order to avoid this issue, we take more control
over random sampling procedure for splitting the complete space of Ising conﬁgurations into
two subspaces. Speciﬁcally, we perform the following steps:
1. Distribute Ising conﬁgurations to their corresponding energy decks (keeping in mind
that we have already placed boundary decks to the training dataset).
2. In each energy deck:
(a) shuﬄe its representatives,
(b) split them into 50 % of training and 50% of testing conﬁgurations using random
We call the datasets obtained by this splitting process candidate training/testing subspaces.
In this way, we ensure that training and testing data models built by ID-MH sampling
of candidate training and testing subspaces equally capture the variability of microstates
representing important energy range.
Also, data consistency is maintained, that is, the
energy range of the candidate testing subspace is included into that of the candidate training
subspace. We ensure that all energy states captured by the testing data model are present
in the training data model.
Having created candidate training and testing Ising subspaces, we now run ID-MH
algorithm for 40 initial random conﬁgurations that we refer to as seeds at temperatures
β = 1.0, 2.5 and 10.0. The reason for generating 40 seed trajectories through each of the
Magnetization
Magnetization
Energy state frequencies
Figure 3: “Phase space” plots of training and testing datasets for the 4 × 4 Ising model.
Higher energy states that are not present in the training dataset tend to appear in the testing
dataset as temperature decreases.
candidate subspaces is to avoid falling into the local minimum of the global energy of a spin
conﬁguration when converging to the equillibrium distribution. Having recorded last 1000
microstates of each seed trajectory consisting of 32,000 MC steps across the energy decks
of the candidate subspace, we arrive at the similar probability distributions of energy- and
magnetizaton- dependent states in training and testing datasets (see Figure 3). At low temperature 1
β = 1.0 the ferromagnetic systems mostly populate magnetization per site branches
with values −1 and 1 in the training dataset. Same behavior is observed in the testing dataset
where these systems tend to visit the lowest energy state (which is equal to the second lowest
value of the energy in the complete dataset of Ising microstates) present in this dataset. As
the temperature increases to 1
β = 2.5, the probability peak moves closer to the 0th value of
the energy per site in both datasets with rare occurrences of spontaneous magnetization. At
a higher temperature, the system has fully lost its spontaneous net magnetization and the
frequency peak gets established at the 0th energy state giving the preference to chaotic or
unstructured combinations of spins.
Temperature
training data
testing data
Temperature
training data
testing data
Figure 4: Temperature-dependent, average (a) energy and (b) magnetization curves obtained
by ID-MH sampling of 4 × 4 Ising conﬁgurations. The discrepancy in average energies and
magnetizations per site in training and testing datasets is due to the exclusion of the the
lowest energy state from the candidate testing subspace.
We also observe the phenomenon of the phase transition in a rapid drop of mean absolute
value of magnetization per site in its temperature-dependent curves in the vicinity of T=2.0
(see Figure 4.b). Simultaneously, the mean energy per site rapidly increases near T=2.0 (see
Figure 4.a). The curves seen in Figures 4.(a-b) were obtained by averaging the total energy
or the absolute value of magnetization per each temperature in training and testing datasets
(we labeled each microstate collected by ID-MH sampling by its energy, magnetization and
temperature). Speciﬁcally,
⟨|M|⟩(T) = 1
step=31,001
|Mseedi, step(T)|,
⟨E⟩(T) = 1
step=31,001
Eseedi, step(T).
where T is a temperature variable taking values in the range from 0.5 to 10 with an increment
∆T = 0.5 and step is a step of the ID-MH algorithm at which the current spin conﬁguration
is updated.
The discrepancy in average training and testing values of magnetization and energy at
low temperatures is due to the fact that the boundary energy states are excluded from the
candidate testing subspace.
Systems in the testing dataset do not get a chance to visit
the lowest energy state. Overall, we conclude that the typical equilibrium behavior of the
Ising-like ferromagnetic system is captured by training and testing data models created by
the ID-MH sampling algorithm.
Summary statistics of system visits of energy- and magnetization- dependent states over
the temperature range [0.5, 40.5] is shown by a color-coded graph in Figure 5. These training
and testing datasets combine approximately canonical ensembles obtained for each temperature in the above mentioned range (with the temperature step equal to 0.5) by ID-MH
sampling of the candidate training and testing subspaces.
If we set the right hand side
boundary temperature to a higher value, then we will be able to reach out for higher energy
microstates.
Here, we have illustrated the application of ID-MH for building the data models appropriate for learning equillibrium properties of the systems with a 2D lattice dimension N ≤5.
However, if we are speciﬁcally interested in microstates representing higher energy states
we can simply modify the temperature range by considering only high temperature values.
Thus, the ID-MH algorithm provides with a ﬂexible tool for building non-intersecting, consistent and physically motivated training and testing datasets depending on Ising-like system
Figure 5: Summary “phase space” plots for the 4 × 4 Ising model for the temperature range
[0.5, 40.5]. The probability distributions of energy states are the same in the training and
testing datasets created by “ID-MH” algorithm.
properties under study.
Block-ID sampling algorithm
While ID-MH algorithm meets all requirements of the successful sampling strategy for validation of supervised learning algorithms for Ising-like systems, it appears to be of little
practical interest. For example, the smallest repetitive volume that comprises the crystal
pattern may contain 88 or more sites.19 Application of ID-MH algorithm starts with the
generation of the complete space of microstates leading to an astronomically large number
of all possible conﬁgurations whose storage is impossible as it goes beyond the capacity of
modern computers. In this section, we incorporate the ID-MH algorithm into our so-called
block-ID (bID) sampling strategy for large size Ising models, speciﬁcally, the ones whose size
is a multiple of N ≤5. The bID sampling algorithm constitutes the central contribution of
this paper.
We start with an observation that any conﬁguration of spins with periodic boundary
conditions arranged on a 2D lattice of size (kN)2, where k ∈N and N ≤5 can be viewed as
a composition of N × N blocks consisting of 1s and −1s. More precisely, we can represent
such conﬁguration as a k×k array of elementary N ×N blocks (see Figure 6). In comparison
to a single-spin-ﬂip dynamics type of MC algorithm where we ﬂip a spin at a random site of
the current conﬁguration to form a candidate one, we consider an N × N block drawn from
a randomly chosen energy deck of the candidate subspace as the proposed replacement at a
random (i, j) site of the k×k array. Given that Hamiltonian operator is deﬁned with periodic
Figure 6: Illustration of block-ID sampling algorithm for the 16 × 16 Ising model viewed as
a 4×4 matrix of 4×4 spin combinations. Shaded 4×4 block represents a spin conﬁguration
randomly drawn from the candidate training or testing subspace. This block replaces the
previous arrangement of spins at a site (2, 2), thus proposing an overall candidate 16 × 16
conﬁguration.
boundary conditions where spins at the opposite boundary sites interact with each other, the
Hamiltonian of the entire kN × kN system is not the sum of Hamiltonians of its elementary
N × N blocks. As such, the diﬀerence in energy between the current and candidate systems
denoted by Cl and Cn, respectively, is computed globally, that is ∆E = E(Cl)−E(Cn). With
this approach, we have more choice of the candidates with lower than the current value of
energy. Indeed, we can ﬁnd kN × kN candidates that will provide the energy diﬀerence of
8, 12, 16 or more units depending on the block dimension N (recall that with a classical
single-spin-ﬂip strategy, at a single MC step we can usually lower the energy by 4 units or by
8 units if transitioning to the lowest energy state). Also, keeping the acceptance rate as the
one deﬁned for MMC we immediately notice that it will be quite small for global candidates
with energy values exceeding the current one by 8 units or more. As a result, the proposed
bID technique described below step-by-step is more eﬃcient than MMC as it “walks” to an
equillibrium distribution by larger MC steps. Moreover, it samples more variety of lower
energy conﬁgurations.
Block-ID sampling algorithm.
1. Choose a random conﬁguration (initial seed) Cn of 1s and −1s of size (kN)2.
2. Structure (kN)2 Ising system into k × k array of N × N blocks where N ≤5.
3. Generate candidate training and testing subspaces for N × N Ising model using the
splitting process of Section ID-MH sampling algorithm.
4. Choose a random site (i, j) of the block array of size k × k.
5. Draw a candidate energy deck m from the uniform distribution U(1, 2, 3, ..., M), where
M is the total number of energy states in the candidate subspace and m refers to one
of the decks arranged in ascending order of their energy values.
6. Draw a random N × N conﬁguration from the candidate deck m and form a global
candidate Cl of size (kN)2 by replacing the elementary block at site (i, j) with the
selected conﬁguration from the candidate subspace.
7. Compute the diﬀerence in energy ∆E = E(Cl) −E(Cn).
8. Generate a random variable u ∼U(0, 1).
9. If ∆E < 0 or if ∆E ≥0 and u < min(1, exp (−β∆E) accept Cl. Otherwise, stay at
current conﬁguration Cn.
10. For each of the candidate subspaces, repeat steps 4 to 9 until convergence and record
last 1000 global conﬁgurations along with their energies and magnetizations.
We point out the advantages of uniform sampling over all energy decks/states in the
candidate training or testing subspace. If we sample N × N conﬁgurations at random then
we will most likely select those ones in the vicinity of 0th energy state (see Figure 11.a).
If we sample energy states with a priori probability distribution of the complete space of
N × N conﬁgurations then the degeneracy of middle range energy states, will trap most of
the candidates and slow convergence to the equillibrium distribution at low temperatures. If
we sample energies according to the ID-MH algorithm maintaining the Markov chain across
energy decks, then the energies of the accepted global Ising conﬁgurations will have a slow
change comparable to that of MMC. By sampling uniformly all possible energy states we
give an equal chance for them to occur including the lowest and highest energy states. For
example, for N = 4 there is 1 chance out of 15 to choose the lowest energy state at each MC
step of the stochastic process versus 2 chances out of 65,536 if the prior distribution is chosen
(see Table 1). Thus, uniform sampling increases the chance to select less populated energy
states and leads to a faster convergence of bID algorithm at low temperatures. In order to
build consistent training and testing datasets, we perform block-ID sampling for the temperature range speciﬁed by a user. The reason for the temperature range will become apparent
from the Section “Physics” and structure of block-ID sampled datasets below.
“Physics” and structure of block-ID sampled datasets
We now run the bID sampling algorithm with 32,000 MC steps and 50 initial seeds, collecting
50,000 microstates in total for each given temperature
β = 1.0, 2.6, 10.0 and plotting the
frequency of visits of energy- and magnetization- dependent states for the 16 × 16 Ising
model (see Figure 7). At low temperatures, most microstates in the training dataset tend
to populate magnetization (per site) branches M = −1 and M = 1. The same behavior
is observed in the testing data model, where the states with the lowest and highest net
magnetizations present in the dataset are most frequently visited. Other conﬁgurations with
Energy state frequencies
Magnetization
Magnetization
Figure 7: “Phase space” plots of block-ID sampled training and testing data for the 16 × 16
Ising model. An upward shift of visited energy states is observed in the testing set relative
to the training set with the temperature decrease. Since the lowest energy state is excluded
from the candidate testing subspace, at low temperatures the block-ID algorithm tends to
select candidate conﬁgurations near the second lowest energy value for the 4×4 Ising model.
zero magnetization (per site) are detected by the algorithm as they share the same low
energy state. As temperature ( 1
β) increases to 2.6, the frequency of state visits extends to
energy levels that neighbor with the lowest one. With respect to net magnetization per site,
it follows magnetization branches starting at -1 and 1 in inward direction. We can say that
spontaneous magnetizations are maintained at low temperatures, consistent with statistical
mechanics prediction of equillibrium behavior of ferromagnetic systems . Increasing the
temperature to 10.0 forms a parabolic triangular region of energies per site advancing to
higher levels and magnetizations per site ﬁlling up the entire magnetization range. Unlike
the case of 4 × 4 Ising model, the frequency of states has not reached its peak at the 0th
energy level, settling in the lower energy range near the value of -1.0 in the training dataset,
and near -0.75 in the testing dataset.
Comparison of energy ranges in training and testing datasets built by bID algorithm
for each temperature shows an upward shift of the testing energy range (as a consequence
of excluded boundary energy states) relative to the training one. This shift appears to be
particularly pronounced for low temperatures when energy ranges in both datasets do not
intersect. It will be impossible for a machine learning algorithm trained to recognize the
energy range given in the training dataset to accurately predict other energy states that it
has not learned. Training and testing datasets built per temperature are not consistent with
respect to energy range and therefore, they cannot be used for algorithm validation. Training
and testing data consistency is achieved by combining sets of microstates obtained by bID
algorithm for diﬀerent temperatures within a certain temperature range such as [0.5, 40.5],
for instance. Setting the temperature step to 0.5, we generated 80 sets of 50000 microstates
labeled with their energy and magnetization values that we then combined into one dataset.
Figure 8 shows energy versus magnetization plots of such training and testing datasets where
the states of the testing dataset form a subset of the state space of the training dataset.
We also observe ferromagnetic phase transition from spontaneous magnetization occurring at the lowest energy level to its loss at higher positive energy levels. Given the tendency
of bID algorithm to sample a variety of lower energy microstates the frequency peak is settled
at the energy per site level between −0.5 and 0.0.
Figure 8: Summary “phase space” plots of block-ID sampled (a) training and (b) testing
data for the 16 × 16 Ising model. The training and testing datasets built by the block-ID
algorithm are consistent as the testing energy range is included into the training energy
We further explore the structure of bID sampled data, and since training and testing
data models are alike, it suﬃces to consider the training dataset only. Having generated the
data array X of size 4, 000, 000×256 that contains 256 features (spin directions at 256 lattice
sites) we perform Principal Component Analysis (PCA)-based dimensionality reduction that
allows us to project the data onto the ﬁrst two leading eigen-vectors ⃗e1 and ⃗e2 of the data
covariance matrix XTX. Denote projected data coordinates by PC1 and PC2 in a new space
spanned by ⃗e1 and ⃗e2. Then for any observation ⃗Xk, where k ∈N : 1 ≤k ≤4, 000, 000
PC1k = ⟨⃗Xk, ⃗e1⟩,
PC2k = ⟨⃗Xk, ⃗e2⟩.
Figure 9 shows a color-coded distribution of energies across the training dataset. Each col-
ored point in this plot represents a microstate of the Ising system. The two lowest energy
conﬁgurations with all spints down and all spins up correspond to the corners of the projected dataset and provide boundaries of the entire variability range along the X-axis. The
“hotter” the microstates are, the more similar (and closer to each other) they are. We can
see the progression from less-alike microstates to more-alike in a structured manner, forming well-deﬁned oval-shaped boundaries that distinguish between lower and higher energy
conﬁgurations. There are only a few microstates with the positive energy shown in bright
orange and yellow colors. The vast majority of conﬁgurations are within the energy range
between −256.0 and 0.0. They are displayed in shades of red.
Figure 9.a shows that the dataset built by block-ID algorithm captures the symmetry of
Hamiltonian operator. Indeed, a microstate with a positive x-coordinate in the 2D principal
component space has a positive magnetization (see Figure 9.b) and its mirror image (with
y-axis serving as a plane mirror) with a negative x-coordinate corresponding to the switching
of the spin direction in all lattice sites of the microstate. The microstate and its mirror image
possess the same energy. That is, H(−x, y) = H(x, y), H(x, −y) = H(x, y), H(−x, −y) =
H(x, y). Also, block-ID sampled data captures antisymmetric property of the magnetization
function as clearly seen from Figure 9.b. Color-coded plot of magnetization values across the
dataset shows that M(−x, y) = −M(x, y) holds for all conﬁgurations represented by (x,y)
coordinates in the 2D principal component space (known as PCA scores).
Magnetization
Figure 9: PCA view of the training dataset (4,000,000 samples) generated by block-ID
sampling algorithm for the 16 × 16 Ising model. Color-coded plots of (a) energies and (b)
magnetizations.
Comparison of datasets obtained by MMC and block-ID
Having developed a new bID sampling strategy, we further justify it as our best choice
for building supervised learning models of the Hamiltonian operator. For this purpose, we
compare the structures of the datasets obtained by bID and MMC sampling for 16×16 Ising
model and shown in Figure 10.(a-b). Each dataset is comprised of 4,000,000 microstates
collected at the asymptotic stage of the Markov chain. Namely, the global parameters for
each algorithm were set to 50 initial seeds, the temperature range [0.5, 40.0] with the sampling
step of 0.5 and 32,000 MC steps (the total length of the Markov Chain). Upon reaching the
equillibrium stage, the last one thousand conﬁgurations were recorded from each of the 50
Markov chains for every temperature in the given range. Dimensionality reduction of the
datasets of size 4, 000, 000 × 256 using Principal Component Analysis was then applied for
visualization. It is clear that the MMC-generated dataset exhibits poor variability of the
energy states(classes) in the energy range between dominant lowest energy and zeroth energy
values. BID sampling compensates for the high imbalance of energy states by collecting more
microstates from the underrepresented energy classes.
Energy values
MH sampling
Block-ID sampling
Equilibrium distribution of energies estimated by MH and block-ID sampling methods
Frequencies
Energy per site
MH sampling
Block-ID sampling
Figure 10: (a-b) PCA view and (c) energy distributions of datasets generated by Metropolis-
MC and block-ID sampling techniques for 16 × 16 Ising model. Both datasets consist of
4,000,000 samples.
Figure 10.c compares the frequencies of visiting energy states collected by MMC and
bID sampling algorithms. The bID algorithm undersamples the dominant zeroth energy
class and adds microstates to the mid-range energy classes. At low temperatures, the Ising
system stabilizes at the lowest energy state with a smaller probability to escape to a higher
energy state (regulated by the acceptance rate) than in MMC asymptotics. As a result,
thousands of repeated microstates form a peak at the lowest energy value. In reality, energies
or other physical quantities characterizing a training molecular database are never evenly
distributed, and therefore, we consider this data model as a true test of predictive capabilities
of a supervised learning algorithm built on it.
When creating a dataset of microstates labeled with energies for learning a Hamiltonian
operator, it is tempting to use to a simple random generator of Ising conﬁgurations as they
can be represented by N2-dimensional vectors of 1s and −1s. As shown in Figure 11.a, a
uniformly random sampling of about 4,000,000 spin conﬁgurations concentrates in the small
neighbourhood of 0th energy value collecting a variety of disordered microstates. This is not
surprising, since this energy class has the highest degeneracy that is, the highest number of
microstate representatives. Given our interest in equillibrium properties of the Ising system,
for temperatures below Curie’s temperature, these microstates have very low Boltzmann
weights and therefore, contribute very little to the actual value of physical observables.
Random sampling does not capture microstates with important energies on the lower end of
the range.
Figures 11.b and 12.a show the diﬀerence between individual seed trajectories generated
by MMC and bID sampling methods for
β = 2.5 that start from the highest energy seed
and proceed downwards visiting microstates in lower energy range.
Total energies were
computed with the coupling coeﬃcient J = 1 for all pairs of interacting neighbors. BID
sampling “falls” to the lowest energy state oscillating between the two microstates with all
spins oriented upwards and downwards. For 1
β = 10.0 (see Figures 11.c and 12.b), the bID
algorithm collects lower energy conﬁgurations with a signiﬁcantly wider magnetization range
as compared to Metropolis-MC.
Overall, the bID method gets to the lower energy range faster (MMC steps forming the
trajectory are smaller as a consequence of this algorithm being a single-spin-ﬂip dynamics
type) and samples more variety of microstates within this range.
Magnetization
Magnetization
A seed trajectory generated by MH sampling, T=2.5
Magnetization
Magnetization
A seed trajectory generated by ID-MH sampling:testing dataset, T=2.5
Magnetization
-1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
Figure 11: Example seed trajectories obtained by (a) random, (b) Metropolis-MC and (c)
bID sampling of 16 × 16 Ising conﬁgurations for 1
β = 2.5. Energies and magnetizations are
computed per site (scaled by 256, the total number of lattice sites). The coupling coeﬃcient
Magnetization
A seed trajectory generated by MH sampling, T= 10
-1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
Magnetization
A seed trajectory generated by ID-MH sampling:testing dataset, T=10
Magnetization
-1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
Figure 12: Seed trajectories obtained by (a) Metropolis-MC and (b) bID sampling for 16×16
Ising model for 1
β = 10.0. Energies and magnetizations are computed per site. The coupling
coeﬃcient J = 1.
Machine learned operator performance comparison
Machine learning experiments with reduced size block-ID sampled
Having generated training and testing datasets containing 4,000,000 examples each via block-
ID sampling, we explore diﬀerent algorithmic models for learning Hamiltonian and Magnetization mappings. Given a 4 unit diﬀerence between the consecutive energy states and an
8 unit diﬀerence between the boundary states and their neighbors, we can formulate the energy forecast problem as the classiﬁcation of Ising conﬁguration to an energy state or class.
Similarly, we can pose the classiﬁcation problem for prediction of magnetizations since the
diﬀerence between the consecutive values is 2 units. We can learn individual mappings using
a variety of machine learning algorithms as well as two-label mappings that forecast energies
and magnetizations simultaneously.
In this section, we intend to apply commonly used supervised learning methods such
as decision trees (DT), random forests (RF), k nearest neighbors (kNN), artiﬁcial neural
networks (ANN) in both, classiﬁcation and regression, paradigms. Each conﬁguration for
the 16 × 16 Ising model is represented by a 256-dimensional vector of 1s and −1s.
machine learning framework, the spins are referred to as features. As such, we have 4,000,000
observations of 256 features. As a ﬁst simple and direct experiment to get an idea which
paradigm suits best for our Ising data, we ran bID sampling algorithm to generate a smaller
representative dataset with 5 initial seeds, 80 diﬀerent values of temperature in the same
range [0.5, 40.5] of the “global” dataset. For each seed trajectory, we only recorded the last
255 conﬁgurations, totaling in 102,000 examples overall. The testing dataset was generated
in the same way.
We then trained the above-mentioned classiﬁers and regressors individually for forecasting
one target quantity, energy or magnetization, on raw Ising conﬁgurations of the reduced-size
dataset shown in Figure 13. To access the performance of the trained models, we used a
statistical measure of error (median). Since we have 102,000 examples in the testing dataset,
for each example we computed the error as the absolute diﬀerence between the predicted
and true values of energy or magnetization. We then computed the global median as the
middle value of the sequence of 102,000 errors sorted in an ascending order.
The ﬁrst four rows of Table 2 show the performance of DT, RF, kNN and ANN classi-
ﬁers and regressors trained individually to predict energies and magnetizations. Given the
ǫ-distance of 4 units between neighboring energy classes, the median error appears unacceptably high for energies. ANN regressor is the best performer yielding a median error of 49.43.
For magnetizations, ANN classiﬁer yields the best accuracy results. In ANN calculations we
used a simple architecture with one hidden layer and 256 hidden neurons. The median error
of 0.0 means that in more than 50% of testing samples we were 100% correct in the magnetization prediction. Comparison of the error in the energy prediction yielded by classiﬁcation
and regression approaches shows that regression is best suited for the modeling Hamiltonian
operator. kNN is the worst performer and as such it is discarded from further experiments
with the global datasets.
Magnetization
Figure 13: PCA view of the training subset (102,000 samples) generated by block-ID sampling algorithm for the 16 × 16 Ising model.
Color-coded plots of (a) energies and (b)
magnetizations.
Another common machine learning strategy is data projection to a lower-dimensional
space via Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and training a classiﬁer/regressor on the
projected data residing in this newly obtained space. PCA is also viewed as a feature reduction technique compressing all important information about the variability of the dataset
into a few linearly independent features. We calculate PCA features of the reduced-size
dataset of size 102, 000 × 256 denoted by Xr as follows:
1. Compute the sample mean ⃗µ.
2. Subtract the mean from each example in Xr and compute the data covariance matrix
(Xr −⃗µ)T(Xr −⃗µ).
3. Compute the eigen-vectors and eigen-values of the covariance matrix and arrange eigenvectors in the ascending order of their eigen-values.
4. Select the ﬁrst few eigen-vectors ⃗e1, ⃗e2, .., ⃗eL that have signiﬁcant contributions to overall variance of the dataset (by examining their corresponding eigen-values).
5. Project the data sample (centered around ⃗0th vector) onto the leading eigen-vectors
selected in the previous step. If e is a matrix whose columns are the selected eigenvectors, then Score = eT(Xr −⃗µ)T. Score deﬁnes new coordinates of the projected
data in PC space.
Using the above-described procedure, we extracted the 50 most important features (scores)
that capture the variability of Xr in PC space. We then applied the same machine learning
techniques to the PCA-based data representation. To prepare for prediction, testing examples were projected onto the 50 leading eigen-vectors of the training data covariance matrix.
The error in energy prediction drops from 49.43 to 29.20 as seen from rows 5 to 8 of Table 2.
PCA paired with Random Forests regressor appears to be the most accurate energy predictor. Overall, PCA transformation of Ising data signiﬁcantly improves predictive capabilities
of machine learning regressors lowering the error in energy prediction by at most 40%.
This is not surprising, as PCA highlights the data structure which is important to Decision Tree-based machine learning techniques.
DT or RF select a hierarchy of features
according to which the training dataset is cut into the subsets. These features are then
extracted from an unknown example leading to the decision which subset it is most likely to
belong to. As such, structured datasets are highly preferred when using these techniques as
they are easier to subdivide.
The stripe-like structure of magnetization classes seen in Figure 13.b naturally suggests
Decision Tree is a suitable algorithm.
PCA paired with the Decision Tree regressor or
classiﬁer yields zero median error. Although ANN trained on raw Ising data also yields zero
median error, PCA+DT is preferred due to its low computational cost of feature selection.
We would like to carry over the best-performing algorithms to their training on massive
Eventually, we formed training datasets with two labels per each example, one label
for energy and another one for magnetization, and built a two-target predictor using PCA
combined with DT and with RF to forecast energy and magnetization simultaneously. The
errors for these predictors are reported in the last two rows of Table 2. As we can see from
regression errors, simultaneous prediction of both quantities increases the median error in
energy to 30.20 and in magnetization to 3.20. Therefore, regressors individually trained on
datasets labeled with energies or datasets labeled with magnetizations constitute the best
strategy for building supervised learning models of Hamiltonian and Magnetization operators. While the global median error reported in Table 2 allows comparison of diﬀerent
machine learning strategies, it does not tell us about the distribution of the median error
across energy or magnetization classes. The right hand-side plot of Figure 14 shows the
histogram distribution of the median error of PCA+DT regressor (with the global median
error of 0) across the entire range of magnetizations. The graph in blue color displays the
frequencies of magnetization classes given in the reduced-size training dataset. We can now
relate the error occurrences to the numbers of representatives per each magnetization value.
As expected, small frequencies of magnetization class visits result in errors. However, these
are still small and acceptable errors. The error of 2 units means that the magnetization
Table 2: Global median errors in energy (En) and magnetization (Mg) prediction using the
training dataset of 102,000 conﬁgurations generated by block-ID sampling. Lower is better.
Classiﬁcation
Regression
Classiﬁcation
Regression
Decision Tree (DT)
Random Forests (RF)
K Near. Neighbors (KNN)
A. Neural Networks (ANN)
PCA features + DT
PCA features + RF
PCA features + KNN
PCA features + ANN
Two-label, PCA + DT
Two-label, PCA + RF
class located next to the true one was forecasted.
We can further improve the accuracy
Magnetization values
Frequency of Mg in the increased training dataset
Median error
Magnetization values
Frequency of Mg in the training dataset of 102000 samples
Median error
Figure 14: Median error of PCA-based Decision Tree regressor trained on (a) the dataset
of 4,000,000 examples and (b) its subset of 102,000 examples. Increasing the size of the
training dataset improves the accuracy of magnetization prediction. Original, non-uniform
distribution of magnetizations in the training dataset does not aﬀect the performance of the
regressor.
in magnetization prediction by increasing the size of the training dataset, speciﬁcally, by
training on our global dataset of 4,000,000 examples. The left hand-side plot of the median
error distribution shows the desired 0th value across all magnetization classes even for seemingly underrepresented magnetization subranges. Since the testing dataset was created by
the same bID sampling algorithm as the training one, the distribution of magnetizations in
the testing dataset is similar to the one displayed by the blue graph in Figure 14. As such,
it does not have a great variety of testing examples in the underrepresented magnetization
subrange either resulting in 0th median error.
The eﬀect of energy distribution equalization
Having learned the best performing machine learning strategy from experiments presented in
the above subsection, speciﬁcally PCA+RF regressor for prediction of energies, we now train
this regressor on the global training dataset containing 4,000,000 examples. The ﬁrst column
of Table 3 shows that this strategy remains the best performer among other methods trained
on the same large size dataset. The global median error decreased in value by about 20% due
to the increased size of the training dataset. However, the error of 22.80 is still too big to be
acceptable. The distribution of the median error across the energy classes seen in Figure 15
for PCA+DT regressor shows high sensitivity of the predictor to underrepresented energy
states. Indeed, since block-ID algorithm by construction mostly samples conﬁgurations on
lower energy end, there are simply not enough positive energy samples in the training dataset
for accurate prediction on higher energy end. As seen from Figure 15 the major contribution
to the global error comes from underrepresented positive energy states.
In the experiment presented below, we studied the eﬀect of equalization of energy distribution on the performance of supervised learning methods. To equalize the original histogram
of energies, we computed the average number of representative samples per energy class
(having excluded the dominant lowest energy class populated with repeated conﬁgurations).
We set it to be the number of representatives per each energy class in the training dataset.
For those classes with original numbers of representatives less than the average number we
oversampled them with random copies of its representatives. Thus, having achieved the uniform distribution of energies we trained our usual regressors on the newly obtained dataset
and compare the global median errors presented in Table 3. With respect to energies, the
global error increased for all methods. For the forecast of magnetizations, equalization of
Energy values
Frequency of En in the original training dataset
Median error
Figure 15: Median error of PCA-based Random Forests regressor trained on original data
of 4,000,000 samples (best performer for energies).
energies caused no change in the error yielded by the best performing PCA+DT method.
Table 3: Global median errors in energy (En) and magnetization (Mg) prediction using the
training dataset of increased size (4,000,000 samples) and its modiﬁed version with equalized
distribution of energies.
ML regression
distr. (En)
distr. (En)
distr. (Mg)
distr. (Mg)
PCA features + DT
PCA features + RF
PCA features + ANN
Two-label, PCA + DT
Two-label, PCA + RF
How does equalization of energy distribution impact the histogram of median errors across
the energy range? Figure 16 shows the median error histogram produced by PCA-based ANN
regressor trained on the global dataset with original (see Figure 16.a) and its modiﬁed version
with equalized distribution of energies (see Figure 16.b). As a result, the error distribution
tends to equalize across the energy range. The error drops signiﬁcantly over the subrange
of positive energies while raising in the middle energy subrange with a maximal number of
original representative microstates. Apparently, adding repeated samples to minority energy
classes improves accuracy of prediction for those energies.
This is an important ﬁnding
that we can use, for instance, to improve forecasting of energy classes that are naturally
underrepresented for Ising systems. Speciﬁcally, these are lowest and highest energies that
appear important in calculating equillibrium and non-equillibrium properties of the system,
respectively. For instance, the lowest energy class appears to have the biggest Boltzmann
weight for systems at thermal equillibrium at low temperatures. In this case, training on the
Ising dataset with equalized energy distribution is preferable, as other energy classes such
as the ones in the middle energy range will have a small contribution to computing physical
observables of the system. Therefore, training datasets can be adjusted to target certain
energy classes that we know a priori are important to predict accurately.
Energy values
Frequency of En in the original training dataset
Median error
Energy values
Frequency of En in the equalized training dataset
Median error
Figure 16: Median error of PCA-based Artiﬁcial Neural Networks regressor trained on data
with (a) original and (b) equalized energy distributions. Equalization of energy distribution
in the training dataset lowers the error of prediction of underrepresented ‘tail‘ energy classes.
Conclusion
In this paper, we illuminated subtle drawbacks of classical Metropolis-MC sampling methods
for the Ising model that prevent the use of conventional validation approaches for supervised
learning models of the Hamiltonian operator. We developed new MC-based methods that
overcome a sampling bias inherent to Metropolis-MC and serve as a validation tool for
machine learning algorithms. The proposed sampling methods (ID-MH algorithm for lattice
dimension N ≤5 and block-ID algorithm for lattice dimension equal to the multiple of N)
accomplish the following tasks:
1. Sample a greater variability of Ising conﬁgurations that represent important energy
states of the system at a thermal equilibrium,
2. Build distinct training and testing datasets needed for a fair assessment of machine
learning algorithm performance,
3. Build physically motivated training and testing data models that capture typical equillibrium behavior, speciﬁcally, a phase transition for ferromagnetic systems,
4. Collect a structured ensemble of microstates that captures the symmetry of Hamiltonian operator and antisymmetry of Magnetization operator,
5. Ensure consistency between training and testing datasets that avoids mismatch of
energy states in the testing and training sets and avoids imbalance between numbers
of representatives of the same energy state present in the training and testing sets.
We shared important insights into the error behavior gained from machine learning experiments with block-ID sampled datasets for the 2D Ising model. The global median error is
not informative and therefore, we computed the histogram distribution of the median error
across all energies and all magnetizations of the testing dataset. The median error distribution for energies revealed a high sensitivity of the best performing machine learning strategy
to underrepresented positive energy states in the training dataset. The median error distribution for magnetizations did not react to low-frequency magnetizations present in the
training data and was found to be equal to 0. The best performing method for prediction
of magnetizations is PCA-based Decision Tree regression yielding the median error of 0 per
each magnetization value in the testing set.
For prediction of energies, our ﬁndings show that regression approach works best and
PCA-based data representation signiﬁcantly improves the accuracy of commonly used algorithms (DT, RF, kNN, ANN). The winner among those algorithms is PCA-based Random
Forests regressor trained on a large size block-ID sampled dataset of 4,000,000 Ising con-
ﬁgurations. However, it yields the median error of 22.80 units that is unsatisfactory given
the ǫ-distance of 4 units between two consecutive energies of the Ising system. Therefore,
the best performer for forecasting energies is yet to be found. Exploration of deep learning methods with predeﬁned architectures that have been found successful in various object
recognition applications will be our next research endeavour.
Acknowledgement
The authors acknowledge NSERC, SOSCIP and Compute Canada for funding and computational resources.