Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 879–888,
Lisbon, Portugal, 17-21 September 2015. c⃝2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.
Joint Named Entity Recognition and Disambiguation
Gang Luo1, Xiaojiang Huang2, Chin-Yew Lin2, Zaiqing Nie2
1Microsoft, California, USA
2Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
{gluo, xiaojih, cyl, znie}@microsoft.com
Extracting named entities in text and linking extracted names to a given knowledge
base are fundamental tasks in applications
for text understanding. Existing systems
typically run a named entity recognition
(NER) model to extract entity names ﬁrst,
then run an entity linking model to link extracted names to a knowledge base. NER
and linking models are usually trained separately, and the mutual dependency between the two tasks is ignored. We propose JERL, Joint Entity Recognition and
Linking, to jointly model NER and linking tasks and capture the mutual dependency between them.
It allows the information from each task to improve the
performance of the other. To the best of
our knowledge, JERL is the ﬁrst model to
jointly optimize NER and linking tasks together completely. In experiments on the
CoNLL’03/AIDA data set, JERL outperforms state-of-art NER and linking systems, and we ﬁnd improvements of 0.4%
absolute F1 for NER on CoNLL’03, and
0.36% absolute precision@1 for linking
Introduction
In applications of complex Natural Language Processing tasks, such as automatic knowledge base
construction, entity summarization, and question
answering systems, it is essential to ﬁrst have high
quality systems for lower level tasks, such as partof-speech (POS) tagging, chunking, named entity recognition (NER), entity linking, and parsing
among others. These lower level tasks are usually
decoupled and optimized separately to keep the
system tractable. The disadvantage of the decoupled approach is that each lower level task is not
aware of other tasks and thus not able to leverage
information provided by others to improve performance. What is more, there is no guarantee that
their outputs will be consistent.
This paper addresses the problem by building
a joint model for Entity Recognition and Disambiguation (ERD). The goal of ERD is to extract
named entities in text and link extracted names to
a knowledge base, usually Wikipedia or Freebase.
ERD is closely related to NER and linking tasks.
NER aims to identify named entities in text and
classify mentions into predeﬁned categories such
as persons, organizations, locations, etc. Given a
mention and context as input, entity linking connects the mention to a referent entity in a knowledge base.
Existing ERD systems typically run a NER to
extract entity mentions ﬁrst, then run an entity
linking model to link mentions to a knowledge
base. Such a decoupled approach makes the system tractable, and both NER and linking models
can be optimized separately. The disadvantages
are also obvious: 1) errors caused by NER will
be propagated to linking and are not recoverable
2) NER can not beneﬁt from information available
used in entity linking; 3) NER and linking may
create inconsistent outputs.
We argue that there is strong mutual dependency between NER and linking tasks. Consider
the following two examples:
1. The New York Times (NYT) is an American
daily newspaper.
2. Clinton plans to have more news conferences
in 2nd term. WASHINGTON 1996-12-06
Example 1 is the ﬁrst sentence from the
Wikipedia article about “The New York Times”.
It is reasonable but incorrect for NER to identify
“New York Times” without “The” as a named entity, while entity linking has no trouble connecting “The New York Times” to the correct entity.
Example 2 is a news title where our NER classi-
ﬁes “WASHINGTON” as a location, since a location followed by a date is a frequent pattern
in news articles it learned, while the entity linking prefers linking this mention to the U.S. president “George Washington” since another president’s name “Clinton” is mentioned in the context. Both the entity boundaries and entity types
predicted by NER are correlated to the knowledge
of entities linked by entity linking. Modeling such
mutual dependency is helpful in resolving inconsistency and improving performance for both NER
and linking.
We propose JERL, Joint Entity Recognition and
Linking, to jointly model NER and linking tasks
and capture the mutual dependency between them.
It allows the information from each task to improve the performance of the other.
highly conﬁdent on its outputs of entity boundaries
and types, it will encourage entity linking to link
an entity which is consistent with NER’s outputs,
and vice versa. In other words, JERL is able to
model how consistent NER and linking’s outputs
are, and predict coherent outputs. According to
our experiments, this approach does improve the
end to end performance. To the best of our knowledge, JERL is the ﬁrst model to jointly optimize
NER and linking tasks together completely .
Sil also proposes jointly conducting
NER and linking tasks.
They leverage existing
NER/chunking systems and Freebase to over generate mention candidates and leave the linking algorithm to make ﬁnal decisions, which is a reranking model. Their model captures the dependency between entity linking decisions and mention boundary decisions with impressive results.
The difference between our model and theirs is
that our model jointly models NER and linking
tasks from the training phrase, while their model
is a combined one which depends on an existing
state-of-art NER system. Our model is more powerful in capturing mutual dependency by considering entity type and conﬁdences information, while
in their model the conﬁdence of outputs is lost
in the linking phrase. Furthermore, in our model
NER can naturally beneﬁt from entity linking’s
decision since both decisions are made together,
while in their model, it is not clear how the linking
decision can help the NER decision in return.
Joint optimization is costly.
It increases the
problem complexity, is usually inefﬁcient, and
requires the careful consideration of features of
multiple tasks and mutual dependency, making
proper assumptions and approximations to enable
tractable training and inference.
However, we
believe that joint optimization is a promising direction for improving performance for NLP tasks
since it is closer to how human beings process text
information. Experiment result indicates that our
joint model does a better job at both NER and
linking tasks than separate models with the same
features, and outperforms state-of-art systems on
a widely used data set. We found improvements
of 0.4% absolute F1 for NER on CoNLL’03 and
0.36% absolute precision@1 for linking on AIDA.
NER is a widely studied problem, and we believe
our improvement is signiﬁcant.
The contributions of this paper are as follows:
1. We identify the mutual dependency between
NER and linking tasks, and argue that NER and
linking should be conducted together to improve
the end to end performance.
2. We propose the ﬁrst completely joint NER and
linking model, JERL, to train and inference the
two tasks together. Efﬁcient training and inference
algorithms are also presented.
3. The JERL outperforms the best NER record
on the CoNLL’03 data set, which demonstrates
how NER could be improved further by leveraging knowledge base and linking techniques.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: the next section discusses related works on
NER, entity linking, and joint optimization; section 3 presents our Joint Entity Recognition and
Linking model in detail; section 4 describes experiments, results, and analysis; and section 5 concludes.
Related Work
The NER problem has been widely addressed by
symbolic, statistical, as well as hybrid approaches.
It has been encouraged by several editions of evaluation campaigns such as MUC , the CoNLL 2003 NER shared task
 and ACE
 .
Along with the improvement of Machine Learning techniques, statistical approaches have become a major direction for research on NER, especially after Conditional Random Field is proposed by Lafferty et al.
 . The well known state-of-art NER systems
are Stanford NER and UIUC
NER .
Liang 
compares the performance of the 2nd order linear chain CRF and Semi-CRF in his thesis. Lin and Wu cluster tens of millions of phrases and use the resulting clusters as features in NER reporting the best
performance on the CoNLL’03 English NER data
set. Recent works on NER have started to focus
on multi-lingual named entity recognition or NER
on short text, e.g. Twitter.
Entity linking was initiated with Wikipediabased works on entity disambiguation . This task is
encouraged by the TAC 2009 KB population task1
ﬁrst and receives more and more attention from the
research community . Linking usually takes mentions detected by NER as its input.
Stern et al. and Wang et al. present
joint NER and linking systems and evaluate their
systems on French and Chinese data sets. Sil and
Yates take a re-ranking based approach and
achieve the best result on the AIDA data set. In
2014, Microsoft and Google jointly hosted “Entity Recognition and Disambiguation Challenge”
which focused on the end to end performance of
linking system 2.
Joint optimization models have been studied at
great length.
Dynamic CRF has been proposed to conduct Partof-Speech Tagging and Chunking tasks together.
Finkel and Manning show how to model
parsing and named entity recognition together. Yu
 work on jointly entity identiﬁcation and relation extraction from Wikipedia. Sil’s
 work on jointly NER and linking is described in the introduction section of this paper.
It is worth noting that joint optimization does not
always work. The CoNLL 2008 shared task was intended to encourage
jointly optimize parsing and semantic role labeling, but the top performing systems decoupled the
two tasks.
Joint Entity Recognition and Linking
Named entity recognition is usually formalized as
a sequence labeling task, in which each word is
classiﬁed to not-an-entity or entity labels. Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) is one of the popu-
1 
2 
Figure 1: The factor graph of JERL model
lar models used. Most features used in NER are
word-level (e.g. a word sequence appears at position i or whether a word contains exactly four
It is hard, if not impossible, to encode
entity-level features (such as ”entity length” and
”correlation to known entities”) in traditional CRF.
Entity linking is typically formalized as a ranking
task. Features used for entity linking are at entitylevel inherently (such as entity prior probability;
whether there are any related entity names or discriminative keywords occurring in the context).
The main challenges of joint optimization between NER and linking are: how to combine a sequence labeling model and a ranking model; and
how to incorporate word-level and entity-level features. In a linear chain CRF model, each word’s
label is assumed to depend on the observations
and the label of its previous word.
carefully relaxes the Markov assumption between
words in CRF, and models the distribution of segmentation boundaries directly. We further extend
Semi-CRF to model entity distribution and mutual dependency over segmentations, and name it
Joint Entity Recognition and Linking (JERL). The
model is described below.
Let x = {xi} be a word sequence containing |x|
words. Let s = {sj} be a segmentation assignment over x, where segment sj = (uj, vj) consist of a start position uj and an end position vj.
All segments have a positive length and are adjacent to each other, so every (uj, vj) always satis-
ﬁes 1 ≤uj ≤vj ≤|x| and uj+1 = vj + 1. Let
y = {yj} be labels in a ﬁxed label alphabet Y
over a segmentation assignment s. Here Y is the
set of types NER to predict. xsj = (xuj . . . xvj)
is the corresponding word sequence to sj, and
Esj = {ej,k} is a set of entities in the knowledge base (KB), which may be referred by word
sequence xsj in the entity linking task. Each entity ej,k is associated with a label ye
j,k ∈{0, 1}.
j,k takes 1 iff xsj referring to entity ej,k,
and 0 otherwise. If xsj does not refer to any entity
in the KB, ye
j,0 takes 1, which is analogous to the
NIL3 identiﬁer in entity linking.
Based on the preliminaries and notations, Figure 1 shows the factor graph of JERL. There are similar factor nodes for
every (uj, vj, ye
j,k), we only show the ﬁrst one
(uj, vj, ye
j,0) for clarity.
Given x, let a = (s, y, ye) be a joint assignment, and g(x, j, a) be local functions for xsj,
namely features, each of which maps an assignment a to a measurement gk(x, j, a) ∈ℜ. Then
G(x, a) = P|s|
j=1 g(x, j, a) is the factor graph
deﬁning a probability distribution of assignment
a conditioned on word sequence x.
Then JERL, conditional probability of a over x,
is deﬁned as:
P(a|x, w) =
Z(x)ew·G(x,a)
where w is the weight vector corresponding to G
will be learned later, and Z(x) is the normalization factor Z(x) = P
a∈A ew·G(x,a), in which A
is the union of all possible assignments over x.
JERL is a probabilistic graphical model. More
speciﬁcly, as shown in Figure 1, there are three
groups of local functions and one constrain introduced. Each of them take a different role in JERL,
as described below:
Features deﬁned on x, sj, yj, yj−1 are written
as gner(x, sj, yj, yj−1).
These functions model
segmentation and entity types’ distribution over x.
Actually, every local features used in NER can be
formulated in this way, and thus can be included in
JERL. We thus refer to them as “NER features”.
Features deﬁned on x, sj, ye
j,k are written as
gel(x, sj, ye
j,k) and are called “linking features”.
These features model joint probabilities of word
sequence xsj and linking decisions yk
j,k = 1(0 ≤
k ≤|Esj|) given context x. JERL incorporates all
linking features in this way.
Features deﬁned on yj, ye
j,k are written as
gcr(yj, ye
j,k). These features model “mutual de-
3In the entity linking task, if a given mention refers to
an entity which is not in the knowledge base, linking system
should return a special identiﬁer “NIL”.
pendency” between NER and linking’s outputs.
For each entity ej,k, there is additional information available in the knowledge base, e.g. categories information, popularity and relationship to
other entities. These features encourage predicting
coherent outputs for NER and linking.
There is one constrain for each ye
j that the corresponding xsj can refer to only one entity ej,k ∈
Esj or NIL. This is equivalent to P|Esj |
Based on the above description,
conjunction
(gner, gel, gcr) over s, and can be rewritten as,
G(x, a) = P|s|
gner(x, sj, yj, yj−1)
k=0 gel on linking argued that entity linking systems often suffer because of errors
involved in mention detection phrase, especially
false negative errors, and try to mitigate it via overgenerating mention candidates. From the mention
generation perspective, JERL actually considers
every possible assignment and is able to ﬁnd the
optimal a.
Parameter Estimation
We describe how to conduct parameter estimation for JERL in this section. Given independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.)
training data
T = {(xt, at)}N
t=1, the goal of parameter estimation is to ﬁnd optimal w∗to maximize the joint
probability of the assignments {at} over {xt}.
w∗= argmaxw∈ℜ|G|
P(at|xt, w)
We use conditional log likelihood with ℓ2 norm as
the objective function in training,
L(T , w) =
t logP(at|xt, w) −
2σ2 ||w||2
The above function is concave, adding regularization to ensure that it has exactly one global optimum. We adopt a limited-memory quasi-Newton
method to solve the optimization problem.
The gradient of L(T , w) is derived as,
(G(xt, at)
G(xt, a′)P(a′|xt, w)) −w
As shown in Figure 1, our model’s factor graph is
a tree, which means the calculation of the gradient
is tractable.
Inspired by the forward backward algorithm
 and Semi-CRF , we leverage dynamic programming techniques to compute the normalization
factor Zw and marginal probability P 
The parameter estimation algorithm is abstracted
in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: JERL parameter estimation
input : training data T = {(xt, at)}N
output: the optimal w
while weight w is not converged do
for t ←1 to N do
calculate αt, βt according to eq.3;
calculate Zt according to eq.4
calculate w′
t according to eq.2, 5;
Z ←Z + Zt;
w′ ←w′ + w′
update w to maximize log likelihood
L(T , w) under (Z, w′) via L-BFGS;
Let αi,y (i ∈[0, |x|], y ∈Y) be the sum of potential functions of all possible assignments over
(x1 . . . xi) whose last segmentation’s labels are y.
Then αi,y can be calculated recursively from i = 0
to i = |x| as below.
We ﬁrst deﬁne base cases as α0,y = 1|{y∈Y}.
When i ∈(0, |x|]:
αi−d,y′ψner
i−d+1,i,y,y′
i−d+1,i,y,ye
where L is the max segmentation length in Semi-
CRF, and Y e∗
is all valid assignments for ye
which satisﬁes P|Esj |
j,k = 1. The ψner
uj,vj,yj,yj−1
and ψel.cr
uj,vj,yj,ye
j are precomputed ahead as below,
uj,vj,yj,yj−1 = ewner·gner(x,sj,yj,yj−1)
uj,vj,yj,ye
ewelgel(x,sj,ye
j,k)+wcrgcr(yj,ye
where wner, wel and wcr are weights for gner, gel
and gcr in w accordingly.
The value of Zw can then be written as
Deﬁne βi,y (i ∈[0, |x|], y ∈Y) as the sum
of potential functions of all possible assignments
over (xi+1 . . . x|x|) whose ﬁrst segmentation’s labels are y. βi,y is calculated in a similar way, except they are calculated from i = |x| to left i = 0.
probability
assignment
aj = (sj, yj, ye
j ), where sj = (uj, vj), can be
calculated as below:
P(sj, yj|x, w) =
y′∈Y αuj−1,y′ψner
uj,vj,yj,y′)βvj,yj
P(aj|xt, w) =
P(sj, yj|x, w)
uj,vj,yj,ye
uj,vj,yj,ye′
Given a new word sequence x and model weights
w trained on a training set, the goal of inference is to ﬁnd the best assignment, a∗
argmaxaP(a|x, w) for x. We extend the Viterbi
algorithm to exactly infer the best assignment. The
inference algorithm is shown in Algorithm 2.
Let φ(uj, vj, yj, yj−1) be the product of potentials depending on (sj, yj, yj−1) as,
φ(uj, vj, yj, yj−1) =
uj,vj,yj,yj−1(
uj,vj,yj,ye
Algorithm 2: JERL inference
input : one word sequence x and weights w
output: the best assignment a over x
// shrink JERL graph to a Semi-CRF graph;
for u ←1 to |x| do
for v ←u + 1 to |x| do
for (y, y′) ∈Y × Y do
calculate φu,v,y,y′ // see eq.6;
// infer the best assignment of (s∗, y∗);
for i ←1 to |x| do
for y ∈Y do
calculate Vi,y // see eq.7;
(s∗, y∗) ←argmax(Vi,y);
// infer the best assignment of {ye
for j ←1 to |s∗| do
j ←argmax(P(|x, w, s∗
a∗←(s∗, y∗, ye∗);
and let V (i, y) denotes the largest value of (w ·
G(x, a′)) where a′ could be any possible partial assignment starting from x1 to xi. The best
(s∗, y∗) are derived during the following recursive calculation,
maxy′∈Y,d∈[1,L]
(Vi−d,y′ + φ(i−d+1, i, y, y′))
where L is the maximum segmentation length for
Once (s∗, y∗) are found, the corresponding
= argmax{ye′ ∈Y e∗
j ,ye′ ) is also the
optimal one. Then a∗= (s∗, y∗, ye∗) is the best
assignment for the given x and w.
Experiments
In our experiments, we ﬁrst construct two baseline models JERLner and JERLel, which use exact
NER and EL feature sets used in JERL. Then evaluate JERL and the two baseline models against
several state-of-art NER and linking systems. After that, we evaluate JERL under different feature
NIL Entities
Table 1: Overview of CoNLL’03/AIDA data set
settings to analysis the contributions of each features set, and show some examples we ﬁnd. We
also compare the training speed under different
We take the CoNLL’03/AIDA English data set
to evaluate the performance of NER and linking
systems. CoNLL’03 is extensively used in prior
work on NER evaluation .
The English data is taken
from Reuters news articles published between August 1966 and August 1997. Four types of entities persons (PER), organizations (ORG), locations (LOC), and miscellaneous names (MISC) are
annotated. Hoffart et al. hand-annotated
all proper nouns with corresponding entities wiht
YAGO2, Freebase and Wikipedia IDs. This data
is referenced as AIDA here. To the best of our
knowledge, this data set is the biggest data set
which has been labeled for both NER and linking
tasks. It becomes a really good starting point for
our work. Table 1 contains of an overview of the
CoNLL’03/AIDA data set.
For entity linking, we take Wikipedia as the referent knowledge base. We use a Wikipedia snapshot dumped in May 2013, which contains around
4.8 million articles. We also align our Wikipedia
dump with additional knowledge bases, Freebase
and Satori (a Microsoft internal knowledge base),
to enrich the information of these entities.
Evaluation Metrics
We follow the CoNLL’03 metrics to evaluate NER
performance by precision, recall, and F1 scores,
and follow Hoffart’s experiment setting
to evaluate linking performance by micro precision@1. Since the linking labels of CONLL’03
were annotated in 2011, it is not completely consistent with the Wikipedia dump we used in the
case. We only consider mention entity pairs where
the ground truth are known, and ignore around
20% of NIL mentions in the ground truth.
Word unigram / bigram
Lower cased unigram / bigram
Word shape unigram / bigram
Stemmed unigram / bigram
POS unigram / bigram
Chunk unigram / bigram
Words in the 4 left/right window
Character n-grams, n ≤4
Brown clusters
WordNet clusters
Dictionaries
Alternative names
Entity priors
Entity name priors
Entity priors over names
Context scores
Geo distance
Related entities
Type-category correlation
Table 2: JERL feature list
JERL Implementation
Table 2 shows features used in our models. JERL
uses all features in the three categories, while
JERLner and JERLel use only one corresponding
category. All three models are trained on the train
and development set, and evaluated on the test set
of CoNLL’03/AIDA.
Features in the NER category are relevant to NER.
We considered the most commonly used features
in literatures .
We collect several
known name lists, like popular English ﬁrst/last
names for people, organization lists and so on
from Wikipedia and Freebase. UIUC NER’s lists
are also included. In addition, we extract entity
name lists from the knowledge base we used for
entity linking, and construct 655 more lists. Although those lists are noisy, we ﬁnd that statistically they do improve the performance of our NER
baseline by a signiﬁcant amount.
Features in linking category are relevant to entity
linking. An entity can be referred by its canonical name, nick names, alias, and ﬁrst/last names.
Those names are deﬁned as alternative names for
this entity. We collect all alternative names for all
known entities and build a name to entity index.
This index is used to select entity candidates for
any word sequence, also known as surface form.
Following previous work by Han and Sun ,
we calculate entity priors and entity name priors
from Wikipedia.
Context scores are calculated
based on discriminative keywords. Geo distance
and related entities capture the relatedness among
entities in the given context.
Features in this category capture the mutual dependency between NER and linking’s outputs. For
each entity in a knowledge base, there is category
information available. We aggregate around 1000
distinct categories from multiple sources. One entity can have multiple categories. For example,
London is connected to 29 categories. We use all
combinations between NER types and categories
as features in JERL, and let the model learn the
correlation of each combination. This encourages
coherent NER and EL decisions, which is one of
the key contributions of our work.
Non-local features
Features capturing long distance dependency between hidden labels are classiﬁed as non-local
features. Those features are very helpful in improving NER system performance but are costly.
Since this is not the focus of this paper, we take
a simple approach to incorporate non-local features. We cache history results of previous sentences in a 1000 words window, and adopt several heuristic rules for personal names. This approach contributes 0.2 points to the ﬁnal NER F1
score. Non-local features are also considered in
linking .
We try several features, which has been proved to
be helpful in TAC data set. However, the gain on
CoNLL’03/AIDA data set is not obvious, we do
not optimize linking globally.
Lastly, based on preliminary studies and experiments, we set the maximum segmentation length
to 6 and max candidate count per segmentation to
5 for efﬁcient training and inference.
State-of-Art systems
We take three state-of-art NER systems: NereL
 , UIUC NER and Stanford NER . NereL ﬁrstly over generates mentions and
decomposes them to sets of connected compo-
Table 3: NER evaluation results
nents, then trains a maximum-entropy model to
re-rank different assignments. UIUC NER uses
a regularized averaged perceptron model and external gazetteers to achieve strong performance.
In Addition, NereL also uses UIUC NER to generate mentions. Stanford NER uses Conditional
Random Fields and Gibbs sampling to incorporate
non-local features into its model.
For entity linking systems,
NereL, Kul09
 and Hof11 are compared with our models.
achieves the best precision@1. Kul09 formulates
the local compatibility and global coherence in entity linking, and optimizes the overall entity assignment for all entities in a document via a local hill-climbing approach. Hof11 uniﬁes the prior
probability of an entity being mentioned, the similarity between context and entity, and the coherence between entity candidates among all mentions in a dense graph.
Table 3 shows the performance of different NER
systems on the CoNLL’03 testb data set. We refer the numbers of state-of-art systems reported by
Sil and Yates . Stanford NER achieves the
best precision, but its recall is low. UIUC reports
the (almost) best recorded F1. JERLner considers
features only in the NER category, which could
be treated as a pure NER system implemented in
Semi-CRF. Actually CRF-based implementation
with a similar feature set has comparable performance. Our baseline JERLner is strong enough.
We argue that that it is mainly because of the additional dictionaries derived from the knowledge
base. JERL further pushes the F1 to 91.2, which
outperforms UIUC by 0.4 points in F1 score. To
the best of our knowledge, it is the best F1 on
CoNLL’03 since 2009.
The reason our model
can outperform state-of-art systems is that, it has
more knowledge about entities via incorporate entity linking techniques. If an entity can be linked
to a well known entity via entity linking in high
Precision@1
Table 4: Linking evaluation results
Feature set description
JERLner (baseline)
+ candidate
+ candidate + linking
+ candidate + mutual
+ candidate + mutual + linking
Table 5: JERL features analysis
conﬁdence, its mention boundary and entity type
are conﬁrmed implicitly.
Table 4 shows the performance of different entity linking systems on the AIDA test set. Kul09
and Hof11 use only the correct mentions detected
by the Stanford NER as input, and thus their recall is bound by the recall of NER. NereL uses
its overgeneration techniques to generate mention
candidates, and outperforms Hoff11 in both precision and recall. Our baseline model JERLel is also
evaluated on Stanford NER generated mentions,
which has comparable performance with Kul09
and Hof11.
JERL achieves precision@1 84.58
which is better than NereL.
We run 15 trials for both NER and linking’s experiments and report the average numbers above.
The standard deviations are 0.11% and 0.08% for
NER and linking separately, which pass the standard t-test with conﬁdence level 5%, demonstrating the signiﬁcance of our results.
In order to investigate how different features
contribute to the overall gain.
We compare
JERLner with four different feature sets. Table
5 summaries the results. In the trial “+candidate”,
JERL expands every possible segmentation with
corresponding entity list and builds its factor graph
without any linking and mutual features. This version’s F1 drops to 88.7 which indicates the created
structure is quite noisy. In the “+candidate +linking” trial, only linking features are enabled and
the F1 is comparable to the baseline. On the other
side, in the “+candidate +mutual” trial when mutual features are enabled the F1 increases to 90.6.
If we combine both linking and mutual features,
people.person
location.city
sports.team
Table 6: Learned mutual dependency
time (min)
Table 7: Training time under different settings
JERL achieves the reported performance. The result indicates that mutual features are the determining factor to the performance gain.
Table 6 shows weights of learned mutual dependency of three categories ”people.person”, ”location.city”, and ”sports.team”. The bigger a weight
is, the more consistent this combination would
be. From the weights, we ﬁnd several interesting things.
If an entity belongs to any of the
three categories, it is less likely to be predicted
as non-an-entity by NER. If an entity belongs to
the category of ”people.person”, it more likely
to be predicted as PER. When an entity belongs
to the category ”location.city” or ”sports.team”,
NER may predict it as ORG or LOC. This is because in the CoNLL’03/AIDA data set, there are
many sports teams mentioned by their city/country
JERL successfully models such unexpected mutual dependency.
Table 7 compares the performance and training
time under different settings of max segmentation
length (MSL) and max referent count (MRC). We
use machines with Intel Xeon E5620 @ 2.4GHz
CPU (8 cores / 16 logical processors) and 48GB
memory. We run every setting 10 times and report
the averages. As MSL and MRC increasing, the
performance is slightly better, but the training time
increased a lot. MSL has linear impact on training
time, while MRC affects training time more.
Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we address the problem of joint optimization of named entity recognition and linking.
We propose a novel model, JERL, to jointly train
and infer for NER and linking tasks. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst model which trains
two tasks at the same time. The joint model is able
to leverage mutual dependency of the two tasks,
and predict coherent outputs. JERL outperforms
the state-of-art systems on both NER and linking
tasks on the CoNLL’03/AIDA data set.
For future works, we would like to study how
to leverage existing partial labeled data, either for
NER or for linking only, in joint optimization, and
incorporate more NLP tasks together for multitasks joint optimization.
Acknowledgments
This work was performed when the ﬁrst author
was working at Microsoft Research. The ﬁrst author is sponsored by Microsoft Bing Core Relevance team. Thanks Shuming Shi, Bin Gao, and
Yohn Cao for their helpful guidance and valuable
discussions. Additionally, we would like to thank
the three anonymous reviewers for their insightful
suggestions and detailed comments.