Blackwell Publishing, Ltd.
A Practical Guide To Developing Effective Web-based Learning
David A. Cook, MD, Denise M. Dupras, MD, PhD
OBJECTIVE: Online learning has changed medical education,
but many “educational” websites do not employ principles of
effective learning. This article will assist readers in developing
effective educational websites by integrating principles of
active learning with the unique features of the Web.
DESIGN: Narrative review.
RESULTS: The key steps in developing an effective educational website are: Perform a needs analysis and specify goals
and objectives; determine technical resources and needs;
evaluate preexisting software and use it if it fully meets your
needs; secure commitment from all participants and identify
and address potential barriers to implementation; develop content in close coordination with website design (appropriately
use multimedia, hyperlinks, and online communication) and
follow a timeline; encourage active learning (self-assessment,
reflection, self-directed learning, problem-based learning,
learner interaction, and feedback); facilitate and plan to
encourage use by the learner (make website accessible and
user-friendly, provide time for learning, and motivate learners);
evaluate learners and course; pilot the website before full
implementation; and plan to monitor online communication
and maintain the site by resolving technical problems, periodically verifying hyperlinks, and regularly updating content.
CONCLUSION: Teaching on the Web involves more than putting together a colorful webpage. By consistently employing
principles of effective learning, educators will unlock the full
potential of Web-based medical education.
KEY WORDS: Internet; medical education; World Wide Web;
e-learning; curriculum development.
J GEN INTERN MED 2004;19:698–707.
he Internet has changed the practice of medicine, and
medical education has not escaped its influence.1 A
recent review found 35 evaluative studies of online interventions in medical education.2 Since that review more have
been reported,3–6 and published studies likely represent
only a fraction of Web-based medical education projects.
Unfortunately, not all educational websites are equally
effective.7 Adult learning theory—focusing on learner involvement in the learning process—has changed medical
education over the past 3 decades, but its influence is not
yet widespread in Web-based teaching. Alur et al. recently
reviewed medical teaching websites for evidence of active
learning. Although most sites met criteria for a “general
informational website,” only 17% had all components
of a “learning paradigm” (critical thinking, independent
learning, evidence-based learning, feedback) and fewer than
50% met any criteria.8 Informational websites certainly
have their use, but a teaching site will be most effective if
it stimulates active learning.1 While incorporating active
learning in an educational website is not difficult, it does
require thought and planning.9
This article outlines essential steps in the development
of Web-based courses or curricula that employ principles
of active learning. It will not address technical issues such
as Web programming or the specifics of webpage design.
The scope of these topics prohibit adequate discussion in
this paper (the reader is referred to other sources for more
information10,11). Likewise, this is not a systematic review
of Web-based learning; Chumley-Jones et al. recently performed this task.2 Rather, this article presents a practical
framework for developing effective educational websites by
combining principles of active learning with the unique
features of the Web (Table 1). We cite literature and personal
experience to illustrate and support the concepts presented.
PREPARATORY STEPS
The first four steps should be completed before starting
the website design. Although it is tempting to skip these
steps, their importance cannot be overemphasized. The
success of a Web-based educational intervention rests on
thorough preparation.
Step 1. Perform a needs analysis and specify goals
and objectives
The first step in any educational endeavor is needs
analysis, including problem identification, assessment of
learners’ needs, and assessment of the teaching environment. Kern et al.’s approach12 is useful: define the health
care problem you hope to address by creating an online
course, and identify what is being done and what should
be done to address this problem. Describe how the current
Received from the Mayo Clinic College of Medicine (DAC, DMD),
Rochester, Minn.
Address correspondence and requests for reprints to Dr. Cook:
Baldwin 4-A, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 55905 (e-mail:
 ).
Volume 19, June 2004
performance of your learners (knowledge, skills, attitudes,
and behaviors) differs from the ideal. Determine learners’
perceived educational needs and preferences. Evaluate
resources and barriers in the teaching environment
(including those in Steps 2 and 4).
Use the needs analysis to develop goals and objectives
that address the gap between current and ideal performance, taking into account available resources and learner
perceptions. Objectives for online education tend naturally
to focus on medical knowledge, but skills and attitudes
can also be taught online. Well-stated objectives focus the
design and function of the program, including evaluation.
List the goals and objectives on the final website.
Clear objectives help define the role of online learning
in your setting. Will it supplement an existing (traditional)
course, or be the primary method of instruction? Most
online teaching in medical education has supplemented
existing courses, but many courses have been successfully
taught completely online.
Estimate the class size. In Web-based teaching the
classroom never fills up and handouts never run out, but
this does not always mean that Web-based classes can
expand ad infinitum. In an automated course—that does not
require instructor intervention—an extra learner requires
virtually no additional resources (a barely perceptible
increase in network usage, and possibly a per-user fee on
software or copyright licenses). However, in courses where
the instructor plays an active role (moderating online
discussion, for example) extra students will have a direct
effect on faculty time.13
Step 2. Determine your technical resources and
Effective course design requires an understanding
of both the subject and the instructional medium.7 The
technical details of Web design and programming can be
delegated to a specialist, but a multidisciplinary approach—
with at least one team member having in-depth understanding of Internet operations—is desirable.9,14
Meet early with an information technology specialist
to discuss technical matters. At least one author recommends doing this even before setting goals and objectives.10
You need to know the resources and limitations of your
local network, including the number, type, and capacities
of computers. Are there tools for multimedia development
(digital camera, scanner, drawing and photo-editing
software, equipment for recording and editing audio or
Determine what e-learning management software
(termed “courseware”) is available at your institution.
Content-free courseware provides tools (student registration,
security, quizzes with automated grading and personalized
feedback, online communication with instructors and
other learners, tools to monitor learner participation, etc.)
to assist the developer in implementing an e-learning
website.15 WebCT (WebCT Inc., Lynnfield, Mass) and
Blackboard (Blackboard Inc., Washington, DC) are the
most widely used courseware systems, but many others
are available. Toohey and Watson review points to consider
in selecting courseware.16
If you plan to employ a specialist or team to develop
the site, find out whether they have developed an educational website before, and estimate development cost and
timeline. Additional questions for those planning to develop
the site themselves are listed in the Appendix.
Determine the technical resources and needs of your
learners. Have they participated in an online course before?
Are they comfortable using the Internet? If they will
complete the curriculum from home, what computer
system (Apple or PC) do they use, and what is the computer’s capacity? What software do they use? Do they have
high-speed Internet access? You will either need to accommodate the learners’ resources or specify computer system
requirements for the course.
Step 3. Evaluate commercial software and use it if
it fully meets your needs
It is probably cheaper to buy commercial software
on your topic than to develop it yourself. Critically assess
how well it meets your needs before purchasing. First
decide whether it aligns with your goals and objectives. A
perfect match is unlikely, but is it close enough? Next
determine whether the product will work on your network
(consult your specialist). Most importantly, evaluate how
well it capitalizes on Web resources (Step 5), promotes
active learning (Step 6), and provides for evaluation
Table 1. Ten Steps to Effective Web-based Learning
1. Perform a needs analysis and specify goals and objectives
2. Determine your technical resources and needs
3. Evaluate preexisting software and use it if it fully meets
your needs
4. Secure commitment from all participants and identify and
address potential barriers to implementation
5. Develop content in close coordination with website design
• Capitalize on the unique capabilities of the Web by
appropriately using multimedia, hyperlinks,
and online communication
• Adhere to principles of good webpage design
• Prepare a timeline; plan for up-front time investment
6. Encourage active learning—self-assessment, reflection,
self-directed learning, problem-based learning,
learner interaction, and feedback
7. Facilitate and plan to encourage use by the learner
• Make the website accessible and user friendly
• Provide time for learning
• Motivate and remind; consider rewards and/or
consequences
8. Evaluate—both learners and course
9. Pilot the website before full implementation
10. Plan to monitor online communication and maintain the
site by resolving technical problems, periodically
verifying hyperlinks, and regularly updating content
Cook And Dupras, Developing Effective Web-based Learning
Even if existing software does not meet your needs, you
may be able to purchase and implement part of the material
you review (for example, an interactive anatomy atlas) as
an element in your course. You may also get ideas on
content or presentation that you can incorporate into
your design.
Step 4. Secure commitment from all participants
and identify and address potential barriers to
implementation
Technical needs are important in an online course, but
the human element is critical. Secure acceptance and commitment from all involved—administrators and faculty in
addition to learners. In our experience, potential barriers
include resistance to online learning, inadequate computer
skills, insufficient time, or perception that the curriculum
is a low priority. Identifying barriers early allows you to
address them in a timely manner—before implementation
begins. Greenhalgh17 suggests targeting staff development
to the needs of a given project, rewarding staff who participate in online initiatives with recognition or promotion,
encouraging collaboration between content experts, educators, and technical specialists, and actively working to
change organizational culture.
DEVELOPMENT
Step 5. Develop content in close coordination with
website design
The key to effective e-learning is to develop content
hand in hand with website design. It is common practice
to copy lecture notes or the text of an existing curriculum
onto a webpage. Such products—termed “shovelware”—
are fast and easy to produce, but although they serve as
repositories of information (lecture notes, syllabi, etc.) they
are rarely effective for actual learning. Existing content
can be used as the basis of an online curriculum, but will
likely require significant modification. The most effective
websites creatively integrate content with the power and
flexibility of the Web to enhance learning rather than merely
replicate traditional methods.9
Capitalize on the Unique Capabilities of the Web by Appropriately Using Multimedia, Hyperlinks, and Online Communication. The Web offers a wide variety of resources that,
when appropriately used, stimulate and enhance learning,
including multimedia, hyperlinks, and online communication. While these are powerful tools, it is important to keep
in mind that they are just that—tools, used to create effective, efficient learning.
Multimedia refers to the simultaneous use of text,
sound, video (with or without sound), slideshow (with or
without narration), images, animation, and more. Text
font, color, and size can be varied to highlight key points.
Although multimedia does not necessarily improve learning,
it improves satisfaction with the learning experience.18–21
Appropriate use of multimedia can enrich teaching but
keep in mind the following four caveats.
First, it is easy to “overdo it.” There is a fine line
between making a page interesting and making it too “busy.”
Keep each element of the website focused on the educational
objective. If it does not have a teaching purpose—remove
it! Do not include multimedia just because it is available.
Rather, choose the format (which may be just text) that will
most effectively teach the principle. Changes in text format
can enhance a page but they can also detract. Again, use
restraint, focus on your objectives, and remember that
multimedia per se does not improve learning.22
Second, multimedia is no substitute for good instructional design. As Rosenberg says, “Multimedia can add
value, but simply adding multimedia to a bad learning
program won’t improve it.”23
Third, keep in mind the issue of download speed.
Learner satisfaction declines when downloads are slow,24,25
suggesting that the advantages of multimedia are offset
by slow speeds. This is less of a problem for users with
high-speed access, but for users with a dial-up modem it
becomes a significant issue. Large files—video, detailed
graphics, animation, and even audio (if the connection is
slow)—take longer to download. If a large multimedia object
illustrates an important point it may be worth the inconvenience. Otherwise, reduce the file size (e.g., image resolution) or eliminate it altogether.
Fourth, pay attention to copyright law. “Fair use” laws
that permit duplication for personal use do not, in general,
allow reproduction on the Internet. This applies to both text
and multimedia. Still, it may be cheaper to purchase a
license to use high-quality material than to develop material in-house (but make sure the license extends to Web
publication). See Hoffman’s text26 for a detailed discussion
of U.S. copyright law as it pertains to the Internet, and
consider consulting local experts.
Hyperlinks take the user from the current page to
another site on the Internet. Target links might include
a table on the same webpage, an illustration in the same
website, an online clinical tool, or a journal article that
discusses the topic in greater detail (see Fig. 1). Hyperlinks
can also open documents (word processor document,
spreadsheet, etc.) to view, print, or save for reference or
modification. Appropriate links enrich a website and enhance
function, but too many links may detract.
Online communication is dominated by e-mail, but also
includes online discussion boards, chat rooms, and whiteboards (supported by many courseware systems), and
Internet-mediated audio and video conferencing. Most
online communication is asynchronous—with a delay from
the time a message is sent to the time a response is returned.
While at times such delays can be frustrating, asynchronous
communication allows learners to communicate on their own
schedule, and may actually increase learning by stimulating reflection and independent learning while composing
a reply.27–29 However, failure to address barriers (including
uninteresting topics) may limit participation.30 Synchronous
Volume 19, June 2004
communication—ongoing “live” conversation—is very similar
to face-to-face teaching. Collison et al. discuss effective
strategies for online moderators.27
Adhere to Principles of Good Webpage Design. Educators
teaching on the Web must understand and adhere to
principles of good webpage design.31 Poorly structured
webpages are unattractive, inefficient, and confusing—all
of which limit learning. Effective webpages are clear, concise, and consistent.32 Table 2 describes additional characteristics of effectively designed webpages, and Figures 2
and 3 illustrate several of these principles. The National
Cancer Institute maintains a webpage on evidence-based
Web design and usability at 
Prepare a Timeline; Plan for Up-front Time Investment. Developing a quality educational website requires a large up-front
investment of time. Once the site is complete maintenance
will take less effort, and when spread over months or years
the total investment (development time + ongoing teaching
efforts) is cost effective. But if not anticipated, the initial
time requirement may overwhelm developers and lead to
a project’s premature demise.
Prepare and follow a timeline.31 Allow sufficient time to
develop the content, create or find appropriate multimedia,
develop active learning techniques, prepare evaluation instruments (write and validate questions), and pilot the site prior
to full implementation. If you are forced to scale back the
project remember that revisions to a website, including more
complete implementations, are easily done down the road.
Step 6. Encourage active learning—selfassessment, reflection, self-directed learning,
problem-based learning, learner interaction, and
This must be done simultaneously with Step 5, but
because of its importance we set it apart as a separate step.
Encouraging active learning is the most challenging, but
often the most interesting and enjoyable, aspect of developing an educational website. Overcoming the inertia of
passive learning requires a combination of creativity, careful planning, and content expertise. The degree of success
in this area will in large part determine the effectiveness
of the educational website.
The key to active learning is involvement of the learner
in the learning process—encouraging them to apply new
information.34 Kaufman integrated several theories of
education to outline seven “principles to guide teaching
practice.”35 Table 3 describes how each of these principles
can be satisfied by online methods. It is not necessary to
employ all of these techniques in every online course.
Rather, select techniques that best satisfy the requirements
of the course content, environment, learners, and teachers.
Figure 4 illustrates several active learning techniques.
Instruction and Feedback. Lectures have an important
role in active online learning but, just as in face-to-face
teaching, success depends on planning and presentation.
Online “lecture” formats include written text, slideshow,
and live or prerecorded video. Appropriate use of multimedia and hyperlinks can highlight important points,
stimulate the imagination, clarify relationships between
concepts, and promote in-depth study of topics of interest.
Cases, self-assessment, and learner interaction can be part
of the lecture plan.
Reading assignments are facilitated by online distribution (copyright issues may arise with this) or links to fulltext sources. The same processes that would be employed
in face-to-face teaching (study questions, group discussion,
etc.) should be implemented in a Web-based program.
Other instructional methods include video (particularly
useful for role modeling and skills training) and visual
instruction (pathology slides, radiographs, photographs, etc.).19
Instructors can provide feedback with either asynchronous or live online communication. Automated,
FIGURE 1. Some potential uses of hyperlinks in an educational website.
Cook And Dupras, Developing Effective Web-based Learning
personalized feedback provided by the computer can also
be effective,36 and allows learners and teachers freedom
in scheduling learning activities and alleviates demands
on instructor time. Automated feedback can be delivered
using hyperlinks (see Fig. 4) or courseware-supported
quizzes. Regardless of which method(s) delivers feedback to
the learner, it is important to provide a way for the learner to
communicate directly with the instructor (e.g., by e-mail).
Application, Self-assessment, and Reflection. Self-assessment
and reflection stimulate learning by reinforcing current
knowledge or by highlighting differences between current
understanding and new information.37 Because the learner
sets the pace, online learning has great potential for encouraging these processes.
Online pretests and posttests, with correct answers
and justification provided immediately, are one way to
accomplish this. Questions can also be embedded within
a lecture and linked to answers and explanations. Assigned
short-answer questions and essays, often completed as a
group project, are another way to facilitate self-assessment
and reflection. Online links to potentially useful resources
support each step of this process.
Patient cases and simulations encourage application
of knowledge and development of judgment and clinical
reasoning, in addition to self-assessment and reflection.38
Simulations can evolve step by step, revealing one part of
the scenario at a time and requiring the learner to make
decisions (request additional information, order a test, etc.)
or answer questions before proceeding.
Other methods to encourage reflection include learner
interaction (see “Learner interaction” below) and online
personal journals and portfolios.39
Self-directed, Evidence-based, and Problem-based
Learning. The self-directed learner asks and then seeks to
answer his or her own questions. Questions develop at
various points in the learning process—lecture and reading, self-assessment and reflection, interaction with other
learners—and the Web is uniquely able to assist learners
in answering questions as they arise. Online textbooks,
search engines for both medical literature and the Internet,
and full-text journal articles provide a wealth of information
from which to derive evidence-based answers. However,
students using Web-based resources must be selective in
their searching to discriminate valid information from
misinformation and to deal with the immense volume of
information available.
Relevant evidence should be presented and discussed.31
Asking learners to interpret evidence reinforces learning.
Small-group
problem-based
encourages
learners to define and address their own learning objectives
based on a clinical scenario. This process has been
successfully implemented on the Web.6,40,41 Variations on
this method would be effective for individual learners
Perhaps the most effective learning occurs as learners
confront a real clinical problem and must immediately
learn and apply a solution (“just-in-time” learning42). We
have found that after completing an online course learners
will return to use the website while caring for patients.
Learner Interaction. Learner interaction serves a dual
purpose as a social function and as a stimulus to active
learning. Almost all courses should provide for “communities of learning,”27 but whether to develop these online (see
“Online communication” in Step 5), face to face, or both
depends on the course design and resources. Courses
where participants have limited face-to-face contact should
Table 2. Characteristics of Effectively Designed Webpages
Clear and Consistent Page Organization
• Hierarchy of importance for items on the page, with more
important things higher on page
• Logical groupings, with visual cues to help organize groups
• Headings and navigation labels reflecting a single theme
(e.g., topic, function, or sequence)
• Consistent format from page to page
Wise Use of Space
• Division of page into grid of defined areas
• Alignment of all screen elements horizontally and vertically
using grid
• Limited unused space (webpages require less white space
than paper)
• Few distractions (e.g., unnecessary color, graphics, or
animation)
Concise Text that Facilitates “Scanning”
(Web users “scan” rather than read from top to bottom and
page design should optimize this.)
• Clear headings
• Short phrases and bulleted outlines
• Limited length of sentences (20 words) and paragraphs (5
sentences)
• Limited page length (single screen for homepage, scrolling
limited to 3 screens for other pages)
• Topic summarized before presenting details
Clear and Consistent Navigation
• Site name/logo on every page with consistent position and
appearance
• Navigation bar on every page with consistent position,
appearance, and content including:
• Link to homepage
• Links to sections/categories
• Search function
• Utilities (help, additional information, contact
information, etc.)
• Navigation bar on right
Clear and Consistent Hyperlinks
• Clearly identified hyperlinks
• Descriptive and unambiguous hyperlink labels
• No use of graphics as hyperlinks
• Repetition of important hyperlinks elsewhere on the page
(as needed)
• Minimum number of “clicks” to access a given point (“flat”
site architecture)
• Consistent hyperlink format on all pages
Figures 2, 3, and 4 illustrate several of these characteristics. For
additional information see references by Krug,32 Horton,10 and the
National Cancer Institute.33
Volume 19, June 2004
have more online interaction, whereas when learners
regularly meet in person, online communication may be
minimal or nonexistent. The amount of monitoring and
interaction from the instructor varies with the topic being
taught and with the goals and objectives of the course.
Step 7. Facilitate and plan to encourage use by
the learner
We would like to think, “If we teach it they will come.”
Unfortunately, we know this is not true in traditional teaching, and multiple studies demonstrate that it is not true
for online teaching either.3,43,44 It is therefore important to
plan ways to enhance learner participation.
Make the Website Accessible and User-friendly. How will
users find your site? Providing the address on paper or in an
e-mail may work the first time the learner accesses the site,
but invariably the paper will be lost and the e-mail deleted.
Better to place a link to the educational site on a frequently
used homepage. Passwords also deter use. They may be required for security, but should be minimized as able. Webpages
that are attractive, intuitive, and functional will encourage
users to return. Those that are not deter further use.
Provide Time for Learning. It is tempting to develop an
online course as an addition to existing coursework, or,
when replacing an older course with an online version, to
divert the time dedicated to the previous course to other
purposes. Such action would likely prove catastrophic
for the online endeavor. Online learning permits flexible
scheduling, but it does not eliminate the time required
to complete the course. Independent and problem-based
learning require “protected” time,45 and so does online
Motivate and Remind; Consider Rewards and/or Consequences. Motivated learners are essential to the success
of any educational activity. Wlodkowski describes six keys
to motivation: at the start of the activity, the teacher should
encourage a positive attitude toward learning and identify
and work to fulfill the needs that the learner hopes to meet
during the course. During the learning process, the teacher
should provide stimulation and promote a positive affective
or emotional experience. Near the end of the activity, feedback should reinforce learning and highlight areas in which
the learner is now competent.46 Many if not all of these
strategies can be creatively implemented online.
Demonstrating the website to learners improves participation.47 We have found reminders, either in person or
via e-mail, to be effective. Rewards for completion and/or
consequences for failure to complete may be effective but
are not possible for all learning activities. Teaching learners
to regulate their own learning may also help.22
FIGURE 2. A well-designed educational website: the home page. This home page has several features of a well-designed Web page:
1) hierarchy of information, with the most important information at the top of the page, 2) navigation bar includes links to the home
page, goals and objectives, help screen, WebCT courseware (with tools for assessment, course evaluation, and online communication), other sites within and external to course, and a means to contact the instructor, and 3) links to other sites within and outside
Cook And Dupras, Developing Effective Web-based Learning
Step 8. Evaluate—both learners and course
In contrast to many other teaching modalities, online
education lends itself easily to assessment of both the
learner48 and the course itself. Courseware systems facilitate submission of assignments and administration of
tests and surveys. Software can automatically grade these
when answers are objectively defined. Plan both formative
evaluation during the educational process and summative
evaluation at the end of the course. Further discussion
of evaluation is beyond the scope of this paper, but a brief
review was recently published.49
IMPLEMENTATION AND MAINTENANCE
Step 9. Pilot the website before full implementation
Obtain input from several people, including targeted
learners, at various stages in the design process. After
development is complete, pilot the entire website prior to full
FIGURE 3. A well-designed educational website: a “content” page. Note the features of this content page: 1) navigation bar for
sections within module, 2) consistent title bar and navigation bar on all pages, and 3) links to online clinical tools, full-text journal
articles, and useful sites within course. Also note prominent headings, bulleted text (rather than paragraphs), and short sentences.
Table 3. Principles to Guide Teaching Practice and Corresponding Techniques for Web-based Teaching
Teaching Principle*
Web-based Teaching Technique
The learner should be an active contributor to the educational process
Learner interaction
Problem-based learning
Self-directed learning
Learning should closely relate to understanding and solving real life problems
Case-based learning
Just-in-time learning
Learners’ current knowledge and experience need to be taken into account
Learner interaction
Problem-based learning
Learners should use self-direction in their learning
Self-directed learning
Learners should be given opportunities and support for practice, accompanied
by self-assessment and constructive feedback from teachers and peers
Case-based learning
Self-assessment
Learners should be given opportunities to reflect on their practice
Self-assessment
Case-based learning
Journals and portfolios
Learner interaction
Medical educators should model good educational principles with their learners
Effective course and website design
(using active learning principles)
Instructor feedback
* “Teaching principles” are modified from Kaufman,35 used with permission from the BMJ Publishing Group.
Volume 19, June 2004
implementation. The “gold standard” is formal testing in a usability lab. If this is not feasible, assemble a group similar to the
targeted learners to test each component of the site informally.
Collect information on navigation (especially navigation errors
and points of confusion), how well objectives were met, time
required, and overall satisfaction. Additional information about
website testing is found in the references on Web design.11,32,33
Step 10. Plan to monitor online communication and
maintain the site by resolving technical problems,
periodically verifying hyperlinks, and regularly
updating content
Budget time to monitor and moderate course activities.
Ongoing faculty time requirements vary by course design,
with courses involving faculty-moderated online activities
demanding much more time than automated courses.
Although time requirements often decrease after completion of the development phase, maintenance will still be
necessary. Plan for at least three ongoing activities:
First, plan to address the technical problems that inevitably arise. Many of these are best handled by a specialist.
Second, hyperlinks should be tested periodically. Links
to pages within your website should continue to work, but
external websites change frequently and links to those sites
may unexpectedly fail.
Third, content should be updated regularly.7 One advantage of the Web is the ease with which content—text, multimedia, hyperlinks—can be modified. Implement changes
based on course evaluation as well as updated information.
Consider scheduling periodic literature reviews.
CONCLUSION
We have presented ten practical steps to guide teachers
in developing educational websites that implement principles of active learning.
Web-based learning accommodates shift schedules
and distance learning, is easily expanded and modified,
facilitates assessment, encourages self-directed learning,
and is inherently learner centered.50,51 Although it may not
be superior to traditional methods,2 these advantages
warrant its use in many circumstances to supplement or
even replace existing courses.
Harden52 and others have suggested that teachers
of the future may be as much designers of learning
experiences as lecturers and tutors—true “facilitators of
learning.”53 Designing Web-based learning involves more
than simply putting together a colorful webpage. Effective
online learning requires the teacher to carefully construct
a program that integrates principles of active learning,
motivation, and evaluation with creative Web design.
Only as educators consistently implement these principles
will Web-based medical education reach its full potential.
A presentation illustrating the step-by-step application of this
process is available online at 
products/journals/suppmat/jgi/JGI30029_appendix.ppt.