Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 1–14 
Printed 26 November 2024
(MN LATEX style ﬁle v2.2)
MULTINEST: an efﬁcient and robust Bayesian inference tool for
cosmology and particle physics
F. Feroz⋆, M.P. Hobson and M. Bridges
Astrophysics Group, Cavendish Laboratory, JJ Thomson Avenue, Cambridge CB3 0HE, UK
Accepted —. Received —; in original form 26 November 2024
We present further development and the ﬁrst public release of our multimodal nested sampling algorithm, called MULTINEST. This Bayesian inference tool calculates the evidence,
with an associated error estimate, and produces posterior samples from distributions that
may contain multiple modes and pronounced (curving) degeneracies in high dimensions.
The developments presented here lead to further substantial improvements in sampling ef-
ﬁciency and robustness, as compared to the original algorithm presented in Feroz & Hobson , which itself signiﬁcantly outperformed existing MCMC techniques in a wide
range of astrophysical inference problems. The accuracy and economy of the MULTINEST
algorithm is demonstrated by application to two toy problems and to a cosmological inference problem focussing on the extension of the vanilla ΛCDM model to include spatial curvature and a varying equation of state for dark energy. The MULTINEST software,
which is fully parallelized using MPI and includes an interface to CosmoMC, is available at
 It will also be released
as part of the SuperBayeS package, for the analysis of supersymmetric theories of particle
physics, at 
Key words: methods: data analysis – methods: statistical
INTRODUCTION
Bayesian analysis methods are already widely used in astrophysics
and cosmology, and are now beginning to gain acceptance in particle physics phenomenology. As a consequence, considerable effort
has been made to develop efﬁcient and robust methods for performing such analyses. Bayesian inference is usually considered to divide into two categories: parameter estimation and model selection.
Parameter estimation is typically performed using Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling, most often based on the standard
Metropolis–Hastings algorithm or its variants, such as Gibbs’ or
Hamiltonian sampling . Such methods can
be very computationally intensive, however, and often experience
problems in sampling efﬁciently from a multimodal posterior distribution or one with large (curving) degeneracies between parameters, particularly in high dimensions. Moreover, MCMC methods
often require careful tuning of the proposal distribution to sample efﬁciently, and testing for convergence can be problematic.
Bayesian model selection has been further hindered by the even
greater computational expense involved in the calculation to sufﬁcient precision of the key ingredient, the Bayesian evidence (also
called the marginalized likelihood or the marginal density of the
data). As the average likelihood of a model over its prior proba-
⋆E-mail: 
bility space, the evidence can be used to assign relative probabilities to different models . The existing preferred evidence evaluation method, again based on MCMC techniques, is thermodynamic
integration , which is extremely computationally intensive but has been used successfully
in astronomical applications . Some fast approximate methods have been used for evidence
evaluation, such as treating the posterior as a multivariate Gaussian
centred at its peak , but this approximation is clearly a poor one for multimodal posteriors (except perhaps
if one performs a separate Gaussian approximation at each mode).
The Savage–Dickey density ratio has also been proposed as an exact, and potentially faster, means of evaluating evidences, but is restricted to the special case of nested hypotheses
and a separable prior on the model parameters. Various alternative
information criteria for astrophysical model selection are discussed
by Liddle , but the evidence remains the preferred method.
Nested sampling is a Monte Carlo method targetted at the efﬁcient calculation of the evidence, but also produces
posterior inferences as a by-product. In cosmological applications,
Mukherjee et al. showed that their implementation of the
method requires a factor of ∼100 fewer posterior evaluations
c⃝2008 RAS
F. Feroz, M.P. Hobson & M. Bridges
than thermodynamic integration. To achieve an improved acceptance ratio and efﬁciency, their algorithm uses an elliptical bound
containing the current point set at each stage of the process to restrict the region around the posterior peak from which new samples
are drawn. Shaw et al. point out that this method becomes
highly inefﬁcient for multimodal posteriors, and hence introduce
the notion of clustered nested sampling, in which multiple peaks
in the posterior are detected and isolated, and separate ellipsoidal
bounds are constructed around each mode. This approach signiﬁcantly increases the sampling efﬁciency. The overall computational
load is reduced still further by the use of an improved error calculation on the ﬁnal evidence result that produces
a mean and standard error in one sampling, eliminating the need
for multiple runs. In our previous paper , we built on the work of Shaw et al. by
pursuing further the notion of detecting and characterising multiple modes in the posterior from the distribution of nested samples,
and presented a number of innovations that resulted in a substantial
improvement in sampling efﬁciency and robustness, leading to an
algorithm that constituted a viable, general replacement for traditional MCMC sampling techniques in astronomical data analysis.
In this paper, we present further substantial development of
the method discussed in FH08 and make the ﬁrst public release of
the resulting Bayesian inference tool, called MULTINEST. In particular, we propose fundamental changes to the ‘simultaneous ellipsoidal sampling’ method described in FH08, which result in a substantially improved and fully parallelized algorithm for calculating the evidence and obtaining posterior samples from distributions
with (an unkown number of) multiple modes and/or pronounced
(curving) degeneracies between parameters. The algorithm also
naturally identiﬁes individual modes of a distribution, allowing for
the evaluation of the ‘local’ evidence and parameter constraints associated with each mode separately.
The outline of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, we brieﬂy
review the basic aspects of Bayesian inference for parameter estimation and model selection. In Section 3, we introduce nested
sampling and discuss the use of ellipsoidal bounds in Section 4.
In Section 5, we present the MULTINEST algorithm. In Section 6,
we apply our new algorithms to two toy problems to demonstrate
the accuracy and efﬁciency of the evidence calculation and parameter estimation as compared with other techniques. In Section 7,
we consider the use of our new algorithm for cosmological model
selection focussed on the extension of the vanilla ΛCDM model to
include spatial curvature and a varying equation of state for dark
energy. We compare the efﬁciency of MULTINEST and standard
MCMC techniques for cosmological parameter estimation in Section 7.3. Finally, our conclusions are presented in Section 8.
BAYESIAN INFERENCE
Bayesian inference methods provide a consistent approach to the
estimation of a set parameters Θ in a model (or hypothesis) H for
the data D. Bayes’ theorem states that
Pr(Θ|D, H) = Pr(D| Θ, H) Pr(Θ|H)
where Pr(Θ|D, H) ≡P(Θ) is the posterior probability distribution of the parameters, Pr(D|Θ, H) ≡L(Θ) is the likelihood,
Pr(Θ|H) ≡π(Θ) is the prior, and Pr(D|H) ≡Z is the Bayesian
In parameter estimation, the normalising evidence factor is
usually ignored, since it is independent of the parameters Θ, and
inferences are obtained by taking samples from the (unnormalised)
posterior using standard MCMC sampling methods, where at equilibrium the chain contains a set of samples from the parameter
space distributed according to the posterior. This posterior constitutes the complete Bayesian inference of the parameter values, and
can be marginalised over each parameter to obtain individual parameter constraints.
In contrast to parameter estimation problems, in model selection the evidence takes the central role and is simply the factor required to normalize the posterior over Θ:
L(Θ)π(Θ)dDΘ,
where D is the dimensionality of the parameter space. As the average of the likelihood over the prior, the evidence automatically
implements Occam’s razor: a simpler theory with compact parameter space will have a larger evidence than a more complicated one,
unless the latter is signiﬁcantly better at explaining the data. The
question of model selection between two models H0 and H1 can
then be decided by comparing their respective posterior probabilities given the observed data set D, as follows
Pr(H0|D) = Pr(D|H1) Pr(H1)
Pr(D|H0) Pr(H0) = Z1
where Pr(H1)/ Pr(H0) is the a priori probability ratio for the two
models, which can often be set to unity but occasionally requires
further consideration.
Evaluation of the multidimensional integral (2) is a challenging numerical task. The standard technique of thermodynamic integration draws MCMC samples not from the posterior directly but
from Lλπ where λ is an inverse temperature that is slowly raised
from ≈0 to 1 according to some annealing schedule. It is possible to obtain accuracies of within 0.5 units in log-evidence via
this method, but in cosmological model selection applications it
typically requires of order 106 samples per chain (with around 10
chains required to determine a sampling error). This makes evidence evaluation at least an order of magnitude more costly than
parameter estimation.
NESTED SAMPLING
Nested sampling is a Monte Carlo technique aimed
at efﬁcient evaluation of the Bayesian evidence, but also produces posterior inferences as a by-product. A full discussion of the
method is given in FH08, so we give only a brieﬂy description here,
following the notation of FH08.
Nested sampling exploits the relation between the likelihood
and prior volume to transform the multidimensional evidence integral (Eq. 2) into a one-dimensional integral. The ‘prior volume’ X
is deﬁned by dX = π(Θ)dDΘ, so that
where the integral extends over the region(s) of parameter space
contained within the iso-likelihood contour L(Θ) = λ. The evidence integral (Eq. 2) can then be written as
where L(X), the inverse of Eq. 4, is a monotonically decreasing
c⃝2008 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14
MULTINEST: efﬁcient and robust Bayesian inference
Figure 1. Cartoon illustrating (a) the posterior of a two dimensional problem; and (b) the transformed L(X) function where the prior volumes Xi
are associated with each likelihood Li.
function of X. Thus, if one can evaluate the likelihoods Li =
L(Xi), where Xi is a sequence of decreasing values,
0 < XM < · · · < X2 < X1 < X0 = 1,
as shown schematically in Fig. 1, the evidence can be approximated
numerically using standard quadrature methods as a weighted sum
In the following we will use the simple trapezium rule, for which
the weights are given by wi = 1
2(Xi−1 −Xi+1). An example of
a posterior in two dimensions and its associated function L(X) is
shown in Fig. 1.
The summation (Eq. 7) is performed as follows. The iteration counter is ﬁrst set to i = 0 and N ‘active’ (or ‘live’) samples are drawn from the full prior π(Θ) (which is often simply
the uniform distribution over the prior range), so the initial prior
volume is X0 = 1. The samples are then sorted in order of their
likelihood and the smallest (with likelihood L0) is removed from
the active set (hence becoming ‘inactive’) and replaced by a point
drawn from the prior subject to the constraint that the point has
a likelihood L > L0. The corresponding prior volume contained
within this iso-likelihood contour will be a random variable given
by X1 = t1X0, where t1 follows the distribution Pr(t) = NtN−1
(i.e. the probability distribution for the largest of N samples drawn
uniformly from the interval ). At each subsequent iteration i,
the removal of the lowest likelihood point Li in the active set, the
drawing of a replacement with L > Li and the reduction of the
corresponding prior volume Xi = tiXi−1 are repeated, until the
entire prior volume has been traversed. The algorithm thus travels
through nested shells of likelihood as the prior volume is reduced.
The mean and standard deviation of log t, which dominates the geometrical exploration, are E[log t] = −1/N and σ[log t] = 1/N.
Since each value of log t is independent, after i iterations the prior
volume will shrink down such that log Xi ≈−(i ±
i)/N. Thus,
one takes Xi = exp(−i/N).
The algorithm is terminated on determining the evidence to
some speciﬁed precision (we use 0.5 in log-evidence): at iteration
i, the largest evidence contribution that can be made by the remaining portion of the posterior is ∆Zi = LmaxXi, where Lmax is
the maximum likelihood in the current set of active points. The
evidence estimate (Eq. 7) may then be reﬁned by adding a ﬁnal
increment from the set of N active points, which is given by
where wM+j = XM/N for all j. The ﬁnal uncertainty on the calculated evidence may be straightforwardly estimated from a single
run of the nested sampling algorithm by calculating the relative entropy of the full sequence of samples (see FH08).
Once the evidence Z is found, posterior inferences can be easily generated using the full sequence of (inactive and active) points
generated in the nested sampling process. Each such point is simply
assigned the weight
where the sample index j runs from 1 to N = M + N, the total
number of sampled points. These samples can then be used to calculate inferences of posterior parameters such as means, standard
deviations, covariances and so on, or to construct marginalised posterior distributions.
ELLIPSOIDAL NESTED SAMPLING
The most challenging task in implementing the nested sampling
algorithm is drawing samples from the prior within the hard constraint L > Li at each iteration i. Employing a naive approach that
draws blindly from the prior would result in a steady decrease in
the acceptance rate of new samples with decreasing prior volume
(and increasing likelihood).
Ellipsoidal nested sampling tries to
overcome the above problem by approximating the iso-likelihood
contour L = Li by a D-dimensional ellipsoid determined from the
covariance matrix of the current set of active points. New points
are then selected from the prior within this ellipsoidal bound (usually enlarged slightly by some user-deﬁned factor) until one is obtained that has a likelihood exceeding that of the removed lowestlikelihood point. In the limit that the ellipsoid coincides with the
true iso-likelihood contour, the acceptance rate tends to unity.
Ellipsoidal nested sampling as described above is efﬁcient for
simple unimodal posterior distributions without pronounced degeneracies, but is not well suited to multimodal distributions. As advocated by Shaw et al. and shown in Fig. 2, the sampling ef-
ﬁciency can be substantially improved by identifying distinct clusters of active points that are well separated and constructing an individual (enlarged) ellipsoid bound for each cluster. In some problems, however, some modes of the posterior may exhibit a pronounced curving degeneracy so that it more closely resembles a
(multi–dimensional) ‘banana’. Such features are problematic for all
sampling methods, including that of Shaw et al. .
In FH08, we made several improvements to the sampling
method of Shaw et al. , which signiﬁcantly improved its efﬁciency and robustness. Among these, we proposed a solution to the
above problem by partitioning the set of active points into as many
sub–clusters as possible to allow maximum ﬂexibility in following
the degeneracy. These clusters are then enclosed in ellipsoids and
a new point is then drawn from the set of these ‘overlapping’ ellipsoids, correctly taking into account the overlaps. Although this
sub-clustering approach provides maximum efﬁciency for highly
degenerate distributions, it can result in lower efﬁciencies for relatively simpler problems owing to the overlap between the ellipsoids. Also, the factor by which each ellipsoid was enlarged was
chosen arbitrarily. Another problem with the our previous approach
was in separating modes with elongated curving degeneracies. We
now propose solutions to all these problems, along with some additional modiﬁcations to improve efﬁciency and robustness still furc⃝2008 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14
F. Feroz, M.P. Hobson & M. Bridges
Figure 2. Cartoon of ellipsoidal nested sampling from a simple bimodal distribution. In (a) we see that the ellipsoid represents a good bound to the active
region. In (b)-(d), as we nest inward we can see that the acceptance rate will rapidly decrease as the bound steadily worsens. Figure (e) illustrates the increase
in efﬁciency obtained by sampling from each clustered region separately.
ther, in the MULTINEST algorithm presented in the following section.
THE MULTINEST ALGORITHM
The MULTINEST algorithm builds upon the ‘simultaneous ellipsoidal nested sampling method’ presented in FH08, but incorporates a number of improvements. In short, at each iteration i of the
nested sampling process, the full set of N active points is partitioned and ellipsoidal bounds constructed using a new algorithm
presented in Section 5.2 below. This new algorithm is far more ef-
ﬁcient and robust than the method used in FH08 and automatically
accommodates elongated curving degeneracies, while maintaining
high efﬁciency for simpler problems. This results in a set of (possibly overlapping) ellipsoids. The lowest-likelihood point from the
full set of N active points is then removed (hence becoming ‘inactive’) and replaced by a new point drawn from the set of ellipsoids,
correctly taking into account any overlaps. Once a point becomes
inactive it plays no further part in the nested sampling process, but
its details remain stored. We now discuss the MULTINEST algorithm in detail.
Unit hypercube sampling space
The new algorithm for partitioning the active points into clusters
and constructing ellipsoidal bounds requires the points to be uniformly distributed in the parameter space. To satisfy this requirement, the MULTINEST ‘native’ space is taken as a D-dimensional
unit hypercube (each parameter value varies from 0 to 1) in which
samples are drawn uniformly. All partitioning of points into clusters, construction of ellipsoidal bounds and sampling are performed
in the unit hypercube.
In order to conserve probability mass, the point u
(u1, u2, · · · , uD) in the unit hypercube should be transformed to
the point Θ = (θ1, θ2, · · · , θD) in the ‘physical’ parameter space,
π(θ1, θ2, · · · , θD) dθ1 dθ2 · · · dθD =
du1du2 · · · duD.
In the simple case that the prior π(Θ) is separable
π(θ1, θ2, · · · , θD) = π1(θ1)π2(θ2) · · · πD(θD),
one can satisfy Eq. 10 by setting
πj(θj)dθj = duj.
Therefore, for a given value of uj, the corresponding value of θj
can be found by solving
In the more general case in which the prior π(Θ) is not separable,
one instead writes
π(θ1, θ2, · · · , θD) = π1(θ1)π2(θ2|θ1) · · · πD(θD|θ1, θ2 · · · θD−1)
where we deﬁne
πj(θj|θ1, · · · , θj−1)
π(θ1, · · · , θj−1, θj, θj+1, · · · , θD) dθj+1 · · · dθD. (15)
The physical parameters Θ corresponding to the parameters u in
the unit hypercube can then be found by replacing the distributions
πj in Eq. 13 with those deﬁned in Eq. 15 and solving for θj. The
corresponding physical parameters Θ are then used to calculate the
likelihood value of the point u in the unit hypercube.
It is worth mentioning that in many problems the prior π(Θ)
is uniform, in which case the unit hypercube and the physical parameter space coincide. Even when this is not so, one is often
able to solve Eq. 13 analytically, resulting in virtually no computational overhead. For more complicated problems, two alternative
approaches are possible. First, one may solve Eq. 13 numerically,
most often using look-up tables to reduce the computational cost.
Alternatively, one can re-cast the inference problem, so that the
conversion between the unit hypercube and the physical parameter space becomes trivial. This is straightforwardly achieved by, for
example, deﬁning the new ‘likelihood’ L′(Θ) ≡L(Θ)π(Θ) and
‘prior’ π′(Θ) ≡constant. The latter approach does, however, have
the potential to be inefﬁcient since it does not make use of the true
prior π(Θ) to guide the sampling of the active points.
Partitioning and construction of ellipsoidal bounds
In FH08, the partitioning of the set of N active points at each iteration was performed in two stages. First, X-means was used to partition the set into the number of clusters that
optimised the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC). Second, to
accommodate modes with elongated, curving degeneracies, each
cluster identiﬁed by X-means was divided into sub-clusters to follow the degeneracy. To allow maximum ﬂexibility, this was performed using a modiﬁed, iterative k-means algorithm with k = 2
to produce as many sub-clusters as possible consistent with there
being at least D + 1 points in any sub-cluster, where D is the dimensionality of the parameter space. As mentioned above, however, this approach can lead to inefﬁciencies for simpler problems
in which the iso-likelihood contour is well described by a few (wellseparated) ellipsoidal bounds, owing to large overlaps between the
ellipsoids enclosing each sub-cluster. Moreover, the factor f by
which each ellipsoid was enlarged was chosen arbitrarily.
We now address these problems by using a new method to partition the active points into clusters and simultaneously construct
c⃝2008 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14
MULTINEST: efﬁcient and robust Bayesian inference
the ellipsoidal bound for each cluster (this also makes redundant the
notion of sub-clustering). At the ith iteration of the nested sampling
process, an ‘expectation-maximization’ (EM) approach is used to
ﬁnd the optimal ellipsoidal decomposition of N active points distributed uniformly in a region enclosing prior volume Xi, as set out
Let us begin by denoting the set of N active points in the
unit hypercube by S = {u1, u2, · · · , uN} and some partitioning of
the set into K clusters (called the set’s K-partition) by {Sk}K
where K ⩾1 and ∪K
k=1Sk = S. For a cluster (or subset) Sk
containing nk points, a reasonably accurate and computationally
efﬁcient approximation to its minimum volume bounding ellipsoid
is given by
Ek = {u ∈RD|uT (fkCk)−1u ⩽1},
(uj −µk)(uj −µk)T
is the empirical covariance matrix of the subset Sk and µk =
j=1 uj is its center of the mass. The enlargement factor fk ensures that Ek is a bounding ellipsoid for the subset Sk. The volume of this ellipsoid, denoted by V (Ek), is then proportional to
det(fkCk).
Suppose for the moment that we know the volume V (S) of
the region from which the set S is uniformly sampled and let us
deﬁne the function
The minimisation of F(S), subject to the constraint F(S) ⩾1,
with respect to K-partitionings {Sk}K
k=1 will then yield an ‘optimal’ decomposition into K ellipsoids of the original sampled region. The minimisation of F(S) is most easily performed using
an ‘expectation-minimization’ scheme as set out below. This approach makes use of the result that for uniformly
distributed points, the variation in F(S) resulting from reassigning
a point with position u from the subset Sk to the subset Sk′ is given
∆F(S)k,k′ ≈γ
„V (Ek′)d(u, Sk′)
−V (Ek)d(u, Sk)
where γ is a constant,
d(u, Sk) = (u −µk)T (fkCk)−1(u −µk)
is the Mahalanobis distance from u to the centroid µk of ellipsoid
Ek deﬁned in Eq. 16, and
V (Sk) = nkV (S)
may be considered as the true volume from which the subset of
points Sk were drawn uniformly. The approach we have adopted in
fact differs slightly from that outlined above, since we make further
use of Eq. 21 to impose the constraint that the volume V (Ek) of
the kth ellipsoid should never be less than the ‘true’ volume V (Sk)
occupied by the subset Sk. This can be easily achieved by enlarging
the ellipsoid Ek by a factor fk, such that its volume V (Ek) =
max[V (Ek), V (Sk)], before evaluating Eqs. 18 and 19.
In our case, however, at each iteration i of the nested sampling
process, V (S) corresponds to the true remaining prior volume Xi,
which is not known. Nonetheless, as discussed in Section 3, we do
know the expectation value of this random variable. We thus take
V (S) = exp(−i/N) which, in turn, allows us to deﬁne V (Sk)
according to Eq. 21.
From Eq. 19, we see that deﬁning
hk(u) = V (Ek)d(u, Sk)
for a point u ∈S and assigning u ∈Sk to Sk′ only if hk(u) <
hk′(u), ∀k ̸= k′, is equivalent to minimizing F(S) using the variational formula (Eq. 19). Thus, a weighted Mahalanobis metric can
be used in the k-means framework to optimize the functional F(S).
In order to ﬁnd out the optimal number of ellipsoids, K, a recursive scheme can be used which starts with K = 2, optimizes this
2-partition using the metric in Eq. 22 and recursively partitions the
resulting ellipsoids. For each iteration of this recursion, we employ
this optimization scheme in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Minimizing F(S), subject to F(S) ⩾1, for points
S = {u1, u2, · · · , uN} uniformly distributed in a volume V (S).
1: calculate bounding ellipsoid E and its volume V (E)
2: enlarge E so that V (E) = max[V (E), V (S)].
3: partition S into S1 and S2 containing n1 and n2 points respectively by applying k−means clustering algorithm with K = 2.
4: calculate E1, E2 and their volumes V (E1) and V (E2) respectively.
5: enlarge Ek (k = 1, 2) so that V (Ek) = max[V (Ek), V (Sk)].
6: for all u ∈S do
assign u to Sk such that hk(u) = min[h1(x), h2(x)].
8: end for
9: if no point has been reassigned then
go to step 14.
go to step 4.
13: end if
14: if V (E1) + V (E2) < V (E) or V (E) > 2V (S) then
partition S into S1 and S2 and repeat entire algorithm for
each subset S1 and S2.
return E as the optimal ellipsoid of the point set S.
18: end if
In step 14 of Algorithm 1 we partition the point set S with
ellipsoidal volume V (E) into subsets S1 and S2 with ellipsoidal
volumes V (E1) and V (E2) even if V (E1) + V (E2) > V (E),
provided V (E) > 2V (S). This is required since, as discussed in
Lu et al. , the minimizer of F(S) can be over-conservative
and the partition should still be performed if the ellipsoidal volume
is greater than the true volume by some factor (we use 2).
The above EM algorithm can be quite computationally expensive, especially in higher dimensions, due to the number of
eigenvalue and eigenvector evaluations required to calculate ellipsoidal volumes. Fortunately, MULTINEST does not need to
perform the full partitioning algorithm at each iteration of the
nested sampling process. Once partitioning of the active points
and construction of the ellipsoidal bounds has been performed
using Algorithm 1, the resulting ellipsoids can then be evolved
through scaling at subsequent iterations so that their volumes are
max[V (Ek), Xi+1nk/N], where with Xi+1 is the remaining prior
volume in the next nested sampling iteration and nk is number of
c⃝2008 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14
F. Feroz, M.P. Hobson & M. Bridges
Figure 3. Illustrations of the ellipsoidal decompositions returned by Algorithm 1: the points given as input are overlaid on the resulting ellipsoids.
1000 points were sampled uniformly from: (a) two non-intersecting ellipsoids; and (b) a torus.
points in the subset Sk at the end of ith iteration. As the MULTI-
NEST algorithm moves to higher likelihood regions, one would
expect the ellipsoidal decomposition calculated at some earlier iteration to become less optimal. We therefore perform a full repartitioning of the active points using Algorithm 1 if F(S) ⩾h;
we typically use h = 1.1.
The approach outlined above allows maximum ﬂexibility and
sampling efﬁciency by breaking up a posterior mode resembling
a Gaussian into relatively few ellipsoids, but a mode possesses a
pronounced curving degeneracy into a relatively large number of
small ‘overlapping’ ellipsoids. In Fig. 3 we show the results of applying Algorithm 1 to two different problems in three dimensions:
in (a) the iso-likelihood surface consists of two non-overlapping
ellipsoids, one of which contains correlations between the parameters; and in (b) the iso-likelihood surface is a torus. In each case,
1000 points were uniformly generated inside the iso-likelihood surface are used as the starting set S in Algorithm 1. In case (a), Algorithm 1 correctly partitions the point set in two non-overlapping
ellipsoids with F(S) = 1.1, while in case (b) the point set is partitioned into 23 overlapping ellipsoids with F(S) = 1.2.
In our nested sampling application, it is possible that the ellipsoids found by Algorithm 1 might not enclose the entire isolikelihood contour, even though the sum of their volumes is constrained to exceed the prior volume X This is because the ellipsoidal approximation to a region in the prior space might not be
perfect. It might therefore be desirable to sample from a region with
volume greater than the prior volume. This can easily be achieved
by using X/e as the desired minimum volume in Algorithm 1,
where X is the prior volume and e the desired sampling efﬁciency
(1/e is the enlargement factor). We also note that if the desire sampling efﬁciency e is set to be greater than unity, then the prior can
be under-sampled. Indeed, setting e > 1 can be useful if one is not
interested in the evidence values, but wants only to have a general
idea of the posterior structure in relatively few likelihood evaluations. We note that, regardless of the value of e, it is always ensured that the ellipsoids Ek enclosing the subsets Sk are always
the bounding ellipsoids.
Sampling from overlapping ellipsoids
Once the ellipsoidal bounds have been constructed at some iteration
of the nested sampling process, one must then draw a new point
uniformly from the union of these ellipsoids, many of which may be
overlapping. This is achieved using the method presented in FH08,
which is summarised below for completeness.
Suppose at iteration i of the nested sampling algorithm, one
has K ellipsoids {Ek}. One ellipsoid is then chosen with probability pk equal to its volume fraction
pk = V (Ek)/Vtot,
where Vtot = PK
k=1 V (Ek). Samples are then drawn uniformly
from the chosen ellipsoid until a sample is found for which the hard
constraint L > Li is satisﬁed, where Li is the lowest-likelihood
value among all the active points at that iteration. There is, of
course, a possibility that the chosen ellipsoid overlaps with one or
more other ellipsoids. In order to take an account of this possibility, we ﬁnd the number of ellipsoids, ne, in which the sample lies
and only accept the sample with probability 1/ne. This provides a
consistent sampling procedure in all cases.
Decreasing the number of active points
For highly multimodal problems, the nested sampling algorithm
would require a large number N of active points to ensure that
all the modes are detected. This would consequently result in very
slow convergence of the algorithm. In such cases, it would be desirable to decrease the number of active points as the algorithm
proceeds to higher likelihood levels, since the number of isolated
regions in the iso-likelihood surface is expected to decrease with increasing likelihood. modes Fortunately, nested sampling does not
require the number of active points to remain constant, provided
the fraction by which the prior volume is decreased after each iteration is adjusted accordingly. Without knowing anything about
the posterior, we can use the largest evidence contribution that can
be made by the remaining portion of the posterior at the ith iteration ∆Zi = LmaxXi, as the guide in reducing the number of active
points by assuming that the change in ∆Z is linear locally. We thus
c⃝2008 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14
MULTINEST: efﬁcient and robust Bayesian inference
set the number of active points Ni at the ith iteration to be
Ni = Ni−1 −Nmin ∆Zi−1 −∆Zi
subject to the constraint Nmin ⩽Ni ⩽Ni−1, where Nmin is the
minimum number of active points allowed and tol is the tolerance
on the ﬁnal evidence used in the stopping criterion.
Parallelization
Even with the enlargement factor e set to unity (see Section 5.2),
the typical sampling efﬁciency obtained for most problems in astrophysics and particle physics is around 20–30 per cent for two main
reasons. First, the ellipsoidal approximation to the iso-likelihood
surface at any iteration is not perfect and there may be regions of the
parameter space lying inside the union of the ellipsoids but outside
the true iso-likelihood surface; samples falling in such regions will
be rejected, resulting in a sampling efﬁciency less than unity. Second, if the number of ellipsoids at any given iteration is greater than
one, then they may overlap, resulting in some samples with L > Li
falling inside a region shared by ne ellipsoids; such points are accepted only with probability 1/ne, which consequently lowers the
sampling efﬁciency. Since the sampling efﬁciency is typically less
than unity, the MULTINEST algorithm can be usefully (and easily) parallelized by, at each nested sampling iteration, drawing a
potential replacement point on each of NCPU processors, where
1/NCPU is an estimate of the sampling efﬁciency.
Identiﬁcation of modes
As discussed in FH08, for multimodal posteriors it can prove useful to identify which samples ‘belong’ to which mode. There is
inevitably some arbitrariness in this process, since modes of the
posterior necessarily sit on top of some general ‘background’ in
the probability distribution. Moreover, modes lying close to one
another in the parameter space may only ‘separate out’ at relatively high likelihood levels. Nonetheless, for well-deﬁned, ‘isolated’ modes, a reasonable estimate of the posterior mass that each
contains (and hence the associated ‘local’ evidence) can be deﬁned,
together with the posterior parameter constraints associated with
each mode. To perform such a calculation, once the nested sampling algorithm has progressed to a likelihood level such that (at
least locally) the ‘footprint’ of the mode is well-deﬁned, one needs
to identify at each subsequent iteration those points in the active
set belonging to that mode. The partitioning and ellipsoids construction algorithm described in Section 5.2 provides a much more
efﬁcient and reliable method for performing this identiﬁcation, as
compared with the methods employed in FH08.
At the beginning of the nested sampling process, all the active
points are assigned to one ‘group’ G1. As outlined above, at subsequent iterations, the set of N active points is partitioned into K
subsets {Sk} and their corresponding ellipsoids {Ek} constructed.
To perform mode identiﬁcation, at each iteration, one of the subsets
Sk is then picked at random: its members become the ﬁrst members
of the ‘temporary set’ T and its associated ellipsoid Ek becomes
the ﬁrst member of the set of ellipsoids E. All the other ellipsoids
Ek′ (k′ ̸= k) are then checked for intersection with Ek using an
exact algorithm proposed by Alfano & Greer . Any ellipsoid
found to intersect with Ek is itself added to E and the members of
the corresponding subset Sk are added to T . The set E (and consequently the set T ) is then iteratively built up by adding to it any
ellipsoid not in E that intersects with any of those already in E, until no more ellipsoids can be added. Once this is completed, if no
more ellipsoids remain then all the points in T are (re)assigned to
G1, a new active point is drawn from the union of the ellipsoids
{Ek} (and also assigned to G1) and the nested sampling process
proceeds to its next iteration.
If, however, there remain ellipsoids {Ek} not belonging to E,
then this indicates the presence of (at least) two isolated regions
contained within the iso-likelihood surface. In this event, the points
in T are (re)assigned to the group G2 and the remaining active
points are (re)assigned to the group G3. The original group G1
then contains only the inactive points generated up to this nested
sampling iteration and is not modiﬁed further. The group G3 is
then analysed in a similar manner to see if can be split further (into
G3 and G4), and the process continued until no further splitting is
possible. Thus, in this case, one is left with an ‘inactive’ group G1
and a collection of ‘active’ groups G2, G3, . . . . A new active point
is then drawn from the union of the ellipsoids {Ek}, and assigned
to the appropriate active group, and the nested sampling process
proceeds to its next iteration.
At subsequent nested sampling iterations, each of the active
groups present at that iteration is analysed in the same manner to
see if it can be split. If so, then the active points in that group are
(re)assigned to new active groups generated as above, and the original group becomes inactive, retaining only those of its points that
are inactive. In order to minimize the computational cost, we take
advantage of the fact that the ellipsoids created by Algorithm 1 can
only get smaller in later iterations. Hence, within each active group,
if two ellipsoids are found not to intersect at some iteration, they are
not checked for intersection in later iterations. This makes the computational expense involved in separating out the modes negligible.
At the end of the nested sampling process, one thus obtains
a set of inactive groups and a set of active groups, which between
them partition the full set of (inactive and active) sample points
generated. It is worth noting that, as the nested sampling process
reaches higher likelihood levels, the number of active points in any
particular active group may dwindle to zero, but such a group is still
considered active since it remains unsplit at the end of the nested
sampling run. Each active groups is then promoted to a ‘mode’,
resulting in a set of L (say) such modes {Ml}.
As a concrete example, consider the two-dimensional illustration shown in Fig. 4, in which the solid circles denote active
points at the nested sampling iteration i = i2, and the open circles are the inactive points at this stage. In this illustration, the ﬁrst
group G1 remains unsplit until iteration i = i1 of the nested sampling process, at which stage it is split into G2, G3 and G4. The
group G3 then remains unsplit until iteration i = i2, when it is
split into G5, G6 and G7. The group G4 remains unsplit until iteration i = i2, when it is split into G8 and G9. The group G2
remains unsplit at iteration i = i2 but the number of active points it
contains has fallen to zero, since it is a low-lying region of the likelihood function. Thus, at the iteration i = i2, the inactive groups
are G1, G3 and G4, and the active groups are G2, G5, G6, G7, G8
and G6. If (say) all of the latter collection of groups were to remain
active until the end of the nested sampling process, each would
then be promoted to a mode according to M1 = G2, M2 = G5,
M3 = G6, · · · , M6 = G9.
Evaluating ‘local’ evidences
The reliable identiﬁcation of isolated modes {Ml} allows one to
evaluate the local evidence associated with each mode much more
c⃝2008 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14
F. Feroz, M.P. Hobson & M. Bridges
Figure 4. Cartoon illustrating the assignment of points to groups; see text
for details. The iso-likelihood contours L = Li1 and L = Li2 are shown
as the dashed lines and dotted lines respectively. The solid circles denote
active points at the nested sampling iteration i = i2, and the open circles
are the inactive points at this stage.
efﬁciently and robustly than the methods presented in FH08. Suppose the lth mode Ml contains the points {uj} (j = 1, · · · , nl). In
the simplest approach, the local evidence of this mode is given by
where (as in Eq. 8) wj = XM/N for each active point in Ml,
and for each inactive points wj =
2(Xi−1 −Xi+1), in which
i is the nested sampling iteration at which the inactive point was
discarded. In a similar manner, the posterior inferences resulting
from the lth mode are obtained by weighting each point in Ml by
pj = Ljwj/Zl.
As outlined in FH08, however, there remain some problems
with this approach for modes that are sufﬁciently close to one another in the parameter space that they are only identiﬁed as isolated regions once the algorithm has proceeded to likelihood values
somewhat larger than the value at which the modes actually separate. The ‘local’ evidence of each mode will then be underestimated
by Eq. 25. In such cases, this problem can be overcome by also
making use of the points contained in the inactive groups at the end
of the nested sampling process, as follows.
For each mode Ml, expression Eq. 25 for the local evidence is
replaced by
where the additional summation over g includes all the points in the
inactive groups, the weight wg = 1
2(Xi−1 −Xi+1), where i is the
nested sampling iteration in which the gth point was discarded, and
the additional factors α(l)
g are calculated as set out below. Similarly,
posterior inferences from the lth mode are obtained by weighting
each point in Ml by pj = Ljwj/Zl and each point in the inactive
groups by pg = Lgwgα(l)
The factors α(l)
can be determined in a number of ways. The
most straightforward approach is essentially to reverse the process
illustrated in Fig. 4, as follows. Each mode Ml is simply an active
group G that has been renamed. Moreover, one can identify the inactive group G′ that split to form G at the nested sampling iteration
i. All points in the inactive group G′ are then assigned the factor
where n(A)
G (i) is the number of active points in G at nested sampling iteration i, and similarly for n(A)
G′ (i). Now, the group G′ may
itself have been formed when an inactive group G′′ split at an
eariler nested sampling iteration i′ < i, in which case all the points
in G′′ are assigned the factor
The process is continued until the recursion terminates. Finally, all
points in inactive groups not already assigned have α(l)
As a concrete example, consider M2 = G5 in Fig. 4. In this
case, the factors assigned to the members of all the inactive groups
G1, G3 and G4 are
It is easy to check that the general prescription (Eqs. 27 and
28) ensures that
i.e. the sum of the local evidences for each mode is equal to the
global evidence. An alternative method for setting the factors α(l)
for which Eq. 30 again holds, is to use a mixture model to analyse
the full set of points (active and inactive) produced, as outlined in
Appendix A.
APPLICATIONS
In this section we apply the MULTINEST algorithm described
above to two toy problems to demonstrate that it indeed calculates
the Bayesian evidence and makes posterior inferences accurately
and efﬁciently. These toy examples are chosen to have features that
resemble those that can occur in real inference problems in astroand particle physics.
Toy model 1: egg-box likelihood
We ﬁrst demonstrate the application of MULTINEST to a highly
multimodal two-dimensional problem, for which the likelihood resembles an egg-box. The un-normalized likelihood is deﬁned as
L(θ1, θ2) = exp
and we assume a uniform prior U(0, 10π) for both θ1 and θ2. A plot
of the log-likelihood is shown in Fig. 5 and the the prior ranges are
chosen such that some of the modes are truncated. Hence, although
only two-dimensional, this toy example is a particularly challenging problem, not only for mode identiﬁcation but also for evaluating
the local evidence of each mode accurately. Indeed, even obtaining
c⃝2008 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14
MULTINEST: efﬁcient and robust Bayesian inference
Figure 5. Toy model 1: (a) two-dimensional plot of the likelihood function deﬁned in Eq. 31; (b) dots denoting the points with the lowest likelihood at
successive iterations of the MULTINEST algorithm. Different colours denote points assigned to different isolated modes as the algorithm progresses.
posterior samples efﬁciently from such a distribution can present a
challenge for standard Metropolis–Hastings MCMC samplers. We
note that distributions of this sort can occur in astronomical object
detection applications (see FH08).
Owing to the highly multimodal nature of this problem, we
use 2000 active points. The results obtained with MULTINEST are
illustrated in Fig. 5, in which the dots show the points with the
lowest likelihood at successive iterations of the nested sampling
process, and different colours indicate points assigned to different isolated modes as the algorithm progresses. MULTINEST required ∼30, 000 likelihood evaluations and evaluated the global
log-evidence value to be 235.86±0.06, which compares favourably
with the log-evidence value of 235.88 obtained through numerical
integration on a ﬁne grid. The local log-evidence values of each
mode, calculated through numerical integration on a ﬁne grid (denoted as ‘true log(Z)’) and using MULTINEST are listed in Table 1.
We see that there is good agreement between the two estimates.
Toy model 2: Gaussian shells likelihood
We now illustrate the capabilities of our MULTINEST in sampling
from a posterior containing multiple modes with pronounced (curving) degeneracies, and extend our analysis to parameters spaces of
high dimension.
Our toy problem here is the same one used in FH08 and
Allanach & Lester . The likelihood function in this model
is deﬁned as,
L(θ) = circ(θ; c1, r1, w1) + circ(θ; c2, r2, w2),
circ(θ; c, r, w) =
−(|θ −c| −r)2
In two dimensions, this toy distribution represents two well separated rings, centred on the points c1 and c2 respectively, each of
radius r and with a Gaussian radial proﬁle of width w (see Fig. 6).
With a sufﬁciently small w value, this distribution is representative
of the likelihood functions one might encounter in analysing forthcoming particle physics experiments in the context of beyond-the-
Standard-Model paradigms; in such models the bulk of the proba-
true local log(Z)
MULTINEST local log(Z)
233.20 ± 0.08
233.10 ± 0.06
233.48 ± 0.05
233.43 ± 0.05
233.65 ± 0.05
233.27 ± 0.05
233.14 ± 0.06
233.81 ± 0.04
232.65 ± 0.12
232.43 ± 0.16
232.11 ± 0.14
232.44 ± 0.11
232.68 ± 0.11
232.84 ± 0.09
233.02 ± 0.09
231.65 ± 0.29
231.49 ± 0.27
230.46 ± 0.36
Table 1. The local log-evidence values of each mode for the toy model 1,
described in Section 6.1, calculated through numerical integration on a ﬁne
grid (the ‘true log(Z)’) and using the MULTINEST algorithm.
bility lies within thin sheets or hypersurfaces through the full parameter space.
We investigate the above distribution up to a 30-dimensional
parameter space Θ with MULTINEST. In all cases, the centres of
the two rings are separated by 7 units in the parameter space, and
we take w1 = w2 = 0.1 and r1 = r2 = 2. We make r1 and
r2 equal, since in higher dimensions any slight difference between
these two values would result in a vast difference between the volumes occupied by the rings and consequently the ring with the
smaller r value would occupy a vanishingly small fraction of the
total probability volume, making its detection almost impossible.
It should also be noted that setting w = 0.1 means the rings have
an extremely narrow Gaussian proﬁle and hence they represent an
‘optimally difﬁcult’ problem for our ellipsoidal nested sampling algorithm, since many tiny ellipsoids are required to obtain a sufﬁciently accurate representation of the iso-likelihood surfaces. For
c⃝2008 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14
F. Feroz, M.P. Hobson & M. Bridges
Likelihood
Common Points
Likelihood
Figure 6. Toy model 2: (a) two-dimensional plot of the likelihood function deﬁned in Eqs. (32) and (33); (b) dots denoting the points with the lowest likelihood
at successive iterations of the MULTINEST algorithm. Different colours denote points assigned to different isolated modes as the algorithm progresses.
Analytical
local log(Z)
local log(Z1)
local log(Z2)
−1.72 ± 0.05
−2.28 ± 0.08
−2.56 ± 0.08
−5.75 ± 0.08
−6.34 ± 0.10
−6.57 ± 0.11
−14.69 ± 0.12
−15.41 ± 0.15
−15.36 ± 0.15
−35.93 ± 0.19
−37.13 ± 0.23
−36.28 ± 0.22
−59.94 ± 0.24
−60.70 ± 0.30
−60.57 ± 0.32
Table 2. The true and estimated global and local log(Z) for toy model 2, as a function of the dimensions D of the parameter space, using MULTINEST.
the two-dimensional case, with the parameters described above, the
likelihood is shown in Fig. 6.
In analysing this problem using the methods presented in
FH08, we showed that the sampling efﬁciency dropped signiﬁcantly with increasing dimensionality, with the efﬁciency being less
than 2 per cent in 10 dimensions, with almost 600, 000 likelihood
evaluations required to estimate the evidence to the required accuracy. Using 1000 active points in MULTINEST,we list the evaluated
and analytical evidence values in Table 2. The total number of likelihood evaluations and the sampling efﬁciencies are listed in Table
3. For comparison, we also list the number of likelihood evaluations
and the sampling efﬁciencies with the ellipsoidal nested sampling
method proposed in FH08. One sees that MULTINEST requires an
order of magnitude fewer likelihood evaluations than the method
of FH08. In fact, the relative computational cost of MULTINEST is
even less than this comparison suggests, since it no longer performs
an eigen-analysis at each iteration, as discussed in Section 5.2. Indeed, for this toy problem discussed, the EM partitioning algorithm
discussed in Section 5.2 was on average called only once per 1000
iterations of the MULTINEST algorithm.
COSMOLOGICAL PARAMETER ESTIMATION AND
MODEL SELECTION
Likelihood functions resembling those used in our toy models do
occur in real inference problems in astro- and particle physics,
such as object detection in astronomy and analysis of beyond-the-Standard-Model theories in particle physics phenomenology .
43, 093, 230
Table 3. The number of likelihood evaluations and sampling efﬁciency for
the ellipsoidal nested sampling algorithm of FH08 and MULTINEST, when
applied to toy model 2 as a function of the dimension D of the parameter
Nonetheless, not all likelihood functions are as challenging and it
is important to demonstrate that MULTINEST is more efﬁcient (and
certainly no less so) than standard Metropolis–Hastings MCMC
sampling even in more straightforward inference problems.
An important area of inference in astrophysics is that of cosmological parameter estimation and model selection, for which the
likelihood functions are usually quite benign, often resembling a
single, broad multivariate Gaussian in the allowed parameter space.
Therefore, in this section, we apply the MULTINEST algorithm to
analyse two related extensions of the standard cosmology model:
non-ﬂat spatial curvature and a varying equation of state of dark
The complete set of cosmological parameters and the ranges
of the uniform priors assumed for them are given in Table 4, where
the parameters have their usual meanings. With Ωk = 0 and
c⃝2008 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14
MULTINEST: efﬁcient and robust Bayesian inference
⩽log[1010As] ⩽
Table 4. Cosmological parameters and uniform priors ranges for the vanilla
ΛCDM model, plus spatial curvature Ωk and dark energy equation of state
parameter w.
w = −1 this model then represents the ‘vanilla’ ΛCDM cosmology. In addition, mirroring the recent analysis of the WMAP 5year (WMAP5) data , a Sunyaev-Zel’dovich
amplitude is introduced, with a uniform prior in the range .
We have chosen three basic sets of data: CMB observations alone;
CMB plus the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) constraint on H0
 ; and CMB plus large scale structure (LSS)
constraints on the matter power spectrum derived from the luminous red galaxy (LRG) subset of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey and the
two degree ﬁeld survey . In addition, for
the dark energy analysis we include distance measures from supernovae Ia data . The CMB data comprises WMAP5 observations + higher resolution datasets from the Arcminute Cosmology Bolometer Array + the Cosmic Background
Imager + Balloon Observations of Millimetric Extragalactic Radiation and Geophysics .
Observations of the ﬁrst CMB acoustic peak cannot in themselves constrain the spatial curvature Ωk. This could be constrained
using angular scale of the ﬁrst acoustic peak coupled with a knowledge of the distance to the last scattering surface, but the latter is
a function of the entire expansion history of the universe and so
there is a signiﬁcant degeneracy between Ωk and the Hubble parameter H(z). This dependence, often termed the ‘geometric degeneracy’, can be broken, however, since measurements at different
redshifts can constrain a sufﬁciently different functions of Ωk and
H. Thus, the combination of CMB data with measurements of the
acoustic peak structure in the matter power spectrum derived from
large scale structure surveys such as the LRG subset of Sloan can
place much tighter constraints on curvature than with either alone
 . The
tightest current constraint suggests Ωk ≈10−2, whereas inﬂation lasting over 60 e-folds would produce ﬂatness at the level of
10−5 . Thus, at present, the data is not capable of refuting or conﬁrming such an inﬂationary picture. From a
Bayesian point of view, however, one can still assess whether the
data currently prefers the inclusion of such a physical parameter.
The algorithmic parameters of MULTINEST were appropriately chosen given our a priori knowledge of the uni-modal form of
typical cosmological posteriors, the dimensionality of the problem
and some empirical testing. The number of active points was set
to N = 400 and a sampling efﬁciency e of 0.3 means that MPI
parallelisation across 4 CPUs is optimal (with a further 4 openmp
Figure 7. Breaking of the ‘geometric’ degeneracy in CMB data (blue) via
the addition of HST (green) and large scale structure data (red).
Dataset \ Model
vanilla + Ωk
vanilla + Ωk + w
−0.29 ± 0.27
−1.56 ± 0.27
−2.92 ± 0.27
−1.29 ± 0.27
Table 5. Differences of log evidences for both models and the three datasets
described in the text.[Negative (Positive) values represent lower (higher)
preference for the parameterisation change]
threads per MPI CPU used by CAMB’s multithreading facility).
This represents a relatively modest computational investment. All
of the inferences obtained in this section required between 40,000
and 50,000 likelihood evaluations.
Results: spatial curvature
Fig. 7. illustrates the progressively tighter constraints placed on Ωk
and H0 produced by combining CMB data with other cosmological
probes of large scale structure. The geometric degeneracy is clearly
unbroken with CMB data alone, but the independent constraints on
H0 by HST are seen to tighten the constraint somewhat. Including
LSS data, speciﬁcally the LRG data, markedly reduces the uncertainty on the curvature so that at 1-σ we can limit the curvature
range to −0.043 ⩽Ωk ⩽0.004. The asymmetry of this constraint
leaves a larger negative tail of Ωk resulting in a mean value that is
only slightly closed. However, even these most stringent parameter
constraints available, we see no statistically signiﬁcant deviation
from a spatially ﬂat universe. The Bayesian evidence, in penalising excessive model complexity should tell us whether relaxing the
constraint on ﬂatness is preferred by the data. Our results (Table 5)
very clearly rule out the necessity for such an addition in anything
other than with CMB data alone. This implies that the inclusion of
spatial curvature is an unnecessary complication in cosmological
model building, given the currently available data.
Results: varying equation of state of dark energy
The properties of the largest universal density component are still
largely unknown, yet such a component seems crucial for the universe to be spatially ﬂat. It has thus been argued by some that it is inappropriate to assume spatial ﬂatness when attempting to vary the properties of the dark energy component beyond those of a simple cosmological constant.
Here we allow for the variation of the dark energy equation of state
parameter w. We will therefore proceed by placing joint constraints
on both w and Ωk, as performed in Komatsu et al. . Once
again we encounter a serious degeneracy, this time between Ωk
and w. With the geometric degeneracy, combining cosmological
observations of the universe at different redshifts was sufﬁcient to
break the dependence, but when dark energy is dynamical we must
use at least a third, independent data set. In this analysis, we have
therefore included distance measures from type Ia supernovae observations . Using this combination of data
produces impressively tight constraints on both w and Ωk; indeed
the resulting constraints on the spatial curvature are tighter than
those obtained in the previous section, for which w was held constant at w = −1. This is primarily due to the near orthogonality of the constraints provided by supernovae and the CMB. Once
again we ﬁnd little evidence to support a departure from the basic
vanilla cosmology (see Table 5). To within estimated uncertainty,
the Bayesian evidence is at least one log unit greater for a ﬂat universe with dark energy in the form of a cosmological constant.
Comparison of MULTINEST and MCMC ‘quick look’
parameter constraints
The above results are in good agreement with those found by
Komatsu et al. using more traditional MCMC methods, and
indicate that MULTINEST has produced reliable inferences, both
in terms of the estimated evidence values and the derived posterior
parameter constraints. It is often the case, however, that cosmologists wish only to obtain a broad idea of the posterior distribution
of parameters, using short MCMC chains and hence relatively few
likelihood evaluations. In this section, we show that the MULTI-
NEST algorithm can also perform this task by setting the number
of active points, N, to a smaller value.
In order to illustrate this functionality, we analyse the
WMAP5 CMB data-set in the context of the vanilla ΛCDM cosmology using both MULTINEST and the publicly available CosmoMC Lewis & Bridle package, which uses an MCMC
sampler based on a tailored version of the Metropolis–Hastings
MCMC(3200)
MCMC(48000)
log(1010As)
Figure 9. 1-D marginalized posteriors for the ﬂat-ΛCDM cosmology obtained with: CosmoMC using 48,000 likelihood evaluations (solid black);
CosmoMC using 3,200 likelihood evaluations (dotted pink); and MULTI-
NEST using 3,100 likelihood evaluations (dashed blue).
method. We imposed uniform priors on all the parameters. The
prior ranges for Ωbh2, Ωcdmh2, Θ, and τ is listed in Table 4. In
addition, ns was allowed to vary between 0.8 and 1.2, log(1010As)
between 2.6 and 4.2 and the Sunyaev–Zel’dovich amplitude between 0 and 2.
To facilitate later comparisons, we ﬁrst obtained an accurate determination of the posterior distribution using the traditional
method by running CosmoMC to produce 4 long MCMC chains.
The Gelman–Rubin statistic R returned by CosmoMC indicated
that the chains had converged to within R ≈1.1 after about 6000
steps per chain, resulting in ∼24,000 likelihood evaluations. To
be certain of determining the ‘true’ posterior to high accuracy, we
then ran the MCMC chains for a further 6,000 samples per chain,
resulting in a total of 48,000 likelihood evaluations, at which point
the convergence statistic was R ≈1.05.
As stated above, however, one often wishes to obtain only a
‘quick-and-dirty’ estimate of the posterior in the ﬁrst stages of the
data analysis. As might be typical of such analyses, we ran CosmoMC again using 4 MCMC chains, but with only 800 steps per
chain, resulting in a total of 3,200 likelihood evaluations. As a comparison, we also ran the MULTINEST algorithm using only 50 active points and with the sampling efﬁciency e set to unity; this required a total of 3,100 likelihood evaluations. In Fig. 9, we plot the
1-D marginalized posteriors for derived from the two analyses, together with the results of the longer CosmoMC analysis described
above. It is clear from these plots that both the MULTINEST and
MCMC ‘quick-look’ results compare well with the ‘true’ posterior
obtained from the more costly rigorous analysis.
c⃝2008 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14
MULTINEST: efﬁcient and robust Bayesian inference
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
We have described a highly efﬁcient Bayesian inference tool, called
MULTINEST, which we have now made freely available for academic purposes as a plugin that is easily incorporated into the COS-
MOMC software. On challenging toy models that resemble real inference problems in astro- and particle physics, we have demonstrated that MULTINEST produces reliable estimates of the evidence, and its uncertainty, and accurate posterior inferences from
distributions with multiple modes and pronounced curving degeneracies in high dimensions. We have also demonstrated in cosmological inference problems that MULTINEST produces accurate
parameter constraints on similar time scales to standard MCMC
methods and, with negligible extra computational effort, also yields
very accurate Bayesian evidences for model selection. As a cosmological application we have considered two extensions of the
basic vanilla ΛCDM cosmology: non-zero spatial curvature and a
varying equation of state of dark energy. Both extensions are determined to be unnecessary for the modelling of existing data via the
evidence criterion, conﬁrming that with the advent of ﬁve years of
WMAP observations the data is still satisﬁed by a ΛCDM cosmology.
As a guide for potential users, we conclude by noting that the
MULTINEST algorithm is controlled by two main parameters: (i)
the number of active points N; and (ii) the maximum efﬁciency e
(see Section 5.2). These values can be chosen quite easily as outlined below. First, N should be large enough that, in the initial sampling from the full prior space, there is a high probability that at
least one point lies in the ‘basin of attraction’ of each mode of the
posterior. In later iterations, active points will then tend to populate
these modes. It should be remembered, of course, that N must always exceed the dimensionality D of the parameter space. Also, in
order to calculate the evidence accurately, N should be sufﬁciently
large so that all the regions of the parameter space are sampled adequately. For parameter estimation only, one can use far fewer active
points. For cosmological data analysis, we found 400 and 50 active
points to be adequate for evidence evaluation and parameter estimation respectively. The parameter e controls the sampling volume
at each iteration, which is equal to the sum of the volumes of the
ellipsoids enclosing the active point set. For parameter estimation
problems, e should be set to 1 to obtain maximum efﬁciency without undersampling or to a lower value if one wants to get a general
idea of the posterior very quickly. For evidence evaluation in cosmology, we found setting e ∼0.3 ensures an accurate evidence
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was carried out largely on the Cambridge High Performance Computing Cluster Darwin and the authors would like to
thank Dr. Stuart Rankin for computational assistance. FF is supported by studentships from the Cambridge Commonwealth Trust,
Isaac Newton and the Pakistan Higher Education Commission Fellowships. MB is supported by STFC.