Importance Estimation for Neural Network Pruning
Pavlo Molchanov, Arun Mallya, Stephen Tyree, Iuri Frosio, Jan Kautz
{pmolchanov, amallya, styree, ifrosio, jkautz}@nvidia.com
Structural pruning of neural network parameters reduces
computation, energy, and memory transfer costs during inference. We propose a novel method that estimates the
contribution of a neuron (ﬁlter) to the ﬁnal loss and iteratively removes those with smaller scores. We describe
two variations of our method using the ﬁrst and secondorder Taylor expansions to approximate a ﬁlter’s contribution. Both methods scale consistently across any network
layer without requiring per-layer sensitivity analysis and
can be applied to any kind of layer, including skip connections. For modern networks trained on ImageNet, we
measured experimentally a high (>93%) correlation between the contribution computed by our methods and a reliable estimate of the true importance. Pruning with the
proposed methods leads to an improvement over state-ofthe-art in terms of accuracy, FLOPs, and parameter reduction. On ResNet-101, we achieve a 40% FLOPS reduction
by removing 30% of the parameters, with a loss of 0.02%
in the top-1 accuracy on ImageNet. Code is available at
 
1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are widely used
in today’s computer vision applications. Scaling up the size
of datasets as well as the models trained on them has been
responsible for the successes of deep learning. The dramatic increase in number of layers, from 8 in AlexNet ,
to over 100 in ResNet-152 , has enabled deep networks to achieve better-than-human performance on the ImageNet classiﬁcation task. Empirically, while larger
networks have exhibited better performance, possibly due to
the lottery ticket hypothesis , they have also been known
to be heavily over-parameterized .
The growing size of CNNs may be incompatible with
their deployment on mobile or embedded devices, with limited computational resources. Even in the case of cloud
services, prediction latency and energy consumption are
important considerations. All of these use cases will bene-
Top-1 Error (%)
Parameters (1e7)
ResNet-101
No pruning
Taylor-FO-BN (Ours)
Li et al. 
ThiNet 
Ye et al. 
Figure 1: Pruning ResNets on the ImageNet dataset. The proposed
method is highlighted in gray. Bottom-left is better.
ﬁt greatly from the availability of more compact networks.
Pruning is a common method to derive a compact network
– after training, some structural portion of the parameters is
removed, along with its associated computations.
A variety of pruning methods have been proposed, based
on greedy algorithms , sparse regularization , and reinforcement learning . Many of them rely on
the belief that the magnitude of a weight and its importance
are strongly correlated. We question this belief and observe a
signiﬁcant gap in correlation between weight-based pruning
decisions and empirically optimal one-step decisions – a gap
which our greedy criterion aims to ﬁll.
We focus our attention on extending previously proposed
methods with a new pruning criterion and a
method that iteratively removes the least important set of
neurons (typically ﬁlters) from the trained model. We deﬁne
the importance as the squared change in loss induced by
removing a speciﬁc ﬁlter from the network. Since computing the exact importance is extremely expensive for large
networks, we approximate it with a Taylor expansion (akin
to ), resulting in a criterion computed from parameter
gradients readily available during standard training. Our
method is easy to implement in existing frameworks with
minimal overhead.
Additional beneﬁts of our novel criterion include: a) no
 
hyperparameters to set, other than providing the desired
number of neurons to prune; b) globally consistent scale
of our criterion across network layers without the need for
per-layer sensitivity analysis; c) a simple way of computing
the criterion in parallel for all neurons without greedy layerby-layer computation; and d) the ability to apply the method
to any layer in the network, including skip connections. We
highlight our main contributions below:
• We propose a new method for estimating, with a little
computational overhead over training, the contribution
of a neuron (ﬁlter) to the ﬁnal loss. To do so, we use
averaged gradients and weight values that are readily
available during training.
• We compare two variants of our method using the
ﬁrst and second-order Taylor expansions, respectively,
against a greedy search (“oracle”), and show that both
variants achieve state-of-the-art results, with our ﬁrstorder criteria being signiﬁcantly faster to compute with
slightly worse accuracy.
We also ﬁnd that using a squared loss as a measure
for contribution leads to better correlations with the
oracle and better accuracy when compared to signed
difference .
Estimated Spearman correlation with the oracle on
ResNets and DenseNets trained on ImageNet show
signiﬁcant agreement (>93%), a large improvement
over previous methods , leading to
improved pruning.
• Pruning results on a wide variety of networks trained
on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet, including those with skip
connections, show improvement over state-of-the-art.
2. Related work
One of the ways to reduce the computational complexity
of a neural network is to train a smaller model that can mimic
the output of the larger model. Such an approach, termed
network distillation, was proposed by Hinton et al. .
The biggest drawback of this approach is the need to
deﬁne the architecture of the smaller distilled model beforehand.
Pruning – which removes entire ﬁlters, or neurons, that
make little or no contribution to the output of a trained network – is another way to make a network smaller and faster.
There are two forms in which structural pruning is commonly applied: a) with a predeﬁned per-layer pruning ratio,
or b) simultaneously over all layers. The second form allows pruning to automatically ﬁnd a better architecture, as
demonstrated in . An exact solution for pruning will be
to minimize the ℓ0 norm of all neurons and remove those that
are zeroed-out. However, ℓ0 minimization is impractical as
it is non-convex, NP-hard, and requires combinatorial search.
Therefore, prior work has tried to relax the optimization
using Bayesian methods or regularization terms.
One of the ﬁrst works that used regularization, by Hanson
and Pratt , used weight decay along with other energy
minimization functions to reduce the complexity of the neural network. At the same time, Chauvin discovered that
augmenting the loss with a positive monotonic function of
the energy term can lead to learning a sparse solution.
Motivated by the success of sparse coding, several methods relax ℓ0 minimization with ℓ1 or ℓ2 regularization, followed by soft thresholding of parameters with a predeﬁned
threshold. These methods belong to the family of Iterative
Shrinkage and Thresholding Algorithms (ISTA) . Han et
al. applied a similar approach for removing individual
weights of a neural network to obtain sparse non-regular
convolutional kernels. Li et al. extended this approach
to remove ﬁlters with small ℓ1 norms.
Due to the popularity of batch-normalization layers
in recent networks , several approaches have been
proposed for ﬁlter pruning based on batch-norm parameters . These works regularize the scaling term (γ) of
batch-norm layers and apply soft thresholding when value
fell below a predeﬁned threshold. Further, FLOPS-based
penalties can also be included to directly reduce computational costs . A more general scheme that uses an ISTAlike method on scaling factors was proposed by and can
be applied to any layer.
All of the above methods explicitly rely on the belief
that the magnitude of the weight or neuron is strongly correlated with its importance. This belief was investigated as
early as 1988 by Mozer who proposed adding a gating
function after each layer to be pruned. With gate values
initialized to 1, the expectation of the negative gradient is
used as an approximation for importance. Mozer noted that
weights magnitude merely reﬂect the statistics of importance.
LeCun et al. also questioned whether magnitude is a
reasonable measure of neuron importance. The authors suggested using a product of the Hessian’s diagonal and the
squared weight as a measure of individual parameter importance, and demonstrated improvement over magnitude-only
This approach assumes that after convergence, the Hessian is a positive deﬁnite matrix, meaning that removing
any neuron will only increase the loss. However, due to
stochasticity in training with minibatches under a limited
observation set and in the presence of saddle points, there do
exist neurons whose removal will decrease the loss.
Our method does not assume that the contribution of all
neurons is strictly positive. Therefore, we approximate the
squared difference of the loss when a neuron is removed and
can do so with a ﬁrst-order or second-order approximation,
if the Hessian is available.
A few works have estimated neuron importance empirically. Luo et al. propose to use a greedy per-layer
procedure to ﬁnd the subset of neurons that minimize a reconstruction loss, at a signiﬁcant computational cost. Yu et
al. estimate the importance of input features to a linear
classiﬁer and propagate their importance assuming Lipschitz
continuity, requiring additional computational costs and nontrivial implementation of the feature score computation. Our
proposed method is able to outperform these methods while
requiring little additional computation and engineering.
Pruning methods such as require sensitivity analysis in order to estimate the pruning ratio that
should be applied to particular layers. Molchanov et al. 
assumed all layers have the same importance in feed-forward
networks and proposed a normalization heuristic for global
scaling. However, this method fails in networks with skip
connections. Further, it computes the criterion using network
activations, which increases memory requirements. Conversely, pruning methods operating on batch-normalization
 do not require sensitivity analysis and can be
applied globally. Our criterion has globally-comparable scaling by design and does not require sensitivity analysis. It can
be efﬁciently applied to any layer in the network, including
skip connections, and not only to batch-norm layers.
A few prior works have utilized pruning as a network
training regularizer. Han et al. re-initialize weights after
pruning and ﬁnetune them to achieve even better accuracy
than the initial model. He et al. extend this idea by
training ﬁlters even after they were zeroed-out. While our
work focuses only on removing ﬁlters from networks, it
might be possible to extend it as a regularizer.
Given neural network parameters W = {w0, w1, ..., wM}
and a dataset D = {(x0, y0), (x1, y1), ..., (xK, yK)} composed of input (xi) and output (yi) pairs, the task of training
is to minimize error E by solving:
W E(D, W) = min
W E(y|x, W).
In the case of pruning we can include a sparsiﬁcation
term in the cost function to minimize the size of the model:
W E(D, W) + λ||W||0,
where λ is a scaling coefﬁcient and ||·||0 is the ℓ0 norm which
represents the number of non-zero elements. Unfortunately
there is no efﬁcient way to minimize the ℓ0 norm as it is
non-convex, NP-hard, and requires combinatorial search.
An alternative approach starts with the full set of parameters W upon convergence of the original optimization (1)
and gradually reduces this set by a few parameters at a time.
In this incremental setting, the decision of which parameters to remove can be made by considering the importance
of each parameter individually, assuming independence of
parameters. We refer to this simpliﬁed approximation to full
combinatorial search as greedy ﬁrst-order search.
The importance of a parameter can be quantiﬁed by the
error induced by removing it. Under an i.i.d. assumption,
this induced error can be measured as a squared difference
of prediction errors with and without the parameter (wm):
E(D, W) −E(D, W|wm = 0)
Computing Im for each parameter, as in (3), is computationally expensive since it requires evaluating M versions of the
network, one for each removed parameter.
We can avoid evaluating M different networks by approximating Im in the vicinity of W by its second-order Taylor
expansion:
where gm =
∂wm are elements of the gradient g, Hi,j =
∂wi∂wj are elements of the Hessian H, and Hm is its m-th
row. An even more compact approximation is computed
using the ﬁrst-order expansion, which simpliﬁes to:
The importance in Eq. (5) is easily computed since the
gradient g is already available from backpropagation. For
the rest of this section we will primarily use the ﬁrst-order
approximation, however most statements also hold for the
second-order approximation. Future reference we denote the
set of ﬁrst-order importance approximations:
I(1)(W) = {I(1)
1 (W), I(1)
2 (W), ..., I(1)
To approximate the joint importance of a structural set
of parameters WS, e.g. a convolutional ﬁlter, we have two
alternatives. We can deﬁne it as a group contribution:
or, alternatively, sum the importance of the individual parameters in the set,
For insight into these two options, and to simplify calculations, we add “gates” to the network, z = 1M, with
weights equal to 1 and dimensionality equal to the number
of neurons (feature maps) M. Gating layers make importance score computation easier, as they: a) are not involved
in optimization; b) have a constant value, therefore allowing
W to be omitted from Eq. (4-8); and c) implicitly combine
the contributions of ﬁlter weights and bias.
If a gate zm follows a neuron parameterized by weights
Ws∈Sm, then the importance approximation I(1)
Sm(W), (9)
where S represents the inner dimensions needed to compute
the output of the previous layer, e.g. input dimension for a
linear layer, or spatial and input dimensions for a convolutional layer. We see that gate importance is equivalent to
group contribution on the parameters of the preceding layer.
Through some manipulation, we can make a connection
to information theory from our proposed method. Let’s
denote hm =
s∈SmWs∈Sm and observe (under the
assumption that, at convergence, E(hm)2 = 0):
Var(hm) = E(h2
m) −E(hm)2 = I(1)(z),
where the variance is computed across observations.
If the error function E(·) is chosen to be the loglikelihood function, then assuming the gradient is estimated
as hx = ∂ln p(x;z)
, borrowing from concepts in information
theory , we obtain
Varx(h) = E
where J is the expected Fisher information matrix. We conclude that the variance of the gradient is the expectation of
the outer product of gradients and is equal to the expected
Fisher information matrix. Therefore, the proposed metric,
I(1), can be interpreted as the variance estimate and as the diagonal of the Fisher information matrix. Similar conclusion
was drawn in .
3.1. Pruning algorithm
Our pruning method takes a trained network as input and
prunes it during an iterative ﬁne-tuning process with a small
learning rate. During each epoch, the following steps are
1. For each minibatch, we compute parameter gradients
and update network weights by gradient descent. We
also compute the importance of each neuron (or ﬁlter)
using the gradient averaged over the minibatch, as described in (7) or (8). (Or, the second-order importance
estimate may be computed if the Hessian is available.)
2. After a predeﬁned number of minibatches, we average
the importance score of each neuron (or ﬁlter) over the
of minibatches, and remove the N neurons with the
smallest importance scores.
Fine-tuning and pruning continue until the target number of
neurons is pruned, or the maximum tolerable loss can no
longer be achieved.
3.2. Implementation details
Hessian computation.
Computing the full Hessian in
Eq. (4) is computationally demanding, thus we use a diagonal approximation. During experiments with ImageNet we
cannot compute the Hessian because of memory constraints.
Importance score accumulation. During training or ﬁnetuning with minibatches, observed gradients are combined
to compute a single importance score ˆI = E
Importance score aggregation. In this work, we compute
the importance of structured parameters as a sum of individual contributions deﬁned in Eq. (8), unless gates are used
automatically compute the group contribution on the parameters from the preceding layer. Second-order methods are
always computed on gates. We observed that the “group
contribution” criterion in Eq. (7) exhibits very low correlation with the “true” importance (3) if the parameter set S is
too large, due to expectation of gradients tending to zero at
convergence.
Gate placement. Unless otherwise stated, gates are placed
immediately after a batch normalization layer to capture
contributions from scaling and shifting parameters simultaneously. The ﬁrst-order criterion computed for a feature
map m at the gate can be shown to be I(1)
m (γm, βm) =
∂γm + βm ∂E
∂βm )2 with γ and β being the scale and shift
parameters of the batch normalization.
Averaging importance scores over pruning iterations.
We average importance scores between pruning iterations using an exponential moving average ﬁlter (momentum) with
coefﬁcient 0.9.
Pruning strategy. We found that the method performs better
when we deﬁne the number of neurons to be removed, prune
them in batches and ﬁne-tune the network after that. An
alternative approach is to continuously prune as long as the
training or validation loss is below the threshold. The latter
approach leads the optimization into local minima and ﬁnal
results are slightly worse.
Number of minibatches between pruning iterations needs
be sufﬁcient to capture statistics of the overall data. We use
10 minibatches and a small batch size for CIFAR datasets,
but a larger (256) batch size and 30 minibatches for ImageNet pruning, as noted with each experiment.
Number of neurons pruned per iteration needs to be chosen
based on how correlated the neurons are to each other. We
observed that a ﬁlter’s contribution changes during pruning and we usually prune around 2% of initial ﬁlters per
iteration.
4. Experiments
We evaluate our method on a variety of neural network
architectures on the CIFAR-10 and ImageNet 
datasets. We also experiment with variations of our method
to understand the best variant. Whenever we refer to Weight,
Weight magnitude or BN scale, we use ℓ2 norm.
4.1. Results on CIFAR-10
With the CIFAR-10 dataset, we evaluate “oracle” methods and second-order methods by pruning smaller networks,
including LeNet3 and variants of ResNets and preactivation ResNets .
We start with a simple network, LeNet3, trained on the
CIFAR-10 dataset to achieve 73% test accuracy. The architecture of LeNet consists of 2 convolutional and 3 linear layers arranged in a C-R-P-C-R-P-L-R-L-R-L (C:
Conv, R: ReLU, P: Pooling, L: Linear) order with 16, 32,
120, 84, and 10 neurons respectively. We prune the ﬁrst 2
convolutional and ﬁrst 2 linear layers without changing the
output linear layer or ﬁnetuning after pruning.
Single layer pruning. In this setup, we only prune the ﬁrst
convolutional layer. This setting allows us to use the Combinatorial oracle, the true ℓ0 minimizer: we compute the
loss for all possible combinations of k neurons that can be
pruned and pick the best one. Note that this requires an exponential number of feedforward passes to evaluate –
k, where n is the number of ﬁlters and k is number of ﬁlters
to prune, and so is not practical for multiple layers or larger
networks. We compare against a greedy search approximation, the Greedy oracle, that exhaustively ﬁnds the single
best neuron to remove at each pruning step, repeated k times.
Results shown in Fig. 2 show the loss vs. the number of
neurons pruned. We observe that the Combinatorial oracle
is not signiﬁcantly better than the Greedy oracle when pruning a small number of neurons. Considering that the former
has exponential computational complexity, in subsequent
experiments we use the Greedy oracle (referred to simply as
Oracle) as a representation of the best possible outcome.
Figure 2: Pruning the ﬁrst layer of LeNet3 on CIFAR-10 with
Combinatorial oracle and Greedy oracle. Networks remain ﬁxed
and are not ﬁne-tuned. Results for Greedy oracle are averaged over
30 seeds with mean and standard deviation shown. Best observed
results for Combinatorial oracle for every seed are averaged.
All layers pruning. Fig. 3 shows pruning results when all
layers are pruned using various criteria. We refer to our
methods based on the Taylor expansion as Taylor FO/Taylor
SO, indicating the order of the approximation used, ﬁrstand second-order, respectively. We consider both a direct
application to convolutional ﬁlter weights (“on weight”) and
the use of gates following each convolutional layer (“on
gate”).] We treat linear layers as 1 × 1 convolutions. In all
cases, pruning removes the entire ﬁlter and its corresponding
bias. At each pruning iteration, we remove the neuron with
the least importance as measured by the criterion used, and
measure the loss on the training set.
Results in Fig. 3 show that Oracle pruning performs best,
followed closely by the second- and ﬁrst-order Taylor expansion criteria, respectively. Both ﬁrst and second-order Taylor
methods prune nearly the same number of neurons as the
Oracle before exceeding the loss threshold. Weight-based
pruning, which removes neurons with the least ℓ2 norm, performs as poorly as randomly removing neurons. OBD 
performs similarly to the Oracle and Taylor methods.
The experiments on LeNet conﬁrm the following: (1) The
greedy oracle closely follows the pruning performance of
the Combinatorial oracle for small changes to the network,
while being exponentially faster to compute. (2) Our ﬁrstorder method (Taylor FO) is comparable to the second-order
method (Taylor SO) in this setting.
Now we compare pruning criteria on the more complex architecture ResNet-18, from the pre-activation family .
Each residual block has an architecture of
BN1-ReLU-conv1-BN2-ReLU-conv2, together with a
skip connection from the input to the output, repeated for a
total of 8 blocks. Trained on CIFAR-10, ResNet-18 achieves
a test accuracy of 94.79%. For pruning, we consider entire
Figure 3: Pruning LeNet3 on CIFAR-10 with various criteria. Network remains ﬁxed and is not ﬁne-tuned. Results are averaged over
50 seeds with mean and standard deviation. The number of pruned
neurons when the loss reaches 1.0 is shown in parentheses.
Residual block
All layers
Taylor FO on conv weight
Weight magnitude
Gate after BN2
Taylor FO - FG
Gate before BN2
Taylor FO - FG
Table 1: Spearman correlation of different criteria with the Oracle on CIFAR-10 with ResNet-18. (FG denotes full gradient, as
described in the text).
feature maps in the conv layers as they command the largest
share of computational resources.
In these experiments, we examine the following ways of
estimating our criterion: (1) Applying it directly on convolutional ﬁlter weights, (2) Using gates placed before BN2 and
after conv2, and (3) Using gates placed after BN2 and after
conv2. We remove 100 neurons every 20 minibatches, and
report ﬁnal results averaged over 10 seeds. We also compare
using gradients averaged over a mini-batch and gradients
obtained per data sample, the latter denoted by “full grad”,
or “FG”. We should note that using the full gradient changes
the gate formulation from computing the group contribution
(Eq. 7) to the sum of individual contributions (Eq. 8).
Table 1 presents the Spearman correlation between various pruning criteria and the greedy oracle. Results in the
Residual block column are averaged over all 8 blocks. The
All layers column includes additional layers: the ﬁrst convolutional layer (not part of residual blocks), all convolutions in
residual blocks, and all strided convolutions. We observe that
placing the gate before BN2 signiﬁcantly reduces correlation
– correlation for conv1 drops from 0.95 to 0.28 for Taylor FO, suggesting that the subsequent batch-normalization
layer signiﬁcantly affects criteria computed from the gate.
We observe that the effect is less signiﬁcant when the full
gradient is used, however it shows smaller correlation overall
with the oracle. OBD has lower correlation than our Taylor based methods. The highest correlation is observed for
Taylor SO, with Taylor FO following right after. As placing
gates after BN2 dramatically improves the results, this indicates that the batch-normalization layers play a key role in
determining the contribution of the corresponding ﬁlter.
Results of pruning ResNet-18 without ﬁne-tuning are
shown in Fig. 4. We observe that the oracle achieves the
best accuracy for a given number of pruned neurons. All
methods, except “-ﬁxed” and Random, recompute the criteria
Figure 4: Pruning ResNet-18 trained on CIFAR-10 without ﬁnetuning. The number of neurons pruned when the loss reaches 0.5
is shown in parentheses.
after each iterative step and can adjust to the pruned network.
Oracle-ﬁxed and Taylor FO-ﬁxed are computed across the
same number of batches as non-ﬁxed criteria. We notice
that ﬁxed criteria clearly perform signiﬁcantly worse than
oracle, emphasizing importance of reestimating the criteria
after each pruning iteration, allowing the values to adjust to
changes in the network architecture.
An interesting observation is that the OBD method performs poorly in spite of having a good correlation with the
oracle in Table 1. The reason for this discrepancy is that
when we evaluate correlation with the oracle, we square
estimates of OBD to make them comparable to the way
the oracle was estimated. However, during pruning, we
use signed values of OBD, as was prescribed in . As
mentioned earlier, for deep networks, the diagonal of the
Hessian is not positive for all elements and removing those
with negative impact results in increased network instability.
Therefore, without ﬁne-tuning, OBD is not well suited for
pruning. Another important observation is that if the Hessian is available, using the Taylor SO expansion can get both
better pruning and correlation. Surprisingly, we observe no
improvement in using the full gradient, probably because of
the switch in contributions from group to individual.
At this stage, after experiments with the small LeNet3
network the larger ResNet-18 on the CIFAR-10 dataset, we
make the following observations: (1) Our proposed criteria
based on the Taylor expansion of the pruning loss have a
very high correlation with the neuron ranking produced by
the oracle. (2) The ﬁrst- and second-order Taylor criteria
are comparable. As the Taylor FO can be computed much
faster with a lower memory footprint, further experiments
with larger networks on ImageNet are performed using this
criterion only.
4.2. Results on ImageNet
Here, we apply our method on the challenging task of
pruning networks trained on ImageNet , speciﬁcally the
ILSVRC2012 version. For all experiments in this section,
we use PyTorch and default pretrained models as a
starting point for network pruning. We use standard preprocessing and augmentation: re-sizing images to have a
smallest dimension of 256, randomly cropping a 224 × 224
patch, randomly applying horizontal ﬂips, and normalizing
images by subtracting a per-dataset mean and dividing by a
per-dataset standard deviation. During testing, we use the
central crop of size 224 × 224.
Neuron importance correlation study
We compare against pruning methods that use various heuristics, such as weight magnitude , magnitude of the
batch-norm scale, BN scale , and output-based
heuristics (Taylor expansion applied to layer outputs) .
We estimate the correlation between the “real importance”
of a ﬁlter and these criteria. Estimating real importance, or
the change in loss value upon removing a neuron, requires
running inference multiple times while setting each individual ﬁlter to 0 in turn. (Note that the oracle ranks neurons
based on this value). For ResNet-101, we pruned ﬁlters in
the ﬁrst 2 convolutional layers of every residual block. Separately, we add gates to skip connections at the input and
output of each block. For the VGG11-BN architecture, we
replace drop-out layers with batch-norms (0.5 scale and 0
shift) and ﬁne-tune for 12 epochs until test accuracy reaches
70.8% to be comparable with . For DenseNet201, we
considered features after the batch-norm layer that follows
the ﬁrst 1 × 1 convolution in every dense layer.
The statistical correlation between heuristics and measured importance are summarized in Table 2. Correlations
were measured on a subset of ImageNet consisting of a
few thousand images. We evaluated various implementations of our method, but always use the ﬁrst-order Taylor
expansion, denoted Taylor FO. As previously discussed, the
most promising variation uses a gate after each batch-norm
layer. The All layers correlation columns show how well
the criteria scale across layers. Our method exhibits >93%
Spearman correlation for all three networks. Weight magnitude and BN scale have quite low correlation, suggesting that
magnitude is not a good representation of importance. Output-based expansion proposed in has high correlation on
the VGG11-BN network but fails on ResNet and DenseNet
architectures. Surprisingly, we observe >92% Pearson correlation for ResNet and DenseNet, showing we can almost
exactly predict the change in loss for every neuron.
We are also able to study the effect of skip connections
by adding a gate after the output of each residual block. We
add skip connections to the full set of ﬁlters and evaluate
Averaged per layer
All layers
ResNet-101
Gate after BN
Gate after BN - FG
Conv weight
Weight magnitude
Taylor-output 
Including skip connections
Gate after BN
Gate after BN - FG
Gate after BN
Conv/Linear weight
Gate after BN - FG
Weight magnitude
Taylor-output 
DenseNet-201
Gate after BN
Gate after BN - FG
Conv weight
Weight magnitude
Taylor-output 
Table 2: Correlation study of different criteria and oracle on the ImageNet dataset. Spearman and Kendall measure rank correlations.
BN stands for batch-normalization, FG for full gradient.
their correlation, denoted “Including skip connections” in
Table 2. We observe high correlation of the criterion with
skip connections as well. Given this result, we adopt this
methodology for pruning ResNets and remove channels from
skip connections and bottleneck layers simultaneously. We
refer to this variant of our method as Taylor-FO-BN.
Pruning and ﬁne-tuning
We use the following settings: 4 GPUs and a batch size of
256 examples; we optimized using SGD with initial learning
rate 0.01 (or 0.001, see Sec. 6.2) decayed a factor 10 every
10 epochs, momentum set to 0.9; pruning and ﬁne-tuning
run for 25 epochs total; we report the best validation accuracy observed. Every 30 mini-batches we remove 100
neurons until we reach the predeﬁned number of neurons to
be pruned, after which we reset the momentum buffer and
continue ﬁne-tuning. By setting the percentage of neurons
to remain after pruning to be X, we get different versions of
the ﬁnal model and refer to them as Taylor-FO-BN-X%.
Comparison of pruning networks on ImageNet by the
proposed method and other methods is presented in the Table 3, where we report total number of FLOPs, number of
parameters, and the top-1 error rate. Comparison is grouped
by network architecture type and the number of parameters.
For ResNet-101 we observe smaller error rates and fewer
GFLOPs (by at least 1.22 GFLOPs) when compare to BN-
ISTA method . Pruning only skip connections shows
larger errors however makes the ﬁnal network faster (see
Sec 6.2). By pruning 40% of FLOPs and 30% of parameters
from original ResNet-101 we only lose 0.02% in accuracy.
Normalized rank, smaller better
skip connections
Normalized rank, smaller better
skip connections
Figure 5: Statistics in boxplot form of per-layer ranks before (top) and after (bottom) pruning ResNet-101 with Taylor-FO-BN-50%. First 4
layers correspond to skip connections, the rest are residual blocks represented by the ﬁrst 2 convolutional layers per block. We can notice
that after pruning most of neurons become more equal than before pruning.
Pruning Method
Params(107)
ResNet-101
Taylor-FO-BN-40% (Ours)
Taylor-FO-BN-50% (Ours)
BN-ISTA v2 
Taylor-FO-BN-55% (Ours)
BN-ISTA v1 
No pruning
Taylor-FO-BN-75% (Ours)
pruning only skip connections
Taylor-FO-BN-52% (Ours)
Taylor-FO-BN-22% (Ours)
Taylor-FO-BN-56% (Ours)
Taylor-FO-BN-56% (No skip)
ThiNet-30 
Taylor-FO-BN-72% (Ours)
NISP-50-B 
ThiNet-70 
Taylor-FO-BN-81% (Ours)
SSS , ResNet-32
NISP-50-A 
Taylor-FO-BN-91% (Ours)
No pruning
SSS , ResNet-41
No pruning
Taylor-FO-BN-82% (Ours)
Li et al. 
No pruning
Taylor-FO-BN-50% (Ours)
From scratch 
Slimming , from 
DenseNet-201
No pruning
Taylor-FO-BN-60% (Ours)
Taylor-FO-BN-36% (Ours)
No pruning
Table 3: Pruning results on ImageNet (1-crop validation errors).
Pruning results on ResNet-50 and ResNet-34 demonstrate
signiﬁcant improvements over other methods. Additionally we study our method without pruning skip connections,
marked as “No skip” and observe accuracy loss. Comparison
per layer ranking of different layers in ResNet-101 before
and after pruning is shown in Fig. 5.
Pruning neurons with a single step. As an alternative to
iterative pruning, we performed pruning of 10000 neurons
with a single step after 3000 mini-batches, followed by ﬁnetuning. This gave a top-1 error of 25.3% , which is 0.68%
higher than Taylor-FO-BN-50%, again emphasizing the beneﬁt of re-evaluating the criterion between pruning iterations.
Pruning other networks. We also prune the VGG11-BN
and DenseNet networks.
The former is a simple feedforward architecture, without skip connections. We prune
50% of neurons across all layers, as per prior work .
Our approach shows only 0.19% loss in accuracy after removing 76% of parameters and improves on the previously
reported results by 0.65% and more than 2% . DeseNets reuse feature maps multiple times, potentially making
them less amenable to pruning. We prune DenseNet-201 and
observe that with the same number of FLOPs (Taylor-FO-
BN-52%) as DenseNet-121, we have 1.79% lower error.
5. Conclusions
In this work, we have proposed a new method for estimating the contribution of a neuron using the Taylor expansion
applied on a squared change in loss induced by removing a
chosen neuron. We demonstrated that even the ﬁrst-order
approximation shows signiﬁcant agreement with true importance, and outperforms prior work on a range of deep networks. After extensive analysis, we showed that applying the
ﬁrst-order criterion after batch-norms yields the best results,
under practical computational and memory constraints.