Document downloaded from:
This paper must be cited as:
The final publication is available at
Additional Information
 
 
Álvarez, C.; Alcázar-Ortega, M.; Escrivá-Escrivá, G.; ANTONIO GABALDON MARIN
 . Technical and economical tools to assess customer demand response in the
commercial sector. Energy Conversion and Management. 50(10):2605-2612.
doi:10.1016/j.enconman.2009.06.002
TECHNICAL AND ECONOMICAL TOOLS TO ASSESS CUSTOMER
DEMAND RESPONSE IN THE COMMERCIAL SECTOR
Carlos Álvarez Bel(*) (a), Manuel Alcázar Ortega (a), Guillermo Escrivá Escrivá(a), Antonio
Gabaldón Marín(b)
(a) Institute for Energy Engineering, Universidad Politécnica de Valencia,
Camino de Vera, s/n, edificio 8E, escalera F, 5ª planta. 46022 Valencia (SPAIN)
(e-mail: )
(b) Department of Electrical Engineering, Universidad Politécnica de Cartagena,
Campus de la Muralla al Mar. 30202 Cartagena (SPAIN)
(e-mail: )
The authors present a methodology to evaluate and quantify the economic parameters (costs
and benefits) attached to customer electricity consumption by analyzing the service provided by
the different “pieces” of absorbed electricity. The first step of this methodology is to perform a
process oriented market segmentation to identify segments according to their flexibility
potential. After that, a procedure based on comprehensive simulations to identify and quantify
the actual demand that can be managed in the short term is presented and, finally, the required
economic analysis is performed. The methodology, which is demonstrated with some
applications to the commercial sector, not only helps the customers to integrate in flexible
distribution systems but also offers the necessary economical parameters for them to integrate
in electricity markets.
* Corresponding Author: Carlos Álvarez Bel. Institute for Energy Engineering. Universidad
Politécnica de Valencia. Camino de Vera, s/n, edificio 8E, escalera F, 5ª planta. 46022
Valencia (SPAIN). Telf. +34 963 879 240 Fax: +34 963 877 272 email: 
Keywords: Deregulated power markets; Distributed energy resources; Demand response
resources; Demand modelling; Responsive demand participation
Introduction
The use of the flexibility in energy consumption by the customers is basic for the effective
integration of other Distributed Energy Resources. To achieve this Demand Response
capability, the customers must identify what they are using the energy for and assign prices to
both the benefits they obtain by consuming electricity and the costs they may incur by giving up
some of the electricity consumption in the short term. Significant research has been recently
implemented worldwide to identify the Demand Response Resources in the electricity market.
Competition has acquired a major role in electricity industry due to power markets
restructuring. A desired market performance requires the demand to be flexible in the sense
that the electricity consumption changes according to electricity prices. Active Demand-Side
participation can decrease supply side agents’ market power and help these markets to achieve
a better operation . In order to maintain market efficiency, demand response should be
considered as a service that consumers give to the grid, and consequently, it should be
financed through market mechanisms and not through subsides. In this sense, electricity
customers should be prepared to take advantage of its flexibility for the energy and power
trading either in open markets (wholesale, retail, balancing, etc.) or by forcing the energy
supplier to trade tailored bilateral contracts that account for this flexibility. They may also use
their flexibility to participate in either regulated or deregulated demand response programs as
those being developed around the world and where the consumers do not participate
directly in the market but interact with an aggregator or other agents.
Up to now, demand participation in electricity markets has not occurred spontaneously and
new tools are required for encourage it. This paper proposes a methodology to ease the
identification and assessment of demand response resources with market participation
Large electricity customers and energy traders may participate by buying energy through
demand bids in forward markets (Day Ahead and/or Intra-Day). After this energy transaction is
somehow firm, they may participate in shorter term markets just as generators do, selling some
of the energy previously bought by offering reductions in Balancing or other Ancillary Services
markets. It is important to reinforce that, for selling energy reductions it is required that the
energy has been previously bought in other markets. If not, the customers would be selling
energy that they do not own . For practical reasons small and residential consumers are
usually not allowed to participate directly in markets, but could participate by managed
aggregators in a similar way.
It is necessary that customers willing to exploit their flexibility in the energy consumption
have to identify their Demand Response potential by organizing their demand according to the
flexibility of their loads and identify the prices they are willing to pay for consuming electricity or
to be paid for reducing those loads. Therefore, the evaluation of the customer Demand
Response potential requires the evaluation of two components: technical and economical
potential.
In order to evaluate these potentials, new tools are required and, due to the different energy
consuming processes existent in different types of customers, they would depend on the
specific type of customer the tools are dedicated to. Commercial customers are intense
electricity consumers worldwide, and the processes where the energy is used in this sector are
quite reduced in comparison to the industrial customers, where almost every industrial process
requires a singular analysis. The main processes in this sector are Heat, Ventilation and Air
Conditioning (HVAC), illumination and electronic equipment.
Evaluation tools for these two purposes are presented and discussed in this paper. These
tools have been partially developed in the framework of a 6FP of the European Commission,
EU-DEEP (research project funded by the European Commission with the objective identify and
overcome barriers that prevent the utilization of Distributed Energy and Demand Response
Resources) and developed for customer segments that have been previously identified as
highly potential in Demand Response, both in the commercial and industrial sectors 
This paper is organized as follows: the first section is devoted to analyze the commercial
sector in order to identify where the potential for DR is. The organization of the demand of the
commercial customers in order to evaluate the amount of available flexibility (technical flexibility)
is dealt with in section 3, based on an improvement of a methodology previously proposed by
the authors.
The economical issues associated to the DR are discussed in section 4. One detailed
application example is described and analyzed in section 5 and, finally, some conclusions are
drawn in section 6.
Technical Demand Response Potential in the Commercial Sector
The commercial sector has been analyzed in detail in the work performed in the above
mentioned EU-DEEP project, where utilities covering more than 80 million customers all over
Europe have been involved. The first step in this project was to perform a segmentation of the
commercial sector based on the way in which the energy was used in the different segments
These segments where afterwards ranked according to the potential to implement different
Distributed Energy Resources implementations, such as distributed generation (DG), distributed
storage (DS) or Demand Response (DR). The commercial segments in the top of the DR
ranking top segments where: Universities and schools, hospitals, malls, hotels and offices.
After the most promising segments were identified, a detailed modelling of the main energy
consuming processes was performed based on the physical description of the typical customer
for the segment, and also accounting for the expected dispersion in the parameters and
equipment describing this facility.
Most of the customers in the same segment have similar final uses of energy in the same
processes, what allows considering similar reaction to energy prices. The share of the more
relevant energy consuming processes for the most DR potential segments is shown in table 1.
Process energy contribution to the consumed energy by the customers (source EU-DEEP)
description
Ventilation Lighting Electronics Others
Universities
with sport
facilities
Restaurants Northern
Demand Response requires the customer demand to be organized according to the specific
uses or processes where the electricity is consumed. Therefore, the identification of the
flexibility in the energy consumption has necessarily associated to a detailed analysis, based on
physical and economical concepts, of the processes in each customer facility.
The potentials of these top DR customers have been estimated by using tools developed in
the project of the International Energy Agency IEA task XIII, Demand Response Resources ,
of the Implementing Agreement on Demand Side Management. These tools estimate the
available market potential for demand response in electricity markets. For the calculation,
benchmark information gathered from experiences with consumers in Europe and America is
used. Flexibility strategies for residential and small commercial customers are associated to
direct load control programs for air conditioners, water heaters and space heating systems by
using the North American long-term program participation rates. Table 2 shows the inputs
considered in order to estimate the potential of demand response in hotels (EU25), which has
been evaluated in 3180 MW.
Inputs for the IEA Task XIII tool
Number of hotels in Europe
Source: The European Hotel Industry
Peak power in EU25, MW
Source: REE, NG, RTE, Eurostat
Peak power for a typical hotel, MW
Source: UPV Models
Avg reducible power for a typical hotel, MW
Source: UPV Models
Estimated potential in hotels (EU25), MW
Task XIII tool
According to these results, it is possible to conclude that commercial sector has a high
potential to provide demand response resources being several the barriers that prevent its
realisation, as the lack of enabling technologies to perform DS response, legislative market
barriers or the need of evaluation tools. The lack of knowledge the customer has about the
impact (cost plus drawbacks) that he has from implementing DR actions and, consequently, the
impossibility he has to value it with the incentives he may receive after the DR action is settled.
The evaluation of the impact the customer has from using DR resources is directly related
to the “piece” of energy use that is going to be modified (usually partially or totally interrupted):
air conditioning, space heating lighting, etc. Therefore, in order to assess about this impact, it is
required to analyze, for each end use, the relation between the service provided (heat, cold,
illumination, etc.) and the electricity that is being absorbed by the process so that the cost
associated to the implementation of the DR and the degradation of the process can be
evaluated. The models that have to be used for that purpose are “physical” where all the
variables related have to be included and related with the physical laws driving the process. The
use of this modelling methodology to customer demand organization was presented in ,
where the suitability of the methodology was demonstrated by the application to one customer.
This methodology stated in has been extensively used in EU-DEEP project to evaluate
both the technical and economical potential of the customer flexibility to assess the flexibility
capability of customers in the commercial, industrial and residential sectors. The aggregated
flexibility potential of selected customers is going to be validated through three real life market
experiments, being the first one going to be implemented in the UK, where the use of DR to
balance renewable wind electricity production and other balancing services is to be
investigated.
This first experiment has been encouraged by the possibilities that BETTA market structure
offers to the utilization of Demand Response Resources. The potential has been estimated in
previous studies and results, as the one shown in Figure 1, have been produced for any specific
commercial customer in the studied portfolio.
Figure 1. Expected savings, based on the DRR technical potential, of a “large offices” customer
The demand for this customer for a typical summer day is shown in Figure 1 a), as well as
its associated cost is shown in Figure 1 b), without implementing DRR (continuous line) and with
the implementation of Demand Response (discontinuous line). The flexibility in this case
corresponds to direct air conditioning cycling and ventilation reduction. The benefit evaluation of
the DR comes from two components: the reduction of the energy cost according to the actual
supply contract (hourly prices have been considered in this example) and the ones resulting
from the participation in the balancing mechanisms. In the example shown in Figure 1,
reductions of 3% are obtained in the total electricity bill if only saves due to consuming
electricity when prices are cheaper are considered. When it is considered the participation in
other markets (i.e. balancing markets), additional profits are obtained (as shown in the figure),
and saves may increase up to 7% .
Technical Evaluation of the Flexibility
The technical potential of this customer is evaluated by splitting the demand according to
the final use: Air Conditioning, ventilation, electronic equipment, water heating, lighting (indoor
and outdoor) and other. The idea behind the proposed methodology is to identify energy pieces
or packages (EP) associated to some consumption where the flexibility is suspected. It means
that these EPs can be interrupted if economically profitable.
The procedure to specify the different energy packages was already proposed by the
authors , and it can be summarized according to the following steps:
1. According to the predicted activity for the customer in the short term (from one day
to one week typically) determine the amount of flexible loads for each hour of the
next day. A typical result for this step can be found in Figure 2 where by performing
the required simulations, the amount of flexible power for each end use is
determined for a large office customer. This curve is built by carrying out
simulations for the different hours during a typical day, which allows investigating
the amount of power to be reduced according to the selected scenario premises.
Most of the premises include different flexibility options that have been identified by
the consumers in surveys, so deviations beyond acceptable levels (for temperature,
illumination level or humidity, etc) are not allowed. It is easy to generate, from this
curve, short term offers (hourly or 15 minutes) for demand reduction.
Figure 2. Flexibility curve divided into processes, of a “large offices” customer segment.
2. Determine, using suitable demand models and simulations for every hour, the
number of EPs that can be offered in every hour of the next day for any end use in
the customer facility. It is necessary in order to evaluate this, to have accurate
models to evaluate the impact in the customer of any possible flexibility action such
as interruption, load cycling or any other control. As an example of the
implementation of this step, it was identified for a Hotel customer that 125 kW are
used for air conditioning a summer day from 14 to 16 hours. After performing
simulations that account for the customer characteristics, it is obtained that an
average of 85 kW can be reduced, for two hours, from this process just by
controlling (cycling) the AC units, not having a degradation of the internal
temperature higher than 2 ˚C (above the thermostat set point). Different amount of
power could be released at this hour if more temperature degradation is allowed or
if shorter time for the implementation of the flexibility action is considered.
Consequently, these packages would have different sizes depending on the
harshness of the control option: the higher is the reduction in temperature and the
shorter the control is, the more power may be offered.
3. Each piece of flexible energy has an associated cost when implemented, that is
when the flexibility is used, and therefore, the next step is to put a price to any EP.
The methodology to perform this step is detailed in the next section. The price for
each EP is based on the extra cost derived both in the short-term impact of the
expected loss of service (comfort) and the cost of the equipment to implement the
required control, as it is explained later. Several packages for each end use could
be found, with different prices according to the severity of the control: the more
power is offered, the highest the impact of the loss of control and, then, the
associated price are.
Summarizing, the objective of the proposed methodology is to obtain, for every end use in the
customer, tall possible flexible energy packages and their price. Once these components, size
and prize, are identified for each EP, the flexibility is completely described and can be used for
trading. The flexibility results discussed have to be completed with an economic analysis in
order to account for the costs motivated by the use of the customer flexibility. These costs and
the way to organize the whole process are discussed in the next section.
Economical Evaluation
The use of the customer flexibility has two cost components: Direct and Indirect costs.
The direct costs are related to the costs that have to be incurred in order to have the
technical possibility to perform the flexibility action. This cost is specific for every flexibility action
and the typical costs that have to be considered here are:
Equipment for monitoring and control the flexible processes. This equipment is
probably used for other applications apart to implement flexibility options and
therefore, the cost has to be shared among the involved applications.
Energy Storage, cost that will depend very much of the form in which the energy is
stored (electricity, heat or cold).The use of the energy storage has to be
discriminated, in order to assign the proper cost, into previously programmed
(regular) use and use for Price Response.
Stand-by generation, in case the flexibility action involves alternative supply
The indirect costs refer to the costs associated to the reduction in the quality of the service
because of the implementation of a flexibility action: costs associated to the loss of comfort
(temperature degradation), loss of productivity, etc. These indirect costs are usually difficult to
identify and, because of that, no service degradation has been traditionally allowed in
customers of the commercial sector. Nevertheless, as the price of the energy, and particularly
the electricity, is increasing in continuously basis worldwide, the evaluation of these indirect
costs will be performed by most customers in the commercial sector. These indirect costs are
basically associated to extra labour costs and loss of revenues.
For example, the cost associated to a flexibility action consisting in switching some loads to
the stand by generation will have to consider only direct costs, as the load is not going to be
reduced, related to stand by generation, such as primary energy, maintenance and operation
costs. A flexibility action consisting in reducing Air Conditioning load in a supermarket will have
to consider as direct costs the control and monitoring equipment costs, and as indirect, the
possible loss of revenues derived from the loss of customer comfort.
The direct costs are motivated by the need to implement new technology and systems to
put into service the customer flexibility. These systems can be associated to a single or to
several flexibility actions. For example, the cost of a thermal storage system has to be
associated to flexibility actions that translate part of the load from “expensive” energy periods to
“cheap” periods, and the cost will be reflected only in the corresponding price. On the other
side, there are systems, such as control and monitoring, that will be used to implement almost
any flexibility action and, therefore, the cost has to be shared by all of them. An example of
these systems for Demand Response infrastructure is the internet-based PG&E InterActII
system used in Automated Critical Peak Pricing in California during 2006/07 experiences .
The methodology proposed in this paper to price the flexibility is based on identifying the
direct and indirect costs associated to each flexible kWh. First, the direct cost is computed by
identifying the systems needed to implement the specific type of flexibility, the amount of this
cost that has to be recovered by the payment of the flexibility. This last parameter is determined
by an estimation of the time this system is to be used by the different applications. The number
of hours that any piece of flexibility is to be used along the year has to be estimated previously
and that depends very much on the mechanisms (market, bilateral, tariff, etc.) to trade this
flexibility.
After this time of use for every flexibility package is determined, the cost share of the
involved systems can be determined and so the total direct cost imputable to a flexibility
package. A typical result of this estimation is shown in tables 3 and 4, where the use of the
utilization of any system is assigned to the different flexible processes.
Extra direct costs resulting from the flexibility
Code Concept
Primary Energy Generation Cost
Electricity Storage Cost
Thermal Storage Cost
Control Equipment Cost
Monitoring and Measurement Equipment Cost
Communication Equipment Cost
Process cost matrix. Each column of this table represents the percentage of use of each direct
cost concept by the different end uses according to the utilization due to their flexibility.
Ventilation
Electronic
The impact of the flexibility in the service provided by the corresponding piece of electric
energy has to be evaluated in order to asses on the indirect costs of the flexibility. An important
part of this cost is motivated by higher personnel costs resulting from electricity consuming
processes rescheduling although some other components may be important (loss of production,
public image deterioration, and any other loss of revenue). According to that, and for the
commercial sector, the developed tools help identifying the technical flexibility not allowing
significant degradation of the service and assigning to each energy package the associated
The new tool which has been developed by the authors in order to evaluate the economical
parameters associated to the flexibility complements other previously developed for estimation
of the available technical flexibility with the described methodology in the previous section and
some results that are shown in the next section. A cost data input screen for this tool is shown
in Figure 3, where the detail of the considered information can be observed. Standard data
menus with current commercial data about prices and characteristics of existing technologies
are embedded in the tool in order to ease the use of it.
Figure 3. Input data screen in the developed tool
Application
The following results have been obtained by applying the methodology exposed above to
the segment coded 99.01-04 “Large offices – Northern”. The main characteristics for this
segment are:
Electricity consumption: 0.16< annual consumption <1.25 GWh
Gas consumption: annual consumption <116 GWh
Location: North of Europe
A real consumer from UK was selected as the typical customer to represent this segment,
customer that is currently participating in the first experiment of the project EU-DEEP
End uses identification
Comprehensive information about the customer description, end uses or for example
weather parameters has been gathered in order to describe and model it. Four relevant
electricity consuming end uses have been identified as shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4. Typical load curves in (a) summer and (b) winter for large offices divided into end uses
Table 5 shows the consumptions for the different end uses of the segment for the typical
customer in summer and winter.
Electricity consumption ratios for the segment 99.01-04 “Large offices – Northern”
Ventilation
Electronic
The end use “electronics” has the largest consumption in both summer and winter, since
computers and other electronic devices are connected during the whole day. HVAC devices are
partially controlled and disconnected during the night.
The peak of demand is higher in summer than in winter since the space heaters are working
by using a different source than electricity (usually natural gas). As it is shown below in table 6,
HVAC and electronics are the two end uses whose power demand has the largest weight in the
total demand on peak hours (at 12:00) in summer.
Contribution of each end use to the to the peak demand at noon for the segment 99.01-04
“Large offices – Northern”
Ventilation
Electronic
Flexibility and demand response evaluation
The highest potential in demand response has been identified in HVAC and ventilation.
Figure 5 shows the effect of applying different flexibility options in the total load curve of the
consumer. In summer, the end use HVAC could be modified by allowing the temperature to be
increased up to 2ºC during a period of 2 hours a day. By doing that, a maximum reduction of
about 120 kW (27% of reduction in the total peak of power) may be obtained. Additionally, a
decrement in ventilation could be got by decreasing the speed of the fan. If it is done while the
HVAC payback period is taking place, a lower recovering peak is obtained.
Figure 5. Flexibility associated to HVAC and ventilation for large offices in (a) summer and
(b) winter
In winter, only the ventilation could be used as a demand response option, and a reduction
of 25 kW (8% in the total peak of power) may be reached.
Economic assessment
Figure 6 shows the prices associated to the demand packages that could be reduced on
peak hours (in this case, at 14:00 h).
Figure 6. Offers for the different end uses in large offices at 14:00 h in (a) summer and (b)
The cheapest demand package to be reduced is HVAC, which may be decreased in about
27 kW if the consumer is paid in, at least, 27 cts€/kWh reduced. Ventilation, lighting and
electronics are, in this order, the following processes to be reduced. A total amount of 73 kW
could be decreased if the consumer was paid in 66 cts€/kWh reduced. The most expensive
process is the one called “others”, which consists on small and difficult to control processes.
It is similar in winter, where the ventilation could be reduced in about 17 kW if the customer
was paid in 25 cts€/kWh reduced.
Conclusions
This paper describes a two steps methodology that would allow a customer to participate in
electricity markets or negotiate bilateral trading mechanisms with the agents capable to use the
customer price responsive capability to enhance the electric energy systems behaviour.
The first step is designed to identify the technical potential of every single customer; i.e. the
amount of power and energy reduction that is able to implement any hour (or for shorter
periods) along any considered period (week, year, etc.). Side effects of the flexibility
implementation can also be identified with this tool, such as service degradation, recovery
energy required, etcetera and, consequently, the associated limitations to the use of each
flexibility package (number times this flexibility can be used along a day/week, required
notification times) as well as other parameters that have to be used to asses in the cost the
implementation of any type of flexibility produces in the customer.
The second step allows the completion of the technical flexibility with the associated costs,
direct and indirect, originated by the use of the each flexibility the customer may implement. The
information provided with this tool provides the customer with all the necessary information to
trade with his flexibility.
A real example of the application of this tool has been described, where the results of the
tool were supplied to the customer and, after some iteration, full agreement was achieved in the
flexibility figures.
Acknowledgments
This research work has been possible with the support of the European Commission
through EU-DEEP project, and through the support of the Spanish Government (Ministerio de
Educación y Ciencia) under Reasearch Project ENE2007-67771-C02-01&02/CON and Red
Eléctrica de España, S.A. (the Spanish System Operator) through the collaboration with the
International Energy Agency project on DSM.