Multi-Task Driven Explainable Diagnosis of
COVID-19 using Chest X-ray Images
Aakarsh Malhotra, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Surbhi Mittal, Graduate Student Member, IEEE,
Puspita Majumdar, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Saheb Chhabra, Kartik Thakral, Mayank Vatsa, Senior
Member, IEEE, Richa Singh, Senior Member, IEEE, Santanu Chaudhury, Ashwin Pudrod, and Anjali Agrawal
Abstract—With increasing number of COVID-19 cases globally, all the countries are ramping up the testing numbers. While
the RT-PCR kits are available in sufﬁcient quantity in several
countries, others are facing challenges with limited availability
of testing kits and processing centers in remote areas. This has
motivated researchers to ﬁnd alternate methods of testing which
are reliable, easily accessible and faster. Chest X-Ray is one of
the modalities that is gaining acceptance as a screening modality.
Towards this direction, the paper has two primary contributions.
Firstly, we present the COVID-19 Multi-Task Network which
is an automated end-to-end network for COVID-19 screening.
The proposed network not only predicts whether the CXR has
COVID-19 features present or not, it also performs semantic
segmentation of the regions of interest to make the model
explainable. Secondly, with the help of medical professionals, we
manually annotate the lung regions of 9000 frontal chest radiographs taken from ChestXray-14, CheXpert and a consolidated
COVID-19 dataset. Further, 200 chest radiographs pertaining to
COVID-19 patients are also annotated for semantic segmentation.
This database will be released to the research community.
Index Terms—X-ray, COVID-19, Detection, Diagnostics, Deep
Learning, Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Multi-task Learning
I. INTRODUCTION
The COVID-19 pandemic has affected the health and wellbeing of people across the globe and continues its devastating
effect on the global population. The total cases have increased
at an alarming rate and have crossed 13 million worldwide .
Increasing cases of COVID-19 patients raises the concern for
effective screening of infected patients. The current process
of testing for COVID-19 is time-consuming and requires
availability of testing kits. This necessitates the requirement
for alternative methods of screening, which is available to the
general population, cost effective, time efﬁcient, and scalable.
Dyspnea is a common symptom for COVID-19. Analyzing
the chest X-ray, radiologists observed that it introduces speciﬁc
abnormalities in a patient’s lungs . For instance, COVID-19
pneumonia has a typical appearance on chest radiographs with
bilateral peripheral patchy lung opacities, lower lung distribution, rounded morphology and absence of pleural effusion
A. Malhotra, P. Majumdar, and S. Chhabra are with IIIT-Delhi, New Delhi,
India 110020 (email: {aakarshm, pushpitam, sahebc}@iiitd.ac.in)
S. Mittal, K. Thakral, M. Vatsa, R. Singh, and S. Chaudhury are with
IIT Jodhpur, India, 342037 (email: {mittal.5, thakral.1, mvatsa, richa, santanuc}@iitj.ac.in).
A. Pudrod is with Ashwini Hospital and Ramakant Heart Care Centre, India
(email: ).
A. Agrawal is with TeleRadiology Solutions, India 560048 (email: ).
Cardiomegaly
Atelectasis
Pneumothorax
Infiltrate
ChestXray-14
Fig. 1: Samples of chest x-ray images. (a) Different kinds of
lung abnormalities and (b) AP and PA views corresponding
to CheXpert and ChestXray-14, and COVID-19 datasets. The
bounding box highlights the diseased region.
and lymphadenopathy. Fig. 1 shows samples of chest x-ray
images with different lung abnormalities including COVID-19.
Motivated by this observation and the fact that x-ray imaging is
faster, cheaper, accessible, and has scope for portability, many
recent studies have proposed machine learning algorithms to
predict COVID-19 using CXRs .
In this research, we propose a deep learning network termed
as COVID-19 Multi-Task Network (CMTNet), which learns
the abnormalities present in the chest x-ray images to differarXiv:2008.03205v1 [eess.IV] 3 Aug 2020
entiate between a COVID-19 affected lung and a Non-COVID
affected lung. Since the explainability of machine learning
systems, particularly for medical applications, is of paramount
importance, the proposed network also incorporates the task
of lung and disease segmentation. The proposed CMTNet
simultaneously processes the input X-ray for semantic lung
segmentation, disease localization, and healthy/unhealthy classiﬁcation. Incorporating additional tasks while performing the
primary task of COVID classiﬁcation has multiple advantages.
While processing for COVID classiﬁcation, the additional
segmentation tasks enforce the network to focus on lung
regions and disease-affected areas only. Further, inclusion of
healthy/unhealthy classiﬁcation aids the CMTNet to effectively
identify a healthy lung. Further, assistance from other tasks
reduces dependence on enormous amounts of data required
during training. The key research highlights of this work are
as follows:
1) Develop COVID-19 Multi-Task Network (CMTNet) for
classiﬁcation and segmentation of the lung and disease1
regions. The CMTNet further predicts if lungs are affected with COVID-19 or Non-COVID-19 disorders and
differentiate them from healthy lungs.
2) Inclusion of simultaneous disease segmentation in the
CMTNet helps in making the decisions explainable.
3) Extensive evaluation and comparison against the existing deep learning algorithms for COVID-19 prediction,
lung, and disease segmentation.
4) Assemble frontal chest x-rays from various sources, that
can be used for diverse tasks such as classiﬁcation and
semantic segmentation of lungs and disease.
5) Creating and publicly releasing manual annotations for
lung semantic segmentation for healthy, unhealthy, and
COVID-19 affected X-ray images.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
Recently, researchers have proposed AI-based techniques
for detecting COVID-19 using chest CT and x-ray images.
Apostolopoulos and Mpesiana explored transfer learning
through various CNNs and observed that MobileNet v2 
yields the best results. Narin et al. proposed to use three
CNN models, namely, ResNet50 , InceptionV3 , and
InceptionResNetV2 for detecting COVID-19 using chest
x-ray. The authors ﬁne-tuned these pre-trained deep models
for distinguishing COVID-19 from normal x-rays and found
that ResNet-50 performed the best. They used 50 chest x-ray
images of COVID-19 patients from Github repository 
and 50 normal chest X-ray images . Abbas et al. 
also performed transfer learning by ﬁne-tuning a pre-trained
AlexNet . Their dataset comprises 80 normal, 105 COVID-
19, and 11 SARS affected lung radiographs. Cohen et al. 
predicted the severity score for COVID-19 using a deep
regression model. Apart from healthy and Non-COVID disease
affected frontal lung x-ray, their dataset included 94 COVID-
19 affected lung x-rays (all PA views). Oh et al. proposed
a patch-based CNN approach for COVID-19 diagnosis. During
1In our context, the terms ‘abnormality’, ‘disease’, and ‘radiological ﬁnding’ are used synonymously.
testing, majority voting from multiple patches at different
locations of lungs is performed for ﬁnal decision.
For interpretation and explainability, there are limited studies. Mangal et al. utilized DenseNet121 for classiﬁcation into four classes: healthy, bacterial pneumonia, viral pneumonia, and COVID-19. They showed Class Activation Maps
(CAM) for interpretation. Karim et al. also classiﬁed into
these four categories using a modiﬁed ResNet architecture.
With an emphasis on explainability, the authors showed CAM
and confusion matrix. On similar lines, Ghoshal and Tucker
 showed the application of ResNet50v2 for the above
four classes. Authors interpret the results using CAM, confusion matrices, Bayesian uncertainty, and Spearman correlation.
The problem of small sample size of COVID-19 chest X-ray
images was tackled by Loey et al. , where they generate
new COVID-19 infected images using GANs. They create a
model composed of three components, namely, a backbone
network, a classiﬁcation head, and an anomaly detection head
by Zhang et al. . Wang and Wong introduced COVID-
Net for detecting COVID-19 cases. Further, the authors investigate the predictions made by COVID-Net to gain insights on
the critical factors associated with COVID-19 cases. In their
work, a three-class classiﬁcation is performed to distinguish
COVID-19 cases from regular and Non-COVID cases.
These research demonstrate that AI-driven techniques can
diagnose COVID-19 using chest x-ray images. It could potentially overcome the challenges of limited test kits and speed
up the screening process of COVID-19 cases. However, a
signiﬁcant limitation of existing studies is that the algorithms
work as a black box. These algorithms predict if the input
x-ray is affected by COVID-19 or some related disease. Most
studies fail to explain the decisions - for instance, which lung
regions are salient for the speciﬁc decisions. Secondly, existing
studies do not focus on radiological abnormalities such as
consolidation, opacities, or pneumothorax. Without a clear
emphasis on the lung or the abnormality, it is hard to have
the explainability of an algorithm in a crucial application of
COVID-19 diagnosis. Further, most of these studies work with
a limited number of COVID-19 samples, with around 100
samples under most scenarios. Thirdly, as shown in Fig. 1(b),
the posteroanterior (PA) and anteroposterior (AP) views of
CXR images vary due to the acquisition mechanisms. While
training, samples from both classes need to be considered but
existing algorithms are generally silent on these details.
III. COVID-19 MULTI-TASK NETWORK (CMTNET)
This section provides the details of the proposed CMTNet.
Multi-task networks are known to learn similar and related
tasks together based on the input data. As shown in Fig. 2,
multi-task networks have a base network with multi-objective
outputs. Since each task shares the same base network, the
weights are learned to be optimal for all functions jointly.
The four tasks of CMTNet are (i) lung localization, (ii)
disease localization, (iii) healthy/unhealthy classiﬁcation and
(iv) multi-label classiﬁcation for COVID-19 prediction. These
tasks are accomplished by using ﬁve loss functions: two for
segmentation and three for classiﬁcation. The details of these
loss functions are described in the following subsections.
Non-COVID disease discriminator
weight-update
weight-update
weight-update
Traditional Approach
Proposed CMT Network
weight-update
weight-update
Fig. 2: The proposed CMTNet to perform multiple related tasks to improve the classiﬁcation performance for COVID-19
disease diagnostics using frontal x-ray. The ﬁgure contrasts the multitask network with single task network.
Let X be the train set with n images and Xi represent an
image. Xi is associated with ﬁve labels, {Li, Di, Hi, Ci, Oi}
where, Li and Di represent the ground truth binary mask
for lung and disease localization, respectively. Hi = {0, 1},
Ci = {0, 1}, and Oi = {0, 1} represents the healthy/unhealthy,
COVID/Non-COVID, and Non-COVID diseases discriminator
labels, respectively. Let f be the proposed CMTNet that
performs the four different tasks. The task set T is deﬁned
as T = {t1, t2, t3, t4}, where, t1 and t2 represent the task
of lung and disease localization, respectively. t3 and t4 represents the task of healthy/unhealthy and COVID/Non-COVID
classiﬁcation, respectively.
A. Segmentation Loss
Chest x-ray of lungs contain peripheral organs along with
lung regions. The primary objective of this research is to
differentiate between COVID and Non-COVID samples. Since
the key information lies in the lungs, the initial task is that of
lung segmentation. The second segmentation loss aims to learn
semantic segmentation of the diseased regions.
Lung segmentation can be achieved by learning a model that
differentiates between the background and foreground lung
regions. The CMTNet accomplishes this by utilizing a VGG16
Encoder-Decoder architecture . The encoder has VGG16
as a base network. It has ﬁve blocks with 2, 2, 3, 3, and 3 layers
of convolution + batch norm + ReLu layers, respectively. The
decoder network builds upon the representation obtained from
the encoder network, with a transposed architecture of the
encoder network. At the ﬁnal layers, the output is derived from
a SoftMax layer. The output dimension equals the input spatial
resolution of the X-ray image with the number of channels
equaling the number of segmentation classes. Hence, the ﬁnal
layer consists of two channels (lung and non-lung).
Similar to lung localization, the disease localization also
builds upon the encoder representation. However, the disease
localization task has a separate decoder branch and is optimized for localizing more than 20+ lung-related disorders.
For both the lung and disease localization, the gradients are
backpropagated via decoder network into the encoder layers.
Let ft1 and ft2 represent the sub-networks for lung and
disease localization, respectively. For any image Xi, the output
predicted binary masks for lung and disease localization are
represented as:
bLi = ft1(Xi)
bDi = ft2(Xi)
In this research, binary cross entropy loss is used for lung and
disease localization. Mathematically, it is represented as:
Li(x, y) log(bLi(x, y))+
(1 −Li) log(1 −bLi(x, y))
Di(x, y) log( bDi(x, y))+
(1 −Di) log(1 −bDi(x, y))
Conv.+Batch Norm+ReLu
Global Average Pooling (GAP)
Linear+SoftMax
Linear+Sigmoid
Max UnPool
COVID/Non-COVID
Non-COVID diseases discriminator
Decoder: Lung
Decoder: Disease
Fig. 3: Architecture of the proposed COVID-19 Multi-task Network (CMTNet), which is based on a Encoder-Decoder
architecture (Best viewed in color).
where, Z1i and Z2i are the lung and disease loss, respectively
for image Xi. Li(x, y) and Di(x, y) represent the pixel value
at location (x, y) for lung and disease masks, respectively.
B. Classiﬁcation Loss
The two classiﬁcation tasks are t3 = Healthy/Unhealthy
classiﬁcation of the lung X-ray, and t4 = Multi-label classiﬁcation for the presence of COVID-19 or other abnormalities.
These tasks are performed using three classiﬁcation loss
functions. The lung and disease localization provides supervision for the three classiﬁcation tasks. For healthy/unhealthy,
COVID/Non-COVID, and Non-COVID diseases discrimination classiﬁcation, two branches are derived over the compact
encoder representation (after GAP). Each branch has three
fully connected layers (FC), each followed by ReLu, ReLu,
and SoftMax activation, respectively (Fig. 3).
Let ft3 and ft4 represent the sub-networks for healthy/ unhealthy and multi-label classiﬁcation, respectively. The output
of ft3 for image Xi is represented as:
P(Hi|Xi) = ft3(Xi)
where, P(Hi|Xi) is the probability of predicting image Xi
to Hi. The loss function for healthy/unhealthy classiﬁcation is
represented as:
Hi log(P(Hi|Xi))
where, Z3i represents the healthy/unhealthy loss for image Xi.
For multi-label classiﬁcation, the output of sub-network ft4 for
an image Xi is written as:
Oi] = ft4(Xi)
Oi represent the output predicted score (∈ ) for COVID/Non-COVID and Non-COVID diseases discriminator, respectively. The radiological ﬁndings of COVID-
19 pneumonia may overlap those of other viral pneumonia and
acute respiratory distress syndrome due to other etiologies. The
network needs supervision to segregate COVID-19 pneumonia
from Non-COVID lung diseases. Hence, the joint optimization
for COVID/Non-COVID along with Non-COVID diseases
discrimination helps differentiate COVID-19 affected lungs
from lungs affected with diseases other than COVID-19. The
joint loss for predicting both COVID/Non-COVID and Non-
COVID diseases discrimination is written as:
Ci log( bCi) + (1 −Ci) log(1 −bCi)
Oi log( bOi) + (1 −Oi) log(1 −bOi)
Overall Loss Function: It is possible that the ground truth
labels or segmentation masks are not available for all the
images during training. In this case, all branches of the
networks will not be active during training of CMTNet. For
instance, if the ground truth mask is unavailable for disease
segmentation, then the sub-network ft2 will remain inactive
and the loss Z2i for image Xi will become zero. In the same
manner, other losses can have a 0/1 “switch”. Therefore, the
total loss L is computed as:
T1iZ1i + T2iZ2i + T3iZ3i + T4iZ4i
where, T1i, T2i, T3i, and T4i are the switches pertaining to
the tasks t1, t2, t3, and t4, respectively. The values of these
switches are either 0 or 1 depending on the availability of
ground truth labels/masks of the respective tasks for the ith
TABLE I: Details of the databases used in the experiments.
Chest X-Ray-14 
CheXpert 
TABLE II: Details for the COVID-19 databases used in the
experiments.
Total Images
GitHub 
Italy 
Spain 
RadioPaedia 
EuroRad 
TABLE III: Details of train-test split across different parameters. Train set for Covid-19 includes augmentation.
Disease-wise
IV. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
We next summarize the databases used for training and
testing, the lung and disease annotations performed as part
of this research, and the implementation details.
A. Database and Protocol
For different tasks of the network, we require a chest Xray database with multiple annotations and diverse properties.
Thus, the database for experiments is created by combining
subsets from the ChestXray-14, CheXPert, and COVID-19
infected X-ray databases. We only use frontal X-ray in our
experiments from the following publicly available databases:
• ChestXray-14 : The dataset contains healthy and
unhealthy x-ray images. It has a total of 112,120 chest xray images, out of which 67,310 are PA view images, and
remaining 44,810 are AP view. Multiple radiographs of
the same patient taken at different times are also present.
From the database, we derive a subset of 13,360 images,
spanning both PA and AP views. The unhealthy X-rays
are labeled for one or more classes in a total of 14 classes,
marking the presence of different radiological signs such
as pleural effusions and consolidation. Additionally, the
dataset provides localization information of abnormalities
for 880 X-rays. The details of the subset drawn from
ChestXray-14 is illustrated in Table I.
• CheXpert : The CheXpert dataset contains a total
of 223,414 chest x-ray images, out of which 29,420 are
PA view, 161,590 are AP view, and the remaining are
lateral or single lung view images. Multiple case studies
of the same patient are available in the dataset. This
dataset contains healthy and unhealthy X-ray images.
We selected a subset of 18,078 images. Based on the
radiological ﬁndings, each X-ray image is labeled positive/negative for 14 pre-deﬁned classes (few overlapping
with ChestXray-14). The details of the x-ray images
selected from CheXpert database is shown in Table I.
• COVID-19: For this study, we collected a total of 415
X-rays from various internet sources. The sources have
a mixed number of PA and AP view frontal chest x-ray.
The number of X-rays collected from each source has
been summarized in Table II.
Since the above COVID-19 subset has limited number of
images, we perform data augmentation. Each image is augmented ﬁve ways - clockwise rotation by 10o, anti-clockwise
rotation by 10o, translation by 10 pixels in the X, Y, and
XY-directions. Since pneumonia is a closely related pathology
to COVID , we select all the pneumonia samples of the
ChestXray-14 and CheXPert datasets. Further, to accommodate the variations in non-healthy x-ray samples, about 50%
more unhealthy samples are selected compared to healthy
samples. AP view x-rays are prominent compared to PA views
in the CheXpert dataset. Hence, we select more AP view X-ray
The data is split into 80% training and 20% testing, in
a subject disjoint manner, ensuring that there is no patient
overlap in the train and test sets. The details of the dataset split
across different properties are speciﬁed in Table III. Note that
all the numbers mentioned in the table are post-augmentation.
B. Lung and Disease Region Annotation
The datasets mentioned above lack lung localization details.
The proposed CMTNet requires a ground-truth lung location
to identify the lung region from the x-ray. For this purpose,
we manually annotated a total of about 9000 lung x-rays.
These x-rays include well-balanced healthy/unhealthy, AP/PA
subsets taken equally from the CheXpert and ChestXray-14
datasets. All x-ray images available for COVID-19 are also
manually annotated for lung segmentation. Mask for each xray image has been created by drawing two solid bounding
boxes, corresponding to the area covered by each lung. As a
part of this study, we also plan to release the ground truth
masks for the manually annotated lung regions.
The datasets included as a part of this study have only 880
disease localization annotation images (from ChestXray-14
database). For COVID-19 affected frontal lung x-ray images,
we lacked disease segmentation masks. Hence, as a part of
this study, the x-ray images are annotated by a radiologist for
various radiological ﬁndings. The ﬁndings radiologists looked
for includes: (i) atelectasis, (ii) consolidation, (iii) interstitial
shadows (reticular, nodular, ground glass), (iv) pneumothorax,
(v) pleural effusion, (vi) pleural thickening, (vii) cardiomegaly,
and (viii) lung lesion. The experts annotated a total of 200
COVID-19 affected chest x-rays. A few sample annotations
for the same can be seen in Fig. 4(a) and the corresponding
description in Fig. 4(b). While training deep learning algorithms, the model requires binary masks as annotation. Hence,
(a) Labelled
COVID X-ray
(c) Corresponding
Binary Masks
-Right mid peripheral, lower
patchy infiltration
-Left lower patchy infiltration
suggests right pleural effusion
-Right mid peripheral, lower
peripheral patchy infiltration
infiltration
-Left lower patchy infiltration
peripheral,
diffuse infiltration
-Right upper, lower peripheral
patchy infiltration
-Left upper, mid peripheral, lower
peripheral patchy infiltration
-Left lower diffuse infiltration
-Right upper, mid, lower, lower
peripheral patchy infiltration
-Left lower, mid peripheral,
mid lower peripheral
patchy infiltration
-Cardiomegaly present
-Right upper patchy infiltration
-Right lower reticular infiltration
peripheral
patchy infiltration
(b) Radiological Finding
Fig. 4: Annotations provided for COVID-19 affected frontal lung x-ray images as a part of this study: (a) Labeled COVID-19
X-ray for locations of radiological ﬁnding, (b) Description of the radiological ﬁnding, (c) Corresponding binary masks for
training deep semantic segmentation algorithms for disease segmentation.
we created these masks based on the annotations (Fig. 4(c)).
We will release the ground truth binary masks to promote
the training of deep semantic segmentation algorithms for
abnormality localization.
C. Implementation Details
The proposed Multi-task network requires input X-ray images of size 224×224×3. The encoder stream is initialized
using a pre-trained VGG16 model. With a batch size of 16,
the model is optimized over binary cross-entropy loss using
Adam optimizer (learning rate = 5 × 10−5). Each loss is
weighted equally. The model is trained for 30 epochs on
NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080Ti and implemented in PyTorch.
V. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
We next evaluate the performance of the proposed CMTNet
for classiﬁcation and localization tasks. The performance is
compared with existing deep learning algorithms for COVID-
19 chest radiograph studies. Further, to study the effectiveness
of the proposed CMTNet, we perform experiments by selecting different combinations of sub-networks from the CMTNet.
A. Lung and Disease Localization
In this subsection, the segmentation results of the proposed CMTNet are compared against region predictions from
UNet , Mask RCNN , and SegNet . For lung
segmentation, sample predictions of the proposed and existing
algorithms are shown in Fig. 5. Additional samples for lung
segmentation can be seen in Fig. 1 of supplementary material.
Inferring the sample prediction, we observe that all four algorithms perform well and give comparable results. However,
the proposed CMTNet yields the most precise bound for lung
segmentation. Since lung and disease localization tasks are
performed simultaneously, and diseases are present within the
lungs, the lung decoder network learns to focus more on the
lung regions rather than the outside the lungs.
For disease segmentation, the prediction results are shown
in Fig. 6. Additional results are shown in Fig. 2 of the
supplementary material. The ﬁrst two rows of Fig. 6 illustrate
abnormalities in COVID-19 affected lungs while last two rows
have abnormality localization in unhealthy but Non-COVID
affected lungs. Of the four algorithms, UNet performs the
worst. From the perspective of shape, Mask-RCNN tends
to provide well-deﬁned shape boundaries for Non-COVID
unhealthy lungs. On the other hand, SegNet and CMTNet provide irregularly shaped predictions, localizing the radiological
ﬁndings compactly. Overall, we observe that each of the four
algorithms predict additional regions for the abnormalities.
The detected abnormalities have false positive regions when
compared to the ground-truth, sometimes localizing better
than the ground-truth (for SegNet and proposed CMTNet).
The same trend is elaborated in Fig. 3 of the supplementary
Further, we observe that for certain abnormalities in ‘Unheathy’ case, deep models fail to localize the abnormality. One
of the reasons for this is the limited training data for abnormality localization with large variations in the diseased regions.
The unhealthy Non-COVID lung abnormalities are derived
from ChestXray-14, which has 700 samples corresponding
to 14 labels. As a result of a small sample size for each
abnormality, the networks cannot localize diseases properly.
However, the proposed CMTNet has assistance from other
tasks. For instance, the lung prediction task would implicitly
reinforce CMTNet to predict diseases within the lung. Hence,
of the four algorithms, the proposed CMTNet provides the
(a) Ground-Truth
(c) Mask RCNN
(d) SegNet
(e) CMT (Proposed)
UNHEALTHY (Non-COVID)
Fig. 5: Samples of lung segmentation output for existing algorithms and the proposed CMTNet.
(a) Ground-Truth
(c) Mask RCNN
(d) SegNet
(e) CMT (Proposed)
Fig. 6: Samples of semantic disease segmentation for existing algorithms and the proposed CMTNet. The x-ray images and
corresponding abnormality localization for “Unhealthy” are derived from ChestXray-14 database .
TABLE IV: Evaluation and comparison of the proposed
CMTNet with existing learning algorithms for COVID-19
prediction. FC represents fully connected classiﬁcation layers.
Sensitivity@Y Speciﬁcity
DenseNet121 + FC
MobileNetv2 + FC
ResNet18 + FC
VGG19 + FC
CMTNet Embedding
CMTNet Embedding
+ SVM (Sigmoid)
CMTNet Embedding
+ SVM (Gaussian)
CMTNet Embedding
+ SVM (RBF)
CMTNet (Proposed)
most overlapping prediction with the ground truth.
Compared to 700 samples for 14+ different radiological
ﬁndings (approx. 50 images per abnormality), the COVID-19
affected lung x-rays are 290 in number (prior to augmentation).
The majority of the COVID-19 affected chest radiographs
demonstrate consolidations, which tend to be bilateral and
more common in lower zones . Hence, deep models have
more samples to learn the localization of COVID-19 speciﬁc
abnormalities than other diseases (290 vs. 50). In retrospection,
the ﬁrst two rows of Fig. 6 illustrate that all four models
perform relatively better for COVID-19 localization than the
last two rows of “unhealthy” localization. In most cases, each
of the four models predict affected regions in the lower lung
zones bilaterally. However, the proposed CMTNet outperforms
other algorithms. For instance, in the ﬁrst row of Fig. 6,
both Mask-RCNN and SegNet tend to leave out the darker
region in the right lung, while ground-truth and CMTNet have
that region marked as diseased. Further, in the low contrast
x-ray in row two, the less opaque part of the right lower
lung looks darker (though being diseased). Hence, UNet fails
to detect any ﬁnding in the right lower lung, while Mask
RCNN and SegNet detects a few small region(s). Nevertheless,
the proposed CMTNet can detect such faint differences in
lung density. The same pattern can also be noticed in the
low contrast x-ray (row two) of Fig. 2 in the supplementary
B. Classiﬁcation
performance
healthy/unhealthy (Task 3) classiﬁcation and multi-label classiﬁcation of COVID-19and other diseases (Task 4). The results of the CMTNet are compared against popular deep
networks. These include DenseNet121 , MobileNetv2
 , ResNet18 , and VGG19 . For each of these
networks, the ImageNet pre-trained version is selected. The
model is then ﬁne-tuned with the dataset and protocol used
for the proposed CMTNet. Further, we draw a comparison
with RDF and SVM with three different kernels
(sigmoid, gaussian, and RBF). The training of RDF and SVM
is performed using feature embedding of training samples,
obtained from the last encoder layer of the CMTNet.
DenseNet121
MobileNetv2
SVM-Sigmoid
SVM-Gaussian
Standard Deviation
Fig. 7: Standard deviation (±) of Sensitivity (at 1% FAR)
for different algorithms. The performance is computed for
different initialization of deep networks. The results show
the stability in sensitivity for CMTNet, delivering consistent
results for different initializations.
The results for classiﬁcation performance are presented in
Table IV. It is observed that the proposed CMTNet achieves
a sensitivity of 87.20% at 99% speciﬁcity, with an overall
test classiﬁcation accuracy of 98.79%. The proposed CMTNet
achieves the highest TPR and lowest EER compared to the
existing algorithms. With the implicit supervision from lung
and disease localization tasks, the proposed CMTNet outperforms all other existing algorithms. To show the stability of
different algorithms with different initialization, the networks
are three-times trained with different initialization parameters.
Across different training initializations, we report the standard deviation in Sensitivity to evaluate the stability (lower
standard deviation implies higher stability). As shown in Fig.
7, the proposed CMTNet is the most stable algorithm across
different initializations. Classiﬁers that use embeddings from
CMTNet also report lower standard deviation. Hence, it can
be inferred that CMTNet consistently provides a discriminative
representation, resulting in a stable performance. Fig. 8 further
shows the comparison using the ROC curves of the proposed
CMTNet and existing algorithms.
The CMTNet’s classiﬁcation performance for the COVID-
19 samples into the healthy and unhealthy class is also
analyzed. The proposed network classiﬁes 97.25% of COVID-
19 samples into unhealthy class and 2.75% in healthy class.
The high TPR of the COVID-19 class and the majority
of the COVID-19 samples being classiﬁed into unhealthy
class showcase the effectiveness of the proposed network
for COVID-19 detection. Overall, the classiﬁcation performance of healthy/unhealthy classiﬁcation is 75.17% for all
the test samples, while for Non-COVID disease classiﬁcation
is 73.87%. Based on the proposed CMTNet, Fig. 9 shows
some of the misclassiﬁed samples where the network predicts
COVID-19 positive instances (as per the RT-PCR test) into
healthy (Task 3). Correspondingly, the same samples are also
predicted as Non-COVID by Task 4 of the proposed CMTNet.
In retrospection, we believe that minimal opacities in the lung
False Positive Rate
True Positive Rate
DenseNet121
MobileNetv2
False Positive Rate
True Positive Rate
SVM - Sigmoid
SVM - Gaussian
Fig. 8: ROC curves summarizing the performance for COVID-19 classiﬁcation: (a) comparing the proposed CMTNet with
existing deep learning models, and (b) CMTNet embedding in combination with different classiﬁers.
Fig. 9: COVID-19 positive case misclassiﬁed as both healthy
and Non-COVID by the proposed CMTNet.
region could be the probable cause of misclassiﬁcation. This
led us to check the ground truth for the hospitalization day. Of
the four misclassiﬁed samples shown in Fig. 9, three turned
out to be the early days of the patients hospitalization (up to
day 3). Based on these observations, it can be concluded that
the CMTNet predicts an x-ray being affected when there is
presence of opacities and consolidations.
C. Ablation Study
To study the importance of different tasks in the proposed
CMTNet, we perform an ablation study by choosing different
combinations of tasks. The four tasks in the CMTNet are
Task 1: Semantic lung segmentation, Task 2: Semantic disease
(a) t-SNE with true labels
(b) t-SNE with predicted labels
Fig. 10: Interpretation of feature representation based on (a)
ground-truth and (b) predicted labels using t-SNE plot for
COVID/Non-COVID classiﬁcation.
segmentation, Task 3: Healthy/Unhealthy classiﬁcation of the
lung X-ray, and Task 4: Multi-label classiﬁcation for the
presence of COVID-19 or other diseases. With at least one
segmentation task included, we perform six different ablation
study experiments, which are presented in the six rows of
It is observed that for COVID-19 prediction, each task (loss
function) has an important role. Removing either of the three
TABLE V: An ablation study on reducing the number of tasks
and observing its effect on COVID-19 prediction.
COVID-19 (Sensitivity)
All 4 Tasks
Task 1 and 4
Task 2 and 4
Task 1, 2 and 4
Task 1, 3 and 4
Task 2, 3 and 4
assisting tasks deteriorates the performance. Of all these three
assisting tasks, the lung segmentation task holds a pivotal role.
In a COVID-19 affected x-ray, a common trait is that the
lungs get affected bilaterally. Hence, a comprehensive view
provided by the lung segmentation task provides more weight
to lung regions, resulting in better performance with Task 1
than any other task. We perform disease segmentation and
healthy/unhealthy classiﬁcation since their efﬁcacy improves
in conjunction with lung segmentation and has a positive
impact on the Non-COVID disease classiﬁcation prediction. As
validated by the ground-truth t-SNE feature space plot (shown
in Fig. 10(a)), the predictions of the test COVID-19 samples
(Fig. 10(b)) are well separated from Non-COVID samples.
It shows that the model can distinguish COVID-19 affected
samples and can predict unseen test labels correctly.
VI. CONCLUSION
In the face of the SARS-CoV2 pandemic, it has become
essential to perform mass screening and testing of patients.
However, many countries around the world are not equipped
with enough laboratory testing kits or medical personnel
for the same. X-rays are amongst the most popular, cheap
and widely available imaging technology across the world.
This paper attempts to provide an “explainable solution” for
detecting COVID-19 pneumonia in patients through chest
radiographs. We propose the CMTNet which performs the
tasks of classiﬁcation and segmentation simultaneously. Experiments conducted on the different chest radiograph datasets
show promising results of the proposed algorithm in COVID-
19 prediction. The ablation study also supports the utilization
of different tasks in the proposed multi-task network.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Aakarsh Malhotra is partially supported by Visvesvaraya
Ph.D. Fellowship. Surbhi Mittal is partially supported by
UGC-Net JRF Fellowship. Puspita Majumdar is partially supported by DST Inspire Ph.D. Fellowship.