Focal Loss for Dense Object Detection
Tsung-Yi Lin
Priya Goyal
Ross Girshick
Kaiming He
Piotr Doll´ar
Facebook AI Research (FAIR)
probability of ground truth class
well-classiﬁed
well-classiﬁed
CE(pt) = −log(pt)
FL(pt) = −(1 −pt)γ log(pt)
Figure 1. We propose a novel loss we term the Focal Loss that
adds a factor (1 −pt)γ to the standard cross entropy criterion.
Setting γ > 0 reduces the relative loss for well-classiﬁed examples
(pt > .5), putting more focus on hard, misclassiﬁed examples. As
our experiments will demonstrate, the proposed focal loss enables
training highly accurate dense object detectors in the presence of
vast numbers of easy background examples.
The highest accuracy object detectors to date are based
on a two-stage approach popularized by R-CNN, where a
classiﬁer is applied to a sparse set of candidate object locations. In contrast, one-stage detectors that are applied
over a regular, dense sampling of possible object locations
have the potential to be faster and simpler, but have trailed
the accuracy of two-stage detectors thus far. In this paper,
we investigate why this is the case. We discover that the extreme foreground-background class imbalance encountered
during training of dense detectors is the central cause. We
propose to address this class imbalance by reshaping the
standard cross entropy loss such that it down-weights the
loss assigned to well-classiﬁed examples. Our novel Focal
Loss focuses training on a sparse set of hard examples and
prevents the vast number of easy negatives from overwhelming the detector during training. To evaluate the effectiveness of our loss, we design and train a simple dense detector
we call RetinaNet. Our results show that when trained with
the focal loss, RetinaNet is able to match the speed of previous one-stage detectors while surpassing the accuracy of
all existing state-of-the-art two-stage detectors. Code is at:
 
inference time (ms)
RetinaNet-50
RetinaNet-101
[A] YOLOv2† 
[B] SSD321 
[C] DSSD321 
[D] R-FCN‡ 
[E] SSD513 
[F] DSSD513 
[G] FPN FRCN 36.2
RetinaNet-50-500
RetinaNet-101-500
RetinaNet-101-800
†Not plotted
‡Extrapolated time
Figure 2. Speed (ms) versus accuracy (AP) on COCO test-dev.
Enabled by the focal loss, our simple one-stage RetinaNet detector outperforms all previous one-stage and two-stage detectors, including the best reported Faster R-CNN system from .
We show variants of RetinaNet with ResNet-50-FPN (blue circles)
and ResNet-101-FPN (orange diamonds) at ﬁve scales (400-800
pixels). Ignoring the low-accuracy regime (AP<25), RetinaNet
forms an upper envelope of all current detectors, and an improved
variant (not shown) achieves 40.8 AP. Details are given in §5.
1. Introduction
Current state-of-the-art object detectors are based on
a two-stage, proposal-driven mechanism. As popularized
in the R-CNN framework , the ﬁrst stage generates a
sparse set of candidate object locations and the second stage
classiﬁes each candidate location as one of the foreground
classes or as background using a convolutional neural network. Through a sequence of advances , this
two-stage framework consistently achieves top accuracy on
the challenging COCO benchmark .
Despite the success of two-stage detectors, a natural
question to ask is: could a simple one-stage detector achieve
similar accuracy? One stage detectors are applied over a
regular, dense sampling of object locations, scales, and aspect ratios. Recent work on one-stage detectors, such as
YOLO and SSD , demonstrates promising
results, yielding faster detectors with accuracy within 10-
40% relative to state-of-the-art two-stage methods.
This paper pushes the envelop further: we present a onestage object detector that, for the ﬁrst time, matches the
state-of-the-art COCO AP of more complex two-stage de-
 
tectors, such as the Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) 
or Mask R-CNN variants of Faster R-CNN . To
achieve this result, we identify class imbalance during training as the main obstacle impeding one-stage detector from
achieving state-of-the-art accuracy and propose a new loss
function that eliminates this barrier.
Class imbalance is addressed in R-CNN-like detectors
by a two-stage cascade and sampling heuristics. The proposal stage (e.g., Selective Search , EdgeBoxes ,
DeepMask , RPN ) rapidly narrows down the
number of candidate object locations to a small number
(e.g., 1-2k), ﬁltering out most background samples. In the
second classiﬁcation stage, sampling heuristics, such as a
ﬁxed foreground-to-background ratio (1:3), or online hard
example mining (OHEM) , are performed to maintain a
manageable balance between foreground and background.
In contrast, a one-stage detector must process a much
larger set of candidate object locations regularly sampled
across an image. In practice this often amounts to enumerating ∼100k locations that densely cover spatial positions,
scales, and aspect ratios. While similar sampling heuristics may also be applied, they are inefﬁcient as the training
procedure is still dominated by easily classiﬁed background
examples. This inefﬁciency is a classic problem in object
detection that is typically addressed via techniques such as
bootstrapping or hard example mining .
In this paper, we propose a new loss function that acts
as a more effective alternative to previous approaches for
dealing with class imbalance. The loss function is a dynamically scaled cross entropy loss, where the scaling factor
decays to zero as conﬁdence in the correct class increases,
see Figure 1. Intuitively, this scaling factor can automatically down-weight the contribution of easy examples during
training and rapidly focus the model on hard examples. Experiments show that our proposed Focal Loss enables us to
train a high-accuracy, one-stage detector that signiﬁcantly
outperforms the alternatives of training with the sampling
heuristics or hard example mining, the previous state-ofthe-art techniques for training one-stage detectors. Finally,
we note that the exact form of the focal loss is not crucial,
and we show other instantiations can achieve similar results.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed focal
loss, we design a simple one-stage object detector called
RetinaNet, named for its dense sampling of object locations
in an input image. Its design features an efﬁcient in-network
feature pyramid and use of anchor boxes. It draws on a variety of recent ideas from . RetinaNet is efﬁcient and accurate; our best model, based on a ResNet-101-
FPN backbone, achieves a COCO test-dev AP of 39.1
while running at 5 fps, surpassing the previously best published single-model results from both one and two-stage detectors, see Figure 2.
2. Related Work
Classic Object Detectors: The sliding-window paradigm,
in which a classiﬁer is applied on a dense image grid, has
a long and rich history. One of the earliest successes is the
classic work of LeCun et al. who applied convolutional neural networks to handwritten digit recognition . Viola and Jones used boosted object detectors for face
detection, leading to widespread adoption of such models.
The introduction of HOG and integral channel features
 gave rise to effective methods for pedestrian detection.
DPMs helped extend dense detectors to more general
object categories and had top results on PASCAL for
many years. While the sliding-window approach was the
leading detection paradigm in classic computer vision, with
the resurgence of deep learning , two-stage detectors,
described next, quickly came to dominate object detection.
Two-stage Detectors: The dominant paradigm in modern
object detection is based on a two-stage approach. As pioneered in the Selective Search work , the ﬁrst stage generates a sparse set of candidate proposals that should contain all objects while ﬁltering out the majority of negative
locations, and the second stage classiﬁes the proposals into
foreground classes / background. R-CNN upgraded the
second-stage classiﬁer to a convolutional network yielding
large gains in accuracy and ushering in the modern era of
object detection. R-CNN was improved over the years, both
in terms of speed and by using learned object proposals . Region Proposal Networks (RPN) integrated proposal generation with the second-stage classiﬁer
into a single convolution network, forming the Faster R-
CNN framework . Numerous extensions to this framework have been proposed, e.g. .
One-stage Detectors: OverFeat was one of the ﬁrst
modern one-stage object detector based on deep networks.
More recently SSD and YOLO have renewed interest in one-stage methods. These detectors have
been tuned for speed but their accuracy trails that of twostage methods. SSD has a 10-20% lower AP, while YOLO
focuses on an even more extreme speed/accuracy trade-off.
See Figure 2. Recent work showed that two-stage detectors
can be made fast simply by reducing input image resolution
and the number of proposals, but one-stage methods trailed
in accuracy even with a larger compute budget . In contrast, the aim of this work is to understand if one-stage detectors can match or surpass the accuracy of two-stage detectors while running at similar or faster speeds.
The design of our RetinaNet detector shares many similarities with previous dense detectors, in particular the concept of ‘anchors’ introduced by RPN and use of features pyramids as in SSD and FPN . We emphasize that our simple detector achieves top results not based
on innovations in network design but due to our novel loss.
Class Imbalance: Both classic one-stage object detection
methods, like boosted detectors and DPMs , and
more recent methods, like SSD , face a large class
imbalance during training. These detectors evaluate 104-
105 candidate locations per image but only a few locations contain objects. This imbalance causes two problems:
(1) training is inefﬁcient as most locations are easy negatives that contribute no useful learning signal; (2) en masse,
the easy negatives can overwhelm training and lead to degenerate models. A common solution is to perform some
form of hard negative mining that samples hard examples during training or more complex sampling/reweighing schemes . In contrast, we show that our
proposed focal loss naturally handles the class imbalance
faced by a one-stage detector and allows us to efﬁciently
train on all examples without sampling and without easy
negatives overwhelming the loss and computed gradients.
Robust Estimation: There has been much interest in designing robust loss functions (e.g., Huber loss ) that reduce the contribution of outliers by down-weighting the loss
of examples with large errors (hard examples). In contrast,
rather than addressing outliers, our focal loss is designed
to address class imbalance by down-weighting inliers (easy
examples) such that their contribution to the total loss is
small even if their number is large. In other words, the focal
loss performs the opposite role of a robust loss: it focuses
training on a sparse set of hard examples.
3. Focal Loss
The Focal Loss is designed to address the one-stage object detection scenario in which there is an extreme imbalance between foreground and background classes during
training (e.g., 1:1000). We introduce the focal loss starting
from the cross entropy (CE) loss for binary classiﬁcation1:
CE(p, y) =
−log(1 −p)
otherwise.
In the above y ∈{±1} speciﬁes the ground-truth class and
p ∈ is the model’s estimated probability for the class
with label y = 1. For notational convenience, we deﬁne pt:
otherwise,
and rewrite CE(p, y) = CE(pt) = −log(pt).
The CE loss can be seen as the blue (top) curve in Figure 1. One notable property of this loss, which can be easily
seen in its plot, is that even examples that are easily classiﬁed (pt ≫.5) incur a loss with non-trivial magnitude.
When summed over a large number of easy examples, these
small loss values can overwhelm the rare class.
1Extending the focal loss to the multi-class case is straightforward and
works well; for simplicity we focus on the binary loss in this work.
3.1. Balanced Cross Entropy
A common method for addressing class imbalance is to
introduce a weighting factor α ∈ for class 1 and 1−α
for class −1. In practice α may be set by inverse class frequency or treated as a hyperparameter to set by cross validation. For notational convenience, we deﬁne αt analogously
to how we deﬁned pt. We write the α-balanced CE loss as:
CE(pt) = −αt log(pt).
This loss is a simple extension to CE that we consider as an
experimental baseline for our proposed focal loss.
3.2. Focal Loss Deﬁnition
As our experiments will show, the large class imbalance
encountered during training of dense detectors overwhelms
the cross entropy loss. Easily classiﬁed negatives comprise
the majority of the loss and dominate the gradient. While
α balances the importance of positive/negative examples, it
does not differentiate between easy/hard examples. Instead,
we propose to reshape the loss function to down-weight
easy examples and thus focus training on hard negatives.
More formally, we propose to add a modulating factor
(1 −pt)γ to the cross entropy loss, with tunable focusing
parameter γ ≥0. We deﬁne the focal loss as:
FL(pt) = −(1 −pt)γ log(pt).
The focal loss is visualized for several values of γ ∈
 in Figure 1. We note two properties of the focal loss.
(1) When an example is misclassiﬁed and pt is small, the
modulating factor is near 1 and the loss is unaffected. As
pt →1, the factor goes to 0 and the loss for well-classiﬁed
examples is down-weighted. (2) The focusing parameter γ
smoothly adjusts the rate at which easy examples are downweighted. When γ = 0, FL is equivalent to CE, and as γ is
increased the effect of the modulating factor is likewise increased (we found γ = 2 to work best in our experiments).
Intuitively, the modulating factor reduces the loss contribution from easy examples and extends the range in which
an example receives low loss. For instance, with γ = 2, an
example classiﬁed with pt = 0.9 would have 100× lower
loss compared with CE and with pt ≈0.968 it would have
1000× lower loss. This in turn increases the importance
of correcting misclassiﬁed examples (whose loss is scaled
down by at most 4× for pt ≤.5 and γ = 2).
In practice we use an α-balanced variant of the focal loss:
FL(pt) = −αt(1 −pt)γ log(pt).
We adopt this form in our experiments as it yields slightly
improved accuracy over the non-α-balanced form. Finally,
we note that the implementation of the loss layer combines
the sigmoid operation for computing p with the loss computation, resulting in greater numerical stability.
While in our main experimental results we use the focal
loss deﬁnition above, its precise form is not crucial. In the
appendix we consider other instantiations of the focal loss
and demonstrate that these can be equally effective.
3.3. Class Imbalance and Model Initialization
Binary classiﬁcation models are by default initialized to
have equal probability of outputting either y = −1 or 1.
Under such an initialization, in the presence of class imbalance, the loss due to the frequent class can dominate total
loss and cause instability in early training. To counter this,
we introduce the concept of a ‘prior’ for the value of p estimated by the model for the rare class (foreground) at the
start of training. We denote the prior by π and set it so that
the model’s estimated p for examples of the rare class is low,
e.g. 0.01. We note that this is a change in model initialization (see §4.1) and not of the loss function. We found this
to improve training stability for both the cross entropy and
focal loss in the case of heavy class imbalance.
3.4. Class Imbalance and Two-stage Detectors
Two-stage detectors are often trained with the cross entropy loss without use of α-balancing or our proposed loss.
Instead, they address class imbalance through two mechanisms: (1) a two-stage cascade and (2) biased minibatch
The ﬁrst cascade stage is an object proposal
mechanism that reduces the nearly inﬁnite set
of possible object locations down to one or two thousand.
Importantly, the selected proposals are not random, but are
likely to correspond to true object locations, which removes
the vast majority of easy negatives. When training the second stage, biased sampling is typically used to construct
minibatches that contain, for instance, a 1:3 ratio of positive to negative examples. This ratio is like an implicit αbalancing factor that is implemented via sampling. Our proposed focal loss is designed to address these mechanisms in
a one-stage detection system directly via the loss function.
4. RetinaNet Detector
RetinaNet is a single, uniﬁed network composed of a
backbone network and two task-speciﬁc subnetworks. The
backbone is responsible for computing a convolutional feature map over an entire input image and is an off-the-self
convolutional network. The ﬁrst subnet performs convolutional object classiﬁcation on the backbone’s output; the
second subnet performs convolutional bounding box regression. The two subnetworks feature a simple design that we
propose speciﬁcally for one-stage, dense detection, see Figure 3. While there are many possible choices for the details
of these components, most design parameters are not particularly sensitive to exact values as shown in the experiments.
We describe each component of RetinaNet next.
Feature Pyramid Network Backbone: We adopt the Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) from as the backbone
network for RetinaNet.
In brief, FPN augments a standard convolutional network with a top-down pathway and
lateral connections so the network efﬁciently constructs a
rich, multi-scale feature pyramid from a single resolution
input image, see Figure 3(a)-(b). Each level of the pyramid
can be used for detecting objects at a different scale. FPN
improves multi-scale predictions from fully convolutional
networks (FCN) , as shown by its gains for RPN 
and DeepMask-style proposals , as well at two-stage
detectors such as Fast R-CNN or Mask R-CNN .
Following , we build FPN on top of the ResNet architecture .
We construct a pyramid with levels P3
through P7, where l indicates pyramid level (Pl has resolution 2l lower than the input). As in all pyramid levels
have C = 256 channels. Details of the pyramid generally
follow with a few modest differences.2 While many
design choices are not crucial, we emphasize the use of the
FPN backbone is; preliminary experiments using features
from only the ﬁnal ResNet layer yielded low AP.
Anchors: We use translation-invariant anchor boxes similar to those in the RPN variant in . The anchors have
areas of 322 to 5122 on pyramid levels P3 to P7, respectively. As in , at each pyramid level we use anchors at
three aspect ratios {1:2, 1:1, 2:1}. For denser scale coverage than in , at each level we add anchors of sizes {20,
21/3, 22/3} of the original set of 3 aspect ratio anchors. This
improve AP in our setting. In total there are A = 9 anchors
per level and across levels they cover the scale range 32 -
813 pixels with respect to the network’s input image.
Each anchor is assigned a length K one-hot vector of
classiﬁcation targets, where K is the number of object
classes, and a 4-vector of box regression targets. We use
the assignment rule from RPN but modiﬁed for multiclass detection and with adjusted thresholds. Speciﬁcally,
anchors are assigned to ground-truth object boxes using an
intersection-over-union (IoU) threshold of 0.5; and to background if their IoU is in [0, 0.4). As each anchor is assigned
to at most one object box, we set the corresponding entry
in its length K label vector to 1 and all other entries to 0.
If an anchor is unassigned, which may happen with overlap
in [0.4, 0.5), it is ignored during training. Box regression
targets are computed as the offset between each anchor and
its assigned object box, or omitted if there is no assignment.
2RetinaNet uses feature pyramid levels P3 to P7, where P3 to P5 are
computed from the output of the corresponding ResNet residual stage (C3
through C5) using top-down and lateral connections just as in , P6 is
obtained via a 3×3 stride-2 conv on C5, and P7 is computed by applying ReLU followed by a 3×3 stride-2 conv on P6. This differs slightly
from : (1) we don’t use the high-resolution pyramid level P2 for computational reasons, (2) P6 is computed by strided convolution instead of
downsampling, and (3) we include P7 to improve large object detection.
These minor modiﬁcations improve speed while maintaining accuracy.
(a) ResNet
(b) feature pyramid net
(c) class subnet (top)
(d) box subnet (bottom)
Figure 3. The one-stage RetinaNet network architecture uses a Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) backbone on top of a feedforward
ResNet architecture (a) to generate a rich, multi-scale convolutional feature pyramid (b). To this backbone RetinaNet attaches two
subnetworks, one for classifying anchor boxes (c) and one for regressing from anchor boxes to ground-truth object boxes (d). The network
design is intentionally simple, which enables this work to focus on a novel focal loss function that eliminates the accuracy gap between our
one-stage detector and state-of-the-art two-stage detectors like Faster R-CNN with FPN while running at faster speeds.
Classiﬁcation Subnet: The classiﬁcation subnet predicts
the probability of object presence at each spatial position
for each of the A anchors and K object classes. This subnet
is a small FCN attached to each FPN level; parameters of
this subnet are shared across all pyramid levels. Its design
is simple. Taking an input feature map with C channels
from a given pyramid level, the subnet applies four 3×3
conv layers, each with C ﬁlters and each followed by ReLU
activations, followed by a 3×3 conv layer with KA ﬁlters.
Finally sigmoid activations are attached to output the KA
binary predictions per spatial location, see Figure 3 (c). We
use C = 256 and A = 9 in most experiments.
In contrast to RPN , our object classiﬁcation subnet
is deeper, uses only 3×3 convs, and does not share parameters with the box regression subnet (described next). We
found these higher-level design decisions to be more important than speciﬁc values of hyperparameters.
Box Regression Subnet: In parallel with the object classi-
ﬁcation subnet, we attach another small FCN to each pyramid level for the purpose of regressing the offset from each
anchor box to a nearby ground-truth object, if one exists.
The design of the box regression subnet is identical to the
classiﬁcation subnet except that it terminates in 4A linear
outputs per spatial location, see Figure 3 (d).
of the A anchors per spatial location, these 4 outputs predict the relative offset between the anchor and the groundtruth box (we use the standard box parameterization from R-
CNN ). We note that unlike most recent work, we use a
class-agnostic bounding box regressor which uses fewer parameters and we found to be equally effective. The object
classiﬁcation subnet and the box regression subnet, though
sharing a common structure, use separate parameters.
4.1. Inference and Training
Inference: RetinaNet forms a single FCN comprised of a
ResNet-FPN backbone, a classiﬁcation subnet, and a box
regression subnet, see Figure 3. As such, inference involves
simply forwarding an image through the network. To improve speed, we only decode box predictions from at most
1k top-scoring predictions per FPN level, after thresholding detector conﬁdence at 0.05. The top predictions from
all levels are merged and non-maximum suppression with a
threshold of 0.5 is applied to yield the ﬁnal detections.
Focal Loss: We use the focal loss introduced in this work
as the loss on the output of the classiﬁcation subnet. As we
will show in §5, we ﬁnd that γ = 2 works well in practice
and the RetinaNet is relatively robust to γ ∈[0.5, 5]. We
emphasize that when training RetinaNet, the focal loss is
applied to all ∼100k anchors in each sampled image. This
stands in contrast to common practice of using heuristic
sampling (RPN) or hard example mining (OHEM, SSD) to
select a small set of anchors (e.g., 256) for each minibatch.
The total focal loss of an image is computed as the sum
of the focal loss over all ∼100k anchors, normalized by the
number of anchors assigned to a ground-truth box. We perform the normalization by the number of assigned anchors,
not total anchors, since the vast majority of anchors are easy
negatives and receive negligible loss values under the focal
loss. Finally we note that α, the weight assigned to the rare
class, also has a stable range, but it interacts with γ making it necessary to select the two together (see Tables 1a
and 1b). In general α should be decreased slightly as γ is
increased (for γ = 2, α = 0.25 works best).
Initialization: We experiment with ResNet-50-FPN and
ResNet-101-FPN backbones . The base ResNet-50 and
ResNet-101 models are pre-trained on ImageNet1k; we use
the models released by . New layers added for FPN are
initialized as in . All new conv layers except the ﬁnal
one in the RetinaNet subnets are initialized with bias b = 0
and a Gaussian weight ﬁll with σ = 0.01. For the ﬁnal conv
layer of the classiﬁcation subnet, we set the bias initialization to b = −log((1 −π)/π), where π speciﬁes that at
(a) Varying α for CE loss (γ = 0)
(b) Varying γ for FL (w. optimal α)
(c) Varying anchor scales and aspects
(d) FL vs. OHEM baselines (with ResNet-101-FPN)
depth scale
(e) Accuracy/speed trade-off RetinaNet (on test-dev)
Table 1. Ablation experiments for RetinaNet and Focal Loss (FL). All models are trained on trainval35k and tested on minival
unless noted. If not speciﬁed, default values are: γ = 2; anchors for 3 scales and 3 aspect ratios; ResNet-50-FPN backbone; and a 600
pixel train and test image scale. (a) RetinaNet with α-balanced CE achieves at most 31.1 AP. (b) In contrast, using FL with the same exact
network gives a 2.9 AP gain and is fairly robust to exact γ/α settings. (c) Using 2-3 scale and 3 aspect ratio anchors yields good results
after which point performance saturates. (d) FL outperforms the best variants of online hard example mining (OHEM) by over 3
points AP. (e) Accuracy/Speed trade-off of RetinaNet on test-dev for various network depths and image scales (see also Figure 2).
the start of training every anchor should be labeled as foreground with conﬁdence of ∼π. We use π = .01 in all experiments, although results are robust to the exact value. As
explained in §3.3, this initialization prevents the large number of background anchors from generating a large, destabilizing loss value in the ﬁrst iteration of training.
Optimization: RetinaNet is trained with stochastic gradient descent (SGD). We use synchronized SGD over 8 GPUs
with a total of 16 images per minibatch (2 images per GPU).
Unless otherwise speciﬁed, all models are trained for 90k iterations with an initial learning rate of 0.01, which is then
divided by 10 at 60k and again at 80k iterations. We use
horizontal image ﬂipping as the only form of data augmentation unless otherwise noted. Weight decay of 0.0001 and
momentum of 0.9 are used. The training loss is the sum
the focal loss and the standard smooth L1 loss used for box
regression . Training time ranges between 10 and 35
hours for the models in Table 1e.
5. Experiments
We present experimental results on the bounding box
detection track of the challenging COCO benchmark .
For training, we follow common practice and use
the COCO trainval35k split (union of 80k images from
train and a random 35k subset of images from the 40k image val split). We report lesion and sensitivity studies by
evaluating on the minival split (the remaining 5k images
from val). For our main results, we report COCO AP on
the test-dev split, which has no public labels and requires
use of the evaluation server.
5.1. Training Dense Detection
We run numerous experiments to analyze the behavior
of the loss function for dense detection along with various
optimization strategies. For all experiments we use depth
50 or 101 ResNets with a Feature Pyramid Network
(FPN) constructed on top. For all ablation studies we
use an image scale of 600 pixels for training and testing.
Network Initialization: Our ﬁrst attempt to train RetinaNet uses standard cross entropy (CE) loss without any
modiﬁcations to the initialization or learning strategy. This
fails quickly, with the network diverging during training.
However, simply initializing the last layer of our model such
that the prior probability of detecting an object is π = .01
(see §4.1) enables effective learning. Training RetinaNet
with ResNet-50 and this initialization already yields a respectable AP of 30.2 on COCO. Results are insensitive to
the exact value of π so we use π = .01 for all experiments.
fraction of foreground examples
cumulative normalized loss
fraction of background examples
cumulative normalized loss
Figure 4. Cumulative distribution functions of the normalized loss for positive and negative samples for different values of γ for a converged
model. The effect of changing γ on the distribution of the loss for positive examples is minor. For negatives, however, increasing γ heavily
concentrates the loss on hard examples, focusing nearly all attention away from easy negatives.
Balanced Cross Entropy: Our next attempt to improve
learning involved using the α-balanced CE loss described
in §3.1. Results for various α are shown in Table 1a. Setting α = .75 gives a gain of 0.9 points AP.
Focal Loss: Results using our proposed focal loss are
shown in Table 1b. The focal loss introduces one new hyperparameter, the focusing parameter γ, that controls the
strength of the modulating term. When γ = 0, our loss is
equivalent to the CE loss. As γ increases, the shape of the
loss changes so that “easy” examples with low loss get further discounted, see Figure 1. FL shows large gains over
CE as γ is increased. With γ = 2, FL yields a 2.9 AP improvement over the α-balanced CE loss.
For the experiments in Table 1b, for a fair comparison
we ﬁnd the best α for each γ. We observe that lower α’s
are selected for higher γ’s (as easy negatives are downweighted, less emphasis needs to be placed on the positives). Overall, however, the beneﬁt of changing γ is much
larger, and indeed the best α’s ranged in just [.25,.75] (we
tested α ∈[.01, .999]). We use γ = 2.0 with α = .25 for all
experiments but α = .5 works nearly as well (.4 AP lower).
Analysis of the Focal Loss: To understand the focal loss
better, we analyze the empirical distribution of the loss of a
converged model. For this, we take take our default ResNet-
101 600-pixel model trained with γ = 2 (which has 36.0
AP). We apply this model to a large number of random images and sample the predicted probability for ∼107 negative
windows and ∼105 positive windows. Next, separately for
positives and negatives, we compute FL for these samples,
and normalize the loss such that it sums to one. Given the
normalized loss, we can sort the loss from lowest to highest
and plot its cumulative distribution function (CDF) for both
positive and negative samples and for different settings for
γ (even though model was trained with γ = 2).
Cumulative distribution functions for positive and negative samples are shown in Figure 4. If we observe the positive samples, we see that the CDF looks fairly similar for
different values of γ. For example, approximately 20% of
the hardest positive samples account for roughly half of the
positive loss, as γ increases more of the loss gets concentrated in the top 20% of examples, but the effect is minor.
The effect of γ on negative samples is dramatically different. For γ = 0, the positive and negative CDFs are quite
similar. However, as γ increases, substantially more weight
becomes concentrated on the hard negative examples. In
fact, with γ = 2 (our default setting), the vast majority of
the loss comes from a small fraction of samples. As can be
seen, FL can effectively discount the effect of easy negatives, focusing all attention on the hard negative examples.
Online Hard Example Mining (OHEM): proposed
to improve training of two-stage detectors by constructing minibatches using high-loss examples. Speciﬁcally, in
OHEM each example is scored by its loss, non-maximum
suppression (nms) is then applied, and a minibatch is constructed with the highest-loss examples. The nms threshold
and batch size are tunable parameters. Like the focal loss,
OHEM puts more emphasis on misclassiﬁed examples, but
unlike FL, OHEM completely discards easy examples. We
also implement a variant of OHEM used in SSD : after
applying nms to all examples, the minibatch is constructed
to enforce a 1:3 ratio between positives and negatives to
help ensure each minibatch has enough positives.
We test both OHEM variants in our setting of one-stage
detection which has large class imbalance. Results for the
original OHEM strategy and the ‘OHEM 1:3’ strategy for
selected batch sizes and nms thresholds are shown in Table 1d. These results use ResNet-101, our baseline trained
with FL achieves 36.0 AP for this setting. In contrast, the
best setting for OHEM (no 1:3 ratio, batch size 128, nms of
.5) achieves 32.8 AP. This is a gap of 3.2 AP, showing FL
is more effective than OHEM for training dense detectors.
We note that we tried other parameter setting and variants
for OHEM but did not achieve better results.
Hinge Loss: Finally, in early experiments, we attempted
to train with the hinge loss on pt, which sets loss to 0
above a certain value of pt. However, this was unstable and
we did not manage to obtain meaningful results. Results
exploring alternate loss functions are in the appendix.
Two-stage methods
Faster R-CNN+++ 
ResNet-101-C4
Faster R-CNN w FPN 
ResNet-101-FPN
Faster R-CNN by G-RMI 
Inception-ResNet-v2 
Faster R-CNN w TDM 
Inception-ResNet-v2-TDM
One-stage methods
YOLOv2 
DarkNet-19 
SSD513 
ResNet-101-SSD
DSSD513 
ResNet-101-DSSD
RetinaNet (ours)
ResNet-101-FPN
RetinaNet (ours)
ResNeXt-101-FPN
Table 2. Object detection single-model results (bounding box AP), vs. state-of-the-art on COCO test-dev. We show results for our
RetinaNet-101-800 model, trained with scale jitter and for 1.5× longer than the same model from Table 1e. Our model achieves top results,
outperforming both one-stage and two-stage models. For a detailed breakdown of speed versus accuracy see Table 1e and Figure 2.
5.2. Model Architecture Design
Anchor Density: One of the most important design factors in a one-stage detection system is how densely it covers
the space of possible image boxes. Two-stage detectors can
classify boxes at any position, scale, and aspect ratio using
a region pooling operation . In contrast, as one-stage
detectors use a ﬁxed sampling grid, a popular approach for
achieving high coverage of boxes in these approaches is to
use multiple ‘anchors’ at each spatial position to cover
boxes of various scales and aspect ratios.
We sweep over the number of scale and aspect ratio anchors used at each spatial position and each pyramid level in
FPN. We consider cases from a single square anchor at each
location to 12 anchors per location spanning 4 sub-octave
scales (2k/4, for k ≤3) and 3 aspect ratios [0.5, 1, 2]. Results using ResNet-50 are shown in Table 1c. A surprisingly
good AP (30.3) is achieved using just one square anchor.
However, the AP can be improved by nearly 4 points (to
34.0) when using 3 scales and 3 aspect ratios per location.
We used this setting for all other experiments in this work.
Finally, we note that increasing beyond 6-9 anchors did
not shown further gains. Thus while two-stage systems can
classify arbitrary boxes in an image, the saturation of performance w.r.t. density implies the higher potential density
of two-stage systems may not offer an advantage.
Speed versus Accuracy: Larger backbone networks yield
higher accuracy, but also slower inference speeds. Likewise
for input image scale (deﬁned by the shorter image side).
We show the impact of these two factors in Table 1e. In
Figure 2 we plot the speed/accuracy trade-off curve for RetinaNet and compare it to recent methods using public numbers on COCO test-dev. The plot reveals that RetinaNet,
enabled by our focal loss, forms an upper envelope over
all existing methods, discounting the low-accuracy regime.
RetinaNet with ResNet-101-FPN and a 600 pixel image
scale (which we denote by RetinaNet-101-600 for simplicity) matches the accuracy of the recently published ResNet-
101-FPN Faster R-CNN , while running in 122 ms per
image compared to 172 ms (both measured on an Nvidia
M40 GPU). Using larger scales allows RetinaNet to surpass the accuracy of all two-stage approaches, while still
being faster. For faster runtimes, there is only one operating
point (500 pixel input) at which using ResNet-50-FPN improves over ResNet-101-FPN. Addressing the high frame
rate regime will likely require special network design, as in
 , and is beyond the scope of this work. We note that
after publication, faster and more accurate results can now
be obtained by a variant of Faster R-CNN from .
5.3. Comparison to State of the Art
We evaluate RetinaNet on the challenging COCO dataset
and compare test-dev results to recent state-of-the-art
methods including both one-stage and two-stage models.
Results are presented in Table 2 for our RetinaNet-101-800
model trained using scale jitter and for 1.5× longer than the
models in Table 1e (giving a 1.3 AP gain). Compared to existing one-stage methods, our approach achieves a healthy
5.9 point AP gap (39.1 vs. 33.2) with the closest competitor,
DSSD , while also being faster, see Figure 2. Compared
to recent two-stage methods, RetinaNet achieves a 2.3 point
gap above the top-performing Faster R-CNN model based
on Inception-ResNet-v2-TDM . Plugging in ResNeXt-
32x8d-101-FPN as the RetinaNet backbone further improves results another 1.7 AP, surpassing 40 AP on COCO.
6. Conclusion
In this work, we identify class imbalance as the primary obstacle preventing one-stage object detectors from
surpassing top-performing, two-stage methods. To address
this, we propose the focal loss which applies a modulating term to the cross entropy loss in order to focus learning on hard negative examples. Our approach is simple and
highly effective. We demonstrate its efﬁcacy by designing
a fully convolutional one-stage detector and report extensive experimental analysis showing that it achieves stateof-the-art accuracy and speed. Source code is available at
 .
FL* =2, =1
FL* =4, =0
Figure 5. Focal loss variants compared to the cross entropy as a
function of xt = yx. Both the original FL and alternate variant
FL∗reduce the relative loss for well-classiﬁed examples (xt > 0).
Table 3. Results of FL and FL∗versus CE for select settings.
Appendix A: Focal Loss*
The exact form of the focal loss is not crucial. We now
show an alternate instantiation of the focal loss that has similar properties and yields comparable results. The following
also gives more insights into properties of the focal loss.
We begin by considering both cross entropy (CE) and the
focal loss (FL) in a slightly different form than in the main
text. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne a quantity xt as follows:
where y ∈{±1} speciﬁes the ground-truth class as before.
We can then write pt = σ(xt) (this is compatible with the
deﬁnition of pt in Equation 2). An example is correctly classiﬁed when xt > 0, in which case pt > .5.
We can now deﬁne an alternate form of the focal loss in
terms of xt. We deﬁne p∗
t and FL∗as follows:
t = σ(γxt + β),
FL∗= −log(p∗
FL∗has two parameters, γ and β, that control the steepness
and shift of the loss curve. We plot FL∗for two selected settings of γ and β in Figure 5 alongside CE and FL. As can be
seen, like FL, FL∗with the selected parameters diminishes
the loss assigned to well-classiﬁed examples.
We trained RetinaNet-50-600 using identical settings as
before but we swap out FL for FL∗with the selected parameters. These models achieve nearly the same AP as those
trained with FL, see Table 3. In other words, FL∗is a reasonable alternative for the FL that works well in practice.
FL* =2, =1
FL* =4, =0
Figure 6. Derivates of the loss functions from Figure 5 w.r.t. x.
Figure 7. Effectiveness of FL∗with various settings γ and β. The
plots are color coded such that effective settings are shown in blue.
We found that various γ and β settings gave good results.
In Figure 7 we show results for RetinaNet-50-600 with FL∗
for a wide set of parameters. The loss plots are color coded
such that effective settings (models converged and with AP
over 33.5) are shown in blue. We used α = .25 in all experiments for simplicity. As can be seen, losses that reduce
weights of well-classiﬁed examples (xt > 0) are effective.
More generally, we expect any loss function with similar
properties as FL or FL∗to be equally effective.
Appendix B: Derivatives
For reference, derivates for CE, FL, and FL∗w.r.t. x are:
dx = y(pt −1)
dx = y(1 −pt)γ(γpt log(pt) + pt −1)
Plots for selected settings are shown in Figure 6. For all loss
functions, the derivative tends to -1 or 0 for high-conﬁdence
predictions. However, unlike CE, for effective settings of
both FL and FL∗, the derivative is small as soon as xt > 0.