Sailing from the seas of chaos into the corridor of stability :
practical recommendations to increase the informational value
of studies
Citation for published version (APA):
Lakens, D., & Evers, E. R. K. . Sailing from the seas of chaos into the corridor of stability : practical
recommendations to increase the informational value of studies. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 9(3),
278-292. 
10.1177/1745691614528520
Document status and date:
Published: 01/01/2014
Document Version:
Publisher’s PDF, also known as Version of Record (includes final page, issue and volume numbers)
Please check the document version of this publication:
• A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. There can be
important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record. People
interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication, or visit the
DOI to the publisher's website.
• The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page
Link to publication
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
• Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
• You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
• You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal.
If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license above, please
follow below link for the End User Agreement:
www.tue.nl/taverne
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at:
 
providing details and we will investigate your claim.
Download date: 26. Mar. 2025
Perspectives on Psychological Science
2014, Vol. 9(3) 278­–292
© The Author(s) 2014
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1745691614528520
pps.sagepub.com
One of the goals of psychological science is to differentiate among all possible truths on the basis of their likelihood. The most important way to achieve this goal in
psychology is the empirical cycle, in which induction (on
the basis of statistical inference) and deduction (on the
basis of theory) take turns in progressive lines of research.
Recent events have led psychologists to acknowledge
that the inherent uncertainty encapsulated in induction is
amplified by problematic research practices. Publication
bias and flexibility during data analyses
 create a situation
in which false positives are easy to publish, whereas contradictory null findings do not reach scientific journals
(but see Nosek & Lakens, in press). It is essentially impossible to predict whether a single statistically significant
finding will replicate , and even
when an effect is real, it is very common that the true
effect size of a finding remains uncertain after initial studies have been published because of the large confidence
intervals (CIs) surrounding effect size estimates . In this article, we provide a practical introduction to recently developed statistical tools
that can be used to assess and mitigate these uncertainties when performing and evaluating research.
This article contains three parts. In Part 1, we discuss (a)
how to report the uncertainty that surrounds effect size
estimates with CIs, (b) how to plan studies such that a
“corridor of stability” around an effect size estimate can be
reached, and, more generally, (c) why collecting large
enough sample sizes is necessary to reduce uncertainty. In
Part 2, we focus on performing research given the inherent
uncertainty about the true effect size of a hypothesized
528520 PPSXXX10.1177/1745691614528520Lakens, EversIncreasing the Informational Value of Studies
research-article2014
Corresponding Author:
Daniël Lakens, Human Technology Interaction Group, School of
Innovation Sciences, Eindhoven University of Technology, Room IPO
1.33, P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, the Netherlands
E-mail: 
Sailing From the Seas of Chaos Into
the Corridor of Stability: Practical
Recommendations to Increase the
Informational Value of Studies
Daniël Lakens1 and Ellen R. K. Evers2
1School of Innovation Sciences, Eindhoven University of Technology; and 2Department of Social Psychology,
Tilburg University
Recent events have led psychologists to acknowledge that the inherent uncertainty encapsulated in an inductive science
is amplified by problematic research practices. In this article, we provide a practical introduction to recently developed
statistical tools that can be used to deal with these uncertainties when performing and evaluating research. In Part 1, we
discuss the importance of accurate and stable effect size estimates as well as how to design studies to reach a corridor
of stability around effect size estimates. In Part 2, we explain how, given uncertain effect size estimates, well-powered
studies can be designed with sequential analyses. In Part 3, we (a) explain what p values convey about the likelihood
that an effect is true, (b) illustrate how the v statistic can be used to evaluate the accuracy of individual studies, and
(c) show how the evidential value of multiple studies can be examined with a p-curve analysis. We end by discussing
the consequences of incorporating our recommendations in terms of a reduced quantity, but increased quality, of the
research output. We hope that the practical recommendations discussed in this article will provide researchers with
the tools to make important steps toward a psychological science that allows researchers to differentiate among all
possible truths on the basis of their likelihood.
induction, p-curve analysis, v statistic, confidence intervals, sequential analyses
at Eindhoven Univ of Technology on May 28, 2014
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Increasing the Informational Value of Studies
effect, and we discuss how to run well-powered studies
with sequential analyses and adaptive designs. In Part 3,
we illustrate how researchers can evaluate past research
by looking further than the statistical significance of the
original findings. We discuss how individual studies can be
evaluated on the basis of the accuracy with which they
estimate effects in the population using the v statistic
 . Furthermore, we review how
to correctly interpret a p value, what a p value conveys
about the likelihood that an effect is true, how to use this
knowledge to design studies in ways that increase the
informational value of a p value, and how the evidential
value of multiple studies can be examined with a p-curve
analysis (Simonsohn, Nelson, & Simmons, in press). We
hope these procedures (and the step-by-step guides in the
Supplemental Material available online) will help researchers (a) evaluate the extent to which previous findings are
worthwhile to cite or build on, (b) plan better studies, and
(c) make an informed choice about whether to start a line
of research with a close replication study (instead of a
conceptual replication or extension) or whether previous
research provides sufficient certainty about the likelihood
of the hypothesis that a researcher can start with a conceptual replication.
Part 1: Confidence, Stability, and
Reduction in Uncertainty
The certainty (or precision) of an effect size estimate
increases with greater sample sizes. This precision is
expressed by the variance of an effect size estimate. In
general, the larger the sample size, the lower the variance
(and thus the lower the standard errors) around estimates,
such as means and effect sizes . The
variance of the effect size estimate is important because it
largely determines the width of a CI. There is a direct relationship between the CI of an effect size and the statistical
significance of the effect. For example, if an effect is statistically significant in a two-sided t test with an alpha of .05,
the 95% CI for the mean difference between two groups
will never include zero. CIs do not only provide information about the statistical significance of an effect but they
also communicate the precision of the effect size estimate.
Therefore, reporting CIs should not be considered as
optional. As Kelly and Rausch noted,
“Although reporting measures of effect is useful, reporting
point estimates without CIs to illustrate the uncertainty of
the estimate can be misleading and cannot be condoned.”
Although CIs communicate more information than a
p value, the information they express is at least as (and
perhaps more) difficult to understand. CIs express the
proportion of intervals that, in the long run, will include
the parameter for which the CI is calculated (which could
be a mean difference, an effect size, or any other estimated parameter in a sample). In other words, in the
long run, 95% of the CIs from a large number of close
replications will capture the true population parameter.
However, researchers typically have access to only a single 95% CI. The width of a single interval gives information about the precision with which a parameter estimate
was measured. It also gives some indication about the
likelihood that a similar value will be observed in future
studies; however, when CIs are used for this purpose, it
is risky. Simulations indicate approximately 83.4% (or five
out of six) of replication studies will give a value that falls
within the 95% CI of a single study;1 although given publication bias or flexibility during the data analysis, this
percentage is likely much lower for a randomly chosen
95% CI in the literature .2
Calculating CIs for effect sizes requires an iterative
procedure, which ESCI takes care of for
Cohen’s d and which can be done in SPSS for η2 (or r2)
with scripts provided by Smithson . In addition to
the sample size, the width of the CI is influenced by precision of the measurement (measures that are inherently
less accurate increase variance and, thereby, lead to less
precise estimates of the effect size) and by the experimental design (in psychological experiments, within-subject designs typically provide more precision than
between-subjects designs with the same sample size). We
provide a practical primer and easy-to-use spreadsheets
to calculate and convert between effect sizes d and r in
the Supplemental Material .
The corridor of stability
With a small number of observations, effect size estimates
have very wide CIs and are relatively unstable. An effect
size estimate observed after collecting 20 observations
can change dramatically if an additional 20 observations
are added. An important question when designing an
experiment is how many observations are needed to
observe relatively stable effect size estimates, such that
the effect size estimate will not change considerably
when more participants are collected. On the basis of
approaches in statistics that stress accuracy, and not just
statistical significance ,
Schönbrodt and Perugini have recently performed
simulations that address this question.
First, it is necessary to define the “stability” of an effect
size estimate, and Schönbrodt and Perugini proposed that a useful (albeit arbitrary) benchmark is that
the difference between the true and observed correlations should not exceed a small effect size as defined by
Cohen , neither in the collected sample nor in
potentially increased samples. Hence, the stability of
effect size estimates refers to a situation in which the
at Eindhoven Univ of Technology on May 28, 2014
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Lakens, Evers
estimated effect is close to the true effect size and stays
close. They defined the width (w) of the interval in which
the effect size estimate has to stay using Cohen’s q (the
difference between two Fisher-z-transformed correlation
coefficients), in which a q (or w) = .1 is defined as a small
effect size. Schönbrodt and Perugini used the term corridor of stability to indicate effect size estimates that are
likely to stay within a specified width around the true
effect size, even when additional observations would be
collected. The sample size associated with the point
where effect size estimates enter the corridor of stability
without leaving it (with a specific level of confidence)
was referred to as the point of stability.
Large enough sample sizes
Because of the probabilistic nature of induction, statistical
inferences require a large enough number of observations.
With too small samples, researchers are (what we would
call) “sailing the seas of chaos”: Estimated effect sizes and
significance levels are highly uncertain and can change
dramatically as additional observations are added or from
one study to the next . In Appendix A, we provide a demonstration of
the importance of large enough sample sizes, in which we
randomly select subsamples of 50, 100, or 250 participants
from a recent large-scale replication study (R. A. Klein et
al., in press); we then show how the sample size determines (a) the variation in effect size estimates, (b) the percentage of studies that observe a significant effect, and (c)
the overestimation in the effect size estimate if we only
consider statistically significant studies.
To reach the corridor of stability, a researcher needs to
collect a large enough sample size. On the basis of their
simulations, Schönbrodt and Perugini provided a
general recommendation of n = 250 per condition when
examining effects of r = .21 if researchers want to reach a small (w = .1)
corridor of stability. We think it is also useful to consider
the minimum number of participants per condition for
effect sizes, ranging from r = .1 to r = .7, based on a
wider corridor of w = .2. The choice of w = .2 is a lower
bound based on the idea that for the average effect size
in psychology (r = .21), an effect size estimate that is
more than .2 lower will be in the opposite direction of
the original hypothesis. In Table 1 (columns 1–4), we
display sample size recommendations for a range of
effect sizes to achieve points of stability with w = .2 or
w = .1. Some readers might consider these sample sizes
too large to be feasible, but this does not change the statistical reality: Large sample sizes are required to achieve
stable effect size estimates.
Large enough sample sizes are also required to have
high statistical power (the likelihood of observing a statistically significant effect if the effect truly exists). The
sample sizes needed to achieve a statistical power of 80%
and 90% for a two-sided independent t test with an alpha
of .05, as a function of the size of the effect, are provided
in Table 1. As is illustrated in Table 1, for large effect
sizes, the goal to be accurate requires a larger sample
size than the goal to have high power, whereas for small
effect sizes, the goal to have high power requires larger
sample sizes than the goal to be accurate (although, in
general, smaller effect sizes require larger sample sizes).
We can use the sample sizes associated with points of
stability to evaluate research findings. Large effects
observed in small samples might not meet the minimum
threshold for stability that we would like to see, which
would be an indication that these effects should be interpreted with caution, and researchers interested in cumulative knowledge might want to start with a replication and
extension study, instead of a conceptual replication, when
building on such work. These sample sizes can also be
used when designing new studies. New studies in which
large effects are expected can be designed to reach the
corridor of stability instead of reaching statistical significance . In Table
1, we also point to the fact that if a researcher wants to
perform a pilot study to acquire a reasonably accurate
effect size estimate for an a priori power analysis, sample
sizes per cell need to be quite large. A solution might be
to perform an internal pilot study and to use sequential
analyses, which we turn to next.
Part 2: Dealing With Uncertainty When
Designing Empirical Studies
If the size of an effect is known, there is no need to study
it. Even though the true effect size is inherently uncertain
Table 1.  Recommended Sample Size per Condition When
Comparing Two Independent Groups Based for Different
Effect Sizes (r and Cohen’s dpop) to Achieve the Point of
Stability (POS) With 80% Confidence and Corridor Widths
of .2 and .1 (see Part 1), to Achieve 80% or 90% Power to
Observe the Effect With an Alpha of .05, and to Achieve a v
Statistic Higher Than .5 (see Part 3)
at Eindhoven Univ of Technology on May 28, 2014
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Increasing the Informational Value of Studies
when a study is designed, it is important to have at least
some indication of the expected effect size to determine
the sample size of a study. Sometimes, researchers use a
heuristic to determine the planned sample size. A problem with using a heuristic is that the resulting sample size
of a study is almost always suboptimal, in that either too
many or, more likely, too few participants will be collected. A second solution is to use previous research
findings in which a comparable effect has been examined and to use the effect size observed in these studies
(or, preferably, the meta-analytic effect size of a large
number of studies) to make a prediction about the
hypothesized effect size. A problem with this solution is
that, especially when meta-analyses are not available,
effect sizes in the published literature typically have wide
CIs and often overestimate the true effect size . Even at their best, effect sizes observed
in comparable studies are proxies of the expected effect
size, which in reality might differ substantially because of
the differences among studies.
A third solution is to perform a pilot study (the size of
which can be based on the sample sizes associated with
a point of stability with a w = .2; see Table 1) to estimate
the effect size and to plan the sample size of the real
study on the basis of the effect size observed in the pilot
study. A problem with this approach is that studies with
a small number of participants (which is typically the
case in pilot studies) will provide relatively uncertain
information about the true effect size. Therefore, power
calculations based on the point estimate of an effect size
in a pilot study will often be wrong. Researchers might
also be tempted to combine data from the pilot study
with that from the larger follow-up experiment (especially if the studies have identical methods). Unfortunately,
not continuing with the follow-up experiment if there
seems to be no effect in the pilot study can increase the
Type II error rate, whereas not performing the follow-up
study if the pilot study reveals a significant effect, but
performing the follow-up experiment if the pilot study
reveals no effect, can increases the Type I error rate .
Sequential analyses
There is a different solution known as sequential analyses. The idea is straightforward. Instead of planning an
experiment and analyzing the results when the data collection is complete, the data are analyzed intermittently.
After an intermittent analysis, researchers follow preregistered decision paths based on the observed effect size.
It is important to realize that repeatedly analyzing the
data while data collection is in progress can increase the
Type I error —but only when
the Type I error rate is not controlled. Statistical procedures to carefully control Type I error rates while performing sequential analyses have been developed in
medical sciences and are widely used in large clinical
trials. Psychologists can benefit from these techniques
because they provide a practical and efficient way to deal
with uncertain effect size estimates while guaranteeing
well-powered studies. Imagine a researcher who expects
to observe a small effect of Cohen’s d = 0.25. An a priori
power analysis shows that an estimated 253 participants are
needed in each between-subjects condition (or 506 participants in total) to have a statistical power of .80 with an
alpha of .05 in a two-sided independent t test. Small variations in the observed effect size would have substantial
consequences for the estimated sample size. With d = 0.2,
the power analysis returns 788 participants in total, and
with d = 0.3, only 352 participants are needed.
Sequential analyses provide a solution to this practical
problem. When sequential analyses are used, researchers can spend the overall alpha level (typically .05)
across the intermittent analyses. Different spending functions can be used depending on the goals of the
researcher to determine the boundaries of the Z value
and p value for each analysis. For instance, the O’Brien–
Fleming rule is relatively conservative in the first analyses (when the effect size estimate is still sailing the seas
of chaos), which is well suited for confirmatory tests, but
a linear spending function is better suited for more
exploratory research. When expecting an effect with d =
0.25, a conservative sample size plan would be to aim to
collect 550 participants in total. Five sequential analyses
could be planned after 110, 220, 330, 440, and 550 participants have been collected with the O’Brien–Fleming
spending function. All the required computations can be
performed with the freeware program WinDL, which
was created by Reboussin, DeMets, Kim, and Lan ,
or with the GroupSeq library in the free software R (stepby-step guides to perform all required calculations are
included in the Supplementary Materials). This software
provides us with the boundaries for our statistical tests at
each of the five interim analyses, with upper bound
Z scores of 4.88, 3.36, 2.68, 2.29, and 2.03, which correspond to p-value boundaries of .000001, .0007, .007,
.022, and .042.
Imagine that after 330 participants, a t test returns the
following: t(328) = 2.74, p = .006, Cohen’s ds = 0.30.
Because the p value of .006 at the third analysis is smaller
than the boundary (p = .007), the data collection can be
terminated, and one can conclude that the data support
the hypothesis. Although it is undesirable to design a
study that has a statistical power of .5 at the final analysis,
having a 50% chance to terminate the data collection
at Eindhoven Univ of Technology on May 28, 2014
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Lakens, Evers
early after observing a significant result (or being able to
continue the data collection when the test is not significant) will often be desirable. Sequential analyses will, on
average, substantially save resources and can easily
reduce sample sizes when examining true effects by at
least 20% (see Lakens, in press).
Note, however, that the main goal of sequential analyses is to test hypotheses by demonstrating a statistically
significant effect. Whenever researchers have the goal to
provide accurate effect size estimates, they need to either
design larger studies or turn to meta-analytic techniques.
Moreover, stopping the data analysis early, if there is a
significant difference, can lead to an overestimated effect
size estimate; therefore, monitoring-adjusted p values,
CIs, and effect size estimates are reported that have been
developed to correct for this bias (see the Supplemental
Material).
Sequential analyses are efficient and provide more
flexibility. If researchers have specified a smallest effect
size of interest, they can decide in advance to terminate
the data collection whenever the observed effect size in
an interim analysis is smaller than this value. In applied
research, the smallest effect size of interest can often be
determined on the basis of a cost–benefit analysis. For
purely theoretical research, a researcher might have a
computational model of the process under examination
that suggests that an effect size lies between specific
values. Alternatively, any effect size larger than zero
might be considered of theoretical interest; however, in
these situations, a researcher will often face practical
limitations because of the number of participants that a
researcher is willing to collect. In such situations, the
smallest effect size of interest is determined by the minimum power that
can be achieved by collecting the maximum sample size
that a researcher is willing to collect. For example, if a
researcher decides that he or she is willing to collect no
more than 200 participants to examine a hypothesis,
this decision means that in practice the effect size that
he or she could detect with 80% power in an independent t test would be a Cohen’s d of 0.4 or larger.
Especially when it is unclear whether an effect exists
(e.g., for completely novel hypotheses), sequential analyses allow researchers to look at the data while data
collection is in progress and to stop the data collection
when the effect size is smaller than the smallest effect
size of interest.
Researchers should be aware that terminating the data
collection early when the effect is unlikely to exist always
includes the risk of a Type II error. We recommend consulting the minimum sample sizes based on the corridor
of stability (see Table 1) before taking effect size estimates with very wide CIs at an interim analysis too seriously (see Lakens, in press).
Adaptive designs
Sequential analyses also open up the possibility to use
adaptive designs, in which the final sample size of a
study is determined by a conditional power analysis. As
opposed to an a priori power analysis, a conditional
power analysis is performed on the basis of the effect
size observed in the data that have been collected so far
(which is referred to as an internal pilot study). By combining a smallest effect size of interest, sequential analyses, and an adaptive design, a researcher can preregister
a study design in which he or she will (a) stop when the
effect is significant at a predefined alpha level, (b) stop
when the effect size reaches a value below the smallest
effect size of interest, or (c) continue the data collection
on the basis of a conditional power analysis. This flexibility is highly efficient. The only cost of using sequential
analyses is a slight reduction in the power of the study,
which should be compensated for by a small increase in
the number of participants compared with a design without interim analyses (the exact increase depends on the
number of interim analyses and the spending function
that is chosen, which in this example leads to a 1%
increase). For a more extensive introduction to sequential analyses, see Lakens (in press). For a detailed overview, see Proschan, Lan, and Wittes .
Part 3: Evaluating Past Research
When research findings are evaluated, the informational
value of a study should always be taken into account,
beyond the dichotomous conclusion of whether the statistical test performed on the reported data is significant.
If an effect is observed reliably, it will most likely be statistically significant, but statistical significance does not
necessarily imply that the effect is observed reliably. This
asymmetry is important to understand, and it means that
not every statistically significant effect is equally strong
support for a theoretical line of reasoning. When metaanalyses are not available, researchers often need to
judge the remaining uncertainty in a single or small number of published studies. There are several ways to evaluate published research findings; we highlight two. The
first, the v statistic , can be
used to interpret individual studies. The second, p-curve
analysis (Simonsohn et al., in press), can reliably be used
to interpret five or more studies.
Comparing estimates with guessing:
The v statistic
Davis-Stober and Dana provided a new approach
to evaluate the accuracy with which parameter values
at Eindhoven Univ of Technology on May 28, 2014
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Increasing the Informational Value of Studies
(such as the average of a dependent variable) in the
population are estimated on the basis of their corresponding observed values in a sample. They introduced
the v statistic, which represents the likelihood of standard estimation methods to be more accurate than a
recently developed benchmark that represents random
guessing. The v statistic is the probability that a model
based on the data is more accurate than a model in
which the strength and direction of effects are randomly
determined (for a conceptual primer, see Appendix B).
The v statistic ranges from 0 (the model based on random guessing is always more accurate) to 1 (the model
based on the data is always more accurate). Obviously,
if a random estimator is more accurate than the estimator based on the observed data (indicated by a v statistic
smaller than .5), a study does not really reduce the
uncertainty about whether the hypothesis is true. It
might seem that comparing empirical observations
against random guessing is an extremely low benchmark, but as the v statistic demonstrates, the sample
sizes used in some psychological studies can lead to the
publication of findings that, although statistically significant, do not improve knowledge about the underlying
structure of the data compared with random guessing
(i.e., the v statistic is lower than .5). The v statistic is easily computed with scripts provided for the free software
R (for a step-by-step guide, see the Supplementary
Materials), is not defined in terms of null-hypothesis significance testing (NHST), and can be used to evaluate
published research irrespective of unquantifiable doubts
about researcher degrees of freedom or publication bias.
As an example of how the v statistic can be used, we
turn to studies by Bargh, Chen, and Burrows and
by Doyen, Klein, Pichon, and Cleeremans , who
examined whether people primed with words related to
the elderly would walk more slowly through a corridor.
We aim to show how the v statistic allows for a purely
statistical evaluation of the performed studies. In Studies
2A and 2B, Bargh et al. reported a statistically significant
difference in walking speed between the primed and
control conditions, t(28) = 2.86, p < .01, and t(28) = 2.16,
p < .05, respectively. The v statistic needs an estimate of
the true effect size, and when it is calculated post hoc on
the basis of observed values, r2
adj (the unbiased estimator
of the observed r 2) should be used.3 An effect size estimate with the t value and total sample size in the studies
by Bargh et al. can be computed that produces a Cohen’s
ds of 1.04 and 0.79, or r2 = .226 and .143, in Studies 1 and
2, respectively (assuming an equal distribution of participants across conditions). The v statistic for the total sample size (30 in each study), the number of estimated
parameters (two in the case of an independent sample t
test because two group means are estimated), and the
computed effect size estimates (r 2 = .226 and .143) return
a v = .50 and v = .27, respectively. These values imply
that—given this sample size, estimate of the effect size,
and number of parameters—the likelihood of the ordinary least squares estimator being more accurate than
random guessing is 50% and 27%, respectively. In other
words, with so few data points, any model based on the
observed data lacks the accuracy that is needed for statistical inferences.
In a recent replication attempt, Doyen et al. replicated the original effect; however,
they only did so when experimenters expected the predicted effect to occur, which is in line with the possibility
that the original effect was due to experimenter bias.
Data from 25 participants revealed slower walking speeds
in the primed condition (M = 6.95, SD = 0.36) compared
with the nonprimed condition (M = 6.52, SD = 0.31), F(1,
24) = 7.07, p = .014, r 2 = .228. The estimation of these two
means, which is based on data from 25 participants and
yields an effect size of r 2 = .228, returns a v = .44. In other
words, estimations based on the observed data in the
study by Doyen et al. do not outperform an estimator
that randomly determines the magnitude of the relationship between the means and is then scaled to the
observed data. Elderly related primes might influence
walking speed , and the explanation for the effect based on experimenter bias could be true; however, models based on the
observed data are no more accurate than models based
on random guessing. In other words, the data of both the
original finding as well as the study in which the effect
was observed only for experimenters who were aware of
the hypothesis do not allow for an accurate model of the
underlying effects; therefore, the data should be interpreted with caution until more convincing evidence has
been provided.
A sufficiently high v statistic can be seen as a precondition before interpreting the outcome of a significance
test. Researchers are already familiar with testing whether
data meet certain conditions before statistical analyses
are performed, such as whether data are normally distributed. Just as a p value is not very meaningful if the
assumptions of the statistical test have been violated, a
p  value is not very meaningful when the v statistic is
equal to or lower than .5. The v statistic thus functions as
a useful benchmark to evaluate the accuracy of estimated
means that are the basis for the statistical test. In contrast
to post hoc power analysis, which is meaningless because
it is directly related to the observed p value ,
the v statistic is not directly related to the observed
p value (i.e., studies can reveal a significant difference
but still have a low v statistic, unlike the relationship
between prep and p, or between p values and observed
power) and can be used to retrospectively evaluate the
appropriateness of the significance test.
at Eindhoven Univ of Technology on May 28, 2014
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Lakens, Evers
The v statistic can be used as information about how
strongly to weigh the statistical conclusions drawn from
empirical observations. For example, if a researcher
observes a statistically significant difference in a very
small sample, the v statistic can help him or her to interpret whether this study was accurate enough to shift his
or her belief about the likelihood that the effect is true or
whether he or she should even interpret the outcome of
the statistical test. Editors of scientific journals could use
the v statistic as one of the factors that determine whether
a study is worthwhile to publish. If a study is part of a
line of research, it becomes possible to analyze a set of
studies (which perhaps all have low v statistics) metaanalytically and to draw conclusions about the likelihood
that effects are true on the basis of the cumulative data
 . For between-subjects t
tests, the minimum sample size in each condition to surpass a v statistic of .5 is provided in Table 1, and researchers should consider consulting this table when designing
an experiment. The v statistic is relatively new, and its
computations for within-subject designs have not yet
been formalized, which would be a useful goal for future
Evaluating the evidential value of a
single study
Statistical significance is a widely used criterion to decide
whether an effect is interesting enough to share with
other scholars. There has been much criticism of NHST
 , but the use of NHST
has not declined. Instead of arguing against the use of
NHST entirely , we briefly review
how to correctly interpret p values, and we point out how
they can be used when evaluating research findings.
In general, there are four possible outcomes of a statistical test. It is possible that a true effect is examined, in
which case a significant result is a true positive, and a
nonsignificant result is a false negative. If the effect under
examination is not true, a significant result is a false positive, and a nonsignificant result is a true negative. The
most prevalent misconception about p values is that they
indicate the chance that an observed effect is a false positive (a mistake perpetuated through a number of introduction-to-statistics textbooks). Observing a significant
effect with a p = .03 does not mean that the chance of a
false positive is 3%, and it does not mean that it is 97%
likely that the effect is true. In the following section, we
review the information p values do provide, and we
review the effect of statistical power and the prior likelihood that a hypothesis is true on the probability that
significant results are Type I errors.
Because researchers sometimes investigate true ideas
and sometimes investigate false ideas, it is important to
understand what influences the likelihood that one of
the four possible outcomes is observed. Increasing the
statistical power of a study increases the likelihood of
finding true positives while decreasing the likelihood of
finding false negatives and, therefore, increases the
informational value of studies. Assume that a researcher
runs 200 studies in which novel research questions are
examined and the alternative hypothesis (H1) and the
null hypothesis (H0) are equally likely with the minimally recommended power of .8 (i.e., by
examining a difference between two independent
groups with a true effect size of Cohen’s d = 0.5 with 51
participants in each condition). On average, he or she
could expect to find 85 significant effects in these 200
studies—80 from 100 studies examining true effects, and
five false positives from the 100 studies in which a nonexisting effect was examined (see Figure 1). Therefore,
approximately 94% (80 out of 85) of the significant
results are true positives, whereas 6% of the significant
results are false positives. A nonsignificant result is also
informative. Because only 20 of the 100 studies in which
a true effect was examined did not yield a significant
difference, and because 95 of the 100 studies in which a
false idea was examined yielded nonsignificant results,
only 17% (20 out of 115) of the nonsignificant findings
are false negatives. If the researcher designs studies with
a statistical power of only .35 (i.e., by examining a difference between two independent groups with a true effect
size of Cohen’s d = 0.5 with 21 participants in each condition), 12.5% of his or her significant results are false
positives, and more than 40% of his or her nonsignificant
results are false negatives. Running studies with low
power thus decreases the informational value of significant, as well as nonsignificant, results.
Although it is common to implicitly assume that the
null hypothesis and the alternative hypothesis are equally
likely to be true (as we have done in the previous example), in many circumstances this assumption is not very
reasonable. Some ideas are a priori more likely to be true
than others. If one is testing highly unlikely (compared
with likely) ideas, relatively more significant results will
be false positives . When designing studies that examine
an a priori unlikely hypothesis, power is even more
important: Studies need large sample sizes, and significant findings should be followed by close replications.
Because only significant results end up in the published
literature (due to publication bias), it is important to realize that surprising or unexpected findings from studies
with small samples are more likely to be false positives
than significant findings in which more likely hypotheses
are examined .
at Eindhoven Univ of Technology on May 28, 2014
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Increasing the Informational Value of Studies
Evaluating the evidential value of a
line of research
Even though a p value cannot be directly interpreted as
the likelihood that an effect is true, this does not mean
that p values do not provide any insight in the likelihood
that H1 is true. There is a direct relationship between the
power of studies and the distribution of p values from
effects examined in these studies .
Cumming has provided a formula that can be
used to calculate these distributions in Excel.4 When the
null hypothesis is true (and the statistical power to
observe a true effect is 0% because there is no true effect),
p values are uniformly distributed. In other words, when
there is no true effect in an experiment, every p value is
expected to be observed with equal likelihood. This may
seem counterintuitive, but a uniform distribution under
the null is in essence the definition of a p value . When H1 is true, increasing
the power of a study changes the distribution of p values
from a uniform to a right-skewed distribution, resulting in
relatively more small p values than large p values.
Knowing the probability of observing a p value under H0
(when power = 0%) compared with the probability of
observing that p value under the different distributions of
power under H1 allows one to infer how much evidence
for the H1 a specific p value provides.
For example, the probability of observing a p value
between .00 and .01 is 1% under the H0, but when H1 is
true in a study with 80% power, the probability has
increased to approximately 59%. Assuming H0 and H1
are equally likely, a p value between .00 and .01 is 59
times more likely to be found under H1 (with 80% power)
than under H0. The probability of observing a p value
between .04 and .05 is also 1% under H0, but it is only
slightly more probable under H1, in which it is 3% in a
study with 80% power. Regardless of the power of a
study, observed p values between .04 and .05 are never
very likely, irrespective of whether H0 or H1 is true.
Sellke, Bayarri, and Berger have calculated exactly
how likely it is to find p values between .04 and .05. By
looking at all possible distributions of p values and by
calculating when the likelihood of finding a value
Fig. 1.  Ratio of false-to-true positives and false-to-true negatives for the two researchers performing studies at 80% or 35% power. Both
Researcher 1 and Researcher 2 conduct 200 experiments in which they examine 100 true ideas (in white) and 100 false ideas (in gray).
Squares represent significant results, and circles represent nonsignificant results.
at Eindhoven Univ of Technology on May 28, 2014
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Lakens, Evers
between .04 and .05 would be the highest, they found
that the chance of finding such a p value is at best only
3.7%. Thus, whereas a p value between .00 and .01 is
much more likely under H1 compared with H0, p values
between .04 and .05 are at best only slightly more likely
under H1. It is also interesting that when power is very
high (approximately 96%), the probability of finding a
p value between .04 and .05 is actually less likely under
H1 than under H0 (because a considerably lower p value
is much more likely). In other words, when power is very
high, observing a (statistically significant) p value between
.04 and .05 is actually more likely when there is no effect
than when there is an effect. Even though researchers are
trained to use p values as a dichotomous measure in
which everything below p = .05 is called significant,
researchers should actually weigh lower p values as
stronger evidence for H1 than higher p values, especially
in well-powered studies.
p-curve analysis
The distribution of p values depends on the power of the
study. A single significant finding can be part of a distribution of other studies that revealed significant effects;
however, because of publication bias, it can also be part
of a set of mostly nonsignificant studies that researchers
are not aware of. In the former situation, the effect is at
least somewhat likely to be real, whereas in the latter
case, the effect is more likely to be a false positive.
Because the distribution of p values is different for true
effects (i.e., right-skewed) than for null effects (i.e., uniformly distributed), it is possible to compare the distribution of an observed set of p values in the literature with
the uniform distribution of a null effect and with the
right-skewed distribution of a true effect, and it is possible to decide whether the observed distribution is more
similar to that of a null effect or a true effect; p curve is a
tool that does just that (Simonsohn et al., in press).
If the distribution of p values is significantly different
from a uniform distribution and is right-skewed, the distribution of p values is consistent with a true effect. If the
distribution is left-skewed, the studies have relatively
(and significantly) more high p values (e.g., .04 and .05)
than would be expected by chance if H0 is true (such a
distribution is even more unlikely when H1 is true). If the
distribution of p values does not significantly differ from
the uniform distribution, the data do not provide evidence against H0. It is possible to examine whether the
distribution of p values is flatter than expected if H1 is
true (given a specific power of the performed studies).
This allows researchers to test whether the effect is even
smaller than a small effect. Simonsohn and et al. (in
press) suggested testing whether the observed p-value
distribution is flatter than would be expected if the
performed studies were powered at 33% (but the test can
be adjusted for different levels of power). If the distribution is significantly flatter than would be expected if studies had 33% power, the studies lack evidential value. The
effect either does not exist or is much smaller than could
be reliably observed in the performed studies.
Several characteristics of the p curve make it a very
useful tool to estimate the evidential value of research.
First, it is relatively easy to use. Second, any set of studies
can be submitted to a p-curve analysis. Third, the power
and false-positive rate of a p-curve analysis is very acceptable because p curve almost always has a higher power to
correctly accept a set of studies as evidence for H1 than
the individual studies. The probability with which p curve
incorrectly rejects true effects depends on the size of the
set of studies and their power, but by definition, the
chance that a p-curve analysis incorrectly concludes that a
set of studies has no evidential value is 5% when those
studies were powered at the 33% level. Although it is
unlikely that a p-curve analysis derives an incorrect conclusion from the available p values (see Simonsohn et al.,
in press), it is possible that the p-curve analysis remains
inconclusive and that more p values are needed to determine whether a set of studies has evidential value.
Finally, and arguably most important, effects in the
literature can be overestimations of the true effect sizes
because of publication bias .
Because a p-curve analysis is restricted to p values
between .00 and .05, publication bias should not affect
conclusions based on the distribution of p values within
this range (though p hacking a true effect may cause the
distribution to appear flatter than it should be). Indeed,
p-curve analysis might even be a useful tool to obtain
unbiased effect size estimates . This makes p-curve analyses a useful
addition to a researcher’s meta-analytic toolbox, complementing existing techniques such as meta-analyses .
On www.p-curve.com, an easy-to-use interface and
helpful instructions are available to select the right p values to perform a p-curve analysis. When planning to
build on existing research, trying to consolidate inconsistent findings, or evaluating the likelihood of research
findings for other reasons (e.g., as a reviewer or editor),
p curve is a simple tool to accurately assess whether the
reported studies contain evidential value for H1. When
there is no evidential value for a theory, a researcher
should proceed with caution when developing a line of
research that builds on the analyzed ideas. If he or she
decides to continue, lack of evidential value in a p-curve
analysis suggests that the published literature might not
provide the best inspiration for hypotheses. Instead, a
better approach might be for the researcher to revisit the
original theoretical ideas and to design the strongest test
at Eindhoven Univ of Technology on May 28, 2014
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Increasing the Informational Value of Studies
of those ideas that he or she can come up with (perhaps
using a completely different methodology). As an illustration of how p-curve analyses can differentiate between
the evidential values of two ostensibly similar research
lines, see Lakens .
Discussion
Researchers are familiar with interpreting the outcome of
empirical research based solely on the p value. We hope
this article has explained why it is important to look at
the sample size and the effect size of a study before looking at the p value. We have proposed the use of a number
of relatively new statistical procedures and insights (see
the checklist in Table 2), such as the corridor of stability
 , sequential analyses
 ,
the v statistic , and p-curve
analysis (Simonsohn et al., in press). It is often thought
that editors and reviewers are conservative when it comes
to new statistical techniques. In this article, we have
Table 2.  Guidelines to Increase and Evaluate the Informational Value of Studies
When planning studies:
More information:
Power studies
adequately . . .
Increases information by
reducing the likelihood
of false negatives and the
relative likelihood of false
positives in the published
literature because of
publication bias.
Always perform an a priori power
When effect size estimates are
extremely uncertain, use
sequential analyses.
Cohen, 1988; Faul, Erdfelder,
Buchner, & Lang, 2009
Lakens, in press;
Proschan, Lan, & Wittes,
2006; see step-by-step
guide in the Supplementary
. . . aim for accurate
effect size estimates.
Stable effect size estimate with
narrow confidence intervals
increase the confidence in
the reliability of the effect.
Aim for the corridor of stability or a
specific width of the confidence
interval around the effect size
Maxwell, Kelley, & Rausch,
2008; Schönbrodt & Perugini,
. . . aim for a v statistic
Make sure your model
outperforms random
Collect enough participants,
depending on the number of
parameters and predicted effect
Davis-Stober & Dana, 2013
When interpreting studies:
More information:
Look at the power of
the study and the
likelihood of the
hypothesis.
Because of publication bias,
low (estimated) power, and
a low (estimated) likelihood
of the hypothesis, the
relative likelihood of false
positives increases.
Never calculate post hoc power, but
use an effect size estimate from a
relevant meta-analysis or
p-curve analysis. Make an
informed (although subjective)
judgment of the likelihood of
the hypothesis on the basis of an
evaluation of the theory.
Ioannidis, 2005; Nelson,
Simonsohn, & Simmons,
Look at the sample size.
Smaller samples yield less
accurate and less reliable
effect size estimates. With
small samples, interpret
results with caution.
Compare the sample size in the
study with the recommended
number of participants in Table
Maxwell et al., 2008; Schönbrodt
& Perugini, 2013
Is the model accurate?
The model should at the very
least be better than random
Calculate the v statistic. The lower
the v value, the less accurate
the model is. When v < .5,
interpreting the p value is not
very meaningful.
Davis-Stober & Dana, 2013; see
step-by-step guide in the
Supplementary Materials
Is there evidential value
in a set of studies?
Because of selection bias, the
number of Type I errors
in the literature might be
larger than desired.
Look at the p curve of all results.
Distribution of p values should
be right skewed. A uniform
(or left-skewed) distribution
indicates a lack of evidential
Simonsohn, Nelson, & Simmons,
2014; see www.p-curve.com
at Eindhoven Univ of Technology on May 28, 2014
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Lakens, Evers
attempted to explain the immediate benefits of introducing new statistical procedures that allow researchers to
evaluate and deal with the uncertainty that is inherent in
an inductive science. The researchers who have created
these novel techniques have provided easy-to-use guidelines and programs to incorporate these techniques correctly without much effort into one’s workflow, and we
provide easy to follow step-by-step guides in the
Supplemental Material.
Especially when used in conjunction with methodological improvements—such as the preregistration of
hypotheses, performing replication studies and metaanalyses, sharing findings that reveal nonsignificant differences, and publically posting data online —researchers in our discipline can make
important steps toward reducing the uncertainty about
what is likely to be true. We believe the v statistic can be
used to complement the use of the p value to interpret
the informational value of studies, and p-curve analysis
can complement more traditional meta-analytic procedures. Each of these techniques has its own strengths and
weaknesses, and we recommend the use of multiple
approaches to evaluate research. When designing studies, we provide recommendations for minimum sample
sizes (see Table 1) if researchers have the goal to either
observe a significant effect or the goal to provide an
accurate effect size estimate, without presupposing that
all individual published studies should meet either (or
both) of these goals.
The practical recommendations discussed in this article
have the goal to provide researchers with tools to deal
with the uncertainty inherent in inductive sciences. We
have to be honest about one important consequence for
researchers who follow these recommendations: They do
not give you the most bang for your buck when it comes
to the number of significant findings you will observe in
your studies. If your goal is to publish as many significant
results as possible, it is more efficient to produce unreliable scientific knowledge than to produce reliable scientific knowledge . This crucial insight should be
clearly communicated to everyone who manages
researchers on the basis of output measures, such as the
number of publications.
Because running studies with large sample sizes is
costly, and because the resources that a researcher has
available are finite, a researcher is forced to make a tradeoff between the number of studies that he or she runs
and the power of these studies. The relation between
sample size and power is a concave function, and therefore splitting a finite pool of participants over many lowpowered studies will result in a higher total number of
significant findings (even though the chance of finding a
significant result is lower per study). This means that
given the common practice of running underpowered
studies , increasing the quality of
research necessarily decreases the quantity of publishable findings. If researchers are (or believe they will be)
rewarded for the amount of significant findings that they
produce, this system provides a perverse incentive to
reduce the scientific quality of empirical studies and to
increase the quantity of studies that will be much less
informative about the truth.
A researcher running underpowered studies may have
published more significant (but also hugely inaccurate)
effects and may have contributed more Type I errors to
the literature (especially when flexibility during the data
analysis leads to an inflated alpha level). Most important,
this researcher does not know which of the examined
hypotheses were true but did not yield an effect because
of low power, which studies yielded a significant result
because the effect was actually true, and which significant results were actually Type I errors (see Figure 1).
However, a researcher running fewer but larger studies
may have fewer significant findings, but the effect sizes
are estimated more accurately, and theoretical predictions that did not yield a significant effect have become
less likely, because the studies had enough statistical
power to observe an effect if there had been a true effect
in the population. Furthermore, when an effect yielded a
significant finding, it is more likely to be a true effect. All
else being equal, a researcher running properly powered
studies will clearly contribute more to cumulative science
than a researcher running underpowered studies, and if
researchers take their science seriously, it should be the
former who is rewarded in tenure systems and reward
procedures, not the latter.
There is no denying that a psychological science that
considerably reduces the uncertainty about the likelihood that hypotheses are true requires larger sample
sizes per study and will most likely reduce the number of
novel empirical articles that a researcher can publish. As
explained earlier, this outcome is actually desirable, given
the goal of science to differentiate among all possible
truths. It also makes other types of publications in addition to novel empirical work, such as meta-analyses or
replications of important results (which can be accepted
for publication before they are performed; see Nosek &
Lakens, in press), more worthwhile, thereby providing
further incentives toward a cumulative science. We
believe reliable research should be facilitated above all
else, and doing so clearly requires an immediate and
­irrevocable change from current evaluation practices in
academia that mainly focus on quantity.
at Eindhoven Univ of Technology on May 28, 2014
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Increasing the Informational Value of Studies
Appendix A
Variance in effect size estimates as a
function of sample size
As an example of how more data provide a greater reduction in inductive uncertainty, we use data from a recent
set of large-scale replication studies (R. A. Klein et al., in
press), in which the retrospective gambler’s fallacy was
tested in one experiment .
Participants were asked to imagine walking into a room
and seeing a gambler roll three dice that either all come
up 6, or roll two dice that come up 6 and one die that
comes up 3. When estimating how many times the gambler had rolled the dice before the observed roll occurred,
participants indicated a greater number of rolls in the condition in which three 6s were rolled. The replication study
had 5,942 participants, and they also estimated more previous rolls in the condition in which three 6s were rolled
(M = 3.76, SD = 3.32) than when two 6s and one 3 were
rolled (M = 2.07, SD = 2.07), F(1, 5940) = 576.36, p < .001,
with an effect size of η2 = .088, 95% CI [.075, .102].
We randomly selected subsets of either 50, 100, or 250
participants from the total sample, repeating this selection 100 times for each sample size, and we tested the
hypothesis in each subsample. The average results for
the 300 samples are summarized in Table A1 as a function of the sample size. As the sample size increases, we
move from the seas of chaos into the corridor of stability.
The 100 effect size estimates are more similar in subsamples of 250 participants (as indicated by the lower
standard deviation of the effect size estimate eta-squared)
and vary more with smaller subsamples. Because of low
statistical power, testing the hypothesis with 25 participants in each condition yields a significant difference in
only 60% of the studies . Although the average effect size estimates over 100 samples are comparable regardless of the
size of the subsample, if we only calculate the average
effect size for the statistically significant tests (mirroring a
literature in which there is publication bias), then smaller
sample sizes substantially overestimate the true effect
size. As can be seen in Figure A1, the effect size estimates
become more precise as sample sizes increase.
Appendix B
A brief conceptual primer on the v
When we analyze data using a statistical procedure based
on ordinary least squares (OLS) estimators (such as linear
regression, analyses of variance, or any time we estimate
population means by using the sample means), we are
creating a model that fits our observed data best.
Generally, models can have two types of error: error due
to a bias in the estimate (the difference between the predicted mean and the observed mean) and error due to
variance (the differences between different data points).
OLS is an unbiased model, meaning it only has error due
to variance. Constraining a model can decrease error in
variance but can introduce error in bias. The v statistic
introduces a benchmark of randomly generated (and
thus arbitrary) constraints by randomly selecting both the
relative strength of an effect as well as the direction. It
then tests whether the error in this nonsensical model,
the random least squares (RLS), is lower than that of a
normal OLS estimate. Because such tests rely on the
unknown true value of the population parameters, v is
calculated for all possible parameter values that result in
a probability of OLS being more accurate than RLS.
The v statistic can be seen as the probability of OLS
being more accurate than a completely random (and
therefore uninformative) model, and it ranges from 0 to
1. A v statistic lower than .5 means that the (random)
RLS estimate is more likely to be an accurate estimate of
the true effect than the OLS estimate. The error due to
variance in any linear model (on the basis of OLS or
RLS) is primarily influenced by the complexity of the
model and the number of data points, whereas the error
in bias in RLS is independent from the number of data
points. Therefore, the more data, the more likely it is
that OLS will outperform RLS. In other words, all that a
study needs to outperform random guessing is a large
enough sample size. For a more detailed and mathematical explanation of the v statistic, see Davis-Stober and
Dana .
Acknowledgments
We thank Geoff Cumming, Jason Dana, Clintin Davis-
Stober, Alison Ledgerwood, and Felix Schönbrodt for
helpful feedback on a draft of this article. We also thank
numerous scholars for fruitful discussions on Twitter.
Table A1.  Power, Percentage of Significant Results in
100 Randomly Selected Subsamples, Mean Effect Size in
Subsamples and Statistically Significant Subsamples (Mirroring
the Effect of Publication Bias), and the Standard Deviation of
the Effect Sizes as a Function of the Size of the Subsamples
 is unaffected by publication bias and that the v statistic (also discussed
later) is primarily determined by the sample size and, when
calculated on the basis of an adjusted effect size estimate, is
less affected by publication bias. Therefore, compared with CIs,
v might be more useful to evaluate a single small study, and
p-curve analysis might be the better approach to evaluate multiple studies.
3. The R script is available from 
.edu/stoberc. See the step-by-step guide in the Supplementary
Materials.
4. The formula can be found in Appendix B in Cumming’s
 study. Note that in the formula to calculate zµ on p. 299,
a square-root sign is missing; the correct formula, zµ = δ√(N/2),
is repeated on p. 300.