Vol. 3, Spring 2004
Just-in-Time Teaching in Biology
Cell Biology Education
Vol. 3, 049–061, Spring 2004
Just-in-Time Teaching in Biology: Creating an Active Learner
Classroom Using the Internet
Kathleen A. Marrs*† and Gregor Novak**
*Department of Biology, Indiana University, Purdue University Indianapolis, 723 W. Michigan Street, Indianapolis
IN 46202; and **Department of Physics, United States Air Force Academy, 2354 Fairchild Drive, Colorado Springs
Colorado 80840
DOI: 10.1187/cbe.03-11-0022
†Corresponding author. E-mail address: .
Just-in-Time Teaching (JiTT) is a teaching and learning approach that combines the best features of traditional in-class
instruction with the communication and resource potential
available via the Web. We describe here how JiTT can be used
to teach biology to undergraduate and graduate level students,
both science majors as well as nonscience majors. A key characteristic of JiTT is the creation of a feedback loop between the
classroom and the Web using Internet “Warm Up” assignments
that are due prior to class time. By examining student responses
to Warm Up exercises before class, faculty members can determine the level of understanding, prior knowledge, and misconceptions that students bring to class. Classroom time can
then be spent addressing these misconceptions while discussing course content. In class Cooperative Learning exercises reinforce course content in an informal group setting. Other features of JiTT, such as “What is Biology Good For,” make clear
the relevance of specific concepts in biology in society and increase student motivation. Assessment results have been positive, including decreased attrition rates, increases in student
attitudes, interactivity, study habits, and cognitive gains in classrooms using JiTT.
WHAT IS JiTT AND WHAT IS IT DESIGNED TO
ACCOMPLISH?
JiTT is a technique for teaching and learning that uses the
Internet to improve student success in college science courses
by enhancing and extending classroom instruction via the Web.
JiTT is designed to bring pedagogically successful methods for
teaching and learning into the classroom: interactive engagement (active learning), constructivism, and prompt feedback
(formative assessment), described below. JiTT was originally
developed at Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI) and the United States Air Force Academy to help
students and faculty in physics . JiTT has
since been expanded to other disciplines and universities and
is currently being used in biology, geology, chemistry, psychology, and math, as well as in nursing, history, economics, and
anthropology. JiTT has been adopted by >200 faculty members
at 80 institutions worldwide. 
The essence of JiTT is the feedback loop between the Web
and the classroom (Figure 1). Faculty use the Internet to post
course materials and Web-based Warm Up assignments before
class, and students use materials on the Web to prepare for each
class. The faculty member in turn uses student responses to
create an interactive classroom environment that emphasizes
active learning and cooperative problem solving and decreases
the use of traditional lecture. Further exploration of selected
topics occurs after class in the form of “What is (Biology) Good
For?” activities that highlight the relevance of course material
to the student’s lives. JiTT is particularly useful in large enrollment courses, for commuting or part-time students, and in any
case in which a student’s first allegiance is not necessarily to the
course, but may be competing with the student’s existing job,
family, and personal responsibilities .
The purpose of this paper is fourfold: (1) To relate the use of
JiTT to what is known about effective teaching and learning in
science; (2) to describe how JiTT is currently used in biology;
(3) to describe the effect of JiTT on student success and learning; and (4) to suggest strategies that faculty can use to implement JiTT in their own classrooms.
OVERVIEW: WHAT DOES THE RESEARCH
LITERATURE SAY ABOUT HOW STUDENTS
LEARN SCIENCE?
A review of the literature on how students learn science reveals
at least three major themes: (1) Learning requires active practice. Extensive research in education has confirmed that deep
conceptual learning requires interactive engagement, recently
reviewed in How People Learn (National Research Council
(NRC), 2000). For example, Hake compared >6,000 students from 62 different introductory physics courses and concluded that students who used active learning or interactive
engagement methods outperformed students in traditional
Received for publication November 21, 2003; accepted December 12, 2003.
© 2004 by The American Society for Cell Biology
Cell Biology Education
K. Marrs and G. Novak
classes. Similar results were seen by faculty teaching general
chemistry and biology courses .
Many recent reviews targeted to college faculty recommend
active learning strategies to increase student success in college;
including Astin’s What Matters in College? Four Critical Years
Revisited , Chickering and Gamson’s Seven Principles for
Good Practice in Undergraduate Education , NSF’s Shaping
the Future: New Expectations for Undergraduate Education in Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology and NSTA’s
recent Learning Science and the Science of Learning .
(2) Learning is actively constructed from prior knowledge. Research in science education has also made us aware that, in
order to learn, students must actively construct new knowledge
from prior knowledge:
Current research on learning indicates that all new learning depends on the learner’s prior knowledge and current state of understanding. If students’ initial understanding is not engaged,
they may fail to grasp the new concepts they are taught, or
…they may revert to their preconceptions outside of the classroom. 
This theory of learning, termed ‘constructivism,’ was developed by Piaget and others and is well-supported in the research
literature, as recently reviewed . Prior
knowledge is defined as a combination of a learner’s preexisting attitudes, experiences, and knowledge . Many times, prior knowledge includes misconceptions,
defined as intuitive but incorrect interpretations or misunderstandings of an idea, concept, or process . Constructivism emphasizes that new concepts
cannot be learned if alternate models already exist in a student’s
mind, and finds that new concepts are best learned when teachers uncover and address the prior knowledge and misconceptions that their students bring to class with them. .
Learning requires prompt feedback: A large body of research
has shown that learning proceeds primarily from prior knowledge, as described above, but also is best achieved when students are provided opportunities for formative assessment—
feedback on their prior knowledge so that they can adjust or
clarify their thinking . However, in
Learning Science and the Science of Learning , Mestre and
Cocking state that:
Largely missing from science classrooms, particularly large lecture classes, is formative assessment, which is intended to provide feedback during learning exercises so that students can
have an opportunity to revise and improve their thinking and
instructors can tailor instruction appropriately.
Feedback is most helpful to student learning when students
have time to reflect on the feedback and make adjustments in
their thinking to improve or clarify their understanding of subject material. Formative assessment gives students an opportunity for practice with concepts in preparation for a graded examination (summative assessment), when they will be asked
to show what they have learned at the end of a set of course
materials.
JiTT Combines Research-based Learning Strategies
A fundamental advantage of JiTT is that it provides a simple
and straightforward way to have students and faculty participate in all of these learning strategies. The use of JiTT Web technology is simply one way to achieve these recommendations to
promote the development of critical thinking, active learning
and cooperative learning skills, and give quick and specific
feedback to students. In addition, JiTT incorporates other recommendations for effective teaching and learning, by encouraging frequent, short study sessions when not in class, increasing the amount of contact between faculty and students, encouraging classroom attendance and participation and connecting the course content to the real world (relevance). .
HOW JiTT IS USED IN TWO CLASSROOMS:
CONTEMPORARY BIOLOGY N100 AND
BIOTECHNOLOGY 540
At IUPUI, one of us (K.A.M.) has been using JiTT in biology
classes since 1999. Contemporary Biology, N100, is a large-enrollment (>200 students), lecture hall course for nonscience majors who use the course as part of their general science requirement for graduation ( 
N100/). Biotechnology 540 has an enrollment maximum of 45
students, and is taken by advanced undergraduate biology
majors and graduate students ( 
biocourses/Biol540/). Both courses meet twice a week for 75 min
each, and neither class has a lab associated with it. Both of these
courses had been taught as traditionally lecture-based classes,
but over the course of 3 yr have gradually incorporated features of JiTT. More than 1,000 biology students at IUPUI have
been taught using JiTT.
While we will show here the way JiTT is used in Biology at
IUPUI, we stress that faculty can tailor any of the following
aspects of JiTT to best meet their own course needs. In fact, the
way JiTT is actually implemented in Biology as described here
is somewhat different from the way JiTT was originally described . The most important goal of JiTT is
for faculty to help engage the students in the course content,
and to help students achieve mastery of the subject through
active learning, constructivism, and prompt feedback, using the
technology as a lever to achieve these goals, and not as an end
in itself .
There are four common features of both Contemporary Biology and Biotechnology. The first is to use the Web to create a
Dynamic Syllabus. The syllabus is on-line and updated weekly
Figure 1. JiTT feedback loop.
Vol. 3, Spring 2004
Just-in-Time Teaching in Biology
throughout the semester. New Web material is posted each Friday, at which point students can access the coming week’s lecture outlines and Web assignments. As the cycle repeats itself
throughout the semester, the students see the syllabus evolve
as new links to course material and assignments are added.
Figure 2 shows the home page and syllabus for Contemporary
Biology, with icons linking the syllabus to the various course
components, such as Lecture Notes, Warm Ups, and “What is
Biology Good For?”
A second feature is the use of Web-based “Warm Up” assignments. Warm Up assignments prompt the students to think
about the upcoming lesson and answer a few simple questions
prior to class. One weekly Warm Up is posted each Friday and
is due any time in the following week up to 3 h before class
time the following Wednesday. Students read the text as well
as look at the Web links to lecture outlines for the upcoming
week before answering the Warm Up, with the actual Warm
Up assignment taking about 15–20 min to complete. Figure 3
shows how a Warm Up exercise looks to students. Students
complete Warm Up assignments at their own pace, and use a
“Submit” button to transmit their answers automatically into a
CGI-bin (Common Gateway Interface program; a standard Web
page tool that collects responses from a form and stores the
information in an HTML file, or bin) that can be accessed by
faculty at any time.
The third feature of both Contemporary Biology and Biotechnology is an Interactive Classroom session. Typically, a modified
lecture-discussion is done for the first 3rd of the class, incorporating student Warm Up responses as described in the next section, followed by a Cooperative Learning exercise, consisting
of collaborative group work and discussion. This is followed
by a second lecture discussion in the last third of the class.
A final feature that is used in Contemporary Biology only are
optional “What is Biology Good For?” assignments, short essay that highlights the relevance of biology in everyday life.
These extra credit assignments involve a small amount of
internet research and are due the Friday following that week’s
WARM UP ASSIGNMENTS: THE STARTING
POINT IN THE JiTT FEEDBACK LOOP
Warm Up exercises are used in a JiTT classroom in three ways:
(1) to identify student beliefs, misconceptions and prior knowledge; (2) to synchronize the student responses with classroom
instruction; and (3) provide classroom time to confront miscon-
Figure 2. Home page of Contemporary Biology, N100 at IUPUI ( From this main page, students
have access to the class lecture outlines (desk icon), the weekly Warm Up exercise (coffee cup icon), Biology in the News articles (newspaper icon),
a page of helpful tips useful for preparing for exams (help icon) and the weekly “What is Biology Good For?” exercises (Chef icon). The home page
also contains the general course syllabus, including a grading scale and descriptions of course policies and procedures (not shown).
Cell Biology Education
K. Marrs and G. Novak
Figure 3. Layout of a typical Warm Up assignment in Contemporary Biology. Students must enter their last name and first initial, the last four
digits of their student identification umber, and a nickname for purposes of anonymity if their response is shown in class. A “Submit” button at
the bottom of the exercise transmits student answers to faculty. Students receive a confirmation page once their Warm Up has been successfully
submitted. Students receive 3 points for answering each Warm Up on time as it appears at the top of the Web page.
Vol. 3, Spring 2004
Just-in-Time Teaching in Biology
ceptions. In doing so, we incorporate students’ prior knowledge as a foundation on which to construct further knowledge
of the subject matter.
How Are Warm Up Questions Written?
A Warm Up question usually presents a situation that students
are likely to be somewhat familiar with and requires students
to speculate or develop a hypothesis before forming the answer. Students typically reveal, through writing the answer to
the Warm Up question, ideas (and misconceptions) based on
both their prior knowledge of the subject—from high school or
earlier classroom experiences, from other college courses, or
from the media—with new information gathered from reading
the textbook or lecture notes. Since Warm Up exercises are primarily intended to uncover student prior knowledge, we typically do not question students on direct factual information
found in the textbook. Instead, we ask questions that start with
open-ended prompts such as:
“What is the difference between...?”
“Why do you think...?”
“Estimate how many....”
“What happens if...?”
“What determines...?”
“In your own words, explain...”
In some cases, Warm Up questions can be designed to target
concepts that are known from the research literature to be associated with specific misconceptions by students. For instance,
many undergraduate students have significant misconceptions
about concepts such as evolution and natural selection , photosynthesis
and respiration , osmosis and diffusion , and understanding the biochemical basis of “dominant versus recessive ” traits
 . For concepts such as these, significant misconceptions can be anticipated in student responses
to Warm Up questions and even categorized into fairly predictable responses.
In other cases, an instructor might want to probe for student
prior knowledge on concepts that do not have a strong base of
information about existing misconceptions. In such a case, we
have found it useful to write Warm Up questions based on categories described in the classic article by Arons that describes the reasoning capacities that faculty expect of college
students. Figure 4 shows a sampling of Warm Up questions
that have been used in both Contemporary Biology and Biotechnology that fall into one of the categories described by
Arons .
For example, a Warm Up question might probe for the ability
of a student to understand new terms and definitions (Figure 4,
question 1 and 9), explain or discuss the meaning of a particular bit of jargon (Figure 4, question 2 and 12), or show students ’
thinking processes when dealing with a difficult concept (Figure 4, question 3, 9, and 10). Other Warm Up questions might
probe for whether a student can draw inferences from data (Figure 4, question 4), translate words into written symbols or written symbols into words (Figure 4, question 5), make connections between the subject and their own experiences (Figure 4,
questions 6 and 7), or discuss the ethical implications of biology (Figure 4, questions 8 and 11). Student responses to these
questions include not only some misconceptions that might be
predicted from the research literature, but will also reveal prior
knowledge and other misconceptions that might never have
occurred to the faculty member to address without seeing the
responses of his or her own students. It is often fascinating to
read through student responses and see the wide range of
thought processes, examples, analogies, mis-information and
logical thinking that students use to answer the questions!
In both biology classes at IUPUI, Warm Up responses are due
3 h before class time. (Any time period before class time can be
chosen that is convenient for the faculty member and the students answering the Warm Ups.) Having an assignment due
before class time has an added benefit—it compels the student
to do the readings and look at the chapter material so that students come to class prepared, increasing their participation in
class discussions and cooperative learning exercises.
Full points (3 points per Warm up assignment) are given to
all students who respond on time—Warm Up responses are
not graded initially as right or wrong since the material has not
yet been discussed in class. The answers do not have to be complete, or even correct. In fact, partially correct responses are the
most useful in starting classroom discussion, as described in
the next section.
If a faculty member prefers to assign a grade to the students ‘
warm up responses, we have developed a way to score student
responses to Warm Up responses, based on a scale from 1 to 4,
with 1 representing “no formal understanding” of the question
to 4 representing “complete formal understanding” of the subject, based on a rubric developed by de Caprariis et al .
For more details on scoring Warm Ups, including actual student responses to different Warm Up questions, see the recent
paper by Marrs et al , the archive of Warm Up exercises
in biology, including selected student responses at , or the Warm
Up scoring rubric at 
N100/warmupscoringrubric.html.
WARM UP RESPONSES: SYNCHRONIZING PRIOR
KNOWLEDGE WITH CLASSROOM DISCUSSION
Faculty using JiTT typically set aside an hour or so before class
to read through student responses. While reading student
Warm Up responses, it is usually evident that the students are
clear about some points but may have serious misconceptions
about other questions.
Once we identify a few points that need to be further clarified in that day’s class, based on reading a sample of student
responses, we determine where to adjust the upcoming classroom lesson in response to the student submissions “Just in
Time,” and decide how much time to devote to a concept that
was to be discussed that day. Should the majority of the class
appear to be confused on a particular Warm Up question, more
time can be planned to clarify this concept in class. Should the
majority of the class appear to understand a concept, more time
can be spent in class discussing other concepts.
Just before class time, we select two to four Warm Up responses for each question that can be used as a starting point
for addressing that day’s content, and copy and paste these responses into a page of comments. This page can be uploaded
immediately to the course Web page, or a transparency can be
made and shown in class.
Cell Biology Education
K. Marrs and G. Novak
How To “Spin” Student Warm Up Responses in Class
An important feature of JiTT is that students actively participate in a class that is based on their prior knowledge, while still
including all the content the faculty member was planning for
that day’s discussion. Student responses to the Warm Up questions are shown and discussed where appropriate in the lecture or discussion. There are many ways the student excerpts
can be used in class, as shown in Figure 5. Incomplete answers
are often the best for stimulating an active classroom discus-
Figure 4. Selected Warm Up questions used in Contemporary Biology (1–8) and Biotechnology (9–12). For sample student responses to all Warm
Up exercises in Contemporary Biology, see the Contemporary Biology Resource Page at 
archives.html.
sion. Students can be asked, as a class, to extend answers beyond what is shown to make the student responses more complete, to expand the answers to a new situation, or to compare
two answers to the same question that differ significantly. Student Warm Up responses are thus used to provide quick and
specific feedback to students, by using their own responses as a
springboard to develop subject material presented to class.
Thus, JiTT provides a simple way to provide continuous formative assessment to students, giving students time to review
their thought processes, and to revise their thinking if needed.
Vol. 3, Spring 2004
Just-in-Time Teaching in Biology
Students report that they benefit from going over the sample
Warm Up responses in class, and are usually pleased to see
their answer presented to the class, identified by an anonymous
(and sometimes humorous), nickname, even if the answer presented is partially incorrect. In questioning three semesters of
students, 87% of students in N100 rated the class discussions of
Warm Up responses “very useful to learning the fine points” of
a concept (n = 485). It should again be stressed that the time
spent on Warm Up responses in a JiTT classroom does not result in less course content or “coverage” of topics; in fact, students spend more time reading, writing, and thinking about a
topic in a JiTT classroom due to the necessity of completing
assignments out of class.
INTERACTIVE LECTURE: COOPERATIVE
LEARNING AND DISCUSSION
Students in a JiTT classroom actively work on their knowledge
of specific concepts during class by not only discussing Warm
Up responses, but also working on solving problems in a group
setting. In Contemporary Biology, understanding is further reinforced by in-class Cooperative Learning exercises that deal
directly with the concepts discussed in class. These exercises
are chosen so that they give students hands-on experience with
specific concepts: for example, transcription and translation
using the codon chart, genetics problems, or graphing exercises
to show exponential population growth or antibiotic resistance.
In some cases, Cooperative Learning exercises are chosen specifically to ‘tie in’ with a particular Warm Up question and provide a ‘two-pronged attack’ to give additional attention to particularly difficult concepts .
Many of these Cooperative Learning exercises come from the
book Cooperative Learning: Making Connections in General Biology
 . This soft cover book contains about
100 hands-on, cooperative learning activities for biology students (majors or nonmajors) that are easily done in the classroom, typically in 10–15 min or less. The book includes activity
worksheets correlated to the content of many standard general
biology textbooks, with sections covering cell structure and
function, mitosis and meiosis, evolution, genetics, and more.
For faculty who may be uncertain of how cooperative learning
might be implemented in their classrooms, particularly in a
large lecture hall classroom, an instructor’s manual is available
which not only includes answers to the cooperative learning
activities but also includes tips for incorporating aspects of cooperative learning and group work into a course.
In Contemporary Biology at IUPUI, informal groups of two
to four students work together for 10–15 min on these cooperative activities and are given time to ask questions and discuss
their answers with other groups. In this way, students who continue to have difficulty with a concept can get clarification while
class is still in session. Since Contemporary Biology is held in a
less-than-ideal setting for group work (fixed, auditorium-style
seating), students are not assigned into groups, but work informally with people who are next to them, or in rows in front of
behind them. While students are sometimes hesitant at the beginning of the semester to work with other students, they
quickly come to enjoy the break in lecture and welcome the
chance practice working with concepts we are discussing in
class. Over 94% of students in one semester of N100 (n = 184)
reported that the cooperative learning exercises were “highly
useful” or “very useful” in promoting understanding of the
concepts discussed in class, as scored on a Lickert Scale.
We have found two other benefits of the cooperative learning
exercises that are not directly related to facilitating understanding of course content. One is that the cooperative learning exercises foster student-to-student interaction, and many times result in the formation of study groups outside of class, an important factor for student success that is often difficult to establish
on an urban campus. A second is that, if graded, the cooperative learning exercises strongly promote classroom attendance.
In Contemporary Biology, two Cooperative Learning exercises
are done per week (one per class). Each exercise that is graded
is worth 3 points each, for a total of only 45 points for the semester (<8% of the total points in the class). However, only one
of the two exercises done per week is graded; the other is discussed and corrected in class but is not turned in and does not
contribute to the students’ grade. Students do not necessarily
know which of the two weekly exercises will be graded, and as
a result typically attend both classes per week. As a result, Contemporary Biology has a very high rate of classroom attendance.
In a class of usually more than 200 students, more than 85% of
the class is in attendance—with an average of 170 students per
class session, an almost doubling of the numbers of students
attending class before cooperative learning exercises were
implemented.
It is fairly straightforward to tailor Cooperative Learning exercises to any biology class by looking for simple activities in
lab manuals, student study guides, or on the internet for activities that might be done to make a lecture class more interactive.
The benefits of cooperative learning in teaching cell biology,
and excellent tips for incorporating cooperative learning into
biology classes has been recently reviewed in Cell Biology Education by Tanner et al . Cooperative learning has been
strongly recommended by the AAAS as part of good practice
in teaching science. As recommended in Science for All Americans science should be taught in a way that is
Figure 5. Examples of prompts that can be used to “spin” or discuss
student Warm Up responses in class.
Cell Biology Education
K. Marrs and G. Novak
consistent with the way that science is done—by inquiry and
collaboration, working with real data.
“WHAT IS BIOLOGY GOOD FOR?” EXERCISES:
EXTENDING THE CLASSROOM EXPERIENCE
Biology is undoubtedly the most rapidly advancing branch of
science today. Cell biology alone has seen an impressive increase recently in the knowledge about signal transduction,
protein sorting, regulation of gene expression, cell division, and
molecular genetics. Obviously, not all of these topics can become part of the curriculum. However, faculty may feel that a
certain topic could really be beneficial or interesting to those
students motivated enough to want to go a little more in depth
than the curriculum permits.
To introduce these extra-curricular topics and enhance student motivation , JiTT uses a final
optional assignment, called “What is (Biology) Good For?”
(each discipline, of course, having its own version of the “Good
For” essay). In biology at IUPUI, these essays are only used in
N100, the course for non-science majors, Figure 6 shows a listing of Good Fors used in Contemporary Biology. The Good For
essays provide a reasonable introduction to a subject, typically
in ~1,000 words and a few figures, followed by 3 research questions for which students may earn 3 points of “extra credit,” for
a total of 30 points for the semester (out of 600 points total).
This small amount of credit, however, is enough to achieve considerable participation. In a given week, >75% of the students
of the students submit responses to the optional Good For essays, which are due the Friday after that week’s classes.
The Good Fors are written to provide a clear sense of the excitement of modern biology, by directly linking material in the
text to a practical application of biology upon which lives may
depend. The research questions at the end of the essays require
students to do a bit of guided internet research using links included throughout the body of the essay or in a set of “further
reading” links at the end. The goal is to activate the students’
interest and the idea that biology occupies a central position in
their lives. Ideally, students begin to tune into news stories about
biology in their everyday lives. The “Good For” essays have
the additional effect of promoting science literacy, requiring students to practice their writing skills, and gaining experience
using the Web as a resource . While
we have tended to write the Good For essays ourselves for our
classes, it is not necessary that a faculty member spend time
developing and writing these essays themselves. Instead, numerous Web sites that write up daily science news or summarize scientific processes can be used as “Good For” assignments.
Students can simply be directed by a link to a story of interest,
and then answer questions provided by the faculty member.
Some Web sites are to consider, particularly for science majors,
are Nature Science Updates ( or Scientific
American ( among many others.
Often, a controversy or an interesting history behind the subject of a Good For is intriguing to many students, and a topic of
before-class conversation in the classroom that week. One of
the most popular “What is Biology Good For?” essays concerns
the use of the Biotechnology drug Epogen, a life-saving drug
that has revolutionized life for patients suffering from kidney
disease or the effects of chemotherapy. In itself, the development of this drug and its effect on patients’ lives is an interesting story, but additional controversies about “Epo” blood doping by athletes and the reluctance of Medicare to subsidize the
complete cost of this drug makes for many interesting Web responses and student conversations. Figure 7 shows a portion of
this Good For assignment.
Student reaction to the Good For essays is extremely favorable. When asked to rate the Good For assignments, over 90%
of the students questioned reported that the Good Fors made
them understand the relevance of science to their lives (n = 170).
Helping students, particularly nonscience majors, to understand the relevance recommended in the as a basis for developing scientific understanding and scientific literacy .
ASSESSMENT: EFFECT OF JiTT ON STUDENT
LEARNING AND STUDENT SUCCESS
JiTT Increases Classroom Interactivity
One of the “Seven Principles for Good Practice in Undergraduate Education” is to encourage
interaction between students and faculty in and out of classes.
A JiTT classroom has high levels of interaction between students and faculty via Warm Up exercises and cooperative learning exercises. Based on reports from trained classroom observers (graduate students in Psychology) as well as peer (faculty)
evaluators who were not using JiTT, a JiTT classroom has substantially more student-student interaction (students involved
in group work, students discussing Warm Up responses as a
class), and more student–faculty interaction (students asking
questions or making comments to faculty during class discussions of Warm Ups or Cooperative Learning assignments) than
does a non-JiTT classroom, as measured by observation of student questions and comments to faculty, faculty questions to
students, and student interaction during group work.
JiTT Provides Ongoing Formative Assessment to
JiTT provides an excellent way to give students feedback on
their understanding before taking a test for a grade. By examining students’ Warm Up responses as “works in progress” and
providing quick and specific feedback during class, and allowing for in-class cooperative active learning, students are given
many opportunities to explore their own thought processes
Figure 6. Selected “What is Biology Good For?” exercises used in
Contemporary Biology.
Vol. 3, Spring 2004
Just-in-Time Teaching in Biology
about a particular concept, and revise their thinking, if necessary. In questioning three semesters of students, 87% of students in N100 rated the class discussions of Warm Up responses
“very useful to learning the fine points” of a concept (n = 485),
and >94% of students in one semester of N100 ( n = 184) reported
that the cooperative learning exercises were “highly useful” or
“very useful” in promoting understanding of the concepts discussed in class, as scored on a Lickert Scale.
JITT Increases Student Success as Measured by Course
Retention Rates
Introductory courses in biology, as well as some upper level
courses that are more conceptual or theoretical in nature (for
example, genetics), commonly have large numbers of students
who do not perform well in class, and who either withdraw
from the class (W), or receive either a D or an F for their semester grade. A common goal for faculty and for a university is to
successfully retain more students without changing or simplifying the course content, reducing the number of students who
leave the course with a D, F, or W. In physics, use of JiTT has
resulted in a 33% DFW rate being lowered to 19% using JiTT,
meaning that 81% of the students will complete the course with
a grade of A, B, or C. Since implementing JiTT in contemporary
biology, the DFW rate has decreased from 27% to 20%; meaning that 80% of the students taking N100 will now complete the
course with a grade of A, B, or C.
JiTT Improves Class Preparation
To make the best use of in-class time, many instructors would
agree that it is important for students to come to class prepared.
In a JiTT classroom–and indeed in any classroom that is not
taught using a traditional lecture format–the value of the class
depends on the quality of the participation. When taking a JiTT
course, students are told that we, their professors, will come
into class expecting that they will have read the notes and the
pages in the book to become familiar with new terms and concepts for the day. To determine whether students changed or
improved their likelihood of class preparation as a result of
using JiTT, we asked students three questions to determine
whether they were preparing for class (Table 1 ). We asked students three questions: (1) Do you read the Web notes before class?
(2) Do you do the readings from the text before class? (3) Do you
do read the textbook or the class notes (if provided) before your
other classes? The results in Table 1 show that only ~50% of the
students who were scoring in the an A, B, or C range after the
third exam in Contemporary Biology self-reported that they
read the textbook and notes before their non-JiTT classed,
whereas ~75% of students who were scoring in the an A, B, or a
C range reported preparing for class in Contemporary Biology.
Students who were not doing well in the class, scoring in the D
or F range after the third exam of the semester, also self-reported that they were not preparing for class. It is likely that
this lack of preparation, as well as other factors relating to their
personal circumstances, was negatively affecting their course
performance.
JiTT Improves Student Study Habits
Developing good study habits is one of the most effective ways
to succeed in college. Research has shown that students learn
more efficiently and retain information longer when they study
regularly, and retain much less information from a single, intensive study session . ‘Cramming’—a single, intensive
study session that saturates the short-term memory with information before an exam—is a technique most college students
will use at times, but unfortunately, it is not an efficient way to
acquire or retain knowledge . We wanted to determine
whether Warm Ups made a significant difference in student
study skills, making it easier for students to study in shorter,
more frequent study sessions. We asked students to report
whether they crammed for exams in Contemporary Biology
versus their other, non-JiTT classes. As shown in Table 2, 40%
of A students, 65% of B and C students and 70% of D and F
students self report that they cram for exams in their non-JiTT
classes. However, only 16% of those same A students felt the
need to cram for N100. Students receiving a B or a C also
showed an improvement in their study skills (with <31% and
44%, respectively, still feeling like they needed to cram). About
70% of students who were receiving poor grades in the class (D
or F) still felt the need to cram whether they were in a JiTT class
or not. The lack of effect on these students’ study skills, combined with their lack of preparation for the class as described
above, indicates that many of these students most likely lacked
either the study habits, the motivation, or the time needed to
succeed in a college classroom.
But Are They Learning? JiTT Increases Cognitive Gains
in Biology
In physics, students from JiTT classrooms showed significant
and measurable gains in achievement on a standardized test in
Physics, the Force Concept Inventory . A
similar tool, the Biology Concept Inventory, is currently under
development , but is not yet in use. To measure the effect of JiTT on cognitive gains in biology, we have
used the results from a 20-question preclass and postclass test,
calculating the average normalized gain as described . In doing this
analysis within individual N100 classes, we found that students
tended to show an average normalized gain of ~15% on test
questions about concepts that were discussed in class, but not
necessarily reinforced by any additional class activities, and
showed an average normalized gain of ~21% on test questions
that were reinforced by back of the book homework problems.
However, students tended to show an average normalized gain
of ~52% on test questions that were reinforced by either Warm
Up questions or Cooperative Learning activities, and showed
an average normalized gain of ~60% on test questions reinforced by both Warm Up questions or Cooperative Learning
activities .
Students prefer JiTT to traditional lecture classes, based on
course attitude surveys, anonymous end-of-course evaluations,
and student focus groups:
The Web page was great. I’ve never had a class run from the
Web before and it was really neat. All of the different categories
(Warm up, Good Fors, notes) were really great and made the
class fun and interesting and different.
I enjoy reading the “What is Biology Good For” assignments, I
learn a lot of details that I probably would not have known.
The Good Fors help me to connect biology to the real world
and it is very incredible. I have not yet had another class that
helped connect the subject with the real world.
Cell Biology Education
K. Marrs and G. Novak
I think that the Cooperative Learning exercises help me to learn
the material. They are a mini review for me!! They definitely
help break up the tedium of lecture. They are wonderful!! Plus
I like the fact that they can kind of take attendance for those of
us who show up to class everyday!
One of the best things about class in my opinion is that the
information is usually so current. More than once a week I see
things we have talked about. Often they are major news stories
and it is a good feeling to be current to the advances in science
and know what we have done is relevant to life stories.
Figure 7. Portion of a “What is Biology Good For?” exercise on the biotechnology drug Epogen. Student read the essay, then complete three
questions requiring internet research. A “Submit” button at the bottom of the exercise transmits student answers to faculty. Students receive a
confirmation page once their Good For assignment has been successfully submitted. Students receive three extra credit points for correctly
answering each Good For question.
I LOVE the Good Fors! I like the extra credit and it is great to
see how biology is used in the real world. It is always frustrating when teachers can’t answer the question “When am I ever
going to use this?” Thanks for being so helpful!
CONCLUSION: ADVANTAGES IN USING JiTT IN
TEACHING AND LEARNING BIOLOGY
JiTT is consistent with practices recommended for effective
learning, including constructivism, active learning, and use of
Vol. 3, Spring 2004
Just-in-Time Teaching in Biology
formative assessment. Warm Up and cooperative learning exercises allow students to build new knowledge based on their
prior knowledge and confront their misconceptions about difficult concepts. “What is Biology Good For?” exercises allow
students to see the relevance of Biology to their everyday lives,
as recommended in the National Science Education Standards
 . By examining students’ “work in progress” and providing feedback to students, JiTT is an excellent way for faculty to
bring formative assessment in their classrooms, and by using
informal group Cooperative Learning exercises, students learn
science by inquiry and collaboration in a way that is consistent
with the way that science is done, as recommended in Science
for All Americans Finally, by requiring students to prepare ahead for class, and attend class regularly, JiTT promotes good study habits necessary for student
success. In addition, students consistently score better on exam
questions addressed by either Warm Up questions or Cooperative Learning exercises, indicating that use of JiTT results in a
strong increase in cognitive gains .
Finally, JiTT is also consistent with many of the procedures
and practices recommended for effective undergraduate teaching. Five of the “Seven Principles for Good Practice in Undergraduate Education” are directly addressed by JiTT: increased
student-faculty contact, active learning techniques, prompt
feedback, cooperation among students, and time on task, with
the other two being indirect effects of JiTT (respecting diverse
ways of learning, communicating high expectations).
Getting Started with JiTT Is Simple
Faculty interested in JiTT but unfamiliar with posting course
materials to the Web can start slowly; by learning how to implement JiTT into a classroom in small pieces, faculty will become
more comfortable with using the Web as a teaching tool in science. Very little technical knowledge of Web page construction
is needed for faculty to implement all aspects in JiTT into a
course, and in today’s Web-savvy society, access to and familiarity with the Web is almost a given for college students.
Many universities have course management software like
BlackBoard, WebCT, or Angel that provide an ideal format for
JiTT, allowing faculty to not only post notes, announcements,
or news, but also set up “Discussion Forums” that can be used
as templates for Warm Up and Good For assignments. Course
management software often has the advantage of automatically
grading assignments that come as discussion forums, saving
faculty from needing to manually grade Warm Ups or Good
For assignments, and in some cases can keep a database of questions from which faculty can easily select or customize assignments . If course
management software is unavailable, interested faculty can register at a new site ( This site was developed at IUPUI for Indianapolis high school teachers who
are using JiTT in their science classes, but is free to all users
within the JiTT community. This site allows JiTT users to generate Warm Up forms to post on their home server, retrieve and
grade student responses on-line, and import graded student
responses into an Excel spreadsheet. Please contact author
Kathy Marrs for more information about using jittWeb.org. For
multiday workshops about JiTT, The National Science Foundation and Project Kaleidoscope (PKAL) offer summer workshops
in Just in Time teaching. Feel free to contact either authors of
this manuscript for more information.
Is It Worth the Extra Time Needed To Do JiTT?
A final consideration is time. Faculty juggling teaching, managing a research lab and writing grants, plus other university
obligations often feel that they have little time to invest in modifying their teaching, particularly when excellence in teaching
may not be rewarded as highly as excellence in research. However, as the primary mission of any university is to promote
learning, courses characterized by a high rate of student success should be the goal. Fortunately, as described in Shaping the
Future: New Expectations for Undergraduate Education in Science,
Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology, many universities departments, deans, and faculty colleagues are realizing the need
to increase the importance of teaching in the reward system for
faculty who help students learn well .
JiTT does take more time compared to the way a traditional
large enrollment lecture-based class is usually managed. However, we stress again that faculty can tailor any of the following
aspects of JiTT to best meet their own course needs and make
the most value of the additional time input needed. Web-based
Warm Up and Good For assignments that come in just once per
week require only an hour of two of faculty time, but have the
value of identifying a large body of prior knowledge from perhaps hundreds of students at a time that can be used to inform
teaching and learning. Cooperative Learning exercises may
take time ‘away’ from traditional lecture, but have the advantage of requiring students to work in a cooperative, active learn-
Table 1. JiTT increases class preparation
Read web notes
before class
before class
Read book in
other classes
A students
B students
C students
D students
F students
Students were asked: (Column 1) Do you read the web notes before
class? (Column 2) Do you do the readings from the text before class?
(Column 3) Do you do read the textbook or the class notes (if provided)
before your other classes? Student responses were grouped depending
on the course grade students were receiving (A–F) after taking the
third of four exams. n = 162.
Table 2. JiTT improves student study skills
Crammed in
Contemporary Biology
Crammed in
other courses
A students
B students
C students
D students
F students
Students were asked to report whether they crammed for exams in
Contemporary Biology versus their other, non-JiTT classes. Cramming
was defined as “saving virtually all studying for the day or night before
or of the exam.” Student responses were grouped depending on the
course grade students were receiving (A–F) after taking the third of
four exams. n = 426.
Cell Biology Education
K. Marrs and G. Novak
ing atmosphere, getting practice with working directly with
data analysis and confronting any difficulties they may be having with the course material while they are in class with faculty
help available. In addition, they have the advantage of greatly
improving classroom attendance, which can be very poor in
many traditional classes.
A final comment about time needed for grading: We recommend that faculty take full advantage of course management
features like automatic grading of Web -based assignments into
the course gradebook, so that valuable time does not have to be
spen t entering student scores manually into a spreadsheet. If
grades must be computed or entered manually (as with Cooperative Learning exercises), a student grader employed for an
hour or two a week can take care of all of the grading used in
JiTT. The most important goal, however, regardless of how
many of the features of JiTT are used, is to engage the students
and help them achieve mastery of the subject through active
learning, constructivism, and prompt feedback. JiTT courses
do require faculty to invest a bit more time than they might in a
traditional lecture class, but the investment of time pays off in
that faculty are using strategies that are strongly recommended
from research on learning by the National Science Foundation,
AAAS, and other national organizations for effective undergraduate teaching, resulting in increased student gains and a
more interactive classroom experience for faculty and students
ACCESSING MATERIALS
Electronic materials discussed in this paper include the following:
Contemporary Biology Web site ( 
iupui.edu/biocourses/N100/)
Biotechnology Web site ( 
biocourses/Biol540/)
Just-in-Time Teaching Web site ( 
iupui.edu/jitt/jitt.html)
The Web Science Project at IUPUI ( 
iupui.edu/webscience/webscience.html)
Contemporary Biology JiTT resource page (http://
www.biology.iupui.edu/biocourses/N100/archives.html)
Each of these Websites is available to the public, is not password-protected, and is available in standard HTML format.
There are no restrictions on the use of materials on these Web
pages by educators or by nonprofit institutions as long the content not modified and proper copyright acknowledgement is
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Support for the development of JiTT methods in Contemporary Biology
and Biotechnology is provided by the National Science Foundation,
Division of Undergraduate Education (NSF-DUE Award 9981111), to
the Web Science Project at IUPUI.