Transparent, Explainable, and Accountable AI for Robotics
Sandra Wachter,1,2 Brent Mittelstadt,2,3, 1 Luciano Floridi1,2
1Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, 1 St Giles, Oxford, OX1 3JS,
United Kingdom; 2The Alan Turing Institute, British Library, 96 Euston Rd,
London, NW1 2DB, United Kingdom; 3Department of Science and Technology
Studies, University College London, 22 Gordon Square, London, WC1E 6BT,
United Kingdom.
Correspondence: Sandra Wachter, 
To create fair and accountable AI and robotics, we need precise regulation and better
methods to certify, explain, and audit inscrutable systems.
Recent governmental statements from the United States (USA) (1, 2), the European
Union (EU) (3), and China (4) identify artificial intelligence (AI) and robotics as
economic and policy priorities. Despite this enthusiasm, challenges remain. Systems
can make unfair and discriminatory decisions, replicate or develop biases, and
behave in inscrutable and unexpected ways in highly sensitive environments that put
human interests and safety at risk (5). For example, Tesla’s self-driving cars, policing
robot Knightscope, or companion robot Pepper autonomously decides whether
something is a pedestrian or another car, whether an individual poses a threat, or
which emotion(s) the user is experiencing. In response, pressure is mounting to
make algorithms, AI, and robotics fair, trans parent, explainable, and therefore
accountable.
These challenges have been reflected in regulation applicable to automated
systems since the 1970s. In the USA, the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA)
and the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) aim to increase transparency in the credit
industry (6) and indirectly affect automated systems. Consumers are guaranteed
notifications of reasons for adverse actions, including those based on automated
scoring systems. More directly, in the EU, the 1995 Data Protection Directive
guarantees individuals a “right of access” to demand “know ledge of the logic
involved” in automated decision-making, for example, about creditworthiness.
Since the 1970s, algorithmic systems and their accountability issues have
grown in scale and complexity. American and European policies now appear to be
diverging on how to close current accountability gaps in AI. In the USA,
notifications guaranteed by the ECOA and FCRA remain. However, recent
recommendations on AI focus more on ethical design, education, and self-regulation
than on individual rights (1, 2). In comparison, the EU continues exploring a “hard”
regulatory approach with legally enforceable rights. This divergence may reflect the
new complexity of regulating AI and robotics compared to previous automated
systems. The inscrutability and the diversity of AI complicate the legal codification
of rights, which, if too broad or narrow, can inadvertently hamper innovation or
provide little meaningful protection.
This tension can be seen in recent European policy debate on the General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and the European Parliament’s resolution on
“Civil Law Rules on Robotics” (3). One potential accountability mechanism has
received great attention: the GDPR’s “right to explanation.” This would be robust
but potentially disruptive and technically challenging for AI, requiring certain
automated decisions to be explained to individuals. Despite a proposal by the
European Parliament to guarantee a “right to explanation,” this appears only in a
nonbinding Recital (7). Elsewhere, individuals are guaranteed “meaningful
information” about the “logic involved” in certain automated decision making
through the GDPR’s “right of access.” Although the Regulation fails to define the
scope of information to be provided in practice, only a general, easily understood
overview of system functionality is likely to be required (7).
The civil law resolution on robotics similarly struggles to define precise
accountability mechanisms. Transparency tools to explain the “rationale” and
“logic” of robotic behavior and decision-making aided by AI are called for but left
undefined (3). The Parliament’s Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice, and Home
Affairs called for compliance with the GDPR in future civil law addressing robotics
(8). Several data protection safeguards were explicitly highlighted, including “the
right to obtain an explanation” and “information obligations” (e.g., the right of
access). Although GDPR compliance is still called for, both safeguards are no longer
explicitly mentioned in the final resolution (3). European legislators thus missed a
second opportunity to clarify the GDPR’s accountability requirements for AI and
Issues remain, even if future civil law rules for robotics are fully compliant
with the GDPR’s safeguards against automated decision making. The safeguards
only apply to decisions “based solely on automated processing,” which may exclude
many robotic systems (9). There is reluctance in high-risk areas (e.g., transport) to
remove humans entirely from the loop. The outcome may be that robotic decision
making would not qualify as “solely” automated. Ironically, this reluctance could
make systems less accountable by preventing the GDPR’s safeguards from applying.
Automated decisions must also have “legal” or “significant” effects for safeguards
to apply (Fig. 1), although a definition of such effects is not provided. Only two
examples are given: online credit applications and e-recruiting. It remains to be seen
whether autonomous robotic behaviors will have “legal” or “significant” effects and
how levels of autonomy will influence this definition (9).
Designing imprecise regulation that treats decision-making algorithms, AI,
and robotics separately is dangerous. It misinterprets their legal and ethical
challenges as unrelated. Concerns about fairness, transparency, interpretability, and
accountability are equivalent, have the same genesis, and must be addressed together,
regardless of the mix of hardware, software, and data involved. For example, security
robots and predictive policing software identify threats with the same method
(automated processing) and purpose (public safety). Hence, the desire to understand
both systems is the same.
Figure 1 - Security or companion robots detecting threat level or mood solely based on automated processing could
produce “significant” effects for an individual, but it remains unclear whether such robotic decisions fall within the scope of
the GDPR’s safeguards. Photo credit: Shutterstock/Anucha Maneechote. Design: Adham Tamer, Oxford Internet Institute
These issues will only grow in importance. Beijing will soon issue a national
development plan for AI (10). It will be interesting to see whether China addresses
AI’s accountability challenges and, if so, adopts a self-regulatory or “hard law”
approach comparable to the USA or EU. Other mechanisms may also be expanded,
such as pre-deployment software certification schemes required by China’s
Cybersecurity Law.
Regulatory and technical accountability mechanisms will be effective only if
designed by taking into account the common functionality and diverse complexity
of algorithms, AI, and robotics. Several considerations require further research:
 How can human-interpretable systems be designed without
sacrificing performance? Interpretability is often perceived to be at
odds with model accuracy and efficiency in machine learning. In
robotics, methods are needed to provide legally required explanations
without significantly hampering performance, for example, using proxy
or simplified models or rule extraction.
 How can transparency and accountability be achieved in
inscrutable systems? Inscrutability in AI challenges calls for
transparency. Mechanisms not reliant on full interpretability, including
pre-deployment certification and algorithmic auditing (5), require
further development to ensure transparency and accountability in
opaque systems. It remains to be seen whether such “black box”
approaches that assess inputs and outputs will comply with legal
requirements.
 How can parallels between emerging systems be identified to set
accountability requirements? Regulatory standards need to be
developed to set system- and context-dependent accountability
requirements based on potential biased and discriminatory decisionmaking and risks to safety, fairness, and privacy.