Integral Human Pose Regression
Xiao Sun1, Bin Xiao1, Fangyin Wei2, Shuang Liang3⋆, and Yichen Wei1
1 Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
{xias, Bin.Xiao, yichenw}@microsoft.com
2 Peking University, Beijing, China
 
3 Tongji University, Shanghai, China
 
Abstract. State-of-the-art human pose estimation methods are based
on heat map representation. In spite of the good performance, the representation has a few issues in nature, such as non-diﬀerentiable postprocessing and quantization error. This work shows that a simple integral
operation relates and uniﬁes the heat map representation and joint regression, thus avoiding the above issues. It is diﬀerentiable, eﬃcient, and
compatible with any heat map based methods. Its eﬀectiveness is convincingly validated via comprehensive ablation experiments under various settings, speciﬁcally on 3D pose estimation, for the ﬁrst time.
Keywords: Integral regression · Human pose estimation · Deep learning.
Introduction
Human pose estimation has been extensively studied . Recent years have
seen signiﬁcant progress on the problem, using deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Best performing methods on 2D pose estimation are all detection
based . They generate a likelihood heat map for each joint and locate the joint
as the point with the maximum likelihood in the map. The heat maps are also
extended for 3D pose estimation and shown promising .
Despite its good performance, a heat map representation bears a few drawbacks in nature. The “taking-maximum” operation is not diﬀerentiable and prevents training from being end-to-end. A heat map has lower resolution than that
of input image due to the down sampling steps in a deep neural network. This
causes inevitable quantization errors. Using image and heat map with higher resolution helps to increase accuracy but is computational and storage demanding,
especially for 3D heat maps.
From another viewpoint, pose estimation is essentially a regression problem. A regression approach performs end-to-end learning and produces continuous output. It avoids the issues above. However, regression methods are not
as eﬀective as well as detection based methods for 2D human pose estimation.
⋆Corresponding author.
 
X. Sun, B. Xiao, F. Wei, S. Liang and Y. Wei
Among the best-performing methods in the 2D pose benchmark , only one
method is regression based. A possible reason is that regression learning is
more diﬃcult than heat map learning, because the latter is supervised by dense
pixel information. While regression methods are widely used for 3D pose estimation , its performance is still not satisfactory.
Existing works are either detection based or regression based. There is clear
discrepancy between the two categories and there is little work studying their
relation. This work shows that a simple operation would relate and unify the
heat map representation and joint regression. It modiﬁes the “taking-maximum”
operation to “taking-expectation”. The joint is estimated as the integration of
all locations in the heat map, weighted by their probabilities (normalized from
likelihoods). We call this approach integral regression. It shares the merits of
both heat map representation and regression approaches, while avoiding their
drawbacks. The integral function is diﬀerentiable and allows end-to-end training.
It is simple and brings little overhead in computation and storage. Moreover, it
can be easily combined with any heat map based methods.
The integral operation itself is not new. It has been known as soft-argmax and
used in the previous works . Speciﬁcally, two contemporary works 
also apply it for human pose estimation. Nevertheless, these works have limited
ablation experiments. The eﬀectiveness of integral regression is not fully evaluated. Speciﬁcally, they only perform experiments on MPII 2D benchmark, on
which the performance is nearly saturated. It is yet unclear whether the approach
is eﬀective under other settings, such as 3D pose estimation. See Section 3 for
more discussions.
Because the integral regression is parameter free and only transforms the
pose representation from a heat map to a joint, it does not aﬀect other algorithm design choices and can be combined with any of them, including diﬀerent
tasks, heat map and joint losses, network architectures, image and heat map
resolutions. See Figure 1 for a summarization. We conduct comprehensive experiments to investigate the performance of integral regression under all such
settings and ﬁnd consistent improvement. Such results verify the eﬀectiveness of
integral representation.
Our main contribution is applying integral regression under various experiment settings and verifying its eﬀectiveness. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrstly show that
integral regression signiﬁcantly improves the 3D pose estimation, enables the
mixed usage of 3D and 2D data, and achieves state-of-the-art results on Human3.6M . Our results on 2D pose benchmarks (MPII and COCO )
is also competitive. Code4 will be released to facilitate future work.
Integral Pose Regression
Given a learnt heat map Hk for kth joint, each location in the map represents
the probability of the location being the joint. The ﬁnal joint location coordinate
4 
Integral Human Pose Regression
Training data?
Image resolution?
Multi-stage?
Loss type?
Heat map resolution?
Loss type?
Integration
(3D) Heat Map
Joint Coordinates
Fig. 1. Overview of pose estimation pipeline and all our ablation experiment settings.
Jk is obtained as the location p with the maximum likelihood as
Jk = arg max
This approach has two main drawbacks. First, Eq. (1) is non-diﬀerentiable,
reducing itself to a post-processing step but not a component of learning. The
training is not end-to-end. The supervision could only be imposed on the heat
maps for learning.
Second, the heat map representation leads to quantization error. The heat
map resolution is much lower than the input image resolution due to the down
sampling steps in a deep neural network. The joint localization precision is thus
limited by the quantization factor, which poses challenges for accurate joint
localization. Using larger heat maps could alleviate this problem, but at the cost
of extra storage and computation.
Regression methods have two clear advantages over heat map based methods.
First, learning is end-to-end and driven by the goal of joint prediction, bridging
the common gap between learning and inference. Second, the output is continuous and up to arbitrary localization accuracy, in principle. This is opposed to
the quantization problem in heat maps.
We present a uniﬁed approach that transforms the heat map into joint location coordinate and fundamentally narrows down the gap between heat map
and regression based method. It brings principled and practical beneﬁts.
Our approach simply modiﬁes the max operation in Eq. (1) to take expectation, as
p · ˜Hk(p).
Here, ˜Hk is the normalized heat map and Ωis its domain. The estimated joint
is the integration of all locations p in the domain, weighted by their probabilities.
Normalization is to make all elements of ˜Hk(p) non-negative and sum to one.
 has already discussed it and we use softmax in this paper as
q∈ΩeHk(q) .
X. Sun, B. Xiao, F. Wei, S. Liang and Y. Wei
The discrete form of Eq. (2) is
p · ˜Hk(p),
By default, the heat map is 3D. Its resolution on depth, height, and width
are denoted as D, H, and W respectively. D = 1 for 2D heat maps.
In this way, any heat map based approach can be augmented for joint estimation by appending the integral function in Eq. (4) to the heat map Hk and
adopting a regression loss for Jk. We call this approach integral pose regression.
Integral pose regression shares all the merits of both heat map based and
regression approaches. The integral function in Eq. (4) is diﬀerentiable and allows end-to-end training. It is simple, fast and non-parametric. It can be easily
combined with any heat map based methods, while adding negligible overhead
in computation and memory for either training or inference. Its underlying heat
map representation makes it easy to train. It has continuous output and does
not suﬀer from the quantization problem.
Joint 3D and 2D training
A lack of diverse training data is a severe problem for 3D human pose estimation.
Several eﬀorts have been made to combine 3D and 2D training .
Since integral regression provides a uniﬁed setting for both 2D and 3D pose
estimation, it is a simple and general solution to facilitate joint 3D and 2D
training so as to address this data issue in 3D human pose estimation.
Recently, Sun et al. introduce a simple yet eﬀective way to mix 2D and
3D data for 3D human pose estimation and show tremendous improvement. The
key is to separate the 2D part (xy) of the joint prediction Jk from the depth
part (z) so that the xy part can be supervised by the abundant 2D data.
Integral regression can naturally adopt this mixed training technique, thanks
to the diﬀerentiability of integral operation in Eq. (4). We also obtain enormous
improvement from this technique in our experiments and this improvement is
feasible due to the integral formulation.
However, the underlying 3D heat map still can not be supervised by the
abundant 2D data. To address this problem, we further decompose the integral
function Eq. (4) into a two-step version to generate separate x, y, z heat map
target. For example, for the x target, we ﬁrst integrate the 3D heat map into 1D
x heat vectors Eq. (5)
and then, further integrate the 1D x heat vector into x joint coordinate Eq. (6)
p · ˜Vk(p).
Integral Human Pose Regression
Corresponding y and z formulation should be easy to infer. In this way, the
x, y, z targets are separated at the ﬁrst step, allowing the 2D and 3D mixed data
training strategy. We obtain signiﬁcant improvements from both direct and twostep integral regression for 3D pose estimation.
Methodology for Comprehensive Experiment
The main contribution of this work is a comprehensive methodology for ablation
experiments to evaluate the performance of the integral regression under various
conditions. Figure 1 illustrates the overview of the framework and the decision
choices at each stage.
The related works only experimented with 2D pose estimation on
MPII benchmark . They also have limited ablation experiments. Speciﬁcally,
 provides only system-level comparison results without any ablation experiments. studies the heat map normalization methods, heat map regularization
and backbone networks, which is far less comprehensive than ours.
Tasks. Our approach is general and is ready for both 2D and 3D pose estimation
tasks, indistinguishably. Consistent improvements are obtained from both tasks.
Particularly, 2D and 3D data can be easily mixed simultaneously in the training.
The 3D task beneﬁts more from this technique and outperforms previous works
by large margins.
Network Architecture. We use a simple network architecture that is widely
adopted in other vision tasks such as object detection and segmentation .
It consists of a deep convolutional backbone network to extract convolutional
features from the input image, and a shallow head network to estimate the
target output (heat maps or joints) from the features.
In the experiment, we show that our approach is a ﬂexible component which
can be easily embedded into various backbone networks and the result is less
aﬀected by the network capacity than the heat map. Speciﬁcally, network designs
ResNet and HourGlass , network depth ResNet18, 50, 101 , multistage design are investigated.
Heat Map Losses. In the literature, there are several choices of loss function
for heat maps. The most widely adopted is mean squared error (or L2 distance)
between the predicted heat map and ground-truth heat map with a 2D Gaussian
blob centered on the ground truth joint location . In this
work, the Gaussian blob has standard deviation σ = 1 as in . Our baseline
with this loss is denoted as H1 (H for heat map).
The recent Mask RCNN work uses a one-hot m × m ground truth mask
where only a single location is labeled as joint. It uses the cross-entropy loss over
an m2-way softmax output. Our baseline with this loss is denoted as H2.
Another line of works solve a per-pixel binary classiﬁcation problem, thus using binary cross-entropy loss. Each location in each heat map is
X. Sun, B. Xiao, F. Wei, S. Liang and Y. Wei
classiﬁed as a joint or not. Following , the ground truth heat map for each
joint is constructed by assigning a positive label 1 at each location within 15
pixels to the ground truth joint, and negative label 0 otherwise. Our baseline
with this implementation is denoted as H3.
In the experiment, we show that our approach works well with any of these
heat map losses. Though, these manually designed heat map losses might have
diﬀerent performances on diﬀerent tasks and need careful network hyper-parameter
tuning individually, the integral version (I1, I2, I3) of them would get prominent
improvement and produce consistent results.
Heat Map and Joint Loss Combination. For the joint coordinate loss, we
experimented with both L1 and L2 distances between the predicted joints and
ground truth joints as loss functions. We found that L1 loss works consistently
better than L2 loss. We thus adopt L1 loss in all of our experiments.
Note that our integral regression can be trained with or without intermediate
heat map losses. For the latter case, a variant of integral regression method is
deﬁned, denoted as I*. The network is the same, but the loss on heat maps is
not used. The training supervision signal is only on joint, not on heat maps. In
the experiment, we ﬁnd that integral regression works well with or without heat
map supervisions. The best performance depends on speciﬁc tasks. For example,
for 2D task I1 obtains the best performance, while for 3D task I* obtains the
best performance.
Image and Heat Map Resolutions. Due to the quantization error of heat
map, high image and heat map resolutions are usually required for high localization accuracy. However, it is demanding for memory and computation especially
for 3D heat map. In the experiment, we show that our approach is more robust
to the image and heat map resolution variation. This makes it a better choice
when the computational capabilities are restricted, in practical scenarios.
Datasets and Evaluation Metrics
Our approach is validated on three benchmark datasets.
Human3.6M is the largest 3D human pose benchmark. The dataset is
captured in controlled environment. It consists of 3.6 millions of video frames.
11 subjects (5 females and 6 males) are captured from 4 camera viewpoints, performing 15 activities. The image appearance of the subjects and the background
is simple. Accurate 3D human joint locations are obtained from motion capture
devices. For evaluation, many previous works 
use the mean per joint position error (MPJPE). Some works 
ﬁrstly align the predicted 3D pose and ground truth 3D pose with a rigid transformation using Procrustes Analysis
 and then compute MPJPE. We call
this metric PA MPJPE.
MPII is the benchmark dataset for single person 2D pose estimation.
The images were collected from YouTube videos, covering daily human activities with complex poses and image appearances. There are about 25k images. In
Integral Human Pose Regression
total, about 29k annotated poses are for training and another 7k are for testing.
For evaluation, Percentage of Correct Keypoints (PCK) metric is used. An estimated keypoint is considered correct if its distance from ground truth keypoint
is less than a fraction α of the head segment length. The metric is denoted as
PCKh@α. Commonly, metric is used for the benchmark . In order
to evaluate under high localization accuracy, which is also the strength of regression methods, we also use and AUC (area under curve, the averaged
PCKh when α varies from 0 to 0.5) metrics.
The COCO Keypoint Challenge requires “in the wild” multi-person detection and pose estimation in challenging, uncontrolled conditions. The COCO
train, validation, and test sets, containing more than 200k images and 250k
person instances labeled with keypoints. 150k instances of them are publicly
available for training and validation. The COCO evaluation deﬁnes the object
keypoint similarity (OKS) and uses the mean average precision (AP) over 10
OKS thresholds as main competition metric . The OKS plays the same role as
the IoU in object detection. It is calculated from the distance between predicted
points and ground truth points normalized by the scale of the person.
Experiments
Training Our training and network architecture is similar for all the three
datasets. ResNet and HourGlass (ResNet and HourGlass on Human3.6M
and MPII, ResNet-101 on COCO) are adopted as the backbone network. ResNet
is pre-trained on ImageNet classiﬁcation dataset . HourGlass is trained from
scratch. Normal distribution with 1e-3 standard deviation is used to initialize
the HourGlass and head network parameters.
The head network for heat map is fully convolutional. It ﬁrstly use deconvolution layers (4×4 kernel, stride 2) to upsample the feature map to the required
resolution (64 × 64 by default). The number of output channels is ﬁxed to 256
as in . Then, a 1 × 1 conv layer is used to produce K heat maps. Both heat
map baseline and our integral regression are based on this head network.
We also implement a most widely used regression head network as a regression
baseline for comparison. Following , ﬁrst an average pooling layer
reduces the spatial dimensionality of the convolutional features. Then, a fully
connected layer outputs 3K(2K) joint coordinates. We denote our regression
baseline as R1 (R for regression).
We use a simple multi-stage implementation based on ResNet-50, the features
from conv3 block are shared as input to all stages. Each stage then concatenates
this feature with the heat maps from the previous stage, and passes through the
conv4 and conv5 blocks to generate its own deep feature. The heat map head
is then appended to output heat maps, supervised with the ground truth and
losses. Depending on the loss function used on the heat map, this multi-stage
baseline is denoted as MS-H1(2,3).
MxNet is used for implementation. Adam is used for optimization. The
input image is normalized to 256 × 256. Data augmentation includes random
X. Sun, B. Xiao, F. Wei, S. Liang and Y. Wei
translation(±2% of the image size), scale(±25%), rotation(±30 degrees) and
ﬂip. In all experiments, the base learning rate is 1e-3. It drops to 1e-5 when the
loss on the validation set saturates. Each method is trained with enough number
of iterations until performance on validation set saturates. Mini-batch size is 128.
Four GPUs are used. Batch-normalization is used. Other training details
are provided in individual experiments.
For integral regression methods (I1, I2, I3, and their multi-stage versions),
the network is pre-trained only using heat map loss (thus their H versions) and
then, only integral loss is used. We found this training strategy working slightly
better than training from scratch using both losses.
Experiments on MPII
Since the annotation on MPII test set is not available, all our ablation studies
are evaluated on an about 3k validation set which is separated out from the
training set, following previous common practice . Training is performed on
the remaining training data.
Table 1. Comparison between methods using heat
maps, direct regression, and integral regression on MPII
validation set. Backbone network is ResNet-50. The performance gain is shown in the subscript
84.6 86.8 86.4 83.0 86.0↑1.4 87.3↑0.5 86.9↑0.5
25.0 17.2 17.6 12.6 28.3↑3.3 29.3↑12.1 29.7↑12.1 29.1↑16.5
54.1 52.9 53.1 46.3 56.6↑2.5 58.3↑5.4 58.3↑5.2 57.7↑11.4 Fig. 2. Curves of PCKh@α
of diﬀerent methods while α
varies from 0 to 0.5.
Eﬀect of integral regression Table 1 presents a comprehensive comparison.
We ﬁrst note that all integral regression methods (I1, I2, I3) clearly outperform
their heat map based counterpart (H1, H2, H3). The improvement is especially
signiﬁcant on with high localization accuracy requirement. For example, the improvement of I1 to H1 is +0.5 on , but +12.1 on .
The overall improvement on AUC is signiﬁcant (+5.4). Among the three heat
map based methods, H3 performs the worst. After using integral regression (I3),
it is greatly improved, eg., AUC from 46.3 to 57.7 (+11.4). Such results show that
joint training of heat maps and joint is eﬀective. The signiﬁcant improvement
on localization accuracy ( metric) is attributed to the joint regression
representation.
Surprisingly, I* performs quite well. It is only slightly worse than I1/I2/I3
methods. It outperforms H1/H2/H3 on and AUC, thanks to its regression representation. It outperforms R1, indicating that integral regression is
better than direct regression, as both methods use exactly the same supervision
and almost the same network (actually R1 has more parameters).
Integral Human Pose Regression
Ground Truth
Ground Truth
Fig. 3. Example results of regression baseline (R1), detection baseline (H1) and integral
regression (I1).
From the above comparison, we can draw two conclusions. First, integral regression using an underlying heat map representation is eﬀective (I*>H, I*>R).
It works even without supervision on the heat map. Second, joint training of heat
maps and joint coordinate prediction combines the beneﬁts of two paradigms and
works best (I>H,R,I*).
As H3 is consistently worse than the other two and hard to implement for 3D,
it is discarded in the remaining experiments. As H1 and I1 perform best in 2D
pose, they are used in the remaining 2D (MPII and COCO) experiments. Figure 2
further shows the PCKh curves of H1, R1, I* and I1 for better illustration.
Figure 3 shows some example results. Regression prediction (R1) is usually
not well aligned with local image features like corners or edges. On the contrary,
detection prediction (H1) is well aligned with image feature but hard to distinguish locally similar patches, getting trapped into local maximum easily. Integral
regression (H1) shares the merits of both heat map representation and joint regression approaches. It eﬀectively and consistently improves both baselines.
Eﬀect of resolution Table 2 compares the results using two input image sizes
and two output heat map sizes.
Not surprisingly, using large image size and heat map size obtains better
accuracy, under all cases. However, integral regression (I1) is much less aﬀected
by the resolution than heat map based method (H1). It is thus a favorable choice
when computational complexity is crucial and a small resolution is in demand.
For example, when heat map is downsized by half on image size 256 (a to
b), 1.1 G FLOPs (relative 15%) is saved. I1 only drops 0.6 in AUC while H1
drops 4.8. This gap is more signiﬁcant on image size 128 (c to d). 0.3G FLOPs
(relative 17%) is saved. I1 only drops 3.5 in AUC while H1 drops 12.5.
When image is downsized by half (b to d), 4.7 G FLOPs is saved (relative
76%). I1 only drops 11.1 in AUC while H1 drops 18.8.
Thus, we conclude that integral regression signiﬁcantly alleviates the problems
of quantization error or needs of large resolution in heat map based methods.
Eﬀect of network capacity Table 3 shows results using diﬀerent backbones
on two methods. While all methods are improved using a network with large
capacity, integral regression I1 keeps outperforming heat map based method H1.
X. Sun, B. Xiao, F. Wei, S. Liang and Y. Wei
Table 2. For two methods (H1/I1), two input image→feature map (f) resolutions, and
two heat map sizes (using either 3 or 2 upsampling layers), the performance metric
( , , AUC), the computation (in FLOPs) and the amount of network
parameters. Note that setting (b) is used in all other experiments
×2, ×2, ×2
×2, ×2, ×2
256 →8 (a) →16 →32 →64 (b) →16 →32 128 →4 (c) →8 →16 →32 (d) →8 →16
86.7/28.0/57.7
86.8/17.2/52.9
81.6/13.6/46.6
75.4/5.6 /34.1
86.6/32.1/58.9
87.3/29.3/58.3
83.2/20.6/50.7
80.9/16.1/47.2
FLOPs 7.3G
params 26M
Table 5. Comparison to state-of-the-art works on MPII
Tompson Raf
Wei Bulat Newell Yang
(Heat map based)
MS-H1 HG-H1
Mean ( )
Method (Regression)
Carreira 
MS-I1 HG-I1
Mean ( )
While a large network improves accuracy, a high complexity is also introduced. Integral regression I1 using ResNet-18 already achieves accuracy comparable with H1 using ResNet-101. This makes it a better choice when a small
network is in favor, in practical scenarios.
Table 3. , and AUC metrics
(top) of three methods, and model complexity (bottom) of three backbone networks. Note that ResNet-
50 is used in all other experiments
ResNet-101
85.5/15.7/50.8 86.8/17.2/52.9 87.3/17.3/53.3
86.0/25.7/55.6 87.3/29.3/58.3 87.9/30.3/59.0
FLOPs 2.8G
params 12M
Table 4. , 
and AUC metrics of a multi-stage
network with and without integral
regression
stage MS-H1
86.8/17.2/52.9 87.3/29.3/58.3
86.9/17.6/53.4 87.7/32.0/59.5
87.1/17.8/53.7 87.8/32.4/59.9
87.4/17.8/54.0 88.1/32.3/60.1
Eﬀect in multi-stage Table 4 shows the results of our multi-stage implementation with or without using integral regression. There are two conclusions. First,
integral regression can be eﬀectively combined with a multi-stage architecture
and performance improves as stage increases. Second, integral regression outperforms its heat map based counterpart on all stages. Speciﬁcally, MS-I1 stage-2
result 87.7 is already better than MS-H1 state-4 result 87.4.
Conclusions From the above ablation studies, we can conclude that eﬀectiveness of integral regression is attributed to its representation. It works under
diﬀerent heat map losses (H1, H2, H3), diﬀerent training (joint or not), diﬀerent
resolution, and diﬀerent network architectures (depth or multi-stage). Consis-
Integral Human Pose Regression
Table 6. COCO test-dev results
AP kp AP kp
CMU-Pose 
Mask R-CNN ResNet-50-FPN
G-RMI 
ResNet-101(353 × 257) 64.9
ResNet-101(256 × 256) 66.3
ResNet-101(256 × 256) 67.8 88.2
74.8 63.9 74.0
tent yet even stronger conclusions can also be derived from COCO benchmark
in Section 5.2 and 3D pose benchmarks in Section 5.3.
Result on the MPII test benchmark Table. 5 summarizes the results of our
methods, as well as state-of-the-art methods. In these experiments, our training
is performed on all 29k training samples. We also adopt the ﬂip test trick as used
in . Increasing the training data and using ﬂip test would increase about 2.5
 from validation dataset to test dataset.
We ﬁrst note that our baselines have good performance, indicating they are
valid and strong baselines. H1 and MS-H1 in the heat map based section has 89.4
and 89.8 PCKh, respectively, already comparable to many multi-stage methods
that are usually much more complex. R1 in regression section is already the best
performing regression method.
Our integral regression further improves both baselines (I1>H1, MS-I1>MS-
H1, 4 stages used) and achieves results competitive with other methods.
We also re-implement the HourGlass architecture , denoted as HG-H1.
Consistent improvement is observed using integral regression HG-I1. While the
accuracy of our approach is slightly below the state-of-the-art, we point out that
the recent leading approaches are all quite complex, making direct
and fair comparison with these works diﬃcult. Integral regression is simple, effective and can be combined with most other heat map based approaches, as
validated in our baseline multi-stage and the HourGlass experiments. Combination with these approaches is left as future work.
Experiments on COCO
Person box detection We follow a two-stage top-down paradigm similar as
in . For human detection, we use Faster-RCNN equipped with deformable
convolution . We uses Xception as the backbone network. The box detection AP on COCO test-dev is 0.49. For reference, this number in is 0.487.
Thus, the person detection performance is similar.
Following , we use the keypoint-based Non-Maximum-Suppression (NMS)
mechanism building directly on the OKS metric to avoid duplicate pose detections. We also use the pose rescoring technique to compute a reﬁned instance
conﬁdence estimation that takes the keypoint heat map score into account.
X. Sun, B. Xiao, F. Wei, S. Liang and Y. Wei
Pose estimation We experimented with heat map based method (H1) and our
integral regression methods (I1). All settings are the same as experiments on
MPII, except that we use ResNet-101 as our backbone and use 3 deconvolution
layers (4 × 4 kernel, stride 2) to upsample the feature maps.
Results Table 6 summarizes the results of our methods, as well as state-ofthe-art on COCO test-dev dataset. Our experiments are performed on COCO
training data, no extra data is added. The baseline model (H1) is a one-stage
ResNet-101 architecture. Our baseline model H1 is already superior to the state
of the art top-down method . Our integral regression further increases AP kp
by 1.5 points and achieves the state-of-the-art result.
Experiments on Human3.6M
In the literature, there are two widely used evaluation protocols. They have
diﬀerent training and testing data split.
Protocol 1 Six subjects (S1, S5, S6, S7, S8, S9) are used in training. Evaluation is performed on every 64th frame of Subject 11. PA MPJPE is used for
evaluation.
Protocol 2 Five subjects (S1, S5, S6, S7, S8) are used in training. Evaluation
is performed on every 64th frame of subjects (S9, S11). MPJPE is used for
evaluation.
Two training strategies are used on whether use extra 2D data or not. Strategy
1 only use Human3.6M data for training. For integral regression, we use Eq. (4).
Strategy 2 mix Human3.6M and MPII data for training, each mini-batch consists
of half 2D and half 3D samples, randomly sampled and shuﬄed. In this strategy,
we use the two-step integral function Eq. (5) (6) so that we can add 2D data on
both heat map and joint losses for training as explained in Section 2.1.
Eﬀect of integral regression Table. 7 compares the integral regression (I*,I1,I2)
with corresponding baselines (R1, H1,H2) under two training strategies. Protocol
2 is used. Backbone is ResNet50. We observe several conclusions.
First, integral regression signiﬁcantly improves the baselines in both training
strategies. Speciﬁcally, without using extra 2D data, the integral regression (I*,
I1, I2) improves (R1, H1, H2) by 6.0%, 13.2%, 17.7% respectively. I2 outperforms
all previous works in this setting. When using extra 2D data, the baselines have
already achieved very competitive results. Integral regression further improves
them by 11.7%, 17.1%, 11.6%, respectively. I* achieves the new state-of-the-art in
this setting and outperforms previous works by large margins, see Table. 10(B).
Second, all methods are signiﬁcantly improved after using MPII data. This is
feasible because of integral formulation Eq. (5)(6) generates x, y, z predictions
individually and keep diﬀerentiable.
Eﬀect of backbone network is the only previous work using 3D heat map
representation. They use a diﬀerent backbone network, multi-stage HourGlass.
In Table. 8, we follow exactly the same practice as in for a fair comparison
Integral Human Pose Regression
Table 7. Comparison between methods using heat maps, direct regression, and integral regression. Protocol 2 is used. Two training strategies are investigated. Backbone
network is ResNet-50. The relative performance gain is shown in the subscript
Training Data Strategy R1
106.6 99.5 80.4 100.2↓6.0% 86.4↓13.2% 66.2↓17.7%
63.6 59.3 49.6↓11.7% 52.7↓17.1% 52.4↓11.6%
Table 8. Comparison with Coarse-to-Fine Volumetric Prediction trained only
on Human3.6M. Protocol 2 is used. Evaluation metric is MPJPE. di denotes the zdimension resolution for the supervision provided at the i-th hourglass component.
Our I1 wins at both stages
Network Architecture (HourGlass ) Coarse-to-Fine. Ours H1 Ours I1
One Stage (d = 64)
Two Stage (d1 = 1, d2 = 64)
using this backbone network. Only Human3.6M data is used for training and
Protocol 2 is used for evaluation.
We have several observations. First, our baseline implementation H1 is strong
enough that is already better than at both stages. Therefore, it serves as a
competitive reference. Second, our integral regression I1 further improves H1 at
both stages by 6.8mm (relative 8.0%) at stage 1 and 3.9mm (relative 5.7%) at
stage 2. We can conclude that the integral regression also works eﬀectively with
HourGlass and multi-stage backbone on the 3D pose problem and our two-stage
I1 sets the new state-of-the-art in this setting, see Table. 11.
Eﬀect of resolution Table. 9 investigates the eﬀect of input image and heat
map resolution on 3D problem. We can also have similar conclusions as in Table. 2. Integral regression (I2) is much less aﬀected by the resolution than heat
map based method (H2). It is thus a favorable choice when computational complexity is crucial and a small resolution is in demand.
For example, when heat map is downsized by half on image size 256 (a to b).
I2 even gets slightly better while H2 drops 2.2mm on MPJPE. This gap is more
signiﬁcant on image size 128 (c to d). I2 only drops 3.8mm in MPJPE while
H2 drops 19.8mm. When image is downsized by half (b to d). I2 only drops in
9.2mm on MPJPE while H2 drops 24.9mm.
Consistent yet even stronger conclusions are derived on 3D task, compared
with Table. 2 on 2D task.
Comparison with the state of the art Previous works are abundant with
diﬀerent experiment settings and fall into three categories. They are compared
to our method in Table. 10 (A), (B) and Table. 11 respectively.
Our approach is the best single-image method that outperforms previous
works by large margins. Speciﬁcally, it improves the state-of-the-art, by 5.1 mm
X. Sun, B. Xiao, F. Wei, S. Liang and Y. Wei
Table 9. For two methods (H2/I2), two input image→feature map (f) resolutions, and
two heat map sizes (using either 3 or 2 upsampling layers). Strategy 2 and Protocol 2
are used. Backbone network is ResNet-50
×2, ×2, ×2
×2, ×2, ×2
256 →8 (a) →16 →32 →64 (b) →16 →32 128 →4 (c) →8 →16 →32 (d) →8 →16
Table 10. Comparison with previous work on Human3.6M. All methods used extra
2D training data. Ours use MPII data in the training. Methods in Group A and B
use Protocol 1 and 2, respectively. Ours is the best single-image method under both
scenarios. Methods with ∗exploit temporal information and are complementary to
ours. We even outperform them in Protocol 2
Hossain Dabral Yasin Rogez Chen Moreno Zhou Martinez Kanazawa Sun Fang Ours
(A, Pro. 1)
108.3 88.1
48.3 45.7 40.6
Hossain Dabral Chen Tome Moreno Zhou Jahangiri Mehta Martinez Kanazawa Fang Sun Ours
(B, Pro. 2)
114.2 88.4
60.4 59.1 49.6
Table 11. Comparison with previous work on Human3.6M. Protocol 2 is used. No
extra training data is used. Ours is the best
Method Zhou Tekin Xingyi Sun Pavlakos Ours
(relative 11.2%) in Table. 10(A), 9.5 mm (relative 16.1%) in Table. 10(B), and
7.8 mm (relative 10.8%) in Table. 11. Note that Dabral et al. and Hossain
et al. exploit temporal information and are complementary to our approach.
Nevertheless, ours is already very close to them in Table. 10(A) and even better
in Table. 10(B).
Conclusions
We present a simple and eﬀective integral regression approach that uniﬁes the
heat map representation and joint regression approaches, thus sharing the merits
of both. Solid experiment results validate the eﬃcacy of the approach. Strong
performance is obtained using simple and cheap baseline networks, making our
approach a favorable choice in practical scenarios. We apply the integral regression on both 3D and 2D human pose estimation tasks and push the very
state-of-the-art on MPII, COCO and Human3.6M benchmarks.
Integral Human Pose Regression