IEEE Communications Magazine • July 2021
0163-6804/21/$25.00 © 2021 IEEE
Location-based analytics leverage accurate
location awareness enabled by the fifth generation (5G) mobile technology standard, as well as
the integration of heterogeneous technologies, to
empower a plethora of new services for 5G verticals and optimize the use of network resources.
This article proposes an end-to-end architecture
integrated in the 5G network infrastructure to provide location-based analytics as a service. Based
on this architecture, we present an overview of
cutting-edge applications in 5G and beyond,
focusing on people-centric and network-centric
location-based analytics.
Introduction
Location information is a pivotal service of 5G
and beyond cellular networks and will enable a
plethora of new location-dependent use cases.
Indeed, since Release (Rel.) 16, the 3rd Generation Partnership Program (3GPP) is enhancing
5G networks and devices with localization functionalities targeting a very high level of location
accuracy (with sub-meter accuracy 95 percent
of the time or more) . Besides the localization of users, there is a growing interest in location-based analytics — the analysis of the location
and behavior of people and objects in public
areas, roads, and buildings — through dedicated infrastructures or by relying on user devices . While closely related, location-based
analytics are not a mere extension of user equipment (UE) localization, but rather a new paradigm that enables a large variety of scenarios
and applications.
Location-based analytics can be classified as
people-centric and network-centric. People-centric analytics refer to the ensemble of information
related to people’s presence and movements in
physical spaces (e.g., people counting, dynamic map creation, flow tracking, fusion of spatiotemporal data with multimodal information,
and anomalous behavior detection) . Network-centric analytics refer to the ensemble of
information related to network operation (e.g.,
network planning, fault detection, resilience,
location-aware diagnosis and troubleshooting)
 . On one hand, the ability to operate 5G
networks in both sub-6 GHz and millimeter-wave
(mmWave) frequency bands and the use of massive antenna arrays significantly extend the capabilities of cellular localization. On the other hand,
such new 5G features as beamforming, multi-connectivity, and the adoption of new spectrum
portions pose new challenges for autonomous
network management.
The provision of location-based analytics
relies on complex features and mobility patterns
extracted from raw location-related data inherent in physical and network events. This calls for
an extension of the 5G network functions (e.g.,
the scheduler) to interface with location data in a
multi-layer and flexible architecture that:
• Facilitates secure sharing and reuse of accurate location and context data for diverse
localization services
• Combines the different network functions for
the extraction of location-based analytics
There is a unique opportunity for network providers to make location-based analytics a network-native service in 5G and beyond, which will
be pivotal in creating new disruptive services and
optimizing network performance.
This article proposes a full-stack architecture integrated in the 5G network infrastructure to enable a plethora of services requiring
location-based analytics. Such analytics rely on
enhanced positioning provided in 5G together
with heterogeneous data. Finally, we present a
set of case studies on people-centric and network-centric analytics that can be implemented
with the proposed architecture.
End-to-End Architecture
The 5G system consists of the next-generation
radio access network (5G-RAN) and the 5G core
network. The 5G-RAN is a distributed set of base
stations, or gNBs, managing efficient use of the
radio spectrum. The 5G core operates via network functions and service-based interfaces. Network virtualization decouples network functions
from the hardware on which they operate, leading to a more dynamic system that can be controlled by software.
We propose new system functionalities integrated in the 5G network infrastructure to allow
operators and service providers to expose location-based analytics as a service. Such functionalities leverage 5G network information combined
with heterogeneous data from other radio access
technologies .
Stefania Bartoletti, Luca Chiaraviglio, Sergio Fortes, Takai Eddine Kennouche, Gürkan Solmaz, Giacomo Bernini,
Domenico Giustiniano, Joerg Widmer, Raquel Barco, Giuseppe Siracusano, Andrea Conti, and Nicola Blefari Melazzi
Stefania Bartoletti is with the National Research Council of Italy (IEIIT-CNR) and CNIT; Luca Chiaraviglio is with the University of Rome Tor
Vergata and CNIT; Sergio Fortes and Raquel Barco are with the Universidad de Málaga; Takai Eddine Kennouche is with VIAVI Solutions
France; Gürkan Solmaz is with NEC Laboratories Europe; Giacomo Bernini is with Nextworks; Domenico Giustiniano and Joerg Widmer are
with IMDEA Networks Institute; Giuseppe Siracusano is with NEC Laboratories Europe; Andrea Conti is with the University of Ferrara and
CNIT; Nicola Blefari Melazzi is with the University of Roma Tor Vergata and CNIT.
Digital Object Identifier:
10.1109/MCOM.001.2001096
Location-Based Analytics in 5G and Beyond
5G FOR VERTICALS: FROM THEORY TO PRACTICE AND BEYOND
The authors propose an end-toend architecture integrated in
the 5G network infrastructure to
provide location-based analytics
as a service. Based on this architecture, they present an overview
of cutting-edge applications in
5G and beyond, focusing on people-centric and network-centric
location-based analytics.
IEEE Communications Magazine • July 2021
Localization and Analytics Functions
We propose the use of virtualization techniques
to run the localization and analytics functions as
virtual functions, with the support of both traditional virtual machine and cloud-native container
based techniques. This provides an augmentation
of the 5G architecture by leveraging the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI)
network function virtualization framework, which
represents the 3GPP standard for operators to
deploy 5G network functions in virtualized infrastructures. This augmentation of the 5G architecture offers operators and service providers the
possibility to expose new location-based analytics
to third parties and exploit location data for smart
network management.
Figure 1 shows a comprehensive view of the
proposed system architecture and includes details
of how the location-related functions coexist on
top of a virtualized infrastructure for on-demand
deployment in the form of localization services.
The proposed system is compliant with the 3GPP
5G core architecture as it makes use of a service-based architecture integrated in the 5G network functions and augments it with atomized
and independent location functions. Specifically,
the system is aligned with the 3GPP enhanced
Location Service (eLCS) architecture, which
specifies 5G network functions, interfaces, and
workflows for location-related functionalities .
Here, the location management function (LMF)
coordinates and calculates the user position for
location-based services requested by external or
internal eLCS clients, including other network
functions.
In our proposed system architecture, the
localization enablers provide the other system
functions with UE location data (e.g., coordinates, velocity, direction). In particular, localization enablers implement the LMFs deployed on
demand to fulfill specific performance requirements: integration of 5G New Radio (NR), global navigation satellite system (GNSS), and WiFi,
as well as device-free localization. Such LMFs
provide location data to the location data analytics functions (LDAFs) for the provision of location-based analytics. LDAFs can be considered
as LCS clients and use location data from LMFs.
People-centric and network-centric LDAFs apply
descriptive, predictive, prescriptive, and diagnostic algorithms to perform statistical analysis on
location and network data, assess future possible conditions, search for actions to be taken,
and determine the causes for specific conditions,
respectively. Finally, the integrity, security, and
privacy functions provide authentication and
advanced cryptographic techniques on the localization and analytics data to be exposed toward
external applications, secure conditional sharing
techniques, and data management policies (e.g.,
anonymization, obfuscation).
Localization Analytics as Service APIs
The localization analytics are exposed as services
through dedicated application programming interfaces (APIs). A service can be seen as a combination of multiple localization-related functions (i.e.,
LMFs and LDAFs) that need to be wired in the
form of pipelines to provide the desired output
requested by external applications. This requires
a workflow execution engine (management and
orchestration) to translate service requests into
functional steps that involve the localization related functions.
The localization analytics output is then
exposed through localization analytics service
APIs as either an on-demand RESTful service or
a continuous data stream. This is managed via
dedicated access control functions within the
API layer. The overall approach’s main goal is
to provide a flexible and composable platform
where the various localization functions can be
combined while facilitating sharing and reuse of
some of the key functionalities (e.g., those for the
localization enablers or data security and privacy)
across different localization services.
5G Localization
This section presents the ongoing 3GPP standardization activities and research in the area of 5G
localization to better define the eLCS involved
within the proposed architecture. We also give
an overview of the main technologies that can
be combined with 5G location data to improve
localization.
5G Standardization and Metrics
The 5G NR was defined in two phases (Phases 1
and 2) corresponding to 3GPP Rels. 15 and 16.
Localization in 5G was introduced in Rel. 15 for
non-standalone operation (5G networks aided
by existing 4G infrastructure) and continued in
Rel. 16 for standalone NR operation, with further
enhancements in Rel. 17. 5G localization mainly
relies on measurements of single-value metrics,
such as downlink and uplink time difference of
arrival (DL/UL-TDoA) and beamforming angle
of arrival (AoA) or angle of departure (AoD).
Depending on the use case, some received signal strength indicators such as the reference signal received power (RSRP) and reference signal
FIGURE 1. System architecture for location-based analytics as a service.
Localization Enablers (LMFs)
NR, GNSS, WIFI Integration
Device-free localization
Virtualization Platform
Management and Orchestration (MANO)
Integrity,
and Privacy
Data Management
Network-centric Analytics (LDAFs)
Pencil Beamforming
People-centric Analytics (LDAFs)
Spatiotemporal
Clustering
Analytics as a Service API
Network Optimization
Mobility Monitoring
Group Detection
Network Diagnosis
Contextualized Indicators
Crowd Counting
Group Inference
Analytics Services
Applications
IEEE Communications Magazine • July 2021
received quality (RSRQ) can also be used for
positioning.
The use of richer information within the localization process (e.g., exploiting multipath or
prior information about the environment) can be
extended to use soft information to significantly improve the localization accuracy in 5G
scenarios, especially in challenging environments.
Heterogeneous Location Data Fusion
The fusion of radio access technology (RAT)-dependent and RAT-independent location data in a
hybrid fashion can help to meet the demanding
localization requirements on accuracy, latency,
and integrity level for 5G use cases.
GNSS is supported in 3GPP for 5G, and combination with cellular positioning is needed for
many use cases in which one technology is not
fully operating or has limited coverage, such as in
tunnels or urban canyon scenarios. Studies show
that use of even only one high-accuracy 5G timing measurement can significantly improve horizontal positioning accuracy with respect to GNSS
standalone solutions .
Concerning the integration of other RAT-independent positioning methods, the combination
of ranging measurements for a UE from multiple WiFi access points (APs) and 5G NR cells, for
both indoor and outdoor scenarios, is envisaged
to accomplish high-accuracy positioning. However, in 5G networks, the location server may not
have the information about the WiFi APs’ exact
locations; this limits the usefulness of WiFi data
at the location server. In such cases, for instance,
smartphone movements can be estimated using
WiFi Fine Time Measurement ranging measurements . These data can be integrated in a
network-based location system defined in 3GPP,
where the network collects timing and angle measurements sent from the UE.
In this context, the large bandwidth of
mmWave networks not only enables very high
accuracy positioning, but enables simultaneous
localization and mapping (SLAM) through AoA
information. SLAM in mmWave networks relies
on anchor location estimation, device localization,
and environment mapping for both physical and
virtual anchors. A low-complexity SLAM algorithm
fully integrated with an mmWave communication
system is feasible with median error smaller than
0.3–0.5 m .
Device-Free Localization
Device-free localization relies on the detection
and analysis of signals reflected by device-free targets (persons, vehicles, etc.) as in radar networks.
Such networks sense the wireless environment to
infer the location of targets and can take advantage of any modulated signal at any frequency of
operation.
The ultra-low-latency connectivity and finer
radar range resolution enabled by 5G are paving
the way to the use of 5G NR waveforms for joint
radar and communication. As an example application, a 5G integrated radar service has been
proposed in for future vehicle networks. In
this context, the use of mmWave technology is
particularly relevant since the reduced wavelength
allows the use of massive arrays with electronic
steering capabilities, thereby improving the directionality properties for detection and tracking of
device-free targets.
From Localization to Analytics
This section presents a set of case studies for people-centric and network-centric location-based
analytics. They are conceived for implementation
as LDAFs (Fig. 1) for compatibility and direct integration in the 3GPP 5G core architecture. These
examples only cover a subset of possible use
cases, and are introduced to showcase the system functionalities in the envisioned architecture,
which is aligned with the ongoing work in 3GPP
and could be further extended based on the technical implementation of use cases.
People-Centric Location-Based Analytics
People-centric analytics provide insights and
empower domains such as smart cities and transportation, enabling a number of 5G services.
Mobility Clustering: This use case investigates
the mobility patterns in large-scale mobility datasets, which can be implemented within the proposed architecture using 5G LMFs as input. Such
datasets exhibit challenges in terms of granularity,
regularity, and accuracy, which motivate the use
of modern deep learning techniques to be implemented as LDAFs. We investigate recurrent-network-based sequence-to-sequence autoencoders
 for human mobility analysis. We conduct unsupervised spatiotemporal clustering on the Open-
PFLOW dataset , which represents walking,
biking, and commuting mobility in the city of
Tokyo for 24 h at regular 1 min timesteps. The
autoencoding model is formed by stacking layers
of gated recurrent units in an encoder/decoder
structure.
After training, spatiotemporal aspects of the
mobility data are encoded in the latent space
represented by the encoder output. There we
apply principal component analysis, and then use
the K-means method to detect clusters. Figure 2
shows the process applied to walking trajectories
from . The visualization on the actual Tokyo
map indicates potential trends such as regional,
sub-regional, and cross-regional mobility concentration, as well as patterns of stationary and
non-stationary behavior across different time periods. The fusion of heterogeneous technologies
and contextual information enabled by the proposed end-to-end architecture, such as network
conditions, events, and geographic labels from
the surrounding environment, will further improve
such mobility analytics (e.g., with dedicated network functions for anomaly detection and the
interplay with other aspects of human activity).
The proposed approach also builds on the architecture’s ability to maintain a steady influx of data
in order to validate, update, and retrain the proposed model.
Group Detection and People Counting: There
is a growing interest in designing crowd-centric
device-free and device-based methods for
group detection and people counting that infer
the number of targets directly from the measured
data without estimating their locations.
The Group-In method is an LDAF that
provides group inference using as input the wireless traces collected by the WiFi LMF. A previous Group-In study used experiments in an
GNSS is supported in 3GPP
for 5G and the combination
with cellular positioning is
needed for many use cases in
which one technology is not
fully operating or has limited
coverage, such as in tunnels
or urban canyon scenarios.
Studies show that use of
even only one high-accuracy
5G timing measurement can
significantly improve horizontal positioning accuracy with
respect to GNSS stand-alone
solutions.
IEEE Communications Magazine • July 2021
indoor setting but did not consider the application
of Group-In at a large scale using WiFi datasets.
In this article, we apply the Group-In algorithms
to a city-scale dataset that is a result of the
pilot study in Gold Coast, Australia. The Group-In
LDAF provides the following localization analytics
1. Group detection
2. Long-term group detection
3. Crowd size
Group detection infers people groups during
short time intervals (e.g., 2 min), long-term linkages aggregate group detection for each pair
of people based on frequency of appearance in
the same groups over a longer time interval (e.g.,
weekly), and crowd size shows the number of
people at the time intervals.
As the city-scale dataset does not contain
ground truth values for people groups, we select
a parameter set based on controlled lab experiments. The fixed (selected) parameters provide
satisfactory performance in almost all scenarios (more than 80 percent pairwise and Jaccard
accuracy except when the groups of devices
are consistently closer than 2 m to each other).
Moreover, the performance is cross-validated by
dividing the controlled datasets into five equal
data chunks and applying the same parameters to
data chunks without re-calibration. It is possible to
apply analytics in the large-scale dataset without
additional training since no explicit training phase
is needed due to the unsupervised graph-clustering-based approach. Through ground-truth data,
more precise calibration of the parameters could
be achieved. We observe that it is computationally feasible to apply Group-In at a large scale, infer
groups out of more than 100 people, and generate insights in near real time.
Figure 3 shows the results of applying Group-
In to a one-week trace (10 min time interval, 30
s sampling time). The preliminary results include
existence of static WiFi devices as well as mobile
WiFi devices that are in vehicles (on the road).
Moreover, a single person is considered as one
group. As a result, the most commonly observed
group was a one-person group, followed by
two-people groups, and so on. As expected, we
observe a positive correlation between the number of groups and the number of people. The
data follows a daily trend with a peak value (up
to 110 people) every day. Results indicate that
Group-In is a promising technique for the analysis of city-scale data for long periods. Accurate
localization through 5G will lead to more granular
insights for people counting and group behavior
identification without additional computational
complexity.
Network-Centric Location-Based Analytics
Two use cases are now presented to show the use
of location-based analytics for network management: network optimization for efficient service
provisioning considering the dynamic changes in
the network; and location-aware diagnosis/troubleshooting for the maintenance of the cellular
network by identifying problems as well as ensuring the resilience of the network itself.
Network Optimization: An example of
location-aware network optimization is pencil
beamforming based on the estimated UE position. Pencil beamforming relies on the location
information of the LMF communicated to network-centric LDAFs, but unlike other types of services, it does not interface third parties via APIs,
but communicates these analytics to other man-
FIGURE 2. Pedestrian mobility autoencoder-based clustering in Tokyo.
FIGURE 3. People counts and number of groups observed every 10 minutes based on wireless activities in the Gold
Coast. The results are shown for a one-week period (as a function of equally spaced time units).
IEEE Communications Magazine • July 2021
agement network functions for the gNB beam
management within the 5G-RAN. We have performed a preliminary analysis on the impact of
pencil beamforming on the quality of service
(QoS) of 5G networks and the electromagnetic
field (EMF) exposure. To this aim, an open source
simulator has been developed that is able to
synthesize the traffic beams for each gNB, in both
direction and beamwidth, by exploiting UE localization accuracy. Each beam is directed toward
the center of a circular area in which the UE is
assumed to be, where the diameter of this circular
area indicates the uncertainty level for UE location estimate. Different from , we summarize
here the main insights about the location-aware
management of the pencil beams, by analyzing
average EMF and throughput over the territory.
Table 1 presents the values of the average EMF
(V/m) and average throughput (Mb/s) according
to different location uncertainty levels, together
with the confidence intervals (C.I.). Results show
that an increase of the location uncertainty level
results in higher EMF (due to possible overlap
of the wider beams) and lower throughput (the
higher beamwidth lowers the beam’s directivity).
Therefore, higher localization accuracy helps to
reduce the EMF exposure while increasing the
throughput.
Network Diagnosis: Location-aware network
diagnosis can rely on contextualized indicators
(i.e., time-series metrics combining location and
cellular network measurement). Such indicators
are extracted from the network measurements
reported by users in different areas of interest,
including cell coverage, center, and edge. This
concept can be especially beneficial for 5G ultradense scenarios, characterized by high dynamicity of users and increased demand due to the
reduced coverage areas and inter-site distances
Supported by the high-accuracy localization
produced by the 5G LMFs and provided to the
network-centric analytics (LDAFs), of which the
contextualized indicators are part, novel mechanisms for failure diagnosis can be implemented
and provided as applications for network operators. In this way, and going beyond the previously
cited approach (which worked with manually
defined areas and simple Bayes classifiers), novel
developments support the complete automation
of the definition of the areas of interest by estimating cell coverage area, center, edge, influencing area on other cells (the area that will be most
likely be covered by the cell in case of a failure in
its neighbor), and area being influenced by each
of their neighbors. This has led to an increased
number of available contextualized indicators that
can be used for diagnosis.
Figure 4 compares the performance of failure
diagnosis mechanisms using only classic metrics
with the use of both classic and contextualized
metrics (fusion). This is done for the indoor ultradense scenario with 12 picocells and multiple
modeled failures presented in . Network
diagnosis is performed based on three classifiers,
namely K-nearest neighbors, discriminant analysis
classification, and multiclass error-correcting output codes classification. Results show that for the
different classifiers, the use of contextualized data
considerably decreases the diagnosis error rate
with respect to only using classical metrics, thus
providing a powerful tool for 5G failure management. The availability of localization data for the
generation of the location-enriched metrics allow
the median diagnosis error rate for the three classifiers to be reduced significantly, going below 1
percent for disc and multiclass. This demonstrates
the relevance of location-aware information for
improving failure management of 5G networks.
The proposed network management approaches
can use different types of data. For example, minimization of drive-test (MDT) data can be directly integrated in the proposed approaches (e.g.,
in the calculation of contextualized indicators).
Therefore, when MDT traces are available, they
could help in both obtaining more accurate location-based analytics and improving network management and diagnosis.
Conclusion
This article has presented a new system architecture for the provision of location-based analytics
as a service, which will enable a plethora of new
people-centric and network-centric applications
for 5G verticals. The proposed system architecture
is an augmentation of the 5G architecture, where
network and user data from heterogeneous technologies are combined to extract on-demand analytics that can serve third-party applications and
be used to optimize the network performance.
Example analytics for case studies involving people grouping, mobility clustering, network optimization, as well as network diagnosis have been
TABLE 1. Average EMF (V/m) and average throughput (Mb/s) for different values of location uncertainty level.
Avg. EMF (V/m)
EMF C.I. (V/m)
Avg. throughput (Mb/s)
Thr. C.I. (V/m)
FIGURE 4. Comparison between the diagnosis error rate (DER) obtained by classic and location-enriched contextualized metrics in an ultra-dense scenario, using k-nearest neighbor (KNN), discriminant analysis classification
(disc), and multiclass error-correcting output codes (ECOC) classification.
IEEE Communications Magazine • July 2021
illustrated, showing the effectiveness of the proposed architecture.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme under Grant no. 871249. The pilot
study in Gold Coast is conducted with NEC Australia.