BioMed Central
 
(page number not for citation purposes)
BMC Medical Education
BMC Medical Education
Undergraduate medical education: Thoughts on future challenges
Philip O Ozuah
Address: Department of Pediatrics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Children's Hospital at Montefiore, New York, USA
E-mail: 
Background: There is considerable uncertainty about the future of undergraduate medical
education in the face of several important challenges. This paper highlights many of the complexities
of the challenges facing medical school leadership today.
Discussion: A major challenge facing medical education in the United States is the erosion of the
clinical environment, the loss of clinical revenues and all its attendant consequences, including
pressures for increased faculty productivity in an environment that is increasingly managed. These
pressures have squeezed the time for teaching out of the system. Another challenge is how to
incorporate all the new and emergent domains of knowledge into the existing curriculum. There is
also a need to incorporate technological advancements into the delivery of teaching.
Summary: Undergraduate medical education in the United States must respond to a multitude of
challenges if it is to remain vibrant in the 21st century.
Background
Medical education faces several important challenges.
There is considerable uncertainty about the future of undergraduate medical education . Changes in the
health care system have had an enormous impact on the
medical school clinical enterprise. In the past few years,
several medical school-owned hospitals and medical
school-affiliated hospitals have undergone mergers, acquisitions, or closures . These events often have direct
ramifications for medical students' clinical rotations.
Clearly, medical schools are feeling the pressure to adapt
to changes in the health care system while maintaining excellence in eduation . Many have said that this is a time
for strong academic visionary leadership in medical
schools . This paper will highlight many of the complexities of the challenges facing medical school leadership today. What is the best way to educate trainees in the
current environment? How do we prepare today's student
to become tomorrow's physician?
Discussion
In recent years, several academic medical centers have reported drastic reductions in revenue streams . Academic centers are the partners of medical schools. Thus, a
top priority for medical education today is the erosion of
the clinical environment, the loss of clinical revenues and
all its attendant consequences, including pressures for increased faculty productivity in an environment that is increasingly managed. These pressures have squeezed the
time for teaching out of the system. Consequently, the
medical student suffers on two counts. First, he sees very
busy clinical faculty with too many patients, working too
long, working too hard, and spending too little time with
patients. At the medical school, the students are taught
how to take a good history, perform a proper physical examination, and interact appropriately with the patient
and the patient's family. Out there in the real world, students see a busy, harried, worried, very often depressed
faculty who appear to be in the middle of budgetary crises
Published: 30 July 2002
BMC Medical Education 2002, 2:8
Received: 16 March 2002
Accepted: 30 July 2002
This article is available from: 
© 2002 Ozuah; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This article is published in Open Access: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in
all media for any non-commercial purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.
BMC Medical Education 2002, 2
 
 
(page number not for citation purposes)
all the time. This role modeling must have some impact
on our students. It appears that managed care in some
form or another will continue to exist along with the cost
containment pressures. So in the face of this eroding clinical environment, how can we preserve the best qualities
of the medical profession to make sure that there is a faculty who can take good care of patients and be role models for students? How can we preserve the best qualities of
clinical education? Medical schools and their leaders must
attend to these problems.
Another challenge is how to incorporate all the different
subjects, new domains of knowledge, and emergent disciplines into the curriculum in order to produce a more
complete physician – one that meets the needs of individuals and populations. What is the best way to integrate
molecular medicine, genetics, palliative care, complementary and alternative medicine, nutrition, medical ethics,
and information technology into the existing curriculum?
We believe that the exclusion of these neglected areas of
medical education produces an incomplete physician.
However, the curriculum is already packed and no one
wants to cut any piece of it out. It is not practical to simply
add a bunch of new courses and several additional hours
of instruction. Yet, there is a need for change. There are no
easy solutions to this challenge. One approach is getting
all the stakeholders together to think collectively about
possible solutions. Currently, the Albert Einstein College
of Medicine has several working groups and committees/
subcommittees looking at these issues. We believe that
this is the way to go.
Information technology is another big challenge that demands its own solutions. In many ways it is a moving target because the technology constantly changes, improves,
gets faster, gets more wireless, gets more pervasive, and becomes all encompassing. We believe that medical schools
have to be as innovative and demanding of ourselves as
companies like Charles Schwab, which has developed
probably the best web site for the brokerage business of
any company in America. Medical schools do not use all
the educational possibilities of information technology,
either in the classroom or the non-classroom environment. While cost is a significant barrier, such innovations
can have a big impact on the area of self-directed learning.
Assuming that the physician of 2020 is going to be using
computer technology much more than the physician of
2000, we have to train our students now for that world –
a world where the physician obtains information in her
own way from experts via computer technology, and not
necessarily through classrooms. We should aim to educate
students now in such a way that they use this technology
in their efforts at self-directed learning. It is not just a
question of technology but also a question of learning to
be critical in evaluating the information available through
technology.
Another challenge facing medical education today is that
we are training students to practice in an environment of
managed care, yet many faculty members do not believe
that this is the right environment for the practice of medicine. So how do we prepare students with the appropriate
skills to be proficient in the current environment and yet
teach them how to practice in an ideal environment? Currently, many schools are educating their students to function properly in a managed care environment. Should
Einstein be doing that? Is that the environment we want
physicians of the future to practice in? So, how should we
prepare our students so as to know what the ideal patientdoctor relationship should be, and yet, prepare them for
the real world? That is the challenge.
Proprietary medicine has made a come back and students
are being placed in these environments. This is similar to
the practice in 1900 when students were placed in apprenticeships physicians who were practicing in the community. Then came the idea of a full-time faculty and hospital
affiliation. Now, it is all changing again. A lot of medical
schools have thrown up their hands and said: let the students go out there and learn how to be a real doctor and
how a real doctor practices. Is this the best approach?
There is a clear need to train medical students in settings
beyond the hospital wards. There is a need for rigorous
ambulatory training. However, the concern is that many
ambulatory practices are so tightly controlled and managed such that it is difficult to devote the optimal amount
of time for each patient. Therefore, farming students out
to such venues requires careful consideration and monitoring.
Finally, we believe that medical schools are going to have
to confront the issue of distance learning in the near future. While it may not be possible to teach entire courses
through distance learning, medical schools should explore the advantages of such technology. For example,
during clinical rotations when students are dispersed at
various clinical sites, there may be distance learning and
video conferencing. Through this mechanism, students
could come together and interact during the didactic aspects of clinical education. Distance learning technology
could provide an avenue for doing this without losing
travel time. But the challenge would be in developing curricula that take full advantage of the promise of distance
technology while maintaining the important personal
contact among students and between students and faculty.
BMC Medical Education 2002, 2
 
 
(page number not for citation purposes)
Publish with BioMed Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMedcentral will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical research in our lifetime."
Paul Nurse, Director-General, Imperial Cancer Research Fund
Publish with BMC and your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours - you keep the copyright
 
Submit your manuscript here:
 
BioMedcentral.com
This paper has identified several major challenges facing
medical education in the United States. These include the
erosion of the clinical environment, the loss of clinical
revenues and all its attendant consequences, as well as
pressures for increased faculty productivity in an environment that is increasingly managed. We contend that these
pressures have squeezed the time for teaching out of the
system. There is also the challenge of how to incorporate
all the new and emergent domains of knowledge into the
existing curriculum, and the need to incorporate technological advancements into the delivery of teaching. While
there are no easy solutions, these challenges can be met
and even ameliorated by the application of creativity and
diligence.
Competing interests
None declared.