Cross-scene Crowd Counting via Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
Cong Zhang1,2
Hongsheng Li2,3
Xiaogang Wang2
Xiaokang Yang1
1Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3School of Electronic Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{zhangcong0929,lihongsheng}@gmail.com
 
 
Cross-scene crowd counting is a challenging task where
no laborious data annotation is required for counting people in new target surveillance crowd scenes unseen in the
training set. The performance of most existing crowd counting methods drops signiﬁcantly when they are applied to
an unseen scene. To address this problem, we propose a
deep convolutional neural network (CNN) for crowd counting, and it is trained alternatively with two related learning
objectives, crowd density and crowd count. This proposed
switchable learning approach is able to obtain better local optimum for both objectives. To handle an unseen target crowd scene, we present a data-driven method to ﬁnetune the trained CNN model for the target scene. A new
dataset including 108 crowd scenes with nearly 200,000
head annotations is introduced to better evaluate the accuracy of cross-scene crowd counting methods.
Extensive experiments on the proposed and another two existing
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and reliability of our
1. Introduction
Counting crowd pedestrians in videos draws a lot of attention because of its intense demands in video surveillance, and it is especially important for metropolis security. Crowd counting is a challenging task due to severe
occlusions, scene perspective distortions and diverse crowd
distributions. Since pedestrian detection and tracking has
difﬁculty when being used in crowd scenes, most state-ofthe-art methods are regression based and the
goal is to learn a mapping between low-level features and
crowd counts. However, these works are scene-speciﬁc, i.e.,
a crowd counting model learned for a particular scene can
only be applied to the same scene. Given an unseen scene
or a changed scene layout, the model has to be re-trained
with new annotations. There are few works focusing on
cross-scene crowd counting, though it is important to actual
applications.
In this paper, we propose a framework for cross-scene
crowd counting. No extra annotations are needed for a new
target scene. Our goal is to learn a mapping from images
to crowd counts, and then to use the mapping in unseen target scenes for cross-scene crowd counting. To achieve this
goal, we need to overcome the following challenges. 1) Develop effective features to describe crowd. Previous works
used general hand-crafted features, which have low representation capability for crowd. New descriptors specially
designed or learned for crowd scenes are needed. 2) Different scenes have different perspective distortions, crowd
distributions and lighting conditions.
Without additional
training data, the model trained in one speciﬁc scene has
difﬁculty being used for other scenes. 3) For most recent
works, foreground segmentation is indispensable for crowd
counting. But crowd segmentation is a challenging problem
and can not be accurately obtained in most crowded scenes.
The scene may also have stationary crowd without movement. 4) Existing crowd counting datasets are not sufﬁcient
to support and evaluate cross-scene counting research. The
largest one only contains 50 static images from different crowd scenes collected from Flickr. The widely used
UCSD dataset and the Mall dataset only consist of
video clips collected from one or two scenes.
Considering these challenges, we propose a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based framework for crossscene crowd counting. After a CNN is trained with a ﬁxed
dataset, a data-driven method is introduced to ﬁne-tune
(adapt) the learned CNN to an unseen target scene, where
training samples similar to the target scene are retrieved
from the training scenes for ﬁne-tuning. Figure 1 illustrates
the overall framework of our proposed method. Our crossscene crowd density estimation and counting framework has
following advantages:
1. Our CNN model is trained for crowd scenes by a
switchable learning process with two learning objectives,
crowd density maps and crowd counts. The two different
but related objectives can alternatively assist each other to
Figure 1. Illustration of our proposed cross-scene crowd counting method.
obtain better local optima. Our CNN model learns crowdspeciﬁc features, which are more effective and robust than
handcrafted features.
2. The target scenes require no extra labels in our framework for cross-scene counting. The pre-trained CNN model
is ﬁne-tuned for each target scene to overcome the domain gap between different scenes. The ﬁne-tuned model
is speciﬁcally adapted to the new target scene.
3. The framework does not rely on foreground segmentation results because only appearance information is considered in our method. No matter whether the crowd is moving or not, the crowd texture would be captured by the CNN
model and can obtain a reasonable counting result.
4. We also introduce a new dataset 1 for evaluating crossscene crowd counting methods. To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest dataset for evaluating crowd counting algorithms.
2. Related work
Counting by global regression. Many works have been
proposed to count the pedestrians by detection 
or trajectory-clustering . But for the crowd counting problem, these methods are limited by severe occlusions between people. A number of methods 
tried to predict global counts by using regressors trained
with low-level features. These approaches are more suitable
for crowded environments and is computationally more efﬁcient. Loy et al. introduced semi-supervised regression
and data transferring methods to reduce the amount of training data needed, but it still needs some labels from the target
crowd scene. Idrees et al. estimated the number of indi-
1 
viduals in dense crowds based on multi-source information
from images but not surveillance videos.
Counting by density estimation estimation. Counting
by global regression ignores spatial information of pedestrians. Lempitsky et al. introduced an object counting
method through pixel-level object density map regression.
Following this work, Fiaschi et al. used random forest
to regress the object density and improve training efﬁciency.
Besides considering spatial information, another advantage
of density regression based methods is that they are able to
estimate object counts in any region of an image. Taking
this advantage, an interactive object counting system was
introduced in , which visualized region counts to help
users to determine the relevance feedback efﬁciently. And
Rodrigueze made use of density map estimation to improve the head detection results. These methods are scenespeciﬁc and not applicable to cross-scene counting.
Deep learning. Many works introduced deep learning
into various surveillance applications, such as person reidentiﬁcation , pedestrian detection , tracking , crowd behavior analysis and crowd segmentation . Their success beneﬁts from discriminative power
of deep models. Sermanet et al. showed that the features extracted from deep models are more effective than
hand-crafted feature for many applications. To the best of
our knowledge, however, deep models have not yet been
explored for crowd counting.
Data-driven approaches for scene labeling. As many
large-scale and well-labeled datasets published, nonparametric, data-driven approaches are proposed.
Such approaches can be scaled up easily because they do
not require training. They transfer the labels from the training images to the test image by retrieving the most sim-
ilar training images and match them with the test image.
Liu et al.
 proposed a nonparametric image parsing
method looking for a dense deformation ﬁeld between images. Inspired by the data-driven scene labeling methods,
for a unseen target scene, we retrieve similar scenes and
crowd patches from the training scenes. However, instead
of directly transferring labels to the target scene like existing methods, we propose to use the training samples that ﬁts
the estimated crowd density distribution to ﬁne-tune (adapt)
the pre-trained CNN model to the target scene.
3.1. Normalized crowd density map for training
The main objective for our crowd CNN model is to learn
a mapping F : X →D, where X is the set of low-level
features extracted from training images and D is the crowd
density map of the image. Assuming that the position of
each pedestrian is labeled, the density map is created based
on pedestrians’ spatial location, human body shape and perspective distortion of images. Patches randomly selected
from the training images are treated as training samples, and
the density maps of corresponding patches are treated as the
ground truth for the crowd CNN model. As an auxiliary objective, the total crowd number in a selected training patch
is calculated through integration over the density map. Note
that the total number will be a decimal, but not an integer.
Many works followed and deﬁned the density map
regression ground truth as a sum of Gaussian kernels centered on the locations of objects.
This kind of density
maps is suitable for characterizing the density distribution
of circle-like objects such as cells and bacteria. However,
this assumption may fail when it comes to the pedestrian
crowd, where cameras are generally not in a bird-view. An
example of pedestrians in an ordinary surveillance camera
is shown in Figure 2. It has three visible characteristics: 1)
pedestrian images in the surveillance videos have different
scales due to perspective distortion; 2) the shapes of pedestrians are more similar to ellipses than circles; 3) due to
severe occlusions, heads and shoulders are the main cues
to judge whether there exists a pedestrian at each position.
The body parts of pedestrians are not reliable for human
annotation. Taking these characteristics into account, the
crowd density map is created by the combination of several
distributions with perspective normalization.
Perspective normalization is necessary to estimate the
pedestrian scales. Inspired by , for each scene, we randomly select several adult pedestrians and label them from
head to toe. Assuming that the mean height of adults is 175
cm, the perspective map M can be approximated through a
linear regression as shown in Figure 2 (a). The pixel value
in the perspective map M(p) denotes that the number of
pixels in the image representing one meter at that location
Figure 2. (a) Estimating the perspective map. Hot color indicates
a high value in the perspective map. (b) The crowd density map
and the red box show some training patch randomly cropped from
image and density map. The patches cover the same actual area.
The ones in the further away regions are smaller and the ones in
the closer regions are larger.
in the actual scene. After we obtain the perspective map and
the center positions of pedestrian head Ph in the region of
interest (ROI), we create the crowd density map is created
∥Z∥(Nh(p; Ph, σh) + Nb(p; Pb, Σ))
The crowd density distribution kernel contains two
terms, a normalized 2D Gaussian kernel Nh as a head part
and a bivariate normal distribution Nb as a body part. Here
Pb is the position of the pedestrian body, estimated by the
head position and the perspective value. To best represent
the pedestrian contour, we set the variance σh = 0.2M(p)
for the term Nh, and σx = 0.2M(p), σy = 0.5M(p) for the
term Nb. To ensure that the integration of all density values
in a density map equals to the total crowd number in the
original image, the whole distribution is normalized by Z.
The crowd density distribution kernel and created density
map are visualized in Figure 2 (b).
3.2. Crowd CNN model
An overview of our crowd CNN model with switchable
objectives is shown in Figure 3. The input is the image
patches cropped from training images. In order to obtain
pedestrians at similar scales, the size of each patch at different locations is chosen according to the perspective value
of its center pixel. Here we constrain each patch to cover a
3-meter by 3-meter square in the actual scene as shown in
Figure 2. Then the patches are warped to 72 pixels by 72
pixels as the input of the Crowd CNN model. Our Crowd
CNN model contains 3 convolution layers (con1-conv3) and
Euclidean loss
Iterative switch loss
Figure 3. The structure of the crowd convolutional neural network.
At the loss layer, a density map loss and a global count loss is
minimized alternatively.
three fully connected layers (fc4, fc5 and fc6 or fc7). Conv1
has 32 7×7×3 ﬁlters, conv2 has 32 7×7×32 ﬁlters and the
last convolution layer has 64 5 × 5 × 32 ﬁlters. Max pooling layers with a 2 × 2 kernel size are used after conv1 and
conv2. Rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU), which is not shown in
Figure 3, is the activation function applied after every convolutional layer and fully connected layer.
We introduce an iterative switching process in our deep
crowd model to alternatively optimize the density map estimation task and the count estimation task. The main task
for the crowd CNN model is to estimate the crowd density
map of the input patch. Because two pooling layers exist in
the CNN model, the output density map is down-sampled
to 18 × 18. Therefore, the ground truth density map is also
down-sampled to 18 × 18. Since the density map contains
rich and abundant local and detailed information, the CNN
model can beneﬁt from learning to predict density map and
can obtain a better representation of crowd patches. The
total count regression of the input patch is treated as the
secondary task, which is calculated by integrating the density map patch. Two tasks alternatively assist each other and
obtain a better solution. The two loss functions are deﬁned
∥Fd(Xi; Θ) −Di∥2,
LY (Θ) = 1
∥Fy(Xi; Θ) −Yi∥2,
where Θ is the set of parameters of the CNN model and
N is the number of training samples. LD is the loss between estimated density map Fd(Xi; Θ) (the output of fc6)
and the ground truth density map Di. Similarly, LY is the
loss between the estimated crowd number Fy(Xi; Θ) (the
output of fc7) and the ground truth number Yi. Euclidean
distance is adopted in these two objective losses. The loss
is minimized using mini-batch gradient descent and backpropagation.
The switchable training procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. We set LD as the ﬁrst objective loss to minimize,
since the density map can introduce more spatial information to the CNN model. Density map estimation requires
the model to learn a general representation for crowd. Then
after the ﬁrst objective converges, the model switches to
minimize the objective of global count regression. Count
regression is an easier task and its learning converges faster
than the task of density map regression. Note that the two
objective losses should be normalized to similar scales, otherwise the objective with the larger scale would be dominant
in the training process. In the experiment, we set the scale
weight of density loss to 10, and the scale weight of count
loss to 1. The training loss converged after about 6 switch
iterations. Our proposed switching learning appoarch can
achieve better performance than the widely used multi-task
learning approach (see experiments in the Section 5).
Algorithm 1: Training with iterative switching losses
Input: Training set: size-normalized patches with
their counts and density maps from the whole
training data
Output: Parameters Θ for crowd CNN model
1 set LD as the ﬁrst objective;
2 for t = 1 to T do
BP to learn Θ, until the validation loss drop rate
ΔL is less than the threshold ε
Switch the objective loss function
4. Nonparametric ﬁne-tuning for target scene
The crowd CNN model is pre-trained based on all training scene data through our proposed switchable learning
process. However, each query crowd scene has its unique
scene properties, such as different view angles, scales and
different density distributions.
These properties signiﬁcantly change the appearance of crowd patches and affect
the performance of the crowd CNN model.
In order to
bridge the distribution gap between the training and test
scenes, we design a nonparametric ﬁne-tuning scheme to
adapt our pre-trained CNN model to unseen target scenes.
Given a target video from the unseen scenes, samples with
similar properties from the training scenes are retrieved and
added to training data to ﬁne-tune the crowd CNN model.
The retrieval task consists of two steps, candidate scenes
retrieval and local patch retrieval.
4.1. Candidate scene retrieval
The view angle and the scale of a scene are the main
factors affecting the appearance of crowd. The perspective map can indicate both the view angle and the scale
as shown in Figure 2 (a). To overcome the scale gap be-
Test Crowd Scene Global Scene Retrieval
Patches and Density Distribution
in the Target Scene
Similar Training Patches
Fitting the Target Scene
Figure 4. Illustration of retrieving local patches similar to those
in the test scene to ﬁne-tune the crowd CNN model. (a) Retrieving candidate scenes by matching perspective maps of the training
scenes and the test scene. (b) Local patches similar to those in the
test scene are retrieved from the candidate scenes. The color bars
indicate the density distributions of patches from the test scene,
and those patches selected from the train scenes
tween different scenes, each input patch is normalized into
the same scale, which covers a 3-meter by 3-meter square
in the actual scene according to the perspective map. Therefore, the ﬁrst step of our nonparametric ﬁne-tuning method
focuses on retrieving training scenes that have similar perspective maps with the target scene from all the training
scenes. Those retrieved scenes are called candidate ﬁnetuning scenes. A perspective descriptor is designed to represent the view angle of each scene. Since the perspective
map is linearly ﬁtted along the y axis, we use its vertical
gradient ΔMy as the perspective descriptor.
Based on the descriptor, for a target unseen scene, the
top 20 perspective-map-similar scenes are retrieved from
the whole training dataset as shown in Figure 4 (a). The
retrieved images are treated as the candidate scenes for local patch retrieval.
4.2. Local patch retrieval
The second step is to select similar patches, which have
similar density distributions with those in the test scene,
from candidate scenes.
Besides the view angle and the
scale, the crowd density distribution also affects the appearance pattern of crowds. Higher density crowd has more severe occlusions, and only heads and shoulders can be observed. On the contrary, in sparse crowd, pedestrian appear
with entire body shapes. Some instances of input patches
are shown in Figure 4 (b). Therefore, we try to predict the
density distribution of the target scene and retrieve similar
patches that match the predicted target density distribution
from the candidate scenes. For example, for a crowd scene
with high densities, denser patches should be retrieved to
ﬁne-tune the pre-trained model to ﬁt the target scene.
With the pre-trained CNN model presented in Section 3.2, we can roughly predict the density and the total
count for every patch of the target image. It is assumed
that patches with similar density map have similar output
through the pre-trained model. Based on the prediction result, we compute a histogram of the density distribution for
the target scene. Each bin is calculated as
ci = ⌊ln(ˆyi + 1) × 2⌋.
where ˆyi is the integrating count of estimated density map
for sample i. Since there rarely exist scenes where more
than 20 pedestrians stand in a 3-meter by 3-meter square,
when ˆyi > 20, the patch should be assigned to the sixth bin,
i.e. ci = 6. Density distribution of the target scene can be
obtained from Equation (4). Then, patches are randomly selected from the retrieved training scenes and the number of
patches with different densities are controlled to match the
density distribution of the target scene. In this way, the proposed ﬁne-tuning method is adopted to retrieve the patches
with similar view angles, scales and density distributions.
The ﬁne-tuned crowd CNN model achieves better performance for the target scene. The results will be shown in the
following section.
5. Experiment
We evaluate our method in three different datasets including our proposed the WorldExpo’10 crowd counting dataset, the UCSD pedestrian dataset and the
UCF CC 50 dataset . The details of the three datasets
are described in Table 1 and example frames are shown in
5.1. WorldExpo’10 crowd counting dataset
We introduce a new large-scale cross-scene crowd counting dataset. To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest
dataset focusing on cross-scene counting. It includes 1132
annotated video sequences captured by 108 surveillance
cameras, all from Shanghai 2010 WorldExpo2. Since most
of the cameras have disjoint bird views, they cover a large
variety of scenes. We labeled a total of 199,923 pedestrians
at the centers of their heads in 3,980 frames. These frames
are uniformly sampled from all the video sequences. The
details are listed in Table 1 and some instances are shown
in Figure 5.
2Since most exhibition pavilions have been deconstructed, and no video
corresponding to those pavilions still in use is included, the data is approved to be released for academic purposes.
Table 1. Statistics of three datasets: Nf is the number of frames; Nc is the number of scenes; R is the resolution; FPS is the number
of frames per second; D indicates the minimum and maximum numbers of people in the ROI of a frame; Tp is total number of labeled
pedestrians
4.44 million
Figure 5. (a) Example frames of the UCSD dataset. (b) Example frames of the UCF CC 50. (c) Example frames of the WorldExpo dataset.
The region within the blue polygons are the regions of interest (ROI) and positions of pedestrian heads are labeled with red dots
Our dataset is splitted into two parts. 1,127 one-minute
long video sequences out of 103 scenes are treated as training and validation sets. The test set has 5 one-hour long
video sequences from 5 different scenes. There are 120 labeled frames in each test scene and the interval between two
frames is 30 seconds. The pedestrian number in the test set
changes signiﬁcantly over time ranging from 1-220. The
existence of large stationary groups makes it hard to detect the foreground area. Thus, most of the proposed counting methods are not applicable to our dataset, because their
methods heavily rely on the segmentation of foreground.
The quantitative results of cross-scene crowd counting
on our dataset are reported in Table 2. The Mean Absolute
Error (MAE) is employed as the evaluation metric. Firstly,
we attempt to extract LBP features and use the ridge regressor (RR) to estimate the crowd number, and the results are
listed at the top row. The results predicted from our CNN
crowd model without ﬁne-tuning are shown at the second
row. Then the results of our proposed method with datadriven ﬁne-tuning are listed at the third row. These three
methods do not use any data from the test scene. Our crowd
CNN model can estimate density maps and crowd counts effectively. The data-driven ﬁne-tuning method improves the
performance in some test scenes. Similar samples retrieved
from training data can help the model to better ﬁt the test
data. The density estimation results are shown in Figure 6.
We also observe that some auxiliary labeling in the target scene could boost the performance of our method. As
scene-speciﬁc information is introduced, most background
noise could be eliminated. Our predicted density map can
be treated as feature and ridge regression is used to ﬁt the
pedestrian number.
For comparison, we test two scenespeciﬁc methods in and .
 is a global regression method using various hand-crafted features including
area, perimeter, edge and local texture feature, while 
adopts the random regression forest to predict the density
The compared methods are trained with the ﬁrst
60 labeled frames for every test scene, and the remaining frames are used as the test set. A GMM-based background modeling method is adopted to extract the foreground segments. Since a mount of stationary crowds exist
in scene 2, it is hard to obtain foreground accurately. Our
cross-scene crowd counting method outperforms the scenespeciﬁc methods. The results are further improved for test
scene 1, scene 3 and scene 4 shown in Table 2. However, for
scene 2, the ridge regression leads to a worse result, because
the density distribution in the ﬁrst 60 training frames have
signiﬁcantly differences with the remaining test frames.
We also compare our iterative switchable learning
scheme with the joint multi-task scheme. The joint multitask loss LJ is deﬁned as:
LJ(Θ) = LD(Θ) + λLY (Θ)
The average mean absolute errors of the two different
losses in the proposed cross-scene WorldExpo’10 dataset
are shown in Table 3. Our iterative switchable training process achieves better performance than the joint multi-task
loss. Different but related objectives can help each other to
Table 2. Mean absolute errors of the WorldExpo’10 crowd counting dataset
Fine-tuned Crowd CNN
Luca Fiaschi et al. 
Ke et al. 
Crowd CNN+RR
Table 3. Average mean absolute errors (AMSE) on WorldExpo’10
crowd counting dataset via switching training scheme and the
multi-task training scheme
GroundTruth
FinetunedCNN
CrowdCNN+RR
Figure 6. Our density estimation and counting results on the
WorldExpo’10 crowd counting dataset. (Left) result curve for each
test scene, where X-axis represents the frame index and Y-axis represents the counting number. (Middle) one sample selected from
the corresponding test scene. (Right) density map and crowd estimated on the sample. Best viewed in color.
obtain better local optima through switching training objectives. In contrast, the joint multi-task scheme requires more
computation to obtain a optimal λ than our switchable training process, and the results are also sensitive to the choice
5.2. UCSD dataset
Our second experiment focuses on crowd counting for
a single scene. Our crowd CNN model is compared with
scene-speciﬁc methods. A 2000-frame video dataset is
chosen from one surveillance camera in the UCSD campus.
The video in this dataset was recorded at 10 fps with a frame
size of 158 × 238. The labeled ground truth is at the center of every pedestrian. The ROI and perspective map are
provided in the dataset.
We follow the dataset setting in and employ frames
601-1400 as the training data and the remaining 1200
frames as test set. 72 × 72 patches are extracted from the
image without normalization. 800 patches are randomly
cropped from each image to train the model. For the test
set, the patches are extracted in a sliding window fashion
with 50% overlap. The density estimation of each pixel is
obtained by averaging all the predicted overlapping patches.
Our predicted density map from the CNN model can be
treated as feature. The ridge regression is used to ﬁt the
training set.
Table 4. Comparison with global regression methods for crowd
counting on the UCSD dataset
Kernel Ridge Regression 
Ridge Regression 
Gaussian Process Regression 
Cumulative Attribute Regression 
Our Crowd CNN Model
Table 4 reports the errors with our methods and four
other methods based on global regression. Two metrics,
the MAE and Mean Squared Error (MSE), are employed
for evaluating the performance of compared methods. Our
proposed crowd CNN model outperforms all the global regression based approaches for both metrics. Note that our
method does not rely on any foreground information and
is tested on the whole area of ROI. Yet other compared
methods rely on the foreground segmentation features. The
methods we compared in Table 4 adopt similar hand-crafted
features including segmentation features (area and perimeter), edge features obtained with the canny operator and local texture features (such as LBP and GLCM ).
The experiment results show that by incorporating the additional density information, our crowd CNN model boosts
the accuracy of crowd counting signiﬁcantly.
Estimated count:
Ground truth count:
Estimated count:
Ground truth count:
Estimated count:
Ground truth count:
Estimated count:
Ground truth count:
Figure 7. Density estimation results in the UCSD dataset and the UCF CC 50 dataset. (Left) the input frame. (Middle) the predict result
through our method. (Right) the density map ground truth
We compare our method with other density regression
based methods in Table 5. Following the experiment settings in and , we split the data into four different training and test sets:
1) ‘maximal’ :training on
frames 600:5:1400; 2) ‘downscale’: training on frames
1205:5:1600; 3) ‘upscale’ : training on frames 805:5:1100;
4) ‘minimal’ : training on frames 640:80:1360. The frames
outside the training range are tested. The four splits differ
in the number of training images and the average number of
pedestrians. Our method is comparable with state-of-thearts. Again, unlike other density regression methods, our
method does not require foreground segmentation. Some of
our results are shown in Figure 7.
Table 5. Mean absolute errors of density regression methods and
our approach on the UCSD dataset
Density + RF 
Density + MESA 
Codebook + RR 
Our Crowd CNN Model
5.3. UCF CC 50 dataset
The UCF CC 50 dataset contains images collected
from Internet. It is a challenging dataset, because there are
only 50 images in the dataset with pedestrian numbers ranging between 94 and 4543. The authors provided the labeled
ground truth, which can be used to generate the ground truth
density map as the right column of Figure 7.
Following by the dataset setting in , we split the
dataset randomly and perform 5-fold cross-validation.
MAE and MSE are employed as the evaluate metrics. Similar to the experimental setting in the USCD dataset, 1600
patches are randomly cropped from each image for training.
The patch size is 72 × 72.
The test patches are
densely selected with 50% overlaps. The predicted density
at each pixel is calculated by averaging overlapping prediction patches.
Table 6. Comparision results in UCF CC 50 dataset
Rodriguez et al 
Lempitsky et al. 
Idrees et al. 
Our Crowd CNN Model
We compared three methods on the UCF CC 50 dataset.
The methods presented in proposed the MESAdistance to learn a density regression model using dense
SIFT features on randomly selected patches.
Rodriguez et al. made use of density map estimation to
improve the head detection results in crowd scenes. Idrees
 relied on multi-source feature, including head
detection, SIFT and Fourier analysis.
There is no postprocessing for all the compared methods. The experimental
results are shown in Table 6. Our proposed method achieves
the best MAE and is effective on cross-scene counting, even
with the very tough test set. Some experimental results are
shown in Figure 7. Still, our method can generate a reasonable density map and obtain a reasonable counting result
close to the ground truth.
6. Conclusion
In this work, we propose to solve the cross-scene crowd
counting problem with deep convolution neural network.
The learned deep model speciﬁcally has better capability for describing crowd scenes than other hand-craft features. We propose a switchable training scheme with two related learning objectives, estimating density map and global
count. With the proposed alternative training scheme, the
two related tasks assist each other and achieve lower loss.
Moreover, a data-driven method is proposed to select samples from the training data to ﬁne-tune the pre-trained CNN
model adapting to the unseen target scene.
7. Acknowledgement
This work is partially supported by NSFC (No.
61025005, 61129001, 61221001, 61301269), STCSM
14XD1402100,
13511504501),
Sichuan High Tech R&D Program
2014GZX0009), General Research Fund sponsored by the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong
CUHK419412, CUHK417011, CUHK14206114,
CUHK14207814), Hong Kong Innovation and Technology
Support Programme (No. ITS/221/13FP) and Shenzhen Basic Research Program (No. JCYJ20130402113127496).