Pricing in Electricity Markets: A Mean
Reverting Jump Diffusion Model with
Seasonali ty
ÁLVARO CARTEA & MARCELO G. FIGUEROA
Birkbeck College. University of London, London WCl E 7 HX, UK
This paper presents a mean-reverting jump diffusion model for the electricity spot
price and derives , removing price controls and openly encouraging competition.
Price variations have increased significantly as a consequence of the introduction
of competition, encouraging the pricing of a new breed of energy-based financial
products to hedge the inherent risk, both physical and financial, in this market. Most
of the current transactions of instruments in the electricity markets are carried out
through bilateral contracts ahead of time although electricity is also traded on
forward and futures markets and through power exchanges.
One of the most striking differences that singles out electricity markets is that
electricity is very difficult or too expensive to store, hence markets must be kept in
balance on a second-by-second basis. In England and Wales, this is done by the
Correspondence Address: Álvaro Cartea, Birkbeck College, University ofLondon, Malet Street, Bloomsbury,
London WCIE 7HX, UK. Email: 
National Grid Company which operates a balancing mechanism to ensure system
security.l Moreover, a1though power markets may have certain similarities with
other markets, they present intrinsic characteristics which distinguish them. Two
distinctive fea tu res are present in energy markets in general, and are very evident in
electricity markets in particular: the mean reverting nature of spot prices and the
existence of jumps or spikes in the prices.
In stock markets, prices are allowed to evolve 'freely', but this is not true for
electricity prices; these will generally gravitate around the cost of production. Under
abnormal market conditions, price spreads are observed in the short run, but in the
long run supply will be adjusted and prices will move towards the level dictated by
the cost of production. This adjustment can be captured by mean-reverting
processes, which in turn may be combined with jumps to account for the observed
Therefore, to price energy derivatives it is essential that the most important
characteristics of the evolution of the spot, and consequently the forward, are
captured. Several approaches may be taken, gene rally falling into two c1asses of
models: spot-based models and forward-based models. Spot models are appealing
since they tend to be quite tractable and also allow for a good mathematical
description of the problem in question. Significant contributions have been made by
Schwartz , for instance, where the author introduces an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
type of model which accounts for the mean reversion of prices. Lucía and Schwartz
 extend the range of these models to two-factor models which incorporate a
deterministic seasonal component. On the other hand forward-based models have
been used largely in the N ord Pool Market of the Scandinavian countries. These rely
heavily, however, on a large data set, which is a limiting constraint in the case of
England and Wales. Finally, it must also be pointed out that the choice of model
may sometimes be driven by what kind of information is required. For example,
pricing interruptible contracts would require a spot-based model while pricing Asian
options on a basket of electricity monthly and seasonal forwards calls for forwardbased models.
The spot models described by Schwartz and Lucia and Schwartz 
capture the mean reverting nature of electricity prices, but they fail to account for the
huge and non-negligible observed spikes in the market. A natural extension is then to
incorporate a jump component in the model. This c1ass of jump-diffusion models
was first introduced by Merton to model equity dynamics. Applying these
jump-diffusion-type models in electricity is attractive since solutions for the pricing
of European options are available in c1osed-form. Nevertheless, it fails to
incorporate both mean reversion and jump diffusion at the same time. Clewlow
et al. describe an extension to Merton's model which accounts for both the
mean reversion and the jumps but they do not provide a c1osed-form solution for the
forward. A similar model to the one we present, although not specific to the analysis
of electricity spot prices, has be en analysed in Benth et al. .
The main contribution of this paper is twofold. First, we present a model that
captures the most important characteristics of electricity spot prices such as mean
reversion, jumps and seasonality and calibrate the parameters to the England and
Wales market. Second, since we are able to calculate an expression for the forward
curve in c1osed-form and recognizing the lack of sufficient data for robust parameter
estimation, we estimate the model parameters exploiting the fact that we can use
both historical spot data and current forward prices (using the closed-form
expression for the forward).2
The remaining of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we present data
analysis to support the use of a model which incorporates both mean reversion and
jumps. In Section 3 we present details of the spot model and derive in closed-form the
expression for the forward curve. In Section 4 we discuss the calibration of the model
to data from England and Wales. In Section 5 we present forward surfaces reflecting
the months, quarters and seasons-ahead prices. Section 6 concludes.
2. Data Analysis
For over three decades most equity models have tried to 'fix' the main drawback
from assuming Gaussian returns. A clear example is the wealth of literature that
deals with stochastic volatility models, jump-diffusion and more recently, the use of
Lévy processes. One of the main reasons to adopt these alternative models is that
Gaussian shocks attach very little probability to large movements in the underlying
that are, on the contrary, frequently observed in financial markets. In this section we
will see that in electricity spot markets assuming Gaussian shocks to explain the
evolutÍon of the spot dynamics is even a poorer assumption than in equity markets.
Electricity markets exhibit their own intrinsic complexities. There is a strong
evidence of mean reversion and of spikes in spot prices, which in general are much
more pronounced than in stock markets. The former can be observed by simple
inspection of the data in both markets. Figure 1 shows daily closes of the FTSE 1 00
index from 2/01/90 to 18/06/04. The nature of the price path can be seen as a
combination of a deterministic trend together with random shocks. In contrast,
Figure 2 shows that for electricity spot prices in England and Wales there is a strong
mean reversion. 3 This is, prices tend to oscillate or revert around a mean level, with
extraordinary periods of volatility. These extraordinary periods of high volatility are
reflected in the characteristic spikes observed in these markets.
Normality Tests
In the Black-Scholes model prices are assumed to be log-normally distributed, which
is equivalent to saying that the returns of the prices have a Gaussian or Normal
distribution.4 Although fat tails are observed in data from stock markets, indicating
the probability of rare events being more frequent than predicted by a Normal
distribution, models based on this assumption have been largely used as a
benchmark, albeit modified in order to account for fat tails.
For electricity though, the departure from Normality is more extreme. Figure 3
shows a Normality test for the electricity spot price from 2/04/01 to 3/03/04. If the
returns were indeed Normally distributed the graph would be a straight lineo We can
clearly observe this is not the case, as evidenced from the fat tails. For instance,
corresponding to a probability of 0.003 we have returns which are higher than -0.5;
instead if the data were perfectly Normally distributed, the dotted lines suggests the
probability of such returns should be virtually zero.
Figure 1. FTSElOO daily closes [rom 2/01/90 to 18/06/04
Deseasonalization
One important assumption of the Black-Scholes model is that returns are assumed
to be independently distributed. This can be easily evaluated with an autocorrelation
test. If the data were in fact independently distributed, the correlation coefficient
would be close to zero. A strong level of autocorrelation is evident in electricity
markets, as can be se en from Figure 4. As explained for instance in Pindyck and
Rubinfield the evidence of autocorrelation manifests an underlying
seasonality. Furthermore, the lag of days between highly correlated points in the
series reveals the nature of the seasonality. In this case, we may observe that the
returns show significant correlation every 7 days (there is data for weekend s also);
which suggests sorne intra-week seasonality.
In order to estimate the parameters of the model, we strip the returns from this
seasonality. Although there are several ways of deseasonalizing the data, we follow a
common approach which is to subtract the mean of every day across the series
according to
where Rr is the defined deseasonalized return at time t, rt the return at time t
and rd is the corresponding mean (throughout the series) of the particular
Figure 2. Averaged daily prices in England and Wales from 2/04/01 to 3/03/04
day rt represents. Figure 5 shows the autocorrelation test performed on the
deseasonalized returns. As expected, the strong autocorrelation is no longer
evidenced.
As seen from the Normality test, the existence of fat tails suggest the probability
of rare events occurring is actually much higher than predicted by a
Gaussian distribution. By simple inspection of Figure 2 we can easily be
convinced that the spikes in electricity data cannot be captured by simple
Gaussian shocks.
We extract the jumps from the original series of returns by writing a numerical
algorithm that filters returns with absolute values greater than three times the
standard deviation of the returns of the series at that specific iteration. 5 On the
second iteration, the standard deviation of the remaining series (stripped from
the first filtered returns) is again calculated; those returns which are now greater than
three times this last standard deviation are filtered again. The process is repeated
until no further returns can be filtered. This algorithm allows us to estimate the
cumulative frequency of jumps and other statistical information of relevance for
calibrating the model. 6
The relevance of the jumps in the electricity market is further demonstrated by
comparing Figure 6 to Figure 3; where we can clearly observe that after stripping the
returns from the jumps, the Normality test improves notoriously.
.... c.. 0.25
Figure 3. Normal probability test for returns of electricity prices from 2/04/01 to 3/03/04
1,.. , , , , I
... ,1 , I
'1 1 1'. J \¡
, ,-' '¡ \ 1
11\' ' 1'\ 1
lag (days)
Figure 4. Autocorrelation test for returns of electricity prices from 2/04/01 to 3/03/04
1I 1\·1\ 1\
1 1 ¡ 1/ 1
¡ \ 11 ,,"
(1 1 L " 1 1 '.'
11/ " 1 ¡ 1 '1 1
¡ '.' " 1' 1 1 1 r 1/
'1'1 .... 1
lag (days)
1 , r 1 ji
1 1 '1 11 1 JII
j 1 ~, 1 1 1 1 1 ¡I
"1' 11 11 "
Figure 5. Autocorrelation test for deseasonalized returns of electricity prices
0.90 ...... ,.'
Figure 6. Normal probability test for filtered returns of electricity prices
3. The Model: Mean-reversion and Jump Diffusion in the Electricity Spot
When modelling the electricity market two distinct approaches may be taken:
modelling the spot market or modelling the entire forward curve. As mentioned
earlier, one of the appeals for using spot models relies on the fact that it is simple to
incorporate the observed characteristics of the electricity market. On the other hand,
forward based models rely more heavily on the amount of historical data available.
Since data for electricity prices in England and Wales are only regarded to be liquid
and 'well priced' since the incorporation ofNETA on 27 March 2001, the amount of
data available is limited. This lack of sufficient data motivates the use of spot-based
models rather than modelling the en tire forward curve in the particular case of this
market. It is worth emphasising that different power markets, although similar in
sorne aspects, exhibit their own properties and characteristics. Hence, based on the
manifest existence of mean-reversion and jumps on the data for England and Wales
presented in the previous section, we propose a one-factor mean-reversion jump
diffusion model; adjusted to incorporate seasonality effects.
Electricity can be bought in the spot market, but once purchased it must be used
almost immediately, since in most cases electricity cannot be stored, at least not
cheaply. Hedging strategies which typically involve holding certain amounts of the
underlying (in this case electricity) are not possible, therefore in e!ectricity markets
forwards on the spot are typically used instead. As a consequence, it turns out it is
extremely useful to be able to extract a closed-form formula for the forward curve
from the spot-based model, which we are able to do for the model proposed here.
From the data analysis of the previous section we have concluded that two
distinctive characteristics of electricity markets should be accounted for in the model;
the mean reversion of the price and the sudden fluctuations in supply and low
elasticity in demand which are reflected in price spikes. Moreover, it would also be
important to incorporate sorne seasonality component which would be reflected in a
varying long-term level of mean reversion.
Schwartz accounts for the mean reversion, and Lucía and Schwartz 
extend the mean reverting model to account for a deterministic seasonality.
However, these models do not incorporate jumps. We propose in this paper a similar
model extended to account for the observed jumps.
As in Lucia and Schwarz let us assume that the log-price process, In SI' can
be wri tten as
In Sr =g(t) + Y[
such that the spot price can be represented as
Sr= G(t)e Yt
where G(t)=~([) is a deterministic seasonality function and Yr is a stochastic process
whose dynamics are given by
In (4) Y[ is a zero leve! mean-reverting jump diffusion process for the underlying
electricity spot price SI> rJ. is the speed of mean reversion, O"(t) the time dependent
volatility, J the proportional random jump size, dZt is the increment of the standard
Brownian motion and dqt a Poisson process such that
with probability 1 dt
with probability 1 -1 dt
where 1 is the intensity or frequency of the process.7 Moreover, J, dqt and dZt are
independent.
Regarding the jump size, J, the following assumptions are made:
• J is log-Normal, i.e. InJ ~N(f1J' aJ)o
• The risk introduced by the jumps is non-systematic and so diversifiable;
furthermore, by assuming E[}]=" 1 we guarantee there is no excess reward for it.
With the assumptions made aboye, the properties of J can be summarized as
J=e,cp~N -l,a}
E[lnJ] = ----.!...
Var[lnJ] =a7
Now, from (3) and (4) we can write the SDE for SI' namely
dS¡ = IX(p(t) -In S¡)St dt+ a(t)S¡ dZ¡ + St(J - 1 )dqt
where the time-dependent mean reverting level is given by
The interpretation of(10) is as follows. Most ofthe time dq¡=O, so we simply have
the mean reverting diffusion process. At random times however, S¡ will jump from
the previous value S¡- to the new value JSt-. Therefore the term St- (J - 1) gives us
the change after and before the jump, I1S¡ = JSt- - St- .
Forward Price
The price at time t of the forward expiring at time T is obtained as the expected value
of the spot price at expiry under an equivalent Q-martingale measure, conditional
on the information set available up to time t; namely
Thus, we need to integra te first the SDE in (lO) in order to extract ST and later
calculate the expectation.
For the first task we define the 10g-return as x=ln SI and apply 1t6's Lemma to
(10) to arrive at
dx¡ = !Yo(p( t) - x¡ )dt + 0"( t)dZ¡ + In J dq¡
p(t)=--d +g(t)
is the time-dependent mean reverting level which depends on the seasonality
Regarding the expectation, we must calculate it under an equivalent
Q-martingale measure. In a complete market this measure is unique, ensuring only
one arbitrage-free price of the forward. However, in incomplete markets (such as the
electricity market) this measure is not unique, thus we are left with the difficult task
of selecting an appropriate measure for the particular market in question. Yet
another approach, common in the literature, is simply to assume that we are already
under an equivalent measure, and thus proceed to perform the pricing directly. This
latter approach would rely however on calibrating the model through implied
parameters from a liquid market. This is certainly difficult to do in young markets,
as in the market of electricity in England and Wales, where there is no liquidity of
instruments which would enable us to do this.
We follow instead Lucía and Schwartz' approach, which consists of
incorporating a market price of risk in the drift, such that j1(t)==p(t)-}_* and
A * == A rr~); where Je denotes the market price of risk per unit risk linked to the state
variable XI. This market price of risk, to be calibrated from market information, pins
down the choice of one particular martingale measure. Under this measure we may
then rewrite the stochastic process in (13) for X¡ as
p(t)= -- +g(t)-Je-
and d2¡ is the increment of a Brownian motion in the Q-measure specified by the
choice of }_.8
In order to integrate the process we multiply (15) by a suitable integrating factor
and integrate between times t and T to arrive at
XT = g(T) + (Xt - g(t) )e~a(T ~t) -), r
a(s)e~a(T ~s) ds
a(s)e~a(T~s) dZ., + r
e~,(T~,) In] dq,.
Now, since ST = eXT , we can replace (17) into (12) to obtain
F(t, T) = lEdSTIFtl
= F G(T) (S( t)) e-,IT-I) lE [ J,T u(s)e
where Xi == e ~A r u(s)e-,¡T-,¡ ds and expectations are taken under the risk-neutral
measure. In the Appendix we prove that the expectation in (18) is
Finally, replacing Xi and (19) into (18) we obtain the price of the forward as
4. Calibration
One of the arguments in favour of spot-based models is that they can provide a
reliable description of the evolution of electricity prices. Moreover, these models are
versatile in the sen se that it is relatively simple to aggregate 'characteristics' to an
existing family or class of models like for example adding a seasonality function. On
the other hand, one of the drawbacks of these models is that it is quite difficult to
estimate parameters given the relatively large number of parameters combined with a
very small sample data .
One approach is to estimate all the parameters involved from historical data using
maximum likelihood estimators (MLE) through the approximations presented by
Ball and Torous .9 However, for the England and Wales data this
method yielded incorrect estima tes, i.e. negative values for certain parameters that
should otherwise be positive and estima tes which depended heavily on the starting
value of the parameters. We believe this is mainly due to the scarcity of data in this
As an alternative we propose a 'hybrid' approach that uses both historical spot
data and forward market data. The forrner is used to calcula te the seasonality
component, the rolling historical volatility, the mean reversion rate and the
frequency and standard deviation of the jumps.lO The latter is used to estimate the
market price of risk.
Spot-based Estimates
Seasonality function.
In (3), G(t) is a deterministic function which accounts for
the observed seasonality in power markets. The form of this seasonality function
inevitably depends on the market in question. For instance, sorne electricity
markets will exhibit a discernible pattern between summer and winter months. In
such cases a sinusoidal function could be suitable ).
Other alternatives inelude a constant piece-wise function, as for instance in
Knittel and Roberts . Furthermore, Lucía and Schwartz introduce a
deterministic function which discerns between weekdays and a monthly seasonal
component.
However sophisticated these functions may be, they all rely on the inelusion of
dummy variables and on being able to calibrate them correctly from the sample of
historical data. As discussed earlier, this might be a serious constraint when dealing
with markets with not enough historical data. Moreover, although it is reasonable to
assume that there might be a distinguishable pattern between summer and winters in
England and Wales, this is yet not evident from the available data.
Hence, ineluding a seasonality function dependent on parameters to estimate from
historical data would only add difficulty and unreliability to the airead y difficult
calibration of the mode!. Instead, we have chosen to introduce a deterministic
seasonality function which is a fit of the monthly averages of the available historical
data with a Fourier series of order 5. In this way, we introduce a seasonality
component into the model, but do not accentuate even further the problems involved
in the calibration. 11 The seasonality function is shown in Figure 7.
Rolling historical volatility.
It can easily be shown that volatility is not constant
across time in electricity markets. One common approach then, is to use as an
estimate a rolling (or moving) historical volatility, as described in Eydeland and
Wolyniec for instance. In this case, we use a yearly averaged rolling historical
volatility with a window of 30 days.
Mean reversion rateo
The mean reversion is usually estimated using a linear
regression. In this case we regressed the returns L1xt versus the series of returns X t of
the log-spot price.
Jump parameters.
In order to estimate the parameters of the jump component of
the spot dynamics, we filtered the data of returns using the code that was explained
earlier. As an output of the code, we estimated the standard deviation of the jumps,
(J j, and the frequency of the jumps, 1, which is defined as the total number of jumps
divided by the annualised number of observations.
Figure 7. Seasonality function based on historical averaged months
Forward-based Estimate
We estimate the remaining parameter, the market price of risk .le, by minimising the
sguare distances of the theoretical forward curve for different maturities (obtained
through (20)) to given market prices of egual maturities. 12
The results obtained are summarized in Table l.
Based on the result obtained for the standard deviation of the jumps through the
filtering process discussed previously we could not conclude that the relationship
imposed in the model between the mean and the variance of the logarithm of the
jumps (through (8) and (9)) holds in each iteration. However, as mentioned earlier,
this condition can easily be relaxed. This would lead, nonetheless, to the inclusion of
an extra parameter to be estimated (the mean of the logarithm of the jumps). At this
point, one must compromise between the imposed assumptions and the feasibility of
calibrating a model dependent on too many parameters. The estimated freguency of
Table 1. Annualized estimates for the standard deviation of the jumps crJ, frequency of the
jumps 1, mean reversion rate rx and average (denoted by [ .] ) market price of risk per unit risk
J.*. When available, the 95% confidence bounds are presented in parenthesis
[.!c*] C%)
0.2853 (0.2431, 0.3274)
-0.2481 (-0.2550, -0.2413)
jumps suggests that there are between eight and nine jumps per year, which is in
agreement with observed historical data.
The estimated mean reversion rate represents a daily estimate. To interpret what
the estimated value of mean reversion implies, let us re-write (15) in an Euler
discretized form in a period 11 t where no random shocks or jumps have occurred,
We may easily see that when we multiply the daily estimate by the appropriate
annualization factor (in this case 365), and since f:..t= 1/365; when C(= 1 we have
Xt+l =jl(t).
This is, when C and Knittel et al. have extensively calibrated mean
reverting jump diffusion models to electricity data for different markets. In both
cases, they calibrate discrete-time parameters. The connection between the time
continuous parameters and the discrete version can be seen by writing the MRJD
process defined in (15) as
and '1t represents the integral of the Brownian motion and the jump component
between times t-l and t.
From (23) we may recover the discrete-time parameter corresponding to the mean
reversion rate, which gives p=0.7518; which is such that IPI<I, guaranteeing that the
process mean reverts back to its non-constant mean. Moreover, our estimate of pis
entirely compatible with the estimates presented in (1) and (12) for different
electricity markets.
Finally, let us interpret the results obtained for the market price of risk per unit
risk. In Table 1 we have shown an average value of the market price of risk; the
average value results from taking an average historical volatility of the rolling
volatility we have estimated. 13 Through (15) and (16) we note that the the drift of x,
is given mainly by C( (g(t) - Á*), since the term ~* is practically zero. Hence, the drift
is being pushed upwards by our market price of risk. The fact that this market price
of risk is negative, does not seem uncommon in sorne energy markets, and in
electricity markets in particular. In fact, Botterud et al. make an empirical study
of the risk premium in the Scandinavian electricity market and find negative values
for their estimates. They explain the risk premium in terms of the difference in the
number of participants on the supply and demand sides. In this context, a negative
risk premium would be consequence of an excess demand for futures contracts.
5. Applications
Pricing a European call option on a forward was first addressed by Black in 1976.
Based solely on arbitrage arguments one can obtain the price of a forward contract
under a OBM very easily, simple arguments then lead to a closed-form solution for a
call option written on a forward, which is wide1y known as Black's formula. 14
However, when departing from the very idealized OBM, and incorporating both
mean reversion and jump-diffusion to the process; closed-form solutions are very
hard, if possible at aH, to obtain. Duffie el al. are able to extract semi-closedform solutions provided that the underlying follows an affine jump-diffusion (AJD);
which they define basically as a jump-diffusion process in which the drift vector,
instantaneous covariance matrix and jump intensities all have affine dependence on
the state vector.
On the other hand, without imposing these dependencies, a closed-form analytical
solution might prove significantly harder to obtain. Hence, the pricing of these
models is generally done numerically. Regardless of the numerical method
employed, ultimately the performance of the model relies on the capability of
successfully capturing the discussed characteristics of this market.
For instance, the model (once calibrated) must yield price paths for the price of
electricity which resemble those observed in the market. In Figure 8 we show a
simulated random walk which results from discretizing (13) and later recovering the
spot price as SI = eX,; subject to the calibration discussed in the preceding section.
Here we observe that the price path succeeds in capturing the mean reversion and
incorporating the jumps, which are mostly (as de si red) upwards. Moreover, the
monthly average s of the simulated price path closely resembles the seasonality
function, which is evidence that the process is mean reverting towards a timedependent equilibrium level dictated mainly by the seasonality function, as expected
from (14).
In order to further test the validity of the model, we show in Figure 9 the
calibrated forward curve with its 95% confidence interval, the averaged months from
the calibrated forward curve and the monthly market forwards. We can observe that
the forward curve sticks on average to levels close to the market curve; albeit
showing a great degree of flexibility. By this we mean that the curve exhibits all the
variety of shapes observed commonly in the market; which are commonly known as
backwardation (decrease in prices with maturity), con tango (increase in prices with
maturity) and seasonal (a combination of both).
In Figure 10 we show a forward surface for 5 months aheadY To understand this
graph better, let us concentra te on the first month of July. For each day in June 2004
we calculate the forwards with starting date ti, i E (1, 30) with maturities Tk , k E (1,
31); where i sweeps across the days in June and k across maturities in July. The
forward for each day in June then is calculated as the average of the forwards of
maturity Tk , thus reflecting the price of a forward contract of electricity for the entire
month of July, as quoted on the ith day of June. Similarly, in Figures 11 and12 we
show forward surface for quarters and seasons ahead.
As can be seen from Figure 10 for instance, the surface evolves in accordance to
the monthly seasonalities, sticking to higher prices towards the end of the winter of
2004. This is again observed in Figure 11, where the prices for quarter 4, 2005 are
Figure 8. Simulated price path
28r---------~--------,_--------_r--------_r--------~--------_,_,
20 L ..... -=--
18~--------~--------~--------~--------~--------~--------~~
maturity (in days)
Figure 9. Optimized forward curve: the circ1es represent the forward; the lower triangles the
upper bound of the estimated forward; the upper triangles the lower bound of the estimated
forward; the solid line the monthly average of the estimated forward and the dotted line the
market forward
days within June
Figure 10. 5-months-ahead forward priccs for cach day in June 2004
days within July 04 ~ March 05
Figure 11. Thrcc-quartcrs-ahcad forward prices for each day within JuJy 2004 and Match
2005. Q2_05 rcprcsents April June 2005, Q3_05 JuJy Scptcmber 2005 and Q4_05 Octobcr-
Dcccmbcr 2005
days wiItlin July 04 - Seplerrber 04
Figure 12. Four-sc<lsons-ahc<ld forward priccs for c<lch day wilhin July 2004 <lnd Scplcmbcr
2004. W04-05 rcprcscnts Oclobcr 2004-March 2005; 505 April-Scplcmbcr 2005. W05-06
OClobcr 2oo5- March 2006 and 506 April September 2006
higher, as expected. In Figure 12, we observe that for Ihe second and third season
ahead the calculated forward price exhibits little variation (seen as an almost straighl
line in lhe x-y plane). This is due 10 the faet that these are long-lerm eontraets and
the shocks become insignificant as maturity inereases.
11 should also be pointcd out that Ihe surfaees exhibit a high correlation aeross
monlhs. For instance, in Figure II we observe that the hump around the day 150
 is nOled across the difTerent quarters. This is due 10
lhe faet that Ihe forward equation derived depends on the starting level of lhe spot
price. Henee, if al 1= 150 we have a spike in the simulated walk, this will be reneeled
across different malurities with Ihe same starting date.
6. Conclusions
In the present papcr we have analysed c1eetricily spot priees in lhe market of
England and Wales. The introduetion of NETA ehanged in a fundamental way the
behaviour ofthis market introducing competition and price variations. ]-Iowever, its
implementation only took place on 27 March 2001, resuhing in not enough dala, as
of today, to estimate or test models. Driven by this lack of data we proposed a spotbased model from which we can also extract in c\osed-form the forward curve. We
lhen use both historieal SpOI data as well as market forwards dala to ealibrate the
parameters of the model.
Regarding the calibration of the modeL we have cireumvented a known drawbaek
in cleetrieily spol-based models, whieh is lhe overwhelming depcnJenee on a great
number of parameters to estima te. As Ihe market evolves and more data becomes
available (or possibly when using high-frequency data, thus extending the data set) it
will be possible to estimate all the parameters more robustly; as already pointed out
by sorne papers which have analysed more mature markets. In the mean time, we
have reduced the number of parameters to be estimated in the model. In doing so, we
have used a 'hybrid' approach which combines estimating sorne parameters from
historical spot data and the remaining from market forward prices. It can be argued
that this is an arbitrary choice, since calibrating to a market curve starting at a
different point might yield different parameters. Even if this were the case, this is not
a serious flaw. This would imply re-calibrating the forward curve with respect to a
different market curve. In a dynamic hedging-strategy this could be done as many
times as necessary, depending on the exposure and the nature of the contract.
As to the output of the model, the simulated price path resembles accurately the
evolution of electricity spot prices as observed in this market. With regards to the
forward curve shown, it succeeds in capturing changing convexities, which is a
serious flaw in models that fail to incorporate seasonality or enough factors.
Finally, the unequivocal evidence of fat tails in the distributions of electricity retums,
together with the complexities on the calibration of these spot-based models and the
existing problem of the exiguous data in this market suggests the exploration of different
altematives. An interesting line of work to pursue is that which involves models that
depart from Gaussian distributions, as for instance those involving Lévy processes.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful for comments from Andrew Shaw, Gareth Davies, Murray Hartley,
Raymond Brummelhuis, Ron Smith, seminar participants at the Commodities
Modelling Workshop held at Birkbeck College, University of London on September
2004, University of Oxford, University of Toronto, and two anonymous referees.
I For more specific information about NETA consult www.ofgem.gov.uk.
2 All data used in this project has been kindly provided by Oxford Economic Research Associates,
3 As proxy to daily closes of spot prices we have used the daily average of historical quoted half-hour spot
prices from 2/04/01 to 3/03/04.
4 Here we define 'return' as in the classical definition; r,=ln(S'+I/S,), Note that this is al so referred to as the
'log-return' by other authors.
5 As can be readily calculated, the probability in a Normal distribution of having returns greater than 3
standard deviations is 0.0027.
6 The calibration will be addressed in Section 4.
7 Although the process followed by Y, mean reverts around a zero level, it will be shown later that the
stochastic process followed by the returns of S, will mean revert around a time-dependent drift.
H Although the market price of risk itself could be time-dependant, he re we assume it constant for reasons
of simplicity.
9 In these papers they demonstrate that for low values of the intensity parameter the Poisson process can
be approximated by a Bernoulli distribution, such that the density function can be written as a mixture of
10 By the restriction imposed in (7) we have reduced the need to calibrate lhe mean of the jumps in the spot.
II Although in electricity there is also evidence of intra-day seasonality, it is not necessary to account for it
in this model since we take as spot prices the average of intra-day half-hour prices. The weekly pattern of
seasonality however, could be accounted for, albeit at the cost of intraducing yet another parameter into
the model.
12The market quotes in reference were obtained fram 'Argus' and represent forward prices at 7 May 2004
for the next six months.
13 When reconstructing the spot and forward prices however, we multiply at each time-step the market
price of risk by the apprapriate volatility at that time, as indicated by (16).
14This derivation can be found in many textbooks, for a simple and intuitive explanation see Bjork .
15 The forward surfaces have been calculated with a considerably lower mean reversion rate in order to
capture the dynamics of larger maturities more realistically.
16 See pages 176-177 in this reference for more details.