Deep learning versus human graders for classifying diabetic
retinopathy severity in a nationwide screening program
Paisan Ruamviboonsuk1, Jonathan Krause2, Peranut Chotcomwongse1, Rory Sayres2, Rajiv Raman3, Kasumi Widner2,
Bilson J. L. Campana2, Sonia Phene2, Kornwipa Hemarat4, Mongkol Tadarati
1, Sukhum Silpa-Archa1, Jirawut Limwattanayingyong1,
Chetan Rao3, Oscar Kuruvilla5, Jesse Jung6, Jeffrey Tan
7, Surapong Orprayoon8, Chawawat Kangwanwongpaisan9,
Ramase Sukumalpaiboon10, Chainarong Luengchaichawang11, Jitumporn Fuangkaew12, Pipat Kongsap13, Lamyong Chualinpha14,
Sarawuth Saree15, Srirut Kawinpanitan16, Korntip Mitvongsa17, Siriporn Lawanasakol18, Chaiyasit Thepchatri19,
Lalita Wongpichedchai20, Greg S. Corrado2, Lily Peng2 and Dale R. Webster2
Deep learning algorithms have been used to detect diabetic retinopathy (DR) with specialist-level accuracy. This study aims to
validate one such algorithm on a large-scale clinical population, and compare the algorithm performance with that of human
graders. A total of 25,326 gradable retinal images of patients with diabetes from the community-based, nationwide screening
program of DR in Thailand were analyzed for DR severity and referable diabetic macular edema (DME). Grades adjudicated by a
panel of international retinal specialists served as the reference standard. Relative to human graders, for detecting referable DR
(moderate NPDR or worse), the deep learning algorithm had signiﬁcantly higher sensitivity (0.97 vs. 0.74, p < 0.001), and a slightly
lower speciﬁcity (0.96 vs. 0.98, p < 0.001). Higher sensitivity of the algorithm was also observed for each of the categories of severe
or worse NPDR, PDR, and DME (p < 0.001 for all comparisons). The quadratic-weighted kappa for determination of DR severity levels
by the algorithm and human graders was 0.85 and 0.78 respectively (p < 0.001 for the difference). Across different severity levels of
DR for determining referable disease, deep learning signiﬁcantly reduced the false negative rate (by 23%) at the cost of slightly
higher false positive rates (2%). Deep learning algorithms may serve as a valuable tool for DR screening.
npj Digital Medicine 2:25 ; 
INTRODUCTION
Deep learning (DL) is a ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence which has
been applied to develop algorithms for the detection of diabetic
retinopathy (DR) with high (>90%) sensitivity and speciﬁcity for
referable disease (moderate non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy
(NPDR) or worse).1–3 In addition to high screening accuracy, DL
also has advantages in terms of resource consumption, consistency, and scalability, and has the potential to be deployed as an
alternative to human graders for classifying or triaging retinal
photographs in DR screening programs.
In Thailand, there are 1500 ophthalmologists, including 200
retinal specialists, who provide ophthalmic care to approximately
4.5 million patients with diabetes. Half of the ophthalmologists
and retinal specialists practice in Bangkok, the capital of the
country, while a majority of patients with diabetes live in areas
100 km or more from provincial hospitals, where ophthalmologists
typically practice. The latest Thailand National Survey of Blindness
conducted in 2006–20074 showed that 34% of patients with
diabetes had low vision or blindness in either eye. DR was and
continues to be the most common retinal disease that causes
bilateral low vision.4,5
A national screening program for DR was set up by the Ministry
of Public Health of Thailand in 2013. The screening was conducted
in each of the 13 health regions with an initial target of screening
at least 60% of diabetic patients in each region. Unfortunately,
Ministry data indicate that less than 50% of the diabetic patients
were screened every year since the inception of the program.
Because this was in part due to the lack of trained graders,
deploying DL in the screening program for DR in Thailand has the
Corrected: Author Correction
Received: 26 October 2018 Accepted: 11 March 2019
Published online: 10 April 2019
1Department of Ophthalmology, Rajavithi Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand; 2Google AI, Google, Mountain View, CA, USA; 3Shri Bhagwan Mahavir Vitreoretinal Services, Sankara
Nethralaya, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India; 4Department of Ophthalmology, Vajira Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand; 5Eye and Laser Center, Charlotte, NC, USA; 6East Bay Retina
Consultants, Oakland, CA; Department of Ophthalmology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA; 7Retina-Vitreous Associates Medical Group, Department
of Ophthalmology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; 8Department of Ophthalmology, Lamphun Hospital, Lamphun, Thailand; 9Department of
Ophthalmology, Somdejphrajaotaksin Maharaj Hospital, Tak, Thailand; 10Department of Ophthalmology, Sawanpracharak Hospital, Nakhon Sawan, Thailand; 11Department of
Ophthalmology, Nakhon Nayok Hospital, Nakhon Nayok, Thailand; 12Department of Ophthalmology, Photharam Hospital, Ratchaburi, Thailand; 13Department of Ophthalmology,
Prapokklao Hospital, Chanthaburi, Thailand;
14Department of Ophthalmology, Mahasarakham Hospital, Mahasarakham, Thailand;
15Department of Ophthalmology,
Nongbualamphu Hospital, Nongbualamphu, Thailand; 16Department of Ophthalmology, Pakchongnana Hospital, Nakhon Ratchasima, Thailand; 17Department of Ophthalmology,
Mukdahan Hospital, Mukdahan, Thailand; 18Department of Ophthalmology, Suratthani Hospital, Suratthani, Thailand; 19Department of Ophthalmology, Sungaikolok Hospital,
Narathiwat, Thailand and 20Bangkok Metropolitan Administration Public Health Center 7, Bangkok, Thailand
Correspondence: Lily Peng ( )
These authors contributed equally: Paisan Ruamviboonsuk, Jonathan Krause
These authors contributed equally: Peranut Chotcomwongse, Rory Sayres
These authors contributed equally: Lily Peng, Dale R. Webster
www.nature.com/npjdigitalmed
Scripps Research Translational Institute
potential to solve some of these problems.6 Similar issues have
been observed in the United Kingdom.7
Several DL algorithms for DR have shown promise in populations with multiethnic diabetic patients.1–3 However, before the
deployment of DL for screening DR, additional large-scale
validation on screening populations that are distinct from the
original developmental datasets will be critical. In addition, the use
of rigorous reference standards that are adjudicated by retinal
specialists is important for robust evaluation of the algorithm and
human graders.2 Lastly, the diagnostic accuracy of DL algorithms
should be compared with human graders who routinely grade
retinal images in a screening population.
This study was conducted to assess the screening performance
of the DL algorithm compared to real-world graders for classifying
multiple clinically relevant severity levels of DR in the national
screening program for DR in Thailand.
Participant demographics
The characteristics of the images and patients included in this
study are described in Table 1. This cohort consisted of 7517
patients, of whom 67.5% were women. The average age was 61.13
(SD = 10.96) years.
Image gradability
Out of 29,943 images, 4595 were deemed not gradable for DR by
either the regional grader, the DL algorithm, or both (Supplementary Table 1, Supplementary Figs. 1 and 2). A sample of
images where the regional grader disagreed with the DL
algorithm on image gradability underwent adjudication and the
results of the adjudication are presented in the Supplementary
Tables 2 and 3. Adjudicators were approximately 2.5 times more
likely to agree with the algorithm than regional graders about the
gradability of images for DR. For this difﬁcult image subset,
adjudicators agreed with the regional grader 29.0% of the time vs
70.9% of the time with the algorithm. For diabetic macular edema
(DME) gradability, they were just as likely to agree with the
algorithm as the regional graders.
Manual grading and algorithm performance
A comparison of the performance of regional graders in Thailand
and the algorithm compared to the reference standard for all
gradable images is summarized in Supplementary Table 4. Out of
all the gradable images, the composite sensitivity (i.e., generated
by pooling all patients and then computing the metric) of the
graders for detecting moderate or worse NPDR was 0.734 (ranging
from 0.4071 to 0.914 across regional graders) and the speciﬁcity
was 0.980 (range: 0.939–1.000). The DL algorithm had a sensitivity
0.893–0.993),
speciﬁcity
0.983–0.987), and area under the curve (AUC) of 0.987 (range:
0.977–0.995) (Fig. 1). These differences in sensitivity (24% absolute
percentage points) and speciﬁcity (−2.5%) between the algorithm
and regional graders were statistically signiﬁcant (p < 0.001). The
algorithm’s performance was better than or equal to that of
composite grading of regional graders for severe or worse NPDR
and proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR), with AUC values of
0.978–0.997)
0.974–0.995),
respectively (Fig. 1). Using moderate or worse NPDR as the
referral threshold, regional graders did not refer 73 out of the 602
(12.1%) severe NPDR or worse images and 56 out of the 398 PDR
images (14.1%). The algorithm would have missed 20 out of the
602 (3.3%) severe NPDR or worse images and 18 out of 398 PDR
images (4.5%).
Results for DME were similar. The sensitivity for regional graders
for detecting referable DME was 0.620 (range: 0.450–0.803 across
regions) and the speciﬁcity was 0.992 (range: 0.973–0.998). For the
algorithm,
sensitivity
0.859–1.000),
speciﬁcity
0.944–0.991),
0.980–0.998;
conﬁdence interval (CI) 0.993–0.994).
Our approach to evaluating grader performance involved
adjudicating a subset of our image set—cases with disagreement
and a sub-sample of cases where the algorithm and human
graders agreed. While this is a common reference standard used
studies,3,8
representative dataset, it may overestimate the accuracy of both
deep learning and human graders. We therefore ran additional
analyses to estimate the impact of our adjudication strategy. We
subsampled 5% of the cases with agreement between the
algorithm and graders randomly for adjudication. We found that
the adjudication panel agreed with the algorithm and regional
grader 96.2% of the time for moderate or worse NPDR and 87.5%
of the time for referable DME. By extrapolating these measured
agreement rates to unadjudicated images, we could compute
adjusted performance metrics of algorithm and graders as if all
images had been adjudicated. For moderate or worse NPDR, the
regional grader would have 0.611 sensitivity and 0.959 speciﬁcity
and the algorithm would have 0.862 sensitivity and 0.934 speci-
ﬁcity. For referable DME, the regional grader would have
0.491 sensitivity and 0.989 speciﬁcity, and the algorithm would
have 0.875 sensitivity and 0.977 speciﬁcity.
Because more rapid referral is warranted for cases with severe
or worse NPDR and/or DME, the performance of the algorithm for
these cases was also examined. At this threshold, regional graders
had a sensitivity of 0.635 (range: 0.475–0.831) and speciﬁcity of
0.997 (range: 0.967–0.998), while the algorithm had a sensitivity of
0.936 (range:
0.852–0.984)
speciﬁcity
0.948–0.993). Using PDR and/or DME as the threshold yields
similar performance metrics as severe or worse NPDR and/or DME
because the number of DME cases outnumbers that of PDR cases
(Figure S1). Additional results for using individual DR severity
levels as the threshold are summarized in Supplementary Fig 3.
The performance of the graders cannot be directly compared to
each other because they each graded a different set of images
that correspond
algorithm’s
performance for images from each region could be compared
directly to the regional grader from that region (Fig. 2). In nearly all
regions, the algorithm’s sensitivity was signiﬁcantly higher than
that of the respective regional grader for moderate or worse NPDR
and for DME. In one of the regions, the algorithm’s sensitivity was
lower than that of the regional grader for moderate or worse
NPDR, but the difference was not statistically signiﬁcant (p = 0.98).
The overall agreement between the regional graders and
algorithm in comparison to the reference standard for DR and
DME is shown in a confusion matrix presented in Fig. 3.
Furthermore, to compare the agreement for the entire range of
DR severities (no/mild, moderate, severe, and proliferative) and for
quadratic-weighted
(Supplementary Table 5). Regional graders were measured at
0.773 (range: 0.624–0.875 across regions) and 0.844 (range:
0.736–0.870), p < 0.001 for the difference.
In addition to per image metrics, we also calculated the
performance of the regional grader and algorithm on a per visit
basis (2 images per visit), including both visits, and on a ﬁrst visit
per patient basis. For moderate or worse NPDR, the regional
grader sensitivity increased ~3% when going from per image basis
to per visit basis, while speciﬁcity decreased ~1%. For the
algorithm, sensitivity and speciﬁcity stayed roughly the same
(within ~1%). For referable DME, the regional grader average
sensitivity increased ~6% while speciﬁcity decreased less than 1%.
The algorithm’s sensitivity remained roughly unchanged while
speciﬁcity decreased ~1%. Details of performance by region are
shown in Supplementary Tables 4 and 5.
P. Ruamviboonsuk et al.
npj Digital Medicine 25
Scripps Research Translational Institute
1234567890():,;
Algorithm performance based on conﬁdence score
While the output of the algorithm is ultimately distilled in a
categorical call (e.g., severe NPDR vs PDR), the algorithm originally
returns a value between 0 and 1 for each level of DR and DME,
indicating a conﬁdence for each severity level. Analysis of the
model’s performance based on the maximum score of both the
DR and DME predictions showed that the algorithm was more
sensitive than regional graders at all ranges of conﬁdence score.
However, when the algorithm was uncertain (maximum score <
0.7), the speciﬁcity of the algorithm was much lower than that of
the regional grader at this particular operating point (Figure S2).
DISCUSSION
This study represents one of the largest clinical validations of a
deep learning algorithm in a population that is distinct from which
the algorithm was trained. In addition, this external validation was
conducted in direct comparison with the actual graders in the
screening program of the same population. This is pivotal since
many countries in the world adopted trained graders for their
screening programs for DR. These include the United States,9,10
United Kingdom,11 India,12 Malaysia,13 South Africa,14 Singapore,15
and China16 among others. Furthermore, according to the
statement by American Academy of Ophthalmology (AAO),14,17
there is a strong (level 1) evidence that single-ﬁeld retinal
photography with interpretation by trained graders can serve as
a screening tool to identify patients with DR where ophthalmologists are not readily available for referral for further ophthalmic
evaluation and management.
Most algorithms in previous studies of DL for DR screening have
simpliﬁed the various levels of DR into binary predictions, either
referable and non-referable or with and without sight-threatening
DR. However, in real-world situations, patient management can be
different at each level of DR. For example, patients with PDR may
require higher urgency for referral for panretinal photocoagulation
or intravitreal injections compared to another severity level, such
as severe NPDR without DME. On the other hand, patients with
moderate NPDR without DME, although labeled as referable, may
not require treatment but still require periodic close monitoring
by ophthalmologists or retinal specialists. Identifying the referable
group of patients requiring treatment accurately may save
community resources. Validation of the performance of DL for
classifying severity levels of DR would therefore be essential for
real-world screening of DR.
Recently, one of the largest head-to-head comparisons between
deep learning and human graders was performed by Ting et al.3
The study included 10 secondary validation sets (e.g. validation
sets that were drawn from a population that is distinct from the
one in which the model was trained), the largest consisting of over
15,000 images. The algorithm validated in this study extends some
(but not all) aspects of this body of work. For example, the
algorithm, which has been previously validated in populations
from the United States and India, showed excellent generalization
on a national level in Thailand across different cameras (Supplemental Table 6) and different levels of expertise (ophthalmologists
or trained non-ophthalmologists) of graders. It also showed high
accuracy when measured on both binary and multi-class tasks.
Grading on a more granular 5-point grade is advantageous,
especially on a global scale, where follow-up and management
guidelines among the many different guidelining bodies may vary
at each of the 5 levels and in the presence of possible macular
edema.18 For example, while the follow-up recommended by the
AAO14,17,19 can be up to 12 months for moderate NPDR with no
macular edema, that recommendation changes to 3–6 months if
there is macular edema and 1 month when there is clinically
signiﬁcant macular edema.17
Summary of patient characteristics, including breakdowns by region
All regions
Grader type
Total patients
Total images
% No/Mild NPDR
% Moderate NPDR
% Severe NPDR
% Referable DME
59 (52, 66)
58 (53, 64)
57 (50, 63)
59 (52, 66)
63 (57, 70)
62 (54, 70)
58 (51, 65)
62 (54, 68)
59 (53, 66)
56 (49, 64)
56 (49, 64)
63 (56, 71)
56 (50, 61)
59 (51, 67)
7.3 (6.5, 8.6)
7.6 (6.9, 8.5)
7.0 (6.4, 8.2)
7.3 (6.4, 8.5)
7.2 (6.5, 8.4)
7.2 (6.3, 8.5)
7.2 (6.5, 8.1)
7.7 (6.8, 9.3)
7.6 (6.5, 9.1)
7.2 (6.3, 8.5)
8.4 (7.3, 9.8)
7.2 (6.5, 8.2)
8.1 (7.1, 9.6)
7.0 (6.3, 8.0)
FBS (mg/dL)
139 (118, 169)
130 (110, 172)
136 (118, 168)
138 (115, 166)
133 (114, 156)
150 (126, 181)
140 (122, 175)
140 (118, 199)
144 (121, 172)
133 (107, 170)
149 (122, 188)
131 (115, 154)
149 (130, 186)
136 (118, 163)
LDL (mg/dL)
105 (83, 130)
117 (107, 147)
113 (90, 135)
102 (79, 124)
101 (81, 128)
94 (75, 120)
103 (80, 129)
102 (93, 122)
109 (86, 132)
107 (86, 131)
104 (85, 124)
96 (73, 119)
118 (96, 142)
108 (88, 132)
For blood sample measures and visual acuity, values reﬂect the distribution across patients at ﬁrst visit. Numeric values indicate the median across a distribution; values in parentheses indicate the 25th and 75th
percentiles.
MD ophthalmologist, DME diabetic macular edema, NPDR non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy, PDR proliferative diabetic retinopathy, HbA1c hemoglobin A1c, FBS fasting blood glucose, LDL low-density
lipoprotein
P. Ruamviboonsuk et al.
Scripps Research Translational Institute
npj Digital Medicine 25
The threshold level for referral in a screening program for DR
may be dependent on the resources of the program. In a lower
resource setting where ophthalmologists only see severe cases,
the referral threshold may be higher. In a higher resource setting
where ophthalmologists prefer to see mild cases, the referral
threshold may be lower. There has been some work in the
literature to address the importance of this 5-severity levels
grading of DR and an adjudicated reference standard.20 However,
this work was not validated on a dataset from a different
population until this present study. External validation of a deep
learning system for accuracy of a 5-point grade should not only
give an advantage for selecting an appropriate threshold with
acceptable accuracy for a screening system, but also act as a
feedback loop to tune the accuracy of the deep learning system
There are some limitations to this study. First, adjudication was
performed largely for moderate NPDR or worse cases where there
was disagreement between the grader and algorithm. For patients
with no retinopathy, screening every 2 years may be appropriate,
while those with mild NPDR should be screened once a year.21
Therefore, future studies should include adjudication for cases
where there is disagreement between no and mild DR.
In addition, the exclusion images with other retinal diseases and
images deemed ungradable by either the algorithm or grader may
also have inﬂated algorithm performance. These limitations need
to be addressed before deploying the algorithms, particularly in a
stand-alone fashion. Future work should include the extension of
the algorithm to detect other common comorbid eye diseases like
age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and glaucoma. Compared to the regional graders, the algorithm was more likely to
agree with adjudication for gradability. However, more work
should be done to study the integration of an image quality
algorithm prospectively to see (1) how immediate feedback about
image quality may motivate camera operators to re-image the
patient for high-quality photos and (2) the disease distribution for
images that algorithm considered gradable with no or mild grade
but are actually ungradable images with referable disease.
Furthermore, the algorithm’s performance could be improved
upon for difﬁcult cases. For example, if we used the moderate or
worse NPDR operating point, the algorithm would have failed to
refer approximate 18 out of 398 cases (4.5%). However, if we used
the PDR operating point for referral, the algorithm would have
only missed 112 out of 398 cases (28.1%). While the manual
grading would have missed even more cases and it is unlikely the
PDR operating point would be used for referral instead of the
moderate or worse NPDR operating point, there is still room for
improvement. Even though the algorithm did miss a few cases
neovascularization
specialists, it primarily missed cases with inactive ﬁbrous tissue
without neovascularization at the optic disc or elsewhere or cases
with panretinal photocoagulation scars. Additional training could
help improve the algorithm for these cases in the future. Some
examples of cases with PDR that were missed by deep learning
and the human graders are shown in Figure S3. Given these
Comparison of manual grading and algorithm performance. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve of model (blue line)
compared to grading by regional graders (red dot) for varying severities of diabetic retinopathy (DR) and diabetic macular edema (DME). The
performance represented by the red dot is a combination of all of the grades from the regional graders on all gradable images, since regional
graders only graded images from their own region
P. Ruamviboonsuk et al.
npj Digital Medicine 25
Scripps Research Translational Institute
Comparison of algorithm and individual regional grader performance. Grader performances are represented as blue diamonds
(ophthalmologists) and red dots (nurse or technician) for a moderate or worse non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy (NPDR), b diabetic
macular edema (DME), and c severe NPDR, proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR), and/or DME. Analysis is performed on all gradable images
P. Ruamviboonsuk et al.
Scripps Research Translational Institute
npj Digital Medicine 25
ﬁndings, if this algorithm were to be deployed in a real-world
setting, any image the algorithm grades as moderate or above or
severe and above will be immediately referred to manual review
to ensure high sensitivity for PDR.
While the regional graders were 80–85% accurate (since
regional grader speciﬁcity was quite high), the sensitivity of some
of the graders was lower than expected for trained graders in a
screening program. This not only highlights the necessity of
regular audits for human graders, but also an opportunity for
algorithms to serve in training, education, and auditing.
In addition, in a real-life screening setting, grading may be
performed with a combination of automated and manual grading.
A preliminary analysis was performed to look at the relationship
between algorithm conﬁdence and performance of both algorithm and manual grading. Future studies could further explore
how to combine the algorithm and manual grading to achieve
better performance than either alone, while minimizing manual
grading workload. In addition, the reference standard for DME in
this study was based on monoscopic fundus photos. For DME,
optical coherence tomography is now considered the clinical
standard, and incorporating this in the reference standard would
Regional Grader Label
Proliferative
No/Mild NPDR
Moderate NPDR
Severe NPDR
Proliferative DR
Quadratic-Weighted Kappa: 0.774 [0.756-0.791]
Algorithm Label
Proliferative
No/Mild NPDR
Moderate NPDR
Severe NPDR
Proliferative DR
Quadratic-Weighted Kappa: 0.844 [0.834-0.855]
Regional Grader
Algorithm Label
Agreement on the image level between the reference standard and regional graders. Comparison of diabetic retinopathy (DR) and
diabetic macular edema (DME) performance between the reference standard and a, c regional graders or b, d the algorithm. Adjudication was
performed only for images where either the regional grader or the algorithm identiﬁed as moderate and above. Thus, for DR, non-referable
cases (no/mild) are combined into a non-referable bucket
P. Ruamviboonsuk et al.
npj Digital Medicine 25
Scripps Research Translational Institute
be ideal.22 Lastly, DR screening programs generally also refer
patients at high suspicion for other non-DR eye diseases such as
AMD or glaucoma. The ability to detect other eye diseases would
further increase the utility of these algorithms.
This study represents an early milestone in the implementation
of a DL algorithm in a large-scale DR screening program. The
demonstration of the algorithm’s performance and generalizability compared to actual graders in a screening program lays
the groundwork for other prospective studies—to further validate
the algorithm’s performance in real screening workﬂows and to
study its impact on DR screening as a whole. While it is critical that
a DL algorithm is accurate, it is equally important to study how the
algorithm may affect clinical workﬂow and outcomes of patients,
such as clinician and patient satisfaction and patient adherence to
follow-up recommendations, and ultimately impact on disease
prevention, progression, and outcomes.
This study was approved by the Ethical Review Committee for Research in
Human Subjects of the Ministry of Public Health of Thailand and the Ethical
Committees of hospitals or health centers from which retinal images of
patients with diabetes were used. Patients gave informed consents
allowing their retinal images to be used for research. This study was
registered in the Thai Clinical Trials Registry, Registration Number
TCTR20180716003.
Data acquisition
Diabetic patients were randomly identiﬁed from a national registry of
diabetic patients, representing hospitals or health centers in each of the 13
health regions in Thailand. Patients were included if they had fundus
images of either eye captured using retinal cameras in both the years 2015
and 2017, as part of a 2-year longitudinal study on DR. Retinal images of
the patients were single-ﬁeld, 45-degree ﬁeld of view, and contained the
optic disc and macula, centered on the macula. A variety of cameras were
used for image acquisition including ones manufactured by 3nethra,
Canon, Kowa, Nidek, Topcon, and Zeiss (Supplementary Table 6). Images
were retrieved from the digital archives from retinal cameras utilized in the
Thailand DR national screening program. Images were excluded from
analysis if they were from patients who had other retinal diseases that
precluded classiﬁcation of severity of DR or DME, such as AMD and other
retinal vascular diseases.
Deﬁnition of DR severity levels and DME
Severity levels of DR and DME were deﬁned according to the International
Clinical Classiﬁcation of DR (ICDR) disease severity scale.20 In short, DR was
classiﬁed into no DR, mild NPDR, moderate NPDR, severe NPDR, and PDR.
DME was identiﬁed as referable DME when hard exudates were found
within the distance of 1 disc-diameter from the center of the fovea.23,24
Sample size estimation
According to previous community-based studies of DR in Thailand,25 the
prevalence of sight-threatening DR (PDR, severe NPDR, or DME) was
approximately 6% of patients with diabetes. With a margin of error of 10%,
type 1 error at 0.5 and type 2 error at 0.2, the sample size was estimated at
no less than 6112 patients with diabetes. A rate of ungradable images at
20% was estimated, and therefore at least 7450 patients with diabetes
were required. The distribution of diabetic patients included from each
region was in proportion with the distribution of diabetic patients from
each region. The numbers of patients from each of the 13 regions are listed
in Table 1.
Deep learning algorithm
The development of the deep learning algorithm for predicting DR and
DME is described in detail in Krause et al.2 Brieﬂy, a convolutional neural
network was trained with an “Inception-v4”26 architecture that predicted a
5-point DR grade, referable DME, gradability of both DR and DME, and an
overall image quality score. The input to the neural network was a fundus
image with a resolution of 779 × 779 pixels. Through the use of many
stages of computation, parameterized by millions of numbers, the network
outputs a real-valued number between 0.0 and 1.0 for each prediction,
indicating its conﬁdence. During training, the model was given different
images from the training set with a known severity rating for DR, and the
model predicted its conﬁdence in each severity level of DR, slowly
adjusting its parameters over the course of the training process to increase
its accuracy. The model was evaluated on a tuning dataset throughout the
training process, which was used to determine model hyperparameters. An
“ensemble” of ten individual models was then created to combine their
predictions for the ﬁnal output. To turn the model’s conﬁdence-based
outputs into discrete predictions, a threshold on the conﬁdence was used
for each binary output (DME, DR gradability, and DME gradability), and a
cascade of thresholds2 was used to output a single DR severity level.
Grading by regional graders
The DL algorithm was compared to 13 human regional graders who
actually grade retinal images for the screening program in each of the 13
health regions. In this study, each grader only graded images that have
been screened in his or her own region. Some of the graders were general
ophthalmologists and others were trained ophthalmic nurses or technicians. Each grader had at least 2 years of experience grading retinal fundus
images for DR. Each grader received standard grading protocols for DR and
DME, including instructions for the web-based grading tool before the
commencement of the study, and each was required to use the same webbased tool for online grading of the retinal images. A tutorial session was
conducted for all the graders before the commencement of grading.
Reference standard
There were two groups of retinal specialists who graded retinal images for
the reference standard. One group was assigned to grade for DR severity
level and another for referable DME.
For gradability, a subset of ~1000 images each for DR and DME where
the regional grader disagreed with the DL algorithm on image gradability
underwent adjudication. For the remainder of the analysis for both DR and
DME, images graded as ungradable by either the algorithm or regional
grader were excluded. Additionally, for images which were not adjudicated
but the DL algorithm and regional graders were in agreement about the
severity of DR, the agreed-upon grade was used as the reference standard.
A similar rule was applied for analysis of DME.
For grading DR severity levels the ICDR scale was used. In order to
reduce adjudication time for quality of grading, adjudicators were assigned
to grade a subset of the images. This subset included all images for which
the regional grader and the DL algorithm were in disagreement and at
least one graded as moderate NPDR or worse; a random sample of 75
images for which the algorithm and regional grader were in agreement
and graded as moderate NDPR or worse; and a random sample of 1175
images for which the algorithm and regional grader both graded as less
than moderate NPDR. This random sample represented 5% of all images
with agreement between the two modalities. The ratio of images with
moderate NPDR or worse to those with less than moderate NPDR in this
random sample was proportional to the entire population. For the
purposes of this study, no DR and mild NPDR were considered a single
category, and only images that both the algorithm and regional grader
deemed gradable for DR were adjudicated. For grading referable DME,
retinal specialists were assigned to grade all images for which the regional
graders and DL were in disagreement about the binary presence or
absence of DME, and 5% of the rest of the images were randomly assigned
from the subset of those images also determined to be gradable for DME
by both the regional grader and the algorithm. Most of the disagreement
occurred in cases that were graded as moderate or worse NPDR or
referable DME. Further review of the discrepancies revealed that most of
the cases were fairly ambiguous and adjudicators tended to err on the side
of increased sensitivity for a screening setting. Overall, for moderate or
worse NPDR, the regional grader and algorithm grade agreed with
adjudication 96.3% of the time. For DME, the agreement rate was 99.1%.
The retinal specialists that served as the reference standard in this study
were from Thailand, India, and the United States. There were two retinal
specialists per group. Each group graded the images independently, and
the same instructions for web-based grading that the regional graders
used were issued to them before grading. They were also required to use
P. Ruamviboonsuk et al.
Scripps Research Translational Institute
npj Digital Medicine 25
the same web-based grading tool as the regional graders. In addition, the
group that graded DR severity level had a teleconference and graded a
small set of images together to ensure congruence.
The adjudication process was as follows: First, both retinal specialists in a
group independently graded each image. Then, until consensus was
reached, the retinal specialists took turns revising their grades, each time
with access to their previous grade and the other retinal specialist’s grade,
as well as any additional comments about the case either retinal specialist
left. If there was still disagreement after each grader had graded the image
three times in this way, then the image’s reference standard was
determined independently by a separate, senior retinal specialist. For
grading DR severity levels, differences between no DR and mild NPDR were
not adjudicated in order to focus adjudication time on referable disease.
Statistical analysis
Primary metrics assessed were sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and area under the
receiver operating characteristic curve. Conﬁdence intervals for sensitivities
and speciﬁcities were calculated using the Clopper–Pearson interval, and
CIs for the quadratic-weighted Cohen’s kappa were calculated using a
bootstrap, both calculated at the 95% level. All p values were calculated
using two-sided permutation tests.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The data that support the ﬁndings of this study may be available from DR screening
programs of Rajivithi Hospital, Lamphun Hospital, Somdejphrajaotaksin Maharaj
Hospital, Sawanpracharak Hospital, Nakhon Nayok Hospital, Photharam Hospital,
Prapokklao Hospital, Mahasarakham Hospital, Nongbualamphu Hospital, Pakchongnana Hospital, Mukdahan Hospital, Suratthani Hospital, Sungaikolok Hospital,
Bangkok Metropolitan Administration Public Health Center 7, but restrictions apply
to the availability of these data. These data, or a test subset of them, may be available
subject to ethical approvals.
CODE AVAILABILITY
Machine learning models were developed and deployed using standard model
libraries and scripts in TensorFlow. Custom code was speciﬁc to our computing
infrastructure and mainly used for data input/output and parallelization across
computers.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to acknowledge the following people for their advice and
assistance with this paper: Piyada Pholnonluang, Rada Kanjanaprachot, Yothin
Jindaluang, Nitaya Suwannaporn, Niteeya Narapisut, Naraporn Sumalgun, Tanawan
Sinprasert, Tienchai Methanoppakhun, Ratana Boonyong, Preeyawan Tanomsumpan,
Rojsak Phuphiphat, Porntip Nitikarun, Phirun Wongwaithayakonkun, Achareeya
Saenmee, Cheunnapa Komkam, Supaporn Numsui, Praween Tantiprapha, Sopon
Nilkumhang, Roongruedee Thangwongchai, Supaporn Petcharat, Jansiri Laiprasert,
Premrudee Maneechaweng, Sareerah Waesamah, Poowadon Pimpakun, Prapaphan
Charncheaw, Ramida Panyarattannakul, Suwannee Saelee, Nutchana Onarun, Yun Liu,
Peter Wubbels, Florence Thng, Sunny Virmani, Varun Gulshan, Philip Nelson, David
Coz, Derek Wu, Elin Pedersen, William Chen, Jessica Yoshimi, Xiang Ji, Quang Duong,
and Brian Basham. This paper will be posted on a preprint server. The results have
been presented at the 2018 Asia Paciﬁc Tele-Ophthalmology Society.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conception or design of the work: P.R., J.K., P.C. R.S., R.R., G.S.C., L.P. and D.R.W.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: P.R., J.K., P.C., R.S., R.R., L.P., D.R.W, K.W.,
B.J.L.C., S.P., K.H., M.T., S.S.-A., J.L., C.R., O.K., J.J., J.T., S.O., C.K., R.S., C.L., J.F., P.K., L.C., S.
S., S.K., K.M, S.L., C.T. and L.W. Drafting the work or revising it critically: all authors. P.R.,
J.K. and L.P. take full responsibility for the work as a whole, including the study
design, access to data, and the decision to submit and publish the manuscript.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information accompanies the paper on the npj Digital Medicine
website ( 
Competing interests: J.K., R.S., K.W., B.J.L.C., G.S.C., L.P., S.P. and D.R.W. are Google
employees and receive salary and stock as a part of the standard compensation
package. O.K., J.J. and J.T. are consultants for Google.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.