Self-Progressing Robust Training
Minhao Cheng,1,2 Pin-Yu Chen,2 Sijia Liu,3 Shiyu Chang,2 Cho-Jui Hsieh,1 Payel Das2
1 Department of Computer Science, UCLA 2 IBM Research
3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University
{mhcheng,chohsieh}@cs.ucla.edu, {pin-yu.chen,shiyu.chang,daspa}@ibm.com, 
Enhancing model robustness under new and even adversarial
environments is a crucial milestone toward building trustworthy machine learning systems. Current robust training methods such as adversarial training explicitly uses an “attack”
(e.g., L-inf-norm bounded perturbation) to generate adversarial examples during model training for improving adversarial robustness. In this paper, we take a different perspective and propose a new framework called SPROUT, selfprogressing robust training. During model training, SPROUT
progressively adjusts training label distribution via our proposed parametrized label smoothing technique, making training free of attack generation and more scalable. We also motivate SPROUT using a general formulation based on vicinity
risk minimization, which includes many robust training methods as special cases. Compared with state-of-the-art adversarial training methods (PGD-L-inf and TRADES) under L-infnorm bounded attacks and various invariance tests, SPROUT
consistently attains superior performance and is more scalable to large neural networks. Our results shed new light
on scalable, effective and attack-independent robust training
Introduction
While deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved unprecedented performance on a variety of datasets and across domains, developing better training algorithms that are capable
of strengthening model robustness is the next crucial milestone toward trustworthy and reliable machine learning systems. In recent years, DNNs trained by standard algorithms
(i.e., the natural models) are shown to be vulnerable to adversarial input perturbations . Adversarial examples crafted by designed input
perturbations can easily cause erroneous decision making of
natural models and
thus intensify the demand for robust training methods.
State-of-the-art robust training algorithms are primarily
based on the methodology of adversarial training , which
calls speciﬁc attack algorithms to generate adversarial examples during model training for learning robust models. Albeit effective, these methods have the following limitations:
Copyright c⃝2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
(i) poor scalability – the process of generating adversarial
examples incurs considerable computation overhead. For instance, our experiments show that, with the same computation resources, standard adversarial training (with 7 attack
iterations per sample in every minibatch) of Wide ResNet
on CIFAR-10 consumes 10 times more clock time per training epoch when compared with standard training; (ii) attack
speciﬁcity – adversarially trained models are usually most
effective against the same attack they trained on, and the robustness may not generalize well to other types of attacks
 ; (iii) preference
toward wider network – adversarial training is more effective when the networks have sufﬁcient capacity (e.g., having
more neurons in network layers) .
To address the aforementioned limitations, in this paper
we propose a new robust training method named SPROUT,
which is short for self-progressing robust training. We motivate SPROUT by introducing a general framework that formulates robust training objectives via vicinity risk minimization (VRM), which includes many robust training methods
as special cases. It is worth noting that the robust training
methodology of SPROUT is fundamentally different from
adversarial training, as SPROUT features self-adjusted label distribution during training instead of attack generation.
In addition to our proposed parametrized label smoothing
technique for progressive adjustment of training label distribution, SPROUT also adopts Gaussian augmentation and
Mixup to further enhance robustness. We
show that they offer a complementary gain in robustness. In
contrast to adversarial training, SPROUT spares the need for
attack generation and thus makes its training scalable by a
signiﬁcant factor, while attaining better or comparable robustness performance on a variety of experiments. We also
show exclusive features of SPROUT in terms of the novel
ﬁndings that it can ﬁnd robust models from either randomly
initialized models or pretrained models, and its robustness
performance is less sensitive to network width. Our implementation is publicly available. 1.
Contributions
Multi-dimensional performance enhancement. To illustrate the advantage of SPROUT over adversarial training
1Code available at 
The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)
Scalibility
Invariance
(a) Natural
Scalibility
Invariance
(b) Adversarial training
Scalibility
Invariance
(c) TRADES
Scalibility
Invariance
(d) SPROUT (ours)
Figure 1: Multi-dimensional performance comparison of four training methods using VGG-16 network and CIFAR-10 dataset.
All dimensions are separately normalized by the best-performance method. The average score of each method is 0.6718 for
natural (standard training), 0.6900 for PGD-ℓ∞based adversarial training , 0.7107 for PGD-ℓ∞based
TRADES , and 0.8798 for SPROUT (ours). The exact numbers are reported in Appendix.
and its variations, Figure 1 compares the model performance of different training methods with the following ﬁve
dimensions summarized from our experimental results: (i)
Clean Acc – standard test accuracy, (ii) L inf Acc – accuracy under ℓ∞-norm projected gradient descent (PGD) attack , (iii) C&W Acc – accuracy under
ℓ2-norm Carlini-Wagner (C&W) attack, (iv) scalability – per
epoch clock run-time, and (v) invariance – invariant transformation tests including rotation, brightness, contrast and
gray images. Comparing to PGD-ℓ∞based adversarial training and TRADES ,
SPROUT attains at least 20% better L inf Acc, 2% better
Clean Acc, 5× faster run-time (scalability), 2% better invariance, while maintaining C&W Acc, suggesting a new robust
training paradigm that is scalable and comprehensive.
We further summarize our main contributions as follows:
• We propose SPROUT, a self-progressing robust training method composed of three modules that are efﬁcient
and free of attack generation: parametrized label smoothing, Gaussian augmentation, and Mixup. They altogether attain the state-of-the-art robustness performance and are scalable to large-scale networks. We will show that these modules are complementary to enhancing robustness. We also
perform an ablation study to demonstrate that our proposed
parametrized label smoothing technique contributes to the
major gain in boosting robustness.
• To provide technical explanations for SPROUT, we motivate its training methodology based on the framework of
vicinity risk minimization (VRM). We show that many robust training methods, including attack-speciﬁc and attackindependent approaches, can be characterized as a speciﬁc
form of VRM. The superior performance of SPROUT provides new insights on developing efﬁcient robust training
methods and theoretical analysis via VRM.
• We evaluate the multi-dimensional performance of different training methods on (wide) ResNet and VGG networks
using CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets. Notably, although
SPROUT is attack-independent during training, we ﬁnd
that SPROUT signiﬁcantly outperforms two major adversarial training methods, PGD-ℓ∞adversarial training and TRADES , against the
same type of attacks they used during training. Moreover,
SPROUT is more scalable and runs at least 5× faster than
adversarial training methods. It also attains higher clean accuracy, generalizes better to various invariance tests, and is
less sensitive to network width.
Related Work
Attack-speciﬁc robust training. The seminal work of adversarial training with a ﬁrst-order attack algorithm for
generating adversarial examples has
greatly improved adversarial robustness under the same
threat model (e.g., ℓ∞-norm bounded perturbations) as the
attack algorithm. It has since inspired many advanced adversarial training algorithms with improved robustness. For
instance, TRADES is designed to minimize a theoretically-driven upper bound on prediction error
ofadversarial examples. combined adversarial training with GAN to further improve robustness.
Bilateral adversarial training ﬁnds
robust models by adversarially perturbing the data samples
and as well as the associated data labels. A feature-scattering
based adversarial training method is proposed in . Different from attack-speciﬁc robust training
methods, our proposed SPROUT is free of attack generation,
yet it can outperform attack-speciﬁc methods. Another line
of recent works uses an adversarially trained model along
with additional unlabeled data or self-supervised learning with adversarial examples to improve robustness,
which in principle can also be used in SPROUT but is beyond the scope of this paper.
Attack-independent robust training. Here we discuss related works on Gaussian data augmentation, Mixup and label smoothing. Gaussian data augmentation during training
is a commonly used baseline method to improve model robustness . demonstrated that additive Gaussian noise at
both input and intermediate layers can improve robustness.
 showed that Gaussian
augmentation at the input layer can lead to certiﬁed robustness, which can also be incorporated in the training objective . Mixup and its
variants are
(1 −α)y + αu
(1 −α)y + αf(˜x)
f(x) ◦f(˜x)
(1 −λ)xi + λxj
(1 −λ)yi + λyj
(1 −α)y + αu
PGDϵ(x) (one or two step)
(1 −α)yi + αPGDϵ′(y)
Dirichlet((1 −α)y + αβ)
(1 −λ)N(xi, ∆2) + λN(xj, ∆2)
(1 −λ)yi + λyj
Table 1: Summary of robust training methods using VRM formulation in (4). PGDϵ(·) means (multi-step) PGD attack
with perturbation budget ϵ. Dirichlet(b) is the Dirichlet distribution parameterized by b. GA/LS stands for Gaussian-
Augmentation/Label-Smoothing.
a recently proposed approach to improve model robustness
and generalization by training a model on convex combinations of data sample pairs and their labels. Label smoothing was originally proposed in as a
regularizer to stabilize model training. The main idea is to
replace one-hot encoded labels by assigning non-zero (e.g.,
uniform) weights to every label other than the original training label. Although label smoothing is also shown to beneﬁt
model robustness , its robustness gain is relatively marginal when
compared to adversarial training. In contrast to currently
used static (i.e., pre-deﬁned) label smoothing functions, in
SPROUT we propose a novel parametrized label smoothing scheme, which enables adaptive sampling of training labels from a parameterized distribution on the label simplex.
The parameters of the label distribution are progressively adjusted according to the updates of model weights.
General Framework for Robust Training
The task of supervised learning is essentially learning a Kclass classiﬁcation function f ∈F that has a desirable mapping between a data sample x ∈X and the corresponding
label y ∈Y. Consider a loss function L that penalizes the
difference between the prediction f(x) and the true label y
from an unknown data distribution P, (x, y) ∼P. The population risk can be expressed as
L(f(x), y)P(x, y)dxdy
However, as the distribution P is unknown, in practice machine learning uses empirical risk minimization (ERM) with
the empirical data distribution of n training data {xi, yi}n
Pδ(x, y) = 1
δ(x = xi, y = yi)
to approximate P(x, y), where δ is a Dirac mass. Notably, a
more principled approach is to use Vicinity Risk Minimization (VRM) , deﬁned as
Pν(x, y) = 1
ν(˜x, ˜y|xi, yi)
where ν is a vicinity distribution that measures the probability of ﬁnding the virtual sample-label pair (˜x, ˜y) in the
vicinity of the training pair (xi, yi). Therefore, ERM can
be viewed as a special case of VRM when ν = δ. VRM
has also been used to motivate Mixup training . Based on VRM, we propose a general framework that
encompasses the objectives of many robust training methods
as the following generalized cross entropy loss:
H(˜x, ˜y, f) = −
[log g(f(˜x)k)]h(˜yk)
where f(˜x)k is the model’s k-th class prediction probability
on ˜x, g(·) : R →R is a mapping adjusting the probability
output, and h(·) : R →R is a mapping adjusting the training
label distribution. When ˜x = x, ˜y = y and g = h = I,
where I denotes the identity mapping function, the loss in
(4) degenerates to the conventional cross entropy loss.
Based on the general VRM loss formulation in (4), in Table 1 we summarize a large body of robust training methods
in terms of different expressions of g(·), h(·) and (˜x, ˜y).
For example, the vanilla adversarial training in aims to minimize the loss of adversarial examples generated by the (multi-step) PGD attack with perturbation budget ϵ, denoted by PGDϵ(·). Its training objective
can be rewritten as ˜x = PGDϵ(x), ˜y = y and g = h = I.
In addition to adversarial training only on perturbed samples
of x, Wang and Zhang designs adversarial label perturbation where it uses ˜x = PGDϵ(x), ˜y = (1 −α)y +
αPGDϵ(y), and α ∈ is a mixing parameter. TRADES
 improves adversarial training with an
additional regularization on the clean examples, which is
equivalent to replacing the label mapping function h(·) from
identity to (1 −α)y + αf(˜x). Label smoothing (LS) alone
is equivalent to the setup that g = I, ˜x = x, ˜y = y and
h(·) = (1−α)y+αu, where u is often set as a uniform vector with value 1/K for a K-class supervised learning task.
Joint training with Gaussian augmentation (GA) and label
smoothing (LS) as studied in is equivalent to the case when ˜x = N(x, ∆2), ˜y = y, g = I and
h(y) = (1 −α)y + α/K. We defer the connection between
SPROUT and VRM to the next section.
SPROUT: Scalable Robust Training
In this section, we formally introduce SPROUT, a novel robust training method that automatically ﬁnds a better vicinal
risk function during training in a self-progressing manner.
Self-Progressing Parametrized Label Smoothing
To stabilize training and improve model generalization,
Szegedy et al. introduces label smoothing that converts one-hot label vectors into one-warm vectors representing low-conﬁdence classiﬁcation, in order to prevent a
model from making over-conﬁdent predictions. Speciﬁcally,
the one-hot encoded label y is smoothed using
˜y = (1 −α)y + αu
where α ∈ is the smoothing parameter. A common choice is the uniform distribution u =
K , where K
is the number of classes. Later works use an attack-driven
label smoothing function u to further improve adversarial
robustness. However, both uniform and attack-driven label
smoothing disregard the inherent correlation between labels. To address the label correlation, we propose to use
the Dirichlet distribution parametrized by β ∈RK
+ for label smoothing. Our SPROUT learns to update β to ﬁnd a
training label distribution that is most uncertain to a given
model θ, by solving
L(˜x, ˜y, β; θ)
where ˜y = Dirichlet((1 −α)y + αβ). Notably, instead of
using a pre-deﬁned or attack-driven function for u in label
smoothing, our Dirichlet approach automatically ﬁnds a label simplex by optimizing β. Dirichlet distribution indeed
takes label correlation into consideration as its generated label z = [z1, . . . , zK] has the statistical properties
E[zs] = βs
, Cov[zs, zt] =
0(β0 + 1),
where β0 = PK
k=1 βk and s, t ∈{1, . . . , K}, s ̸= t. Moreover, one-hot label and uniform label smoothing are our
special cases when β = y and β = u, respectively. Our
Dirichlet label smoothing co-trains with the update in model
weights θ during training (see Algorithm 1).
Gaussian Data Augmentation and Mixup
Gaussian augmentation. Adding Gaussian noise to data
samples during training is a common practice to improve model robustness. Its corresponding vicinal function is the Gaussian vicinity function ν(˜xi, ˜yi|xi, yi) =
N(xi, ∆2)δ(˜yi = yi), where ∆2 is the variance of a standard normal random vector. However, the gain of Gaussian
augmentation in robustness is marginal when compared with
adversarial training (see our ablation study). Shafahi et al.
 ﬁnds that combining uniform or attack-driven label
smoothing with Gaussian smoothing can further improve
Algorithm 1 SPROUT algorithm
Input: Training dataset (X, Y ), Mixup parameter λ,
Gaussian augmentation variance ∆2, model learning rate
γθ, Dirichlet label smoothing learning rate γβ and parameter α, generalized cross entropy loss L
Initial model θ: random initialization (train from scratch)
or pre-trained model checkpoint
Initial β: random initialization
for epoch=1, . . . , N do
for minibatch XB ⊂X, YB ⊂Y do
XB ←N(XB, ∆2)
Xmix, Ymix ←Mixup(XB, YB, λ)
Ymix ←Dirichlet(αYmix + (1 −α)β)
gθ ←∇θL(Xmix, Ymix, θ)
gβ ←∇βL(Xmix, Ymix, θ)
θ ←θ −γθgθ
β ←β + γβgβ
adversarial robustness. Therefore, we propose to incorporate Gaussian augmentaion with Dirichlet label smoothing.
The joint vicinity function becomes ν(˜xi, ˜yi|xi, yi, β) =
N(xi, ∆2)δ(˜yi = Dirichlet((1 −α)yi + αβ)). Training
with this vicinity function means drawing labels from the
Dirichlet distribution for the original data sample xi and its
neighborhood characterized by Gaussian augmentation.
Mixup. To further improve model generalization, SPROUT
also integrates Mixup that performs convex combination on pairs of training data samples (in a minibatch) and their labels during training. The vicinity function
of Mixup is ν(˜x, ˜y|xi, yi) = δ(˜x = (1 −λ)xi + λxj, ˜y =
(1−λ)yi+λyj), where λ ∼Beta(a, a) is the mixing parameter drawn from the Beta distribution and a > 0 is the shape
parameter. The Mixup vicinity function can be generalized
to multiple data sample pairs. Unlike Gaussian augmentation which is irrespective of the label (i.e., only adding noise
to xi), Mixup aims to augment data samples on the line segments of training data pairs and assign them convexly combined labels during training.
Vicinity function of SPROUT. With the aforementioned
techniques integrated in SPROUT, the overall vicinity function of SPROUT can be summarized as ν(˜x, ˜y|xi, yi, β) =
λN(xi, ∆2) + (1 −λ)N(xj, ∆2),
Dirichlet((1 −α)((1 −λ)yi + λyj) + αβ).
In the experiment, we will show that Dirichlet label
smoothing, Gaussian augmentation and Mixup are complementary to enhancing robustness by showing their diversity
in input gradients.
SPROUT Algorithm
Using the VRM framework, the training objective of
L(ν( ˜xi, ˜yi|xi, yi, β); θ),
where θ denotes the model weights, n is the number of
training data, L is the generalized cross entropy loss de-
ﬁned in (4) and ν(˜x, ˜y|xi, yi, β) is the vicinity function
of SPROUT. Our SPROUT algorithm co-trains θ and β via
stochastic gradient descent/ascent to solve the outer minimization problem on θ and the inner maximization problem
on β. In particular, for calculating the gradient gβ of the
parameter β, we use the Pytorch implementation based on
 . SPROUT can either
train a model from scratch with randomly initialized θ or
strengthen a pre-trained model. We ﬁnd that training from
either randomly initialized or pre-trained natural models using SPROUT can yield substantially robust models that are
resilient to large perturbations (see Appendix). The training
steps of SPROUT are summarized in Algorithm 1.
We also note that our min-max training methodology is different from the min-max formulation in
adversarial
i=1 maxδi:∥δi∥p≤ϵ L(xi + δi, yi; θ), where ∥δi∥p
denotes the ℓp norm of the adversarial perturbation δi.
While the outer minimization step for optimizing θ can be
identical, the inner maximization of adversarial training requires running multi-step PGD attack to ﬁnd adversarial perturbations {δi} for each data sample in every minibatch
(iteration) and epoch, which is attack-speciﬁc and timeconsuming (see our scalability analysis in Table 6). On the
other hand, our inner maximization is upon the Dirichlet parameter β, which is attack-independent and only requires
single-step stochastic gradient ascent with a minibatch to
update β. We have explored multi-step stochastic gradient
ascent on β and found no signiﬁcant performance enhancement but increased computation time.
Advantages of SPROUT. Comparing to adversarial
training, the training of SPROUT is more efﬁcient and scalable, as it only requires one additional back propagation to
update β in each iteration (see Table 6 for a run-time analysis). As highlighted in Figure 1, SPROUT is also more
comprehensive as it automatically improves robustness in
multiple dimensions owing to its self-progressing training
methodology. Moreover, we ﬁnd that SPROUT signiﬁcantly
outperforms adversarial training and attains larger gain in
robustness as network width increases (see Figure 3), which
makes SPROUT a promising approach to support robust
training for a much larger set of network architectures.
Performance Evaluation
Experiment Setup
Dataset and network structure. We use CIFAR-10 and ImageNet for performance evaluation. For
CIFAR-10, we use both standard VGG-16 and Wide ResNet. The Wide ResNet models are pre-trained PGD-ℓ∞robust models given by adversarial training and TRADES. For VGG-16, we implement
adversarial training with the standard hyper-parameters and
train TRADES using the ofﬁcial implementation. For ImageNet, we use ResNet-152.
Implementation details. As suggested in Mixup , we set the Beta distribution parameter a = 0.2
when sampling the mixing parameter λ. For Gaussian augmentation, we set ∆= 0.1, which is within the suggested
range in . Also, we
set the label smoothing parameter α = 0.01. A parameter
sensitivity analysis on λ and α is given in Appendix. Unless
speciﬁed otherwise, for SPROUT we set the model initialization to be a natural model. An ablation study of model
initialization is given in ablation study.
Adversarial Robustness under Various Attacks
White-box attacks. On CIFAR-10, we compare the model
accuracy under ϵ = 0.03 ≈8/255 strength of white-box
ℓ∞-norm bounded non-targeted PGD attack, which is considered as the strongest ﬁrst-order adversary with an ℓ∞-norm constraint ϵ (normalized between 0
to 1). All PGD attacks are implemented with random starts
and we run PGD attack with 20, 100 and 200 steps in our
experiments. To be noted, we use both PGDX (X-step PGD
with step size ϵ/5). As suggested, we test our model under different steps PGD and multiple random restarts. In
Table 2, we ﬁnd SPROUT achieves 62.24% and 66.23%
robust accuracy on VGG16 and Wide ResNet respectively,
while TRADES and adversarial training are 10-20% worse
than SPROUT. Moreover, we report the results of C&W-
ℓ∞attack in Appendix. Next,
we compare against ℓ2-norm based C&W attack by using the default attack setting with 10 binary search steps
and 1000 iterations per step to ﬁnd successful perturbations while minimizing their ℓ2-norm. SPROUT can achieve
85.21% robust accuracy under ℓ2 ϵ = 0.05 constraint while
Adv train and TRADES achieves 77.76% and 82.58% respectively. It veriﬁes that SPROUT can improve ℓ∞robustness by a large margin without degrading ℓ2 robustness. SPROUT’s accuracy under C&W-ℓ2 attack is similar
to TRADES and is better than both natural and adversarial
training. The results also suggest that the attack-independent
and self-progressing training nature of SPROUT can prevent
the drawback of failing to provide comprehensive robustness
to multiple and simultaneous ℓp-norm attacks in adversarial
training .
Transfer attack. We follow the criterion of evaluating transfer attacks in to inspect
whether the models trained by SPROUT will cause the issue of obfuscated gradients and give a false sense of robustness. We generate 10,000 PGD-ℓ∞adversarial examples
from CIFAR-10 natural models with ϵ = 0.03 and evaluate
their attack performance on the target model. Table 3 shows
SPROUT achieves the best accuracy when compared with
adversarial training and TRADES, suggesting the effectiveness of SPROUT in defending both white-box and transfer
ImageNet results. As many ImageNet class labels carry
similar semantic meanings, to generate meaningful adversarial examples for robustness evaluation, here we follow
the same setup as in 
that adopts PGD-ℓ∞attacks with randomly targeted labels. Table 4 compares the robust accuracy of natural and
SPROUT models. SPROUT greatly improves the robust accuracy across different ϵ values. For example, when ϵ =
Wide-ResNet 20
Table 2: The clean and robust accuracy of VGG-16 and Wide-ResNet 20 models trained by various defense methods. All robust
accuracy results use ϵ = 0.03 ( ℓ∞perturbation). B PGDA denotes an A-step PGD attack with B random restarts.
−0.10−0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10−0.10
(a) Natural
−0.10−0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10−0.10
(b) Adv Train
−0.10−0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10−0.10
(c) TRADES
−0.050.000.05 0.10−0.10
(d) SPROUT
Figure 2: Loss landscape comparison of different training methods
Wide ResNet
Table 3: Robust accuracy of CIFAR-10 under transfer attack
Table 4: Accuracy of ImageNet under PGD-ℓ∞attack
0.01, SPROUT boosts the robust accuracy of natural model
by over 43%. When ϵ = 0.015 ≈4/255, a considerably large adversarial perturbation on ImageNet, SPROUT
still attains about 35% robust accuracy while the natural
model merely has about 2% robust accuracy. Moreover,
comparing the clean accuracy, SPROUT is about 4% worse
than the natural model but is substantially more robust.
We omit the comparison to adversarial training methods as
we are unaware of any public pre-trained robust ImageNet
models of the same architecture (ResNet-152) prior to the
time of our submission, and it is computationally demanding for us to train and ﬁne-tune such large-scale networks
with adversarial training. On our machine, training a natural model takes 31,158.7 seconds and training SPROUT
takes 59,201.6 seconds. Comparing to the run-time analysis, SPROUT has a much better scalability than adversarial
training and TRADES.
Loss Landscape Exploration
To further verify the superior robustness using SPROUT, we
visualize the loss landscape of different training methods in
Figure 2. Following the implementation in , we vary the data input along a linear
space deﬁned by the sign of the input gradient and a random Rademacher vector, where the x- and y- axes represent
the magnitude of the perturbation added in each direction
and the z-axis represents the loss. One can observe that the
loss surface of SPROUT is smoother. Furthermore, it attains
smaller loss variation compared with other robust training
methods. The results provide strong evidence for the capability of ﬁnding more robust models via SPROUT.
Invariance Test
In addition to ℓp-norm bounded adversarial attacks, here we
also evaluate model robustness against different kinds of
input transformations using CIFAR-10 and Wide ResNet.
Speciﬁcally, we change rotation (with 10 degrees), brightness (increase the brightness factor to 1.5), contrast (increase
the contrast factor to 2) and make inputs into grayscale
(average all RGB pixel values). The model accuracy under these invariance tests is summarized in Table 5. The results show that SPROUT outperforms adversarial training
and TRADES. Interestingly, natural model attains the best
accuracy despite the fact that it lacks adversarial robustness,
suggesting a potential trade-off between accuracy in these
invariance tests and ℓp-norm based adversarial robustness.
Brightness
Table 5: Accuracy under invariance tests
Wide ResNet
Table 6: Training-time (seconds) for 10 epochs
Scalability
SPROUT enjoys great scalability over adversarial training
based algorithms because its training requires much less
number of back-propagations per iteration, which is a dominating factor that contributes to considerable run-time in adversarial training. Table 6 benchmarks the run-time of different training methods for 10 epochs. On CIFAR-10, the
run-time of adverarial training and TRADES is about 5×
more than SPROUT.
Ablation Study
Dissecting SPROUT. Here we perform an ablation study using VGG-16 and CIFAR-10 to investigate and factorize the
robustness gain in SPROUT’s three modules: Dirichlet label smoothing (Dirichlet), Gaussian augmentation (GA) and
Mixup. We implement all combinations of these techniques
and include uniform label smoothing (LS) as another baseline. Their accuracies under PGD-ℓ∞
0.03 attack are shown in Table 7. We highlight some important ﬁndings as follows.
• Dirichlet outperforms uniform LS by a signiﬁcant factor,
suggesting the importance of our proposed self-progressing
label smoothing in improving adversarial robustness.
• Comparing the performance of individual modules alone
(GA, Mixup and Dirichlet), our proposed Dirichlet attains
the best robust accuracy, suggesting its crucial role in training robust models.
• No other combinations can outperform SPROUT. Moreover, the robust gains from GA, Mixup and Dirichlet appear
to be complementary, as SPROUT’s accuracy is close to the
sum of their individual accuracy. To justify their diversity in
robustness, we compute the cosine similarity of their pairwise input gradients and ﬁnd that they are indeed quite diverse and thus can promote robustness when used together.
The details are given in Appendix.
Effect on network width. It was shown in that adversarial training (Adv Train) will take effect when a network has sufﬁcient capacity, which can be
achieved by increasing network width. Figure 3 compares
the robust accuracy of SPROUT and Adv Train with varying network width on Wide ResNet and CIFAR-10. When
the network has width = 1 ), the robust accuracy of SPROUT and
Adv Train are both relatively low (less than 47%). However,
as the width increases, SPROUT soon attains signiﬁcantly
better robust accuracy than Adv Train by a large margin
(roughly 15%). Since SPROUT is more effective in boosting robust accuracy as network width varies, the results also
Mixup+Dirichlet
GA+Dirichlet
Uniform LS
Table 7: Robust accuracy under ℓ∞0.03 strength with different combinations of the modules in SPROUT.
ResNet width
Accuracy under attack
ResNet PGD-20 attack with ε = 0.03
Figure 3: Effect of network width against PGD-ℓ∞attack on
CIFAR-10 and ResNet-34.
suggest that SPROUT can better support robust training for
a broader range of network structures.
Conclusion
This paper introduced SPROUT, a self-progressing robust
training method motivated by vicinity risk minimization.
When compared with state-of-the-art adversarial training
based methods, our extensive experiments showed that the
proposed self-progressing Dirichlet label smoothing technique in SPROUT plays a crucial role in ﬁnding substantially more robust models against ℓ∞-norm bounded PGD
attacks and simultaneously makes the corresponding model
more generalizable to various invariance tests. We also ﬁnd
that SPROUT can strengthen a wider range of network
structures as it is less sensitive to network width changes.
Moreover, SPOURT’s self-adjusted learning methodology
not only makes its training free of attack generation but also
becomes scalable solutions to large networks. Our results
shed new insights on devising comprehensive and robust
training methods that are attack-independent and scalable.
Acknowledgments
This work was done during Minhao Cheng’s internship at
IBM Research. Cho-Jui Hsieh and Minhao Cheng are partially supported by National Science Foundation (NSF) under IIS-1901527, IIS-2008173 and Army Research Lab under W911NF-20-2-0158.