Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 1980, 50:449--456
© Elsevier/North-Holland Scientific Publishers, Ltd.
RELATIVE CONTRIBUTIONS OF INTRACORTICAL AND THALAMO-CORTICAL
PROCESSES IN THE GENERATION OF ALPHA RHYTHMS, REVEALED BY PARTIAL
COHERENCE ANALYSIS
F.H. LOPES DA SILVA 1, J.E. VOS 2, j. MOOIBROEK 2 and A. VAN ROTTERDAM 1
1 Brain Research Department, Institute of Medical Physics TNO, Da Costakade 45, Utrecht, and 2 Department of
Developmental Neurology, University of Groningen, Groningen (The Netherlands)
 
A good deal of electroencephalographic
research in man pertains to the alpha rhythms
as recorded from the scalp. In order to under-
stand the neurophysiology of alpha rhythms
one has, however, to resort to studies in other
species which may offer an experimental
model of the human alpha rhythm, for exam-
ple cat and dog have
revealed that intracortical coherences are in
any thalamo-cortical
coherence measured in the same dog. This
entails the following question: are these large
intracortical coherences exclusively due to an
intracortical process independent of thalamic
sources, or not? In other words, the question
is to measure the amount of thalamic influ-
ence on the large intracortical coherences.
One possible way to solve this problem would
be to measure the amount of intracortical
coherence before and after making a thalamic
lesion. This method, however, could lead to a
radical change of the whole physiological
state responsible for the generation of the
alpha rhythm and therefore it would not be
alternative
approach is by way of a signal-analytical
technique by means of which a sort of 'theo-
deafferentation'
achieved. This technique resorts to the compu-
tation of partial coherence functions. Such
functions have been applied already in a few
cases to neurophysiological problems such as
that of spread of epileptiform activity , of the organization of
EEG during development 
and the analysis of seizure patterns within the
cortex . We report
here some of the results obtained with this
method. A more extensive report is published
elsewhere .
Theoretical considerations
Computing partial coherences implies first
eliminating from each of the two signals of a
pair (eg. two cortical signals) that part that
can be considered as being determined by, or
predictable on the basis of, a third signal (e.g.
a thalamic signal). Let us consider the follow-
ing cases: we record alpha rhythms from two
cortical areas and one thalamic area; the
former are the signals C1 and C2; the latter is
the signal the. We assume that C~ and C2 may
contain contributions which are determined
by thl, and for which linear least-square pre-
dictions can be computed based on the
knowledge of th~ and on the cross power
spectra between both th~ and C~, and th~ and
C2. When we correct C1 and C2 for these 'pre-
dictable' contributions we can compute the
F.H. LOPES DA SILVA ET AL.
(partial) coherence between the residual sig-
nals as follows:
[ Crclc 2'[hi (f) I 2
C°hclc2 "thl (f) = ~ClCl "thl (f) Ac2c2 "thl(f)
where the residual spectra are defined as follows:
Crclc 2 "thl (f)
Athlth 1 (f)Crclc2(f) J
fikClCl.th 1 (f) = fikClCm(f ) [1 -- COhclth 1 (f)]
fikc2c2.th 1 (f) = .~C2C2(f) [1 -- Cohc2th 1 (f)]
where Cr is the estimated cross power spectra,
.~ is the estimated autospectra and COhclthl,
magnitude-
squared coherences, called coherences in the
remainder of this paper. The estimated coher-
ence between C1 and C2 partialized on thl is
given by Cohclc2 • thl(f).
Material and methods
Tb ~ investigation was done in the same
dogs as used before . The relevant epochs of the EEGs of
thalamic and cortical sites recorded for the
previous study had been stored on digital tape
and therefore could be used again for com-
puting partial coherence functions. In sum-
mary, we used records of alpha rhythms ob-
tained by way of two types of electrode: (a)
bundles of 3--7 wires (100 pm diameter) insu-
lated to 0.5 (thalamic sites) or 1 mm (cortical
sites) from the tip; (b) sheets of wires with
uninsulated surfaces of 0.15--0.20 mm which
were embedded in a polyethylene sheet less
than 0.5 mm thick. The bundles by way of
which alpha rhythms were recorded, were
inserted in the marginal gyms (dog C) and in
the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) and pul-
vinar nucleus. The sheets were placed under
the dura either over the occipital marginal
gyrus or over the mesial cortex above the cal-
carine region. The positions of the electrodes
were confirmed post mortem by histological
examination (sections of the brain 15 pm
thick stained by Kltiver or Nissl methods).
Derivations were made in general against one
common electrode, a stainless steel pin placed
in the frontal bone at the level of the frontal
sinus. As some electrodes were placed in areas
free of alpha rhythms the degrees of 'indiffer-
ence' of the common electrode as regards the
phenomenon being studied could be deter-
mined. Recording was by means of a 16-
channel radiotelemetry system . The signals were
further amplified by a 16~channel EEG Off-
ner-Beckman dynograph and stored on mag-
netic tape (EMI) simultaneously with a time
code. The epochs of EEG used for analysis
were selected on the basis of the presence of
alpha rhythms. They were digitized by way of
an 8-channel analogue-to<ligital
converter.
The signals were passed by anti-aliasing filters
with a band between 0.5 and 30 c/sec. The
sampling frequency was 80/sec. Analysed
epochs consisted either of 1024 (duration
12.8 sec) or of 256 sample points (duration
3.2 sec). The digitized signals were stored on
DEC tape (PDP 9 computer). The same tapes
as used in the previous study were analysed
again by way of the PDP 15 computer at the
University of Groningen, using the partial
coherence program developed there .
The statistical evaluation of the results was
done as follows: in order to improve the reli-
ability of the estimates of spectra and coher-
ences we performed ensemble averaging. Co-
herence functions were treated statistically by
way of the z-transformation in a similar way
to that usually employed for the correlation
coefficient. In this way the square root of the
coherence function (i.e. of the coherence as
defined by eq. 1) was first taken and then
the z-transform was computed. The corre-
sponding standard deviation was calculated
using the formula: 1/x/N-- 3 where N was 80 for the
cases of dogs D and R, and 40 for dog C. In
order to quantify in an explicit way the results
obtained by using partial coherences we
decided to formulate these results as the dif-
ference between the ordinary coherence for a
particular frequency and the corresponding
partial coherence; these differences were then
expressed in terms of the standard deviation
(S.D.) of the ordinary coherence. Moreover
we tested whether the z-transformed partial
coherence values differed significantly from
the corresponding values of the ordinary
coherence using the t test. t = [(~--x2)/
(x/-2~ X S.D.)] should be >2.358 in order to
accept a difference between 2 means as signif-
icant at P< 0.01 (df=2X80--2
cases of dogs D and R, and df = 2 X 40 -- 2 for
the case of dog C). In our case xl --~2 = Az;
for the cases where N = 80 a value Az > 0.372
S.D. should be reached in order for the differ-
ence to be accepted as significant at P < 0.01;
for the case where N = 40 it should be Az >
0.527 S.D.
Effects of eliminating thalamic components
on cortico-cortical coherences in the alpha
For most pairs of cortical signals investi-
gated in all dogs there was a significant (P <
0.01) decrease of the coherence after partiali-
zation, indicating that the thalamic signal
contributed to the alpha rhythms recorded
from both cortical sites, as shown in Fig. 1.
A remarkable feature of the results ob-
tained by partialization was that the effect of
removing the influence of the LGN signals on
cortico~ortical
coherences
although significant, in all cases investigated.
For dog D the maximal decrease in coherence
was 1.8 X S.D.; for dog R it was 2 S.D. and
for dog C it was 1 S J:). In contrast, the effect
of eliminating the influence of the signal from
the pulvinar was, in all cases, much larger than
that of removing the LGN signal, as also
shown in Table I and Fig. 1. From this it can
be concluded that the extent of the influence
pulvinar over the cortical alpha
rhythms was much greater than that of the
One point to be examined is the value of
the remaining cortico-cortical coherence after
partialization on a thalamic signal. In this case
two groups of results may be distinguished:
remained appreciable and (b) those where it
decreased to negligible values. Most cases
studied were of the former type; the latter
cases were all combinations including the
marginal gyrus and one mesial cortical signal
(D8, D15; D8, D17) in dog D when the influ-
ence of the pulvinar (D27) was eliminated
(Table I). These findings lead to the following
conclusions: although a remarkable effect of
thalamic signals on the degree of coherence
between cortical alpha rhythms could be
demonstrated, there must exist other factors
which are responsible for the remaining large
values of intracortical partial coherences; in
some cases, however, such as between the
alpha rhythms of marginal gyms and mesial
cortex sites in dog D, the coherence in the
alpha band was determined almost exclusively
by the influence of a thalamic signal, that of
the pulvinar (D27). This experimental result is
shown in Fig. 1; in this figure it can be seen
that by eliminating the influence of D27 the
coherence between D8 (marginal gyms) and
D15 (mesial cortex) in the alpha band (12--13
Hz) decreased to negligible values; approxi-
mately the same happened by eliminating the
influence of the signal recorded from neigh-
bouring sites at the mesial cortex (D13 or
difference
between the partial coherence components at
a frequency double that of the alpha band:
the effect of partialization by way of the
thalamic signal (D27) was negligible at this
frequency whereas that of partialization by
way of the mesial cortex signals (D13 or D17)
was appreciable, mainly that of D17. This dis-
sociation of frequency components by way
of partialization is an indication that different
F.H. LOPES DA SILVA ET AL.
Ist ROW: OR/]INARY COHEKENCE
i: D8 x 5: DIS
OTHER ROWS:
PARTIAL COHERENCES WHERE THE 3rd sIGNAL IS AS INDICATED BELOW
I ..4.s mm
Fig. 1. A: dog D: ordinary and partial coherences for a number of electrode combinations, the placements of
which are indicated on the left. The ordinary coherence between D8 and D15 is shown in the first trace. The
effect of partialization using other cortical or thalamic signals is shown in other traces (Dg, Dll, D13, D17, D10);
these are from the ipsilateral cortex and D6 from the contralateral cortex; D20 from LGN and D27 from pul-
vinar. Note the large decrease in coherence, mainly within the alpha band, from partialization using other cortical
signals (D13 and D17) and also D27. B: electrode placements for dogs R and C (see Table I).
GENERATION OF ALPHA RHYTHMS
Summary of the effect on cortico-cortical coherences of
ments see Fig. 1).
thalamic signals in the alpha band (for electrode place-
electrodes
Ordinary coherences (Coh)
D27 (pulvinar)
Difference (Az) between the z-transformed (Coh) 1/2
after partialization on the signal recorded from
thalamic sites and the Zcoh: Az = q × S.D.
Note: for cases D and R is the standard deviation of the z-transformed (Coh) 1/2 S.D. = 0.10; a significant (P <
0.01) effect of partialization is considered when Az > 0.372 S.D.; for case C is the standard deviation of
z(Coh) U2 S.D. = 0.16; in this case is Az > 0.527 S.D. at P < 0.01 ; n.s. = non-significant or P > 0.01.
spectral frequency components have different
sources and spatial distributions. In a small
number of cases the effect of partialization
was an increase in coherence value as indi-
cated by a + sign in Table I. This occurred in
those cases in which there was a large differ-
ence in coherence between the thalamic site
and the two cortical sites of one pair, as fol-
lows: Coh (D20, D13)= 0.40 whereas Coh
(D20, Dll)=0.02;
Coh (R2, R19)=0.14
whereas Coh (R2, R18)= 0.07; Coh (C23,
C10) = 0.28 whereas Coh (C23, Cll) = 0.04.
In these cases the effect of partialization was
to eliminate what we may call a 'one-sided'
thalamo-cortical component, i.e., a compo-
nent which was not shared by both cortical
between the 2 cortical sites increased.
F.H. LOPES DA SILVA ET AL.
When a large coherence between two alpha
rhythm signals is present or an appreciable
effect of partialization is found, we can con-
clude that there are alpha rhythm compo-
nents which are common to signals recorded
from different sites. The question which in
these cases must be answered is whether those
common frequency components result from a
passive process -- volume conduction of the
electrical potential -- or whether they are
determined by processes of active propagation
of neural activity. In the former case the
phase difference between the two signals
should be zero; in the latter a phase which is
significantly different from zero should be
encountered. It is therefore of importance to
examine the phase angles of those combina-
tions of signals which presented large coher-
ences and on which the effect of partializa-
tion was considerable (i.e., partial coherence
decreased to a negligible value, ~0.10).
We found that the pulvinar signal which
was responsible for a large decrease in intra-
cortical coherences after partialization pre-
sented a phase difference of --101.5 ° ± 5 ° in
relation to D17 and --68 ° ± 7 ° in relation to
D15; translated into the time domain these
values correspond to, respectively,
21.1 ± 2.1 msec and 17.6 ± 2 msec. It is inter-
esting to relate these findings to the phase
angle found between the LGN (C23) and the
cortical site where the largest coherence (0.56
at 12.1 Hz) was encountered: this was the
combination C23, C10 with the last electrode
situated in the marginal gyms: the time delay
computed in this case was 13 ± 4 msec.
Discussion
The results of partial coherence analysis
obtained by eliminating the influence of tha-
lamic signals within the alpha frequency band,
upon cortical areas, are clear in showing that a
model based on point-to-point thalamo~orti-
cal projections cannot be accepted to explain
the organization of thalamo-cortical alpha
rhythms. Therefore we conclude that a model
based on multiple projections from a thalamic
neuronal population to several cortical areas
should be preferred. The projections could be
realized either by way of ramifications of
thalamo-cortical afferents or by way of intra-
cortical projections. Of course, we have first
to eliminate the possibility that the large
effects of partialization might be due to
spread of electrical potentials in the brain due
to the passive process of volume conduction.
We have demonstrated here that such a possi-
bility cannot explain, by itself, our results
significant
between signals recorded from different corti-
cal and thalamic sites. Similarly, we demon-
strated previously that there are also signifi-
cant phase shifts over the surface of the mar-
ginal gyms . Since alpha rhythms have
been shown to originate in layers IV and V of
the visual cortex it has been hy-
pothesized that in the cortex there exist 'epi-
centres' of alpha activity from which this activ-
ity spreads in different directions with rela-
tively low 'apparent velocities of propaga-
tion', of the order of 0.3 m/sec.
The time delays measured between thala-
mic sites -- pulvinar and LGN -- and cortex
are reported here for the first time; they cor-
respond most certainly to the transmission of
neural activity in the thalamo-cortical path-
ways. The difference between pulvinar-and
LGN-cortical time delays indicate that, as
regards the generation of alpha rhythms, the
former correspond to slower pathways.
Another difference between pulvinar and
LGN cortical relations was the much larger
and more widespread influence of the former
cortico-cortical coherences within the
alpha band. In particular, the pulvinar's influ-
ence was most pronounced on the mesial cor-
tex neighbouring the marginal gyms. This area
corresponds in general terms to the area of
projection of pulvinar afferents (mainly area
18) as studied in detail in other species than
the dog . Histological analysis of the afferents of
area 18 in squirrel monkeys led to the conclu-
GENERATION OF ALPHA RHYTHMS
sion that there is, in this as in other cortical
sensory areas, overlapping or interweaving of
thalamic and cortical afferents ; whether this is also the case in
the dog is, of course, still a question. How-
ever, such a pattern of extensive overlapping
of pulvinar-cortical afferents with intracorti-
cal connections would provide the structural
basis which would explain the results ob-
tained in the present investigation using par-
tial coherence analysis.
Notwithstanding the effects of thalamic
cortico-cortical
coherences
should be emphasized that the residual coher-
ences measured between signals recorded over
the mesial cortex were still very large. This
implies that there must be other factors which
are responsible for the large intracortical
coherence. It is possible that there are thala-
mo-cortical afferents involved in the genera-
tion of the alpha rhythms which bifurcate and
project to patches of cortex . However, it is not likely that such
a system of bifurcation would be able to
account for the large cortical areas over which
coherent activity in the alpha band was
encountered. Therefore, we consider more
likely that an alternative may provide the sub-
strate for explaining the present results. We
consider as possible anatomical substrates the
system of surface-parallel intracortical fibres
which may extend over a distance of 6--8
mm, together with a pyramidal collateral
spread module which extends over about 3
mm .
This would also provide the structural basis
for the spread of alpha activity from cortical
epicentres over the surface of the cortex, as
explained above. Theoretical investigations
(Van Rotterdam et al. in preparation) indicate
that this spread can be accounted for by a
system of excitatory and inhibitory intracor-
tical connections in which the influence of
each neurone decays exponentially with dis-
tance, with a characteristic length of the order
of a few hundreds of microns. Furthermore,
the terminals of subcortical projections of dif-
ferent origins end up in overlapping cortical
modules so that distinct, although neighbour-
ing, cortical modules share common inputs.
Indeed, if such a system did not exist we
should be left with a patchy non~verlapping
assembly of cortical modules, each with its
own type of EEG activity, with little intracor-
tical coherence; it would be almost impossible
in such a case to record an EEG at a relative
large distance from the cortex.
The present results have been obtained by
way of a method which we may call a 'theo-
retical thalamic deafferentation'; the advan-
tages offered by this signal analytical meth-
odology over a real experimental deafferenta-
tion are certainly of importance, since in this
way we can 'disconnect' brain areas one from
the other without changing, by introducing
lesions, the system which we want to study.
The thalamo-cortical relationships of alpha
rhythms have been analysed in dogs using par-
tial coherence function analysis. The objective
was to clarify how far the large intracortical
coherence commonly recorded between dif-
ferent cortical sites could depend on a com-
mon thalamic site. It was found that the alpha
rhythm of the LGN influenced only moder-
ately the coherence between cortical alpha
rhythms whereas that of the pulvinar had
much more influence, at least in relation to
some cortical areas. Significant phase shifts
between thalamus and cortex were also mea-
sured. The results demonstrate that there are
thalamo-cortical and cortico-cortical compo-
nents which interact in the generation of cor-
tical alpha rhythms.
Contributions relatives des processus intracor-
ticaux et thalamo-corticaux dans la gendse des
rythmes alpha, mises en gvidence par l'analyse
de cohdrence partielle
Les relations entre le thalamus et le cortex
pendant les rythmes alpha ont dt~ analys~es
F.H. LOPES DA SILVA ET AL.
chez le chien en utilisant la m~thode de
l'analyse de coherence partielle. Le but ~tait
de d~terminer dans quelle mesure les valeurs
~lev~es de la coherence intra-corticale d~pen-
dent de l'activit~ d'une r~gion d~termin~e et
commune du thalamus. On a trouv~ que
tandis que l'influence du CGL ~tait relative-
ment faible, celle du pulvinar' ~tait beaucoup
plus grande, au moins en ce qui conceme cer-
taines aires corticales. Des relations de phase
significatives entre le thalamus et le cortex
ont ~galement ~t~ mesur~es. Ces r~sultats
montrent qu'il existe des composantes thala-
mo-corticales et cortico-corticales qui inter-
fbrent dans la gen~se de l'activit~ alpha.