Fast and Adaptive Detection of Pulmonary Nodules in Thoracic
CT Images Using a Hierarchical Vector Quantization Scheme
Department of Radiology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794 USA
( )
Lihong Li [Senior Member, IEEE],
Department of Engineering Science and Physics, College of Staten Island of The City University
of New York, Staten Island, NY 10314 USA
Fangfang Han,
Northeastern University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110819 China
Bowen Song,
Department of Radiology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794 USA
William Moore, and
Department of Radiology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794 USA
Zhengrong Liang* [Fellow, IEEE]
Department of Radiology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794 USA
Computer-aided detection (CADe) of pulmonary nodules is critical to assisting radiologists in
early identification of lung cancer from computed tomography (CT) scans. This paper proposes a
novel CADe system based on a hierarchical vector quantization (VQ) scheme. Compared with the
commonly-used simple thresholding approach, high-level VQ yields a more accurate segmentation
of the lungs from the chest volume. In identifying initial nodule candidates (INCs) within the
lungs, low-level VQ proves to be effective for INCs detection and segmentation, as well as
computationally efficient compared to existing approaches. False-positive (FP) reduction is
conducted via rule-based filtering operations in combination with a feature-based support vector
machine classifier. The proposed system was validated on 205 patient cases from the publically
available on-line LIDC (Lung Image Database Consortium) database, with each case having at
least one juxta-pleural nodule annotation. Experimental results demonstrated that our CADe
system obtained an overall sensitivity of 82.7% at a specificity of 4 FPs/scan, and 89.2%
sensitivity at 4.14 FPs/scan for the classification of juxta-pleural INCs only. With respect to
comparable CADe systems, the proposed system shows outperformance and demonstrates its
potential for fast and adaptive detection of pulmonary nodules via CT imaging.
*telephone: 631-444-2508, . .
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
 
IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. 2015 March ; 19(2): 648–659. doi:10.1109/JBHI.2014.2328870.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Computer-aided detection; CT imaging; false positive reduction; lung nodules; vector quantization
I. Introduction
According to the up-to-date statistics from American Cancer Society , lung cancer is the
leading cause of cancer-related deaths with over 159,000 deaths estimated for the United
States alone in 2013, and the overall 5-year survival rate for lung cancer is merely 16%. The
survival rate increases to 52% if it is localized, and decreases to 4% if it has metastasized.
Therefore, to detect lung cancer at earlier stages is of great importance , and computeraided detection (CADe) in supplement to radiologists’ diagnosis has become a promising
tool to serve such purposes .
While detection of pulmonary nodules has a crucial effect on the diagnosis of lung cancer,
but the detection is a nontrivial task, not only because the density of pulmonary nodules
varies in a wide range, but also because the nodule densities have low contrast against
adjacent vessel segments and other lung tissues. Computed tomography (CT) has been
shown as the most popular imaging modality for nodule detection , , because it has the
ability to provide reliable image features for the detection of small nodules. The
development of lung nodule CADe systems using CT imaging modality has made good
progress over the past decade , . Generally, such CADe systems consist of three stages:
(1) image preprocessing, (2) initial nodule candidates (INCs) identification, and (3) false
positive (FP) reduction of the INCs with preservation of the true positives (TPs).
In the preprocessing stage, the system aims to largely reduce the search space to the lungs,
where a segmentation of the lungs from the entire chest volume is usually required. Because
of the high image contrast between lung fields and the surrounding body tissue, image
intensity-based simple thresholding is effective, and is currently the most commonly used
technique for lung segmentation , . However, the determination of an accurate
threshold is greatly affected by image acquisition protocols, scanner types, as well as the
inhomogeneity of intensities in the lung region, especially towards the segmentation of
pathological lungs with severe pathologies , . This work proposes an adaptive
solution to mitigate the difficulty of threshold method in lung segmentation.
After defining the search space (i.e., the lung volume), INCs detection is the next step to
build a CADe system. Various INCs detection techniques have been extensively studied in
recent years, such as multiple thresholding , , nodule enhancement filtering ,
 , mathematical morphology , , and genetic algorithm template matching ,
 , among many others. The most commonly used multiple thresholding approach aims to
find connected components of similar image gray-values. Though intensity-based
thresholding methods are computationally cheaper than other pattern-recognition techniques
for the detection of INCs, they also suffer considerable drawback. For example, it is difficult
to adaptively and simultaneously determine the thresholds, because pulmonary nodules with
a wide range of image intensity are embedded in an inhomogeneous parenchyma
background. On the other hand, pattern-recognition techniques are complicated and usually
Han et al.
IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
computational intensive. This work proposes an efficient means which shares the adaptive
natures of pattern-recognition techniques and the simplicity of intensity-based thresholding
Sufficient detection power for nodule candidates is inevitably accompanied by many
(obvious) FPs. A rule-based filtering operation , , is often employed to cheaply
and drastically reduce the number of obvious FPs, so that their influence on the
computationally more expensive learning process can be eliminated. In general, FP
reduction has been extensively studied using machine learning in the literature. Compared
with unsupervised learning that aims to find hidden structures in unlabeled data, supervised
learning, which aims to infer a function from labeled training data, is more frequently used
to design a CADe system. The rules learned from the training dataset can be applied to the
differentiation between nodules and non-nodules in the test dataset. A number of supervised
FP reduction techniques have been reported for the characterization of INCs, such as linear
discriminant analysis (LDA) , , artificial neural network (ANN) , - , and
support vector machine (SVM) , , . The last step to complete a CADe system is
to evaluate its performance for FP reduction. In this respect, receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) analysis has been widely acknowledged as a powerful tool to judge the
performance of a classification system. This work takes the advantages of the rule-based
filtering operation and the supervised learning for FP reduction and can be summarized
Inspired by our previous work , we have proposed a hierarchical vector quantization
(VQ) approach to address the preprocessing and INCs detection issues in an adaptive
manner, aiming to overcome the drawbacks of global thresholding methods. Compared with
the existing approaches, the hierarchical VQ can be an alternative with either comparable
detection performance and less computational cost, or comparable cost and better detection
performance. To reduce FPs in the detected INCs, we make use of both rule-based filtering
and supervised learning. Expert rules are learned from prior knowledge of true nodules
annotated by the radiologists, while the classification rule for SVM is learned from two
dimensional (2D) and 3D features extracted from the INCs.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the details of each
module employed in the proposed CADe system. Section 3 reports the experimental
outcomes on validating the proposed CADe system using the largest publicly available
database built by the Lung Image Database Consortium and Image Database Resource
Initiative (LIDC-IDRI). Section 4 discusses the experimental results, the advantages and
disadvantages of the proposed CADe system, as well as the future work to improve the
CADe system. The last section draws conclusions of this study.
II. Methods
This section will provide details of the proposed CADe system for lung nodules. The toplevel block diagram of the proposed CADe system is depicted in Fig. 1. In the preprocessor
block, the chest volume is extracted from the field-of-view (FOV) of the image volume by
simple thresholding . In the detector block, the two lungs are first separated from their surrounding
anatomical structures via high level VQ and a connected component analysis. In order to
include juxta-pleural nodules (i.e., nodules grow near, or originated from the parenchyma
wall), the initial lung mask obtained by the above separation operation is refined by a
morphological closing operation. Then low level VQ is employed to identify and segment
the INCs within the extracted lung volume. In the classifier block, the obvious FPs are firstly
excluded from the INCs via rule-based filtering operations, and then the SVM classifier is
trained to further separate nodules from non-nodules based on the 2D and 3D features of the
INCs. More details on the proposed CADe system are given by the following sections.
A. Self-adaptive VQ Algorithm for Image Segmentation
VQ was originally used for data compression in signal processing , and becomes
popular in a variety of research fields such as speech recognition , face detection ,
image compression and classification , and image segmentation , , . It
allows for the modeling of probability density functions by the distribution of prototype
vectors. The general VQ framework evolves two processes: (1) the training process which
determines the set of codebook vector according to the probability of the input data; and (2)
the encoding process which assigns input vectors to the codebook vectors. The well-known
Linde-Buzo-Gray (LBG) algorithm has been widely used for the design of vector quantizer
 . The algorithm aims to minimize the mean squared error and guarantees to converge to
the local optimality. However, the following properties of the LBG algorithm limit its
application in image segmentation: (1) it relies on the initial conditions, and (2) it requires
an iterative procedure and long computation times. Hence in our previous work, the selfadaptive online VQ scheme was proposed to speed up the vector quantizer, where the
training and encoding processes are conducted in a parallel manner.
Medical image segmentation is the key step toward quantifying the shape and volume of
different types of tissues in a given image modality, which are used for 3D display and
feature analysis to facilitate diagnosis and therapy. The main idea of VQ for image
segmentation is to classify voxels based on their local intensity distribution rather than
voxel-based intensities. The local intensity distribution can be described by a vector of local
intensities. Fig. 2 illustrates three typical configurations of the local intensity vector that can
be used by the VQ algorithm, and in this study the 3D first order neighborhood was chosen
to form the local intensity feature vector. Chest CT volume data consists of a very large
number of body voxels, where each voxel has a local intensity vector. This requires
intensive computing effort to process such a huge quantity of vectors. To greatly reduce the
computational complexity, a feature extraction algorithm can be applied in the local
feature vector space. For each specific 3D volume, upon a linear Karhunen-Loéve (K-L)
transformation of the local intensity vectors via the principal component analysis (PCA), we
choose the first few principal components (PCs) that contribute at least 95% of the total
variance for optimizing the dimension of the local vector space. Only the selected PCs will
be retained to form the feature vector for VQ, and the remaining PCs with very little
information will be neglected.
Han et al.
IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
VQ models the local statistics, analyzes group features and classifies each voxel in the
dimension-reduced feature space. VQ scans from the first voxel to the last one in a
contiguous manner. For a given volume of interest (VOI), there is only one class at the
beginning (i.e., the current total number of classes K’ = 1) and its representative vector c1 is
the local feature vector of the first voxel. Since the initial value setup is data-oriented, the
VQ algorithm is fully automatic. For each following voxel i, the squared Euclidean distance
between its local feature vector ωi and the representative vector ck of every existing class k
= 1, …, K’ is calculated by
Here the local feature vector ωi and each representative vector ck are both of dimension P,
which was previously determined by PCA. The finite set codebook CB = {c1, c2, …, cK’} is
then exhaustively searched for the nearest codevector cmin such that
Let T denote the threshold for inter-cluster distance, so that if d(ωi, cmin) > T, a new class K’
= K’ + 1 is generated subject to the constraint of maximum class number K. Otherwise, if
d(ωi, cmin) = d(ωi, ck) < T or K’ = K, the representative vector ck of the current class k is
updated after adding a new member xi into the class k. After a whole scan of the VOI, the
representative vector, prior probability, and covariance of each cluster are generated.
Meanwhile, all voxels have been classified under the nearest neighbor rule, where the
exhaustive search under condition of Eq. (2) ensures the optimal classification result. As
described above, our VQ algorithm only depends on two parameters: K and T. The
maximum class number K can be determined according to radiologists’ prior knowledge of
how many major tissue types are perceived in the specific VOI. For instance in chest CT
images, the lungs usually consist of four major tissue types: low and high frequency
parenchyma, blood vessels, and nodules. And their average intensities increase from the
lowest to the highest. To set an appropriate value for the classification threshold T is more
crucial than the setting of K. If T is too large, only one class could be obtained. On the other
hand, if T is too small, redundant classes might occur. According to extensive numerical
experiments, a robust choice for T would be the maximum principle component variance of
the local intensity vector series. In addition, to avoid the situation of resulting class number
being less than the expected number of tissue types, the class separation threshold T may be
tuned to be the second or third maximum principal component variance. Since the similarity
threshold T is estimated from each CT scan, the algorithm is self-adaptive. The proposed
VQ-based image segmentation algorithm is outlined as follows.
Perform PCA to obtain the K-L transformation matrix for the target VOI, determine
the reduced dimension P for the local intensity vector space, and calculate the K-L
transformed local intensity vector ωi = {ωi1, ωi2, …, ωiP} for each voxel i = 1, …,
Han et al.
IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Set the classification threshold T as the maximum principal component variance,
and set a value for the maximum class number K based on prior anatomical
knowledge.
i = 1, set the first voxel label ν1 = 1, its local intensity vector ω1 as the
representative vector c1 for the first class, n1 = 1 as the number of voxels belonging
to class 1, and K’ = 1 as the current number of classes.
i = i + 1, calculate the squared Euclidean distance d(ωi, ck) between the local
intensity vector ωi of the current voxel and the representative vector ck for each
existing class k = 1, …, K’.
Let d(ωi, cm) = min1≤j≤K’{d(ωi, cj)}, if d(ωi, cm) < T or K’ = K, the label for the i-th
voxel is νi = m. cm is updated by cm = (nm*cm + ωi) / (nm + 1), and nm = nm + 1.
Otherwise, a new class K’ = K’ + 1 is generated with representative vector cK’ = ωi,
and the current voxel is labeled as vi = K’ s.t. K’ <= K.
Repeat from step 4 until i = I to complete a whole scan.
If K’ < K, repeat steps 1) to 6) for another whole scan while setting the
classification threshold T to be the second or third maximum principal component
variance until K’ = K.
In this paper, we mainly focus on demonstrating the merits of our hierarchical VQ scheme in
the detection of INCs, from where a novel CADe system is proposed to efficiently detect
pulmonary nodules. The detection is detailed below.
B. INCs Detection via a Hierarchical VQ Scheme
A very important but difficult task in the CADe of lung nodules is the detection of INCs,
which aims to search for suspicious 3D objects as nodule candidates using specific
strategies. This step is required to be characterized by a sensitivity that is as close to 100%
as possible, in order to avoid setting a priori upper bound on the CADe system performance.
Meanwhile, the INCs should minimize the number of FPs to ease the following FP reduction
step. This section presents our hierarchical VQ scheme for automatic detection and
segmentation of INCs. Due to the higher in-plane resolution, both the high level and low
level VQ employ 3D first order neighbors of each voxel to form the local intensity vector.
1) Lung Segmentation by High Level VQ—First of all, since the chest CT images in
the LIDC database were acquired under different scanning protocols, a standardization of
CT intensities was carried out to preprocess our target datasets. Then by imposing an
empirical threshold of −500 HU , on the entire CT scan, we could separate the chest
body volume from the surrounding materials, such as air, fastening belts, CT bed, and other
background materials.
In order to ensure nodule detection being performed within the lung volume, the
segmentation of lungs from the body volume is desired. Fig. 3 shows the histogram plot of
the intensity of chest body volume from a typical lung CT scan, where we observe a clear
separation of two major classes (i.e. the air tissue and other dense body tissue). Hence, it is
reasonable to use the proposed high level VQ for body voxels with these two major classes
Han et al.
IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
for segmentation. Of note, “high level” in the context of this paper refers to the operation of
segmenting lungs from the entire chest volume. Since the lung parenchyma and the air in
other organs have similar image intensities, they were classified into the low-intensity class.
Most existing approaches utilize the outcome from simple thresholding to extract lungs from
the chest volume. Though thresholding is computationally inexpensive, the associated side
effect, called “salt and pepper” noise , diminishes the computational advantage.
Furthermore, because of relatively high image contrast between pathologic abnormalities
and normal lung parenchyma, it is known that the conventional thresholding methods fail to
extract complete lungs from such scans . The proposed high level VQ scheme can avoid
the failure on lung boundary corrections, as shown by the rectangular regions marked in Fig.
4. Although both thresholding and VQ are intensity-based approaches, VQ classifies each
voxel based on its local intensity features rather than the single voxel intensity used by
simple thresholding. Moreover, most simple thresholding approaches set a uniform
threshold for all CT scans, which is unrealistic, while the similarity threshold in VQ is
adaptively determined for each scan. This makes VQ more robust to intensity
inhomogeneity and image noise.
By the high level VQ scheme, the obtained initial lung mask corresponds to the largest and
the second largest (if left and right lungs are disconnected due to pathologic abnormalities)
connected components in the low-intensity class, where the holes inside the extracted lung
mask are filled by a flood-fill operation. Furthermore, in order to include juxta-pleural
nodules into consideration, a 3D morphological closing operation using a spherical
structuring element of radius 15 mm is applied to close the boundary in the binary lung
2) INCs Detection by Low Level VQ—After extraction of the lungs from the entire
chest volume by using the high level VQ, the low level VQ aims to simultaneously detect
and segment nodules from the much smaller lung volume or VOI. Hereby, “low level” also
indicates the operation of VQ with a more diversified classification compared to the high
level VQ. In contrast to the high-level classification in the first stage, the low-level VQ in
the second stage becomes more challenging when it comes to the determination of an
appropriate value for the maximum class number K.
Fig. 5 shows the histogram plot of lung voxel intensities from one chest CT scan of the
LIDC datasets. Recall the CT distribution of chest body volume in Fig. 3, Fig. 5 indeed
depicts the distribution of the leftmost component in Fig. 3. Statistically, the observed
distribution in Fig. 5 consists of both high frequency and low frequency parts. Each part is
asymmetric and left skewed, which can be decomposed into two Gaussian components.
Hence this intensity distribution can be eventually represented by four Gaussian mixtures in
total. Based on physicians’ input, we interpret the four classes as low-frequency
parenchyma, high-frequency parenchyma, blood vessels, and INCs.
To experimentally determine an appropriate value for the maximum class number K, we
conducted repeated experiments of applying VQ to lung voxel classification with different K
values. Consistent with our previous observation, we found that the four-class setting
Han et al.
IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
yielded the most stable segmentation result across different scans. Since the average
intensity of lung nodules is relatively higher than the other three types of tissues, the class
with the highest average intensity was extracted as the INCs class. The flowchart of the
proposed hierarchical VQ scheme for INCs detection is illustrated through Fig. 6.
C. False Positive Reduction from INCs
1) Rule-based Filtering Operations—It is challenging for any intensity-based detector
to thoroughly separate nodules from attached structures due to their similar intensities,
especially for the juxta-vascular nodules (the nodules attached to blood vessels). Since the
thickness of blood vessels varies considerably (e.g., from small veins to large arteries), a 2D
morphological opening disk with radius of 1 up to 5 pixels was adopted to detach vessels at
different degrees. Of note, 2D rather than 3D opening operation is favored here because of
the anisotropic nature of the LIDC data, where 2D operations have been found to outperform
3D operations for relatively thick-slice data . Since vessels in lung parenchyma appear
to have various radii, opening disks of different radii were adopted to treat varying levels of
vessel attachment. In order to keep small nodules while removing attached vessels, the lower
bound of opening disk radius was set to be the smallest - - one pixel. The upper bound of 5
pixels was experimentally determined by examining the sensitivity for annotated nodules in
the LIDC training dataset.
The rule-based filtering operations were separately conducted for INCs obtained at each
opening level, as well as for the original INCs without opening operation to preserve small
solitary nodules. Therefore, there are four levels of INCs for rule-based filtering operations,
and the final INCs to enter the SVM classification are formed by a logical union operation
of the filtered INCs at all levels.
For each level of INCs, obvious FPs were first filtered out using the size rule on volumeequivalent diameter, which is calculated by
Because blood vessels are elongated in shape, we also established the elongation rule to
exclude vessel-like structures with large elongation values. And the elongation in 3D space
is defined by
In addition, because pulmonary nodules are usually compact in shape, we define the
following compactness rule:
In Eqs. (4) and (5), dx, dy, and dz are the maximal projection lengths (in mm) of an object
along X, Y, and Z axes, respectively. Rules defined in Eqs. (4) and (5) together can capture
the major shape characteristics of pulmonary nodules. In this study, the threshold values for
R1, R2, and R3 were determined experimentally. Given the true nodule (or TP) annotations in
the LIDC database, we can compute the above three shape features for each true nodule.
Han et al.
IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Then based on the range of each feature we can set a conservative threshold for each
filtering rule. Combining these three expert rules, a
2) Feature-based SVM Classification—Our feature-based SVM classifier relies on a
series of features extracted from each of the remaining INC after rule-based filtering
operations. Table I lists the definitions of extracted features by four categories, including 10
geometric or shape features, 16 intensity features, 15 gradient features, and 8 Hessian
eigenvalue based features. In the first three groups of features, both 2D and 3D features are
extracted from each INC. It is noted that the step size difference along different dimensions
is taken into account for the calculation of all related features. All 2D features are extracted
from the largest area slice of INC segmentation, and the segmentation at maximum area
slice is dilated for 5 layers to obtain the “outside” region where statistics features can be
computed. For 3D features, the dilation is performed by enlarging the original segmentation
using a spheroidal structuring element that has a radius of 5 pixels in the X-Y plane and
extends by a single slice along each direction of the Z-axis.
Several of the features in Table I warrant some explanation. Specifically the square
compactness is computed on the INC segmentation at each relevant CT section. The
separation features (such as standard deviation separation) are computed using the difference
of the inside and outside statistics divided by their sum. The inside and outside contrast is
defined as the difference between the inside and outside means divided by the sum of the
inside and outside standard deviations. For the gradient features, the XY gradient magnitude
separation feature is defined as the mean separation between the magnitudes of gradients
along the X- and Y-axis directions. Since pulmonary nodules usually have symmetric
appearance, a radial gradient feature is also incorporated. It defines the projection of
gradient magnitude on radial vector, and represents gradient strength along the radial
direction. The 3D Hessian features are extracted from the Hessian matrix, which has been
shown in the literature to be potentially useful to distinguish blob-like and tubular objects
 , . Since the shape of most nodules is close to a blob and the shape of blood vessels
are tubular, both tube-likeness and blob-likeness features are employed for the
differentiation of tubular and blob structures.
After extracting the above features from each remaining INC, a supervised learning strategy
is carried out using the SVM classifier to further reduce FPs. The decision rule in our binary
SVM classifier is whether the INC tends to be a TP or FP. The basic idea for SVM is to
construct an optimal classification boundary that maximizes the inter-cluster distance. In this
study, the LIBSVM classifier with the commonly used radial-basis-function (RBF)
kernel is employed.
Specifically, the remaining INCs after the rule-based filtering operations are randomly and
equally split into two subsets with the same proportion of true nodules. Suppose the labeling
information in subset 1 is known, a binary SVM classifier could be trained and applied for
the classification of subset 2. Subsequently, subset 2 is switched to be the training set and
Han et al.
IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
subset 1 is treated as the testing set. This is indeed a two-fold cross validation. To alleviate
the possible biases due to the selection of training and testing datasets, we repeated the
random grouping process for sufficient times (e.g., 50). The overall detection accuracy can
be summarized via ROC analysis over all SVM runs. By searching the optimal operating
point on the averaged ROC curve, we can obtain the sensitivity and specificity of the CADe
system, which are defined as follows
where TP represents the number of true positives, and FN, TN and FP denote the number of
false negatives, true negatives and false positives, respectively.
III. Results
The proposed CADe system was validated on a subset of the largest publicly available
database -- LIDC-IDRI . A complete set of the annotated scans is available online at
 The LIDC-IDRI images were collected under different
scanner manufacturers and models, variable spatial resolution and different X-ray imaging
parameters (e.g. slice thicknesses: 0.45-5.0 mm; in-plane pixel size: 0.461-0.977 mm; total
slice number: 96-605 slices; tube peak potential energies: 120-140 kV; and tube current:
40-627 mA).
As it is unclear how well most current CADe systems would perform for juxta-pleural
nodules , in this study we aim to particularly emphasize the performance of our CADe
system subject to the large presence of juxta-pleural nodules. The LIDC-IDRI database has
226 scans with at least one juxta-pleural nodule annotation. Among those scans, 21 were not
included for the evaluation of our CAD system due to the following reasons. One scan
shows a tube inside patient’s airway which leads to the leakage of lung volume by the
connected component analysis. Four scans were excluded because of severe image streak
artifacts induced by the failure of image reconstruction. There are two cases with incorrect
radiologists’ annotation of VOI positions. The remaining 14 cases have at least one groundglass opacity (GGO) nodule, which are not our consideration in this current study. Therefore
a total of 205 chest CT scans in the LIDC database were utilized to evaluate the above
presented CADe system.
Fig. 7 shows the size distribution of the 490 nodules in the 205 considered datasets. These
nodules were annotated with an agreement level of as low as one (i.e. each nodule was
annotated by at least one out of the four radiologists). We can see that almost all of the
nodules are within 3 ~ 30 mm in volume-equivalent diameter, and the majority are small
nodules with a size of less than 10 mm. Each nodule’s relation with lung parenchyma was
also summarized for the 205 considered datasets. Among all nodules, 99 are well-
Han et al.
IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
circumscribed, 68 are juxta-vascular, and 323 are juxta-pleural nodules. In terms of
structural appearance, 283 are solid nodules while 207 are part-solid nodules.
A. Evaluation of the PCA for Feature Extraction
The purpose of local intensity feature extraction is to retain the major image information for
reducing the computational burden. Fig. 8 shows an example of 3-component images, in the
K-L domain selected by PCA, with a decreasing order of significance. It is clear that the first
3 PCs represent the dominant information. Those PCs beyond the third one contain even less
information. PCA not only preserves the true image information, but also largely boosts the
computational efficiency for our VQ algorithm.
B. INCs Detection and Segmentation Performance
At the prescreening stage, all of the 490 nodules from the target dataset of 205 chest CT
scans were detected by the proposed hierarchical VQ approach. Hence the sensitivity for
INCs detection is 100%, and the number of FPs is 1526 per scan.
The rule-based filtering operations on the INCs preserved 475 of the nodules detected by
VQ and brought the overall detection sensitivity to 96.9%. And the average number of FPs
was significantly reduced from 1526 to 138.7 per scan, which corresponds to a FP reduction
rate of more than 10 times. Three examples showing the performance of the hierarchical
INCs detection approach followed by rule-based filtering operation are illustrated through
Fig. 9. The leftmost image contains a huge juxta-pleural nodule. The second image shows an
example of part-solid juxta-pleural nodule, while the last image contains a juxta-vascular
nodule in the right lobe and a solitary nodule in the left lobe. The proposed scheme of
hierarchical VQ followed by rule-based filtering operations is effective to detect all the TPs
while substantially reducing the FPs in these three examples.
C. Performance of FP Reduction by SVM Classification
After rule-based pruning of the obvious FPs, we further reduced the FPs via feature-based
SVM classification. Two-fold cross validation was used to estimate the generalization
capabilities of the SVM classifier. INCs were randomly and equally split into two folds, and
each fold consisted of 237 true nodules and 14217 FPs. Each fold was used as the training
set for once, and the other fold was treated as the testing set. This two-fold cross validation
was repeated for 50 times to generate the averaged SVM classification results.
Table II shows the values of area under the ROC curve (AUC) in different feature spaces
based on the 50 times average. For group-wise feature comparison, two-sample t-test was
utilized to compare the mean of AUC value for different groups of features. Statistical
analysis showed that the gradient features achieved a significantly higher AUC value than
any of the other groups of features (one-sided p-value < 0.0001), and the geometric features
is suboptimum, better than either of the intensity or Hessian features (one-sided p < 0.0001).
The Hessian features alone yielded the least AUC value, significantly lower than the
intensity features (one-sided p < 0.0001). According to the principle of forward feature
selection, the next step is to compare the classifier performance by joining any of the other
three groups of features with the gradient features selected in the previous step. The t-test
Han et al.
IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
showed that the AUC value in the “gradient + intensity” feature space was significantly
higher (one-sided p < 0.0001) than the AUC value generated in either the “gradient +
geometric” or the “gradient + Hessian” feature space. It also outperformed the previously
selected gradient features (one-sided p < 0.0001). Furthermore, we compared the
performance of the SVM classifier with the addition of either geometric or Hessian features
to the “gradient + intensity” feature space. Statistical analyses showed the AUC mean with
the addition of either geometric or Hessian features was, however, significantly lower than
that for the previously selected “gradient + intensity” feature set (one-sided p < 0.05).
Finally, all the four groups of features were combined together, but using all the extracted
features still could not yield better performance than using only the “gradient + intensity”
features (two-sided p = 0.5565).
Thus, the best feature subset for the SVM classifier is the combination of gradient and
intensity features. Fig. 10 illustrates the averaged ROC curves calculated from different
feature combinations. The optimal operating point for the best feature subset corresponds to
a sensitivity of 92.7 % at a specificity level of 93.3%.
D. Performance on Detection of Juxtapleural Nodules
In particular, we conducted a further experiment to examine the performance of our CADe
system to the detection of juxta-pleural nodules, where the SVM classifier was exclusively
trained and applied to the juxta-pleural INCs. Technically, the corrected lung mask for each
dataset is firstly eroded by 5 layers, and any INC with at least one voxel outside this eroded
mask will be treated as a juxta-pleural candidate. The INCs that do not meet such criterion
are categorized as internal candidates. The sensitivity and specificity of our CADe system
before entering the SVM classifier could be summarized for the detection of juxta-pleural
nodules exclusively. Among the 15 nodules that were mistakenly excluded by our filtering
rules, 7 are juxta-pleural nodules. This indicates a sensitivity of 97.8% for the detection of
323 juxta-pleural nodules, and the number of FPs within juxta-pleural INCs was in average
53.8 per scan. Again, two-fold cross validation was used to evaluate the performance of the
SVM classifier. Each fold consisted of 158 true nodules and 5512 FPs. This random crossvalidation process was also repeated for 50 times to generate a series of AUC and ROC
The test AUC values of the SVM classification based on different features are summarized
in Table III. For the group-wise feature comparison, the two-sample t-test indicated that the
gradient features outperformed any of the other three groups of features (one-sided p <
0.0001). The intensity features were suboptimal, better than either of the geometric or
Hessian features (one-sided p < 0.0001), while among the single-group features the Hessian
features had the least contribution to the SVM classification. Upon forward selection of
another group of features, the “gradient + intensity” features generated a significantly higher
AUC value than the either of the “gradient + geometric” or “gradient + Hessian” features
(one-sided p < 0.0001). There was also a significant increment of AUC value compared to
that for the gradient features alone (one-sided p < 0.0001). In the next feature selection step,
we added either geometric or Hessian features to the “gradient + intensity” feature space.
The t-test showed there was no significant difference in AUC value by including the
Han et al.
IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
geometric features (two-sided p = 0.1396), and the AUC value after the inclusion of Hessian
features was significantly lower (one-sided p = 0.0093). Finally, the AUC mean using all the
extracted features was compared with that using the “gradient + intensity” features only.
Two-sample t-test showed that AUC mean in the later feature set was, however,
significantly higher than AUC mean of all features based classification at a significance
level of 0.05 (one-sided p = 0.0417).
Hence, the optimal performance of the SVM classifier for the classification of juxta-pleural
INCs could be achieved by using the gradient and intensity features only. The averaged
ROC plot of Fig. 11 indicated that the optimal operating point in the “gradient + intensity”
feature space corresponds to a sensitivity of 91.2% and a specificity of 92.3%.
E. Comparison with Existing Methods
We compared the detection accuracy and speed of our CADe system with those of existing
systems that also evaluated the LIDC-IDRI database. We selected five CADe systems that
showed detection capability or reported detection speed. The detection of INCs in reference
 was based on a multithreshold surface-triangulation approach, and the features used as
input to their ANN classifier were volume, roundness, maximum density, mass, and
principal moments of inertia. Reference used a 2D filter to extract the seeds of INCs on
each slice image, and then applied a SVM classifier with 6 complex features to reduce the
FPs. Based on maximum intensity projection processing and Zernike moments, a feature
extraction algorithm in reference was employed to enhance the SVM for FP reduction.
Reference extracted the VOI by two segmentation algorithms of region growing and 3D
active contour, while the following LDA classification employed three groups of features
based on the gradient field, Hessian matrix, and the size and shape of the segmented object.
Reference proposed a fixed-topology ANN classifier based on 45 geometric, position,
and intensity features.
Although the detection parameters and image datasets (number of cases, number of nodules,
and agreement level of target nodules) employed in those methods are different, it is still
meaningful to attempt making relative comparisons. Summary of comparison with the
existing systems is shown in Table IV, where the ROC analysis results have been interpreted
in terms of the free-response form. By considering the detection rate of 96.9% after our VQ
and rule-based filtering operations, our proposed CADe system achieved an overall
detection sensitivity of 82.7% at 4 FPs/scan. Consequently, our CADe system shows not
only comparable detection performance but also less computational cost by using our fast
hierarchical VQ approach. On average, the detection of INCs consumed about 20-25
seconds per case on a DELL Personal Computer with a processor speed of 2.26GHz. This is
about 10 times faster than existing methods.
Moreover, we also compared the performance of our CADe system to three published
systems that were devoted to the identification of juxta-pleural nodules. Reference 
proposed a multiscale α-hull approach to identify juxta-pleural nodules by patching lung
border concavities, and then fed the located nodules to an ANN classifier for FP reduction.
In another study by , a conventional template matching approach was employed to
detect nodules existing on the lung wall area, and only four features were used to eliminate
Han et al.
IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
FP findings. Reference presented an approach to tackle the detection of internal and
sub-pleural nodules, respectively, and both algorithms were finally combined as the
assembled CADe system for evaluation. In their method , the INCs detection was based
on a filter that enhanced spherical-shaped objects, and the FP reduction was carried out via a
voxel-based neural network approach. Later on, reference developed another CADe
system particularly dedicated for pleural nodule identification using directional-gradient
concentration method in combination with a morphological opening-based procedure. Each
identified candidate was characterized by 12 morphological and textural features, which
were analyzed by a rule-based filter and a neural classifier. Table V shows the summary of
system performance comparison. Considering the detection rate of 97.8% for juxta-pleural
nodules before SVM classification and an overall sensitivity of 89.2% for our CADe system
at the optimal operating point after SVM classification, we would say our CADe system can
outperform the existing systems for detection of juxta-pleural nodules. In terms of freeresponse ROC analysis, the corresponding specificity of our CADe system was 4.14 FPs per
scan. Compared with the existing methods in Table V, our CADe system was evaluated via
a larger dataset and, therefore, its favor performance is not only on the detection accuracy
(including both sensitivity and specificity), but also on the statistical power.
IV. Discussions
As mentioned in Section 3, LIDC-IDRI images were collected from several different
institutions. Consequently, the evaluation of such database was much more challenging than
evaluation on images acquired from a single institution. Another challenge to the capability
of our CADe system comes from the selection of target dataset. As we know, juxta-pleural
nodules are usually semi-spherical or spiculate in shape, making them relatively difficult to
detect. In addition, because they have similar intensities to the pleural wall, segmentation
algorithms often fail in correcting the lung borders to include juxta-pleural nodules.
Therefore, it is important to stress-test any CADe system in the presence of the irregularlyshaped juxta-pleural nodules. This study collected 205 chest CT scans with at least one
juxta-pleural attachment to evaluate the proposed CADe system. For this regard, this study
is unique.
The nodule size distribution in Fig. 7 shows the representativeness of the studied datasets,
where about 74% of the nodules are less than 10 mm. This is clinically valuable in the sense
that the detection of small nodules is crucial to detecting lung cancer at an early stage.
Besides the substantial presence of small nodules, the consideration of nodules with the
lowest agreement level also places a challenge to the detection power of our CADe system.
It is worth mentioning that the segmentation of challenging juxta-pleural nodules is critical,
because failure to include such nodules makes it impossible for VQ to recover them in the
later stages. Different from some previous works using 2D closing operation, we adopted the
3D morphological closing strategy to close the lung boundary. Fig. 12 portrays some
examples of juxta-pleural nodules that were excluded by 2D closing operation but recovered
by our 3D operation, which is more robust for lung border smoothing.
Han et al.
IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Though the proposed hierarchical VQ scheme was able to detect all non-GGO nodules in the
studied datasets, more efforts are desired to deal with the associated large number of FPs.
One possible solution is to merge clusters close to each other so that separated portions of a
single object may be associated. Another solution is to incorporate more features into the
feature vector for VQ, such as geometric features (e.g., shape index, curvedness) and texture
features (e.g., local binary pattern, Haralick and Gabor features). By considering
sophisticated features, FPs with low contrast to true nodules are expected to be identified by
some unique feature characteristics other than just the image intensity. In addition, we also
investigated the feasibility of boosting low level VQ for the detection of GGO nodules in
LIDC database. Some of the GGO nodules may be recovered by increasing the maximum
class number K, and by selecting two or more high-intensity classes as the INCs.
It has been widely acknowledged that the inclusion of rule-based filtering before the
computationally expensive classification step will enhance the performance of CADe
systems. Since intensity-based VQ could barely separate nodules from other attaching
structures with similar intensities, preprocessing of the detected INCs is needed to handle
the juxta-vascular nodules, which are otherwise prone to be excluded by expert rules. For
computational simplicity, all the INCs are refined via morphological opening, because basic
morphological operations are often effective for most juxta-vascular cases . As a result,
the detection rate after rule-based pruning retained at a relative high level of 96.9% as we
desired and expected. The selection of appropriate radius for opening disk is critical to
preserving TPs to the highest degree. Of note, certain nodules excluded by expert rules were
irregularly-shaped nodules that could not be completely separated from attaching structures.
Challenges also persist in determining the thresholds for expert rules. If too strict, it will
lower the sensitivity of the CADe system. If too loose, too many FPs will render a difficulty
to the following SVM classification. Replacing empirical filtering rules with semisupervised learning is an ongoing topic for future research.
Both Table II and Table III demonstrate that among all single-group features of interest the
gradient features contribute the most, which is consistent with our observation that most
pulmonary nodules are symmetric in appearance while non-nodule structures are not. It is
interesting to observe that the geometric features outperformed the intensity features for the
classification of all INCs, but in contrast the intensity features are superior to the geometric
features for the classification of juxta-pleural INCs only. This is reasonable because juxtapleural nodules have a large variation in shape, and therefore shape-based features from the
training set may not be representative for the testing dataset. It is also noted that the Hessian
features show the lowest differentiation power among the four groups of features of interest.
This may due to the fact that most tubular-like objects have already been excluded at the
rule-based filtering stage, and thus the advantage of using Hessian eigenvalues to
differentiate tubular from blob structures may be diminished.
Whereas the features incorporated in the SVM classifier has been commonly-used by
published works on lung nodule detection, more sophisticated features such as texture
features employed by our previous work for nodule diagnosis can be incorporated to
improve the performance of our CADe system.
Han et al.
IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
V. Conclusion
In this paper, a novel CADe system was proposed for fast and adaptive detection of
pulmonary nodules in chest CT scans. Based on our previous work of self-adaptive online
VQ for image segmentation , we developed a hierarchical VQ scheme for INCs
detection. The high level VQ proves to be feasible to replace the commonly-used simple
thresholding scheme for extraction of the lungs in terms of higher accuracy, comparable
processing time and automation level. The following low level VQ illustrates adequate
detection power for non-GGO nodules, and is computationally more efficient than the stateof-the-art approaches. In this study, simple expert rules were firstly employed to exclude
obvious FPs from being considered by the sophisticated feature-based SVM classifier, and
further reduced the computational complexity. The SVM classification results indicated that
gradient features contributed the most against any of the other three groups of features
(geometric, intensity, and Hessian features). The forward feature selection strategy showed
that the SVM classifier performed the best in the “gradient + intensity” feature space rather
than in any other feature combination spaces. The optimal operating point of the SVM
classifier for the best feature subset yielded a sensitivity of 92.7% and a specificity of
93.3%. In terms of the free-response ROC analysis, the proposed CADe system achieves an
overall sensitivity of 82.7% at 4.0 FPs per scan. Compared with existing CADe systems
evaluated on the same lung image LIDC database, our approach showed a comparable
detection capability but a lower computational cost. In particular, we reported the
performance of our system for the detection of juxta-pleural nodules. The outcome from our
CADe system, with an overall sensitivity of 89.2% at a specificity level of 4.14 FPs/scan, is
promising for tackling this challenging detection task. In a nutshell, the proposed
hierarchical INCs detection approach is fast, adaptive and fully automatic. The presented
CADe system yields comparable detection accuracy and more computational efficiency than
existing systems, which demonstrates the feasibility of our CADe system for clinical utility.
Acknowledgements
The authors would appreciate Mr. Michael J. Salerno for English editing of this work.
This work was supported in part by the NIH/NCI under grants #CA082402 and #CA143111.