International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
DOI : 10.5121/ijaia.2012.3205 45
A MACHINE LEARNING APPROACH FOR OPINION
HOLDER EXTRACTION IN ARABIC LANGUAGE
Mohamed Elarnaoty, Samir AbdelRahman, and Aly Fahmy
Computer Science Department
Faculty of Computers and Information, Cairo University
m.elarnaoty, s.abdelrahman, and a.fahmy @fci-cu.edu.eg
Opinion mining aims at extracting useful subjective information from reliable amounts of text. Opinion
mining holder recognition is a task that has not been considered yet in Arabic Language. This task
essentially requires deep understanding of clauses structures. Unfortunately, the lack of a robust, publicly
available, Arabic parser further complicates the research. This paper presents a leading research for the
opinion holder extraction in Arabic news independent from any lexical parsers. We investigate constructing
a comprehensive feature set to compensate the lack of parsing structural outcomes. The proposed feature
set is tuned from English previous works coupled with our proposed semantic field and named entities
features. Our feature analysis is based on Conditional Random Fields (CRF) and semi-supervised pattern
recognition techniques. Different research models are evaluated via cross-validation experiments achieving
54.03 F-measure. We publicly release our own research outcome corpus and lexicon for opinion mining
community to encourage further research.
Sentiment, Private state, Opinion mining, Conditional Random Fields, Cross-Validation.
1. INTRODUCTION
With the increasing availability of blogs, internet forums and social networks, electronic press
sites, people have the chance to express their opinions and sentiments and make them available to
everyone. Opinion mining is concerned with the extraction and the computational treatment of
such subjective information. The main tasks of opinion mining are:
1. The subjectivity extraction. This task aims at discriminating opinionated sentences from
objective ones. Several researches explore this task on both document levels 
and phrase level .
2. The opinion polarity identification. The objective of this task is to decide if a given
subjective text has a positive or a negative or neutral orientation. Many publications have
been dedicated to this task . This task can be considered the
most active research point in opinion mining area.
3. Opinion elements identification task. The main components of any subjective expression
are the opinion source, the opinion subject on which the opinion is expressed, and the
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
opinion words or phrases. Few researches were published to address opinion components
extraction task .
4. The development of linguistic resources required for previous tasks such as subjectivity
lexicons and annotated corpora .
The opinion holder extraction subtask gained less attention from opinion mining researchers than
other tasks. To the best of our knowledge, there exists no published work in this task for Arabic
language text, while for English language, we have few published works. One of the existing
approaches to address this problem is to track the presence of subjectivity clues in order to
identify opinionated uses of verbs, while using semantic parsing to locate opinion sources .
Another approach is to treat opinion holder extraction task as a sequential labelling classification
problem . Structural features from syntactic parse tree are selected by other researchers to
model structural relation between a holder and opinion expression . The identification of
opinion holders can benefit from, or perhaps even require, accounting for opinion expressions
either simultaneously or as a pre-processing step .
Several challenges complicate the opinion source identification in Arabic language. Compared to
the large number of publications and available resources and lexicons in English, the Arabic
opinion mining field is still immature and has less number of publications and
very few resources . The lack of resources, the high inflectual nature of Arabic language ,
the variant sources of ambiguity , and rich metaphoric script usage remain the most
challenging problems for Arabic NLP researchers. Opinion mining research, however, is affected
by one more important limitation; the absence of a robust general purpose Arabic parser makes it
difficult to understand the sentence structure and hence harden the extraction of the opinion
holder as well as other opinion components.
In this paper, we explore the opinion source identification task in Arabic news text. Some
researchers distinguish between subjective text documents, such as editorials and reviews, and
objective documents, such as newspaper reports. We, on the other hand, do not make this
distinction in our work. We believe that many newspaper articles contain a mix between both
subjective and objective information and therefore, we need to identify sources of subjective
information inside these articles. We explore three different approaches to solve Arabic opinion
holder extraction problem. The three investigated approaches are semi-supervised traditional
pattern based classification, supervised machine learning sequential labelling (CRF), and an
integration between them.
This paper contribution is the following: First, it is the first Arabic research work to address
opinion holder extraction problem. Second, two new features for this task are introduced: 1) the
semantic field feature as a mighty indication for subjectivity existence, 2) the named entity
feature as opinion holders are often identified as a named entities. Finally, we publically released
an annotated Arabic corpus for opinion holder and an Arabic subjectivity lexicon resource for
Arabic NLP researchers.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 gives a general overview of opinion source
identification task and mentions related works. Section 3 presents the proposed solution and its
main components. Section 4 focuses on opinion holder extraction using patterns while section 5
focuses on the CRF tagging and used features. Section 6 shows the experimental results and error
analysis. Finally, Section 7 draws our conclusions and future work.
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
2. TASK DESCRIPTION AND RELATED WORK
There are three main ways that private states are expressed in language: speech events expressing
private states, direct mentions of private states, and expressive subjective elements . In this work, we distinguish between three types of opinion holders corresponding to
the above three types of subjective statements:
Figure 1. Opinion Holders Three Types Examples
1- Opinion Holders For Speech Events Expressions, Either Direct Or Indirect.
By speech events we mean that some subjective statement is said by someone directly or claimed
to be said by him. The first case is referred to as direct speech event while the second case is
indirect speech event.
Considering the examples presented in Figure 1, the first sentence is an example of direct speech
event and the opinion holder in this sentence is “the former president”. The second sentence
(Figure 1) is an example of an indirect speech event with the word “president” as an opinion
source. Opinion holders for direct/indirect subjective speech events are referred to along this
paper with “Type 1 Holders”.
2- Opinion Holders For Private State Expressions.
By private state expressions, we mean the use of some key subjective words, mostly verbs, which
express certain sentiments about opinion subjects. Words such as {liked, hated, supported, was
angry with …etc} are used to express someone’s feeling about something.
For instance, the use of verb “supported” in the third sentence (Figure 1) causes us to nominate
the word “president” as the opinion source of this subjective sentence. Opinion holders for this
type of subjective statements are referred to along this paper with “Type 2 Holders”.
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
3- Expressive Subjective Elements Sources.
With expressive subjective elements, sarcasm, emotion, evaluation, etc. are expressed implicitly
through the way something is described or through particular wording. Clearly, this type of
subjective expressions is the most difficult one to detect, as the subjectivity analysis of the
statement in this case depends on understanding its meaning rather than its structure.
For example, while there are neither any sentiment words nor any speech events in the last
sentence (Figure 1), it’s obvious that the sentence expresses the crowd admiration sentiment
towards their favorite player. Opinion holders for this type of subjective statements are referred to
along this paper with “Type 3 Holders”.
The proposed work aims at identifying all the three types of the opinion holder within Arabic
news based on pattern matching and sequential labelling.
Choi et al presented an approach that combines conditional random fields and extraction
patterns. They treat opinion source finding as a combined sequential tagging and information
extraction task. They exploit the high precision but low recall extraction patterns as a feature to
train CRF engine along with other certain collection of lexical, syntactic, and semantic features.
CRF as well was used to detect opinion expressions. They achieve the opinion source
identification task with 62.0 F-measure points.
Choi et al use CRF sequential tagging classifier to extract n-best candidates for direct
expressions of opinions and their sources jointly, and employ integer linear programming to find
the link between subjective expressions and their sources jointly with 69.0 F-measure success.
3. THE PROPOSED APPROACH
In this section we start first by describing the needed pre-processing phase to the input Arabic text
(Subsection 3.1), and then provide a short overview of the investigated approaches (Subsection
3.2). The details of these approaches are given in sections 4 and 5 and the results analysis is given
in section 6.
3.1 Corpus Collection and Preparation
Arabic NLP resources are rare, therefore we had to build the needed resources, and perform the
required pre-processing on it. The pre-processing tasks include sentence segmentation,
morphological analysis, part of speech tagging (POST), semantic analysis, named entities
recognition (NER), subjective analysis, and manual annotation for opinion holders.
Arabic search engine ( was used to crawl the web for Arabic news articles
getting 150 MB news documents. 1 MB only of our corpus was manually tagged for opinion
holder by three different persons, where conflicts of tagging are resolved using majority voting
principle. The tagged corpus is freely distributed by the Arabic Language Technology Center
"ALTEC" by following the data resources link on their web site ( 
We used the Research and Development International (RDI) ( toolkit to
handle the orthographic and morphological analysis of Arabic sentences, part of speech (POS)
tagging, and semantic analysis of news words.
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
The Research and Development International (RDI) toolkit mainly consists of Arabic RDI-
ArabMorpho-POS tagger and RDI-ArabSemanticDB tool . RDI-ArabMorpho-POS
tagger includes Arabic morphology and POS models. The tagger works with an average of 90.4%
accuracy. RDI-ArabSemanticDB tool is composed of Arabic lexical semantics language resource
(database) and its related interface. The database archives approximately 40,000 Arabic words,
1840 semantic fields, and 20 semantic relations, such as synonyms, antonym, hyponymy and
causality.
For Arabic named entity recognition (ANER), we employed the bootstrapping technique
described by S.AbdelRahman et al . The named entity tagger recognizes named entities for
ten named entity (NE) classes, {Person, Location, Organization, Job, Device, Car, Cell Phone,
Currency, Date, and Time}, with F-measure accuracies of {74.06%, 89.09%, 75.01%, 69.47%,
77.52%, 80.95%, 80.63%, 98.52%, 76.99%, and 96.05%}, respectively.
For subjectivity classification of sentences, we used two naive classifiers that were described by
E.Riloff and J.Wiebe . The first classifier looks for sentences that can be labeled as subjective
with high confidence based on the existence of certain subjectivity clues. The second classifier
looks for sentences that can be labeled as objective with high confidence. All other sentences in
the corpus are left unlabeled.
The subjectivity clues are divided into strongly subjective and weakly subjective clues. A
strongly subjective clue as defined by E.Riloff and J.Wiebe is the one that is seldom used
without a subjective meaning, whereas a weakly subjective clue is the one that commonly has
both subjective and objective uses. The high-precision objective classifier classifies a sentence as
objective if there are no strongly subjective clues and at most one weakly subjective clue in the
current, previous, and next sentence combined while the high-precision subjective classifier
classifies a sentence as subjective if it contains two or more of the strongly subjective clues .
For obtaining Arabic strongly and weakly subjectivity clues, we manually translated the MPQA
subjectivity
Pittsburgh
University
( into Arabic and marked the polarity and
strength for each word. The translated MPQA subjectivity lexicon contains more than 8000
English words and corresponding Arabic words and it is made available through ALTEC Society
( 
As in English lexicon, words that are subjective in most contexts were marked strongly subjective
(strongsubj), and those that may only have certain subjective usages were marked weakly
subjective (weaksubj). For example, the word “condemning - ”مستنكراis a strongsubj clue while
the word “respectful - ”محترمdespite its, full of praise, meaning is a weaksubj clue due to its
frequent use in formal letters and reports.
3.2 The Investigated Approaches
For opinion source identification, we explored three different approaches.
1. Opinion sources identification using traditional pattern matching.
2. Opinion sources identification using sequential tagging CRF classifier.
3. Opinion sources identification using sequential tagging CRF classifier with the use of
patterns as a feature
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
The first investigated approach made use of hand crafted holder patterns. Such patterns are
defined in terms of words, named entities and POS tags. The pattern matching approach is
described in details in section 4.
The second investigated approach is supervised statistical machine learning approach. We used
conditional random field classifier to train our model using our feature set. The CRF features are
described in details in section 5,
The third approach is also based on CRF. The only difference between the second and third
approaches is the matched pattern feature being disabled in the second approach and enabled in
the third approach.
4. OPINION HOLDER EXTRACTION USING PATTERN MATCHING
An initial set of hand crafted patterns were extracted by manual inspection of a collection of
articles crawled from the web. The patterns are defined using key phrases, and POS tags (Figure
To test the manually extracted patterns validity; two tests are done. The first test is the frequency
test where the pattern is retained if its occurrence frequency in a corpus of 150 MB text exceeds a
threshold value (the value 5 is selected by trial and error method).
The second test is the precision of the pattern in extracting the opinion holders from a corpus of
size 1 MB. All patterns of precision lower than a selected threshold were removed. The selection
of the threshold is subject to a tradeoff between recall and precision. The larger the value of the
threshold, the less patterns we extract, and hence the less recall we obtain, while the smaller the
value of the threshold, the less precision we obtain. Experimentally, 0.8 was selected as the
threshold value.
The previous process resulted in a total of 43 patterns neglecting the morphological inflection of
words (“he said ”قالand “she said ”قالتare counted in the same pattern); examples of the final
patterns set are shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2. Opinion Holder Patterns Examples
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
Finally, our pattern based opinion holder classifier was run to identify the opinion sources on the
testing data. The classifier used the patterns as input for the pattern matcher code and all matched
candidates were classified as following:
1. The candidate opinion holder is neglected if its containing statement is of type objective
(as determined by the high-precision objective classifier).
2. The candidate opinion holder is retained if its containing statement is of type subjective
(as determined by the high-precision subjective classifier).
3. The candidate opinion holder is also retained if it is a named entity and its containing
statement is neither objective nor subjective from the point of view of the high precision
classifiers.
Section 6 will give examples of correctly and erroneously identified opinion holders, and provide
the evaluation for pattern classifier results.
5. OPINION HOLDER EXTRACTION USING CRF
The opinion holder extraction task can be formulated as a classification problem for each word in
the corpus, where each word is classified as one of three categories {B-Holder, I-Holder, or Non-
Holder} based on the word features. We used for this classification problem the CRF++
( classifier.
CRF is a discriminative probabilistic model . It is used for segmenting and labelling the
sequential data. It is a generalization of Hidden Markov Model in which its undirected graph
consists of nodes to represent the label sequence y corresponding to the sequence x . The aim of
CRF model is to find y that maximizes
(Equation 1) for that sequence.
A CRF model was trained on the manually tagged for opinion holder training corpus using a set
of features extracted from text. Converting a piece of text into a feature vector representation is an
important part of data-driven approaches to text processing. There is an extensive body of work
that addresses the selection of the most salient features for machine learning classifiers in general,
as well as for learning approaches tailored to the specific problems of classic text categorization
and information extraction .
We compiled a set of morphological, lexical, and semantic features to train our CRF classifier.
Unlike Choi et al work , we didn’t use any syntactic parser features due to lack of robust
general purpose Arabic parsers. On the other hand, we exploited some features that are not used
by Choi et al such as named entities and semantic field features.
We used two classes of features for training the opinion holder CRF model:
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
1. Window features: We used a window of size 2n+1 around the current word. Most of
features fall in this type. We will refer to window features in the following by using the
suffix letter w.
2. Word features: They are used without considering surrounding context of the current
The full feature set according to this categorization is described below:
1. The Word And Its Surrounding (w):
The word by itself was used as a feature and also the previous and next 3 words. The logic behind
this is obvious as we need to train the classifier for common opinion holder surrounding words
which are considered as keywords.
2. The Semantic Field (SF) Feature (w):
The occurrence of some keywords may be sufficient for humans to detect an opinion source, for
example, “clarified ّوض
”keyword is an obvious clue for opinion holder existence in case the
statement was tagged as subjective statement. But what if the training set contains small or even
zero frequency of this keyword? We can compensate this by grouping together the semantically
related keywords like (illustrated, showed, made clear...etc) (بيّن
)so that the missed
keyword (“clarified” in our example) has the same conditional probability p(OH|SF) of its
This feature was determined using the RDI semantic lexicon , the input to the lexicon is the
word in its phrase and the output is the semantic field of this word. If the word doesn't exist in the
lexicon, it's given a null value for this feature. Prepositions also have no semantic fields and
hence, take null value.
3. Part Of Speech Tag (POST) Feature (w):
Part-of-speech (POS) information is commonly exploited in sentiment analysis and opinion
mining. One simple reason holds for general textual analysis, not just opinion mining: part-ofspeech tagging can be considered to be a crude form of word sense disambiguation .
The word POST feature is extracted using the RDI morphological analyzer . The actual POST
tag from RDI was not used as it's so extensive that the same tag may not occur frequently, Figure
3 shows an example of the RDI actual tagging result:
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
Figure 3. RDI Part Of Speech Tagging Example
Hence, we reduced this tag to a smaller tag set {Noun, Definite, Verb, Translit, Number, Symbol,
and NA}. Any non-Arabic words (Latin letters, special characters...etc) are tagged as symbols.
Definite class is any noun that is attached with a definite article prefix ( .)الTranslit class is
dedicated for transliterated words. The RDI POS tagging in Figure 3 will be reduced to:
{أجلتVerb }, {إدارةNoun }, {الطيرانDefinit }
Opinion holders could be nouns, definites, or translits. But the other tag set classes can be useful
for recognizing the opinion holder context. For example, an opinion holder in direct speech
events subjective statements are usually preceded by a word with verb POS tag.
4. Base Phrase Chunk (BPC) Feature (w):
PBC represents the Base Phrase Chunks (atomic parts) of a sentence. The BPC feature is useful
especially for detecting the boundaries of the recognized opinion sources.
calculated
( using word and POST features. Possible BPC tags are
{B-Tag, I-Tag, O} | Tag ∈{NP,VP,PP,CONJP,ADJP,ADVP}
5. The Named Entity Features (w):
NE features are a set of Boolean features indicating whether each word in the moving
window is tagged as a named entity or not. Each NE class has a corresponding Boolean
feature column. These feature were calculated by applying bootstrapping technique
described by S.AbdelRahman et al on our corpus to detect NE’s of 10 different classes;
Person, Location, Organization, Job, Device, Car, Cell Phone, Currency, Date, and Time.
Of these 10 mentioned classes, person, and job NE’s are the most effective NE features in the
detection of opinion holders as the vast majority of opinion sources are either persons, or jobs.
Another advantage of using this feature is that the boundaries of opinion holder are correctly
detected following the detection of corresponding NE boundaries. We were able to benefit from
this characteristic in evaluating opinion holder extraction based on exact matching scheme.
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
6. Pattern Feature :
It is a Boolean feature that indicates whether the current word is a part of any of the opinion
holder patterns described in section 4 or not. We made two experiments, one of them with this
feature enabled and the other with this feature disabled to figure out the effect of adding pattern as
a feature to the ML CRF training as will be discussed later (Section 6).
7. MPQA Subjectivity Lexicon Features:
MPQA features are four binary features that were extracted from the Arabic version of MPQA
subjectivity lexicon.
7.1 Strong Subjectivity Clue Feature (w):
It is a binary feature that indicates whether the word is a strong clue for subjectivity or not as
retrieved from MPQA lexicon.
7.2 Weak Subjectivity Clue Feature (w):
It is a binary feature that indicates whether the word is a weak clue for subjectivity or not as
retrieved from MPQA lexicon.
7.3 Subjectivity Classifier Feature :
It is a binary feature that indicates whether the current word is a part of a statement that was
classified as a subjective statement using the high-precision subjective classifier.
7.4 Objectivity Classifier Feature :
It is a binary feature that indicates whether the current word is a part of a statement that was
classified as an objective statement using the high-precision objective classifier.
Section 6 will give examples of correctly and erroneously identified opinion holders, and provide
the evaluation for CRF classifier results.
6. EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS
The evaluation of the three approaches described previously is based on the exact match between
identified opinion holders and the manually annotated true holders. We used precision, recall and
F-measure to evaluate these approaches
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
In the patterns experiment, we applied pattern matching on the entire corpus. In CRF
experiments, since we have only 1 Mb annotated text and in order to avoid the problem of overfitting to training set, we applied 3-fold cross-validation method to verify the achieved results.
Table 1 shows the results for our three investigated approaches. CRF machine learning technique
results are better than pattern matching ones in terms of recall and precision, and F-measure. The
integration between patterns and CRF improves the F-measure for all three CRF folds
experiments. Figure 4 shows the comparison between pattern results and CRF three folds results.
In the CRF experiments, the CRF third fold achieves the best results in terms of F-measure. Fold
2 achieves comparable results; however, fold 1 has about 10.0 points less than the other two folds.
The average F-measure of the three folds is 49.22 without using pattern feature, and 50.52 using
pattern feature.
Table 1. Opinion Holder Extraction Results
Pattern results
CRF results
Integration results
Returning to the work of Choi et al , we found that the behaviour of the pattern experiments
compared to the ML experiments is similar in both English and Arabic language. Choi et al 
raise the recall of tagged holders from 41.9 in case of patterns experiment to 51.7 in case of CRF
experiment, and raise the precision from 70.2 to 72.4 resulting in increasing F-measure from 52.5
to 60.3. The combination of the two approaches gives 54.1, 72.7, and 62.0 recall, precision, and
F-measure, respectively, which means that encoding the pattern as a CRF feature enhances the
English opinion holder extraction task with 1.7 F-measure points. All previous results are
reported based on exact matching method.
Figure 4. Opinion Holder Results: a) Pattern Only, b) Fold1 CRF, c) Fold2 CRF, d) Fold3 CRF, e) Fold1
Integration, f) Fold2 Integration, g) Fold3 Integration
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
6.1 Discussion:
From our experiments, CRF proves that it is more practical in opinion holder recognition problem
than patterns. This is conformed to the work of Choi et al conclusion. CRF sentiment
training is able to capture most instances of patterns using our proposed feature set, and it is able
to capture other types of holders that patterns fails to cover. Most of CRF failure cases are due to
sentiment expression complexity and language inherent ambiguity which also restrain the pattern
matching task.
Another drawback for pattern work is that patterns are applied only to sentences that are not
tagged as objective. Therefore, many holders are lost due to erroneous tagging of their statements
as objective. This is not the case of CRF, as the sentence subjectivity is encoded as a feature for
CRF model training, and whatever the conditional probability of being a holder given existence in
a subjective statement, there is still a probability for being a holder in a statement that is tagged as
objective.
With no more true holders captured by pattern, and with low precision nature of patterns, it is
justified why CRF outperforms patterns in terms of precision, recall, and F-measure. Although
the pattern is added as a feature to our CRF experiment, its effect is minor compared to the other
features. After we disabled the pattern feature, the average F-measure is just decreased by 1.3 Fmeasure points from 50.52 to 49.22. Choi et al , on the other hand, get 1.7 F-measure
enhancement from adding the pattern feature in English.
CRF technique also is successful in detecting the boundaries of opinion holders. CRF utilizes
BPC (base phrase chunking) feature besides the named entities boundaries to precisely recognize
holder boundaries. While semantic field feature is used for detecting sentiment words (verbs,
adjectives, and adverbs) which ease the task of capturing private state expressions. MPQA
features are utilized by CRF for detecting the context of the holder as well as deciding the
subjectivity of the sentence.
Table 2 shows the effect of pattern, NE’s, MPQA, and semantic field features. The first row
presents the F-measure for opinion holder extraction on fold 3 dataset using all features.
Following rows show the effect of the absence of studied feature on the F-measure.
Table 2. Comparing CRF Features’ Contributions To Final Result
Disabled Feature
Pattern feature
Subjectivity classifiers features
Semantic Field feature
Subjectivity clues features
Job NE only
Person NE only
All NE features
Table 2 shows that NE features absence degrades the performance severely. The absence of
person only NE decreases the F-measure approximately by 20 points which indicates how
important is this feature in the recognition of opinion sources. MPQA and Semantic field features
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
contributes significantly to the enhancement of the result in the range of 1.2 to 3 F-measure
To explain the performance of CRF classifier in recognizing different types of opinion holder, we
consider our fold 3 CRF experiment. Table 3 shows that the opinion holders in fold 3 dataset are
fairly distributed among the 3-type opinion holder. However, for correctly extracted opinion
holders, type 1 covers more than 55% of the extracted true holders. Holder types 1 and 2 cover
together around 88% of the extracted true holders. The main difficulty arises from the third type
of holders due to the related complicated and unusual sentence structure, and its dependence on
deep semantic knowledge. Pattern recognition, on the other hand, fails to detect most of types 2
and 3 holders, while it performs moderately in detecting type 1 holder.
Table 3. Opinion Holder Three Types Results Comparison
Holder Type
percentage
detected holders ratio
Accumulative ratio
Type recall
Accumulative recall
The number of captured opinion holders of a certain type relative to the total number of true
holders of the same type defines this holder type extraction recall. Table 3 shows the recall for all
three opinion holder types. Type 3 achieves over than 65% recall. If we calculated the
accumulative recall for types 1 and 2, we still get 50% recall (Table 3, and Figure 5), while the
overall recall for all three types is degraded lower than 40% (Tables 1, and 3).
Figure 5. Opinion Holder Types Mining Recall
The reason that CRF fold 1 experiment results are less than the other two folds is that fold 1
testing dataset contains relatively small number of holders (195); most of them are of holder types
2 and 3. On the other hand, the opinion sources in folds 2 and 3 are approximately uniformly
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
distributed on three opinion holder classes. Therefore, these parts achieve better results but still
incomparable to the sentiment source identification results in English language.
From Natural Language Processing point of view, the quality of the opinion holder extraction task
relies on the performance of several pre-required NLP tasks such as part of speech tagging, base
phrase chunking, named entity recognition, and sentiment analysis. While all these pre-tasks are
useful in the detecting the holder, these tasks in the same time adds an incremental error ratio to
the opinion holder extraction task. If we add to this factor the high inflectual nature and the
relative complexity of Arabic language sentence structures compared to the Latin languages, we
can explain the degradation of this task results compared to the other languages like English.
Generally speaking, the performance degradation can be returned mainly to the following two
1. The incremental error in pre-required tasks in English is smaller than its peer incremental
errors in Arabic Language NLP tasks.
2. The use of lexical parser features in other languages, while we have not used any parsers
yet. The robust, publicly available, Arabic parser existence is a questionable research
compared to English existing mature parsers.
6.2 The Error Analysis:
Starting with CRF experiments results, we show first some examples of correctly tagged
statements. Afterwards, false positives and false negatives examples are presented. In all
subsequent statements, we underline all NPs tagged by the classifiers as opinion sources while the
non-detected sources remain only bold without underlining. It’s worth mentioning, as shown in
the examples, that we include the titles, surnames, nationalities and job titles in the tagged
opinion sources for both training and testing corpora. This is useful as some the opinion sources
are mentioned by job title instead of person name. For instance, “Algerian President الرئيس
”الجزائريmay be mentioned in text without using his name.
Correctly Detected Holder Example:
بالسعوديه ان
And Si Kee Shu the company CEO in Saudi Arabia said that both devices achieved many
international prizes for their elegant size and wonderful performance.
السنيوره الذى
And Rice arrived at Israel coming from Beirut where she hold a meeting with Lebanon
Government President Faud Al-Sanyoura who emphasized the necessity of immediate stop of
اينشتاين طرائق
And Einstein liked the ways of teaching there
اينشتاين من
And Einstein was not from “callers for war” party
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
The first two statements are two examples of correctly tagged holders in direct speech events. The
third statement is an example of private state expression holder that is correctly tagged. The last
statement can be considered an example of a sentiment holder of the third type as it expresses
Einstein feelings against wars by mentioning his negative actions towards its declaration.
False Positives in CRF Experiments:
بيه بمستوى
appeared in average level
the Senegalese player “Sedi Beah”
couldn’t resist
Monastic of thought
المصرى الى
to think about Cornea donation subject
And called out
In the first two examples, both sentences are definitely subjective statements. This could be easily
figured out from the use of words like (average ,عاديmonastic of thought ,)راھب الفكرbut the
opinion holders here are the writers of the two sentences and not the two subjects in each
The third sentence is an example of inherent ambiguity of Arabic language. Even with the
existence of lexical parser, it will be difficult to know whether the (Egyptian people )الشعب المصري
is the subject or object of the verb (called out ,)دعاwe know from the previous context that
Egyptian people here is the object of the verb and the caller is some doctor who motivates others
to donate with corneas. Tagging the previous statement as subjective is also a controversial
manner. We consider it subjective as not all people encourage the donation of their corneas even
after their death.
CRF Experiment False Negatives:
اقل كان انه
East Sparrow Tawfik Al-Hakim was known to be less aggressive to woman than Al-Akkad
الباثفيندر
And it wasn’t strange what new models such as Murano, Armada, new Pathfinder got from
citizens, both admiration and interest
And Einstein the Son made use of this chance to leave the school in Munich, where (he) hated its
strict regime and choky spirit
Arab and Muslim people went out in streets in huge numbers (hundreds of thousands) from the
first moment of attacking Lebanon cities and villages to express their support for party and
Lebanon and their anger for the attack they face
الباكستانيين
Tens of Pakistanis protested in Karachi against any possible war towards Iraq leaded by USA
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
The first two sentences are examples of common failure to detect type 2 holders due to the
sentence structure complexity. In the following statement, the classifier couldn’t recognize that
the verb “hated ”كرهrefers to previously mentioned Einstein. This is an example of a case where
the holder classification is much simpler for English than Arabic because the personal pronoun
“he” is used in English translation while it is implicit in the Arabic statement.
The last two statements are examples of common failure to capture type 3 holders, as the
sentiment of (Arab and Muslim people ,العرب و المسلمونPakistanis )الباكستانيينis not directly stated
in the two statements but could be grasped from the actions of demonstration and protest.
False positive And False Negative in The Same Sentence:
الرئاسه شدد
And the Presidency said President emphasized on the necessary balance of forces distribution
This is an example of a sentence where the CRF miss-tag the opinion holder in an indirect speech
event subjective statement (Type 1 Holder) by tagging (the presidency organization الرئا
instead of (the president ,)الرئيسthe true opinion holder.
Pattern Experiment Correct Examples:
البراك يرى 2 انه
And the parliament member Muslim Al-Barrak confirmed he doesn’t see any need for binding
Iraq’s debt payment to people loans
False Positive in Pattern Experiment:
العام يملك
And said the public finance can achieve whatever justice they are speaking about
False Negative in Pattern Experiment:
And Okash condemned publishing this book containing such unacceptable defamation
7. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presents a leading research work in Arabic opinion holder field. Opinion source
identification in Arabic language are explored using two approaches, we conclude that sequential
tagging ML classifiers outperform patterns in terms of recall and precision. Moreover, patterns do
not contribute significantly to the results after they are encoded as a CRF feature. NE and
Semantic field features are crucial for opinion source detection and they partially compensate the
lack of parser features. We are going to explore the possibility to enhance the Arabic Opinion
Holder Extraction task performance while utilizing a robust Arabic lexical or dependency parser
constituents.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
All authors thank profoundly Engineers Amr Magdy and Marwa Magdy, NLP researchers, for
their coding and translation support through the development of this paper
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012