Anagram: A Content Anomaly Detector Resistant to
Mimicry Attack1
Ke Wang Janak J. Parekh Salvatore J. Stolfo
Computer Science Department, Columbia University
500 West 120th Street, New York, NY, 10027
{kewang, janak, sal}@cs.columbia.edu
Abstract. In this paper, we present Anagram, a content anomaly detector that
models a mixture of high-order n-grams (n > 1) designed to detect anomalous and
“suspicious” network packet payloads. By using higher-order n-grams, Anagram
can detect significant anomalous byte sequences and generate robust signatures of
validated malicious packet content. The Anagram content models are implemented using highly efficient Bloom filters, reducing space requirements and enabling privacy-preserving cross-site correlation. The sensor models the distinct
content flow of a network or host using a semi-supervised training regimen. Previously known exploits, extracted from the signatures of an IDS, are likewise
modeled in a Bloom filter and are used during training as well as detection time.
We demonstrate that Anagram can identify anomalous traffic with high accuracy
and low false positive rates. Anagram’s high-order n-gram analysis technique is
also resilient against simple mimicry attacks that blend exploits with “normal” appearing byte padding, such as the blended polymorphic attack recently demonstrated in . We discuss randomized n-gram models, which further raises the bar
and makes it more difficult for attackers to build precise packet structures to evade
Anagram even if they know the distribution of the local site content flow. Finally,
Anagram’s speed and high detection rate makes it valuable not only as a standalone sensor, but also as a network anomaly flow classifier in an instrumented
fault-tolerant host-based environment; this enables significant cost amortization
and the possibility of a “symbiotic” feedback loop that can improve accuracy and
reduce false positive rates over time.
1 Introduction
The current generation of Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDS) are typically illsuited for stealthy worms and targeted attacks. Misuse and anomaly detectors that analyze packet headers and traffic flow statistics may be too slow to react to reliably detect
worms that are designed to evade detection by shaping their behavior to look like legitimate traffic patterns . Furthermore, signature scanners are vulnerable to zero-day
exploits and polymorphic worms/stealthy attacks with obfuscated exploit code .
Consequently, there has been an increasing focus on payload analysis to detect the early
onset of a worm or targeted attack. Ideally, one would hope to detect the very first packets of an attack, rather than accumulating sufficient statistics about connection flows to
detect a zero-day attack.
A number of researchers (e.g., ) have focused on payload-based anomaly detection. Approaches that have been studied include specification-based anomaly detection
 as well as techniques that aim to detect “code-like” byte sequences in network payloads . In our work, we have focused on automated statistical learning approaches
to efficiently train content models on a site’s “normal” traffic flow without requiring
1 This work has been partially supported by a grant with the Army Research Office, No. DA
W911NF-04-1-0442.
significant semantic analysis. Ideally, we seek to design a sensor that automatically
learns the characteristics of “normal” attack-free data for any application, service, network or host. Consequently, a model learned for “normal” attack-free data may be used
to identify “abnormal” or suspicious traffic that would be subjected to further analysis
to validate whether the data embodies a new attack.
In our previous work we proposed PAYL (short for “PAYLoad anomaly detection”)
that modeled the “normal” attack-free traffic of a network site as 1-gram, byte-value
frequency distributions , and demonstrated an ability to effectively detect worm
behavior via ingress/egress and cross-site correlation . The sensor was designed to
be language-independent, requiring no syntactic analysis of the byte stream. Furthermore, PAYL was designed to be efficient and scalable for high-speed networks and
applicable to any network service. Various experiments demonstrated that PAYL
achieved a high detection rate and with low false positives for “typical” worms and
exploits available at the time.
However, most researchers2 correctly suspected that PAYL’s simplicity would be
easily blinded by mimicry attacks. Kolesnikov, Dagon and Lee demonstrated a new
blended, polymorphic worm designed to evade detection by PAYL and other frequency
distribution-based anomaly detectors. This demonstration represents a new class of
“smart worms” that launch their attack by first sniffing traffic and shaping the datagram
to the statistics specific to a given site to appear normal. The same principles may be
applied to the propagation strategy as well as in, for example, parasitic worms. Since
PAYL only models 1-gram distributions, it can be easily evaded with proper padding to
avoid detection of anomalous byte sequences. As a countermeasure, we conjecture that
higher-order n-gram modeling may likely detect these anomalous byte sequences. Unfortunately, computing a full frequency distribution for higher order n-grams is computationally and memory-wise infeasible, and would require a prohibitively long training
period even for modest gram sizes.
In this paper we present a new sensor, Anagram, which introduces the use of Bloom
filters and a binary-based detection model. Anagram does not compute frequency distributions of normal content flows; instead, it trains its model by storing all of the distinct
n-grams observed during training in a Bloom filter without counting the occurrences of
these n-grams. Anagram also stores n-grams extracted from known malicious packets in
a second bad content Bloom filter, acquired by extracting n-grams from openly available worm detection rules, such as the latest Snort rulesets . At detection time,
packets are scored by the sensor on the basis of the number of unobserved n-grams the
packet contains. The score is weighted by the number of malicious n-grams it contains
as well. In this paper, we demonstrate that this semi-supervised strategy attains remarkably high detection and low false positive rates, in some cases 100% detection with
less than 0.006% false positive rate (per packet).
The use of Bloom filters makes Anagram memory and computationally efficient and
allows for the modeling of a mixture of different sizes of n-grams extracted from packet
payloads, i.e. an Anagram model need not contain samples of a fixed size gram. This
strategy is demonstrated to exceed PAYL in both detection and false positives rates.
Furthermore, Anagram’s modeling technique is easier to train, and allows for the estimation of when the sensor has been trained enough for deployment. The Bloom filter
model representation also provides the added benefit of preserving the privacy of shared
content models and alerts for cross-site correlation.
2 Including ourselves; a proposal to study counter-evasion techniques led to the work reported
Of particular interest here is that Anagram is shown to be robust against existing
mimicry attack approaches. We demonstrate Anagram’s ability to counter the simple
mimicry attacks levied against PAYL. Furthermore, Anagram is designed to defeat
training and mimicry attacks by using randomized n-gram modeling. The approach
presented raises the bar against the enemy, making it far more difficult to design an ngram attack against Anagram. By randomizing the portion of packets that Anagram
extracts and models, mimicry attackers cannot easily guess how and where to pad malicious content to avoid detection. We also describe the use of a feedback loop between
the Anagram sensor and host-based detectors, thereby updating Anagram models over
time and improving its detection performance. Thus, the combination of model randomization and a feedback loop makes it more difficult to evade detection by training
and mimicry attacks. The contributions of this paper include:
A new statistical, language-independent, efficient content-based anomaly detector based upon semi-supervised training of higher-order n-gram analysis
that is shown to be resistant against existing mimicry attacks. The sensor does
not rely upon a specification or semantic analysis of the target applications;
Robustness against future mimicry attacks by the use of a novel, low-overhead
randomized testing strategy, making it difficult for the attacker to guess where
or how to pad content;
Development of a run-time measure of the “stability” of a network’s content
flow, providing a reasonable estimate of when the sensor has been well enough
trained and is ready for deployment.
A robust means of representing content-based alerts for cross-site alert sharing
and robust signature generation using a Bloom Filter representation of anomalous byte sequences3;
A new defensive strategy showing how a symbiotic relationship between hostbased sensors and a content-based sensor can adapt over time to improve accuracy of modeling a site’s content flow.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 details the Anagram sensor
and its relevant algorithms. Performance, detection rate, and false positive characteristics are presented testing Anagram against real network traffic traces infected with a
collection of worms and viruses. Section 3 describes Anagram’s robustness against the
cleverly crafted blended polymorphic worm reported in , previews the possibility of
new customized mimicry attacks being crafted against Anagram, and describes randomization techniques for defeating such attacks. In section 4 we present the concept of
coupling a “shadow server” with Anagram and discuss how the combination can effectively support the techniques presented in section 3, as well as support robust signature
generation and patch generation. Section 5 discusses related work, while section 6 concludes the paper with a call for collaboration among researchers at distributed sites.
2 Anagram – Modeling a Mixture of N-grams
Anagram’s approach to network payload anomaly detection uses a mixture of higher
order n-grams (n>1) to model and test network traffic content. N-gram analysis is a
well-known technique has been used in a variety of tasks, such as system call monitoring . In Anagram, the n-grams are generated by sliding windows of arbitrary
lengths over a stream of bytes, which can be per network packet, per request session, or
other type of data unit.
3 The representation also permits patch generation systems to share anomalous data for local
patch generation across an “application community” .
In our previous work on network payload anomaly detection, PAYL , we
modeled the length-conditioned 1-gram frequency distribution of packet payloads, and
tested new packets by computing the Mahalanobis distance of the test packet against the
model. This approach is effective at capturing attacks that display abnormal byte distributions, but it is likely to miss well-crafted attacks that focus on simple CPU instructions and that are crafted to resemble normal byte distributions. For instance, although a
standard CodeRed II’s buffer overflow exploit uses a large number of “N” or “X” characters and so appears as a peak in the frequency distribution, shows that the buffer
can instead be padded with nearly any random byte sequence without affecting the attack vector. Another example is the following simple phpBB forum attack:
GET /modules/Forums/admin/admin_styles.php?phpbb_root_path=http
://81.174.26.111/cmd.gif?&cmd=cd%20/tmp;wget%20216.15.209.4/cri
man;chmod%20744%20criman;./criman;echo%20YYY;echo|..HTTP/1.1.Ho
st:.128.59.16.26.User-Agent:.Mozilla/4.0.(compatible;.MSIE.6.0;
.Windows.NT.5.1;)..
In such situations, the abnormal byte distribution model is insufficient by itself to
identify these attack vectors as abnormal data. However, invariants remain in the packet
payloads: the exploit code, the sequence of commands, or the special URL that should
not appear in the normal content flow to the target application. By modeling higher
order n-grams, Anagram captures the order dependence of byte sequences in the network payload, enabling it to capture more subtle attacks. The core hypothesis is that any
new, zero-day exploit will contain a portion of data that has never before been delivered
to the application. These subsequences of new, distinct byte values will manifest as
anomalous” n-grams that Anagram is designed to efficiently and rapidly detect.4
In the following sections we will give a detailed description of Anagram, which outperforms PAYL in the following respects:
Accuracy in detecting anomalous payloads, even carefully crafted ‘mimicry attacks’ with a demonstrably lower false positive rate;
Computational efficiency in detection by the use of fast (and incremental, lineartime) hashing in its Bloom filter implementation;
Model space efficiency since PAYL's multiple-centroid modeling is no longer
necessary, and Bloom filters are compact;
Fast correlation of multiple alerts while preserving privacy as collaborating sites
exchange Bloom filter representations of common anomalous payloads;
The generation of robust signatures via cross-site correlation for early warning
and detection of new zero day attacks.
In the following sections, we will describe the mechanisms in detail and present experimental results of testing Anagram against network traces sniffed from our local
2.1 High Order N-gram Payload Model
While higher order n-grams contain more information about payloads, the feature
space grows exponentially as n increases. Comparing an n-gram frequency distribution
against a model is infeasible since the training data is simply too sparse; the length of a
packet is too small compared to the total feature space size of a higher-order n-gram.
4 Note that some attacks may not include byte sequences that are “code-like”, and hence testing
content for such code-like data subsequences is not guaranteed to cover all attack cases. The
language independence of anomalous n-grams may be broadly applicable to these and other attacks.
One TCP packet may contain only a thousand or so n-grams, while the feature space
size is 256n. Clearly, with increasing n, generating sufficient frequency statistics to
estimate the true empirical distribution accurately is simply not possible in a reasonable
amount of time.
In Anagram, we therefore do not model the frequency distribution of each n-gram.
Rather, we observe each distinct n-gram seen in the training data and record each in a
space efficient Bloom filter. Once the training phase terminates, each packet is scored
by measuring the number of n-grams it did not observe in the training phase. Hence, a
packet is scored by the following formula, where
is the number of new n-grams
not seen before and T is the total number of n-grams in the packet:
At first glance, the frequency-based n-gram distribution may contain more information about packet content; one might suspect it would model data more accurately and
perform better at detecting anomalous data, but since the training data is sparse, this
alternative “binary-based model” performs significantly better than the frequency-based
approach given the same amount of training data.
We analyzed the network traffic for the Columbia Computer Science website and, as
expected, a small portion of the n-grams appear frequently while there is a long “tail” of
n-grams that appear very infrequently. This can be seen in Table 1, which displays the
percentage of the n-grams by their frequency counts for 90 hours of CS web traffic.
Since a significant number of n-grams have a small frequency count, and the number of
n-grams in a packet is very small relative to the whole feature space, the frequencydistribution model incurs relatively high false positives. Thus, the binary-based model
(simply recording the distinct n-grams seen during training) provides a reasonable estimate of how “normal” a packet may be. This is a rather surprising observation; as we
will demonstrate, it works very well in practice. The conjecture is that true attacks will
be delivered in packets that contain many more n-grams not observed in training than
“normal” packets used to train the model. After all, a true zero-day attack must deliver
data to a server application that has never been processed by that application before.
Hence, the data exercising the vulnerability is very likely to be an n-gram of some size
never before observed. By modeling a mixture of n-grams, we increase the likelihood of
observing these anomalous grams.
To validate this conjecture, we compare the ROC curves of the frequency-based approach and the binary-based approach for the same datasets (representing equivalent
training times) as displayed in figure 1. We collected the web traffic of two CS departmental web servers, www and www1; the former serves the department webpage, while
the latter serves personal web pages. Traffic was collected for two different time periods:
a period of sniffed traffic from the year 2004 and another dataset sniffed in 2006. The
2004 datasets5 (www-04 and www1-04) contain 160 hours of traffic; the 2006 datasets
(www-06 and www1-06) contain about 560 hours. We tested for the detection of several
real worms and viruses: CodeRed, CodeRed II, WebDAV, Mirela, a php forum attack, and a
worm that exploits the IIS Windows media service, the nsiislog.dll buffer overflow vulnerability (MS03-022). These worm samples were collected from real traffic as they appeared in
the wild, from both our own dataset and from a third-party.
5 The 2004 dataset was used to train and test PAYL as reported in , and is used here for
comparative evaluation.
For the first experiment, we used 90 hours of www1-06 for training and 72 hours for
testing. (Similar experiments on the other datasets display similar results, and we skip
them here for brevity.) To make it easier for the reader to see the plots, the curves are
plotted for the cases where the false positive rate is less than 0.03%. Both the detection
rate and false positive rate are calculated based on packets with payloads; non-payload
(e.g., control) packets were ignored. Notice that the detection rate in figure 1 is based on
per packet, instead of per attack. Some attacks have multiple packets; while fragmentation can result in a few packets appearing normal, we can still guarantee reliable attack
detection over the entire set of packets. For example, for the IIS5 WebDAV attack, 5grams detect 24 out of 25 packets as being anomalous. The only missed packet is the
first packet, which contains the buffer overflow string “SEARCH /AAA……AA”; this
is not the key exploit part of the attack. For further comparison, we list minimum false
positive rates when detecting all attack attempts (where an attack is detected if at least
80% of the packets are classified as anomalous) for both binary-based and frequencybased models in table 2.
Table 1. The percentage of the observed unique n-grams for different frequencies of occurrence for 90 hours of training traffic
frequency count
False Positive Rate (%)
Detection Rate (%) of all packets
Freq-based, 5-gram
Binary-based, 5-gram
Freq-based, 3-gram
Binary-based, 3-gram
Fig. 1. ROC curves comparing the frequency-based and binary-based n-gram approach
Table 2. The false positive rate (%) of the two approaches using different n-grams when
achieving 100% detection rate, www1-06 train/test dataset
Freq-based
Binarybased
The binary-based approach yields significantly better results than the frequencybased approach. When a 100% detection rate is achieved for the packet traces analyzed,
the false positive rate of the binary-based approach is at least one order of magnitude
less than the frequency-based approach. The relatively high false positive rate of the
frequency-based approach suggests much more training is needed to capture accurate
statistical information to be competitive. In addition, the extremely high false positive
rate of the 3-gram frequency-based approach is due to the fact that the 3-grams of the
php attack all appear frequently enough to make it hard to distinguish them from normal
content packets. On the other hand, the binary-based approach used in Anagram results
in far better performance. The 0.01% false positives average to about 1 alert per hour
for www1 and about 0.6 alerts per hour for www. The result also shows that 5-grams
and 6-grams give the best result, and we’ve found this to be true for others as well.
As previously stated, Anagram may easily model a mixture of different n-grams simply by storing these in the same Bloom filter. However, for larger n-grams additional
training may be required; as we shall describe shortly, our modeling approach allows us
to estimate when the sensor has been sufficiently trained.
2.2 Model Size and Bloom Filters
As previously stated, one significant issue when modeling with higher order n-grams is
memory overhead. By leveraging the binary-based approach, we can use more memoryefficient set-based data structures to represent the set of observed n-grams. In particular,
the Bloom filter (BF) is a convenient tool to represent the binary model. Instead of
using n bytes to represent the n-gram, or even 4 bytes for a 32-bit hash of the n-gram,
the Bloom filter can represent a set entry with just a few bits, reducing memory requirements by an order of magnitude or more.
A Bloom filter is essentially a bit array of m bits, where any individual bit i is set if
the hash of an input value, mod m, is i. As with a hash table, a Bloom filter acts as a
convenient one-way data structure that can contain many items, but generally is ordersof-magnitude smaller. Operations on a Bloom filter are O(1), keeping computational
overhead low. A Bloom filter contains no false negatives, but may contain false positives if collisions occur; the false positive rate can be optimized by changing the size of
the bit array and by using multiple hash functions (and requiring all of them to be set for
an item to be verified as present in the Bloom filter; in the rare case where one hash
function collides between two elements, it’s highly unlikely a second or a third would
also simultaneously collide). By using universal hash functions , we can minimize
the probability of multiple collisions for n-grams in one packet (assuming each n-gram
is statistically independent); the Bloom filter is therefore safe to use and does not negatively affect detection accuracy.
Fig. 2. Inserting n-grams (here, n = 5) into a Bloom filter.
2.2.1 Memory overhead
While Bloom filters are comparatively small even when inserting a large number of
entries, choosing the optimal size of a Bloom filter is nontrivial, since Anagram is not
aware of a site’s distribution (and the number of unique n-grams) before building its
model. Additionally, a Bloom filter’s size cannot be dynamically resized, as the hash
values cannot be recomputed without the original underlying training data.6
A large Bloom filter will waste memory, but small Bloom filters saturate more
quickly, yielding higher false positive rates. It is worth pointing out that “large” is relative; a 24-bit Bloom filter is capable of holding 224/nh elements, where nh represents the
number of hash functions used, in only 2MB of memory, e.g., each n-gram inserted uses
about 2.7 bits when 3 hash functions are used. Additionally, we can use traditional compression methods (e.g., LZW) for storing a sparse Bloom filter, which significantly
reduces storage and transport costs. As discussed later in this paper, our experiments
anecdotally suggest this Bloom filter is large enough for at least 5-grams, assuming a
mostly textual distribution.
The presence of binary data does significantly increase Bloom filter requirements; if
allocating extra initial memory is undesirable, a “layered” approach can be employed,
where new Bloom filters are created on demand as previous Bloom filters saturate, with
a small constant-time overhead. It should be evident that Bloom filters can be trivially
merged via bitwise ORing and compared via bitwise ANDing.
2.2.2 Computation overhead
The overhead of inserting or verifying a single item into a Bloom filter is O(1) per
item inserted in the Bloom filter. However, the constant-time overhead to process an ngram can become significant when inserting or checking n-grams over a large population of packets. This effect is magnified when an Anagram model uses different-size ngrams, as the same data is repeatedly hashed into different positions on the Bloom filter
based on the various n-gram windows being processed. Couple this with the fact that
6 While the training data can be kept, we do not consider this practical for actual deployment,
especially if techniques like incremental and run-time training are used.
Bloom filters need a good source of hashes, and Anagram’s largest computation overhead in both training and testing rapidly becomes the hash operation.
To reduce this computation overhead, we make use of a cumulative universal hash
cumulative
requirement
that h c a,b
)= d h a( ),h b( )
), where h represents our hash function, a and b are data (ngrams or fragments of them), c is a (bitwise) concatenation function, and d is a composition function. Given such a hash function, we can avoid re-computing hashes when
sliding the n-gram window and when using different window sizes, e.g., if we’ve
hashed a 5-gram and need to generate the hash of a 7-gram, we can just hash the incremental 2 grams and combine that with the 5-gram hash value. A class of universal hash
functions known as H3 uses XOR as the composition function, which is very fast
and lends itself well to our application. Thus, Anagram’s modeling engine may perform
fast enough to scale to very high bandwidth environments. Dharmapurikar, et. al. describe a similar technique for static signature scanning in hardware.
2.3 Learning Issues
The huge feature space of higher order n-grams makes estimating the frequency distribution infeasible. In the case of representing distinct n-grams, we pose the following
questions: how long do we need to train before deploying the sensor in detection mode?
Further, how well can Anagram handle noisy training data since the model is binarybased?
2.3.1 When is the model well trained?
Since there are many distinct n-grams, many of which may take days or weeks to see,
when can we say the model is well trained and ready to use? We first check the likelihood of seeing a new n-gram with additional training. Figure 2 shows the percentage of
the new distinct n-grams out of every 10,000 content packets when we train for up to
500 hours of traffic data. The key observation is that during the initial training period,
one should expect to see many distinct n-grams. Over time, however, fewer distinct
“never before seen” n-grams should be observed. Hence, for a given value of n, a particular site should exhibit some rate of observing “new” distinct n-grams within its
“normal” content flow. By estimating this rate, we can estimate how well the Anagram
model has been trained. When the likelihood of seeing new n-grams in normal traffic is
stable and low, the model is stable; we can then use the rate to help detect the attacks, as
they should contain a higher percentage of unseen n-grams. Figure 3 plots the false
positive rates of different models, varying in n-gram size and length of training time,
when tested on the 72 hours of traffic immediately following the training data.
Per 10000 content packets
Likelihood of seeing new n-grams
Training Dataset Length (in days)
False Positive Rate (%) when 100% Detection Rate
Fig. 3. The likelihood of seeing new n-grams
as training time increases.
Fig. 4. False positive rate (with 100% detection rate) as training time increases.
From the above plots, we can see that as the training time increases, the false positive
rate generally goes down as the model is more complete. After some point, e.g. 4 days’
in figure 3, there is no further significant gain, and the FP rate is sufficiently low.
Higher order n-grams need a longer training time to build a good model, so 7-grams
display a worse result than 5-grams given the same amount of training. While the 3gram model is likely more complete with the same amount of training, it scores significantly worse: 3-gram false positives do not stem from inadequate training, but rather
because 3-grams are not long enough to distinguish malicious byte sequences from
normal ones.7
In theory, Anagram should always improve with further training – if we can guarantee a clean training dataset, which is crucial for the binary-based approach. However,
obtaining clean training data is not an easy task in practice. During our experiments,
increased training eventually crosses a threshold where the false positive rate starts
increasing, even if the training traffic has been filtered for all known attacks. The binary-based approach has significant advantages in speed and memory, but it’s not tolerant of noisy training, and manual cleanup is infeasible for large amounts of training data.
We therefore introduce semi-supervised training in the next section to help Anagram be
more robust against noisy data.
2.3.2 Semi-supervised Learning
The binary-based approach is simple and memory efficient, but too sensitive to noisy
training data. One form of supervised training is quite simple. We utilize the signature
content of Snort rules obtained from and (a collection of about 500) virus samples
to precompute a known “bad content model”. We build a bad content Bloom filter containing the n-grams that appear in the two collections, using all possible n that we may
eventually train on (e.g., n=2~9 in our experiments). This model can be incrementally
updated when new signatures have been released.
It’s important to note, however, that signatures and viruses often contain some normal n-grams, e.g., the ‘GET’ keyword for HTTP exploits. To remove these normal ngrams, we can maintain a small, known-clean dataset used to exclude normal traffic
7 We hypothesize, though, that as the number of new 3-grams converges very rapidly, that the rate
of detection of unique 3-grams during testing may be a good sign of an attack. In general,
anomalous content may be measurable as a function of the size of the gram detected that was
not seen during training.
when generating the bad content BF. This helps to exclude, as a minimum, the most
common normal n-grams from the bad content model.
In one experiment, we used 24 hours of clean traffic to filter out normal n-grams
from the bad content BF. Figure 4 shows the distribution of normal packets and attack
packets that match against the bad content model. The X axis represents the “matching
score”, the percentage of the n-grams of a packet that match the bad content model,
while the Y axis shows the percentage of packets whose matching score falls within that
score range. The difference between normal and attack packets is obvious; where the
normal traffic barely matches any of the bad content model, attack packets have a much
higher percentage, so that we can reliably apply the model for accurate detection. The
resulting bad content BF contains approximately 46,000 Snort n-grams and 30 million
virus n-grams (for n=2…9).
Bad Content Model Matching Score
Percentage of the packets
Normal Content Packets
Bad Content Model Matching Score
Percentage of the packets
Attack Packets
Fig. 5. Distribution of bad content scores for normal packets (left) and attack packets (right).
The “bad content model” is used during both training and detection. During training,
the incoming data stream is first filtered through Snort to ensure it is free of known, old
attacks. Packets are then compared against the bad content model; any n-gram that
matches the bad content model is dropped. The whole packet is also dropped if it
matches too many n-grams from the bad content model – as new attacks often reuse old
exploit code – to avoid modeling new malicious n-grams. In our experiment, we established a 5% bad n-gram threshold before ignoring a training packet. While this is rather
strict, ignoring a packet during training time is harmless as long as relatively few packets are dropped, as figure 4 shows.
During detection, if a never-before-seen n-gram also appears in the bad content
model, its detection score is further weighted by a factor t over other malicious n-grams;
in our experiment, we set t to 5. This enables us to further separate malicious packets
from normal ones in order to achieve higher detection accuracy. To show the improvement we gain by using the bad content model, figure 5 compares the false positive rate
before and after using it for different n-gram sizes on two datasets. The false positive
rates are significantly reduced with the help of this bad content model.
Value n of n-grams
False Postitive Rate (%) when 100% Detection Rate
dataset www1-06, normal
dataset www1-06, supervised
dataset www-06, normal
dataset www-06, supervised
Fig. 6. The false positive rate (with 100% detection rate) for different n-grams, under both
normal and semi-supervised training.
2.4 Signature Generation and Privacy-Preserving Cross-site Collaboration
One other substantial advantage of Anagram is its ability to generate robust signatures.
When a suspicious packet is detected, the corresponding malicious n-grams are identified in the packet for free. These n-grams are good target for further analysis and signature generation. It’s also particularly important to note that the order of the distinct
anomalous n-grams is irrelevant, since it’s just a set of n-grams. An attempt to avoid
detection by an attacker by reordering their attack vector code will therefore fail.
Here we first revisit the php attack presented before, and then show the generated
signatures by extracting the detected malicious n-grams, using 3-grams, 5-grams and 7grams, respectively. Nonprintable characters are represented by “.”, while “*” represents a wildcard for signature matching.
GET /modules/Forums/admin/admin_styles.phpadmin_styles.php?phpb
b_root_path= 
216.15.209.4/criman;chmod%20744%20criman;./criman;echo%20YYY;ec
ho|..HTTP/1.1.Host:.128.59.16.26.User-Agent:.Mozilla/4.0.(compa
tible;.MSIE.6.0;.Windows.NT.5.1;)..
*?ph*bb_*//8*p;wg*n;c*n;./c*n;ec*0YYY;echo|H*26.U*1;).*
*ums/ad*in/admin_sty*.phpadmin_sty*hp?phpbb_root_path= 
.174.26.111/cmd*cmd=cd%20/tmp;wget%20216*09.4/criman;chmod%2074
4%20criman;./criman;echo%20YYY;echo| HTT*6.26.Use*5.1;)..*
*dules/Forums/admin/admin_styles.phpadmin_styles.php?phpbb_root
_path= 
.209.4/criman;chmod%20744%20criman;./criman;echo%20YYY;echo|
HTTP/*59.16.26.User-*T 5.1;)..*
All of these signatures are quite accurate: no normal packet matches more than 5% of
the malicious n-gram signatures of the attack. Generally, low order n-grams produces
less optimal signatures, since relatively few n-grams will be detected as malicious and
they are not long enough to capture useful information. 7-grams produce the best signature; in theory, the longer the n-gram the better the generated signature, higher training
and false positive costs notwithstanding.
Besides the benefits of accurate signature generation, Anagram’s models enable
cross-site privacy-preserving information sharing by using Bloom Filters. In our previous PAYL work , we discussed the idea of cross-site collaboration and its use for
zero-day worm detection and signature generation, followed by several approaches for
alert information sharing. However, PAYL’s correlation techniques traded accuracy for
Instead, Anagram can share Bloom Filters with no loss of accuracy. Suspect payloads
are identified by the sensor, and the particular anomalous n-grams (of any size) are
stored in a Bloom Filter.8 The use of one-way hashes, combined with the large number
of possible n-grams, makes reverse-engineering or brute forcing infeasible. By checking
the n-grams of local alerts against the remote alert Bloom Filters, it’s easy to tell how
similar the alerts are to each other, and identify the common malicious n-grams that can
be used to construct a candidate attack signature.
This is a substantial improvement over the previous approaches reported by several
researchers whereby most common tokens, longest common substrings, and/or longest
common subsequences are computed in order to identify common substrings between
two or more suspect payloads. These computations intend to compute string signatures
common across multiple instances of a polymorphic worm attack. Anagram essentially
"pre-computes" common string subsequences via the common anomalous n-grams
stored in the Bloom Filter, irrespective of the order of appearance of any of these
anomalous strings, and thereby speeds up correlation.
To validate the accuracy of using a Bloom Filter of malicious n-grams for cross-site
correlation, we collected alerts from the four previously-mentioned datasets and computed pairwise alert similarity scores, using the same worms for testing as before. The
similarity score of a pair of alerts is defined as 2*Nc/(N1+N2), where Nc is the number
of common n-grams, and N1 and N2 are the number of malicious n-grams of the different alerts, respectively. We used 5-grams in this experiment and set the malicious
threshold to be zero, which means a packet will be flagged as an alert and correlated if
there are one or more malicious n-grams. The results are summarized as:
1. Alerts from different datasets containing the same worm yield a similarity score
greater than 0.9;
2. Alerts containing similar worms (e.g., CodeRed vs. CodeRed II) still score high,
around 0.85, likely due to their similar code heritage;
3. Almost all other combinations yield a similarity score of less than 0.01, with less
than .003% scoring more than 0.01 but less than 0.5.
Compared to our previous approaches for cross-site correlation, the Bloom filter
based malicious n-grams can easily achieve better accuracy and privacy-preservation.
This also illustrates the position independence of n-grams, as Anagram remains robust
in detecting fragmented or reordered malcode, while ignoring non-malicious or padded
The BF representation also provides an efficient means of combining models computed from multiple sensors: one can simply bitwise AND the respective models to
merge their contents—achieving performance scalability and faster learning at a remarkably low cost. We intend to further report on the effectiveness of these techniques,
and their applicability to polymorphic worms, in an upcoming paper.
2.5 Implementation
The current Anagram prototype is implemented in approximately 3,000 lines of Java
code. While we have recently built an optimized Bloom filter implementation using H3,
most of the models currently trained use an older, less optimized version based on SHA-
8 The number of anomalous n-grams must also be transmitted, as it is used in the threshold logic
to identify anomalous packets.
1. While we are still evaluating the faster hash algorithm’s performance in training and
detection, we expect to be able to handle a 100Mbps network subnet in real-time.9 Anagram models take approximately 8MB of memory; Anagram, as a whole, uses approximately 20MB of memory when running (small enough to fit on a handheld device).
3 Randomized Models to thwart Mimicry Attacks
3.1 Anagram against Mimicry Attack
As mentioned earlier, mimicry attacks are perhaps the most significant threat to any
anomaly detector, such as , which details a polymorphic mimicry worm targeting
PAYL. This smart worm learns a site’s normal traffic pattern by sniffing then blends the
exploit packet with characters to simulate the normal byte frequency distribution to
successfully evade PAYL’s 1-gram models. Since this mimicry attack pads without
considering the sequence of bytes, Anagram can easily detect any variants of the crafted
attacks10.
We adapted this worm to launch a mimicry attack against Anagram. Instead of padding the packet to simulate the byte frequency, we padded attack packets with normal
strings; in this case, long URLs of the target website which should be, by definition,
composed of normal n-grams. Although the anomaly scores are greatly reduced by this
padding, the remaining portions of the crafted attack packets still have enough abnormal
n-grams to be detected by Anagram. Besides the “sled”, which provides the opportunity
for crafted padding, the attack packet still requires a byte sequence for the polymorphic
decryptor, the encrypted exploit, encoded attacks, and the embedded mapping table.
Since the amount of space in each packet is limited, the mimicked worm content containing the exploit vector is purposely spread over a long series of fragmented packets.
Thus, the worm is fragmented so that each packet on its own does not appear suspicious.
This strategy is described in the aforementioned paper and is akin to a multi-partite
attack strategy where the protocol processor assembles all of the distributed pieces necessary for the complete attack.
Using the blended polymorph worm engine, we generated different variants of the
worm. The following table shows the maximum padding length of each version. Each
cell in the top row contains a tuple (x, y), representing a variant sequence of y packets
of x bytes each. The second row represents the maximum number of bytes that can be
used for padding in each packet. It’s obvious that there is a substantial chunk of packet
that needs to be reserved for the exploit, where we conjecture malicious higher order ngrams will appear to encode the encrypted exploit code or the decryptor code.
Table 3. The padding length for a packet of different varieties of the mimicry attack
Padding length
We tested Anagram over these modified mimicry attacks where the padding contained normal, non-malicious n-grams, and all of the attacks were successfully detected.
This is the case since the crafted attack packets still require at least 15%-20% of the ngrams for code, which were detected as malicious. The false positive rates grows, however, as the packet length gets longer. The worst case for the (1460, 100) experiment
yields a false positive rate around 0.1%. The semi-supervised learning strategy em-
9 We also would expect to be able to give actual performance numbers by publication time.
10 We are very grateful to Wenke Lee and his colleagues for providing the polymorph engine for
use in our research.
ployed in Anagram using a model of “malicious n-grams” doesn’t help here since this
mimicry worm uses encryption and data encoding to obfuscate its content.
This experiment demonstrates that Anagram raises the bar for attackers making mimicry attacks harder since now the attackers have the task of carefully crafting the entire
packet to exhibit a normal content distribution. Further effort is required by mimicry
attacks to encode the attack vectors or code in a proper way that appears as normal high
order n-grams. Without knowing exactly which value of n, the size of the modeled
grams, they should plan for, the problem becomes even harder. We take this uncertainty
and extend it in the next section for a more thorough strategy to thwart mimicry attacks.
3.2 Randomization
The general idea of payload-based mimicry attack is simply to evade detection by crafting small pieces of exploit code with a large amount of “normal” padding data to make
the whole packet look normal. But as we’ve seen in the example above, no matter what
techniques are used for padding, there has to be some non-padded “exposed” sections of
data to decode the exploit of the target vulnerability. The attacker has to determine
where to pad with normal data, and where to hide the exploit code. Without knowing
exactly what portions of the packet are tested by the detector, the task is complicated,
and possibly reduced to guessing, even if the attacker knew what padding would be
considered normal.
We first discuss the notion of randomized modeling. Instead of modeling and testing
the whole packet payload, we randomly partition packets into several (possibly interleaved) substrings or subsequences S1,S2,…,SN, and model and test each of them separately. Since the partition is randomly chosen by each sensor instance and kept secret,
we assume the attackers cannot gain this information before they compromise the machine. The attempted mimicry attack would be thwarted since the attacker would have
no means of knowing precisely how a remote payload anomaly sensor at its target location has chosen to partition the space of the data flow. The attackers could only succeed
if they can craft an attack vector ensuring that the data is normal with respect to any
randomly selected portion of a packet; this makes the attacker’s tasks much harder than
before. This technique can be generally applied to any content anomaly detector.
Fig. 7. Randomized modeling.
We performed experiments using randomized modeling for PAYL, where we computed multiple models based on different secret partitions of the data stream. Although
the strategy successfully thwarted mimicry attack, it substantially increased the overhead of the sensor. A future report will detail those experiments.
Alternatively, we can employ randomized testing, which does not incur any substantial overhead. Instead of testing and scoring the whole packet payload, we randomly
partition packets into several (possibly interleaved) substrings or subsequences
S1,S2,…,SN, and test each of them separately against the same single normal BF model
and the single bad content model. Since the partition is randomly chosen by each sensor
instance and kept secret, we assume the attackers cannot gain this information before
they compromise the machine. The attackers could only succeed if they can craft an
attack vector ensuring that the data is normal with respect to any randomly selected
portion of a packet; this makes the attacker’s tasks much harder than before. This technique can be generally applied to any content anomaly detector.
Fig. 8. Randomized testing.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of this counter-evasion tactic, we developed a simple randomization framework for Anagram. We generate a random binary mask with
some length l (say, 100 bytes), and repeatedly apply this mask to the contents of each
packet to generate test partitions. The mask corresponds to subsequences of contiguous
bytes in the packet tested against the model; each is scored separately. The sequence of
bytes appearing at locations where the mask had bits set to 1 are tested separately from
those byte sequences where the mask had zero bits, randomly separating it into two nonoverlapping parts. The packet anomaly score is adapted from section 2.1 to maximize
the score over all partitions, i.e.
and Ti are the
number of new and total n-grams in partition i, respectively. This can easily be extended
to overlapping regions of the packet, and more than just two randomly chosen portions.
There are several issues to consider. First, we want to optimize binary mask generation. While the mask can be a purely random binary string, we may then lose information about sequences of bytes. Since Anagram models n-grams, it’s not surprising that
this strategy performs poorly. Instead, we randomize the mask using a “chunked” strategy. Any string of contiguous 0’s or 1’s in the mask must be at least 10 bits long (corresponding to 10 contiguous bytes in a partition), enabling us to preserve most of the ngram information for testing. The results achieved for this strategy are far better than a
random binary mask.
Another observation is that the length of the randomly chosen partitions is best balanced, which means the two parts should have roughly the same size, i.e. equal numbers
of 1’s and 0’s. The false positive rate is usually much higher when the partitions have
extremely unbalanced lengths; for example, a partition where one fragment is 10% of
the total length and the other is 90% produces a poor false positive rate.
For the following results, we use this “chunk-based binary mask strategy” and guarantee that one partition of the packet datagram is at most double the size of the other
one. Again, we measure the false positive rate when we achieve 100% detection rate for
our test traces. For each size n-gram, we repeated the experiment 10 times to show the
average (the middle plot) and standard deviation (the vertical bars), both for the unsupervised learning (left plot) and semi-supervised learning (right plot) using the malicious n-gram content model. The experiment was performed on dataset www1-06,
trained for 90 hours and tested on the following 72 hours of traffic.
Fig. 9. The average false positive rate and standard deviation with 100% detection rate for randomized testing, with normal training (left) and semi-supervised training (right).
On average, the randomized models produce comparable false positive rates to the
non-randomized approach, especially when using semi-supervised learning. The lower
order n-grams are more sensitive to partitioning, so they exhibit a high standard deviation, while higher order n-gram models are relatively stable. Further research needs to
be done to determine a good partitioning approach that can reduce the deviation while
keeping the essential randomization strategy intact. We believe randomization is the
correct direction, and a valuable step toward complicating the task for the mimicry attacker.
3.3 Threshold reduction and “extreme” padding
In the experiments we reported above, we noticed that the randomized models’ false
positive rates, while comparable on average, exhibit a higher variance than the case
where models are not randomized. Consider an extreme mimicry attack: suppose an
attacker crafts packets with only one instruction per packet, and pads the rest with normal data. If a 100% detection rate is desirable, lowering the score threshold to some
minimum nonzero value ε might be the only way to achieve this goal. Unsurprisingly,
this approach corresponds to a direct increase in the false positive rate, which may vary
between 10% to 25% of all packets, depending on the n-gram sizes chosen and the
amount of training of the model.
Such a false positive rate may be viewed as impractical, rendering the sensor useless.
We believe this is wrong. The false positive rate is not always the right metric – especially if Anagram is used in conjunction with other sensors. For example, Anagram may
be used to shunt traffic to a host-based, heavily instrumented shadow server used as a
detector; in other words, we do not generate Anagram alarms to drop traffic or otherwise mitigate against (possibly false) attacks, but rather we may validate whether traffic
is indeed an attack by making use of a host-based sensor system. If we can shunt, say
25% of the traffic for inspection by an (expensive) host-based system, while leaving the
remaining normal traffic unabated to be processed by the operational servers, the proposed host-based shadow servers can amortize their overhead costs far more economically. Thus, the false positive rate is not as important as the true positive rate, and false
positives do not cause harm. We describe this approach in greater detail in section 4.
4 Adaptive Learning
4.1 Training Attacks versus Mimicry Attacks
We distinguish between training attacks and mimicry attacks: A mimicry attack is the
willful attempt to craft and shape an attack vector to look normal with respect to a
model computed by an anomaly detector. The attacker would need to know the modeling algorithm used by the sensor and the normal data it was trained on. The polymorphic blended attack engine discussed in Section 3 assumes to know both by sniffing an
environment’s normal data (an open question is whether the normal data of one site
produces sufficiently similar models to other sites that are targeted by a mimicry attack).
Alternatively, a training attack is one whereby the attacker sends a stream of data incrementally or continuously distant from the normal data at a target site in order to influence the anomaly detector to model data consistent with the attack vector. Attack
packets would appear normal since they were modeled. This type of attack would succeed if the attacker were lucky enough to send the stream of data while the anomaly
detector was in training mode. Furthermore, the attacker would presume that the stream
of “malicious training data” would go unnoticed by the sensor while it was training.
We presented the concept of randomization in order to thwart mimicry attack. Even
if the attacker knew the normal data distribution, the attacker would not know the actual
model used by the sensor. However, we have not addressed training attacks. explores this problem and suggests several theoretical defenses. For example, Anagram’s
semi-supervised learning mechanism can help protect the model if learning attacks recycle old exploit code. However, if the learning attack does not contain any known bad
n-grams, Anagram cannot detect it by itself. We conjecture that the coupling of the
training sensor with an “oracle” that informs the sensor of whether or not the data it is
modeling is truly normal can thwart such training attacks. For example, if the attacker
sends packets that do not exploit a server vulnerability, but produces an error response,
this should be noticed by the sensor in training mode; we discuss this further in the next
section. Such feedback-based learning does not address all cases, e.g., a learning attack
embedded into a HTTP POST payload, which would generate a legitimate server response. Randomization may also be valuable for learning attacks; we leave the exploration of such defense mechanisms for future research.
4.2 Feedback-based learning and filtering using instrumented shadow servers
Host-based fault detection and patch generation techniques (such as Stack-
Guard/MemGuard , STEM , DYBOC , and many others) hold significant
promise in improving worm and attack detection, but at the cost of significant computational overhead on the host. The performance hit on a server could render such technologies of limited operational value. For instance, STEM imposes a 200% overhead for an entirely-instrumented application. DYBOC is more proactive and designed to be deployed on production servers to provide faster response, but still imposes
at least a 20% overhead on practical web servers. If one can find a means of reducing
the cost of this overhead, the technology will have a far greater value to a larger market.
We envision an architecture consisting of both production servers and an instrumented shadow server, with the latter executing both valid and malicious requests securely but with significant overhead. A network anomaly flow classifier is placed in
front of these pools and shunts traffic based on the anomaly content in incoming requests, as shown in figure 10.
Fig. 10. Shadow server architecture.
In order for the flow classifier to be appropriate for this architecture, we need to ensure that no malicious requests are sent to the production pool, as those machines may
be potentially vulnerable to zero-day attacks. It is acceptable if a small fraction of the
traffic deemed as false positives are shunted to the shadow server, because this server
will indeed serve the requests, but with a greater latency. Nothing has been lost, but
only some amount of response time for a minority portion of the traffic flow. In other
words, an anomaly detector that wants to act as this classifier should have a 100% true
positive detection rate and a reasonably low false positive rate. We can characterize the
latency in such an architecture as l'= l × 1−fp
)+ l ×os × fp
), where l is the standard
latency of a service, os is the shadow server overhead, and fp is the false positive rate. If
we want to target a maximum latency increase l'−l of 1%, given a 20% overhead in
using the shadow server, the false positive rate can be as high as approximately 10%. As
we described in section 3.3, we believe this order-of-magnitude is achievable, along
with a 100% detection rate, by setting the threshold to some low ε. This places network
content flow anomaly detectors in a completely new light. Zero false positive rates are
simply not the right objective. Furthermore, a symbiotic relationship may emerge over
time. False positives validated by the shadow server serve as training data to improve
the accuracy of the anomaly detector. In time, the false positive rate would be decrease
and less traffic would be served by the shadow server; we discuss this in the next section.
4.2.1 Adaptive model training of Anagram with shadow servers
Anagram’s detection model assumes no noise in the model, and uses semi-supervised
training (section 2.3.2) to ensure clean training traffic. This approach can be enhanced
with a hybrid shadow server architecture:
1. Use the shadow server as a training supervisor. This entails an initial passive Anagram deployment, and a “slow training mechanism” whereby the shadow server is
initially sent all requests, and only requests generating a normal response are then
sent to Anagram for training. After a sufficient amount of training has been done,
Anagram can then be put into an active deployment.
2. Use a short training time, and use the shadow server as a false positive feedback
mechanism. In this scenario, Anagram only trains on a small fraction of traffic assumed to be good and is then immediately deployed. While the false positive rate
will be higher, Anagram can watch for normal responses from the shadow server
and can then include the appropriate n-grams of the original request in its model
of “normal traffic”. This can incrementally reduce the false positive rate as the
system continues processing requests.
Of course, a hybrid approach can also be employed; for example, Anagram could be
deployed with no model, process 100% as false positives, and use feedback as an incremental learning architecture. We performed some early experiments with feedback
learning using the PAYL sensor in , and Anagram has recently been used as a sensor in . We intend to continue integration experiments using Anagram, and will
report our results in a future paper.
5 Related Work
In addition to the works cited in the introduction, we further discuss research in
anomaly detection, signature generation, polymorphic worms, and mimicry and learning
5.1 Anomaly Detectors and Signature Generators
Early intrusion anomaly sensors focused system calls. Forrest ’s "foreign sequences
of system calls" in a binary-based anomaly detector is quite similar to the modeling
implemented in Anagram. Tan and Maxion shows why Forrest's work produced
optimal results when the size of the token window was fixed at 6 (essentially a 6-gram).
In Anagram, no fixed sized window is needed; one may model a mixture of n-grams.
Forrest’s grams were sequences of tokens each representing a unique system function,
whereas Anagram models n-grams of byte values.
Many researchers have considered the use of packet flows and/or content analysis for
anomaly detection. Honeycomb is a host-based IDS that automatically creates
signatures by applying longest common substring (LCS) on malicious traffic captured
by a honeypot targeting dark space. Computed substrings are used as candidate worm
signatures. Similarly, EarlyBird uses Rabin fingerprints to find the most frequent
substrings for signatures. Unlike Honeycomb (and PAYL), Anagram computes distinct
n-grams from packets and compares the n-gram set against those in its model; this is a
linear-time operation, unlike polynomial-time LCS.
Polygraph extends the work done in Autograph ; both are signature generators that assume traffic is separated into two flow pools, one with suspicious scanning
traffic and a one with non-suspicious traffic. Instead of assuming signatures are contiguous, like Autograph, Polygraph allows a signature composed multiple noncontiguous substrings (tokens), particularly to accommodate polymorphic worms. Tokens may
be generated as a set (of which all must be present), as an ordered sequence, or as a
probabilistic set (Bayes signature). Like Polygraph, Anagram is capable of identifying
multiple “tokens”. However, Anagram’s design also does not assume an external flow
classifier, being one itself. A more general discussion of related work in the area of
anomaly detection can be found in .
Shield provides vulnerability signatures instead of string-oriented content signatures, and blocks attacks that exploit that vulnerability. A “shield” is manually specified
for a vulnerability identified in some network available code; the time lag to specify,
test and deploy shields from the moment the vulnerability is identified favors the worm
writer, not the defenders. COVERS analyzes attack-triggered memory errors in
C/C++ programs and develops structural memory signatures; this is a primarily hostspecific approach, while Anagram focuses on network traffic.
SigFree uses a different approach, focusing on generic code detection; as its name
implies, it does not rely on signatures, preferring to disassemble instruction sequences
and identify, using data flow anomaly detection, if requests contain sufficient code to
merit them as being suspicious. Anagram does not explicitly differentiate between code
and data, although it is often able to do so based on training. Additionally, Anagram
monitors content flows, not just requests, and can apply to a broader variety of protocols.
5.2 Polymorphic Worms, Mimicry and Learning Attacks
Polymorphic viruses are nothing new; “1260” and the “Dark Avenger Mutation Engine”
were considered the first two polymorphic virus engines, written in the early 90s .
However, early work focused on making it more difficult for detection by COTS signature scanners, would be easily detected by an anomaly detector as they contain significantly different byte distributions than non-malicious code, and were primarily targeted
for manual execution and so did not incorporate exploit mechanisms like common Internet worms. Polymorphic worms with vulnerability-exploiting shellcode, e.g., ADMmutate and CLET , do support exploit vectors and are primarily designed to fool
signature-based IDSes. CLET does feature a form of padding, which they call cramming, to defeat simple anomaly detectors. However, cram bytes are derived from a static
source, i.e. instructions in a file included with the CLET distribution; while this may be
customized to approach a general mimicry attack, it must be done by hand.
The notion of a mimicry attack on an anomaly detection system was first introduced
in 2001 by Wagner and Dean , but initial efforts to generate mimicry attacks, including and , focused on system-call anomaly detection. With the advent of
effective network payload-based anomaly detection techniques, researchers have begun
building “smart worms” that employ a combination of polymorphism and mimicry attack mechanisms. Kolesnikov, Dagon and Lee built a worm specifically designed to
target network anomaly detection approaches, including PAYL. They use a number of
techniques, including polymorphic decryption, normal traffic profiling and blending,
and splitting to effectively defeat PAYL and several other IDSes.
Defeating learning attacks is also current research; discusses the problem for
anomaly detectors from a theoretical perspective, categorizes different types of learning
attacks (e.g., causative vs. exploratory, etc.) and speculates as to several possible solutions. Anagram implements some of these techniques, and its use of randomization,
hiding key parameters of the model secret from the attacker, may be extensible to learning. Our ongoing work includes exploring several other strategies, including the randomization of n-gram sizes, and various strategies to test whether an attacker is polluting learning traffic at given points in time.
6 Conclusion
Anagram is an anomaly detector based upon n-gram analysis using a binary-based
modeling technique. The use of randomization makes the sensor resistant to mimicry
attack. Anagram’s models use Bloom filters for compactness and performance. Our tests
suggest Anagram has less than a .01% false positive rate along with a 100% detection
rate for a variety of worms and viruses detected in traces of our local network traffic.
Anagram’s use of Bloom filters also enables effective privacy-preserving cross-site
correlation and signature generation.
Anagram detects existing mimicry attacks, including those targeted at our previous
anomaly detection sensor, PAYL, and we speculate that Anagram will be robust to
future attacks as well. We also discuss approaches to effectively learn Anagram models,
including the use of a bad content Bloom filter and instrumented shadow servers. For
the latter case, we believe Anagram can act as an effective network anomaly flow classifier to mitigate host instrumentation overhead and make these tools effective for practical deployment.
There are a number of interesting venues for future research. We intend to build an
integrated instrumented shadow server architecture utilizing Anagram to collect statistics on performance and modeling accuracy. Another open area of research is to make
binary-based modeling more robust against learning attacks. We would also like to
compare Anagram’s performance to other proposed content-based anomaly sensors.11
Finally, we intend a practical deployment of a multiple-site correlation effort and gauge
Anagram’s performance in helping to identify broad zero-day worms or targeted attacks
while maintaining full privacy.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Gabriela Cretu, Wei-Jen Li, Michael Locasto, Angelos Stavrou,
and Angelos Keromytis for their suggestions and advice during our collaboration, and
Panagiotis Manolios and Peter Dillinger for their suggestions in Bloom filter design.