Causal Inference in Public Health
Thomas A. Glass1, Steven N. Goodman2, Miguel A. Hernán3,4, and Jonathan M. Samet5
1Department of Epidemiology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205; 
2Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California 94305;
 
3Departments of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Harvard University,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115
4Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02115;
 
5Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, and USC Institute for Global
Health, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90089; 
Causal inference has a central role in public health; the determination that an association is causal
indicates the possibility for intervention. We review and comment on the long-used guidelines for
interpreting evidence as supporting a causal association and contrast them with the potential
outcomes framework that encourages thinking in terms of causes that are interventions. We argue
that in public health this framework is more suitable, providing an estimate of an action’s
consequences rather than the less precise notion of a risk factor’s causal effect. A variety of
modern statistical methods adopt this approach. When an intervention cannot be specified, causal
relations can still exist, but how to intervene to change the outcome will be unclear. In application,
the often-complex structure of causal processes needs to be acknowledged and appropriate data
collected to study them. These newer approaches need to be brought to bear on the increasingly
complex public health challenges of our globalized world.
causation; causal modeling; causal framework; epidemiology
Copyright © 2013 by Annual Reviews. All rights reserved
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the
objectivity of this review.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 02.
 
Annu Rev Public Health. 2013 ; 34: 61–75. doi:10.1146/annurev-publhealth-031811-124606.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
INTRODUCTION
The determination that an association is causal can have profound public health
consequences, signaling the need or at least the possibility to take an action to reduce
exposure to a hazardous agent or to increase exposure to a beneficial one. Consequently,
causal inference is implicitly and sometimes explicitly embedded in public health practice
and policy formulation. Practitioners decide on interventions on the basis of consequences
produced by a presumed causal relationship. Causal inference is embedded in regulatory
processes, for example those of the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) with regard
to major outdoor air pollutants and the hazards of chemicals, and those of the Department of
Veterans Affairs, in compensation of US veterans for service-connected conditions and
diseases [Agent Orange Act, Pub. L. 102—4 ; Clean Air Act 42 U.S.C. § 7401-7671q
 (36, 37). Public health evidence may be prominent in legal proceedings in which
judgment about the existence of a causal relationship is pivotal in determining guilt and
liability for damages (16, 70). Causal inference is also embedded in many aspects of medical
practice through the principles of evidence-based medicine, where decisions about harms or
benefits of therapeutic agents are based, in part, on rules for how to measure the strength of
evidence for causal connections between interventions and health outcomes (20).
The history of public health and of its quantitative disciplines, epidemiology and
biostatistics, can be seen as one long discourse on disease causation, the ultimate targets of
which are to find and to mitigate reversible causes (22, 23, 33, 45, 49, 65). Over that history,
a variety of “frameworks” for thinking about causation have risen to coincide with the
dominant problems of the day and the scientific understanding of their etiology. During the
ravages of the cholera epidemics of the nineteenth century, John Snow gathered evidence in
support of waterborne transmission, using what Frost later called his ordered “chains of
inference” (15, 71, 72). With the advent of germ theory, Koch’s postulates provided a more
systematic and formalized approach that worked well within the specificity of unique germdisease links.
In the 1950s and 1960s, what we call the classic framework for causal thinking was
articulated by Sir Austin Bradford Hill, who added to this discourse with his causal criteria
against the backdrop of international debate about the causal role of smoking in the
epidemic of lung cancer (52, 74). This classic framework was developed to identify the
causes of diseases and particularly to determine the role of smoking in lung cancer (33, 69),
but its use has been extended to public health decision making, a domain where questions
about causal effects relate to the consequences of interventions that have often been
motivated by the identification of causal factors. This framework, described below, has
proven useful and has driven decision making in public health for decades. However, the
framework does not reflect the current, more clearly articulated view of causal processes.
Additionally, the guidelines used to evaluate evidence have not changed for decades, even as
the causal questions have become more complex, beyond the original intent of this
framework.
Glass et al.
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
One important limitation of the classic view of disease causation arising from the Hill
criteria has been the lack of a formal basis for evaluating causal hypotheses. Only in the past
several decades have investigators explored more formally the foundational mathematical
and conceptual issues required for rigorous estimation of causal effects, particularly in
circumstances where randomization of treatment assignment that insures exchangeable
comparison groups is unfeasible. Since 1970, the frequency and intensity of formal
discourse on causation and causal inference have increased, and the field has progressed
toward what we term the modern approach, based on the counterfactual or potential
outcomes framework (18, 25).
In this review, we first describe and comment on the classic framework that is generally
attributed to Sir Austin Bradford Hill and the advisory committee that prepared the 1964 US
Surgeon General’s report on smoking (33, 69). We follow with a brief review of the modern
framework based on the counterfactual, or potential, outcomes model for estimating causal
effects. The latter approaches are unified by an analytic effort to approximate the
experimental paradigm that balances treated (exposed) and untreated (unexposed) groups on
other factors. We next carry this counterfactual approach to the broad and multilevel nature
of causal questions, as formulated over the past several decades, and consider causal
inference in the context of such questions and their implications for public health actions
(14). We end with consideration of how these new approaches---broader frameworks for
formulating causal questions and developing analytical tools to answer them---can be used
to reduce uncertainty associated with causal determinations. The interplay between strength
of evidence and remaining uncertainties typically figures prominently in decision making.
More pragmatically grounded and transparent approaches are needed as we face such
challenges as the rise of obesity throughout the world---an example that necessitates a
multilevel framing of underlying causal processes, with structure extending from the genes
of individuals to the foods sold worldwide by multinational corporations, as the basis for
formulating interventions (35). This type of framework has already proven valuable in
approaching tobacco control (Figure 1). The upstream drivers of the epidemic are clear at
this point in its course: a large and powerful global industry led by a handful of powerful
multinational corporations. The role of factors at other levels has also been characterized:
cultural acceptance of smoking, laws, peers, and the family. Now, we are probing the
genetic basis of susceptibility to nicotine addiction and tobacco-caused diseases. Within the
modern framework, such structure leads to questions and counterfactuals at multiple levels:
At the highest level, what would be the disease burden, absent the upstream factor (e.g., the
tobacco industry), and at the lowest level, what would be the disease risk for genetically
susceptible individuals, absent the environmental factor (e.g., smoking)? The structure also
raises the possibility of interventions at multiple levels, reflecting how interventions might
be carried out in practice.
A Brief Detour into Philosophy
Although public health scientists and practitioners have disagreed fiercely at times about
what is required of causal explanations, the idea that causal relationships can be proven has
rarely been seriously questioned. But in the long and contentious discourse on causation in
philosophy (5), one can discern two distinct classes of causation theory. On one side are the
Glass et al.
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
descendants of Locke and John Stuart Mill, who argued that causation can be verified
through the careful implementation of the scientific method and the power of
experimentation. On the other side is a parallel line of discourse that extends from David
Hume, who argued that even though nature may contain real causal “connexions” between
phenomena, causation cannot be empirically verified (4). This skeptical tradition had no
better spokesman than Bertrand Russell (63), who in a famous essay delivered to the
Aristotelian Society of 1912, wrote, “The law of causality, I believe, like much that passes
muster among philosophers, is a relic of a bygone age, surviving, like the monarchy, only
because it is erroneously supposed to do no harm” (p. 1).
Although the science of epidemiology and the practice of public health fall clearly into the
pragmatic tradition of Locke and Mill, evidence of the influence of Hume and Russell can
be found in the early skepticism of R.A. Fisher (10) and Karl Pearson, the father of modern
statistics, who argued that the correlation between two variables, once known, is all there is
to know, a view that persists with some epidemiologists. In their review of causal inference
in epidemiology, Lipton & Odegaard (46) ask what is really added to the statement that
smokers are at X-fold increased risk of lung cancer by the statement that smoking is a cause.
From a policy point of view, the use of causal language has obvious advantages, and it has
been widely embraced not only by researchers but by policy makers. The legacy of Hume
and Russell urges us to be cautious because assigning causal significance to some
phenomena also provides an easy target for skeptics and, potentially, affected stakeholders
to derail reasonable interventions on the basis of an absence of proof. Public health
practitioners and researchers are interested primarily in effecting change and not in engaging
in philosophical debates, but the ghost of Russell reminds us that the invocation of causal
language has powerful consequences, both good and bad.
The challenge of determining causation in public health has always been shaped by the
limitations of the available data, the understanding of the underlying biological or
sociological processes, and our ability to intervene in the real world. Faced with sometimes
limited data and an often poor understanding of a network of connected factors in a complex
world, we revert to pragmatism. Public health science seeks the certainty of the experiment
as its organizing principle. Holland (34) says it succinctly in a famous paper, “Put as bluntly
and as contentiously as possible, in this article I take the position that causes are only those
things that could, in principle, be treatments in experiments” (p. 954).
This statement is formalized in the potential outcomes framework, which compares what is
observed to what might have been observed, all other things being equal, under a
counterfactual scenario. The potential outcomes framework is a powerful tool that has
implications for how we see the world and to determine what types of questions can be
answered in a useful way for public health purposes and what kinds of questions are beyond
our capacity to answer (25, 54, 60--62).
Approaches to Causal Inference in Public Health
The classic approach to causal inference in public health, described quite similarly across
textbooks and widely used in practice, has its roots in the seminal debate around smoking as
a cause of lung cancer in the 1950s and 1960s (33, 69). At that time, the results of
Glass et al.
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
epidemiological studies had shown associations of smoking with increased risk for lung
cancer and other cancers, for coronary heart disease, and for “emphysema” and “bronchitis.”
The most relevant data came from case-control and cohort studies and findings from animal
models and lab studies characterizing the components of tobacco smoke. Rising mortality
rates from lung cancer and coronary heart disease provided a strong imperative for taking
action to reduce cigarette smoking. However, taking action required that smoking be
established as the cause of the increases in mortality. Even as the epidemiological evidence
mounted, the tobacco industry implemented a wide-ranging strategy to question the
credibility of epidemiological evidence generally and of the most pivotal studies specifically
(53). This tactic of creating doubt about the evidence heightened tension around the
challenge of interpreting the findings of epidemiological research, and its use attests to the
societal importance of causal determinations. The manufacture and dissemination of doubt
remain strategies today, widely used by stakeholders whose interests are potentially
threatened by a causal finding (48).
The framework that was put forth for causal inference in the 1960s involved expert
judgment grounded in a set of guidelines or criteria (Table 1). The long-standing discussion
among philosophers was acknowledged as these guidelines were elaborated, but the need for
a pragmatic and timely approach foreshortened debate. The framework was effective for
smoking and lung cancer, one of its first applications. Smoking is a potent cause, increasing
the risk of lung cancer about 20-fold and leading to most cases of lung cancer; consequently,
the evidence from observational studies was consistent and strong, and temporality was
clear. As described by their originators and as used in practice, these criteria (or what Hill
calls “viewpoints”) are not absolute nor does inference of a causal relationship require that
all criteria be met. In fact, only temporality is requisite. Some features of evidence, most
notably specificity, have proven to have little applicability for noncommunicable diseases
that have multiple causes. The classic approach is vulnerable to subjectivity in the
evaluation of evidence and to manipulation of the evidence, and stakeholders potentially
affected by the finding that an association is or is not causal may take opposing positions on
evidence interpretation. Additionally, as constructed and applied, the framework assumes a
simplistic direct relationship between cause and putative effect without explicit
consideration of the structure of the underlying causal processes. For example, tobacco
smoking is an indisputable cause of lung cancer, but more distally in the causal process, a
small number of multinational tobacco companies produce most of the cigarettes sold and
smoked worldwide (Figure 1). The inference about cause became the rationale for
intervention, but the causal conclusions were not couched in the consequences of specific
actions to reduce or eliminate cigarette smoking. And later, public health action was aimed
at the individual smoker, rather than at the upstream system of cigarette manufacture,
advertising, and distribution. This limited focus is a key characteristic of the traditional
approach; causal determinations were made by epidemiologists and others in public health
about various risk factors without considering the effect of a specific way of changing them.
Today, public health practice can be seen to be influenced by both the classic and modern
frameworks, as exemplified in the following case studies. In setting outdoor air quality
standards in the United States, causal inference and associated counterfactuals figure in the
decision process. Two sections of the US Clean Air Act (108 and 109) address the major
Glass et al.
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
outdoor air pollutants, requiring the Administrator of the EPA to set National Ambient Air
Quality Standards (NAAQS) such that “the attainment and maintenance of which in the
judgment of the Administrator, based on such criteria and allowing an adequate margin of
safety, are requisite to protect the public health” (2, p. 5697). The phrase “such criteria”
refers to the accumulated evidence on harm, giving emphasis to that reported since the last
review of the NAAQS. The present process for a pollutant, e.g., ozone, begins with a review
of the evidence, assembled in the Integrative Science Assessment (Figure 2). The process for
causal inference draws on the long-standing classic approach and classifies the strength of
evidence in a five-level scheme (“not likely,” “inadequate,” “suggestive,” “likely,” and
“causal”). The classification, in part, determines the effects that are subsequently considered
in the risk analysis, which estimates the pollutant-related burden of disease and the
consequences of potential changes to the NAAQS. Those effects for which the evidence
reaches the level of “likely” or “causal” are generally advanced for consideration in the risk
analysis and consequently figure in the policy judgment made by the Administrator on
revising the NAAQS for a pollutant. The risk analysis models the counterfactual distribution
of health outcomes under different scenarios of pollution reduction and under no
intervention. The risk analysis has the modern approach as its conceptual underpinning.
The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) of the World Health Organization
operates its Monograph Program, which conducts systematic reviews to classify agents by
their carcinogenicity (38). The general approach involves a meeting of a multidisciplinary
working group that reviews evidence relevant to a particular agent in four broad categories:
(a) exposure, (b) studies of cancer in humans, (c) studies of cancer in experimental animals,
and (d) mechanistic and other relevant data. The human and animal evidence is separately
considered, and for each category, the strength of evidence for causation is classified in a
four-level hierarchical schema: sufficient, limited, inadequate, or suggesting lack of
carcinogenicity. The evidence is evaluated with an approach based in the Hill or classic
criteria. Evidence for the role of particular mechanisms is evaluated as “weak,” “moderate,”
or “strong,” and investigators consider the relevance of the mechanism to cancer in humans.
The overall classification is based primarily on the animal and human findings (Figure 3),
but the mechanistic evidence can figure in the classification as well. This approach, for
example, resulted in the 2011 classification of radiofrequency electromagnetic radiation, the
type emitted by mobile phones, as a possible human carcinogen, Group 2B in the IARC
schema (4).
CAUSAL INFERENCE AS A COMPARISON OF OUTCOMES UNDER
DIFFERENT PUBLIC HEALTH INTERVENTIONS
As described above, a key role for causal inference in public health is the comparison of the
distribution of health outcomes after different interventions. In an ideal world, these
comparisons would be conducted via randomized experiments, and all public health
decisions would be based on the findings of those experiments. For example, the integration
of smoking-cessation programs into the health care system would ideally rely on the
findings from long-term randomized studies comparing the efficacy of the intervention in
large groups of people from the target population that adhered to the intervention with
Glass et al.
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
control groups. Similarly, the decision to increase taxation or regulation of tobacco products
would be based in studies that randomly allocated these policies across communities or
counties. Unfortunately, such randomized experiments are often unethical, impractical, or
simply too lengthy for timely decision making. As a result, causal inferences for public
health are usually derived from observational studies, buttressed by other lines of evidence if
available.
The use of observational, rather than experimental, data for causal inference in public health
raises several concerns. One particularly relevant concern for public health is that the
interventions under consideration may be vaguely defined, if at all, limiting the relevance of
the findings for public health decision making. For example, the comparison of observed
mortality rates between obese and lean people suggests a possible causal relation between
obesity and death but offers little guidance for action: Should solutions be found in exercise
programs in the workplace, reduction of sizes of sugared sodas available in retail stores,
liposuction (26, 32)? Although obesity may meet criteria for a causal factor in the classic
framework, the association between obesity and mortality offers little insight for preventive
action. One alternative is to focus on the contrast between individuals randomly assigned to
dietary modification versus those who are not or a contrast between communities
randomized to taxation of sugary drinks versus those who are not. The findings from such
experiments would provide direct, actionable information about the effects of interventions
against obesity. The observational study that compares obese and lean people provides only
indirect evidence and lacks a formally testable causal relation in the absence of further
specification.
One way to address this concern and bridge the gap between the observational data and
public health decision making is to design observational analyses in such a way that the
observational data emulate those from hypothetical randomized experiments with relatively
well-defined interventions. For example, observational data could be used to mimic a
hypothetical randomized experiment involving dietary interventions by comparing the
observed outcomes of individuals who change versus those who do not change their diet
during the study period; or data could be used to mimic a hypothetical randomized
experiment of food policy by comparing health outcomes between schools that did and did
not restrict access to sugary drinks. This approach is built into the counterfactual or potential
outcomes framework proposed by Neyman (50), expanded by Rubin (60, 61), and
generalized to time-varying exposures by Robins (54, 55). A counterfactual approach to
causal inference in public health requires that the causal effects are defined in terms of
contrasts between the distributions of the health outcomes under different (hypothetical)
well-defined interventions.
Comparing relatively well-defined public health interventions is only the first problem for
causal inference from observational data, however. Even well-defined intervention groups
will not usually be directly comparable because the key characteristics of individuals in each
group are likely to differ. For example, individuals who change their diet may also adopt a
healthier lifestyle than those who do not, and schools that change their food policies may
serve populations with less economic inequality than do those schools whose policies
Glass et al.
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
remain unchanged. This noncomparability problem, commonly referred to as confounding,
is a fundamental problem for causal inference using observational data.
The most common approach to mitigate confounding is to measure as many variables as
possible that are responsible for the noncomparability and to adjust for them in the statistical
analysis. The available methods to adjust for measured confounders are stratification,
matching, standardization, inverse probability weighting, and g-estimation. In practical
applications with sparse or high-dimensional data, these adjustment methods are
implemented with the help of statistical models. For example, adjustment via stratification is
often carried out using conventional regression models.
Sometimes the measured confounders are used to estimate each study participant’s
probability of receiving the exposure of interest. For binary exposures (e.g., yes/no), this
probability is referred to as the propensity score (59). If the propensity score is available for
adjustment, then the individual variables are not necessary. Inverse probability weighting
and g-estimation are methods based on propensity scores. Propensity scores can also be used
to adjust for confounding via stratification (e.g., by adding the propensity score as a
covariate in the regression model), matching, and standardization.
For the above methods to provide valid causal inferences, all the confounders must have
been identified and appropriately measured, a condition that is not empirically testable. One
alternative method to eliminate confounding from the effect estimate is instrumental variable
estimation (17, 31). Unlike the other methods, instrumental variable estimation does not
require investigators to measure any confounders. Rather, it requires them to identify and
appropriately measure an instrument, which is roughly defined as a variable that has an
effect on the exposure and that is unassociated with the outcome except through its effect on
the exposure. Unfortunately, it is impossible to verify empirically that a particular variable is
an appropriate instrument. Furthermore, valid instruments can provide only lower and upper
bounds for the magnitude of the causal effect of interest. Typically, these bounds are not
helpful for decision making because they range from beneficial to harmful effects. As a
result, most applications of instrumental variables make additional untestable assumptions to
obtain point estimates for the effect of interest.
When exposures are time-varying, a new potential problem arises: Perhaps the confounders
(also time-varying) are themselves affected by prior exposure levels. In the presence of this
exposure-confounder feedback process, some of the above methods---stratification and
matching---cannot be generally used for valid causal inference. Valid adjustment for
measured confounding requires the use of the parametric g-formula (a generalization of
standardization) (54, 66), inverse probability of marginal structural models (27, 57), or gestimation of nested structural models (which include some forms of instrumental variable
estimation for time-varying exposures as a particular case) (28, 56). These methods,
developed by Robins and collaborators since 1986, are often referred to as causal methods
because they can be applied to obtain valid causal inferences, even in complex settings with
time-varying confounders affected by prior exposure (29, 54).
Glass et al.
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Another recent addition to causal inference methodology is the use of causal diagrams
(directed acyclic graphs, or DAGs). Although not a data-analysis method themselves, causal
diagrams are used to represent the structure of the causal networks linking exposure,
outcome, confounders, and other variables, requiring an explicit formulation of the
relationships among these factors. Thus, causal diagrams are a helpful tool to detect,
graphically, possible sources of bias and to guide investigators in the design of their data
analysis (19, 30, 51).
Challenges to Implementing the Potential Outcomes Framework
Although the potential outcomes approach is robust in the context of a range of causal
questions of high value to public health, its use raises some questions. For example, should
we consider causal questions about inherent features of the individual (such as sex, race/
ethnicity, or age) that cannot be reasonably translated into hypothetical interventions (6, 40,
41, 46, 64)? And how should investigators address individual (e.g., body weight) or social
(e.g., neighborhood income level) factors that can be translated into hypothetical
interventions but for which many possible interventions exist? The potential outcomes
approach highlights that when we estimate associations of health outcomes with factors not
amenable to change, the question of how to change the outcomes caused by those factors
remains open. Consequently, investigations into the association between nonmanipulable
factors and health outcomes can be seen as a prelude to other studies on hypothetical
interventions (3). For example, if observational studies tell us that individuals living in poor
neighborhoods experience higher cancer rates than do those living in more affluent
neighborhoods, then the next suite of investigations might consider potentially manipulable
carcinogen exposures or diets that differ between the communities under study. The initial
finding of a higher cancer rate in poor communities is critical in motivating studies to find
causes that can be manipulated. Absent such further research, epidemiology becomes more
of a descriptive tool for sociologic analysis and less of an instrument for providing evidence
leading to interventions to improve health.
The potential outcomes framework can also be combined with a multilevel framework to
bring context back to epidemiology and public health (7, 8, 12, 47, 58). The causal role of
higher-level contextual factors can be evaluated as long as they can be defined as
comparisons between alternative interventions or policies. However, even when hypothetical
interventions on national or regional policies can be imagined (though often impossible to
implement), many of these contextual exposures are uniform within a society, which makes
it difficult to gather the data needed to conduct an evaluation. As a result, in practice,
epidemiologists and public health practitioners can be induced to prioritize the study of
proximal, downstream interventions at the individual level. For example, it is easier to
conduct, or emulate using observational data, randomized trials of smoking-cessation
programs that target individuals than to conduct trials about the behavior of well-funded
corporate entities with vested interests and political connections.
The potential outcomes framework has been extended in several directions to accommodate
multilevel causal processes (73). Formal modeling approaches have arisen in infectious
disease to handle endogeneity and interference (21, 42--44, 67). Complex systems
Glass et al.
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
approaches have begun to offer new frameworks for causal processes across multiple
geographic and time scales (9, 13, 14, 24). They call for a mapping of the agents and
processes involved in producing outcomes and, consequently, are useful for framing many
of the most pressing public health challenges that result from processes at levels ranging
from local to global. They need to be brought to bear on public health problems as
appropriate. They point to the data that should be collected, how the data should be
organized, and how the data should be analyzed in the potential outcomes framework.
Complex systems approaches may also provide insights into the consequences of outcomes
carried out by different actors and at different levels.
THE FUTURE OF CAUSAL INFERENCE IN PUBLIC HEALTH
In this article, we have offered a brief overview of how causal inference can evolve to
enhance public health decision making; we have given insight into how this goal could be
accomplished. Current causal inference methods are relevant and useful because they are
directed not at identifying causes, but at identifying effects of interventions. The classic
criteria for causal inference do not clearly separate these two goals, leading to debates about
the attribution of cause that are, in fact, implicitly about the appropriate intervention. Even if
we understood a causal chain perfectly, i.e., knew every factor that could be considered a
cause, we still might not know how best to change the outcome. Newer causal inference
methods move us away from the philosophical exercise of identifying causes and force us to
consider more profoundly how to improve health through specific interventions.
Returning to the example of tobacco, for public health purposes, estimating the impact of a
given reduction in individual smoking is less important than estimating the consequences for
health of smoking-cessation programs versus cigarette taxes. The latter exercise provides a
guide to action. But what is different about these two interventions, aside from their
estimated effects, is how we evaluate them. The effect of smoking cessation is amenable to
randomized evaluation, but characterizing the consequences of raising taxes and other forms
of social intervention may not be. In such situations, we must use observational data to
emulate the experiment that cannot be conducted. The greater the departure from the
randomized experiment for evaluation, the greater the reliance on modeling and subjectmatter knowledge, including sociologic and other theories. This need to turn to
observational data poses a potential dilemma for public health; if we succumb to focusing on
interventions that are easy to evaluate, we may ignore upstream interventions for which the
randomized experiment cannot be conducted or emulated but which may have the greatest
potential to effect change. Causal inference frameworks and methods help us to identify
intervention options and to determine how best to assess their effects, but they do not
necessarily inform on the relevant levels of intervention to consider and which interventions
should be attempted.
The preceding discussion shows us that causal inference methods cannot be ignored by those
who endeavor to improve the public’s health. A focus on the effects of interventions rather
than causes brings the science of public health in closer alignment with its practice. New
causal inference methods force us to confront, as previous methods did not, how
interventions will affect public health. However, a number of steps must be taken to move
Glass et al.
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 02.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
these methods from academia to practice. First, teaching in public health, particularly in
MPH (master of public health) programs, often emphasizes the classic framework. This
limited focus needs to be changed so we can birth a new cohort of public health
professionals who have a better understanding of causation and the relevance of the potential
outcomes framework for their work. Second, accessible, high-profile examples of the utility
of the modern framework need to be developed and disseminated through publication and
presentations at professional meetings that public health professionals attend. A very useful
case study could be developed, for example, around the multicomponent strategy used to
address cigarette smoking in New York City (11). During the period 2002--2003, cigarette
smoking dropped steeply in New York City following the implementation of an aggressive
strategy with components including increased taxes, an indoor smoking ban covering most
workplaces, increased cessation services, and education. The use of these methods to gauge
the public health impact of the recent ban on large sugar-containing drinks in New York
City would garner substantial attention and could be quite instructive.
The potential outcomes framework should be embraced as appropriate to gauge the potential
effectiveness of public health actions. We have touched on new analytical tools developed to
sharpen analyses of observational data within this framework, recognizing that true
randomized trials are not possible for many issues. Other approaches capture the complexity
of causal processes with formality sufficient to be useful as a framework for data collection
and analysis and to identify targets for intervention. As public health data are collected, they
need to have enough richness for this purpose. Public health professionals need not shy from
causal inference using these newer approaches because of perceived complexities.
As the origins of questions confronting public health professionals become more complex
and global, we are increasingly challenged to understand the world sufficiently and to
capture its complexity in our models and interventions, to identify areas for change. From
obesity to climate change, how we should measure the effects of causes and where
investments are best directed become questions with enormous health and social
consequences. With so much at stake, and with quantities of linked information from
multiple levels---from gene to environment---which past generations never had, our
quantitative and conceptual tools must keep pace. The utility of long-used, familiar
approaches for statistical analysis and causal inference to interpret the broad sweep of
evidence on the causal determinants of human health is diminishing. Public health
practitioners and researchers must understand the limitations of those methods and commit
to learning what new approaches offer if they are to be reliable scientific guides for the
health of future generations.