Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
ACTOR-MIMIC
DEEP MULTITASK AND TRANSFER REINFORCEMENT
Emilio Parisotto, Jimmy Ba, Ruslan Salakhutdinov
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
{eparisotto,jimmy,rsalakhu}@cs.toronto.edu
The ability to act in multiple environments and transfer previous knowledge to
new situations can be considered a critical aspect of any intelligent agent. Towards this goal, we deﬁne a novel method of multitask and transfer learning that
enables an autonomous agent to learn how to behave in multiple tasks simultaneously, and then generalize its knowledge to new domains. This method, termed
“Actor-Mimic”, exploits the use of deep reinforcement learning and model compression techniques to train a single policy network that learns how to act in a set
of distinct tasks by using the guidance of several expert teachers. We then show
that the representations learnt by the deep policy network are capable of generalizing to new tasks with no prior expert guidance, speeding up learning in novel
environments. Although our method can in general be applied to a wide range
of problems, we use Atari games as a testing environment to demonstrate these
INTRODUCTION
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL), the combination of reinforcement learning methods and
deep neural network function approximators, has recently shown considerable success in highdimensional challenging tasks, such as robotic manipulation and arcade games . These methods exploit the ability of deep networks
to learn salient descriptions of raw state input, allowing the agent designer to essentially bypass the
lengthy process of feature engineering. In addition, these automatically learnt descriptions often signiﬁcantly outperform hand-crafted feature representations that require extensive domain knowledge.
One such DRL approach, the Deep Q-Network (DQN) , has achieved state-ofthe-art results on the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) , a benchmark of
Atari 2600 arcade games. The DQN uses a deep convolutional neural network over pixel inputs to
parameterize a state-action value function. The DQN is trained using Q-learning combined with several tricks that stabilize the training of the network, such as a replay memory to store past transitions
and target networks to deﬁne a more consistent temporal difference error.
Although the DQN maintains the same network architecture and hyperparameters for all games, the
approach is limited in the fact that each network only learns how to play a single game at a time,
despite the existence of similarities between games. For example, the tennis-like game of pong
and the squash-like game of breakout are both similar in that each game consists of trying to hit a
moving ball with a rectangular paddle. A network trained to play multiple games would be able to
generalize its knowledge between the games, achieving a single compact state representation as the
inter-task similarities are exploited by the network. Having been trained on enough source tasks,
the multitask network can also exhibit transfer to new target tasks, which can speed up learning.
Training DRL agents can be extremely computationally intensive and therefore reducing training
time is a signiﬁcant practical beneﬁt.
 
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
The contribution of this paper is to develop and evaluate methods that enable multitask and transfer learning for DRL agents, using the ALE as a test environment. To ﬁrst accomplish multitask
learning, we design a method called “Actor-Mimic” that leverages techniques from model compression to train a single multitask network using guidance from a set of game-speciﬁc expert networks.
The particular form of guidance can vary, and several different approaches are explored and tested
empirically. To then achieve transfer learning, we treat a multitask network as being a DQN which
was pre-trained on a set of source tasks. We show experimentally that this multitask pre-training
can result in a DQN that learns a target task signiﬁcantly faster than a DQN starting from a random
initialization, effectively demonstrating that the source task representations generalize to the target
BACKGROUND: DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
A Markov Decision Process (MDP) is deﬁned as a tuple (S, A, T , R, γ) where S is a set of
states, A is a set of actions, T (s′|s, a) is the transition probability of ending up in state s′ when
executing action a in state s, R is the reward function mapping states in S to rewards in R, and γ is
a discount factor. An agent’s behaviour in an MDP is represented as a policy π(a|s) which deﬁnes
the probability of executing action a in state s. For a given policy, we can further deﬁne the Q-value
function Qπ(s, a) = E[PH
t=0 γtrt|s0 = s, a0 = a] where H is the step when the game ends. The
Q-function represents the expected future discounted reward when starting in a state s, executing
a, and then following policy π until a terminating state is reached. There always exists at least one
optimal state-action value function, Q∗(s, a), such that ∀s ∈S, a ∈A, Q∗(s, a) = maxπ Qπ(s, a)
 . The optimal Q-function can be rewritten as a Bellman equation:
Q∗(s, a) =
s′∼T (·|s,a)
r + γ · max
a′∈A Q∗(s′, a′)
An optimal policy can be constructed from the optimal Q-function by choosing, for a given state, the
action with highest Q-value. Q-learning, a reinforcement learning algorithm, uses iterative backups
of the Q-function to converge towards the optimal Q-function. Using a tabular representation of the
Q-function, this is equivalent to setting Q(n+1)(s, a) = Es′∼T (·|s,a)[r + γ · maxa′∈A Q(n)(s′, a′)]
for the (n+1)th update step . Because the state space in the ALE is too large
to tractably store a tabular representation of the Q-function, the Deep Q-Network (DQN) approach
uses a deep function approximator to represent the state-action value function .
To train a DQN on the (n+1)th step, we set the network’s loss to
L(n+1)(θ(n+1)) =
s,a,r,s′∼M(·)
r + γ · max
a′∈A Q(s′, a′; θ(n)) −Q(s, a; θ(n+1))
where M(·) is a uniform probability distribution over a replay memory, which is a set of the m
previous (s, a, r, s′) transition tuples seen during play, where m is the size of the memory. The
replay memory is used to reduce correlations between adjacent states and is shown to have large
effect on the stability of training the network in some games.
ACTOR-MIMIC
POLICY REGRESSION OBJECTIVE
Given a set of source games S1, ..., SN, our ﬁrst goal is to obtain a single multitask policy network
that can play any source game at as near an expert level as possible. To train this multitask policy
network, we use guidance from a set of expert DQN networks E1, ..., EN, where Ei is an expert
specialized in source task Si. One possible deﬁnition of “guidance” would be to deﬁne a squared
loss that would match Q-values between the student network and the experts. As the range of the
expert value functions could vary widely between games, we found it difﬁcult to directly distill
knowledge from the expert value functions. The alternative we develop here is to instead match
policies by ﬁrst transforming Q-values using a softmax. Using the softmax gives us outputs which
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
are bounded in the unit interval and so the effects of the different scales of each expert’s Q-function
are diminished, achieving higher stability during learning. Intuitively, we can view using the softmax
from the perspective of forcing the student to focus more on mimicking the action chosen by the
guiding expert at each state, where the exact values of the state are less important. We call this
method “Actor-Mimic” as it is an actor, i.e. policy, that mimics the decisions of a set of experts. In
particular, our technique ﬁrst transforms each expert DQN into a policy network by a Boltzmann
distribution deﬁned over the Q-value outputs,
πEi(a|s) =
eτ −1QEi(s,a)
eτ −1QEi(s,a′) ,
where τ is a temperature parameter and AEi is the action space used by the expert Ei, AEi ⊆A.
Given a state s from source task Si, we then deﬁne the policy objective over the multitask network
as the cross-entropy between the expert network’s policy and the current multitask policy:
policy(θ) =
πEi(a|s) log πAMN(a|s; θ),
where πAMN(a|s; θ) is the multitask Actor-Mimic Network (AMN) policy, parameterized by θ. In
contrast to the Q-learning objective which recursively relies on itself as a target value, we now have
a stable supervised training signal (the expert network output) to guide the multitask network.
To acquire training data, we can sample either the expert network or the AMN action outputs to
generate the trajectories used in the loss. Empirically we have observed that sampling from the
AMN while it is learning gives the best results. We later prove that in either case of sampling from
the expert or AMN as it is learning, the AMN will converge to the expert policy using the policy
regression loss, at least in the case when the AMN is a linear function approximator. We use an
ϵ-greedy policy no matter which network we sample actions from, which with probability ϵ picks a
random action uniformly and with probability 1 −ϵ chooses an action from the network.
FEATURE REGRESSION OBJECTIVE
We can obtain further guidance from the expert networks in the following way. Let hAMN(s) and
hEi(s) be the hidden activations in the feature (pre-output) layer of the AMN and i’th expert network computed from the input state s, respectively. Note that the dimension of hAMN(s) does not
necessarily need to be equal to hEi(s), and this is the case in some of our experiments. We deﬁne
a feature regression network fi(hAMN(s)) that, for a given state s, attempts to predict the features
hEi(s) from hAMN(s). The architecture of the mapping fi can be deﬁned arbitrarily, and fi can be
trained using the following feature regression loss:
F eatureRegression(θ, θfi) = ∥fi(hAMN(s; θ); θfi) −hEi(s)∥2
where θ and θfi are the parameters of the AMN and ith feature regression network, respectively.
When training this objective, the error is fully back-propagated from the feature regression network
output through the layers of the AMN. In this way, the feature regression objective provides pressure
on the AMN to compute features that can predict an expert’s features. A justiﬁcation for this objective is that if we have a perfect regression from multitask to expert features, all the information in
the expert features is contained in the multitask features. The use of the separate feature prediction
network fi for each task enables the multitask network to have a different feature dimension than
the experts as well as prevent issues with identiﬁability. Empirically we have found that the feature
regression objective’s primary beneﬁt is that it can increase the performance of transfer learning in
some target tasks.
ACTOR-MIMIC OBJECTIVE
Combining both regression objectives, the Actor-Mimic objective is thus deﬁned as
ActorMimic(θ, θfi) = Li
policy(θ) + β ∗Li
F eatureRegression(θ, θfi),
where β is a scaling parameter which controls the relative weighting of the two objectives. Intuitively, we can think of the policy regression objective as a teacher (expert network) telling a student
(AMN) how they should act (mimic expert’s actions), while the feature regression objective is analogous to a teacher telling a student why it should act that way (mimic expert’s thinking process).
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
TRANSFERING KNOWLEDGE: ACTOR-MIMIC AS PRETRAINING
Now that we have a method of training a network that is an expert at all source tasks, we can proceed
to the task of transferring source task knowledge to a novel but related target task. To enable transfer
to a new task, we ﬁrst remove the ﬁnal softmax layer of the AMN. We then use the weights of
AMN as an instantiation for a DQN that will be trained on the new target task. The pretrained DQN
is then trained using the same training procedure as the one used with a standard DQN. Multitask
pretraining can be seen as initializing the DQN with a set of features that are effective at deﬁning
policies in related tasks. If the source and target tasks share similarities, it is probable that some of
these pretrained features will also be effective at the target task (perhaps after slight ﬁne-tuning).
CONVERGENCE PROPERTIES OF ACTOR-MIMIC
We further study the convergence properties of the proposed Actor-Mimic under a framework similar
to . The analysis mainly focuses on L2-regularized policy regression without feature regression. Without losing generality, the following analysis focuses on learning from a
single game expert softmax policy πE. The analysis can be readily extended to consider multiple
experts on multiple games by absorbing different games into the same state space. Let Dπ(s) be the
stationary distribution of the Markov decision process under policy π over states s ∈S. The policy
regression objective function can be rewritten using expectation under the stationary distribution of
the Markov decision process:
s∼DπAMN,ϵ-greedy(·)
πE(a|s), πAMN(a|s; θ)
where H(·) is the cross-entropy measure and λ is the coefﬁcient of weight decay that is necessary
in the following analysis of the policy regression. Under Actor-Mimic, the learning agent interacts
with the environment by following an ϵ-greedy strategy of some Q function. The mapping from a
Q function to an ϵ-greedy policy πϵ-greedy is denoted by an operator Γ, where πϵ-greedy = Γ(Q). To
avoid confusion onwards, we use notation p(a|s; θ) for the softmax policies in the policy regression
objective.
Assume each state in a Markov decision process is represented by a compact K-dimensional feature
representation φ(s) ∈RK. Consider a linear function approximator for Q values with parameter
matrix θ ∈RK×|A|, ˆQ(s, a; θ) = φ(s)T θa, where θa is the ath column of θ. The corresponding
softmax policy of the linear approximator is deﬁned by p(a|s; θ) ∝exp{ ˆQ(s, a; θ)}.
STOCHASTIC STATIONARY POLICY
For any stationary policy π∗, the stationary point of the objective function Eq. (7) can be found
by setting its gradient w.r.t. θ to zero. Let Pθ be a |S| × |A| matrix where its ith row jth column
element is the softmax policy prediction p(aj|si; θ) from the linear approximator. Similarly, let ΠE
be a |S| × |A| matrix for the softmax policy prediction from the expert model. Additionally, let
Dπ be a diagonal matrix whose entries are Dπ(s). A simple gradient following algorithm on the
objective function Eq. (7) has the following expected update rule using a learning rate αt > 0 at the
tth iteration:
ΦT Dπ(Pθt−1 −ΠE) + λθt−1
Lemma 1. Under a ﬁxed policy π∗and a learning rate schedule that satisﬁes P∞
t=1 αt = ∞,
t < ∞, the parameters θ, updated by the stochastic gradient descent learning algorithm
described above, asymptotically almost surely converge to a unique solution θ∗.
When the policy π∗is ﬁxed, the objective function Eq. (7) is convex and is the same as a multinomial
logistic regression problem with a bounded Lipschitz constant due to its compact input features.
Hence there is a unique stationary point θ∗such that ∆θ∗= 0. The proof of Lemma 1 follows the
stochastic approximation argument .
STOCHASTIC ADAPTIVE POLICY
Consider the following learning scheme to adapt the agent’s policy. The learning agent interacts
with the environment and samples states by following a ﬁxed ϵ-greedy policy π′. Given the samples
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
#10 4 CRAZY CLIMBER
SPACE INVADERS
Figure 1: The Actor-Mimic and expert DQN training curves for 100 training epochs for each of the 8 games.
A training epoch is 250,000 frames and for each training epoch we evaluate the networks with a testing epoch
that lasts 125,000 frames. We report AMN and expert DQN test reward for each testing epoch and the mean
and max of DQN performance. The max is calculated over all testing epochs that the DQN experienced until
convergence while the mean is calculated over the last ten epochs before the DQN training was stopped. In the
testing epoch we use ϵ = 0.05 in the ϵ-greedy policy. The y-axis is the average unscaled episode reward during
a testing epoch. The AMN results are averaged over 2 separately trained networks.
and the expert prediction, the linear function approximator parameters are updated using Eq. (8) to
a unique stationary point θ′. The new parameters θ′ are then used to establish a new ϵ-greedy policy
π′′ = Γ( ˆQθ′) through the Γ operator over the linear function ˆQθ′. The agent under the new policy
π′′ subsequently samples a new set of states and actions from the Markov decision process to update
its parameters. The learning agent therefore generates a sequence of policies {π1, π2, π3, ...}. The
proof for the following theorem is given in Appendix A.
Theorem 1. Assume the Markov decision process is irreducible and aperiodic for any policy π
induced by the Γ operator and Γ is Lipschitz continuous with a constant cϵ, then the sequence of
policies and model parameters generated by the iterative algorithm above converges almost surely
to a unique solution π∗and θ∗.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
The convergence theorem implies the Actor-Mimic learning algorithm also belongs to the family of
no-regret algorithms in the online learning framework, see Ross et al. for more details. Their
theoretical analysis can be directly applied to Actor-Mimic and results in a performance guarantee
bound on how well the Actor-Mimic model performs with respect to the guiding expert.
t (s, π) be the t-step reward of executing π in the initial state s and then following policy
π′. The cost-to-go for a policy π after T-steps is deﬁned as JT (π) = −T Es∼D(·) [R(s, a)], where
R(s, a) is the reward after executing action a in state s.
Proposition 1. For the iterative algorithm described in Section (4.2), if the loss function in Eq. (7)
converges to ϵ with the solution πAMN and Zπ∗
T −t+1(s, π∗)−Zπ∗
T −t+1(s, a) ≥u for all actions a ∈A
and t ∈{1, · · · , T}, then the cost-to-go of Actor-Mimic JT (πAMN) grows linearly after executing T
actions: JT (πAMN) ≤JT (πE) + uTϵ/ log 2.
The above linear growth rate of the cost-to-go is achieved through sampling from AMN action output
πAMN, while the cost grows quadratically if the algorithm only samples from the expert action output.
Our empirical observations conﬁrm this theoretical prediction.
EXPERIMENTS
In the following experiments, we validate the Actor-Mimic method by demonstrating its effectiveness at both multitask and transfer learning in the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE). For our
experiments, we use subsets of a collection of 20 Atari games. 19 games of this set were among the
29 games that the DQN method performed at a super-human level. We additionally chose 1 game,
the game of Seaquest, on which the DQN had performed poorly when compared to a human expert.
Details on the training procedure are described in Appendix B.
To ﬁrst evaluate the actor-mimic objective on multitask learning, we demonstrate the effectiveness
of training an AMN over multiple games simultaneously. In this particular case, since our focus is
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
Crazy Climber
Space Invaders
100% × AMN
Table 1: Actor-Mimic results on a set of eight Atari games. We compare the AMN performance to that of the
expert DQNs trained separately on each game. The expert DQNs were trained until convergence and the AMN
was trained for 100 training epochs, which is equivalent to 25 million input frames per source game. For the
AMN, we report maximum test reward ever achieved in epochs 1-100 and mean test reward in epochs 91-100.
For the DQN, we report maximum test reward ever achieved until convergence and mean test reward in the last
10 epochs of DQN training. Additionally, at the last row of the table we report the percentage ratio of the AMN
reward to the expert DQN reward for every game for both mean and max rewards. These percentage ratios are
plotted in Figure 6. The AMN results are averaged over 2 separately trained networks.
on multitask learning and not transfer learning, we disregard the feature regression objective and set
β to 0. Figure 1 and Table 1 show the results of an AMN trained on 8 games simultaneously with
the policy regression objective, compared to an expert DQN trained separately for each game. The
AMN and every individual expert DQN in this case had the exact same network architecture. We
can see that the AMN quickly reaches close-to-expert performance on 7 games out of 8, only taking
around 20 epochs or 5 million training frames to settle to a stable behaviour. This is in comparison
to the expert networks, which were trained for up to 50 million frames.
One result that was observed during training is that the AMN often becomes more consistent in
its behaviour than the expert DQN, with a noticeably lower reward variance in every game except
Atlantis and Pong. Another surprising result is that the AMN achieves a signiﬁcantly higher mean
reward in the game of Atlantis and relatively higher mean reward in the games of Breakout and
Enduro. This is despite the fact that the AMN is not being optimized to improve reward over the
expert but just replicate the expert’s behaviour. We also observed this increase in source task performance again when we later on increased the AMN model complexity for the transfer experiments
(see Atlantis experiments in Appendix D). The AMN had the worst performance on the game of
Seaquest, which was a game on which the expert DQN itself did not do very well. It is possible
that a low quality expert policy has difﬁculty teaching the AMN to even replicate its own (poor)
behaviour. We compare the performance of our AMN against a baseline of two different multitask
DQN architectures in Appendix C.
We have found that although a small AMN can learn how to behave at a close-to-expert level on
multiple source tasks, a larger AMN can more easily transfer knowledge to target tasks after being trained on the source tasks. For the transfer experiments, we therefore signiﬁcantly increased
the AMN model complexity relative to that of an expert. Using a larger network architecture also
allowed us to scale up to playing 13 source games at once (see Appendix D for source task performance using the larger AMNs). We additionally found that using an AMN trained for too long on
the source tasks hurt transfer, as it is likely overﬁtting. Therefore for the transfer experiments, we
train the AMN on only 4 million frames for each of the source games.
To evaluate the Actor-Mimic objective on transfer learning, the previously described large AMNs
will be used as a weight initialization for DQNs which are each trained on a different target task. We
additionally independently evaluate the beneﬁt of the feature regression objective during transfer
by having one AMN trained with only the policy regression objective (AMN-policy) and another
trained using both feature and policy regression (AMN-feature). The results are then compared to
the baseline of a DQN that was initialized with random weights.
The performance on a set of 7 target games is detailed in Table 2 (learning curves are plotted in
Figure 7). We can see that the AMN pretraining provides a deﬁnite increase in learning speed for
the 3 games of Breakout, Star Gunner and Video Pinball. The results in Breakout and Video Pinball
demonstrate that the policy regression objective alone provides signiﬁcant positive transfer in some
target tasks. The reason for this large positive transfer might be due to the source game Pong having
very similar mechanics to both Video Pinball and Breakout, where one must use a paddle to prevent
a ball from falling off screen. The machinery used to detect the ball in Pong would likely be useful
in detecting the ball for these two target tasks, given some ﬁne-tuning. Additionally, the feature
regression objective causes a signiﬁcant speed-up in the game of Star Gunner compared to both the
random initialization and the network trained solely with policy regression. Therefore even though
the feature regression objective can slightly hurt transfer in some source games, it can provide large
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
AMN-policy
AMN-feature
AMN-policy
AMN-feature
AMN-policy
AMN-feature
Road Runner
AMN-policy
AMN-feature
AMN-policy
AMN-feature
Star Gunner
AMN-policy
AMN-feature
Video Pinball
AMN-policy
AMN-feature
Table 2: Actor-Mimic transfer results for a set of 7 games. The 3 networks are trained as DQNs on the target
task, with the only difference being the weight initialization. “Random” means random initial weights, “AMNpolicy” means a weight initialization with an AMN trained using policy regression and “AMN-feature” means
a weight initialization with an AMN trained using both policy and feature regression (see text for more details).
We report the average test reward every 4 training epochs (equivalent to 1 million training frames), where the
average is over 4 testing epochs that are evaluated immediately after each training epoch. For each game, we
bold out the network results that have the highest average testing reward for that particular column.
beneﬁts in others. The positive transfer in Breakout, Star Gunner and Video Pinball saves at least up
to 5 million frames of training time in each game. Processing 5 million frames with the large model
is equivalent to around 4 days of compute time on a NVIDIA GTX Titan.
On the other hand, for the games of Krull and Road Runner (although the multitask pretraining does
help learning at the start) the effect is not very pronounced. When running Krull we observed that the
policy learnt by any DQN regardless of the initialization was a sort of unexpected local maximum.
In Krull, the objective is to move between a set of varied minigames and complete each one. One of
the minigames, where the player must traverse a spiderweb, gives extremely high reward by simply
jumping quickly in a mostly random fashion. What the DQN does is it kills itself on purpose in the
initial minigame, runs to the high reward spiderweb minigame, and then simply jumps in the corner
of the spiderweb until it is terminated by the spider. Because it is relatively easy to get stuck in this
local maximum, and very hard to get out of it (jumping in the minigame gives unproportionally high
reward compared to the other minigames), transfer does not really help learning.
For the games of Gopher and Robotank, we can see that the multitask pretraining does not have
any signiﬁcant positive effect. In particular, multitask pretraining for Robotank even seems to slow
down learning, providing an example of negative transfer. The task in Robotank is to control a tank
turret in a 3D environment to destroy other tanks, so it’s possible that this game is so signiﬁcantly
different from any source task (being the only ﬁrst-person 3D game) that the multitask pretraining
does not provide any useful prior knowledge.
RELATED WORK
The idea of using expert networks to guide a single mimic network has been studied in the context
of supervised learning, where it is known as model compression. The goal of model compression is
to reduce the computational complexity of a large model (or ensemble of large models) to a single
smaller mimic network while maintaining as high an accuracy as possible. To obtain high accuracy,
the mimic network is trained using rich output targets provided by the experts. These output targets
are either the ﬁnal layer logits or the high-temperature softmax outputs of the
experts . Our approach is most similar to the technique of 
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
which matches the high-temperature outputs of the mimic network with that of the expert network.
In addition, we also tried an objective that provides expert guidance at the feature level instead of
only at the output level. A similar idea was also explored in the model compression case , where a deep and thin mimic network used a larger expert network’s intermediate
features as guiding hints during training. In contrast to these model compression techniques, our
method is not concerned with decreasing test time computation but instead using experts to provide
otherwise unavailable supervision to a mimic network on several distinct tasks.
Actor-Mimic can also be considered as part of the larger Imitation Learning class of methods, which
use expert guidance to teach an agent how to act. One such method, called DAGGER , is similar to our approach in that it trains a policy to directly mimic an expert’s behaviour
while sampling actions from the mimic agent. Actor-Mimic can be considered as an extension of
this work to the multitask case. In addition, using a deep neural network to parameterize the policy
provides us with several advantages over the more general Imitation Learning framework. First, we
can exploit the automatic feature construction ability of deep networks to transfer knowledge to new
tasks, as long as the raw data between tasks is in the same form, i.e. pixel data with the same dimensions. Second, we can deﬁne objectives which take into account intermediate representations of the
state and not just the policy outputs, for example the feature regression objective which provides a
richer training signal to the mimic network than just samples of the expert’s action output.
Recent work has explored combining expert-guided Imitation Learning and deep neural networks in
the single-task case. Guo et al. use DAGGER with expert guidance provided by Monte-Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS) policies to train a deep neural network that improves on the original DQN’s
performance. Some disadvantages of using MCTS experts as guidance are that they require both
access to the (hidden) RAM state of the emulator as well as an environment model. Another related method is that of guided policy search , which combines a regularized
importance-sampled policy gradient with guiding trajectory samples generated using differential dynamic programming. The goal in that work was to learn continuous control policies which improved
upon the basic policy gradient method, which is prone to poor local minima.
A wide variety of methods have also been studied in the context of RL transfer learning for a more comprehensive review). One related approach is to use a dual state
representation with a set of task-speciﬁc and task-independent features known as “problem-space”
and “agent-space” descriptors, respectively. For each source task, a task-speciﬁc value function is
learnt on the problem-space descriptors and then these learnt value functions are transferred to a
single value function over the agent-space descriptors. Because the agent-space value function is
deﬁned over features which maintain constant semantics across all tasks, this value function can be
directly transferred to new tasks. Banerjee & Stone constructed agent-space features by ﬁrst
generating a ﬁxed-depth game tree of the current state, classifying each future state in the tree as
either {win, lose, draw, nonterminal} and then coalescing all states which have the same class or
subtree. To transfer the source tasks value functions to agent-space, they use a simple weighted average of the source task value functions, where the weight is proportional to the number of times that
a speciﬁc agent-space descriptor has been seen during play in that source task. In a related method,
Konidaris & Barto transfer the value function to agent-space by using regression to predict
every source tasks problem-space value function from the agent-space descriptors. A drawback of
these methods is that the agent- and problem-space descriptors are either hand-engineered or generated from a perfect environment model, thus requiring a signiﬁcant amount of domain knowledge.
DISCUSSION
In this paper we deﬁned Actor-Mimic, a novel method for training a single deep policy network
over a set of related source tasks. We have shown that a network trained using Actor-Mimic is
capable of reaching expert performance on many games simultaneously, while having the same
model complexity as a single expert. In addition, using Actor-Mimic as a multitask pretraining
phase can signiﬁcantly improve learning speed in a set of target tasks. This demonstrates that the
features learnt over the source tasks can generalize to new target tasks, given a sufﬁcient level of
similarity between source and target tasks. A direction of future work is to develop methods that
can enable a targeted knowledge transfer from source tasks by identifying related source tasks for
the given target task. Using targeted knowledge transfer can potentially help in cases of negative
transfer observed in our experiments.
Acknowledgments: This work was supported by Samsung and NSERC.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016