Teaching More by Lecturing Less
Jennifer K. Knight, and William B. Wood,
Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309
Received June 23, 2005; Revised September 1, 2005; Accepted September 2, 2005
Monitoring Editor: Eric Chudler
We carried out an experiment to determine whether student learning gains in a large,
traditionally taught, upper-division lecture course in developmental biology could be increased
by partially changing to a more interactive classroom format. In two successive semesters, we
presented the same course syllabus using different teaching styles: in fall 2003, the traditional
lecture format; and in spring 2004, decreased lecturing and addition of student participation and
cooperative problem solving during class time, including frequent in-class assessment of
understanding. We used performance on pretests and posttests, and on homework problems to
estimate and compare student learning gains between the two semesters. Our results indicated
significantly higher learning gains and better conceptual understanding in the more interactive
course. To assess reproducibility of these effects, we repeated the interactive course in spring 2005
with similar results. Our findings parallel results of similar teaching-style comparisons made in
other disciplines. On the basis of this evidence, we propose a general model for teaching large
biology courses that incorporates interactive engagement and cooperative work in place of some
lecturing, while retaining course content by demanding greater student responsibility for learning
outside of class.
undergraduate students, developmental biology, peer instruction, just-in-time teaching,
concept maps
INTRODUCTION
Thirty years ago, the future success of biology students
might have been predictable by the amount of factual
knowledge they had accumulated in their college courses.
Today, there is much more information to learn, but the
increasingly easy accessibility of facts on the Internet is
making long-term memorization of details less and less
important. Students who go on to biology-related careers
after college will be required to apply conceptual knowledge
to problem solving rather than simply to know many facts,
and they will probably be asked to work as members of a
team, rather than individually. Therefore, teaching for
conceptual understanding and analytical skills while encouraging collaborative activities makes increasing sense in
undergraduate courses.
There is now a great deal of evidence that lecturing is a
relatively ineffective pedagogical tool for promoting conceptual understanding. Some of this evidence is general,
showing that learners at all levels gain meaningful understanding of concepts primarily through active engagement
with and application of new information, not by passive
listening to verbal presentations . More specific evidence, primarily
from university courses in physics, shows that students learn
substantially more from active inquiry–based activities and
problem solving than from listening to lectures . Nevertheless, many university faculty who are comfortable with
their lecture courses remain unconvinced that more interactive teaching will lead to increased student learning, or
that interactive teaching is even feasible in large classes.
Colleagues we have talked with are also concerned that the
time and effort required for course revision would be
prohibitive, that their students would learn less content, that
outcomes could not be reliably assessed in any case, and that
such changes would take students and faculty alike out of
their current comfort zones (see Allen and Tanner, this issue).
To address the validity of these concerns, we carried out an
experiment in ‘‘scientific teaching’’ 
in a large upper-level Developmental Biology course, in
DOI: 10.1187/05–06–0082
Address correspondence to: Jennifer K. Knight (knight@
colorado.edu).
Cell Biology Education
Vol. 4, 298–310, Winter 2005
 2005 by The American Society for Cell Biology
which the same two instructors (the authors), teaching the
same syllabus, tested the effect of two different teaching
styles on student learning gains in successive semesters. The
results we present here indicate that even a moderate shift
toward more interactive and cooperative learning in class
can result in significantly higher student learning gains than
achieved using a standard lecture format. We also discuss the
impact of changing the course format on student attitudes,
some of the practical implications of course reform, and
implications of these findings for the future design of large
biology courses.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
Context of the Course
In our department, Molecular, Cellular and Developmental
Biology (MCDB) at the University of Colorado, Boulder,
about 50% of declared majors initially self-identify as
premedical. Majors are required to take a sequence of five
core courses, four of which have an associated but separate
laboratory course. Developmental Biology is the last of these
courses, preceded by Introduction to Molecular and Cell
Biology, Genetics, Cell Biology, and Molecular Biology.
Therefore, students taking the Developmental Biology course
are juniors or seniors who should have acquired a substantial
knowledge base in these fields of biology. All the core
courses are large, ranging from about 400 students in the
introductory course to about 70 in Developmental Biology.
Because these courses are required, they include students
with varying interest levels in the material. In all the courses
that precede Developmental Biology, the format is lecture
based, and students are required to learn large amounts of
factual information. The average MCDB student is thus
accustomed to memorizing material and to working independently and competitively to achieve a desired grade. Our
best students have acquired a deep grasp of the subject
matter from previous courses; the majority, however, have
not. Their lack of conceptual understanding becomes
particularly evident during the Developmental Biology
course, in which we expect them to apply what they have
been taught in their previous core courses about genetics,
molecular biology, and cell biology.
Structure of the Course
Developmental Biology, with an accompanying laboratory as
a separate course, has been taught in a similar format for
about 25 yr in MCDB. It was initially taught as three 50-min
classes per week with five high-stakes (summative) exams
(four ‘‘midterm’’ exams on current material and a cumulative
final exam), which together determined 100% of a student’s
grade. Several years ago, we changed the classes to two 75min lectures per week, and we added homework problem
assignments worth 20% of the grade, basing the remaining
80% on three midterm exams and a cumulative final exam.
The course we used in this study as our ‘‘traditional lecture’’
control course, taught in the fall semester of 2003 (F’03), had
this basic format. Lectures, in a standard lecture hall with
fixed seating, were divided evenly between the two
instructors. The lectures involved no interactive in-class
work, although we did occasionally pose questions to the
class. Although we attempted to make students comfortable
about asking their own questions, they did so only rarely. We
did not encourage students to work together on homework
problems, although we did not explicitly forbid collaboration.
The spring semester 2004 course (S’04), into which we
introduced several interactive features, also met twice a week
(Tuesday and Thursday) for 75 min in a standard lecture hall.
The same textbook was used for assigned readings , and student demographics in the two courses were
similar (Table 1). However, as described below, the S’04
course differed substantially in several respects, including a
teaching staff expanded to include undergraduate learning
assistants (LAs), various learning activities during classes in
place of some lecture time, collaborative work in student
groups, and substantially increased use of in-class, ongoing
(formative) assessment and group discussion. Both the F’03
and S’04 courses, as well as the spring 2005 (S’05) course
described below, were taught by the authors. A corequisite
for each of these courses was a concurrent Developmental
Biology Laboratory course, in which sections of ;20 students
could interact in a more informal setting. One of us (J.K.)
taught this course in each of the three semesters, and the
structure and organization of this course did not change
during this time.
Teaching Staff. As in the control F’03 course, each instructor
in S’04 conducted one-half of the 30 class periods, but the
other was almost always present and often participated in
discussions. Four graduate teaching assistants (TAs) were
assigned to help with the laboratory course and as graders in
the lecture course, but they were also asked to attend classes
and help to facilitate group work as described below. In
addition, we employed four undergraduate LAs, chosen
from among students who had performed well in the fall
traditional course. The LAs were supported by a National
Science Foundation STEM-TP grant to several University of
Colorado science departments and the School of Education,
which was intended to promote the training of undergraduates interested in possible K–12 teaching careers (see
Acknowledgments). The primary role of LAs was to facilitate
group work, both in class and during the first hour of each
laboratory session, where the students worked on weekly
homework assignments.
Classroom Activities. In the S’04 course, we assigned
students to groups of three or four at the beginning of the
semester and asked them to sit with and work with these
groups during both lecture and lab classes. Although we still
lectured for 60%–70% of class time, we interspersed periods
of lecturing with multiple-choice, in-class questions (ICQs),
similar to the ConcepTests described by Mazur and
Demographics of the F’03 traditional and the S’04
interactive classes
Total students
Vol. 4, Winter 2005
Teaching More by Lecturing Less
designed to assess conceptual understanding of the lecture
content. Students answered these questions individually and
anonymously using an audience response system (‘‘clickers’’), which then displayed a histogram of the answers to the
class . If there was significant disagreement
among the answers, we asked students to discuss the
alternatives within their groups and then revote. At other
times, we posed a more general question to the class and
asked students to discuss with their group members before
we solicited responses from several groups. On four
occasions, we devoted an entire class period to discussing
a recent developmental biology journal article, which we had
posted for students to read prior to class with a specific set of
questions to answer. Finally, we asked students to spend the
first hour of each period in the accompanying laboratory
course working on the current homework assignment
collaboratively with their group members. As described
further below, we assessed student performance based on
four problem sets, participation in class (clicker questions
and discussion), two in-class exams, and one cumulative
final exam (Table 2).
Group Organization and Group Work. As mentioned above,
there was no explicitly encouraged group work in the control
F’03 class. In the interactive S’04 class, groups were
organized as described by Beichner and Saul . We
assigned students to groups on the basis of their grades in
prerequisite MCDB courses (this method was not disclosed
to the students), such that each group included one excellent
(‘‘A’’ range), two medium (‘‘B’’ range), and one low (‘‘C’’
range) performer. We also attempted to balance gender and
ethnic ratios to minimize possible feelings of isolation among
female, male, or minority students. Assuming that group
work would be unfamiliar and perhaps uncomfortable for
many students, we explained at the start of the semester why
working in a group could be valuable both for learning
purposes and as training for future job situations, and we
gave pointers on managing group dynamics. As an incentive
for groups to work effectively together, we added five
percentage points to the exam grades of each student in a
group if the group as a whole achieved an 80% average on
the exam. Group work both in class and during laboratory
sessions was facilitated by LAs, as described above.
Assessment
Pretests and Posttests and Homework Problems. For both
classes, we administered a multiple-choice pretest during the
first week and then readministered the same test as
embedded questions in the final exam, to provide a rough
measure of student learning gains during the semester. All
students received the same number of points for completing
the pretest, which otherwise had no effect on their grade.
Their outgoing performance on posttest questions comprised
less than 2% of their final grade (10 out of 500 points). The test
was composed of 15 multiple-choice questions designed to
test understanding of core concepts in development, a few of
which they could have learned from previous courses (see
Appendix A). When we repeated the interactive course in
spring 2005 (described below under Results), only 12 of the
pretest and posttest questions were the same as in the
previous two semesters. To facilitate comparisons between
the three semesters, only the 12 common questions were used
in the data analysis for the tables and figures presented.
The questions on the pretest and posttest were similar to
many that we asked during the semester and on the midterm
exams, and thus were representative of the knowledge and
understanding required in the course. To determine whether
students were interpreting the pretest and posttest questions
correctly, we conducted student interviews in spring 2005. All
students in the S’05 class were invited to interview after the
course, and six students were interviewed (including at least
one who had achieved each of the grades ‘‘A,’’ ‘‘B,’’and ‘‘C’’ in
the course). In the interview, we asked students to think out
loud as they worked through each of the questions, and to
verbalize why they selected or eliminated certain answers.
Our intent was to verify that students understood what each
question was asking. All six students correctly interpreted
each of the 12 questions we used to compare normalized
learning gains. The results of these sample interviews suggest
that at least for most students, our pretests and posttests
provided a valid assessment of conceptual understanding for
the concepts tested.
In addition to the pretest and posttest, we repeated 19 of
the homework problems in the F’03 and S’04 semesters, so
that student performance on these questions could be
compared. Results based on the problems are less comparable than those based on the pretests and posttests, because
problems were, for the most part, solved individually in the
F’03 course and collaboratively in the S’04 course.
In-Class Formative Assessment. In both the F’03 and S’04
classes, we asked students at several times during the
semester to give us feedback on how various aspects of the
class were aiding their learning. Otherwise, however, there
was no formative assessment in the F’03 course beyond the
midterm exams. By contrast, in the S’04 course, we carried
out formative assessment during each class period using
clicker responses to ICQs. Students could receive up to five
points per class period for correct answers, but we also gave
partial credit up to 2½ points for incorrect answers in order
to encourage participation. In general, we used these
questions both to gauge the understanding level of the class,
and as opportunities for discussion and peer instruction if
more than 30% of the class selected an incorrect answer (see
Appendix B for examples of ICQs).
Overall Performance in the Classes
All MCDB core courses traditionally have been graded on a
curve. We decided to maintain that practice for these courses
Assessments and percent contributions to grade for F’03
and S’04 classes
Assessments
Contribution to grade
Homework problems
In-class participation and group work
Cell Biology Education
J.K. Knight and W.B. Wood
as well, although we subsequently realized that grading on a
curve discourages many students from working collaboratively. More students in the interactive course achieved a
grade of ‘‘B’’ (51%) than in the traditional course (37%) (Table
3). Because of the curve, there were actually fewer students
who achieved an ‘‘A’’ grade in the interactive course,
although the overall distribution of point totals was higher
(Figure 1).
As shown in Table 4, the average performance on exams
and problem sets differed only slightly between the two
semesters. Although the questions on the F’03 and S’04
exams were similar, they were not identical. Reflecting the
differences in emphasis of the classes, the exams in S’04 were
designed to test more conceptual and less factual knowledge
than those in F’03. Because the exams were substantially
different, we cannot make meaningful comparisons of exam
performances between the two semesters. Several students in
both semesters (nine in F’03, 11 in S’04) would have received
below ‘‘C’’ if their grades had been based solely on exam
performance. In F’03, grades of these students were
improved by problem set performance, and in S’04 by
problem set performance and class participation (class
participation grades in S’04 averaged 86%, which accounted
for about 30% of the grade). We suspect that the in-class
exercises also helped prepare students to perform better on
the posttest, as described further below.
Normalized Learning Gains Were Significantly Higher
for the Interactive Class
The average performance and standard deviation on the
pretest were not significantly different in the two semesters:
traditional, 34% (612%); interactive, 31% (612%), indicating
that the incoming students were equally well prepared.
However, the average performance on the posttest was
significantly higher in the interactive course, by 9 percentage
points (p ¼ .001, two tailed t-test).
The most compelling support for superiority of the
interactive approach came from comparisons of normalized
learning gains calculated from pretest and posttest scores in
the traditional and interactive classes (Table 4). Normalized
learning gain is defined as the actual gain divided by the
possible gain, expressed as a percentage [100 3 (posttest 
pretest)/(100  pretest); ]. Normalization
allows valid comparison and averaging of learning gains for
students with different pretest scores. A comparison of the
F’03 and S’04 courses showed a significant 16% difference (p
¼ .001) in average learning gains, corresponding to a 33%
improvement in performance by students in the more
interactive S’04 course. Learning gains of greater than 60%
were achieved by substantially more students in the
interactive class (43/70) than in the traditional class (19/72)
(Figures 2, 3). Both ‘‘A’’ and ‘‘B’’ students made higher gains
in the interactive course, while ‘‘C’’ students achieved about
the same learning gain range in both semesters (Figure 2). A
more detailed breakdown of gains on individual posttest
questions is presented in Appendix C (Figure C1).
In both the F’03 and S’04 courses, we saw a slight negative
correlation between pretest performance and learning gain
(Pearson correlation test coefficient:0.4 in F’03,0.1 in S’04).
However, students exhibiting low pretest with high gain,
low pretest with low gain, high pretest with high gain, and
high pretest with low gain were all represented in both
courses (data not shown). In the S’04 interactive class, we
saw a higher positive correlation between learning gain and
grade achieved (.54) than in the traditional F’03 class (.12).
However, even in S’04, individuals with low grades sometimes achieved high learning gains, and vice versa. When we
compared normalized learning gains by gender and ethnicity, we found that average learning gains for minority and
male students were somewhat lower than for female
Percent of students receiving final grades of A, B, and C
Traditional (fall ’03)
Interactive (spring ’04)
Comparison of average performance on different assessments for all three courses
Assessment
Performance (average percent
of maximum score)
Pretest (12 questions)a
posttest (12 questions)a
Raw learning gain
Normalized learning gainb
Hourly exams
Final exam
Problem sets
Participation
Final total points
aData based only on the 12 questions that were common to all three
pretests and posttests (see Appendix A).
bAverage for each class is shown. Normalized learning gains were
computed as described in the text and the legend to Figure 2.
Final course point distributions (% of possible maximum)
in traditional (F’03, blue) and interactive (S’04, red) classes. The
number of students achieving a final score is shown for five ranges
of scores.
Vol. 4, Winter 2005
Teaching More by Lecturing Less
students in F’03, and that the minority average was slightly
lower than the total average in S’04 (Table 5); however, these
differences were not significant. The ranges of gains were
similar across all three groups.
Reproducibility of Learning Gain Comparisons
In the spring of 2005, we again presented the interactive
course using the same syllabus and course content, in a very
similar format. There were a few changes from the S’04
course: we eliminated the curved grading; we removed the
5% incentive on exams; we allowed students to choose their
own group members; and we incorporated additional group
activities, such as concept mapping , into the classes at the expense of lecture time. We also
omitted the previous structured class discussions of current
journal articles and instead gave students data from current
developmental biology articles with questions to answer as a
group in class. To maintain approximately the same amount
of course content in spite of reduced lecture time (more
reduced than in S’04), we asked students to take more
responsibility for their own learning. We assigned reading
for each week in advance and gave a graded multiple-choice
quiz on the reading material (using clickers) at the start of
each Tuesday class; the points earned (five maximum), were
counted toward students’ participation grade. Prior to each
Thursday class, we required that students work with their
groups to complete a set of homework problems and post
their answers on the course Web site. This allowed us to
review their performance in advance and identify the
concepts that were causing frequent difficulties, which we
could then focus on in class.
Normalized learning gains from the S’05 class are
compared with those from F’03 and S’04 in Table 4 and
Figure 3, based on results from the 12 validated pretest and
posttest questions that were the same in all three semesters.
Comparison of normalized learning gain ranges (% of
possible maximum) achieved by students in each passing grade
range (‘‘A,’’ ‘‘B,’’ and ‘‘C’’) in the F’03 and S’04 courses. Normalized
learning gains were computed as 100 3 (posttest score  pretest
score)/(100  pretest score) (see text). A. F’03 (traditional class). B.
S’04 (interactive class).
Average percent normalized learning gains by ethnicity
and gender
Minority (male and female)
41 6 21 (17)
56 6 21 (13)
41 6 32 (22)
62 6 19 (31)
51 6 18 (51)
62 6 24 (42)
46 6 23 (73)
62 6 22 (73)
aEntries are indicated as 6 standard deviations, with number of
students in parentheses.
Comparison of normalized learning gains (% of possible maximum) in 10% increments on 12 common pretest and posttest questions
for students in one traditional (F’03) and two interactive (S’04, S’05) classes. Normalized learning gains were computed as in Figure 2.
Cell Biology Education
J.K. Knight and W.B. Wood
As in the S’04 course, a substantial fraction of the S’05 class
(34/69) achieved greater than 60% normalized learning gains,
and 4/69 achieved greater than 90% gains, compared with 3/
70 in S’04 and 0/72 in F’03. The increases in average
normalized learning gains over those in the F’03 course
were almost identical in the S’04 and S’05 courses. The
variation of gains on individual questions was also generally
reproducible (Appendix C). We conclude that the effects of
interactive engagement seen between the F’03 and S’04
courses are reproducible.
Performance on Repeated Homework Problems
We also compared student performance on 19 homework
problems that were assigned in the F’03 and S’04 courses. All
were short-answer questions graded by different TAs, but
following the same guidelines in both semesters. Although
performance data from the two semesters are not strictly
comparable, because of the increased collaboration on
homework in S’04 (see Experimental Design), the comparison nevertheless suggests an additional benefit from the
interactive format. Performance on all but two of the
questions was significantly better in S’04 than in F’03. The
19 questions could be grouped into three categories. In the
first were six questions that involved primarily recall. The
remaining 13 required conceptual understanding, and we
had designated six of these as ‘‘puzzlers’’ or difficult
questions with no obvious answer, for which students had
to apply facts and concepts they had learned in an unfamiliar
context. Whereas improvement over F’03 performance was
,10% on all but one of the six recall questions, it ranged
from 10% to 40% on the six puzzlers. These results suggest
that the interactive, collaborative format followed in the S’04
course positively affected students’ ability to learn and apply
conceptual understanding.
Use and Success of In-Class Clicker Questions and
Group Work
Personal response systems using clickers have been used for
several years in our Physics Department. As a result, about
one-half of the students in our S’04 and S’05 classes had used
them previously. However, none had experienced clickers in
a biology class, since ours was the first to use them. Although
we did not manage to make every student like using the
clickers (see Student Attitudes below), we were impressed by
the effectiveness of this technology in changing the dynamic
of the classroom and providing us as well as students with
valuable feedback . The ICQs revealed student
misconceptions and helped identify concepts that were
difficult for students to grasp. They provided a way for
individual students, who otherwise might have assumed
they alone had misunderstood a concept, to realize that in
many cases, one-half the class was similarly confused. They
allowed us to determine, on the spot, when a concept was
not getting across and needed more explanation or discussion. Most importantly, the clicker questions actively
engaged the students, allowing them to talk and think about
the topic of the class rather than simply record it, and to
interact with teaching staff during the class period. Students
quickly became comfortable asking questions of us and each
other because interaction was part of the classroom dynamic
from the first day.
The clickers also synergized effectively with group work in
promoting active engagement and conceptual learning
during class. We found that ICQs for which about half the
class chose an incorrect alternative to the correct answer
provided valuable teaching and learning opportunities
 . There was often a palpable tension in the
classroom until the disagreement was resolved. To exploit
this tension, it was important not to reveal the correct choice
immediately, but rather to let the students work it out
through discussion with the members of their group. Almost
inevitably, when a second vote was taken after 3–4 min of
discussion, more than 75% of the class chose the correct
answer (Appendix B).
After the second vote, we always held a brief discussion of
why students might have first chosen incorrect answers and
then changed their choices. For some questions it became
clear that conceptual misunderstanding was not the problem; rather, students had simply misunderstood the question, which was somehow poorly phrased or otherwise
ambiguous. For questions that did reveal conceptual
misunderstanding, one could imagine two possible extreme
explanations for the greatly improved performance following group discussion: 1) students were simply identifying the
group member most likely to know the correct answer based
on previous experience and following that person’s choice, or
2) students were meaningfully debating the alternatives and
explaining them to each other, ultimately leading their group
to the best choice. During these discussions, the instructors,
TAs, and LAs circulated among the students (limited by the
constraints of classroom design; see Discussion), listening in
on discussions and attempting to facilitate them if necessary
(without giving away the answer). From our own observations and subsequent debriefing of the TAs and LAs, we
concluded that most groups were engaging in constructive
dialog that led them to the correct answer.
Group Dynamics
Group work on homework problems during the lab periods
was also moderately successful, but worked better for some
groups than for others. Whereas some groups discussed and
worked through the problems together as we had intended,
with all members participating, other groups split up the
work, each member doing one problem, and pooling their
answers. A few groups were dominated by one or two
members who did most of the talking, while the other
members listened and copied their work.
Despite our view that group work was clearly successful in
class and moderately successful outside, four of the 20
groups in the S’04 class reported that they did not work well
together because of personality conflicts, differing work
ethics, or differing levels of interest. Because the same groups
were also working together in the accompanying lab course,
in which there were ongoing projects, we did not reconstitute
them during the course of the semester as recommended by
Beichner and Saul .
We also found that the incentive for group members to
work together, described under Experimental Design, was
largely unsuccessful. For the first exam, only one of the 20
groups achieved an average of greater than 80%, and for the
second exam, only three groups did so. Students reported
that the incentive made them uncomfortable because they
did not like sharing their scores, nor did they feel it was fair.
Finally, students reported, quite vehemently, that they did
Vol. 4, Winter 2005
Teaching More by Lecturing Less
not like being assigned to groups. Overall, we did not see
any benefit to the assigned groups; whether a group worked
well seemed to depend more on personalities and similar
motivation to succeed than on a balance of previous student
performance records.
In the S’05 course, in which students chose their own
group members, the groups worked together much better
than in S’04, both in class and in solving homework
problems during scheduled problem-solving sessions. This
conclusion was based on both self-reporting and our
observations. In S’05, only two out of 20 groups shared
complaints with us about poor functioning; in both cases, the
problem was a single member of the group not participating,
while the rest of the group worked well together.
Student Attitudes
General Reactions to the Interactive Format. Although
many students in the S’04 and S’05 courses at first disliked
and distrusted the interactive classes and group activities,
most became comfortable with the unfamiliar format and
ultimately reported that it helped their learning. Some
students, however, never fully accepted the new approaches.
One common complaint was that the interactive techniques
promoted grade leveling (since students received points for
participation, and could discuss answers with group
members). Other complaints included annoyance at being
‘‘forced’’ to attend class and work in groups (see Discussion).
In the traditional class, complaints tended to focus not on
the style of the class, but rather on the content or sheer
volume of information. For example: ‘‘I was so concerned
with just getting everything done that I’m not sure I really
learned anything.’’ ‘‘A ton of information was crammed into
our heads.’’
When we asked students in the traditional class to
anonymously write down what they had learned at the
end of a particular lecture, one telling comment was: ‘‘I can’t
answer this. In class I just take notes. Then I go home and try
to figure out what we talked about.’’
In the interactive class, students in general tended to feel
strongly about the format. We received negative comments,
such as: ‘‘Clicker questions took too long and took away
from the learning experience.’’ ‘‘Clickers are promoting mass
mediocrity by evening everyone out.’’
But we also received positive ones; for example: ‘‘I’ve
never had a class where I felt like the teachers cared as much
for the students as this one.’’ ‘‘It was good to see what other
people thought about problems because sometimes even if
we were both wrong, information from the two wrong
solutions could lead to a correct solution.’’
Reactions to Specific Aspects of the Interactive Format. In
the interactive S’04 and S’05 courses, we asked students to
rate various components of the course for helpfulness in
learning the material on a scale of one (not) to five (very)
useful (Table 6). We do not have comparable data from the
F’03 course, except on the usefulness of posted lecture notes
and PowerPoint slides, which were equally highly appreciated in all three semesters. Students in the S’04 class were
on average fairly neutral regarding usefulness of the
interactive techniques overall and somewhat more positive
about in-class group work. In the S’05 course, average
ratings were significantly higher for both these categories,
possibly for reasons suggested in the Discussion. A
substantial majority of students in both S’04 and S’05
reported that significant learning took place during class as
well as outside of class; unfortunately we do not have
comparable data for the F’03 course.
On other topics, about 90% of the students in both S’04 and
S’05 reported that they still studied for the exams on their
own rather than in groups, but only 40%–50% of these felt
this technique was successful. In comparing the results of
F’03 and S’04 Faculty Course Questionnaires, we were
interested to note no difference in ratings of the course
workloads, despite substantially more assignments and
requirements that demanded student time in the interactive
S’04 class: about two-thirds of students rated the workload
as too high in both semesters. In F’03, 69% of the students
gave the course an overall rating of ‘‘B’’ or higher. They
rated the S’04 course slightly less positively (61%), while in
S’05, the course rating was much more positive (86% ‘‘B’’).
We were particularly interested in student attitudes
toward the clickers, which we viewed as a powerful aid to
both teaching and in-class learning. At the beginning of the
S’04 course, students were on average neutral in their overall
reaction to using clickers in class, although there were strong
negative and positive opinions on the ends of the scale
(Figure 4). By the end of the semester, the distribution of
attitudes had shifted toward a more positive opinion,
although some students were still strongly negative, possibly
for reasons discussed below.
DISCUSSION
Positive Effects of Interactive Classes and In-Class
Cooperative Activities on Student Learning
The experience we report here, in an advanced biology class
of students previously taught almost exclusively in lecture
courses, suggests that even a partial shift toward a more
interactive and collaborative course format can lead to
significant increases in student learning gains. Moreover,
students in the interactive environment apparently developed better skills for solving conceptual problems than the
similar group of students taught only through lectures. In
particular, our results indicate that, as observed in elementary physics courses by Beichner and Saul , both ‘‘A’’
and ‘‘B’’ students had higher learning gains in an interactive
environment than in a traditional environment, whereas ‘‘C’’
Student reactions to specific components of the interactive
course format
Course component
Posted lecture notes and PowerPoint slidesa
In-class interactive activities, in generala
In-class group worka
Significant learning took place during class
(as well as outside of class)
aRated by students on a Leichert scale of one (not useful for learning)
to five (very useful).
Cell Biology Education
J.K. Knight and W.B. Wood
students made relatively low learning gains in both environments. Recognizing and addressing the needs of these
students is an important future goal.
Even though our assessment instrument for learning gains
was rudimentary, and our experiment was not ideally
controlled, we believe our results are meaningful for several
reasons. First, we have been interacting closely with this
student population (junior and senior MCDB majors) for years
and have identified the topics that challenge them; we
designed our assessment instrument around these topics. A
second reason is the reproducibility of our results; a repeat of
the interactive course with a different set of students showed a
very similar increase in learning gains over the control course.
A third reason is an uncontrolled variable that almost
certainly worked against learning in the interactive format.
Both our interactive ‘‘experimental’’ classes, in S’04 and S’05,
included greater than 60% spring-term seniors (Table 1), a
generally undermotivated group! Our finding that these
students nevertheless made greater learning gains and
apparently achieved better conceptual understanding than
their peers in the fall control course strengthens our
confidence in the results. A final reason is that our findings
parallel those of similar studies conducted in other disciplines,
notably physics. During the past decade, physicists have used
a standardized, validated assessment of conceptual understanding of force and motion known as the Force-Concept
Inventory to measure learning gains,
which they could then compare between traditionally taught
and interactive classes. Their results show compellingly that
in comparison to traditional lecture courses, interactive
courses including features we have described here result in
significantly higher normalized student learning gains at all
achievement levels .
We believe that a substantial impact could be achieved if
interactive and collaborative teaching were introduced in
introductory courses and continued throughout the curriculum. Such reforms may also be necessary simply to
maintain enough interest among incoming students to make
them want to continue as biology majors. More and more of
these students are likely to experience interactive, inquirybased teaching and collaborative learning in secondaryschool biology courses, where there is also increasing
evidence for its efficacy . The
Advanced Placement Biology syllabus is currently undergoing revision to a more inquiry-based format, with less
emphasis on factual knowledge and more on in-depth
understanding of biological concepts . Incoming students with this sort of background are likely to require more to maintain their interest in
biology than large impersonal lecture courses emphasizing
memorization of factual knowledge.
Student Reactions to Interactive Classes and Group
The dynamic in our interactive classes was almost certainly
affected by the stage of the students in their undergraduate
careers. By their junior and senior years, most had developed
study habits they believed were effective, and they were
reluctant to question or change these habits, even when faced
with evidence that they do not work well for long-term
retention or conceptual understanding. They also had
become comfortable with traditional course structures, and
some resented having to adapt to a new format (see Allen
and Tanner, this issue). Many students have unfortunately
adopted the misconception (promulgated by some professors) that meaningful teaching and learning in the classroom
take place only while the instructor is actually lecturing . Particularly at
the start of the course, these students saw other classroom
activities as distractions and a waste of time. Even at the end
of the semester, students who disliked the interactive format
complained that we were not teaching them very much, but
rather making them learn the material on their own. We tried
to explain to them why we found this perception gratifying.
We can suggest two reasons for why some students
persisted in their dislike of the clickers. First, in the
traditional course, some of the better students were able to
learn the course content adequately from reading assignments, posted lecture notes, and posted PowerPoint slides.
These students often did not come to class, feeling (perhaps
justifiably) that the lectures were not providing any additional value. In the interactive courses, because participation
via the clickers was rewarded by course points, these
students felt compelled to come to class in order to achieve
a high grade. In fact, class attendance increased from 60% to
70% in the F’03 course to greater than 95% in the interactive
courses. A second reason for disliking clickers was the time
they took away from lecturing, which most students feel is
essential for their learning, as mentioned above. Finally,
rewarding correct clicker answers with points led to an
atmosphere in which students were constantly thinking
about how many points they had in the class. This created a
higher level of concern about their grade on a day-to-day
basis, something we did not intend to emphasize.
Regarding group work, students who had performed well
in previous courses were particularly prejudiced against it,
since they felt they would be helping their group members
without getting anything in return. Their competitive
instincts, fostered by years of being graded on a curve,
tended to strengthen this prejudice. Students in the S’05
course had fewer complaints about group work than those in
S’04, probably for two main reasons. First, the students in
S’05 chose their own groups, and thus seemed to feel more
Changes in student attitudes about clickers during the
semester in the interactive S’04 course. Near the beginning (open
bars) and near the end (solid bars) of the course, students were given
an ICQ asking them to rate the usefulness of the personal response
system for their learning in class, on a Leichert scale of 1 (not at all
useful; don’t like), to 5 (very useful; like very much). Reasons for
why some students persisted in their dislike of the clickers are
discussed in the text.
Vol. 4, Winter 2005
Teaching More by Lecturing Less
loyalty to other group members than students in S’04, who
were assigned to their groups. A second factor was our own
increased comfort level with the interactive format after a
semester of experience. Students in S’04 knew they were part
of an ‘‘experiment,’’ while students in S’05 accepted the
unfamiliar format as simply the way this course was taught.
Solving the Content Problem
A common concern among faculty who contemplate
introducing more interactive classroom activities in place of
lecturing is that course content will have to be limited.
Because clicker responses and discussion take time, less
material can be ‘‘covered’’ during each class. As pointed out
in the Introduction, content knowledge is not the only
benefit, and perhaps not the most important benefit, that
students gain from a good course. Ability to solve problems
and in-depth understanding of underlying concepts will
probably be of more use to them in the long run than any
particular piece of factual information .
Nevertheless, there is a certain amount of content knowledge that will seem essential for any required course in the
curriculum, particularly for students who are continuing in
the discipline. In our experience, the best way to make sure
that students assimilate all the essential content is to place on
them more of the responsibility for learning it, outside of class
time. We employed this approach successfully in our S’05
course as described under Results. Because students are
required to demonstrate their understanding of each week’s
material by posting answers to homework problems on the
course Web site before class, the instructors receive the added
benefit of knowing in advance which concepts the students
are finding difficult, so that they can tailor classroom
activities to address these problems. The purpose of classes
then changes, from the traditional one of transmitting
information to one of helping students understand and apply
concepts from their reading and homework assignments.
This approach, first described several years ago for use in
physics courses as ‘‘Just-In-Time Teaching’’ , has also been used successfully in teaching
biological sciences .
Concerns for Instructors
The active-engagement teaching we have described here
presents several practical problems for instructors. First, the
extra time and effort required to design and teach such a
course is substantial if an existing lecture course is being
transformed, as in our case. We note, however, that for a
beginning instructor preparing to teach a subject for the first
time, creating an interactive course may not require
substantially more effort than preparing a semester’s worth
of lectures.
Second, the physical facilities provided by most universities do not favor this kind of teaching. Interaction
between teaching staff and students during discussion of
our ICQs and other in-class group activities was greatly
hampered by the theatre-style design that is unfortunately
standard for large university classrooms. Cafe´-style classrooms, such as those designed by Beichner and his
colleagues , would be far more conducive to activeengagement teaching, and should be introduced in universities as new classrooms are built.
Third, because students at present are used to having most
large courses taught in the lecture format, the unfamiliar
demands of an active-engagement course may take them out
of their comfort zone, resulting in lower student ratings for
the instructor. In our experience, some students did react in
this manner, but others were enthusiastic about the high
level of instructor involvement and its effect on their
learning. These students rated the course as superior to their
other lecture-style courses. We believe an antidote to this
concern is more emphasis on student learning gains as part
of the faculty teaching evaluation. Although biology so far
generally lacks assessments comparable to the FCI in physics
 , we found it fairly straightforward
to develop an assessment tool for measuring learning gains
 . Once baseline learning
gains have been established for a course, the effects of new
teaching strategies can be determined by comparing measured learning gains to baseline data . If preassessments and postassessments such as those we have used here
were to become standard practice, then evaluation of
teaching could be based on actual student learning gains as
well as student course ratings.
An additional, more subtle concern for instructors is that
we, like the students, have generally become comfortable
with the lecture format. We found that adjusting to a
decreased emphasis on information transmission during
class was difficult not only for our students, but also for us.
Part of what inspired us to become teachers was a delight in
explaining fascinating aspects of our discipline to students.
Good lecturing is a skill in which many of us take pride, and
there is no doubt that an outstanding presentation can be a
formative experience for students, remembered for many
years. However, such rare lectures generally have enduring
effects not because of the factual information they convey,
but more likely because they inspire by example, or reveal
unexpected new insights, or open up new worlds to their
listeners. Few instructors can hope to deliver at best more
than one or two such lectures during a semester. Thus, while
lecturing in small doses remains a valuable teaching
technique, lecturing for an entire period of 50 or 75 min is
unlikely to be the best use of class time.
Like the students who bring prior knowledge to our
courses in the form of misconceptions about biology , we as instructors
must face up to the common pedagogical misconception that
students will learn effectively only what we tell them in class.
Like our students, we must allow ourselves to undergo
conceptual change , based on
evidence for the greater learning effectiveness of active
engagement over passive listening in lectures. This evidence
is now overwhelming . Even in large courses, clicker
technology and Web-based course management software make active-engagement
classroom activities feasible without sacrificing content. We
have shown here that even a partial change in this direction
can lead to significantly increased learning gains. We urge
our colleagues to adopt these approaches throughout the
biology curriculum.
Cell Biology Education
J.K. Knight and W.B. Wood
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Valerie Otero and Carl Wieman for helpful
discussions and comments on the manuscript, and to Carl Wieman
for partial support of J.K. We also acknowledge the dedicated
participation of several undergraduate learning assistants; those
participating in the spring 2004 course were supported by a STEM-
TP grant from the National Science Foundation (Richard McCray,
Principal Investigator; DUE-0302134).