Publisher’s version / Version de l'éditeur:
Vous avez des questions? Nous pouvons vous aider. Pour communiquer directement avec un auteur, consultez la
première page de la revue dans laquelle son article a été publié afin de trouver ses coordonnées. Si vous n’arrivez
pas à les repérer, communiquez avec nous à .
Questions? Contact the NRC Publications Archive team at
 . If you wish to email the authors directly, please see the
first page of the publication for their contact information.
 
L’accès à ce site Web et l’utilisation de son contenu sont assujettis aux conditions présentées dans le site
LISEZ CES CONDITIONS ATTENTIVEMENT AVANT D’UTILISER CE SITE WEB.
2nd ACM Workshop on Embedded Sensing Systems for Energy-Efficiency in
Buildings : 02 November 2010, Zurich, Switzerland [Proceedings],
pp. 13-18, 2010-11-02
READ THESE TERMS AND CONDITIONS CAREFULLY BEFORE USING THIS WEBSITE.
 
NRC Publications Archive Record / Notice des Archives des publications du CNRC :
 
 
NRC Publications Archive
Archives des publications du CNRC
This publication could be one of several versions: author’s original, accepted manuscript or the publisher’s version. /
La version de cette publication peut être l’une des suivantes : la version prépublication de l’auteur, la version
acceptée du manuscrit ou la version de l’éditeur.
Access and use of this website and the material on it are subject to the Terms and Conditions set forth at
Building-level occupancy data to improve ARIMA-based electricity use
Newsham, G. R.; Birt, B.
 
Building-level occupancy data to improve ARIMA-based electricity
use forecasts
N R C C - 5 3 5 6 6
N e w s h a m , G . R . ; B i r t , B .
November 2010
A version of this document is published in / Une version de ce document se trouve dans:
2nd ACM Workshop on Embedded Sensing Systems for Energy-Efficiency in
Buildings , Zurich, Switzerland, November 2, 2010, pp. 13-18
The material in this document is covered by the provisions of the Copyright Act, by Canadian laws, policies, regulations and international
agreements. Such provisions serve to identify the information source and, in specific instances, to prohibit reproduction of materials without
written permission. For more information visit 
Les renseignements dans ce document sont protégés par la Loi sur le droit d'auteur, par les lois, les politiques et les règlements du Canada et
des accords internationaux. Ces dispositions permettent d'identifier la source de l'information et, dans certains cas, d'interdire la copie de
documents sans permission écrite. Pour obtenir de plus amples renseignements : 
Building-level Occupancy Data to Improve ARIMA-based
Electricity Use Forecasts
Guy R. Newsham
National Research Council Canada – Institute for Research
in Construction
1200 Montreal Rd, M24, Ottawa
Ontario, K1J 7X1, Canada
+1 613 993 9607
 
Benjamin J. Birt
National Research Council Canada – Institute for Research
in Construction
1200 Montreal Rd, M24, Ottawa
Ontario, K1J 7X1, Canada
+1 613 991-0939
 
The energy use of an office building is likely to correlate
with the number of occupants, and thus knowing
occupancy levels should improve energy use forecasts.
To gather data related to total building occupancy,
wireless sensors were installed in a three-storey building
in eastern Ontario, Canada comprising laboratories and 81
individual work spaces. Contact closure sensors were
placed on various doors, PIR motion sensors were placed
in the main corridor on each floor, and a carbon-dioxide
sensor was positioned in a circulation area. In addition,
we collected data on the number of people who had
logged in to the network on each day, network activity,
electrical energy use (total building, and chilling plant
only), and outdoor temperature. We developed an
ARIMAX model to forecast the power demand of the
building in which a measure of building occupancy was a
significant independent variable and increased the model
accuracy. The results are promising, and suggest that
further work on a larger and more typical office building
would be beneficial. If building operators have a tool that
can accurately forecast the energy use of their building
several hours ahead they can better respond to utility price
signals, and play a fuller role in the coming Smart Grid.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
Engineering]:
Engineering
General Terms
Measurement, Experimentation, Human Factors
Sensors, office buildings, occupancy, energy forecast
1. INTRODUCTION
Energy costs are rising, and there is a growing trend
towards charging higher prices for energy when overall
system demand is highest, in order to better reflect the
true cost of generation, and to discourage on-peak use that
might threaten grid stability. A building’s ability to
reduce overall energy use and peak demand may be
substantial, depending on the systems in place and data
available to inform decisions, and tuning building power
draw in response to utility signals and other inputs may be
one element of the Smart Grid . As part of this
strategy a building operator may wish to explore and
manipulate building energy use a few hours ahead;
actions might involve load shedding, pre-cooling,
charging of ice storage, activation of local generation, or a
variety of other actions .
Building energy use data comprise a time series. In
recent decades a class of time series analysis models
named ARIMAX (Auto Regressive Integrated Moving
Average with eXternal (or eXogenous) input) has been
developed for forecasting in other domains, particularly in
economics . The “integrated” part of the name
indicates that it is often required that one runs the analysis
on the change in the dependent variable of interest
(known as “differencing”), to render the series
stationary1. “Auto regressive” indicates that the
forecasted value of the dependent variable may be
predicted from prior, known, values of the dependent
variable. “Moving average” indicates that the forecasted
value of the dependent variable may be predicted from
prior values of the error term. “External input” refers to
the optional use of independent predictors. The general
notation for such a model is ARIMAX(p,d,q); if
independent predictor variables are not employed then the
notation is ARIMA only. The “p” indicates how far back
in time one goes in using prior values of the variable of
interest. For example, if the current value of a variable
measured every hour is predicted using values of that
1 In a “stationary” series the values vary around an
unchanging mean, and the variance over time is constant.
Stationary series are a requirement for ARIMA models.
variable from one and two hours ago (known as “lag 1”
and “lag 2”), p=2. Similarly, q refers to how many lags in
the error term are used and “d” indicates how many times
one takes the difference of the dependent variable. It is
often the case that the variable of interest exhibits obvious
periodic behaviour, generally referred to as “seasonal”
behaviour. For example, building power use often
displays a clear diurnal pattern; if one measures power
hourly then there will be a seasonality of order 24. For
modelling, one creates a new seasonal variable to reflect
this variation, which is the current value of the dependent
variable minus the value from one seasonal period ago.
One can then apply differencing and lags to this variable
and include these terms in the model. Thus the final
general notation is ARIMAX(p,d,q)(P,D,Q)s, where P, D,
and Q have the same meaning as above, but now refer to
the seasonal variable, and s is the order of seasonality
with respect to the measurement interval.
The most general mathematical form of the ARIMAX
model equation is as follows :
ሺͳ െܤሻௗሺͳ െܤ௦ሻ஽ܻ௧
ൌߤ൅ߖ௜ሺܤሻܺ௜,௧൅ߠሺܤሻߠ௦ሺܤ௦ሻ
߶ሺܤሻ߶௦ሺܤ௦ሻ ܽ௧
is the dependent time series
is a set of i external predictor time series
is a white noise time series representing random
error, the values of this series are not known a
priori, but are an outcome of the iterative
parameter estimation methods used to generate
the best-fitting model
is the mean of the series (=0 when series is
differenced)
indexes time
is the backshift operator; i.e. BYt ൌ Yt‐ͳ;
BͳʹY ൌ Yt‐ͳʹ; BBͳʹYt ൌ Bͳ͵Yt
is the autoregressive operator, a polynomial of
r p in the backshift operator
߶ሺܤሻൌͳ െ߶ଵܤെڮ െ߶ܤ௣
similarly,
autoregressive
perator, a polynomial of order
߶௦ሺܤ௦ሻൌͳ െ߶௦,ଵܤ௦െڮ െ߶௦,௉ܤ௦௉
is the moving average operator, a polynomial of
order q in the backshift operator:
ߠሺܤሻൌͳ െߠଵܤെڮ െߠ௤ܤ௤
is, similarly, the seasonal moving average
perator, a polynomial of order
ߠ௦ሺܤ௦ሻൌͳ െߠ௦,ଵܤ௦െڮ െߠ௦,ொܤ௦ொ
X ,t o Yt :
is a transfer function for the effect of
ߖ௜ሺܤሻൌ߱௜ሺܤሻ߱௦,௜ሺܤ௦ሻ
ߜ௜ሺܤሻߜ௦,௜ሺܤ௦ሻሺͳ െܤሻௗ೔ሺͳ െܤ௦ሻ஽೔ܤ௞೔
is the denominator polynomial in the backshift
rator, for the ith
ߜ௜ሺܤሻൌͳ െߜ௜,ଵܤെڮ െߜ௜,௣೔ܤ௣೔
δs,iሺBሻ is
similarly,
denominator
nomial, for th ith predictor:
ߜ௦,௜ሺܤሻൌͳ െߜ௦,௜,ଵܤെڮ െߜ௦,௜,௉೔ܤ௦௉೔
is the numerator polynomial in the backshift
or e ith predictor:
߱௜ሺܤሻൌ߱௜,଴െ߱௜,ଵܤെڮ െ߱௜,௤೔ܤ௤೔
ωs,iሺBሻ is similarly, the numerator seasonal polynomial,
r th ith p
߱௦,௜ሺܤሻൌ߱௦,௜,଴െ߱௦,௜,ଵܤെڮ െ߱௦,௜,ொ೔ܤ௦ொ೔
is the time delay for the effect of the ith predictor
(if the predictor cannot affect the dependent
variable for a certain number of time steps for
basic physical reasons)
ARIMAX models have been applied to building-related
applications, including: modelling and forecasting of
room temperature , modelling of water and fuel use
in a variety of buildings , optimizing the operation of
cold storage in a large building , and forecasting and
controlling the peak demand for electricity at a
government complex .
Occupants are a key factor behind commercial building
energy use, due to use of office equipment, lighting, plug
loads, ventilation, thermal conditioning etc. Because
ARIMAX models use prior values of the dependent
variable, and because power use in a building is correlated
with occupancy, the auto regressive and moving average
components will implicitly carry the effect of occupancy.
The question we explored was whether including an
occupancy metric as an explicit independent variable
would improve model accuracy. In the authors
suggested that variance in their ARIMA model of indoor
temperature could be partially explained by variations in
occupancy, and in the authors lamented the lack of
occupancy data for use in their artificial neural network
model of building energy use.
In this study, our goal was not to compare ARIMA
models to other forecasting techniques, but to use an
ARIMA model as a platform for exploring the added
value of occupancy data. In certain buildings swipe card
access can easily give building occupancy information,
but where this is not used, are there other ways of
determining how many people are in a building?
2. METHODS & PROCEDURES
The study was conducted in a three-storey building in
eastern Ontario, Canada, comprising laboratories and 81
individual work spaces, and total serviced floor area of
5800 m2. Various wireless sensors were installed to
collect data on activities related to occupancy, and other
relevant information. Contact closure sensors were
placed on the two exterior doors used as primary entrance
and exit points, on two internal doors in common use, and
on the refrigerator door in the main break room. PIR
motion sensors were placed in the main corridor on each
floor, and a carbon-dioxide sensor was positioned in a
circulation area on the third floor. Wireless air
temperature and horizontal illuminance sensors were
positioned on the building’s roof to provide external
climate data. These sensors were all based on the
EnOcean platform. Repeater stations, with considerable
trial-and-error experimentation in their placement, were
required to deliver sensor data to the central receiver in a
reliable manner. In addition, we collected data on the
number of people who had logged in to the network on
each day (but not when they logged off), network activity
(bit transfer rates), and electrical energy use (total
building, and chiller separately). Detailed information on
the sensor system and data sources is available in .
2.1 Energy Use Forecasts Using ARIMAX
All variables used were hourly values (derived from
measurements at shorter time scales). The dataset
occupancy was virtually nil and our long term interest
was in peak demand load control.
We subtracted chiller power from total building power.
Thus the power variable included lighting, office
equipment, lab equipment, and other plug loads that were
likely directly related to occupancy, and thus perhaps of
more relevance to the goals of this study2 (in the
authors suggested that non-weather related energy use
would benefit from a separate analysis). Figure 1 shows
the average hourly values of this power variable. The
average peak load corresponds to ~46 W/m2, perhaps
double the typical value for a building comprising offices
only. An initial analysis suggested that network logins
and motion sensor counts were likely to be the most
2 An earlier, linear regression time series analysis
suggested that using total building power including the
chiller yielded similar final results and conclusions.
useful measures of occupancy ( provides information
on all measures of occupancy, and the correlations
between them). Analysis showed using once-differenced
variables was appropriate for modelling purposes. Figure
2 shows average hourly values, and the expected rise (and
fall) of building power draw coincident with the rise (and
fall) of indicators of occupancy.
Figure 1. Average hourly values of total building
power minus chiller. Length of box is interquartile
range (IQR); line in box is median; ‘o’ are outlier
values more than 1.5 IQR from the end of the box; ‘*’
are outlier values more than 3 IQR from the end of the
box; whiskers show min. to max. range excluding
outliers as defined above.
All analyses were conducted using the Forecasting
module in SPSS version 18. Some SPSS routines require
complete data sets, whereas we had some gaps in our data
due to imperfect data collection systems and subsequent
data cleaning. We had 79 days of complete and
continuous data for building power draw; of these 79
days, 5 complete days of network login data and 17
complete days of motion sensor data were missing and
were imputed with the mean of the non-missing values for
that hour and day of the week.
Data were available from 1 am on June 12th, 2009 (Week
1 Day 1 Hour 1) to midnight on September 30th, 2009
(Week 17 Day 3 Hour 24). Initial model exploration was
conducted on the majority of the dataset (Week 2 Day 1
Hour 1 to Week 16 Day 1 Hour 7), and checked for
robustness on a split sample. Finally, the model was used
to forecast power draw for the immediate future hours
(Week 16 Day 1 Hour 8 onwards) and compared to the
actual power draw data for this same period; i.e., data that
were not used in the derivation of the model.
Figure 2. Average hourly values of the change in total
building power minus chiller, unique network logins,
and motion sensor activation (sum of three sensors).
3. RESULTS
Initially we derived a model for building power on the
majority of the dataset without occupancy-related or other
predictors. We did try cooling degree hours (base 18 °C,
CDH18) for each hour (differenced) as a predictor to
check for residual climate dependence. CDH18 was
significant in the model but worsened the model fit. We
therefore decided on the pure ARIMA model as the base
model for comparison to later models. The automaticallygenerated, best fit model from SPSS Forecasting included
a lag 7 term. However, this did not have any obvious
physical explanation, and to keep the model compact we
dropped this term from the model; this had only a tiny
effect on the overall model fit. Therefore, the model was
ARIMA(0,1,1)(0,1,1)24, and Eq. 1 simplifies to:
ሺͳ െܤሻሺͳ െܤଶସሻܻ௧ൌሺͳ െߠଵܤሻሺͳ െߠ௦,ଵܤଶସሻ ܽ௧
The model parameters and fit statistics are shown in Table
1. For time-series data, stationary R-squared is a better
measure of variance explained than simple R-squared, and
higher values indicate a better fit. RMSE (Root Mean
Square Error), MAPE (Mean Absolute Percentage Error),
MAE (Mean Absolute Error), MaxAPE (Maximum
Absolute Percentage Error), MaxAE (Maximum Absolute
Error) are all measures where lower values indicate better
performance. Normalized BIC (Bayesian Information)
accounts for the number of parameters used in the model,
and may penalize non-compact models; lower values
indicate better model performance.
Table 1. Model with no external predictors, Week 2
Day 1 Hour 1 to Week 16 Day 1 Hour 7.
ARIMA Model
Parameters
MA (Power),
MA (Power),
Seasonal, θs,ͳ
Stationary
Normalized
In the next step we added login data as a predictor in the
model, using the Transfer Function option in SPSS
Forecasting. Logins were significant in the model. The
final model was ARIMAX(0,1,1)(0,1,1)24, and Eq. 1 thus
simplifies to:
ሺͳ െܤሻሺͳ െܤଶସሻܻ௧
ൌ߱଴ሺͳ െܤሻሺͳ െܤଶସሻܺ௧
൅ሺͳ െߠଵܤሻሺͳ െߠ௦,ଵܤଶସሻ ܽ௧
The model parameters and fit statistics shown are shown
in Table 2; fit statistics were generally improved
compared to Table 1, albeit by relatively small amounts.
Table 2. Model with logins as predictor, Week 2 Day 1
Hour 1 to Week 16 Day 1 Hour 7.
ARIMA Model
Parameters
MA (Power),
MA (Power),
Seasonal, θs,ͳ
(Logins), ωͲ
Stationary
Normalized
We tried adding motion sensor data as a predictor instead
of logins, but this predictor was not statistically
significant and did not improve the model.
We explored model robustness by specifying the model
form in Table 2 to a split sample (Week 2 Day 1 Hour 1
to Week 10 Day 5 Hour 24; and, Week 11 Day 1 Hour 1
to Week 16 Day 5 Hour 24). All three model parameters
from Table 2 were significant in both split samples, and
the parameter estimates were similar.
We then used the model from Table 2 to forecast building
power into the future, using the methods in the SPSS
Forecasting module. Note, that using the final model
equation (Eq. 3), to forecast the value of Yt൅ͳ requires
Xt൅ͳ. In this case, Xt൅ͳ is unknown a priori, and therefore
it too must be forecast in some manner. This may be
done with a separate ARIMA model for X alone .
The model in Table 2 was used in a forecast for the
remainder of Week 16 Day 1 (a Monday). Figure 3
shows the forecast made at Hour 7 for the remainder of
the day, and the actual building power. For comparison
we chose two simple forecasts that might commonly be
invoked: the average for all weekdays in the sample up to
Week 15 Day 5; and the values from Week 15 Day 1 (the
previous Monday). Beyond Hour 7 the ARIMAX model
tends to under-predict the building power draw,
forecasting a peak load 20 kW lower than the actual peak.
The RMSE for Hours 8 to 24 are shown in Table 3.
Overall, the ARIMAX model performs better than
assuming values from the previous Monday, but slightly
worse that assuming average values from all weekdays.
Figure 3. Building power forecast using the
ARIMAX model (at Hour 7, and hour-ahead
forecasts to Hour 13), compared to: actual power;
average for all weekdays; the previous Monday.
It is common practice to update ARIMAX models as new
data become available . We recalculated the
model at every hour after Hour 7, and restricted ourselves
to one-hour ahead forecasts; Figure 3 also shows the
aggregate one-hour ahead forecasts up to Hour 13, and the
forecast out to Hour 24 using the model updated at Hour
13. In this mode the RMSE is 73% lower than that from
the average of all previous weekdays.
Table 3. Accuracy of forecasts for Hours 8 – 24 on
Week 16 Day 1, for various methods
(Hours 8 – 24)
ARIMAX model (at 16.1.7)
ARIMAX model (aggr. to 16.1.13)
Average of all weekdays
Previous Monday
4. DISCUSSION
The improvement in the ARIMAX model with logins as a
predictor was small but encouraging. There were several
reasons why small effects might prevail in this building,
and why we could expect a larger effect in a more typical
office building. First, the study building had a high
fraction of process loads for laboratory equipment, and a
Building Power (‐ chiller), kW
Ave. of all prior weekdays
Previous Monday
Forecast at 07h
Aggr. of hourly forecasts to 13h
relatively lower fraction of loads related to the arrival and
departure of occupants. This building was not unusual for
its type, building power and occupancy profiles for a
university computer science building were very
similar to those in our study building. In a building
power profile for a more typical office building , the
peak power draw was similar to our study building, but
the overnight power draw was only 20% of this peak.
Second, we expect that if logouts were also known in
addition to logins, the model would be improved.
Motion sensor data did not improve our model. Perhaps
this was because there was more variability in this
parameter, or that it had less of a direct connection to
occupancy than logins (i.e. logging in requires switching
on a load, a computer, whereas activating a motion sensor
does not). It might also simply be an artefact of the
modelling process. Also, recall that a relatively large
number of days of data were missing for this variable and
had to be imputed, thus reducing the explanatory power.
None of the other occupancy measures were effective in
the model. Again, it would be interesting to explore
whether such data streams were more effective in a more
conventional office building. Further, the sensors and
data streams we selected were a convenience sample from
a wider possible range, other sensors might prove
valuable (e.g. cameras, pressure sensors, noise data).
Future development should explore robustness over
longer time periods, through changing patterns of energy
use throughout a year, and in a variety of building types.
5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Loren Parfitt and Shawn Pedersen (Echoflex
Solutions Inc.) for assistance with the wireless network.
Richard Laurin, Mario Laniel and David Fothergill (NRC)
provided IT support, and Kevin Li (NRC) helped access
power meter data. Greg Nilsson (NRC) assisted with
sensor calibration. We are also grateful to Ruth Rayman
of NRC’s ICT Sector for financial and moral support.
6. REFERENCES
 Gershenfeld, N., Samouhos, S., and Nordman, B.
2010. Intelligent infrastructure for energy efficiency.
Science, 327 (Feb. 26th), 1086-1088.
 Zhou, Q., Wand, S., Xu, X., and Xiao, F. 2008. A
grey-box model of next-day building thermal load
prediction for energy-efficient control. International
Journal of Energy Research, 32, 1418-1431.
 Neto, A.H. and Fiorelli, F.A.S. 2008. Comparison
between detailed model simulation and artificial
neural network for forecasting building energy
consumption. Energy and Buildings, 40, 2169-2176.
 Hoffman, A.J. 1998. Peak demand control in
commercial buildings with target peak adjustment
based on load forecasting. Proceedings of the 1998
IEEE International Conference on Control
Applications (Trieste, Italy), 1292-1296.
 Piette, M.A., Watson, D.S., Motegi, N., and
Bourassa, N. 2005. Findings from the 2004 fully
automated demand response tests in large facilities.
Report for the PIER Demand Response Research
Center. LBNL Report Number 58178. URL:
 
 Newsham, G.R. and Birt, B. 2010a. Demand-
responsive lighting: a field study. Leukos, 6 (3), 203-
 Montgomery, D.C., Jennings, C.L., and Kulahci, M.
2008. Introduction to Time Series Analysis and
Forecasting. Wiley Series in Probability and
Statistics. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (Hoboken, USA).
 UC. 2010. Notation for ARIMA models. URL:
 
 Loveday, D.L. and Craggs, C. 1993. Stochastic
modelling of temperatures for a full-scale occupied
building zone subject to natural random influences.
Applied Energy, 45, 295-312.
 Rios-Moreno, G.J., Trejo-Perea, M., Castaneda-
Miranda, R., Hernandez-Guzman, V.M., and Herrera-
Ruiz, G. 2007. Modelling temperature in intelligent
buildings by means of autoregressive models.
Automation in Construction, 16, 713-722.
 Lowry, G., Bianeyin, F.U., and Shah, N. 2007.
Seasonal autoregressive modeling of water and fuel
consumptions in buildings. Applied Energy, 84, 542-
 Kimabra, A., Kurosu, S., Endo, R., Kamimura, K.,
Matsuba, T., and Yamada, A. 1995. On-line
prediction for load profile of an air-conditioning
system. ASHRAE Transactions, 101 (2), 198-207.
 Newsham, G.R. and Birt, B. 2010b. Detecting Total
Building Occupancy for More Efficient Operation,
National Research Council – Institute for Research in
Construction, Research Report, RR-304. URL:
 
 Kawashima, M., Dorgan, C.E., and Mitchell, J.W.
1995. Hourly thermal load prediction for the next 24
hours by ARIMA, EWMA, LR, and an Artificial
Neural Network. ASHRAE Transactions, 101 (1),
 Hay, S. and Rice, A. 2009. The case for
apportionment. Proceedings of the First ACM
Workshop on Embedded Sensing Systems for Energy-
Efficiency in Buildings .