Edinburgh Research Explorer
Sequence-discriminative training of deep neural networks
Citation for published version:
Veselý, K, Ghoshal, A, Burget, L & Povey, D 2013, Sequence-discriminative training of deep neural
networks. in Proceedings of Interspeech 2013. ISCA, 14th Annual Conference of the International Speech
Communication Association, Lyon, France, 25/08/13.
< >
Link to publication record in Edinburgh Research Explorer
Document Version:
Peer reviewed version
 
Proceedings of Interspeech 2013
General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via the Edinburgh Research Explorer is retained by the author(s)
and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and
abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
Take down policy
The University of Edinburgh has made every reasonable effort to ensure that Edinburgh Research Explorer
content complies with UK legislation. If you believe that the public display of this file breaches copyright please
contact providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately and
investigate your claim.
Download date: 26. Mar. 2025
Sequence-discriminative training of deep neural networks
Karel Vesel´y1, Arnab Ghoshal2, Luk´aˇs Burget1, Daniel Povey3
1Brno University of Technology, Czech Republic
2Centre for Speech Technology Research, University of Edinburgh, UK
3Center for Language and Speech Processing, Johns Hopkins University, USA
 , , , 
Sequence-discriminative training of deep neural networks
(DNNs) is investigated on a standard 300 hour American English conversational telephone speech task. Different sequencediscriminative criteria — maximum mutual information (MMI),
minimum phone error (MPE), state-level minimum Bayes risk
(sMBR), and boosted MMI — are compared. Two different
heuristics are investigated to improve the performance of the
DNNs trained using sequence-based criteria — lattices are regenerated after the ﬁrst iteration of training; and, for MMI and
BMMI, the frames where the numerator and denominator hypotheses are disjoint are removed from the gradient computation. Starting from a competitive DNN baseline trained using cross-entropy, different sequence-discriminative criteria are
shown to lower word error rates by 7-9% relative, on average. Little difference is noticed between the different sequencebased criteria that are investigated. The experiments are done
using the open-source Kaldi toolkit, which makes it possible
for the wider community to reproduce these results.
Index Terms: speech recognition, deep learning, sequencecriterion training, neural networks, reproducible research
1. Introduction
This paper presents a reproducible set of experiments on speech
recognition with a deep neural network (DNN) - hidden Markov
model (HMM) hybrid. In such hybrid setups the DNN is used
to provide pseudo-likelihooods (“scaled likelihoods”) for the
states of an HMM . While computational constraints limited
earlier uses of hybrid systems to estimating scaled likelihoods
for monophones using a two layered network and recurrent
networks , recent years have seen a resurgence in their use
 . The principal modeling and algorithmic difference
to previous systems is the use of RBM pretraining .
Neural networks (NNs) for speech recognition are typically
trained to classify individual frames based on a cross-entropy
IARPA BABEL program, the IT4Innovations Centre of Excellence
CZ.1.05/1.1.00/02.0070 and Czech Ministry of Education project No¯
MSM0021630528.
Arnab Ghoshal was supported by EPSRC Programme Grant no. EP/I031022/1 (Natural Speech Technology). Daniel
Povey was supported by DARPA BOLT contract No¯ HR0011-12-C-
0015, and IARPA BABEL contract No¯ W911NF-12-C-0015, and the
Human Language Technologies Center of Excellence. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright annotation thereon.
The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors
alone and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the of-
ﬁcial policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of IARPA,
DARPA/DoD, or the U.S. Government.
criterion (section 2.1). Speech recognition, however, is inherently a sequence classiﬁcation problem. As such, speech recognizers using Gaussian mixture model (GMM) as the emission density of an HMM achieve state-of-the-art performance
when trained using sequence-discriminative criteria like maximum mutual information (MMI) , boosted MMI (BMMI)
 , minimum phone error (MPE) or minimum Bayes risk
(MBR) . It is possible to efﬁciently estimate the parameters based on any of these criteria using statistics collected
from lattices .
The theory for sequence-discriminative training of neural
networks was also developed in early literature . In
fact, the “clamped” and “free” posteriors described in are
same as the numerator and denominator occupancies used
in discriminative training of GMM-HMM systems. This connection, and its logical extension that sequence-discriminative
training of NNs can take advantage of the lattice-based computations that are routinely used for GMM-HMM systems, was
pointed out in , where it was shown that the sequencediscriminative training can improve upon networks trained using cross-entropy. Subsequent results reported in 
have also shown consistent gains from sequence-discriminative
training of NNs. However, there is some disagreement about
which of the criteria is suitable: suggest using a statelevel minimum Bayes risk (sMBR) criterion, while ﬁnds
MMI to work better than MPE, and only provide results using MMI.
Needless to say, such empirical observations depend on the
choice of the dataset and speciﬁc details of the implementation.
In this paper, we present a comparison of the different training
criteria for DNNs on the standard 300-hour Switchboard conversational telephone speech task, which has also been used in
 . We do this using the Kaldi speech recognition toolkit
 , which is a free, open-source toolkit for speech recognition
research. The tools and scripts used to produce the results reported in this paper are publicly available as part of the Kaldi
toolkit1, and anyone with access to the data should be able to
reproduce our results.
2. Acoustic modeling with DNNs
In a DNN-HMM hybrid system, the DNN is trained to provide
posterior probability estimates for the HMM states. Speciﬁcally, for an observation out corresponding to time t in utterance u, the output yut(s) of the DNN for the HMM state s is
obtained using the softmax activation function:
yut(s) ≜P(s|out) =
exp{aut(s)}
s′ exp{aut(s′)},
1Available from 
Veselý, K., Ghoshal, A., Burget, L. S., & Povey, D. . Sequence-discriminative training of deep neural networks. In
Proceedings of Interspeech 2013. ISCA.
where aut(s) is the activation at the output layer corresponding
to state s. The recognizer uses a pseudo log-likelihood of state
s given observation out,
log p(out|s) = log yut(s) −log P(s),
where P(s) is the prior probability of state s calculated from
the training data .
The networks are trained to optimize a given training objective function using the standard error backpropagation procedure . Typically, cross-entropy is used as the objective
and the optimization is done through stochastic gradient descent
(SGD). For any given objective, the important quantity to calculate is its gradient with respect to the activations at the output
layer. The gradients for all the parameters of the network can
be derived from this one quantity based on the back-propagation
procedure.
2.1. Cross-Entropy
For multi-class classiﬁcation, it is common to use the negative
log posterior as the objective:
log yut(sut),
where sut is the reference state label at time t for utterance u.
This is also the expected cross-entropy between the distribution
represented by the reference labels and the predicted distribution y(s). The necessary gradient is:
∂aut(s) = −∂log yut(sut)
= yut(s) −δs;sut,
where δs;sut is the Kronecker delta function. Minimizing the
cross-entropy is the same as maximizing the mutual information
between y(s) and δs;sut computed at the frame-level.
The MMI criterion used in ASR is the mutual information between the distributions of the observation and word sequences. With Ou = {ou1, . . . , ouTu} as the sequence of all
observations, and Wu as the word-sequence in the reference for
utterance u, the MMI criterion is:
p(Ou|Su)κP(Wu)
W p(Ou|S)κP(W),
where Su = {su1, . . . , suTu} is the sequence of states corresponding to Wu; and κ is the acoustic scaling factor. The sum
in the denominator is taken over all word sequences in the decoded speech lattice for utterance u. Differentiating (5) w.r.t.
the log-likelihood log p(out|r) for state r, we get:
∂log p(out|r) = κδr;sut −
W :st=r p(Ou|S)κP(W)
W p(Ou|S)κP(W)
= κ(δr;sut −γDEN
where γDEN
(r) is the posterior probability of being in state r
at time t, computed over the denominator lattices for utterance
u. The required gradient w.r.t. the activations is obtained as:
∂log p(out|r)
∂log p(out|r)
= κ(δs;sut −γDEN
Note that in this work we have assumed that the reference state
labels are obtained through a forced alignment of the acoustics
with the word transcript. More generally, one may use forwardbackward over the word reference to obtain the numerator occupancies γNUM
(s) instead of using δs;sut in equations (4) and
2.3. MPE/sMBR
While minimizing FCE minimizes expected frame-error, maximizing FMMI minimizes expected sentence error. The MBR
family of objectives are explicitly designed to minimize the
expected error corresponding to different granularity of labels
W p(Ou|S)κP(W)A(W, Wu)
W ′ p(Ou|S)κP(W ′)
where A(W, Wu) is the raw accuracy, that is, the number of
correct phone labels (for MPE) or state labels (for sMBR)
corresponding to the word sequence W with respect to that
corresponding to the reference Wu. Differentiating (8) w.r.t.
log p(out|r), we get:
∂log p(out|r) = κ γDEN
 ¯Au(st = r) −¯Au
where ¯Au(st = r) is the average accuracy of all paths in the
lattice for utterance u that pass through state r at time t; ¯Au is
the average accuracy of all paths in the lattice; and γMBR
the MBR “posterior” as deﬁned in . Like before, we get:
∂aut(s) = κγMBR
2.4. Boosted MMI
In boosted MMI , the MMI objective 5 is modiﬁed to boost
the likelihood of paths that contain more errors:
p(Ou|Su)κP(Wu)
W p(Ou|S)κP(W) e−b A(W,Wu) ,
where b is the boosting factor. The BMMI criterion may also be
interpreted as incorporating a margin term in the MMI objective
 . The gradient computation is identical to that of MMI (eq.
(7)), with the effect of the boosting showing up in the γDEN
3. Experimental setup
In this paper, we report experiments on the 300 hour Switchboard conversational telephone speech task. Speciﬁcally, we
use Switchboard-1 Release 2 (LDC97S62) as the training set,
together with the Mississippi State transcripts2 and the 30Kword lexicon released with those transcripts. The lexicon contains pronunciations for all words and word fragments in the
training data. We use the Hub5 ’00 (LDC2002S09) data as the
development set and Hub5 ’01 (LDC2002S13) data as a separate test set. A trigram language model (LM) is trained on
3M words of the training transcripts, which is then interpolated
with another trigram LM trained on 11M words of the Fisher
English Part 1 transcripts (LDC2004T19). The LMs are trained
2Available from: 
Table 1: Results (% WER) for the baseline GMM-HMM systems on the subsets of the Hub5 ’00 evaluation set.
ML SAT GMM
BMMI SAT GMM
ML SAT GMM
BMMI SAT GMM
using interpolated Kneser-Ney smoothing and the interpolated
LM has 950K trigrams and 1064K bigrams.
The acoustic models (both GMM-HMM and DNNs) are
trained on features that are obtained by splicing together 7
frames (3 on each side of the current frame) of 13-dimensional
MFCCs (C0-C12) and projecting down to 40 dimensions using linear discriminant analysis (LDA). The MFCCs are normalized to have zero mean per speaker. We also use a single semi-tied covariance (STC) transform on the features
obtained using LDA. The combined features are referred to as
LDA+STC. Moreover, speaker adaptive training (SAT) is done
using a single feature-space maximum likelihood linear regression (FMLLR) transform estimated per speaker. We select the
ﬁrst 100K utterances from the training data to create a second
smaller training set with 110 hours of speech, in order to achieve
faster turnaround times for the different tuning experiments.
3.1. Baseline GMM-HMM systems
LDA+STC+FMLLR features described above.
The models
trained on the full 300 hour training set contain 8859 tied triphone states and 200K Gaussians. In Table 1, we compare the
results of the maximum likelihood (ML) trained models with
those trained using BMMI with a boosting factor b = 0.1 (cf.
equation (10)). It is worth pointing out that the Hub5 ’00 data
contain 20 conversations from Switchboard (SWBD) and 20
conversations from CallHome English (CHE). The CallHome
data tends to be harder to recognize, partly due to a greater
prevalence of foreign-accented speech. Here, we present results on both of these subsets as well as the complete Hub5 ’00
evaluation set. Only the results in the SWB column should be
compared with the Hub5 ’00 results presented in and .
The models trained on the 110 hour training set contain 4234
tied triphone states and 90K Gaussians, the results for which
are similarly presented in Table 1. For either of the training
conditions, the leaves of the phonetic decision tree used for the
GMM-HMM system correspond to the output units of the respective DNNs.
3.2. DNNs trained using cross-entropy
The DNNs are trained on the same LDA+STC+FMLLR features as the GMM-HMM baselines, except that the features
are globally normalized to have zero mean and unit variance.
The FMLLR transforms are the same as those estimated for the
GMM-HMM system during training and testing. The network
trained on the full 300 hour training set has 7 layers (that is, 6
hidden layers), where each hidden layer has 2048 neurons, and
8859 output units. The input to the network is an 11 frame (5
frames on each side of the current frame) context window of the
40 dimensional features. This DNN3 is initialized with stacked
3We do not use different names (e.g. deep belief networks) depending on how the networks are initialized.
Table 2: Results (% WER) for the DNN systems on the subsets of the Hub5 ’00 evaluation set. The DNNs are trained on
LDA+STC+FMLLR features using the cross-entropy criterion.
DNN 7 layers
DNN 5 layers
restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs) that are pretrained in
a greedy layerwise fashion . The Gaussian-Bernoulli RBM
is trained with an initial learning rate of 0.01 and the Bernoulli-
Bernoulli RBMs with a rate of 0.4. The initial RBM weights are
randomly drawn from a Gaussian N(0, 0.01); the hidden biases of Bernoulli units as well as the visible biases of the Gaussian units are initialized to zero, while the visible biases of the
Bernoulli units are initialized as bv = log(p/1 −p), where p is
the mean output of a Bernoulli unit from previous layer. During
pretraining, the momentum m is linearly increased from 0.5 to
0.9 on the initial 50 hours of data, which is accompanied by a
rescaling of the learning rate using 1 −m. Also the L2 regularization is applied to the weights, with a penalty factor of
The DNN trained on the smaller training set (110 hours)
has 5 layers, where each hidden layer has 1200 neurons, and
4234 output units. This network is randomly initialized, with
the weights drawn from N(0, 0.01) and the biases initialized
uniformly at random from U(−4.1, −3.9). A 9 frame context
window (± 4 frames) is used at input, followed by a second
LDA transform that keeps 350 dimensions out of the 360 and
whose output is globally normalized to zero mean and unit variance. The second LDA was initially used since it gave a slight
improvement over a 5 layer network, and it was faster to train
than a 6 layer network. However, it is not important to consider
this detail for the overall message of this paper.
The utterances and frames are presented in a randomized
order while training both of these networks using SGD to minimize the cross-entropy between the labels and network output.
The SGD uses minibatches of 256 frames, and an exponentially decaying schedule that starts with an initial learning rate
of 0.008 and halves the rate when the improvement in frame accuracy on a cross-validation set between two successive epochs
falls below 0.5%. The optimization terminates when the frame
accuracy increases by less than 0.1%. Cross-validation is done
on a set of 4000 utterances that are held out from the training
data. The speed of training is accelerated by running on generalpurpose graphics processing units (GPGPUs). The recognition
results with these two DNNs are presented in Table 2.
3.3. Sequence-discriminative training of DNNs
Just like with GMM-HMM systems, sequence-discriminative
training of DNNs start from a set of alignments and lattices
that are generated by decoding the training data with a unigram LM. For each training condition, the alignments and lattices are generated using the corresponding DNN trained using
cross-entropy. The cross-entropy trained models are also used
as the starting point for the sequence-discriminative training. As
with CE training, the posterior probability computation using
the DNN and the backpropagation are done on a GPU, while
the lattice-based computations run on a CPU. It is possible to
speed-up the training by using a distributed algorithm .
However, this has not been done in this initial implementation.
Table 3: Results (% WER) of the DNNs trained on the full 300 hour training set using different criteria.
WER%, Hub5 ’00
CE realign
Figure 1: Hub5 ’00: DNNs trained with MMI on 110h set, with
and without frame rejection (FR).
length of rejected interval (in frames)
# occurences
Figure 2: Histogram of lengths of rejected frame intervals.
Through some initial benchmarking experiments with MMI
as the objective function, we found 1e-5 to be a suitable learning
rate4 and that an exponentially decaying learning rate provided
no gains. Figure 1 shows the results with MMI trained DNNs
on Hub5 ’00. The horizontal line (CE realign) shows the
results with CE training when starting with alignments from a
CE trained DNN instead of the alignments from a GMM system. This accounts for about half of the improvements from
MMI. We ﬁnd the MMI objective to overﬁt after 2 iterations. A
detailed analysis revealed somewhat anomalous objective and
gradient values for utterances where the reference hypothesis is
missing from the lattice. This may be caused by search errors or
by a poor match of the acoustics to the model or even by errors
in the reference transcription. However, only in the ﬁrst of these
cases, that is when there are search errors on the training data,
it is reasonable to explicitly add the reference to the lattice.
A closer look at the number of frames in intervals where
the reference is missing from the lattice (Figure 2) reveals that
most of them are short segments. In fact, 78% of such frames
lie in intervals shorter than 50 frames (i.e. 0.5 seconds). While
the errors are mostly local, these frames may disproportionately
impact the training since γDEN
(s) = 0 for them and hence
the computed gradients are larger. As a result, we decided to
remove such frames from the gradient computation, which re-
4In our implementation, the gradients are not scaled by the acoustic
scale κ, but its effect is subsumed in the learning rate. So, with κ = 0.1,
the effective learning rate is 1e-4.
WER%, Hub5 ’00
Figure 3: Hub5 ’00: DNNs trained on 110h set, various criteria.
WER%, Hub5 ’00
BMMI FR lat
MMI FR lat
Figure 4: Hub5 ’00, lattice regeneration after 1st epoch (indicated by “lat” sufﬁx).
duces the amount of training data by 2.5%. The results in Figure 1 show that this frame rejection (FR) heuristic leads to more
stable learning. Nearly all of the reduction in errors is on the
CallHome part, which is more mismatched to the training data.
Next, comparing the different sequence-discriminative criteria in Figure 3, we do not ﬁnd a big difference between them.
A learning rate of 1e-5 was also found to work well for these
other criteria. In Figure 4, we compare the results when the
lattices are regenrated after the ﬁrst epoch. We see that regrenerating lattices provide a small gain. However, this is computationally expensive and regenerating lattices after the second
epoch did not produce any further gains. Finally, Table 3 summarizes the results of the different systems trained on the entire
300 hour training set. The results are presented on both the development set (Hub5 ’00) and the test set (Hub5 ’01) and their
respective subsets.
4. Conclusions
We have presented experiments with DNN-HMM hybrid systems trained using frame-based cross-entropy and different
sequence-discriminative criteria on the 300 hour Switchboard
conversational telephone speech task.
We achieved state-ofthe-art results on this task. The system building scripts and
the neural network training code are released as part of the free
and open-source Kaldi toolkit, making it possible for the wider
speech recognition research community to use these state-ofthe-art techniques in their work.
5. References
 H. Bourlard and N. Morgan, Connectionist Speech Recognition—
A Hybrid Approach.
Kluwer Academic, 1994.
 S. Renals, N. Morgan, H. Bourlard, M. Cohen, and H. Franco,
“Connectionist probability estimators in HMM speech recognition,” IEEE Trans. Speech Audio Process., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 161–
174, 1994.
 A. J. Robinson, “An application of recurrent nets to phone probability estimation,” IEEE Trans. Neural Networks, vol. 5, no. 2, pp.
298–305, 1994.
 G. E. Dahl, D. Yu, L. Deng, and A. Acero, “Context-dependent
pre-trained deep neural networks for large-vocabulary speech
recognition,” IEEE Trans. Audio Speech Lang. Process., vol. 20,
no. 1, pp. 30–42, 2012.
 F. Seide, G. Li, X. Chen, and D. Yu, “Feature engineering
in context-dependent deep neural networks for conversational
speech transcription,” in Proc. IEEE ASRU, December 2011, pp.
 N. Jaitly, P. Nguyen, A. Senior, and V. Vanhoucke, “Application of
pretrained deep neural networks to large vocabulary speech recognition,” in Proc. INTERSPEECH, September 2012.
 T. N. Sainath, B. Kingsbury, B. Ramabhadran, P. Fousek, P. Novak, and A. Mohamed, “Making deep belief networks effective for
large vocabulary continuous speech recognition,” in Proc. IEEE
ASRU, December 2011, pp. 30–35.
 G. E. Hinton, S. Osindero, and Y. Teh, “A fast learning algorithm
for deep belief nets,” Neural Computation, vol. 18, pp. 1527–
1554, 2006.
 L. R. Bahl, P. F. Brown, P. V. de Souza, and R. L. Mercer, “Maximum mutual information estimation of hidden Markov model parameters for speech recognition,” in Proc. IEEE ICASSP, vol. 1,
April 1986, pp. 49–52.
 D. Povey, D. Kanevsky, B. Kingsbury, B. Ramabhadran, G. Saon,
and K. Visweswariah, “Boosted MMI for model and feature-space
discriminative training,” in Proc. IEEE ICASSP, 2008, pp. 4057–
 D. Povey, “Discriminative training for large vocabulary speech
recognition,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK, 2003.
 J. Kaiser, B. Horvat, and Z. Kaˇciˇc, “A novel loss function for the
overall risk criterion based discriminative training of HMM models,” in Proc. ICSLP, vol. 2, October 2000, pp. 887–890.
 M. Gibson and T. Hain, “Hypothesis spaces for minimum Bayes
risk training in large vocabulary speech recognition,” in Proc. IN-
TERSPEECH, September 2006, pp. 2406–2409.
 D. Povey and B. Kingsbury, “Evaluation of proposed modiﬁcations to MPE for large scale discriminative training,” in Proc.
IEEE ICASSP, vol. 4, April 2007, pp. IV–321–IV–324.
 J. S. Bridle and L. Dodd, “An Alphanet approach to optimising
input transformations for continuous speech recognition,” in Proc.
IEEE ICASSP, vol. 1, April 1991, pp. 277–280.
 A. Krogh and S. K. Riis, “Hidden neural networks,” Neural Computation, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 541–563, February 1999.
 B. Kingsbury, “Lattice-based optimization of sequence classiﬁcation criteria for neural-network acoustic modeling,” in Proc. IEEE
ICASSP, April 2009, pp. 3761–3764.
 G. Wang and K. C. Sim, “Sequential classiﬁcation criteria for NNs
in automatic speech recognition,” in Proc. INTERSPEECH, August 2011, pp. 441–444.
 B. Kingsbury, T. N. Sainath, and H. Soltau, “Scalable minimum
Bayes risk training of deep neural network acoustic models using
distributed Hessian-free optimization,” in Proc. INTERSPEECH,
September 2012.
 D. Povey, A. Ghoshal, G. Boulianne, L. Burget, O. Glembek,
N. Goel, M. Hannemann, P. Motl´ıˇcek, Y. Qian, P. Schwarz,
J. Silovsk´y, G. Stemmer, and K. Vesel´y, “The Kaldi speech recognition toolkit,” in IEEE ASRU, December 2011.
 D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams, “Learning
representations by back-propagating errors,” Nature, vol. 323, pp.
533–536, October 1986.
 G. Heigold, T. Deselaers, R. Schl¨uter, and H. Ney, “Modiﬁed
MMI/MPE: A direct evaluation of the margin in speech recognition,” in Proc. ICML, 2008, pp. 384–391.
 M. J. F. Gales, “Semi-tied covariance matrices for hidden Markov
models,” IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Processing,
vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 272–281, May 1999.
 J. Dean, G. S. Corrado, R. Monga, K. Chen, M. Devin, Q. V.
Le, M. Z. Mao, M. Ranzato, A. Senior, P. Tucker, K. Yang, and
A. Y. Ng, “Large scale distributed deep networks,” in Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems.
MIT Press, 2012, pp.
1232–1240.