Over the Air Deep Learning
Based Radio Signal Classiﬁcation
Tim O’Shea, Senior Member, IEEE, Tamoghna Roy, Member, IEEE
and T. Charles Clancy, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—We conduct an in depth study on the performance of
deep learning based radio signal classiﬁcation for radio communications signals. We consider a rigorous baseline method using
higher order moments and strong boosted gradient tree classi-
ﬁcation and compare performance between the two approaches
across a range of conﬁgurations and channel impairments. We
consider the effects of carrier frequency offset, symbol rate,
and multi-path fading in simulation and conduct over-the-air
measurement of radio classiﬁcation performance in the lab using
software radios and compare performance and training strategies
for both. Finally we conclude with a discussion of remaining
problems, and design considerations for using such techniques.
INTRODUCTION
Rapidly understanding and labeling of the radio spectrum in
an autonomous way is a key enabler for spectrum interference
monitoring, radio fault detection, dynamic spectrum access,
opportunistic mesh networking, and numerous regulatory and
defense applications. Boiling down a complex high-data rate
ﬂood of RF information to precise and accurate labels which
can be acted on and conveyed compactly is a critical component today in numerous radio sensing and communications
systems. For many years, radio signal classiﬁcation and modulation recognition have been accomplished by carefully handcrafting specialized feature extractors for speciﬁc signal types
and properties and by and deriving compact decision bounds
from them using either analytically derived decision boundaries or statistical learned boundaries within low-dimensional
feature spaces.
In the past ﬁve years, we have seen rapid disruption occurring based on the improved neural network architectures,
algorithms and optimization techniques collectively known
as deep learning (DL) . DL has recently replaced the
machine learning (ML) state of the art in computer vision,
voice and natural language processing; in both of these ﬁelds,
feature engineering and pre-processing were once critically
important topics, allowing cleverly designed feature extractors
and transforms to extract pertinent information into a manageable reduced dimension representation from which labels
or decisions could be readily learned with tools like support
vector machines or decision trees. Among these widely used
front-end features were the scale-invariant feature transform
(SIFT) , the bag of words , Mel-frequency Cepstral
coefﬁcients (MFCC) and others which were widely relied
Authors are with the Bradley Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech and DeepSig, Arlington, VA e-mail: (oshea,tamoghna,tcc)@vt.edu.
upon only a few years ago, but are no longer needed for state
of the art performance today.
DL greatly increased the capacity for feature learning directly on raw high dimensional input data based on high level
supervised objectives due to the new found capacity for learning of very large neural network models with high numbers of
free parameters. This was made possible by the combination of
strong regularization techniques , , greatly improved
methods for stochastic gradient descent (SGD) , ,
low cost high performance graphics card processing power,
and combining of key neural network architecture innovations
such as convolutional neural networks , and rectiﬁed linear
units . It was not until Alexnet that many of these
techniques were used together to realize an increase of several
orders of magnitude in the practical model size, parameter
count, and target dataset and task complexity which made
feature learning directly from imagery state of the art. At
this point, the trend in ML has been relentless towards the
replacement of rigid simpliﬁed analytic features and models
with approximate models with much more accurate high
degrees of freedom (DOF) models derived from data using
end-to-end feature learning. This trend has been demonstrated
in vision, text processing, and voice, but has yet to be widely
applied or fully realized on radio time series data sets until
We showed in , that these methods can be readily
applied to simulated radio time series sample data in order
to classify emitter types with excellent performance, obtaining
equivalent accuracies several times more sensitive than existing
best practice methods using feature based classiﬁers on higher
order moments. In this work we provide a more extensive
dataset of additional radio signal types, a more realistic
simulation of the wireless propagation environment, over the
air measurement of the new dataset (i.e. real propagation
effects), new methods for signal classiﬁcation which drastically
outperform those we initially introduced, and an in depth
analysis of many practical engineering design and system
parameters impacting the performance and accuracy of the
radio signal classiﬁer.
BACKGROUND
A. Baseline Classiﬁcation Approach
1) Statistical Modulation Features: For digital modulation
techniques, higher order statistics and cyclo-stationary moments , , , , are among the most widely
used features to compactly sense and detect signals with strong
periodic components such as are created by the structure of the
 
carrier, symbol timing, and symbol structure for certain modulations. By incorporating precise knowledge of this structure,
expected values of peaks in auto-correlation function (ACF)
and spectral correlation function (SCF) surfaces have been
used successfully to provide robust classiﬁcation for signals
with unknown or purely random data. For analog modulation
where symbol timing does not produce these artifacts, other
statistical features are useful in performing signal classiﬁcation.
For our baseline features in this work, we leverage a number
of compact higher order statistics (HOSs). To obtain these
we compute the higher order moments (HOMs) using the
expression given below:
M(p, q) = E[xp−q(x∗)q]
From these HOMs we can derive a number of higher order
cumulantss (HOCs) which have been shown to be effective
discriminators for many modulation types . HOCs can
be computed combinatorially using HOMs, each expression
varying slightly; below we show one example such expression
for the C(4, 0) HOM.
M(4, 0) −3 × M (2, 0)2
Additionally we consider a number of analog features which
capture other statistical behaviors which can be useful, these
include mean, standard deviation and kurtosis of the normalized centered amplitude, the centered phase, instantaneous
frequency, absolute normalized instantaneous frequency, and
several others which have shown to be useful in prior work.
2) Decision Criterion: When mapping our baseline features
to a class label, a number of compact machine learning
or analytic decision processes can be used. Probabilistically
derived decision trees on expert modulation features were
among the ﬁrst to be used in this ﬁeld, but for many years
such decision processes have also been trained directly on
datasets represented in their feature space. Popular methods
here include support vector machines (SVMs), decision trees
(DTrees), neural networks (NNs) and ensembling methods
which combine collections of classiﬁers to improve performance. Among these ensembling methods are Boosting, Bagging , and Gradient tree boosting . In particular, XGBoost
 has proven to be an extremely effective implementation
of gradient tree boosting which has been used successfully by
winners of numerous Kaggle data science competitions . In
this work we opt to use the XGBoost approach for our feature
classiﬁer as it outperforms any single decision tree, SVM, or
other method evaluated consistently as was the case in .
B. Radio Channel Models
When modeling a wireless channel there are many compact stochastic models for propagation effects which can be
used . Primary impairments seen in any wireless channel
carrier frequency offset (CFO): carrier phase and frequency offset due to disparate local oscillators (LOs)
and motion (Doppler).
symbol rate offset (SRO): symbol clock offset and time
dilation due to disparate clock sources and motion.
Delay Spread: non-impulsive delay spread due to delayed reﬂection, diffraction and diffusion of emissions
on multiple paths.
Thermal Noise: additive white-noise impairment at the
receiver due to physical device sensitivity.
Each of these effects can be compactly modeled well and
is present in some form on any wireless propagation medium.
There are numerous additional propagation effects which can
also be modeled synthetically beyond the scope of our exploration here.
C. Deep Learning Classiﬁcation Approach
DL relies today on SGD to optimize large parametric
neural network models. Since Alexnet and the techniques
described in section I, there have been numerous architectural
advances within computer vision leading to signiﬁcant performance improvements. However, the core approach remains
largely unchanged. Neural networks are comprised of a series
of layers which map each layer input h0 to output h1 using
parametric dense matrix operations followed by non-linearities.
This can be expressed simply as follows, where weights, W,
have the dimension |h0 × h1|, bias, b, has the dimension |h1|
(both constituting θ), and max is applied element-wise peroutput |h1| (applying rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) activation
functions).
h1 = max(0, h0W + b)
Convolutional layers can be formed by assigning a shape
to inputs and outputs and forming W from the replication of
ﬁlter tap variables at regular strides across the input (to reduce
parameter count and enforce translation invariance).
Training typically leverages a loss function (L ), in this
case (for supervised classiﬁcation) categorical cross-entropy,
between one-hot known class labels yi (a zero vector, with a
one value at the class index i of the correct class) and predicted
class values ˆyi.
L (y, ˆy) = −1
[yi log(ˆyi) + (1 −yi) log(1 −ˆyi)]
Back propagation of loss gradients can be used to iteratively
update network weights (θ) for each epoch n within the
network (f(x, θ)) until validation loss is no longer decreasing.
We use the Adam optimizer , whose form roughly follows
the conventional SGD expression below, except for a more
complex time varying expression for learning rate (η) beyond
the scope of this work.
θn+1 = θn −η ∂L (y, f(x, θn))
RANDOM VARIABLE INITIALIZATION
Random Variable
Distribution
U(0.1, 0.4)
N(0, σclk)
N(0, σclk)
Σiδ(t −Rayleighi(τ))
To reduce over ﬁtting to training data, regularization is
used. We use batch normalization for regularization of
convolutional layers and Alpha Dropout for regularization
of fully connected layers. Detail descriptions of additional
layers used including SoftMax, Max-Pooling, etc are beyond
the scope of this work and are described fully in .
DATASET GENERATION APPROACH
Fading Power Delay Proﬁle Examples
We generate new datasets for this investigation by building
upon an improved version of the tools described in . 24
different analog and digital modulators are used which cover a
wide range of single carrier modulation schemes. We consider
several different propagation scenarios in the context of this
work, ﬁrst are several simulated wireless channels generated
from the model shown in ﬁgure 2, and second we consider over
the air (OTA) transmission channel of clean signals as shown in
ﬁgures 3 and 4 with no synthetic channel impairments. Digital
signals are shaped with a root-raised cosine pulse shaping ﬁlter
 with a range of roll-off values (α).
For each example in the synthetic data sets, we independently draw a random value for each of the variables shown
below in table I. This results in a new and uncorrelated random
channel initialization for each example.
Figure 1 illustrates several random values for H, the channel
impulse response envelope, for different delay spreads, τ =
[0, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0], relating to different levels of multi-path fading
in increasingly more difﬁcult Rayleigh fading environments.
Figure 22 illustrate examples from the training set when using
a simulated channel at low SNR (0 dB Es/N0).
We consider two different compositions of the dataset,
ﬁrst a “Normal” dataset, which consists of 11 classes which
are all relatively low information density and are commonly
seen in impaired environments. These 11 signals represent
a relatively simple classiﬁcation task at high SNR in most
cases, somewhat comparable to the canonical MNIST digits.
Second, we introduce a “Difﬁcult” dataset, which contains
all 24 modulations. These include a number of high order
modulations (QAM256 and APSK256), which are used in the
real world in very high-SNR low-fading channel environments
such as on impulsive satellite links (e.g. DVB-S2X). We
however, apply impairments which are beyond that which you
would expect to see in such a scenario and consider only
relatively short-time observation windows for classiﬁcation,
where the number of samples (ℓ) is = 1024. Short time
classiﬁcation is a hard problem since decision processes can
not wait and acquire more data to increase certainty. This is
the case in many real world systems when dealing with short
observations (such as when rapidly scanning a receiver) or
short signal bursts in the environment. Under these effects,
with low SNR examples (from -20 dB to +30 dB Es/N0),
one would not expect to be able to achieve anywhere near
100% classiﬁcation rates on the full dataset, making it a good
benchmark for comparison and future research comparison.
The speciﬁc modulations considered within each of these
two dataset types are as follows:
Normal Classes: OOK, 4ASK, BPSK, QPSK, 8PSK,
16QAM, AM-SSB-SC, AM-DSB-SC, FM, GMSK,
Difﬁcult Classes: OOK, 4ASK, 8ASK, BPSK, QPSK,
8PSK, 16PSK, 32PSK, 16APSK, 32APSK, 64APSK,
256QAM, AM-SSB-WC, AM-SSB-SC, AM-DSB-WC,
AM-DSB-SC, FM, GMSK, OQPSK
The raw datasets will be made available on the RadioML
website 1 shortly after publication.
A. Over the air data capture
In additional to simulating wireless channel impairments, we
also implement an OTA test-bed in which we modulate and
transmit signals using a universal software radio peripheral
(USRP) B210 software deﬁned radio (SDR). We use a
second B210 (with a separate free-running LO) to receive
these transmissions in the lab, over a relatively benign indoor
wireless channel on the 900MHz ISM band. These radios use
the Analog Devices AD9361 radio frequency integrated
circuit (RFIC) as their radio front-end and have an LO that
provides a frequency (and clock) stability of around 2 parts per
million (PPM). We off-tune our signal by around 1 MHz to
avoid DC signal impairment associated with direct conversion,
but store signals at base-band (offset only by LO error).
Received test emissions are stored off unmodiﬁed along with
ground truth labels for the modulation from the emitter.
SIGNAL CLASSIFICATION MODELS
In this section we explore the radio signal classiﬁcation
methods in more detail which we will use for the remainder
of this paper.
1 
System for dataset signal generation and synthetic channel impairment modeling
Over the Air Test Conﬁguration
FEATURES USED
Feature Name
M(2,0), M(2,1)
M(4,0), M(4,1), M(4,2), M(4,3)
M(6,0), M(6,1), M(6,2), M(6,3)
C(2,0), C(2,1)
C(4,0), C(4,1), C(4,2),
C(6,0), C(6,1), C(6,2), C(6,3)
Additional analog II-A
A. Baseline Method
Our baseline method leverages the list of higher order
moments and other aggregate signal behavior statistics given in
table II. Here we can compute each of these statistics over each
1024 sample example, and translate the example into feature
space, a set of real values associated with each statistic for the
example. This new representation has reduced the dimension of
each example from R1024∗2 to R28, making the classiﬁcation
task much simpler but also discarding the vast majority of
the data. We use an ensemble model of gradient boosted trees
(XGBoost) to classify modulations from these features,
which outperforms a single decision tree or support vector
machine (SVM) signiﬁcantly on the task.
B. Convolutional Neural Network
Since and the use of convolutional neural network
(CNN) layers to impart translation invariance in the input,
Conﬁguration for Over the Air Transmission of Signals
followed by fully connected layers (FC) in classiﬁers, has been
used in the computer vision problems. In , the question
of how to structure such networks is explored, and several
basic design principals for ”VGG” networks are introduced
(e.g. ﬁlter size is minimized at 3x3, smallest size pooling
operations are used at 2x2). Following this approach has
generally led to straight forward way to construct CNNs with
good performance. We adapt the VGG architecture principals
to a 1D CNN, improving upon the similar networks in ,
 . This represents a simple DL CNN design approach which
can be readily trained and deployed to effectively accomplish
many small radio signal classiﬁcation tasks.
Of signiﬁcant note here, is that the features into this CNN
are the raw I/Q samples of each radio signal example which
have been normalized to unit variance. We do not perform any
expert feature extraction or other pre-processing on the raw
radio signal, instead allowing the network to learn raw time-
TABLE III.
CNN NETWORK LAYOUT
Output dimensions
FC/Softmax
series features directly on the high dimension data. Real valued
networks are used, as complex valued auto-differentiation is
not yet mature enough for practical use.
C. Residual Neural Network
As network algorithms and architectures have improved
since Alexnet, they have made the effective training of deeper
networks using more and wider layers possible, and leading to
improved performance. In our original work we employ
only a small convolutional neural network with several layers
to improve over the prior state of the art. However in the
computer vision space, the idea of deep residual networks
has become increasingly effective . In a deep residual
network, as is shown in ﬁgure 5, the notion of skip or bypass
connections is used heavily, allowing for features to operate at
multiple scales and depths through the network. This has led
to signiﬁcant improvements in computer vision performance,
and has also been used effectively on time-series audio data
 . In , the use of residual networks for time-series radio
classiﬁcation is investigated, and seen to train in fewer epochs,
but not to provide signiﬁcant performance improvements in
terms of classiﬁcation accuracy. We revisit the problem of
modulation recognition with a modiﬁed residual network and
obtain improved performance when compared to the CNN
on this dataset. The basic residual unit and stack of residual
units is shown in ﬁgure 5, while the network architecture for
our best architecture for (ℓ= 1024) is shown in table IV.
We also employ self-normalizing neural networks in the
fully connected region of the network, employing the scaled
exponential linear unit (SELU) activation function, meanresponse scaled initialization (MRSA) , and Alpha Dropout
 , which provides a slight improvement over conventional
ReLU performance.
For the two network layouts shown, with ℓ= 1024 and
L = 5, The ResNet has 236,344 trainable parameters, while
the CNN/VGG network has a comparable 257,099 trainable
parameters.
SENSING PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
There are numerous design, deployment, training, and data
considerations which can signiﬁcantly effect the performance
Hierarchical Layers Used in Network
RESNET NETWORK LAYOUT
Output dimensions
Residual Stack
Residual Stack
Residual Stack
Residual Stack
Residual Stack
Residual Stack
FC/Softmax
of a DL based approach to radio signal classiﬁcation which
must be carefully considered when designing a solution. In
this section we explore several of the most common design
parameters which impact classiﬁcation accuracy including
radio propagation effects, model size/depth, data set sizes,
observation size, and signal modulation type.
A. Classiﬁcation on Low Order Modulations
We ﬁrst compare performance on the lower difﬁculty dataset
on lower order modulation types. Training on a dataset of 1
million example, each 1024 samples long, we obtain excellent
performance at high SNR for both the VGG CNN and the
ResNet (RN) CNN.
In this case, the ResNet achieves roughly 5 dB higher
sensitivity for equivalent classiﬁcation accuracy than the baseline, and at high SNR a maximum classiﬁcation accuracy
rate of 99.8% is achieved by the ResNet, while the VGG
network achieves 98.3% and the baseline method achieves a
94.6% accuracy. At lower SNRs, performance between VGG
and ResNet networks are virtually identical, but at high-
SNR performance improves considerably using the ResNet and
obtaining almost perfect classiﬁcation accuracy.
Es/N0 [dB]
Correct classiﬁcation probability
11-modulation AWGN dataset performance comparison (N=1M)
Es/N0 [dB]
Correct classiﬁcation probability
Comparison models under AWGN (N=240k)
For the remainder of the paper, we will consider the much
harder task of 24 class high order modulations containing
higher information rates and much more easily confused
classes between multiple high order PSKs, APSKs and QAMs.
B. Classiﬁcation under AWGN conditions
Signal classiﬁcation under additive white gaussian noise
(AWGN) is the canonical problem which has been explored
for many years in communications literature. It is a simple
starting point, and it is the condition under which analytic
feature extractors should generally perform their best (since
they were derived under these conditions). In ﬁgure 7 we
compare the performance of the ResNet (RN), VGG network,
and the baseline (BL) method on our full dataset for ℓ= 1024
Es/N0 [dB]
Correct classiﬁcation probability
RN σclk = 0.01
RN σclk = 0.0001
RN τ = 0.5
Resnet performance under various channel impairments (N=240k)
samples, N = 239, 616 examples, and L = 6 residual stacks.
Here, the residual network provides the best performance at
both high and low SNRs on the difﬁcult dataset by a margin
of 2-6 dB in improved sensitivity for equivalent classiﬁcation
C. Classiﬁcation under Impairments
In any real world scenario, wireless signals are impaired
by a number of effects. While AWGN is widely used in
simulation and modeling, the effects described above are
present almost universally. It is interesting to inspect how
well learned classiﬁers perform under such impairments and
compare their rate of degradation under these impairments with
that of more traditional approaches to signal classiﬁcation.
In ﬁgure 8 we plot the performance of the residual network
based classiﬁer under each considered impairment model.
This includes AWGN, σclk = 0.0001 - minor LO offset,
σclk = 0.01 - moderate LO offset, and several fading models
ranging from τ = 0.5 to τ = 4.0. Under the fading models,
moderate LO offset is assumed as well. Interestingly in this
plot, ResNet performance improves under LO offset rather
than degrading. Additional LO offset which results in spinning
or dilated versions of the original signal, appears to have
a positive regularizing effect on the learning process which
provides quite a noticeable improvement in performance. At
high SNR performance ranges from around 80% in the best
case down to about 59% in the worst case.
In ﬁgure 9 we show the degradation of the baseline classiﬁer
under impairments. In this case, LO offset never helps, but the
performance instead degrades with both LO offset and fading
effects, in the best case at high SNR this method obtains about
61% accuracy while in the worst case it degrades to around
45% accuracy.
Directly comparing the performance of each model under
moderate LO impairment effects, in ﬁgure 10 we show that
Es/N0 [dB]
Correct classiﬁcation probability
BL σclk = 0.01
BL σclk = 0.0001
BL τ = 0.5
Baseline performance under channel impairments (N=240k)
Es/N0 [dB]
Correct classiﬁcation probability
BL σclk = 0.01
RN σclk = 0.01
VGG σclk = 0.01
Comparison models under LO impairment
for many real world systems with unsynchronized LOs and
Doppler frequency offset there is nearly a 6dB performance
advantage of the ResNet approach vs the baseline, and a 20%
accuracy increase at high SNR. In this section, all models are
trained using N = 239, 616 and ℓ= 1024 for this comparison.
D. Classiﬁer performance by depth
Model size can have a signiﬁcant impact on the ability of
large neural network models to accurately represent complex
features. In computer vision, convolutional layer based DL
models for the ImageNet dataset started around 10 layers deep,
but modern state of the art networks on ImageNet are often
over 100 layers deep , and more recently even over 200
layers. Initial investigations of deeper networks in did not
Es/N0 [dB]
Correct classiﬁcation probability
ResNet performance vs depth (L = number of residual stacks)
show signiﬁcant gains from such large architectures, but with
use of deep residual networks on this larger dataset, we begin
to see quite a beneﬁt to additional depth. This is likely due to
the signiﬁcantly larger number of examples and classes used.
In ﬁgure 11 we show the increasing validation accuracy of
deep residual networks as we introduce more residual stack
units within the network architecture (i.e. making the network
deeper). We see that performance steadily increases with depth
in this case with diminishing returns as we approach around 6
layers. When considering all of the primitive layers within this
network, when L = 6 we the ResNet has 121 layers and 229k
trainable parameters, when L = 0 it has 25 layers and 2.1M
trainable parameters. Results are shown for N = 239, 616 and
E. Classiﬁcation performance by modulation type
In ﬁgure 12 we show the performance of the classiﬁer for
individual modulation types. Detection performance of each
modulation type varies drastically over about 18dB of signal
to noise ratio (SNR). Some signals with lower information
rates and vastly different structure such as AM and FM
analog modulations are much more readily identiﬁed at low
SNR, while high-order modulations require higher SNRs for
robust performance and never reach perfect classiﬁcation rates.
However, all modulation types reach rates above 80% accuracy
by around 10dB SNR. In ﬁgure 13 we show a confusion
matrix for the classiﬁer across all 24 classes for AWGN
validation examples where SNR is greater than or equal to
zero. We can see again here that the largest sources of error
are between high order phase shift keying (PSK) (16/32-PSK),
between high order quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM)
(64/128/256-QAM), as well as between AM modes (confusing
with-carrier (WC) and suppressed-carrier (SC)). This is largely
to be expected as for short time observations, and under noisy
observations, high order QAM and PSK can be extremely
difﬁcult to tell apart through any approach.
Signal to noise ratio (Es/N0) [dB]
Correct classiﬁcation probability
Modrec performance vs modulation type (Resnet on synthetic data with N=1M, σclk=0.0001)
F. Classiﬁer Training Size Requirements
When using data-centric machine learning methods, the
dataset often has an enormous impact on the quality of the
model learned. We consider the inﬂuence of the number of
example signals in the training set, N, as well as the timelength of each individual example in number of samples, ℓ.
In ﬁgure 14 we show how performance of the resulting
model changes based on the total number of training examples
used. Here we see that dataset size has a dramatic impact
on model training, high SNR classiﬁcation accuracy is near
random until 4-8k examples and improves 5-20% with each
doubling until around 1M. These results illustrate that having
sufﬁcient training data is critical for performance. For the
largest case, with 2 million examples, training on a single state
of the art Nvidia V100 graphics processing unit (GPU) (with
approximately 125 tera-ﬂoating point operations per second
(FLOPS)) takes around 16 hours to reach a stopping point,
making signiﬁcant experimentation at these dataset sizes cumbersome. We do not see signiﬁcant improvement going from
1M to 2M examples, indicating a point of diminishing returns
for number of examples around 1M with this conﬁguration.
With either 1M or 2M examples we obtain roughly 95% test set
accuracy at high SNR. The class-confusion matrix for the best
performing mode with ℓ=1024 and N=1M is shown in ﬁgure
15 for test examples at or above 0dB SNR, in all instances
here we use the σclk = 0.0001 dataset, which yields slightly
better performance than AWGN.
Figure 16 shows how the model performance varies by
window size, or the number of time-samples per example used
for a single classiﬁcation. Here we obtain approximately a
3% accuracy improvement for each doubling of the input size
(with N=240k), with signiﬁcant diminishing returns once we
reach ℓ= 512 or ℓ= 1024. We ﬁnd that CNNs scale very
well up to this 512-1024 size, but may need additional scaling
strategies thereafter for larger input windows simply due to
memory requirements, training time requirements, and dataset
requirements.
G. Over the air performance
We generate 1.44M examples of the 24 modulation dataset
over the air using the USRP setup described above. Using a
partition of 80% training and 20% test, we can directly train
a ResNet for classiﬁcation. Doing so on an Nvidia V100 in
around 14 hours, we obtain a 95.6% test set accuracy on the
over the air dataset, where all examples are roughly 10dB SNR.
24-modulation confusion matrix for ResNet trained and tested on
synthetic dataset with N=1M and AWGN
Es/N0 [dB]
Correct classiﬁcation probability
Performance vs training set size (N) with ℓ= 1024
A confusion matrix for this OTA test set performance based
on direct training is shown in ﬁgure 17.
H. Transfer learning over-the-air performance
We also consider over the air signal classiﬁcation as a transfer learning problem, where the model is trained on synthetic
data and then only evaluated and/or ﬁne-tuned on OTA data.
Because full model training can take hours on a high end GPU
and typically requires a large dataset to be effective, transfer
learning is a convenient alternative for leveraging existing
models and updating them on smaller computational platforms
and target datasets. We consider transfer learning, where we
freeze network parameter weights for all layers except the
24-modulation confusion matrix for ResNet trained and tested on
synthetic dataset with N=1M and σclk = 0.0001
Es/N0 [dB]
Correct classiﬁcation probability
Performance vs example length in samples (ℓ)
last several fully connected layers (last three layers from table
IV) in our network when while updating. This is commonly
done today with computer vision models where it is common
start by using pre-trained VGG or other model weights for
ImageNet or similar datasets and perform transfer learning
using another dataset or set of classes. In this case, many lowlevel features work well for different classes or datasets, and do
not need to change during ﬁne tuning. In our case, we consider
several cases where we start with models trained on simulated
wireless impairment models using residual networks and then
evaluate them on OTA examples. The accuracies of our initial
models (trained with N=1M) on synthetic data shown in ﬁgure
8, and these ranged from 84% to 96% on the hard 24-class
24-modulation confusion matrix for ResNet trained and tested on
OTA examples with SNR ∼10 dB
Transfer Learning Epochs
Correct classiﬁcation probability (Test Set)
σclk=0.0001
RESNET Transfer Learning OTA Performance (N=120k)
dataset. Evaluating performance of these models on OTA data,
without any model updates, we obtain classiﬁcation accuracies
between 64% and 80%. By ﬁne-tuning the last two layers of
these models on the OTA data using transfer learning, we
and can recover approximately 10% of additional accuracy.
The validation accuracies are shown for this process in ﬁgure
18. These ResNet update epochs on dense layers for 120k
examples take roughly 60 seconds on a Titan X card to execute
instead of the full ∼500 seconds on V100 card per epoch when
updating model weights.
Ultimately, the model trained on just moderate LO offset
(σclk = 0.0001) performs the best on OTA data. The model
obtained 94% accuracy on synthetic data, and drops roughly
24-modulation confusion matrix for ResNet trained on synthetic
σclk = 0.0001 and tested on OTA examples with SNR ∼10 dB (prior to
ﬁne-tuning)
24-modulation confusion matrix for ResNet trained on synthetic
σclk = 0.0001 and tested on OTA examples with SNR ∼10 dB (after ﬁnetuning)
7% accuracy when evaluating on OTA data, obtaining an
accuracy of 87%. The primary confusion cases prior to training
seem to be dealing with suppress or non-suppressed carrier
analog signals, as well as the high order QAM and APSK
This seems like it is perhaps the best suited among our
models to match the OTA data. Very small LO impairments
are present in the data, the radios used had extremely stable
oscillators present (GPSDO modules providing high stable ˜75
PPB clocks) over very short example lengths (1024 samples),
REFERENCES
and that the two radios were essentially right next to each
other, providing a very clean impulsive direct path while any
reﬂections from the surrounding room were likely signiﬁcantly
attenuated in comparison, making for a near impulsive channel.
Training on harsher impairments seemed to degrade performance of the OTA data signiﬁcantly.
We suspect as we evaluate the performance of the model
under increasingly harsh real world scenarios, our transfer
learning will favor synthetic models which are similarly impaired and most closely match the real wireless conditions
(e.g. matching LO distributions, matching fading distributions,
etc). In this way, it will be important for this class of systems
to train either directly on target signal environments, or on
very good impairment simulations of them under which well
suited models can be derived. Possible mitigation to this are
to include domain-matched attention mechanisms such as the
radio transformer network in the network architecture
to improve generalization to varying wireless propagation
conditions.
DISCUSSION
In this work we have extended prior work on using deep
convolutional neural networks for radio signal classiﬁcation by
heavily tuning deep residual networks for the same task. We
have also conducted a much more thorough set of performance
evaluations on how this type of classiﬁer performs over a
wide range of design parameters, channel impairment conditions, and training dataset parameters. This residual network
approach achieves state of the art modulation classiﬁcation performance on a difﬁcult new signal database both synthetically
and in over the air performance. Other architectures still hold
signiﬁcant potential, radio transformer networks, recurrent
units, and other approaches all still need to be adapted to
the domain, tuned and quantitatively benchmarked against the
same dataset in the future. Other works have explored these to
some degree, but generally not with sufﬁcient hyper-parameter
optimization to be meaningful.
We have shown that, contrary to prior work, deep networks
do provide signiﬁcant performance gains for time-series radio
signals where the need for such deep feature hierarchies was
not apparent, and that residual networks are a highly effective
way to build these structures where more traditional CNNs
such as VGG struggle to achieve the same performance or
make effective use of deep networks. We have also shown
that simulated channel effects, especially moderate LO impairments improve the effect of transfer learning to OTA signal
evaluation performance, a topic which will require signiﬁcant
future investigation to optimize the synthetic impairment distributions used for training.
CONCLUSION
DL methods continue to show enormous promise in improving radio signal identiﬁcation sensitivity and accuracy,
especially for short-time observations. We have shown deep
networks to be increasingly effective when leveraging deep
residual architectures and have shown that synthetically trained
deep networks can be effectively transferred to over the air
datasets with (in our case) a loss of around 7% accuracy or
directly trained effectively on OTA data if enough training data
is available. While large well labeled datasets can often be
difﬁcult to obtain for such tasks today, and channel models
can be difﬁcult to match to real-world deployment conditions,
we have quantiﬁed the real need to do so when training such
systems and helped quantify the performance impact of doing
We still have much to learn about how to best curate datasets
and training regimes for this class of systems. However, we
have demonstrated in this work that our approach provides
roughly the same performance on high SNR OTA datasets
as it does on the equivalent synthetic datasets, a major step
towards real world use. We have demonstrated that transfer
learning can be effective, but have not yet been able to achieve
equivalent performance to direct training on very large datasets
by using transfer learning. As simulation methods become
better, and our ability to match synthetic datasets to real world
data distributions improves, this gap will close and transfer
learning will become and increasingly important tool when real
data capture and labeling is difﬁcult. The performance trades
shown in this work help shed light on these key parameters
in data generation and training, hopefully helping increase
understanding and focus future efforts on the optimization of
such systems.