RESEARCH ARTICLE
Open Access
A novel integration of online and flipped
classroom instructional models in public
health higher education
Lindsay P Galway1*, Kitty K Corbett1,2, Timothy K Takaro1, Kate Tairyan1 and Erica Frank3
Background: In 2013, a cohort of public health students participated in a ‘flipped’ Environmental and Occupational
Health course. Content for the course was delivered through NextGenU.org and active learning activities were
carried out during in-class time. This paper reports on the design, implementation, and evaluation of this novel
Methods: Using mixed-methods, we examined learning experiences and perceptions of the flipped classroom model
and assessed changes in students' self-perceived knowledge after participation in the course. We used pre- and
post-course surveys to measure changes in self-perceived knowledge. The post-course survey also included items
regarding learning experiences and perceptions of the flipped classroom model. We also compared standard
course review and examination scores for the 2013 NextGenU/Flipped Classroom students to previous years when
the course was taught with a lecture-based model. We conducted a focus group session to gain more in-depth
understanding of student learning experiences and perceptions.
Results: Students reported an increase in knowledge and survey and focus group data revealed positive learning
experiences and perceptions of the flipped classroom model. Mean examination scores for the 2013 NextGenU/
Flipped classroom students were 88.8% compared to 86.4% for traditional students . On a scale of 1–5 (1 = lowest
rank, 5 = highest rank), the mean overall rating for the 2013 NextGenU/Flipped classroom students was 4.7/5 compared
to prior years’ overall ratings of 3.7 , 4.3 , 4.1 , and 3.9 . Two key themes emerged from the focus
group data: 1) factors influencing positive learning experience (e.g., interactions with students and instructor); and 2)
changes in attitudes towards environmental and occupation health (e.g., deepened interest in the field).
Conclusion: Our results show that integration of the flipped classroom model with online NextGenU courses can be an
effective innovation in public health higher education: students achieved similar examination scores, but NextGenU/
Flipped classroom students rated their course experience more highly and reported positive learning experiences and
an increase in self-perceived knowledge. These results are promising and suggest that this approach warrants further
consideration and research.
Keywords: Flipped classroom, Blended learning, E-learning, Public health education, Master of Public Health,
Environmental and occupational health
* Correspondence: 
1Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6,
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2014 Galway et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License ( which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver ( applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.
Galway et al. BMC Medical Education 2014, 14:181
 
Background
The rapid increase in Internet access and advances in
online technology over the last decade present an opportunity to rethink the way we teach and learn in the
context of public health higher education. The flipped
classroom instructional model (also known as the
inverted classroom) has emerged as a promising alternative to conventional lecture-based teaching as it offers
a framework for integrating emerging online learning
technologies with active and collaborative learning. The
flipped classroom model is a type of blended learning
where in-class learning is integrated with online learning
experiences . A meta-analysis from the United States
Department of Education in 2010 showed that blended
learning, such as the flipped classroom, is more effective
than either face-to-face (i.e. lecture-based instruction) or
online learning alone . This meta-analysis was focused
on K-12 education. There has been limited research exploring the flipped classroom model in the context of
higher education (and none in the realm of public health
higher education) highlighting an important knowledge
gap. In an era of rising education costs and declining public
funding for higher education, innovative approaches that
foster positive learning experiences while taking advantage
of emerging technologies and use both student and instructor time more efficiently are called for .
The defining characteristic of the flipped classroom
instructional model is that content and material are delivered primarily outside of the classroom while in-class
time is used “to work through problems, advance concepts, and engage in collaborative learning” . Using
online educational technologies to deliver content and
material outside of the classroom frees up in-class time
for active and collaborative application of content with
the support of classmates and the instructor . This
model is designed to allow students to independently engage with materials on their own time and at their own
pace, shifts focus from the instructor to the learner, and
promotes active learning and problem-solving.
The flipped classroom model involves more than shifting content delivery outside of class time . It represents a broader shift in how we think about the learning
process. It is grounded in several interconnected theories
of learning and pedagogy. The explicit attention to interactive and collaborative learning draws on Piaget’s theory
of active learning which highlights that learning occurs
when we act on and apply new ideas and concepts .
In terms of Bloom’s influential (revised) taxonomy of
thinking and learning, the flipped classroom enables both
higher and lower levels of cognitive work . More specifically, students do lower level cognitive work, i.e., the
acquisition of knowledge, independently and outside of
class while higher-order cognitive work including knowledge application, analysis, and synthesis occurs during
class time with the support of peers and instructors. In
our application of the flipped classroom design within the
context of graduate level public health education, we also
draw on Mesirow’s theory of transformative adult learning
 and Habermas’ related theory of knowledge and human interests . We therefore integrate reflection, a key
aspect of learning according Mesirow and an essential
type of knowledge according to Habermas, into the course
to complement the online content delivery and the inclass application of knowledge.
There is no single or standard way to design and implement the flipped classroom instructional model in
practice . The means of delivering content and the
ways in which face-to-face class time is used will vary
with the characteristics of the students, background of
the instructor, available resources and the subject matter.
To date, electronic video-recordings (vodcasts) and podcasts have been the primary means of content delivery,
however online courses can also be used for this purpose. In our application of the flipped classroom model,
we have used an environmental and occupational health
course offered by NextGenU.org, a portal to free and
accredited higher education . Partnering with universities, professional societies, and government organizations, NextGenU creates online courses referred to as
DOOHICHEs (Democratically-Open Outstanding Hybrids
of Internet-aided, Computer-aided, and Human-aided
Education, pronounced as “doohickey”). These DOO-
HICHEs are competency-based and include high-quality
learning resources, online peer activities and discussion
forums, and quizzes. As of February 22nd 2014, NextGenU
has over 2,000 students registered in 105 countries, and
has 130 trainings in development, primarily focusing on
health sciences and public health education. The ways
in which NextGenU builds on and differs from traditional education and Massive Open Online Courses can
be reviewed at www.NextGenU.org.
The goal of this study was to examine the impact of
this NextGenU/Flipped classroom instructional model
on self-perceived environmental and occupational health
(EOH) knowledge and student learning experiences and
perceptions of the instructional model. Our specific objectives were: 1) to design and implement a master’s level
environmental and occupational health course (EOHC) integrating a NextGenU DOOHICHE and the flipped classroom model, 2) to assess changes in students' self-reported
EOH knowledge after participating in the course, and 3) to
understand student learning experiences and perceptions
of this NextGenU/Flipped classroom model.
Course design and implementation
The first author designed the EOH DOOHICHE for
NextGenU in 2012. The content and structure of the
Galway et al. BMC Medical Education 2014, 14:181
 
 
DOOHICHE was based on core Master of Public Health
competencies developed by the Association of Schools
of Public Health (APSH) and the Association
of Schools of Public Health in the European Region
(ASPHER) . These core competencies “delineate
fundamental knowledge, attitudes, and skills that every
MPH student, regardless of their major field, should
possess upon graduation” . The final version was
reviewed by an advisory committee of environmental
health professionals, and endorsed by the International
Society of Doctors for the Environment, Physicians for
Social Responsibility, and Simon Fraser University’s
Faculty of Health Sciences.
NextGenU’s EOH DOOHICHE can be accessed for
free in its entirety at www.NextGenU.org. Each of the
course’s nine modules (see Table 1), offered students the
opportunity to learn content and material by engaging
with a diversity of learning material (e.g., reports, journal
articles, videos, websites) from reputable sources including universities, governments, professional societies, and
peer-reviewed publications. The online course platform
also included discussion forums, peer-to-peer activities,
quizzes, and additional learning resources for those students wanting to explore certain subject areas more
deeply. In-class sessions were held every other week,
which gave students two weeks to complete the assigned
modules. Students were assigned either one or two modules for each two-week period. Within the two-week
period, students could move through the materials at
their own pace. After engaging with the learning materials and completing peer activities in a given module,
and before coming to the in-class sessions, students
completed a quiz that helped students and the instructor
identify poorly-understood areas.
Table 1 Overview of the course
Target participants
MPH students
Description of the course
Students will gain familiarity with fundamental principles and general areas of knowledge that are important to the
broad field of environmental health. Students will learn about approaches and tools used to recognize, assess, and
manage environmental and occupational health hazards. This course also aims to expose students to numerous
environmental and occupational health issues and to encourage critical thinking and reflection on these issues; we
will consider what can be done about environmental and occupational health issues to ultimately protect and
promote health and well-being. Finally, this course aims to inspire interest in the role of the environment in
promoting and maintaining the health of populations in both local and global settings.
Online learning modules from NextGenU DOOHICHE 1:
Introduction to environmental and occupational health
Environmental and occupational hazards and their effects on human health and ecosystems
Principles of exposure assessment
Toxicology and epidemiology in environmental health
Risk assessment: Concepts and application
Risk management, communication, and regulation
Susceptibility, vulnerability, and inequality in environmental health
Environmental and occupational health case studies
Emerging perspectives in environmental health
Learning activities used during class time:
Linking thinking for environmental health
Exposure assessment in action
Shipbreaking in Alang, India
Module 4 and 5:
Toxicology, epidemiology, and risk assessment problem set
Class debate- Should Canada apply the precautionary principle in environmental health policy and decision-making
A closer look at Air Quality Guidelines
Module 8 and 9:
Presentation and discussion of environmental health case studies
Evaluation:
Final grades were based on:
1) A final exam consisting of multiple choice and short answer application questions
2) Four graded reflective responses written throughout the semester
3) In-class and online participation
4) A final group project exploring a selected environmental or occupational health issue
1The online Learning modules in the NextGenU DOOHICHE can be accessed in full at 
Galway et al. BMC Medical Education 2014, 14:181
 
 
The general routine of in-class time included a minilesson addressing concepts or aspects that were identified as challenging by students, along with a brief question and answer period to give students the opportunity
to clarify any remaining aspects from the assigned modules. The remaining in-class time (90 minutes) was used
to carry out active learning activities. The learning activities varied for each in-class session. Examples include: a
toxicology problem set that students worked on in pairs;
an occupational health case-study examined in small
groups; and a whole-class debate on the topic of environmental health decision-making (see Table 2 for a description of three in-class activities). Over the course of
the 13-week semester there were eight in-class sessions
that ran for two hours.
An additional requirement was writing four reflective
responses. Students were instructed to reflect on the
meaning and importance of the course material from
their own perspective, to make links between the various
aspects of EOH within the course, and to make links to
the student’s other public-health-related interests. The
reflective responses acted as an ongoing conversation
between the instructor and the students, and were also
used by the instructor to identify areas of particular
interest among the group and to influence and inform
the direction of in-class activities.
Finally, students completed a final exam at the end of
the semester that included multiple choice and short
answer questions.
Study participants
Study participants were MPH students (n = 11) enrolled
in the 2013 spring session of an EOHC at a Canadian
university. All participants were graduate students in
their first or second year of study in the MPH program.
An EOHC is offered in the second year of study and is a
required core course of the MPH degree. Primary areas
of interest among the students within the broad field of
public health ranged from gender and health to social
inequities and health. None of the students were focused
Table 2 Description of a selection of in-class learning activities
Activity name:
Linking thinking for environmental health
Summary of activity:
Each student selects a health issue of interest. Working on their own, students create an influence diagram on
a large blank piece of paper that explicitly illustrates the links between their selected health issue and the
environment or environmental factors. In pairs, the students describe their influence diagram to one another.
Finally, the instructor facilitates a discussion around the following questions “Was it difficult to integrate the
environment and/or environmental factors into the influence diagram for your selected health issue? Why or
Adapted from 
Activity name:
Shipbreaking in Alang, India
Summary of activity:
Before coming to class, students are instructed to watch the documentary ‘Shipbreakers’. This documentary acted as
background knowledge to complete the case-study described below. Students work on the case-study in groups
of 3 or 4.
You and your co-workers from Workplace Health Without Borders have recently returned from a visit to the
shipbreaking port in Alang, India (the movie that you watched before coming to class this week served as your visit).
Although it was a short trip, while in Alang you had the opportunity to observe the work setting and living conditions
as well as to speak with many shipbreakers, port owners, the doctor, and other members of the community. Upon your
return, your boss has asked for a review of what you saw and learned while visiting Alang. Specifically, she would like
you and your colleagues to create a presentation that addresses the following questions:
1. Who works in the shipbreaking yards? Describe relevant characteristics of workers in the shipbreaking yards.
2. What are the major health hazards associated with shipbreaking identified during your visit?
3. Use the following classification scheme (from the Canadian Centre for Occupational Hazards and Safety) to classify
the hazards you have identified as: a) Biological; b) Chemical; c) Ergonomic (i.e. repetitive strain injury); d) Physical
(noise, radiation); e) Psychosocial.
4. For the chemical hazards identified, note the potential health implications using information provided by the Agency
for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry at the following website: 
5. Drawing on your experience in Alang, what are possible research activities, interventions, or policy changes that
our organization could implement to improve the current situation in Alang? Be sure to provide ample justification
for your proposed research, intervention, or policy ideas.
Activity name:
Toxicology, epidemiology, and risk assessment problem set
Summary of activity:
Students work in pairs to solve problems applying toxicology, epidemiology, and risk assessment concepts.
Galway et al. BMC Medical Education 2014, 14:181
 
 
specifically on environmental or occupational health nor
enrolled in the EOH concentration of the MPH program. All of the students in the class agreed to participate in the study.
Evaluation and analysis
We used a mixed-method approach including a pre- and
post-survey, comparisons of overall course ratings and
examination scores across years, and a post-course focus
group session. A mixed-methods approach was used selected surveys are an effective tool for assessing pre and
post student knowledge while focus groups are useful
for gaining a more in-depth understanding of student
perceptions and are also convenient and appropriate for
non-sensitive topics.
Pre- and post-course survey instruments were developed
by the course instructor and reviewed by three colleagues.
Participants electronically completed the pre-course survey
one week prior to the beginning of the course and the
post-course survey one week following course completion.
To measure self-perceived knowledge, students were
asked to rate their knowledge regarding EOH competencies. Students rated their knowledge relating to each
competency (12 in total, see Figure 1) on a 5-point
Likert scale (1 = strongly disagree; 5 = strongly agree).
The self-perceived knowledge questions were identical
in the pre- and post-course survey instruments. The
post-course survey instrument also contained 10 items
pertaining to student learning experiences and perceptions of the flipped classroom, and one open-ended
question where students were asked for general comments and/or feedback.
To determine whether there was a statistically significant change in self-perceived EOH knowledge following
participation in the class we used the Wilcoxon signedrank test for paired data (5% significance level). This
non-parametric test was selected because the data was
non-normally distributed and ranked, and due to the
small sample size. Descriptive statistics were used to
report items pertaining to learning experiences and
student perceptions of the flipped classroom model as
measured in the post-course survey. For reporting of
these items, agreement (strongly agree and agree) and
disagreement (strongly disagree and disagree) were
We also compared overall course ratings and examination scores for the NextGenU/Flipped classroom students against course ratings and examination scores for
student who took a lecture-based EOHC in previous
years. Specifically, we compared overall course ratings
collected by the university from the 2013 students (n = 9
who participated in the course and completed the standard course review) with overall course ratings for students from 2012, 2011, 2010, and 2009 (n = 130). To
compare examination scores, we looked at scores from
the course exam for the 2013 NextGenU/Flipped classroom students (n = 11) compared to scores for the 2011
lecture-based EOHC students (n = 22). Examination result data were only available for 2011. The exam contained 11 short answer questions, and was marked by
the same individual. A Mann–Whitney U test (5% significance level) was used to assess whether there was a
statistically significant difference in the examination
scores for the 2013 vs. the 2011 students.
Finally, to gain a more in-depth understanding of student perceptions of the NextGenU/Flipped classroom
model, we (LPG) collected, audiotaped, and transcribed
qualitative data from one 40-minute focus group session
with all students in the course after the final in-class session. All focus group participants reviewed and signed a
consent form. Open-ended queries addressed learning
experiences and perceptions of the flipped classroom
model in general. The data were analyzed using qualitative thematic analysis, selected because of the exploratory and descriptive nature of this study. First, the
transcribed text was read in its entirety to get a general
overview and sense of the data. During a second reading
of the transcript, the data were coded to identify and explore themes. Major themes were therefore derived inductively from the data. Data were then summarized
and representative excerpts from the focus group were
identified to illustrate the major themes.
All data collection was completed by the end of the
2013 spring session of the university. Statistical analyses
were conducted using R statistical software version
2.13.0. Given the manageable length of the single focus
group session, we used Microsoft Word to analyze the
qualitative data .
Ethics approval was obtained from The University of
British Columbia Ethics Committee. Recruitment was
conducted by the lead author (LPG) during the first class
session. All participants gave written informed consent
and were assured of confidentiality and anonymity. Also,
the voluntary nature of the study was underscored, and
it was made clear to students that they could end their
participation in the study at any point and that their
marks in the class would not be affected by their decision to participate in the study.
Self-perceived knowledge assessment
The response rate for the pre-and post-course survey
was 100%. A comparison of self-perceived knowledge of
EOH competencies before and after the course is presented in Figure 1. A statistically significant increase was
found in students’ self-perceived knowledge for every
competency (p-value < 0.05).
Galway et al. BMC Medical Education 2014, 14:181
 
 
Students’ perceptions of the NextGenU/flipped
classroom model
Our results show that student perceptions of the course
and the NextGenU/Flipped classroom instructional model
were highly favorable overall. In response to the item “In
the future, would you rather take a ‘flipped’ course than a
traditional lecture-based course”, 82% of students agreed
or strongly agreed. All students agreed or strongly agreed
with the statement, “The flipped classroom model was a
different learning experience than other MPH courses.”
Also, the use of a NextGenU DOOHICHE for the online
delivery of content and materials was favorably received. In
response to the item, “I was comfortable with self-directed
online learning through NextGenU”, all students either
agreed or strongly agreed (see Table 3 for a summary of
results from the post-course survey).
In response to the only open-ended question in the postcourse survey “Do you have any additional feedback/
comments about the flipped classroom model?” students provided additional generally-positive feedback.
One participant wrote: “I really enjoyed the structure
and content of this course. I would say it was one of the
best courses I’ve taken during the MPH! Also, it changed
my perspective on online learning. I never thought online learning would be beneficial for me, but I will definitely consider it if I decide to do continued studies
later on.” A second student wrote, “It was a great
class and ignited an interest in enviro health that was not
previously there!”
Comparison of overall course ratings and examination scores
The 2013 NextGenU/Flipped Classroom students rated
their overall course experience more highly than those
students who took the EOHC in previous years when
a lecture-based model was used. On a scale of 1–5
(1 = lowest rank; 5 = highest rank), the mean overall
rating for the course in 2013 was 4.7/5 vs. prior years’
overall ratings of 3.7 , 4.3 , 4.1 , and
3.9 . We compared examination scores for the
2013 NextGenU/Flipped classroom students to those for
the 2011 lecture-based EOHC students. The mean test
score was 88.8% for the 2013 students and 86.4% for the
2011 students. A Mann–Whitney U test revealed no statistically significant difference (p = 0.72) between examination scores across the two groups .
Figure 1 Comparison of pre- and post-course self-perceived knowledge of EOH competencies.
Galway et al. BMC Medical Education 2014, 14:181
 
 
Key themes from focus group data
Qualitative thematic analysis of the focus group data
turned up two major themes: factors influencing positive
learning experiences and changes in attitudes towards
environmental and occupational health. These themes are
discussed below along with excerpts from participants’
responses.
Students discussed multiple factors that contributed to
their positive learning experiences. High amounts of
interaction with other students and the instructor, small
class size, the use of active in-class learning activities
and reflective responses, and engagement with content online before attending in-class sessions were all
positively-cited aspects of the course and its design.
Students commented that the class size and the flipped
model contributed to a more interactive learning environment and greater interaction with the instructor and their
peers. This was recognized as deficient in previous
courses: “…the discussions that we were able to have in
class, by having a small class, that what we were able to
get out of an in-class session was a lot more than a 3 hour
lecture once per week of fifty people.” Several students also
noted that they were unsure whether the flipped classroom model would be as effective with a larger class. For
example, one student stated, “So if they are just going to
try and flip i,t then just throw 50 people in there, I don’t
know if it would work.”
The focus group also highlighted the contribution of
reflective responses to positive learning experiences.
They allowed students to make connections between
various aspects of the course with other areas of public
health and student lives in general. One student stated:
“And I found I would be like noticing environmental
health news articles or stuff coming up, and you would
think ‘Oh! I could really try and incorporate this into my
reflection’. A second student followed up on this comment stating: “Ya – that is what I found. I found the reflections really encouraged me to be thinking about the
course beyond the content, like beyond the actual readings because you don’t really reflect about readings a lot
of the time. But I was drawing on other things, and it
kind of encouraged me to make those connections, those
bigger connections.”
Students also had positive comments about applying
content through in-class learning activities. Students reported that the variety of learning activities used in the
in-class sessions contributed to positive learning experiences. One student commented, “So I feel like I took in a
lot of it, so that when I came to class I was cementing the
knowledge that I just read.” Another student said, “every
week there was something that was fresh and new and…
interactive and I appreciated that.”
Finally, several students noted that they were much
more likely to complete readings and engage with content before coming to class in the flipped classroom
model than the traditional lecture-based model. One
student stated, “it is really easy to justify that you don’t
have time to do readings, but for this set-up I think that
is was just like, something I needed to get done.”
When students began this course, there was very little
interest in the field of environmental health and occupational health in the group. For example, none of the students were part of the EOH concentration option
available for the MPH students at the test-site university.
The majority of students noted that they would not have
taken the course had it not been a required core course
for their degree. However, a major theme that emerged
from the focus group was that this course contributed to
Table 3 Descriptive statistics of post-course survey items focusing on learning experience and perceptions
Survey item
Agree/strongly
Disagree/strongly
disagree (%)
Neutral (%)
I was comfortable with self-directed learning through NextGenU.
The online learning materials contributed to my learning.
I completed the activities and learning materials before in-class sessions.
The quizzes encouraged completion of the online learning materials.
In-class learning activities complemented online self-directed learning.
The reflective responses contributed to my learning.
Interaction with my instructor and other classmates contributed to my learning.
The flipped classroom model (online learning plus in-person classroom interaction and
problem-solving) was a different learning experience than other MPH courses.
The flipped classroom model enabled more interaction with my instructor and classmates
than did other MPH courses.
In the future, I would rather take a ‘flipped’ course (blended online learning plus in-persons
classroom interaction and problem-solving) than a traditional (lecture-based) course.
NB: Students were asked to react to statements on a 5-point Likert scale where 1 = “Strongly disagree” and 5 = “Strongly agree.” For reporting of these survey items,
agreement (strongly agree and agree) and disagreement (strongly disagree and disagree) were combined.
Galway et al. BMC Medical Education 2014, 14:181
 
 
greater interest in environmental health and environmental health issues in general. One student noted about
the course: “It gave me a huge appreciation for environmental health, it really did truly.” A second student
agreed and stated: “I feel like I got a tremendous appreciation for environmental health and I got a really good
grounding in environmental and occupation health and
so that is why, you know, I really really liked the course.”
Discussion
This paper reported on the design, implementation,
and evaluation of a master’s level EOHC that integrated two emerging instructional models: NextGenU’s
DOOHICHE and the flipped classroom. Our results
suggest that this innovative approach fostered learning
and provided positive learning experiences for this
small group of graduate students. To quote one of the
students, “This was a successful experiment!” Students
also expressed a preference for the flipped classroom
instructional model over the traditional lecture-based
model, with most (82%) agreeing that, “In the future, I
would rather take a ‘flipped’ course (blended online learning plus in-persons classroom interaction and problemsolving) than a traditional (lecture-based) course. In
addition, the instructor (LPG) had positive experiences
regarding the design, implementation, and overall outcomes of the course.
This instructional model should be considered for
more widespread experimentation in the context of public health higher education and beyond. It is worth noting that the flipped classroom, blended learning, and
NextGenUs DOOHICHEs are three of many emerging
approaches that are student-centered, promote application and collaboration, and optimize face-to-face time
and complementary educational technologies . We
urge instructors interested in moving away from conventional lecture-based teaching to consider the wide range
of instructional models available and to select the model
which bests suits the course content, student needs, and
available resources to optimally facilitate learning.
For those instructors considering applying the flipped
classroom instructional model, we caution that ‘flipping’
the classroom is not simply about shifting lectures outside of the classroom. Content delivery is “just one small
piece of the overall learning experience…” . ‘Flipping’
the classroom involves seeing students as active learners,
shifting control of both learning and the classroom from
the instructor to the students; it should promote a focus
on higher-order cognitive work. Additionally, research
shows that, “for blended learning environments to be
successful, it is important to structure the face-to-face
and the online portions of the learning experience so
that they coherently support one another” . Educators
should think purposefully about course design, develop
effective learning activities that engage students, encourage
reflections, and complement online content, and take maximal advantage of invaluable face-to-face class time.
Further, we encourage instructors to think creatively
about how to use emerging educational technologies
in their teaching. For this work, we have employed a
NextGenU DOOHICHE to deliver content online, but
other opportunities for innovation in blended learning
also exist. The use of open online courses within the
flipped classroom, and blended learning more broadly
can reduce the burden of course re-design on instructors
and institutions by most-fully utilizing already-existing
and free courses.
Although we agree with others who suggest that that
the flipped classroom model has the potential to influence the landscape of higher education , we also
note that more research is needed to evaluate the impacts of this model on teaching and learning experiences
and to better understand the specific characteristics of
‘flipped’ courses that lead to positive impacts. It is also
important for instructors to share their experiences and
course design to ensure that we are collectively capitalizing on lessons learned in implementation. Finally, more
research is needed to understand the role of reflection in
the flipped classroom instructional model. Reflection
which plays a key role in adult learning, has not been explicitly considered within the flipped classroom model
 . Students in the flipped classroom environments
“need to have more space to reflect on their learning activities so that they can make necessary connections to
course content” . Qualitative evidence from this small
cohort, as well as the opinions of the course instructor,
suggest that reflection is an important yet overlooked
element of applying the flipped classroom model.
There are limitations that should be noted. We cannot
exclude the possibility that students answered questions
in a socially desirable way nor that the positive perceptions of this instructional model were attributable to it
being a different experience than other courses offered
to the students. A major limitation of this study is the
small sample size. As this was a pilot study, the sample
size was simply the number of students that participated
in the class. Finally, comparisons of overall course ratings and examination scores should be interpreted with
caution. Although the courses were designed around the
same MPH core competencies, there were important differences across years that we have not controlled for in
the design or analysis. Specifically, different instructors
taught the course, class sizes were higher in previous
years (as high as 50) compared to 11 in the 2013, and reflection was only included as part of the curriculum in
the flipped classroom EOHC. These factors could certainly influence both overall course ratings and examination scores.
Galway et al. BMC Medical Education 2014, 14:181
 
 
Conclusion
The lecture-based teaching model continues to dominate higher education despite massive advances in online
access and technology and developments in pedagogical
theory . Our results show that the flipped classroom model can have positive impacts on learning and
learning experiences in public health higher education.
Our data suggest that the use of a DOOHICHE from
NextGenU was an effective and efficient means of content delivery and could facilitate more widespread application of the flipped classroom in public health higher
education.
Abbreviations
ASPH: Association of Schools of Public Health; ASPHER: Association of Schools
of Public Health in the European Region; DOOHICHE: Democratically-Open
Outstanding Hybrid of Internet-aided Computer-aided, and Human-aided
Education; MPH: Master of Public Health.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
LPG, TT, KC, KT and EF designed the online course and the flipped course.
LPG implemented the course and conducted the evaluation. All authors
participated in drafting the manuscript. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript.
Acknowledgement
LPG is supported by the Canadian Institute for Health Research. KT is
supported by Grand Challenges Canada. EF is supported by Grand
Challenges Canada and the Canada Research Chair program. No funding
body had any influence over the design, data collection, analysis,
interpretation, or writing of the manuscript.
Author details
1Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6,
Canada. 2School of Public Health and Health Systems, University of Waterloo,
Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1, Canada. 3School of Population and Public Health,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z3, Canada.
Received: 5 March 2014 Accepted: 18 August 2014
Published: 29 August 2014