Research Article
Statistics
in Medicine
Received XXXX
(www.interscience.wiley.com) DOI: 10.1002/sim.0000
Tutorial in Biostatistics: Instrumental
Variable Methods for Causal Inference∗
Michael Baiocchia,Jing Chengb,Dylan S. Smallc
A goal of many health studies is to determine the causal effect of a treatment or intervention on health
outcomes. Often, it is not ethically or practically possible to conduct a perfectly randomized experiment and
instead an observational study must be used. A major challenge to the validity of observational studies is the
possibility of unmeasured confounding (i.e., unmeasured ways in which the treatment and control groups
differ before treatment administration which also affect the outcome). Instrumental variables analysis is
a method for controlling for unmeasured confounding. This type of analysis requires the measurement of
a valid instrumental variable, which is a variable that (i) is independent of the unmeasured confounding;
(ii) affects the treatment; and (iii) affects the outcome only indirectly through its effect on the treatment.
This tutorial discusses the types of causal effects that can be estimated by instrumental variables analysis;
the assumptions needed for instrumental variables analysis to provide valid estimates of causal effects
and sensitivity analysis for those assumptions; methods of estimation of causal effects using instrumental
variables; and sources of instrumental variables in health studies.
Copyright c⃝0000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Keywords: instrumental variables; observational study; confounding; comparative effectiveness
1. Introduction
1. Introduction
The goal of many medical studies is to estimate the causal effect of one treatment vs. another, i.e., to compare
the effectiveness of giving patients one treatment vs. another. To compare the effects of treatments, randomized
controlled studies are the gold standard in medicine. Unfortunately, randomized controlled studies cannot answer
many comparative effectiveness questions because of cost or ethical constraints. Observational studies offer an
∗The three authors contributed equally to this paper.
aDepartment of Statistics, Stanford University
b Division of Oral Epidemiology and Dental Public Health, School of Dentistry, University of California, San Francisco (UCSF)
c Department of Statistics, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania
∗Correspondence to: Dylan Small, Department of Statistics, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, 400 Huntsman Hall, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
e-mail: 
Statist. Med. 0000, 00 1–55
Copyright c⃝0000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Prepared using simauth.cls [Version: 2010/03/10 v3.00]
alternative source of data for developing evidence regarding the comparative effectiveness of different treatments.
However, a major challenge for observational studies is confounders – pre-treatment variables that affect the
outcome and differ in distribution between the group of patients who receive one treatment vs. the group of patients
who receive another treatment.
The impact of confounders on the estimation of a causal treatment effect can be mitigated by methods such as
propensity scores, regression and matching . However, these methods only control for measured confounders
and do not control for unmeasured confounders.
The instrumental variable (IV) method was developed to control for unmeasured confounders. The basic idea
of the IV method is 1) ﬁnd a variable that inﬂuences which treatment subjects receive but is independent of
unmeasured confounders and has no direct effect on the outcome except through its effect on treatment; 2) use
this variable to extract variation in the treatment that is free of the unmeasured confounders; and 3) use this
confounder-free variation in the treatment to estimate the causal effect of the treatment. The IV method seeks to
ﬁnd a randomized experiment embedded in an observational study and use this embedded randomized experiment
to estimate the treatment effect.
1.1. Tutorial Aims and Outline
IV methods have long been used in economics and are being increasingly used to compare treatments in health
studies. There have been many important contributions to IV methods in recent years. The goal of this tutorial
is to bring together this literature to provide a practical guide on how to use IV methods to compare treatments
in a health study. We focus on several important practical issues in using IVs: (1) when is an IV analysis needed
and when is it feasible? (2) what are sources of IVs for health studies; (3) how to use the IV method to estimate
treatment effects, including how to use currently available software; (4) for what population does the IV estimate
the treatment effect; (5) how to assess whether a proposed IV satisﬁes the assumptions for an IV to be valid; (6)
how to carry out sensitivity analysis for violations of IV assumptions and (7) how does the strength of a potential
IV affect its usefulness for a study.
In the rest of this section, we will present an example of using the IV method that we will use throughout the
paper. In Section 2, we discuss situations when one should consider using the IV method. In Section 3, we discuss
common sources of IVs for health studies. In Section 4, we discuss IV assumptions and estimation for a binary
IV and binary treatment. In Section 5, we discuss the treatment effect that the IV method estimates. In Section 6,
we provide a framework for assessing IV assumptions and sensitivity analysis for violations of assumptions. In
Section 7, we demonstrate the consequences of weak instruments. In Section 8, we discuss power and sample size
calculations for IV studies. In Section 9, we present techniques for analyzing outcomes that are not continuous
outcomes, such as binary, survival, multinomial and continuous outcomes. In Section 10, we discuss multi-valued
and continuous IVs. In Section 11, we discuss using multiple IVs. In Section 12, we present IV methods for multivalued and continuously valued treatments. In Section 13, we suggest a framework for reporting IV analyses. In
Section 14, we provide examples of using software for IV analysis.
If you are just beginning to familiarize yourself with IVs we recommend focussing on Sections 1-4, 5.1-5.2, 6-8
and 13-14, while skipping Sections 5.3-5.5 and 9-12. Sections 5.3-5.5 and 9-12 contain interesting, cutting-edge,
and more specialized applications of IVs that the beginner may want to return to at a later point. We include these
sections for advanced readers, or those interested in more specialized applications.
Table 1 is a table of notation that will be used throughout the paper.
1.2. Example: Effectiveness of high level neonatal intensive care units
As an example where the IV method is useful, consider comparing the effectiveness of premature babies being
delivered in high volume, high technology neonatal intensive care units (high level NICUs) vs. local hospitals (low
Table 1. Table of notation.
observed outcome
potential outcome if treatment is 1, potential outcome if treatment is 0
observed treatment
potential treatment if instrumental variable (IV) is 1, potential treatment if IV is 0
observed IV
measured confounders
compliance class
unmeasured confounder
Complier Average Causal Effect, the average effect of treatment for the compliers (C = co)
level NICUs), where a high level NICU is deﬁned as a NICU that has the capacity for sustained mechanical assisted
ventilation and delivers at least 50 premature infants per year. used data from birth and death certiﬁcates and
the UB-92 form that hospitals use for billing purposes to study premature babies delivered in Pennsylvania. The
data set covered the years 1995-2005 (192,078 premature babies). For evaluating the effect of NICU level on baby
outcomes, a baby’s health status before delivery is an important confounder. Table 2 shows that babies delivered
at high level NICUs tend to have smaller birthweight, be more premature, and the babies’ mothers tend to have
more problems during the pregnancy. Although the available confounders, which include those in Table 2 and
several other variables that are given in , describe certain aspects of a baby’s health prior to delivery, the data
set is missing several important confounding variables such as fetal heart tracing results, the severity of maternal
problems during pregnancy (e.g., we only know whether the mother had pregnancy induced hypertension but not
the severity) and the mother’s adherence to prenatal care guidelines.
Figure 1, which is an example of a directed acyclic graph , illustrates the difﬁculty with estimating a causal
effect in this situation. The arrows denote causal relationships. Read the arrow between the treatment D and
outcome Y like so: Changing the value of D causes Y to change. In our example, Y represents in-hospital mortality,
and D indicates whether or not a baby attended a high level NICU. Our goal is to understand the arrow connecting
D to Y , that is, the effect of attending a high level NICU on in-hospital mortality compared to attending a low
level NICU. Assume that Figure 1 shows relationships within a strata of the observed covariates X, e.g., Figure
1 represents the relationships for only babies with gestational age 33 weeks and mother had pregnancy induced
hypertension. The U variable causes concern as it represents the unobserved level of severity of the preemie and
it is causally linked to both mortality (sicker babies are more likely to die) and to which treatment the preemie
receives (sicker babies are more likely to be delivered in high level NICUs). Because U is not recorded in the data
set, it cannot be precisely adjusted for using statistical methods such as propensity scores or regression. If the story
stopped with just D, Y and U, then the effect of D on Y could not be estimated.
IV estimation makes use of a form of variation in the system that is free of the unmeasured confounding. What
is needed is a variable, called an IV (represented by Z in Figure 1), that has very special characteristics. In this
example we consider excess travel time as a possible IV. Excess travel time is deﬁned as the time it takes to travel
from the mother’s residence to the nearest high level NICU minus the time it takes to travel to the nearest low
level NICU. We write Z = 1 if the excess travel time is less than or equal to 10 minutes (so that the mother is
encouraged by the IV to go to a high level NICU) and Z = 0 if the excess travel time is greater than 10 minutes.
(We dichotomize the instrument here for simplicity of discussion.)
There are three key features a variable must have in order to qualify as an IV (see Section 4 for mathematical
details on these features and additional assumptions for IV methods). The ﬁrst feature (represented by the directed
Table 2. Imbalance of measured covariates between babies delivered at high level NICUs vs. low level NICUs.
The standardized difference is the difference in means between the two groups in units of the pooled within group
standard deviation, i.e., for a binary characteristic X, where D = 1 or 0 according to whether the baby was delivered
at a high or low level NICU, the standardized difference is
P (X=1|D=1)−P (X=1|D=0)
{V ar(X|D=1)+V ar(X|D=0)}/2.
Characteristic X
P(X|High Level NICU)
P(X|Low Level NICU)
Standardized Difference
Birthweight < 1500g
Gestational Age <= 32 weeks
Mother College Graduate
African American
Gestational Diabetes
Diabetes Mellitus
Pregnancy Induced Hypertension
Chronic Hypertension
Figure 1. Directed acyclic graph for the relationship between an instrumental variable Z, a treatment D, unmeasured confounders U and an outcome Y .
arrow from Z to D in Figure 1) is that the IV causes a change in the treatment assignment. When a woman becomes
pregnant, she has a high probability of establishing a relationship with the proximal NICU, regardless of the level,
because she is not anticipating having a preemie. Proximity as a leading determinant in choosing a facility has been
discussed in . By selecting where to live, mothers assign themselves to be more or less likely to deliver in a high
level NICU. The fact that changes in the IV are associated with changes in the treatment is veriﬁable from the data.
The second feature (represented by the crossed out arrow from Z to U) is that the IV is not associated with
variation in unobserved variables U that also affect the outcome. That is, Z is not connected to the unobserved
confounding that was a worry to begin with. In our example, this would mean unobserved severity is not associated
with variation in geography. Since high level NICUs tend to be in urban areas and low level NICUs tend to be
the only type in rural areas, this assumption would be dubious if there were high level of pollutants in urban areas
(think of Manchester, England circa the Industrial Revolution) or if there were more pollutants in the drinking
water in rural areas than in urban areas. These hypothetical pollutants may have an impact on the unobserved levels
of severity. The assumption that the IV is not associated with variation in the unobserved variables, while certainly
an assumption, can at least be corroborated by examining the values of variables that are perhaps related to the
unobserved variables of concern (see Section 6.1).
The third feature (represented by the crossed out line from Z to Y in Figure 1) is that the IV does not cause
the outcome variable to change directly. That is, it is only through its impact on the treatment that the IV affects
the outcome. This is often referred to as the exclusion restriction assumption. In our case, the exclusion restriction
assumption seems reasonable as presumably a nearby hospital with a high level NICU affects a baby’s mortality
only if the baby receives care at that hospital. That is, proximity to a high level NICU in and of itself does not change
the probability of death for a preemie, except through the increased probability of the preemie being delivered at
the high level NICU. See Section 6.2.2 for further discussion about the exclusion restriction in the NICU study.
2. Evaluating the Need for and Feasibility of an IV Analysis
As discussed above, IV methods provide a way to control for unmeasured confounding in comparative
effectiveness studies. Although this is a valuable feature of IV methods relative to regression, matching and
propensity score methods which do not control for unmeasured confounding, IV methods have some less attractive
features such as increased variance. When considering whether or not to include an IV analysis in an evaluation of
a treatment effect, the ﬁrst question one should ask is whether or not an IV analysis is needed. The second question
one should ask is whether or not an IV analysis is feasible in the sense of there being an IV that is close enough
to being valid and has a strong enough effect on the treatment to provide useful information about the treatment
effect. In this section, we will discuss how to think about these two questions.
2.1 Is an IV analysis needed?
The key consideration in whether an IV analysis is needed is how much unmeasured confounding there is. It is
useful to evaluate this using both scientiﬁc considerations and statistical considerations.
Scientiﬁc Consideration. Whether or not there is any unmeasured confounding should be ﬁrst thought of from
a scientiﬁc point of view. In the NICU example discussed in Section 1.2, mothers (as advised by doctors) who
choose to deliver in a far away high level NICU rather than a nearby low level NICU often do so because they think
their baby may be at a high risk of having a problem and that delivery at a high level NICU will reduce this risk.
Investigators know that a lot of variables can be confounders (i.e., associated with delivery at a high level NICU
and associated with in hospital mortality) such as variables indicating a baby’s health prior to delivery. They know
that the data set available for analyses is missing several important confounding variables such as fetal heart tracing
results, the severity of maternal problems during pregnancy and the mother’s adherence to prenatal care guidelines.
When unmeasured confounding is a big concern in a study like in the NICU study, analyses with IV methods are
desired and helpful to better understand the treatment effect.
Unmeasured confounders are particularly likely to be present when the treatment is intended to help the patient
(as compared to unintended exposures) . When two patients who have the same measured covariates are given
different treatments, there are often rational but unrecorded reasons. In particular, administrative data often does
not contain measurements of important prognostic variables that affect both treatment decisions and outcomes such
as lab values (e.g., serum cholesterol levels), clinical variables (e.g., blood pressure and fetal heart tracing results),
aspects of lifestyle (e.g., smoking status, eating habits) and measures of cognitive and physical functioning .
Common sources of IVs for health studies are discussed in Section 3. When using IV analyses, the assumptions
that are required for a variable to be a valid IV are usually at best plausible, but not certain. If the assumptions are
merely plausible, but not certain, are IV analyses still useful? Imbens and Rosenbaum provide a nice discussion
of two settings in which IV analyses with plausible but not certain IVs are useful: 1) When one is concerned
about unmeasured confounding in any way, it’s helpful to replace the implausible assumption of no unmeasured
confounding by a plausible assumption, although not a certain assumption, with IV methods; 2) When there is
concern about unmeasured confounding, IV analyses play an important role in replicating an observational study.
Consider two sequences of studies, the ﬁrst sequence in which each study involves only adjusting for measured
confounders and the other sequence in which each study involves using a different IV (one of the studies in this
second sequence could also involve only adjusting for measured confounders). Throughout the ﬁrst sequence of
studies, the comparison is likely to be biased in the same way. For example, a repeated ﬁnding that people with
more education are more healthy from different survey data sets that do not contain information about genetic
endowments or early life experiences does little to address the concern of unmeasured confounding from these
two variables. However, if different IVs are used for education, e.g., a lottery that affects education , a regional
discontinuity in educational policy , a temporal discontinuity in educational policy and distance lived from
a college when growing up , and if each IV is plausibly, but not certainly, valid, then there may be no reason why
these different IVs should provide estimates that are biased in the same direction. If studies with these different IVs
all provide evidence that education affects health in the same direction, this would strengthen the evidence for this
ﬁnding (when different IVs are used, each IV identiﬁes the average treatment effect for a different subgroup,
so that we would only expect that ﬁndings from the different IVs would agree in direction if the average treatment
effects for the different subgroups have the same direction; see Section 5.5 and 11 for discussion).
In summary, when unmeasured confounding is a big concern in a study based on one’s understanding of the
problem and data, investigators should consider IV methods in their analyses. At the same time, if investigators
only expect a small amount of unmeasured confounding in their study, suggest that investigators may not want
to use IV methods for the primary analysis but may want to consider IV methods for a secondary analysis.
Statistical Tests. Under some situations in practice, especially for exploratory studies, investigators may not have
enough scientiﬁc information to determine whether or not there is unmeasured confounding. Then statistical tests
can be helpful to provide additional insight. The Durbin-Wu-Hausman test is widely used to test whether there is
unmeasured confounding . The test requires the availability of a valid IV. The test compares the ordinary
least squares estimate and IV estimate of the treatment effect; a large difference between the two estimates indicates
the potential presence of unmeasured confounding.
The Durbin-Wu-Hausman test assumes homogeneous treatment effects, meaning that the treatment effect is
the same at different levels of covariates. The test cannot distinguish between unmeasured confounding and
treatment effect heterogeneity . As an alternative approach, developed a test that can detect unmeasured
confounding as distinct from treatment effect heterogeneity in the context of the model described below in Section
2.2. Valid IVs
As discussed in Section 1, a variable must have three key features to qualify as an IV: 1) Relevance: the IV
causes a change in the treatment received; 2) Effective random assignment: the IV is independent of unmeasured
confounding conditional on covariates as if it was randomly assigned conditional on covariates; 3) Exclusion
restriction: the IV does not have a direct effect on outcomes, i.e., it only affects outcomes through the treatment.
Section 4 includes mathematical details on these features and assumptions. To use IV methods in a real study,
investigators need to evaluate if there is any variable which satisﬁes the three features and qualiﬁes as a good
IV based on both scientiﬁc understanding and statistical evidence. Please see Section 3 below for sources of IVs
in health studies. Note that not all of the features/assumptions can be completely tested, but methods have been
proposed to test certain parts of the assumptions. Please see Section 6 for a discussion about how to evaluate if a
variable satisﬁes those features/assumptions needed to be a valid IV.
We would also like to point out that even if there is no variable which is a perfectly valid IV, an IV analysis
may still provide helpful information about the treatment effect. As discussed above, when there is unmeasured
confounding, a repeated ﬁnding from a sequence of analyses with different IVs (even though none of the IVs is
perfect) will provide very helpful evidence on the treatment effect . Also, sensitivity analyses can be performed
to assess the evidence provided by an IV analysis allowing for the IV not being perfectly valid; see Section 6.2.
2.3. Strength of IVs
An IV is considered to be a strong IV if it has a strong impact on the choice of different treatments and a weak
IV if it only has a slight impact. When the IV is weak, even if it is a valid IV, treatment effect estimates based
on IV methods have some limitations, such as large variance even with large samples. Then investigators face a
trade-off between an IV estimate with a large variance and a conventional estimate with possibly slight bias .
Additionally, the estimate with a weak IV will be sensitive to a slight departure from being a valid IV. Please see
Section 7 for more detailed discussion on the problems when only weak IVs are available in a study.
In summary, whether or not an IV analysis will be helpful for a study depends on if unmeasured confounding is
a major concern, if there is any plausibly close to valid IV, and if the IV is strong enough for a study. For studies
with treatments that are intentionally chosen by physicians and patients, there is often substantial unmeasured
confounding from unmeasured indications or severity . Therefore, an IV analysis can be most helpful
for those studies. When an IV is available, even if it is not perfectly valid, an IV analysis or a sequence of IV
analyses with different IVs can provide very helpful information about the treatment effect. For studies in which
unmeasured confounding is not a big concern and no strong IV is available, we suggest investigators to consider
IV analyses as secondary or sensitivity analyses.
3. Sources of Instruments in Health Studies
The biggest challenge in using IV methods is ﬁnding a good IV. There are several common sources of IVs for
health studies.
Randomized Encouragement Trials. One way to study the effect of a treatment when that treatment cannot be
controlled is to conduct a randomized encouragement trial. In such a trial, some subjects are randomly chosen to
get extra encouragement to take the treatment and the rest of the subjects receive no extra encouragement .
For example, studied the effect of maternal smoking during pregnancy on an infant’s birthweight using a
randomized encouragement trial in which some mothers received extra encouragement to stop smoking through a
master’s level staff person providing information, support, practical guidance and behavioral strategies . For a
randomized encouragement trial, the randomized encouragement assignment (1 if encouraged, 0 if not encouraged)
is a potential IV. The randomized encouragement is independent of unmeasured confounders because it is randomly
assigned by the investigators and will be associated with the treatment if the encouragement is effective. The only
potential concern with the randomized encouragement being a valid IV is that the randomized encouragement might
have a direct effect on the outcome not through the treatment. For example, in the smoking example above, the
encouragement could have a direct effect if the staff person providing the encouragement also encouraged expectant
mothers to stop drinking alcohol during pregnancy. To minimize a potential direct effect of the encouragement, 
asked the staff person providing encouragement to avoid recommendations or information concerning other habits
that might affect birthweight such as alcohol or caffeine consumption and also prohibited discussion of maternal
nutrition or weight gain. A special case of a randomized encouragement trial is a usual randomized trial in which
the intent is for everybody to take their assigned treatment, but in fact some people do not adhere to their assigned
treatment so that assignment to treatment is in fact just an encouragement to treatment. For such randomized trials
with non-adherence, random assignment can be used as an IV to estimate the effect of receiving the treatment vs.
receiving the control provided that random assignment does not have a direct effect (not through the treatment);
see Section 4.7 for further discussion and an example.
Distance to Specialty Care Provider. When comparing two treatments, one of which is only provided by specialty
care providers and one of which is provided by more general providers, the distance a person lives from the
nearest specialty care provider has often been used as an IV. For emergent conditions, proximity to a specialty
care provider particularly enhances the chance of being treated by the specialty care provider. For less acute
conditions, patients/providers have more time to decide and plan where to be treated, and proximity may have less
of an inﬂuence on treatment selection, while for treatments that are stigmatized (e.g., substance abuse treatment),
proximity could have a negative effect on the chance of being treated. A classic example of using distance as an IV
in studying treatment of an emergent condition is McClellan et al.’s study of the effect of cardiac catheterization
for patients suffering a heart attack . The IV used in the study was the differential distance the patient lives
from the nearest hospital that performs cardiac catheterization to the nearest hospital that does not perform cardiac
catheterization. Another examples is the study of the effect of high level vs. low level NICUs that was discussed
in Section 1.2. Because distance to a specialty care provider is often associated with socioeconomic characteristics,
it will typically be necessary to control for socioeconomic characteristics in order for distance to potentially be
independent of unmeasured confounders. The possibility that distance might have a direct effect because the time
it takes to receive treatment affects outcomes needs to be considered in assessing whether distance is a valid IV.
Preference-Based IVs. A general strategy for ﬁnding an IV for comparing two treatments A and B is to look for
naturally occurring variation in medical practice patterns at the level of geographic region, hospital or individual
physician, and then use whether the region/hospital/individual physician has a high or low use of treatment A
(compared to treatment B) as the IV. termed these IVs “preference-based instruments” because they assume
that different providers or groups of providers have different preferences or treatment algorithms dictating how
medications or medical procedures are used. Examples of studies using preference-based IVs are that studied
the effect of surgery plus irradiation vs. mastectomy for breast cancer patients using geographic region as the
IV, that studied the effect of surgery vs endovascular therapy for patients with a ruptured cerebral aneurysm
using hospital as the IV and that studied the beneﬁts and risks of selective cyclooxygenase 2 inhibitors vs.
nonselective nonsteroidal antiinﬂammatory drugs for treating gastrointenstinal problems using individual physician
as the IV. For proposed preference-based IVs, it is important to consider that the patient mix may differ between
the different groups of providers with different preferences, which would make the preference-based IV invalid
unless patient mix is fully controlled for. It is useful to look at whether measured patient risk factors differ between
groups of providers with different preferences. If there are measured differences, there are likely to be unmeasured
differences as well; see Section 6.1 for further discussion. Also, for proposed preference-based IVs, it is important
to consider whether the IV has a direct effect (not through the treatment); a direct effect could arise if the group of
providers that prefers treatment A treats patients differently in ways other than the treatment under study compared
to the providers who prefer treatment B. For example, studied the efﬁcacy of phototherapy for newborns
with hyperbilirubinemia and considered the frequency of phototherapy use at the newborn’s birth hospital as an
IV. However, chart reviews revealed that hospitals that use more phototherapy also have a greater use of infant
formula; use of infant formula is also thought to be an effective treatment for hyperbilirubinemia. Consequently,
the proposed preference-based IV has a direct effect (going to a hospital with higher use of phototherapy also
means a newborn is more likely to receive infant formula even if the newborn does not receive phototherapy) and
is not valid. The issue of whether a proposed preference-based IV has a direct effect can be studied by looking at
whether the IV is associated with concomitant treatments like use of infant formula . A related way in which
a proposed preference-based IV can have a direct effect is that the group of providers who prefer treatment A
may have more skill than the group of providers who prefer treatment B. Also, providers who prefer treatment
A may deliver treatment A better than those providers who prefer treatment B because they have more practice
with it, e.g., doctors who perform surgery more often may perform better surgeries. discuss a way to assess
whether there are provider skill effects by collecting data from providers on whether or not they would have treated
a different provider’s patient with treatment A or B based on the patient’s pretreatment records.
Calendar Time. Variations in the use of one treatment vs. another over time could result from changes in
guidelines; changes in formularies or reimbursement policies; changes in physician preference (e.g., due to
marketing activities by drug makers); release of new effectiveness or safety information; or the arrival of new
treatments to the market . For example, studied the effect of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) on
cardiovascular health among postmenopausal women using calendar time as an IV. HRT was widely used among
postmenopausal women until 2002; observational studies had suggested that HRT reduced cardiovascular risk, but
the Womens’ Health Initiative randomized trial reported opposite results in 2002, which caused HRT use to drop
sharply. A proposed IV based on calendar time could violate the assumption of being independent of unmeasured
confounders by being associated with unmeasured confounders that change in time such as the characteristics of
patients who enter the cohort, changes in other medical practices and changes in medical coding systems . The
most compelling type of IV based on calendar time is one where a dramatic change in practice occurs in a relatively
short period of time .
Genes as IVs. Another general source for potential IVs is genetic variants which affect treatment variables. For
example, studied the effect of HDL cholesterol on myocardial infarction using as an IV the genetic variant
LIPG 396Ser allele for which carriers have higher levels of HDL cholesterol but similar levels of other lipid
and non-lipid risk factors compared with noncarriers. Another example is that studied the effect of maternal
smoking on orofacial clefts in babies using genetic variants that increase the probability that a mother smokes
as IVs. The approach of using genetic variants as an IV is called Mendelian randomization because it makes
use of the random assignment of genetic variants conditional on parents’ genes discovered by Mendel. Although
genetic variants are randomly assigned conditional on a parent’s genes, genetic variants need to satisfy additional
assumptions to be valid IVs that include the following:
associated
unmeasured
confounders
population
stratiﬁcation.
randomization analyses do not condition on parents’ genes, creating the potential of the proposed genetic
variant IV being associated with unmeasured confounders through population stratiﬁcation. Population
stratiﬁcation is a condition where there are subpopulations, some of which are more likely to have the genetic
variant, and some of which are more likely to have the outcome through mechanisms other than the treatment
being studied. For example, consider studying the effect of alcohol consumption on hypertension. Consider
using the ALDH2 null variant, which is associated with alcohol consumption, as an IV (individuals who
are homozygous for the ALDH2 null variant have severe adverse reactions to alcohol consumption and tend
to drink very little ). The ALDH2 null variant is much more common in people with Asian ancestry
than other types of ancestry . Suppose ancestry was not fully measured. If ancestry is associated with
hypertension through mechanisms other than differences in the ALDH2 null variant (e.g., through different
ancestries tending to have different diets), then ALDH2 would not be a valid IV because it would be associated
with an unmeasured confounder.
• Not associated with unmeasured confounders through genetic linkage. Genetic linkage is the tendency of genes
that are located near to each other on a chromosome to be inherited together because the genes are unlikely to
be separated during the crossing over of the mother’s and father’s DNA . Consider using a gene A as an
IV where gene A is genetically linked to a gene B that has a causal effect on the outcome through a pathway
other than the treatment being studied. If gene B is not measured and controlled for, then gene A is not a valid
IV because it is associated with the unmeasured confounder gene B.
• No direct effect through pleiotropy. Pleiotropy refers to a gene having multiple functions. If the genetic variant
being used as an IV affects the outcome through a function other than affecting the treatment being studied,
this would mean the genetic variant has a direct effect. For example, consider the use of the APOE genotype
as an IV for studying the causal effect of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDLc) on myocardial infarction
(MI) risk. The ϵ2 variant of the APOE gene is associated with lower levels of LDLc but is also associated with
higher levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, less efﬁcient transfer of very low density lipoproteins
and chylomicrons from the blood to the liver, greater postprandial lipaemia and an increased risk of Type III
hyperlipoproteinaemia (the last three of which are thought to increase MI risk) . Thus, the gene APOE is
pleiotropic, affecting myocardial infarction risk through different pathways, making it unsuitable as an IV to
examine the causal effect of any one of these pathways on MI risk.
 and provide good reviews of Mendelian randomization methods.
Timing of Admission. Another source of IVs for health studies is timing of admission variables. For example,
 used day of the week of hospital admission as an IV for waiting time for surgery to study the effects of waiting
time on length of stay and inpatient mortality among patients admitted to the hospital with a hip fracture. Day of
the week of admission is associated with waiting time for surgery because many surgeons only do non-emergency
operations on weekdays, and therefore patients admitted on weekends may have to wait longer for surgery. In order
for weekday vs. weekend admission to be a valid IV, patients admitted on weekdays vs. weekends must not differ
on unmeasured characteristics (i.e., the IV must be independent of unmeasured confounders) and other aspects of
hospital care that affect the patients’ outcomes besides surgery must be comparable on weekdays vs. weekends
(i.e., the IV has no direct effect). Another example of a timing of admission variable used as an IV is hour of birth
as an IV for a newborn’s length of stay in the hospital .
Insurance Plan. Insurance plans vary in the amount of reimbursement they provide for different treatments.
For example, used drug co-payment amount as an IV to study the effect of β-blocker adherence on clinical
outcomes and health care expenditures after a hospitalization for heart failure. In order for variations in insurance
plan like drug co-payment amount to be a valid IV, insurance plans must have comparable patients after controlling
for measured confounders (i.e., the IV is independent of unmeasured confounders) and insurance plans must not
have an effect on the outcome of interest other than through inﬂuencing the treatment being studied (i.e., the IV
has no direct effect).
We have discussed several common sources of IVs for health studies and considerations to think about in
deciding whether potential IVs from these sources satisfy the assumptions to be a valid IV. A detailed understanding
of how treatments are chosen in a particular setting may yield additional, creative ideas for potential IVs. In Section
4, we will formally state the assumptions for an IV to be valid and discuss how to use a valid IV to estimate the
causal effects of a treatment.
4. IV Assumptions and Estimation for Binary IV and Binary Treatment
In this section, we consider the simplest setting for an instrumental variable design, when both the instrument
and treatment are binary. The main ideas in IV methods are most easily understood in this setting and the ideas will
be expanded to more complicated settings in later sections.
4.1 Framework and Notation
The Neyman-Rubin potential outcomes framework will be used to describe causal effects and formulate
IV assumptions. The classic econometric formulation of instrumental variables is in terms of structural equations
and assumptions about the IV being uncorrelated with structural error terms; the formulation in terms of
potential outcomes that is described here provides clarity about what effects are being estimated when there
are heterogeneous treatment effects and provides a ﬁrm foundation for nonlinear as well as linear outcome
models . Suppose there are N subjects. Let Z denote the N-dimensional vector of IV assignments with
individual elements Zi, i = 1, . . . , N, where Zi = 0 or 1. Level 1 of the IV is assumed to mean the subject was
encouraged to take level 1 of the treatment, where the treatment has levels 0 and 1. Let Dz be the N-dimensional
vector of potential treatment under IV assignment z with elements Dz
i , i = 1, . . . , N, Dz
i = 1 or 0 according to
whether person i would receive treatment level 1 or 0 under IV assignment z. Let Yz,d be the N-dimensional
vector of potential outcomes under IV assignment z and treatment assignment d where Yz,d
is the outcome subject
i would have under IV assignment z and treatment assignment d. The observed treatment for subject i is Di ≡DZ
and the observed outcome for subject i is Yi ≡Y Z,DZ
. Let Xi denote observed covariates for subject i. When we
write expressions like E(Y ), we mean the expected value of Y for a randomly sampled subject from the population.
 considered an IV to be a variable satisfying ﬁve assumptions – the stable unit treatment value assumption,
the IV is positively correlated with treatment assumption, the IV is independent of unmeasured confounders
assumption, the exclusion restriction assumption and the monotonicity assumption. We will describe the ﬁrst
four of these assumptions and then describe the need for the ﬁfth assumption or some substitute to obtain point
identiﬁcation. The ﬁrst four assumptions are
IV-A1 Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA). If zi = z
i, then Dz
i and if zi = z
i and di = d
. In words, this assumption says that the treatment affects only the subject taking the treatment
and that there are not different versions of the treatment which have different effects (see for details).
The stable unit treatment value assumption allows us to write Dz
i where z here denotes subject i having
IV assignment z and Y z,d
where z and d here denote subject i having IV assignment z and treatment
IV-A2 IV is positively correlated with treatment received. E(D1|X) > E(D0|X) (Note that we have assumed that
level 1 of the IV means that the subject was encouraged to take level 1 of the treatment).
IV-A3 IV is independent of unmeasured confounders (conditional on covariates X).
Z is independent of (D1, D0, Y 1,1, Y 1,0, Y 0,1, Y 0,0)|X.
IV-A4 Exclusion restriction (ER). This assumption says that the IV affects outcomes only through its effect on
treatment received: Y z,d
for all i. Under the ER, we can write Y d
for any z, i.e., Y 1
potential outcome for subject i if she were to receive level 1 of the treatment (regardless of her level of the
IV) and Y 0
i is the potential outcome if she were to receive level 0 of the treatment. The exclusion restriction
assumption is also called the no direct effect assumption.
Assumptions IV-A2, IV-A3 and IV-A4 are the assumptions depicted in Figure 1. These assumptions are the
“core” IV assumptions that basically all IV approaches make; assumption IV-A1 is typically implicitly made as
well. The core IV assumptions enable bounds on treatment effects to be identiﬁed but do not point identify a
treatment effect .
To see why the core IV assumptions alone do not point identify a treatment effect and to understand what
additional assumptions would identify a treatment effect, it is helpful to introduce the idea of compliance
classes . A subject in a study with binary IV and treatment can be classiﬁed into one of four latent compliance
classes based on the joint values of potential treatment received . The four compliance classes are referred
to as never-takers, always-takers, deﬁers and compliers. We denote subject i’s compliance class as Ci, which are
deﬁned like so: Ci = never-taker (nt) if (D0
i ) = (0, 0); complier (co) if (D0
i ) = (0, 1); always-taker (at)
i ) = (1, 1) and deﬁer (de) if (D0
i ) = (1, 0). Note that there being four compliance classes is not an
assumption but an exhaustive list of the possible types of compliance. Note also that a subject’s compliance class
is relative to a particular IV, e.g., in studying the effect of regular exercise on the lung function of patients with
chronic pulmonary obstructive disease, a person might be a complier if the IV is Z = 1 means the person will
receive $1000 if she regularly exercises vs. Z = 0 means the person will receive no extra payment if she regularly
Table 3. The relation between observed groups and latent compliance classes
Always-taker
Never-taker
Never-taker
Always-taker
exercises but the person might be a never taker if Z = 1 means the person will receive only $100 if she regularly
exercises. Table 3 shows the relationship between the latent compliance classes and the observed groups.
Suppose the outcome is binary so that the observed data (Y, D, Z) is a multinomial random variable with
2 × 2 × 2 = 8 categories. Under Assumptions (IV-A1)-(IV-A4), there are ten free unknown parameters: P(Z = 1),
P(Y 1 = 1|C = at), P(Y 1 = 1|C = co), P(Y 0 = 1|C = co), P(Y 0 = 1|C = nt), P(Y 1 = 1|C = de), P(Y 0 =
1|C = de), P(C = at), P(C = co) and P(C = nt) (note that P(C = de) is determined by P(C = co) + P(C =
at) + P(C = nt) + P(C = de) = 1). Since there are ten free parameters but the observed data multinomial random
variable has only 8 categories (so 7 free probabilities), the model is not identiﬁed. Two types of additional
assumptions have been considered that reduce the number of free parameters: (i) an assumption about the process
of selecting a treatment based on the IV that restricts the number of compliance classes by ruling out deﬁers; (ii)
assumptions that restrict the heterogeneity of treatment effects among the different compliance classes.
We ﬁrst consider the approach (i) to point identiﬁcation of restricting the number of compliance classes. The
assumption made by rules out deﬁers:
IV-A5 Monotonicity assumption. This assumption says that there are no subjects who are “deﬁers,” who would only
take level 1 of the treatment if not encouraged to do so, i.e., there is no subject i with D1
Monotonicity is automatically satisﬁed for single-consent randomized encouragement designs in which only the
subjects encouraged to receive the treatment are able to receive it (for this design, there are only compliers and
never takers). Monotonicity is also plausible in many applications in which the encouragement (Z = 1) provides a
clear incentive and no disincentive to take the treatment. For the setting of a binary outcome, (IV-A5) reduces the
number of free parameters to seven, enabling identiﬁcation since there are seven free probabilities for the observed
data. However, the model only identiﬁes the average treatment effect for compliers. The never-takers and alwaystakers do not change their treatment status when the instrument changes, so under the ER assumption, the potential
treatment and potential outcome under either level of the IV (Zi = 1 or 0) is the same. Consequently, the IV is
not helpful for learning about the treatment effect for always-takers or never-takers. Compliers are subjects who
change their treatment status with the IV, that is, the subjects would take the treatment if they were encouraged to
take it by the IV but would not otherwise take the treatment. Because these subjects change their treatment with
the level of the IV, the IV is helpful for learning about their treatment effects. The average causal effect for this
subgroup, E(Y 1
i |Ci = co), is called the complier average causal effect (CACE) or the local average treatment
effect (LATE). It provides the information on the average causal effect of receiving the treatment for compliers.
Approach (ii) to making assumptions about IVs to enable point identiﬁcation of a treatment effect keeps
Assumptions (IV-A1)-(IV-A4) but does not make Assumption (IV-A5) (Monotonicity); instead, it makes an
assumption that restricts the heterogeneity of treatment effects among the compliance classes. The strongest
such assumption is that the average effect of the treatment is the same for all the compliance classes, E(Y 1 −
Y 0|C = co) = E(Y 1 −Y 0|C = at) = E(Y 1 −Y 0|C = nt) = E(Y 1 −Y 0|C = de). This assumption identiﬁes
the average treatment effect for the whole population (this can be derived by using the same reasoning as in the
derivation of (2)). A weaker restriction on the heterogeneity of treatment effects among the compliance classes is
the no current treatment value interaction assumption :
E(Y 1 −Y 0|D = 1, Z = 1, X) = E(Y 1 −Y 0|D = 1, Z = 0, X).
Assumption (1) combined with (IV-A1)-(IV-A4) identiﬁes the average effect of treatment among the treated,
E(Y 1 −Y 0|D = 1). Under Assumptions (IV-A1)-(IV-A5), Assumption (1) says that the average treatment effect
is the same among always takers and compliers conditional on X, since the left hand side of (1) is the average
effect of treatment among compliers and always takers and the right hand side is the average effect among always
takers (all conditional on X). For further information on approach (ii), see .
We are going to focus on approach (i) to the IV assumptions (i.e., Assumptions (IV-A1)-(IV-A5)) for the rest
of this tutorial. An attractive feature of this approach is that the monotonicity assumption (IV-A5) is reasonable
in many applications (e.g., when the encouragement level of the IV provides a clear incentive to take treatment
and no disincentive); see also Section 5.3 for discussion of a weaker assumption than monotonicity which has
similar consequences. Although the effect identiﬁed by (IV-A1)-(IV-A5), the CACE, is only the effect for the
subpopulation of compliers, the data is in general not informative about average effects for other subpopulations
without extrapolation, just as a randomized experiment conducted on men is not informative about average effects
for women without extrapolation . By focusing on estimating the CACE, the researcher sharply separates
exploration of the information in the data from extrapolation to the (sub)-population of interest . See Section
5.1-5.2 for discussion of extrapolation of the CACE to other (sub)-populations.
 showed that Assumptions (IV-A1)-(IV-A5) are equivalent to a version of common approach to IV
assumptions in economics. In economics, selection of treatment A vs. B is often modeled by a latent index crossing
a threshold, where the latent index is interpreted as the expected net utility of choosing treatment A vs. B. For
α0 + α1Zi + εi1
β0 + β1Di + εi2
Zi independent of εi1, εi2
 showed that a nonparametric version of the latent index model is equivalent to the Assumptions (IV-A1)-(IV-
A5) above that use to deﬁne an IV.
4.2 Two stage least squares (Wald) estimator
Let us ﬁrst consider IV estimation when there are no observed covariates X. For binary IV and treatment variable,
 show that under Assumptions (IV-A1)-(IV-A5), the CACE is nonparametrically identiﬁed by
E(Y |Z = 1) −E(Y |Z = 0)
E(D|Z = 1) −E(D|Z = 0) =
[P(C = at|Z = 1)E(Y 1,1|Z = 1, C = at) + P(C = co|Z = 1)E(Y 1,1|Z = 1, C = co)+
P(C = nt|Z = 1)E(Y 1,0|Z = 1, C = nt) + P(C = de|Z = 1)E(Y 1,0|Z = 1, C = de)]−
[P(C = at|Z = 0)E(Y 0,1|Z = 0, C = at) + P(C = co|Z = 0)E(Y 0,0|Z = 1, C = co)+
P(C = nt|Z = 0)E(Y 0,0|Z = 0, C = nt) + P(C = de|Z = 0)E(Y 0,1|C = de)]
[P(C = at|Z = 1) + P(C = co|Z = 1)] −[P(C = at|Z = 1) + P(C = de|Z = 1)]
[P(C = at|Z = 1)E(Y 1,1|Z = 1, C = at) + P(C = co|Z = 1)E(Y 1,1|Z = 1, C = co)+
P(C = nt|Z = 1)E(Y 1,0|Z = 1, C = nt)] −[P(C = at|Z = 0)E(Y 0,1|Z = 0, C = at)+
P(C = co|Z = 0)E(Y 0,0|Z = 1, C = co) + P(C = nt|Z = 0)E(Y 0,0|Z = 0, C = nt)]
[P(C = at|Z = 1) + P(C = co|Z = 1)] −[P(C = at|Z = 1)]
[P(C = at)E(Y 1,1|C = at) + P(C = co)E(Y 1,1|C = co) + P(C = nt)E(Y 1,0|C = nt)]−
[P(C = at)E(Y 0,1|C = at) + P(C = co)E(Y 0,0|C = co) + P(C = nt)E(Y 0,0|C = nt)]
[P(C = at) + P(C = co)] −[P(C = at)]
[P(C = at)E(Y 1|C = at) + P(C = co)E(Y 1|C = co) + P(C = nt)E(Y 0|C = nt)]−
[P(C = at)E(Y 1|C = at) + P(C = co)E(Y 0|C = co) + P(C = nt)E(Y 0|C = nt)]
[P(C = at) + P(C = co)] −[P(C = at)]
P(C = co)[E(Y 1 −Y 0|C = co)]
E(Y 1 −Y 0|C = co),
where the second equality follows from the monotonicity assumption (Assumption IV-A5), the third equality
follows from the IV is independent of unmeasured confounders assumption (Assumption IV-A3), the fourth
equality follows from the exclusion restriction assumption (Assumption IV-A4) and the ﬁfth equality follows from
the IV is correlated with treatment received assumption (Assumption IV-A2).
The standard IV estimator for a binary IV and a binary treatment is the sample analogue of the ﬁrst expression
ˆE(Yi|Zi = 1) −ˆE(Yi|Zi = 0)
ˆE(Di|Zi = 1) −ˆE(Di|Zi = 0)
where ˆE denotes the sample mean. The standard IV estimator is called the Wald estimator after .
The standard IV estimator is also called the two stage least squares (2SLS) estimator because it can be obtained
from the following two stage least squares procedure: (i) regress D on Z by least square to obtain ˆE(D|Z); (ii)
regress Y on ˆE(D|Z). The coefﬁcient on ˆE(D|Z) from the regression (ii) equals (3) . Since (3) can be obtained by
the two stage least squares procedures, we denote (3) by
CACE2SLS =
ˆE(Yi|Zi = 1) −ˆE(Yi|Zi = 0)
ˆE(Di|Zi = 1) −ˆE(Di|Zi = 0)
To see why two stage least squares provides a consistent estimate of the CACE, write Y = α + CACE × D + u,
where α is chosen so that E(u) = 0. Then, under the monotonicity and exclusion restriction assumption,
i ) −CACE]Zi
Thus, under the IV independent of unmeasured confounders assumption, E(Y |Z) = α + CACE × E(D|Z) and
an unbiased estimate of the CACE can be obtained from regressing Y on E(D|Z). We do not know E(D|Z) but
can replace it by the consistent estimate ˆE(D|Z) from regressing D on Z, and then regress Y on ˆE(D|Z); this is
the two stage least squares procedure. The standard error for
CACE2SLS is not the standard error from the second
stage regression but needs to account for the sampling uncertainty in using ˆE(D|Z) as an estimate of E(D|Z); see
 and , Chapter 9.8 Speciﬁcally, the asymptotic standard error for
CACE2SLS is given in , Theorem
3. The 2SLS estimator
CACE2SLS can also be written as
Cov(D,Z) .
The 2SLS estimator does not take into full account the structure in Table 3 that the observed outcomes are
mixtures of outcomes from different compliance classes. develop approaches to estimating the CACE that
use the mixture structure to improve efﬁciency. For example, develops an empirical likelihood approach that is
consistent under the same assumptions as 2SLS but that provides substantial efﬁciency gains in some ﬁnite sample
4.3 Estimation with Observed Covariates
As discussed above, various methods have been proposed to use IVs to overcome the problem of unmeasured
confounders in estimating the effect of a treatment on outcomes without covariates. However, in practice, IVs may
be valid only after conditioning on covariates. For example, in the NICU study of Section 1.2, race is associated
with the proposed IV excess travel time and race is also thought to be associated with infant complications through
mechanisms other than level of NICU delivery such as maternal age, previous Caesarean section, inadequate
prenatal care and chronic maternal medical conditions . Consequently, in order for excess travel time to be
independent of unmeasured confounders conditional on measured covariates, it is important that race be included
as a measured covariate. To incorporate covariates into the two-stage least squares estimator, regress Di on Xi
and Zi in the ﬁrst stage to obtain ˆDi and then regress Yi on ˆDi and Xi in the second stage. Denote the coefﬁcient
on ˆDi in the second stage regression by ˆλ2SLS. The estimator ˆλ2SLS estimates a covariate-averaged CACE as we
shall discuss . Let (λ, ϕ) be the minimum mean squared error linear approximation to the average response
function for compliers E(Y |X, D, C = co), i.e., (λ, ϕ) = arg minλ∗,ϕ
∗E[(Y −ϕ∗T X −λ∗D)2|C = co] (where
X is assumed to contain the intercept). Speciﬁcally, if the complier average causal effect given X is the same for
all X and the effect of X on the outcomes for compliers is linear (i.e., E(Y |X, D, C = co) = ϕT X + λD), then λ
equals the CACE. The estimator ˆλ2SLS is a consistent (i.e., asymptotically unbiased) estimator of λ. Thus, if the
complier average causal effect given X is the same for all X and the effect of X on the outcomes for compliers is
linear, ˆλ2SLS is a consistent estimator of the CACE. As discussed in Section 4.2, the standard error for ˆλ2SLS is not
the standard error from the second stage regression but needs to account for the sampling uncertainty in using ˆDi
as an estimate of E(Di|Xi, Zi); see and , Chapter 9.8. Other methods besides two-stage least squares
for incorporating measured covariates into the IV model are discussed in among others. and 
introduce covariates in the IV model of with distributional assumptions and functional form restrictions. 
consider settings under fully saturated speciﬁcations with discrete covariates. Without distributional assumptions
or functional form restrictions, develops closed forms for average potential outcomes for compliers under
treatment and control with covariates. discuss incorporating covariates with an empirical likelihood approach.
4.4. Robust Standard Errors for 2SLS
When there is clustering in the data, standard errors that are robust to clustering should be computed. For
2SLS, this can be done by using robust Huber-White standard errors . Code for computing robust Huber-White
standard errors for IV analysis with clustering in R is given in Section 14. For the NICU study, there is clustering
by hospital.
Even when there is no clustering, we recommend always using the robust Huber-White standard errors for
Table 4. Risk Difference Estimates for Mortality Per 1000 Premature Births in High Level NICUs vs. Low Level
NICUs. The conﬁdence intervals account for clustering by hospital through the use of Huber-White robust standard
Risk Difference
Conﬁdence Interval
Unadjusted
(6.6, 15.3)
Multiple Regression, Adjusted for Measured Confounders
(-6.8, -1.5)
Two Stage Least Squares, Adjusted for Measured and Unmeasured Confounders
(-9.6, -2.2)
2SLS as the non-robust standard error’s correctness requires additional strong assumptions about the relationships
between the different compliance classes’ outcome distributions and homoskedasticity while the robust standard
error’s correctness does not require these assumptions; see Theorem 3 in and Section 4.2.1 of . Code for
computing robust Huber-White standard errors without clustering in R is given in Section 14.
4.5. Two Sample IV
The 2SLS estimator (4) can be used when information on Y , Z, D and X are not available in a single data
set, but one data set has Y , Z and X and the other data set has D, Z and X. One can estimate the regression
function ˆE(D|Z, X) from the ﬁrst data set and then compute ˆE(D|Zi, Xi) for the subjects i in the second data
set and regress Yi on ˆE(D|Zi, Xi) and Xi for the second data set. This is called two-sample two stage least
squares ; see for how to compute standard errors. An example of using two-sample two-stage least
squares is that studied the effect of food stamps on body mass index (BMI) in immigrant families using
differences in state responses to a change in federal laws on immigrant eligibility for the food stamp program as an
IV. The National Health Interview Study was used to estimate the effect of state lived in on BMI and the Current
Population Survey was used to estimate the effect of state lived in on food stamp program participation because
neither data set contained all three variables.
4.6. Example 1: Analysis of NICU study
For the NICU study, Table 4 shows the two stage least squares estimate for the effect of high level NICUs using
excess travel time as an IV and compares the 2SLS estimate to the estimate that does not adjust for any confounders
and the multiple regression estimate that only adjusts for the measured confounders (those in Table 4 plus several
other variables described in ) The unadjusted estimate is that high level NICUs increase the death rate, causing
10.9 more deaths per 1000 deliveries; this estimate is probably strongly biased by the selection bias that doctors
and mothers are more likely to insist on babies being delivered at a high level NICU if the baby is at high risk of
mortality. The regression estimate that adjusts for measured confounders is that high level NICUs save 4.2 babies
per 1000 deliveries. The two stage least squares estimate that adjusts for measured and unmeasured confounders is
that high level NICUs save even more babies, 5.2 babies per 1000 deliveries.
As illustrated by Table 4, the multiple regression estimate of the causal effect will generally have a smaller
conﬁdence interval than the 2SLS estimate. However, when the IV is valid and there is unmeasured confounding,
the multiple regression estimate will be asymptotically biased whereas the 2SLS estimate will be asymptotically
unbiased. Thus, there is a bias-variance tradeoff between multiple regression vs. 2SLS (IV estimation). When the
IV is not perfectly valid, the 2SLS estimator will be asymptotically biased, but the bias-variance tradeoff may still
favor 2SLS. develops a diagnostic tool for deciding whether to use multiple regression vs. 2SLS.
4.7. Example 2: The Effect of Receiving Treatment in a Randomized Trial with Nonadherence
An important application of IV methods is to estimating the effect of receiving treatment in randomized trials
with nonadherence. When some subjects do not adhere to their assigned treatments in a randomized trial, the
intention to treat (ITT) effect is often estimated,
ITT = ˆE(Y |Z = 1) −ˆE(Y |Z = 0); ITT is estimating the effect
of being assigned the active treatment compared to being assigned the control (e.g., a placebo or usual care).
When there is nonadherence, the ITT effect is different from the effect of receiving the treatment vs. the control.
Both of these effects are valuable to know. One situation when knowing the effect of receiving the treatment vs.
the control is particularly valuable is when the treatment non-adherence pattern is expected to differ between the
study sample and the target population . In this situation, the ITT estimate may be biased for the estimating
effect of offering the treatment to the target population and a key quantity that needs to be known to
accurately predict the effect of offering the treatment to the target population is the effect of actually receiving the
treatment . For example, discuss a trial of vitamin A supplementation to reduce child mortality. In the
trial, the Vitamin A supplementation was implemented by having children take pills and some children who were
randomized to treatment did not take the pills. The ITT effect is the effect of making Vitamin A pills available to
children. However, if the the trial showed that taking the pills was efﬁcacious, Vitamin A supplementation would
not likely be implemented by providing pills but instead by fortifying a daily food item such as monosodium
glutamate or salt . By knowing the effect of receiving Vitamin A supplementation (the biologic efﬁcacy) and
the rate at which Vitamin A supplementation would be successfully delivered under a fortiﬁcation program, we can
estimate the effectiveness of a fortiﬁcation program. A second situation in which knowing the effect of receiving
treatment vs. control is particularly valuable is when patients who are interested in fully adhering to a treatment are
making decisions about whether to take the treatment . For example, mention the setting that to decide
whether to use a certain contraception method, a couple may want to know the failure rate if they use the method
as indicated, rather than the failure rate in a population that included a substantial proportion of non-adherers.
A standard estimate of the effect of receiving the treatment vs. the control is the as treated estimate, ˆE(Y |D =
1) −ˆE(Y |D = 0), which compares the outcomes of subjects who received the treatment vs. the control regardless
of the subjects’ assigned treatment. The as-treated estimate may be biased for estimating the effect of receiving
the treatment because of unmeasured confounding, e.g., individuals with better diet may be more likely to
adhere to treatment and to have better outcomes regardless of treatment. Another standard estimate is the per
protocol estimate, ˆE(Y |Z = 1, D = 1) −ˆE(Y |Z = 0, D = 0), which compares the outcomes of subjects who
were assigned to the treatment and followed the treatment protocol to subjects who were assigned the control
and followed the control protocol; similar to the as treated estimate, the per protocol estimate may be biased
for estimating the effect of receiving the treatment because of unmeasured confounding, e.g., individual with
better diet may be more likely to adhere to treatment but all subjects may adhere with the control if the control
is usual care. The IV method has the potential of overcoming bias from unmeasured confounding in estimating
the effect of receiving the treatment. Consider as a possible IV, the randomly assigned treatment Z. The randomly
assigned treatment satisﬁes the IV is independent of unmeasured confounders assumption (IV-A3) because of
the randomization and the randomly assigned treatment will usually make receiving treatment more likely, thus
satisfying (IV-A2) that the IV is positively correlated with treatment received. It needs to be considered whether
the randomly assigned treatment satisﬁes the exclusion restriction (IV-A4) and monotonicity assumptions (IV-A5)
for speciﬁc trials. In the Vitamin A pill trial mentioned above, the treatment was only available to those assigned
to treatment so that monotonicity was automatically satisﬁed. argue that the exclusion restriction is also likely
satisﬁed for the Vitamin A trial because for never takers, being assigned to the treatment group vs. the control
group is unlikely to affect mortality (there was no placebo in the trial). In contrast, raise concern about the
exclusion restriction holding in certain mental health randomized trials. If the randomly assigned treatment does
satisfy all the IV assumptions (IV-A1)-(IV-A5) for a trial, then the two stage least squares (Wald) estimator (4) is a
consistent estimate of the effect of actually receiving treatment for compliers. The numerator of (4) is equal to the
intent to treat estimate and the denominator of (4) is an estimate of the proportion of compliers.
Table 5. Mortality rates in Vitamin A trial, stratiﬁed by assigned treatment and received treatment. The top part of
the table shows all three strata and the bottom part shows certain collapsed strata
Randomization
# of Children
Mortality Rate
Assignment
(per 1000)
Control or
9,675=12,094
Control or
Table 5 shows the mortality rates in the Vitamin A trial, stratiﬁed by assigned treatment and received
treatment . The ITT estimate for the effect on the mortality rate per 1000 children is 3.8 −6.4 = −2.6, the
as treated estimate is 1.2 −7.7 = −6.5, the per protocol estimate is 1.2 −6.4 = −5.2 and the IV estimate is
9675/12094 = −3.3. As discussed above, the assumptions for randomization assignment to be a valid IV are
plausible for the Vitamin A trial and the IV estimate says that taking the Vitamin A pills saves an estimated
3.3 per 1000 children among those children who would take the Vitamin A pills if offered them (the compliers in
this trial – note that there are no always takers in this trial).
5. Understanding the Treatment Effect that IV Estimates
As discussed in Section 4, the IV method estimates the CACE, the average treatment effect for the compliers
(i.e. E[Y 1 −Y 0|C = co]), which might not equal the average treatment effect for the whole population. Although
we might ideally want to know the average treatment effect for the whole population, the average treatment effect
for compliers often provides useful information about the average treatment for the whole population and the
average treatment effect for compliers may be of interest in its own right. In Section 5.1, we discuss how to relate
the average treatment for compliers to the average treatment effect for the whole population and in Section 5.2, we
discuss how to understand more about who the compliers are, which is helpful for interpreting the average treatment
effect for compliers in its own right. In Sections 5.3-5.5, we discuss additional issues related to understanding the
treatment effect that IV estimates. In particular, in Section 5.3, we discuss interpreting the treatment effect when
the compliance class is not deterministic; in Section 5.4, we discuss interpreting the treatment effect when there are
different versions of the treatment; and in Section 5.5, we discuss interpretation issues when there is heterogeneity
in response.
5.1 Relationship between Average Treatment Effect for Compliers and Average Treatment Effect for the
Whole Population
As discussed in Section 4, the IV method estimates the CACE, the average treatment effect for the compliers
(i.e. E[Y 1 −Y 0|C = co]). The average treatment effect in the population is, under the monotonicity assumption, a
weighted average of the average treatment effect for the compliers, the average treatment effect for the never-takers
and the average treatment effect for the always-takers:
E[Y 1 −Y 0] = P(C = co)E[Y 1 −Y 0|C = co] + P(C = at)E[Y 1 −Y 0|C = at] + P(C = nt)E[Y 1 −Y 0|C = nt].
The IV method provides no direct information on the average treatment effect for always-takers (i.e., E[Y 1 −
Y 0|C = at]) or the average treatment effect for never-takers (i.e., E[Y 1 −Y 0|C = nt]). However, the IV method
can provide useful bounds on the average treatment effect for the whole population if a researcher is able to put
bounds on the difference between the average treatment effect for compliers and the average treatment effects for
never-takers and always-takers based on subject matter knowledge. For example, suppose a researcher is willing to
assume that this difference is no more than b. Then
E[Y 1 −Y 0|C = co] −b[1 −P(C = co)] ≤E[Y 1 −Y 0] ≤E[Y 1 −Y 0|C = co] + b[1 −P(C = co)],
where the quantities on the left and right hand sides of (5) other than b can be estimated as discussed in Section 4
and . For binary or other bounded outcomes, the boundedness of the outcomes can be used to tighten
bounds on the average treatment effect for the whole population or other treatment effects . Qualititative
assumptions, such as that the average treatment effect is larger for always-takers than compliers, can also be used
to tighten the bounds, e.g., .
In thinking about extrapolating the CACE to the full population, it is useful to think about how compliers’
outcomes compare to always takers and never takers’ outcomes . The data provide some information about this.
Speciﬁcally, we can compare
E(Y 0|C = nt) vs. E(Y 0|C = co) and
E(Y 1|C = at) vs. E(Y 1|C = co).
Under (IV-A1)-(IV-A5), shows that the following are consistent estimates of the quantities in (1) when
there are no covariates: ˆE(Y 0|C = nt) = ˆE(Y |D = 0, Z = 1), ˆE(Y 0|C = co) =
E(Y (1−D)|Z=1)−ˆ
E(Y (1−D)|Z=0)
E(1−D|Z=1)−ˆ
E(1−D|Z=0)
ˆE(Y 1|C = at) = ˆE(Y |D = 1, Z = 0) and ˆE(Y 1|C = co) =
E(Y D|Z=1)−ˆ
E(Y D|Z=0)
E(D|Z=1)−ˆ
E(D|Z=0) ; when there are covariates,
the methods of or can be used to estimate the quantities in (1). If compliers, never takers and always takers
are found to be substantially different in levels by evidence of a substantial difference between E(Y 0|C = nt) and
E(Y 0|C = co) and/or between E(Y 1|C = at) and E(Y 1|C = co), then it appears much less plausible that the
average effect for compliers is indicative of average effects for other compliance types. On the other hand, if one
ﬁnds that potential outcomes given the control for never takers and compliers are similar, and potential outcomes
given the treatment are similar for compliers and always takers, it is more plausible that average treatment effects
for the groups are also comparable . For example, in the Vitamin A trial described in Table 5, the mortality
rate for never takers is estimated to be 14.1 (per 1000 children) and for compliers under control is estimated to be
4.8 (note that there are no always takers in the Vitamin A trial). This substantial difference in estimated mortality
rates between the compliance classes suggests that we should be cautious in extrapolating the CACE to the full
population.
5.2 Characterizing the Compliers
The IV method estimates the average treatment effect for the subpopulation of compliers. In most situations, it is
impossible to identify which subjects in the data set are “compliers” because we only observe a subject’s treatment
selection under either Z = 1 or Z = 0 which means we cannot identify if the subject would have complied under
the unobserved level of the instrument. So who are these compliers and how do they compare to noncompliers? To
understand this better, it is useful to characterize the compliers in terms of their distribution of observed covariates
 . The mean of a covariate Xi among the compliers is the following under the IV assumptions 1-5 from
Section 4.1, where f represents the probability mass function or probability density function,
E[X|C = co] =
xf(x|C = co)
f(x)dx = E
X f(X|C = co)
Table 6. Complier characteristics for NICU study. The second column shows the estimated proportion of compliers
with a characteristic X, the third column shows the estimated proportion of the full population with the
characteristic X and the fourth column shows the estimated ratio of compliers with X compared to the full
population with X.
Characteristic X
Prevalence of X
Prevalence of X
Prevalence Ratio
among compliers
in full population
of X among compliers to full population
Birthweight < 1500g
Gestational Age <= 32 weeks
Mother College Graduate
African American
Gestational Diabetes
Diabetes Mellitus
Pregnancy Induced Hypertension
Chronic Hypertension
f(x|C = co)
P (C=co|x)f(x)
= P(C = co|x)
= E(D|Z = 1, X = x) −E(D|Z = 0, X = x)
E(D|Z = 1) −E(D|Z = 0)
We estimate E(X|C = co) by estimating θi = f(Xi|C=co)
for i = 1, . . . , N based on (8) (e.g., using logistic
regression to estimate E(D|Z, X) and then plugging into (8)) and then taking the sample average of Xiθi. See
 for an alternate representation of E(X|C = co). For a binary characteristic X, (7) simpliﬁes to
[E(D|Z = 1, X = 1) −E(D|Z = 0, X = 1)
E(D|Z = 1) −E(D|Z = 0)
The prevalence ratio of a binary characteristic X among compliers compared to the full population is
Prevalence Ratio = P(X = 1|C = co)
Table 6 shows the mean of various characteristics X among compliers vs. the full population, and also shows
the prevalance ratio. Babies whose mothers are college graduates are slightly underrepresented (prevalence ratio
= 0.87) and African Americans are slightly overrepresented (prevalence ratio = 1.14) among compliers. Very low
birthweight (< 1500 g) and very premature babies (gestational age ≤32 weeks) are substantially underrepresented
among compliers, with prevalence ratios around one-third; these babies are more likely to be always-takers, i.e.,
delivered at high level NICUs regardless of mother’s travel time. Babies whose mothers’ have comorbidities such
as diabetes or hypertension are slightly underrepresented among compliers. Overall, Table 6 suggests that higher
risk babies are underrepresented among the compliers. If the effect of high level NICUs is greater for higher risk
babies, then the IV estimate will underestimate the average effect of high level NICUs for the whole population.
5.3 Understanding the IV Estimate When Compliance Status Is Not Deterministic
For an encouragement that is uniformly delivered, such as patients who made an appointment at a psychiatric
outpatient clinic are sent a letter encouraging them to attend the appointment , it is clear that a subject is
either a complier, always taker, never taker or deﬁer with respect to the encouragement. However, sometimes
encouragements that are not uniformly delivered are used as IVs. For example, in the NICU study, consider the
IV of whether the mother’s excess travel time to the nearest high level NICU is more than 10 minutes. If a mother
whose excess travel time to the nearest high level NICU was more than 10 minutes moved to a new home with an
excess travel time less than 10 minutes, whether the mother would deliver her baby at a high level NICU might
depend on additional aspects of the move, such as the location and availability of public transportation at her new
home and the exact travel time to the nearest high level NICU at her new home. Consequently, a mother
may not be able to be deterministically classiﬁed as a complier or not a complier – she may be a complier with
respect to certain moves but not others. Another example of nondeterministic compliance is that when physician
preference for one drug vs. another is used as the IV (e.g., Z = 1 if a patient’s physician prescribes drug A more
often drug B), whether a patient receives drug A may depend on how strongly the physician prefers drug A
 . Another situation in which nondeterministic compliance status can arise is that the IV may not itself be
an encouragement intervention but a proxy for an encouragement intervention. Consider the case of Mendelian
randomization, in which the IV is often a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP). Changes in the SNP itself may
not affect the exposure D. Instead, genetic variation at another location on the same chromosome as the SNP, call it
L, might affect D. The SNP might just be a marker for the subject’s genetic code at location L. The encouragement
intervention is having a certain genetic code at L and the SNP is just a proxy for this encouragement. Consequently,
even if a subject’s exposure level would change as a result of a change in the genetic code at location L, whether
the subject is a complier with respect to a change in the SNP depends on whether the change in the SNP leads to a
change in the genetic code at location L, which is randomly determined through the process of recombination .
Brookhart and Schneeweiss provide a framework for understanding how to interpret the IV estimate when
compliance status is not deterministic. Suppose that the study population can be decomposed into a set of κ + 1
mutually exclusive groups of patients based on clinical, lifestyle and other characteristics such that within each
group of patients, whether a subject receives treatment is independent of the effect of the treatment. All of
the common causes of the potential treatment receiveds D1, D0 and the potential outcomes Y 1, Y 0 should be
included in the characteristics used to deﬁne these groups. For example, if there are L binary common causes
of (D1, D0, Y 1, Y 0), then the subgroups can be the κ + 1 = 2L possible values of these common causes. Denote
patient membership in these groups by the set of indicators S = {S1, S2, . . . , Sκ}. Consider the following model
for the expected potential outcome:
E(Y d|S) = α0 + α1d + αT
The average effect of treatment in the population is α1 + αT
3 E[S] and the average effect of treatment in subgroup
j is α1 + α3,j. Under the IV assumptions (IV-A1)-(IV-A4) in Section 4.1, i.e., all the assumptions except
monotonicity, the 2SLS estimator (4) converges in probability to the following quantity:
E(Y |Z = 1) −E(Y |Z = 0)
E(D|Z = 1) −E(D|Z = 0) = α1 +
α3,jE[Sj]wj,
wj = E(D|Z = 1, Sj = 1) −E(D|Z = 0, Sj = 1)
E(D|Z = 1) −E(D|Z = 0)
The IV estimator (9) is a “weighted average” of treatment effects in different subgroups, where the subgroups in
which the instrument has a stronger effect on the treatment get more weight. Note that when the compliance class
is deterministic, then the subgroups can be deﬁned as the compliance classes and (9) just says that the IV estimator
is the average treatment effect for compliers. In the NICU study, where compliance class may not be deterministic,
Table 6 suggests that babies in lower risk groups, e.g., not very low birthweight or not very low gestational age,
are weighted more heavily in the IV estimator. If there are subgroups for which the instrument has no effect on
their treatment level, then that subgroup gets zero weight. For example, mothers or babies with severe preexisting
conditions may virtually always be delivered at a high level NICU, so that the IV of excess travel time has no
effect on their treatment level . If there are subgroups for which the encouraging level of the instrument makes
them less likely to receive the treatment, then this subgroup would get “negative weight” and (9) is not a true
weighted average, potentially leading the IV estimator to have the opposite sign of the effect of the treatment. For
example, discussed studying the safety of metformin for treating Type II diabetes vs. other antihyperglycemic
drugs among patients with liver disease using physician preference as the IV (Z = 1 if a physician is more likely to
prescribe metformin than other antihyperglycemic drugs). Metformin is contraindicated in patients with decreased
renal function or liver disease, as it can cause lactic acidosis, a potentially fatal side effect. speculated that
physicians who infrequently use metformin (Z = 0) will be less likely to understand its contraindications and
would therefore be more likely to misuse it. If this hypothesis is true, then for estimating the effect of metformin
on lactic acidosis, the IV estimator could mistakenly make metformin appear to prevent lactic acidosis because the
subgroup(s) of patients with decreased renal function or liver disease, for which metformin causes lactic acidosis,
would have a negative weight wj. When the compliance class is deterministic, a subgroup getting negative weight
means that there are deﬁers, violating the monotonicity assumption.
5.4. Understanding the Treatment Effect Estimated by IV When SUTVA is Violated
Consider the (IV-A1) assumption from Section 4.1, SUTVA. Two ways in which SUTVA could be violated are
(i) there are different versions of the treatment that have different effects, i.e., Y 1
i depends on which version of the
treatment was received or (ii) there is interference between units, i.e., Y 1
i depends on whether unit i′ received the
treatment or control . When one of these violations occur, the IV estimate (4) may still be interpretable as long
as (IV-A2)-(IV-A5) hold.
Consider ﬁrst the no different versions of the treatment part of SUTVA. This would be violated if there are
different ways of implementing the treatment that have different effects. For example, consider the effect of
lowering one’s body mass index on one’s mental health. There are different ways that a lower body mass index
might be achieved, e.g., by eating less or by exercising more, and these different ways of lowering body mass index
might have different effects on mental health. The version of the treatment effect estimated by IV is the one that
implements the treatment in the same way as the IV. For example, consider estimating the effect of body mass index
on mental health using the FTO gene as an IV for body mass index . It has been hypothesized that FTO affects
body mass index through affecting appetite and there is some support for this hypothesis . If this hypothesis is
correct, then the treatment effect of lowering body mass index on mental health that is estimated by using the FTO
gene as an IV is the version that involves lowering body mass index by reducing food intake. An intervention that
lowered body mass index by increasing exercise might have different effects on mental health than an analysis that
uses FTO as an IV suggests .
Consider next the no interference assumption part of SUTVA that subject A receiving the treatment affects only
subject A and not other subjects. In the NICU study, the no interference assumption is reasonable – if preemie A
is treated at a high level NICU, this does not affect preemie B’s outcome. However, if there were crowding effects
(e.g., treating additional babies at a hospital decreases the quality of care for babies already under care at that
hospital), this assumption might not be true. The no interference assumption is also not appropriate for situations
like estimating the effect of a vaccine on an individual because a non-vaccinated individual A may beneﬁt from
individual B receiving the vaccine because A can no longer become infected from contact with person B .
When no interference fails to hold, the IV method is roughly estimating the difference between the effect of the
treatment and the spillover effect of some units being treated on those units left untreated (see for a precise
formulation and details).
5.5. Interpreting the Treatment Effect Estimated by IV When There Are Heterogeneous Responses
As discussed in section 4.1, the treatment effect estimated by the IV applies to only a subset of the subjects,
namely the subjects whose treatment level is modiﬁed by the level of the IV. In a binary setting, we refer to the
subjects that respond to the IV as the compliers, in constrast to the never-takers and always-takers. If there is
heterogeneity in the response to the treatment (i.e., Y 1
i′ for some i, i′) , then the IV estimate is
only valid for the compliers and may not generalize to the entire population. In fact, in many medical situations it
is almost certain that there is heterogeneity in response to treatment. Further, it is often the case that the alwaystakers always take the treatment because it is believed their response to the treatment is quite large, whereas the
never-takers either have minimal or even a negative response to the treatment. If only one instrument is available,
the treatment effect is not identiﬁable for the never-takers and always-takers. Careful thought is needed to state for
which populations the IV estimate is valid.
In the NICU example, the compliers are those preemies whose NICU level would change due to travel time
to the different facilities. The ”always-taker” preemies tended to be more difﬁcult to treat (e.g., younger, lower
birthweight; see Table 4) and thus more obviously in need of care at a high-level NICU. It is quite possible that the
treatment effect for the ”always-takers” subgroup is larger than the effect estimated by the IV analysis.
Continuing with this logic, if the compliance groups are determined by how their treatment level changes due
to the IV, then it follows that different IVs may estimate different treatment effects because the effects are being
estimated on different subgroups. That is, if two different analyses are run on the same population, using two
different but completely valid IVs, it is entirely possible for the effect estimates to differ because the composition
of the compliers changes. For example, the preemies who have their NICU level changed by relative proximity to
treatment facilities may have a different risk proﬁle than preemies who would have their NICU level changed by
a modiﬁcation to hospital contracts with insurance providers, wherein a large percentage of the population would
have to pay ”out-of-network” fees in order to receive care at a high-level facility.
The issue of multiple IVs is discussed in more detail in section 11.
6. Assessing the IV Assumptions and Sensitivity Analysis for Violations of Assumptions
For most proposed IVs, there is some uncertainty about whether the proposed IV actually satisﬁes the
IV assumptions. Consequently, it is important to empirically assess whether a proposed IV satisﬁes the IV
assumptions. Although not all of the assumptions can be completely tested, there are methods that test certain
parts of the assumptions; we discuss these methods in Section 6.1. Even if a proposed IV is not perfectly valid, it
may still provide useful inferences about treatment effects as long as it does not violate the assumptions for being
a valid IV too badly. In Section 6.2, we discuss sensitivity analysis methods that characterize how much inferences
are affected by a proposed IV violating the assumptions by speciﬁed magnitudes.
6.1. Assessing the IV Assumptions
The assumption (IV-A2) that the IV is correlated with the treatment received can be straightforwardly assessed
by looking at the association between the IV and the treatment; see Section 7 for discussion of measures of
this association. This section will discuss assessing the other two core IV assumptions, (IV-A3) that the IV is
independent of unmeasured confounders and (IV-A4) that the IV affects the outcome only through treatment
received (the exclusion restriction).
Assessing whether the IV is independent of unmeasured confounders. The association between the (proposed)
IV and the measured confounders may provide insight into whether there is any association between the IV and
the unmeasured confounders conditional on the measured confounders. Although the measured confounders can
be controlled for and an association between the IV and a measured confounder does not necessarily imply that
Table 7. Imbalance of measured covariates between babies living near vs. far from a high level NICU (relative to
the nearest low level NICU). The standardized difference (fourth column) is the difference in means between the
two groups in units of the pooled within group standard deviation, i.e., for a binary characteristic X, where Z = 1
or 0 according to whether the baby lives near or far, the standardized difference is
P (X=1|Z=1)−P (X=1|Z=0)
{V ar(X|Z=1)+V ar(X|Z=0)}/2.
The bias ratio is the ratio of the bias from failing to adjust for X from the IV method compared to the bias from
ordinary least squares (OLS); a bias ratio of less than 1 indicates that the IV method would be less biased than OLS
from failing to adjust for X.
Characteristic X
Standardized
Difference
Birthweight < 1500g
Gestational Age <= 32 weeks
Mother College Graduate
African American
Gestational Diabetes
Diabetes Mellitus
Pregnancy Induced Hypertension
Chronic Hypertension
there will be an association between the IV and unmeasured confounders, if a measured confounder(s) is only a
proxy for a true confounder, then an association between the IV and this measured confounder(s) suggests that
there will be an association between the IV and the unmeasured part of the true confounder. If there are two or
more sources of confounding, then it is useful to examine if the observable part of one source of confounding
is associated with the IV after controlling for the other sources of confounding. These ideas will be illustrated
using the NICU study described in Section 1.2. Table 7 shows the imbalance of measured covariates across levels
of the IV. The standardized difference (fourth column) compares the difference in means between the encouraged
(Z = 1) and unencouraged (Z = 0) groups in units of the pooled standard deviation. The racial composition is very
different between the near (Z = 1) and far (Z = 0) babies, with near babies being much more likely to be African
American. Since race has a substantial association with neonatal outcomes , it is sensible to examine
the association of other measured confounders with the IV after controlling for race. Tables 8 and 9 show the
association of the IV with measured confounders for whites and African Americans. After stratifying on race, the
clinical measured confounders such as low birthweight, gestational age <= 32 weeks and maternal comorbidities
(diabetes and hypertension) are generally similar between babies whose mother lives near to a high level NICU vs.
babies whose mother lives farther away, although there are some signiﬁcant associations. This similarity between
the clinical status of near vs. far babies after controlling for race provides some support that the IV is approximately
valid. However, whether the mother is a college graduate differs substantially between white near vs. far mothers,
suggesting that there may be residual confounding due to socioeconomic status.
Comparing the standardized differences in measured covariates between babies delivered at high vs. low level
NICUs (fourth column of Table 2) to the standardized differences between babies living near vs. far from a high
level NICU (ﬁfth column of Table 7), we see that the standardized differences are generally smaller for the near/far
groups (the IV) than the high level NICU/low level NICUs (the treatment). This suggests that the proposed IV,
living near vs. far from a high level NICU, is “more randomly assigned” than the treatment of delivering at a
high level NICU vs. a low level NICU. However, even though a proposed IV may be more randomly assigned
than a treatment, an IV analysis based on the proposed IV may still be more biased than a regression/propensity
score analysis that assumes the treatment is randomly assigned conditional on the measured covariates, because IV
Table 8. Imbalance of measured covariates between babies born to white mothers living near vs. far from a high
level NICU (relative to the nearest low level NICU). The standardized difference (fourth column) is the difference
in means between the two groups in units of the pooled within group standard deviation. The bias ratio is the ratio
of the bias from failing to adjust for X from the IV method compared to the bias from ordinary least squares (OLS);
a bias ratio of less than 1 indicates that the IV method would be less biased than OLS from failing to adjust for X.
Characteristic X
Standardized
Difference
Birthweight < 1500g
Gestational Age <= 32 weeks
Mother College Graduate
Gestational Diabetes
Diabetes Mellitus
Pregnancy Induced Hypertension
Chronic Hypertension
Table 9. Imbalance of measured covariates between babies born to African American mothers living near vs. far
from a high level NICU (relative to the nearest low level NICU). The standardized difference (fourth column) is
the difference in means between the two groups in units of the pooled within group standard deviation. The bias
ratio is the ratio of the bias from failing to adjust for X from the IV method compared to the bias from ordinary
least squares (OLS); a bias ratio of less than 1 indicates that the IV method would be less biased than OLS from
failing to adjust for X.
Characteristic X
Standardized
Difference
Birthweight < 1500g
Gestational Age <= 32 weeks
Mother College Graduate
Gestational Diabetes
Diabetes Mellitus
Pregnancy Induced Hypertension
Chronic Hypertension
analyses are more sensitive to bias .
The bias ratio, shown in the last column of Tables 7-9, is a measure of how biased an IV analysis would be from
failing to adjust from the confounder as compared to an ordinary least squares analysis The below discussion of
the bias ratio is drawn from (the bias ratio is the prevalence difference ratio of divided by the strength of the
IV). Denote the confounder by U. Consider the following model for the potential outcome:
Y d = α0 + α1d + α2U + ϵd,
where E(ϵd|U) = 0. The average treatment effect is E[Y 1 −Y 0] = α1. The observed data is
Y = α0 + α1D + α2U + ϵ0 + D(ϵ1 −ϵ0).
Assume that E(ϵd|D, U) = 0 for d = 0 or 1. This assumption means that if U were controlled for, the parameters
of (10) could be consistently estimated by least squares. By iterated expectations, E[ϵ0 + D(ϵ1 −ϵ0)|D] = 0.
Therefore,
E(Y |D = 1) −E(Y |D = 0) = α1 + α2(E[U|D = 1] −E[U|D = 0]),
so that an ordinary least squares analysis that did not adjust for U would be biased by
OLS) = α2(E[U|D = 1] −E[U|D = 0]).
To evaluate the 2SLS estimator (4) using Z as an IV, consider the further assumption that E[ϵ0|Z] = 0 so that
the proposed IV Z can be related to the observed outcome only through its effect on D or association with U;
also assume that E(ϵ1 −ϵ0|C) is the same for all compliance classes C so that the complier average causal effect
is equal to the overall average causal effect α1. These assumptions together say that if U were controlled for,
the 2SLS estimator would consistently estimate the average treatment effect α1. Under these assumptions, the
probability limit of the 2SLS estimator that does not control for U can be written as
E[Y |Z = 1] −E[Y |Z = 0]
E[D|Z = 1] −E[D|Z = 0] = α1 + α2
E(U|Z = 1) −E(U|Z = 0)
E(D|Z = 1) −E(D|Z = 0).
The asymptotic bias of the 2SLS estimator is thus
Bias(ˆα2SLS
E(U|Z = 1) −E(U|Z = 0)
E(D|Z = 1) −E(D|Z = 0).
The ratio of the absolute bias of the 2SLS estimator to the absolute bias of the OLS estimator from failing to control
Bias Ratio =
E(U|Z=1)−E(U|Z=0)
E(D|Z=1)−E(D|Z=0)
E(U|D = 1) −E(U|D = 0)
We estimate the bias ratio for each measured confounder by plugging in sample means for the expectations in
(12). In order for us to think that the IV analysis is less biased than OLS, the bias ratios should be less than 1,
particularly for those variables clearly related to the outcome. Table 8 shows that for whites, the bias ratios are
generally less than 1, particularly for the clinical variables gestational age and birthweight that are important to the
outcome (mortality). On the other hand, Table 9 shows that for African Americans, the bias ratios are often greater
than 1. The bias ratios suggest that IV analysis reduces bias for whites compared to OLS but maybe not for African
Americans.
Assessing whether the IV satisﬁes the exclusion restriction. In order for the IV to satisfy the exclusion restriction,
it must only inﬂuence the outcome through its inﬂuence on the treatment under study. For many clinical problems,
there may be other treatments that could be used alongside the treatment under study . If a proposed IV is
associated with these concomitant treatments, then it would violate the exclusion restriction if these concomitant
treatments affect the outcome. Thus, exploring the association between the proposed IV and concomitant treatments
can help determine whether the exclusion restriction is violated because of associations between the treatment
under study and co-interventions. For example, studied the efﬁcacy of phototherapy for newborns with
hyperbilirubinemia and considered the frequency of phototherapy use at the newborn’s birth hospital as an IV.
Besides phototherapy, another treatment that is given for infants suffering from hyperbilirubinemia is to supplement
breastfeeding with infant formula. found that hospitals that use more phototherapy also have a greater use of
infant formula. Consequently, the proposed preference-based IV has a direct effect (going to a hospital with higher
use of phototherapy also means a newborn is more likely to receive infant formula even if the newborn does not
receive phototherapy) and violates the exclusion restriction if use of infant formula inﬂuences outcomes. For the
NICU study, the treatment of a high level NICU vs. a low level NICU encompasses all aspects of care at the NICU
and so there are not concomitant treatments to consider.
Joint test of whether IV is independent of unmeasured confounders and satisﬁes the exclusion restriction. A
way of testing whether a proposed IV is both independent of measured confounders and satisﬁes the exclusion
restriction is to ﬁnd a subpopulation for whom the link between the IV and treatment received is thought to be
broken and then test whether the IV is associated with the outcome in this subpopulation. The only way in which
the IV could be associated with the outcome in such a subpopulation is if the IV was associated with unmeasured
confounders or directly affected the outcome through a pathway other than treatment received. Figure 2 shows an
example. study the effect of children in Africa getting malaria on their becoming stunted (having a height
that is two standard deviations below the expected height for the child’s age) and consider the sickle cell trait
as a possible IV. The sickle cell trait is that a person inherits a copy of the hemoglobin variant HbS from one
parent and normal hemoglobin from the other. While inheriting two copies of HbS results in sickle cell disease and
substantially shortened life expectancy, inheriting only one copy (the sickle cell trait) is protective against malaria
and is thought to have little detrimental effect on health . To test whether the sickle cell trait indeed does
not affect stunting in ways other than reducing malaria and is not associated with unmeasured confounders, 
considered whether the sickle cell trait is associated with stunting among African-American children; the sickle
cell trait has high prevalence among African-Americans but does not affect rates of malaria because malaria is not
present in the United States. and found no evidence that sickle cell trait is associated with growth and
development in African-American children. This absence of association supports that the dashed lines in Figure
2 are indeed absent, which would mean that the proposed IV of the sickle cell trait does indeed satisfy the core
IV assumptions (IV-A3) of being independent of unmeasured confounders and (IV-A4) of affecting outcomes only
through treatment received. Although this test supports that the sickle cell trait is a valid IV, the test does not have
power to detect certain ways in which the IV could be invalid, e.g., the sickle cell trait might be associated with an
unmeasured genetic variant that interacts with environment in such such a way that the unmeasured genetic variant
only affects height in African children but not African-American children.
A related way of testing whether a proposed IV is both independent of unmeasured confounders and satisﬁes the
exclusion restriction is to ﬁnd a “treatment- unaffected outcome” that the treatment is thought not to affect and test
whether the IV is associated with the treatment-unaffected outcome after controlling for measured confounders.
Because the treatment does not affect the treatment-unaffected outcome, if the IV is associated with the outcome
after controlling for measured confounders, this suggests that the IV might either be associated with unmeasured
confounders or violate the exclusion restriction. Figure 3 explains the motivation behind the test and under what
situations does the test have power to detect that the proposed IV is invalid. Let Y 2 denote the treatment unaffected
outcome and Y the outcome of interest. There are four ways in which the IV could be associated with the
treatment unaffected outcome Y 2: (i) the IV could be associated with unmeasured confounders for Y 2 that are
also unmeasured confounders for the outcome of interest Y (common unmeasured confounders); (ii) the IV could
have a direct effect on Y 2 through a pathway that also results in a direct effect on Y (common pathway of direct
effect); (iii) the IV could be associated with unmeasured confounders for Y 2 that are not unmeasured confounders
for Y (Y 2 speciﬁc unmeasured confounders); (iv) the IV could have a direct effect on Y 2 through a pathway
that is speciﬁc to Y 2 and does not result in a direct effect on Y . For cases (i) and (ii), an association between
the proposed IV Z and the treatment unaffected outcome Y 2 implies that the IV is invalid. For cases (iii) and
(iv), an association between the proposed IV and the treatment unaffected outcome does not imply that the IV is
invalid. In order for the test using a treatment-unaffected outcome to have high power to detect a proposed IV as
being invalid, the unmeasured confounder that the invalid proposed IV is related to must also be strongly related to
Figure 2. Causal diagrams for the effect of the sickle cell trait (the IV) and malaria episodes (the treatment) on stunting (the outcome) in African children and
African-American children. If the sickle cell trait is a valid IV, then the dashed lines should be absent and the sickle cell trait will have no effect on stunting among
African-American children.
the treatment-unaffected outcome or the proposed IV must have a strong direct effect on the treatment-unaffected
outcome . For example, in Figure 3, the test has no power if the proposed IV is invalid, but only related to Y
speciﬁc unmeasured confounders or only has a direct effect through a Y speciﬁc pathway. use a treatmentunaffected outcome to test the validity of a proposed IV in a study of the effect of C-section vs. normal delivery
for babies born between 23-24 weeks on mortality using hospital C-section rate (on babies born at any age) as
a proposed IV. C-section is thought not to affect mortality for babies who are not very premature, e.g., babies
born between 30-34 weeks. To test the validity of the proposed hospital C-section rate IV, used mortality for
babies born between 30-34 weeks as a treatment-unaffected outcome and tested whether hospital C-section rate
was associated with mortality for babies born between 30-34 weeks.
Newcomers to IV methods often think that the validity of the IV can be tested by regressing the outcome on
treatment received, the IV and measured confounders, and testing whether the coefﬁcient on the IV is signiﬁcant.
However, this is not a valid test as even if the IV assumptions hold, the coefﬁcient on the IV would typically be
nonzero. One way to see this is that if there are no measured confounders, the test amounts to testing whether (i)
E[Y |Z = 1, D = 1] −E[Y |Z = 0, D = 1] = 0 and (ii) E[Y |Z = 1, D = 0] −E[Y |Z = 0, D = 0] = 0. These are
the differences between (i) the average potential outcome of the group of always-takers and compliers together
when these subjects are encouraged to receive treatment and receive treatment vs. those of always-takers alone
when they are not encouraged to receive treatment but do receive treatment and (ii) the average potential outcome
of never-takers when encouraged to receive treatment but do not receive treatment vs. those of the group of nevertakers and compliers when they are not encouraged to receive treatment and do not receive treatment. If the
IV assumptions (IV-A1)-(IV-A5) hold, then (i) is equal to zero if and only if the average potential outcome of
compliers and always-takers are the same when both groups receive treatment and (ii) is equal to zero if and only
Figure 3. Causal diagram explaining the motivation behind the treatment-unaffected outcome test for the validity of an IV. The IV is Z, the treatment is D, the outcome
of interest is Y and the treatment unaffected outcome is Y 2.
Common Unmeasured
Confounders
Pathway of
Direct Effect
Y2 Specific
Pathway of
Direct Effect
Y Specific
Pathway of
Y2 Specific
Unmeasured
Confounders
Y Specific
Unmeasured
Confounders
if the average potential outcomes of compliers and never-takers are the same when both groups do not receive
treatment. Typically, the average potential outcome of compliers and always-takers (compliers and never-takers)
will not be the same when both groups receive (do not receive) treatment even if the IV assumptions hold.
6.2. Sensitivity Analysis
A sensitivity analysis seeks to quantify how sensitive conclusions from an IV analysis are to plausible violations
of key assumptions. Sensitivity analysis methods for IV analyses have been developed by 
among others. Here we will present approaches to sensitivity analysis for violations of IV Assumptions (IV-A3)-
6.2.1. Sensitivity Analysis for Violations of the IV Independent of Unmeasured Confounders Assumption.
Assume that the concern is that the IV may be related to an unmeasured confounder U which has mean 0
and variance 1 and is independent of the measured confounders X (U can always be taken to be the residual of
the unmeasured confounder given the measured confounders to make this assumption plausible). Consider the
following model:
i = α + βd + γT Xi + δUi + ei
Ui = ρ + ηZi + vi
E(vi|Xi, Zi) = 0, E(ei|Xi, Zi) = 0.
Note that since Z is binary, we can always write Ui = ρ + ηZi + vi, E(vi|Zi) = 0, but the condition
E(vi|Xi, Zi) = 0 in model (13) requires an additional assumption such as that the relationship between Z and
the unmeasured confounder U is the same across strata of X; this assumption could be relaxed by allowing η to
depend on X at the cost of making the sensitivity parameters harder to interpret. The parameter β in (13) is the
causal effect of increasing D by one unit. The sensitivity parameters are δ, the effect of a one standard deviation
increase in the unmeasured confounder on the mean of the potential outcome under no treatment, and η, how much
higher the mean of the unmeasured confounder Ui is in standard deviation units for Zi = 1 vs. Zi = 0. Model (13)
says that Zi would be a valid IV if both the measured confounders Xi and the unmeasured confounder Ui were
controlled for. Under model (13), the following holds:
Yi = α + βDi + γT Xi + δUi + ei
Yi −δηZi = α + δρ + βDi + γT Xi + ei + δvi
E(vi|Xi, Zi) = 0, E(ei|Xi, Zi) = 0.
Consequently, a consistent estimate of and inferences for β can be obtained by carrying out a two stage least squares
analysis with Yi −δηZi as the outcome variable, Di as the treatment variable, Xi as the measured confounders and
Zi as the IV. Table 10 shows a sensitivity analysis for the NICU study. If there was an unmeasured confounder U
that decreased the death rate in low level NICUs by 1 death per 1000 deliveries for a one standard deviation increase
in U and was 0.5 standard deviations higher on average in subjects with Z = 1 vs. Z = 0 (Sensitivity Parameter
Vector II in Table 10), then there would still be strong evidence that high level NICUs reduce mortality substantially
(95% CI: 1.0 to 8.3 deaths prevented per 1000 deliveries). However, if instead the unmeasured confounder U had
a stronger effect on the death rate, decreasing the death rate by 5 per 1000 deliveries for a one standard deviation
increase in U, and was 0.5 standard deviations higher in subjects with Z = 1 vs. Z = 0 (Sensitivity Parameter
Vector III in Table 10), then there would no longer be strong evidence that high level NICUs reduce mortality
substantially (95% CI: 3.3 deaths prevented to 4.0 deaths caused by high level NICUs per 1000 deliveries). It
can be useful to calibrate the effect of a potential unmeasured confounder U to that of a measured confounder.
For example, an increase in gestational age from 30 to 33 weeks, which is a one standard deviation increase in
gestational age, is associated with a reduction in the death rate of 22 per 1000 deliveries and the mean gestational
age is 0.093 standard deviations smaller among near (Z = 1) vs. far (Z = 0) babies. For a comparable U that
reduced the death rate by 22 per 1000 deliveries for a one standard deviation increase in U and was 0.093 standard
deviations smaller in babies with Z = 1 vs. Z = 0 (Sensitivity Parameter Vector VI in Table 10), there would still
be strong evidence that high level NICUs reduce mortality substantially (95% CI: 6.8 to 15.2 deaths prevented per
1000 deliveries).
6.2.2. Sensitivity Analysis for Violation of the Exclusion Restriction Assumption.
A sensitivity analysis for violations of the exclusion restriction can be carried out in a similar manner as above.
For example, for the NICU study, a way in which the exclusion restriction could be violated is that travel time
to the hospital could have a direct effect on the outcome. This would occur when it is important that the mother
Table 10. Estimates and 95% conﬁdence intervals for the risk difference in mortality per 1000 premature births
in high level NICUs vs. low level NICUs (i.e., 1000β) for different values of the sensitivity parameters in (13).
The sensitivity parameters are 1000δ, the effect of a one standard deviation increase in the unmeasured confounder
on the number of deaths per 1000 premature babies if all babies delivered in low level NICUs and η, how much
higher the mean of the unmeasured confounder Ui is in standard deviations for babies who live near to the high
level NICU, Zi = 1, vs. those who live far, Zi = 0.
Sensitivity Parameter Vector #
Risk Difference (
95% CI for Risk Difference
(-9.6, -2.2)
(-8.3, -1.0)
(-3.3, 4.0)
(-11.0 -3.3)
(-16.5, -7.7)
(-15.2, -6.8)
reaches the hospital very quickly such as during an umbilical cord prolapse. Such need for reaching the hospital
very quickly is relatively uncommon but does occasionally occur in perinatal care . A model for this direct effect
= α + βd + γT Xi + λ(1 −z)d + ei
E(ei|Xi, Zi) = 0.
Model (14) assumes that babies who deliver at a low level NICU never have to travel far, but babies who deliver at
a high level NICU might have to travel far and λ is the effect of having to travel far on the death rate. Under model
(14), a consistent estimate of and inferences for β can be obtained by carrying out a two stage least squares analysis
with Yi −λ(1 −Zi)Di as the outcome variable, Di as the treatment variable, Xi as the measured confounders and
Zi as the IV. For the NICU study, if λ = .001 so that having to travel far to a high level NICU increases the death
rate by 1 per 1000 deliveries, then there is still strong evidence that high level NICUs prevent deaths; we estimate
that high level NICUs prevent 5.1 deaths per 1000 deliveries with a 95% conﬁdence interval of preventing 1.5 to
8.7 deaths per 1000 deliveries. If λ = .005 so that having to travel far to a high level NICU increases the death rate
by 5 per 1000 deliveries, then there is no longer strong evidence that high level NICUs prevent deaths; we estimate
that high level NICUs prevent 1.9 deaths per 1000 deliveries but the upper end of the 95% conﬁdence interval is
that high level NICUs cause 1.9 extra deaths per 1000 deliveries. However, having to travel far to a high level NICU
increasing the death rate by 5 per 1000 deliveries would be a large direct effect given that the overall death rate is
only 18.5 per 1000 deliveries.
When a proposed IV Z is thought to be independent of unmeasured confounders but there is concern that Z
might have a direct effect on the outcome, proposed an extended instrumental variables strategy for obtaining
an unbiased estimate of the causal effect of treatment. The strategy involves using Z × W as an instrumental
variable, where W is a covariate, and the required assumptions are that the covariate W interacts with Z in affecting
treatment but the direct effect of Z does not depend on W.
6.2.3. Sensitivity Analysis for Violation of the Monotonicity Assumption.
Suppose that (IV-A1)-(IV-A4) hold but (IV-A5), the monotonicity assumption, is violated. Then, the 2SLS
estimate (4) converges to the CACE plus a bias term :
P(C = co) −P(C = de){E[Y 1 −Y 0|C = de] −E[Y 1 −Y 0|C = co]}
(this can be proved by considering the effect of violations of monotonicity in the derivation of (2)). The bias due
to violations of monotonicity is composed of two factors. The ﬁrst factor, −
P (C=co)−P (C=de) is related to the
proportion of deﬁers and is equal to zero under the monotonicity assumption. The smaller the proportion of deﬁers,
the smaller the bias will be from violations of the monotonicity assumption. However, if the IV is weak in the
sense that the average effect of the IV Z on D is small, then even a few deﬁers could generate a large bias; the
stronger the IV, the less sensitive the IV estimate is to violations of the monotonicity assumption . The second
factor, E[Y 1 −Y 0|C = de] −E[Y 1 −Y 0|C = co], is the difference in the average treatment effect between deﬁers
and compliers. If the average treatment effect is identical for deﬁers and compliers, violations of the monotonicity
assumption generate no bias. The less variation there is in the average treatment effect among deﬁers and compliers,
the smaller the bias from violations of the monotonicity assumption.
7. Weak Instruments
The strength of an IV refers to how strongly the IV is associated with the treatment after controlling for the
measured confounders X. An IV is weak if this association is weak. When the IV is encouragement (vs. no such
encouragement) to accept a treatment, the IV is weak if the encouragement only has a slight impact on acceptance of
the treatment. The strength of the IV can be measured by the proportion of compliers. The proportion of compliers
can be estimated by
ˆP(D = 1|Z = 1, X = Xi) −ˆP(D = 1|Z = 0, X = Xi).
Another measure of the strength of the IV is the partial r2 when adding the IV to the ﬁrst stage model for the
treatment after already including the measured confounders X .
Studies that use weak IVs face three problems:
1. High Variance. The IV method is estimating the complier average causal effect (CACE) and the only subjects
that are contributing information about the CACE are the compliers. Thus, the weaker the IV is (i.e., the
smaller the proportion of compliers), the larger is the variance of the IV estimate. One might think that for a
sample of size N, the variance of the IV estimate would be equivalent to the variance from having a sample
of N × P(C = co) known compliers. However, the situation is actually worse because additional variability
is contributed from the always-takers and never-takers having different sample means in the encouraged and
unencouraged groups, even though the population means are the same. For example, suppose that the nevertakers and compliers under Z = 0 have the same population mean, the always-takers and compliers under
Z = 1 have the same population mean and all groups have the same population variance, i.e.,
E(Y |C = nt) = E(Y |C = co, Z = 0), E(Y |C = at) = E(Y |C = co, Z = 1),
V ar(Y |C = nt) = V ar(Y |C = co, Z = 0) = V ar(Y |C = co, Z = 1) = V ar(Y |C = at)
Then, the asymptotic variance of the two stage least squares estimator of the CACE is
CACE2SLS −CACE)} →
V ar(Y |C = co, Z)
P(C = co)2P(Z = 1)P(Z = 0),
 . The asymptotic variance for the treatment effect estimate from a sample of N known compliers, i.e.,
CACEknown complier sample = ˆE(Y |Z = 1) −ˆE(Y |Z = 0), is
CACEknown complier sample −CACE)} →V ar(Y |C = co, Z)
P(Z = 1)P(Z = 0).
Therefore, for a sample of size N, under assumption (17), the variance of the IV estimate is equivalent to
the variance from having a sample of NP(C = co)2 known compliers. For example, for a sample size of
10,000 with 20% compliers, the variance of the IV estimate is equivalent to that from a sample of 400 known
compliers as could be obtained from a randomized trial of size 400 with perfect compliance. Thus, weak IVs
can drastically reduce the effective sample size, resulting in high variance and potentially low power.
For settings in which assumption (17) does not apply, it is still generally true that the variance of the IV estimate
from a sample of size N is more than the variance from having a sample of N × P(C = co) known compliers
due to the extra variability contributed from the always-takers and never-takers (this follows from ,
Theorem 3). If V ar(Y |C = nt) > V ar(Y |C = co, Z = 0) and V ar(Y |C = at) > V ar(Y |C = co, Z = 1),
then the variance of the IV estimate is greater than that from having a sample of NP(C = co)2 known
compliers. See Section 8 for discussion of power and sample size calculations for IV studies.
2. Misleading inferences from two stage least squares. When the IV is weak enough, conﬁdence intervals formed
using the asymptotic distribution for two stage least squares may be misleading even when the IV is perfectly
valid . When the IV is weak, the two-stage least squares estimate can have substantial ﬁnite sample
bias towards the ordinary least squares estimate and the asymptotic variance understates the actual variance.
To see the source of the ﬁnite sample bias, consider using a randomly generated number for each subject
as an IV; the random number should provide no useful information about the treatment effect because it is
unrelated to the treatment. Although the random number is unrelated to the unmeasured confounding variables
in the population, it will have some chance association with the unmeasured confounders in a sample and
thus, some confounding will get transferred to the predicted value of the treatment. This will result in some
unmeasured confounding getting transferred to the second stage estimate of the treatment effect, resulting in
bias . studied what strength of IV is needed to ensure that two-stage least squares provides
reliable inferences. They suggested looking at the ﬁrst stage partial F statistic for testing that the coefﬁcient on
the IV(s) is zero (where the ﬁrst stage is the regression of treatment on IVs and measured confounders). For one
IV, if this ﬁrst stage partial F statistic is less than about 10, the two stage least squares inferences are misleading
in the sense that the Type I error rate of a nominal 0.05 level test is actually greater than 0.15. If more than one
IV is used, then the ﬁrst stage partial F statistic needs to be larger to avoid misleading inferences, greater than
12 for two IVs, greater than 16 for ﬁve IVs and greater than 21 for ten IVs.
A number of methods have been developed that provide accurate inferences when the IV is weak. One approach
is to use the Anderson-Rubin test statistic to test H0 : CACE = β0 by testing whether the coefﬁcient of Z is 0
in the linear regression of Y −β0D on Z and X using an F test . If there is a constant treatment effect (i.e.,
i is the same for all i), E(Y 0
i |X) is linear in X and Y 0
i |X) is homoskedastic and normally
distributed, then this is an exact test regardless of the strength of the IV. A related permutation inference
method that is less reliant on assumptions is developed in and illustrated in . A conditional likelihood
ratio method is developed in , where the approach involves considering the conditional distribution of the
likelihood ratio statistic, conditioning on the value of nuisance parameters. This conditional likelihood method
and the Anderson-Rubin test are implemented in a Stata program CLRv2. The R package ivpack, that is is
discussed in Section 14, implements the Anderson-Rubin test using the function anderson.rubin.ci.
3. Highly sensitive to bias from unmeasured confounders. Recall formula (11) for the bias in the IV estimator
when the proposed IV is associated with an unmeasured confounder U. The numerator measures the
association between the IV and the unmeasured confounder (multiplied by how much the unmeasured
confounder affects the outcome). The denominator is the proportion of compliers and reﬂects the strength of
the IV. Thus, when the IV is weak (i.e., the proportion of compliers is small), the effect of the IV being invalid
from being associated with an unmeasured confounder is greatly exacerbated and even a minor association
between the IV and an unmeasured confounder can lead to substantial bias. .
In summary, when the IV is weak, the IV estimate may have high variance and if it is weak enough (i.e., partial
ﬁrst stage F statistic less than 10), it is important to use inference methods other than two stage least squares to
provide accurate inferences. These inference methods may inform us that the conﬁdence interval for the treatment
effect is very wide, but it is possible that even when the IV is weak, if the treatment effect is large enough and the
sample size is big enough, there may still be a statistically signiﬁcant treatment effect assuming the IV is valid. The
third problem with weak IVs is that they are very sensitive to bias from being slightly invalid, i.e., being slightly
correlated with unmeasured confounders. This problem does not go away with a larger sample size. A slightly
biased but strong IV may be preferable to a less biased but weak IV .
8. Power and Sample Size Calculations for IV studies
Power calculations are an important part of designing a study. As discussed in Section 7, under (17), the variance
of the 2SLS estimator is (18) and the sample size needed for an IV study is approximately equal to that needed for
a conventional observational study to detect the same magnitude of effect divided by the proportion of compliers
squared. More generally, when (17) does not hold, power and sample size formulas for an IV study to be analyzed
by 2SLS are given by . When the IV might be weak, we recommend computing the power under an
analysis that is appropriate for weak IVs such as the Anderson-Rubin test. provide a formula for computing
the power for the Anderson-Rubin test and the function power.iv in the R package ivpack that is discussed in
Section 14 computes this power.
9. Binary, Survival, Multinomial and Distributional Outcomes
Most of the early development of instrumental variable methods in econometrics was for continuous, uncensored
outcomes. In this section, we consider special issues that arise in applying IV methods to other types of outcomes
such as binary, survival, multinomial and distributional outcomes.
9.1. Binary Outcomes
For binary outcomes without measured confounders, two stage least squares estimates the risk difference for
compliers. When there are measured confounders, two stage least squares (2SLS) still seeks to estimate the risk
difference for compliers but the second stage model that 2SLS uses, E(Yi| ˆDi, Xi) = α + β ˆDi + γT Xi, does not
constrain the probability of the binary outcome Y to be between 0 and 1. argues that, in spite of not accounting
for the constraints imposed by a binary outcome, the 2SLS estimate of β is still often close to methods such as
 that account for the constraints and that “2SLS approximates the causal relation of interest.” An approach
to estimating the risk difference for binary outcomes that respects the nature of binary outcomes is the matching
approach of Baiocchi et al. . In this approach, units with Z = 1 are matched to units with Z = 0 with similar
values of measured confounders and permutation inference is used to make inferences about the effect ratio. We
applied this approach to the NICU study in and estimated that high level NICUs save 7.8 babies per 1000
deliveries, fairly similar to the two stage least squares estimate in Table 4.
Another approach for binary outcomes is to specify a functional form for E(Y d
i |Xi, Ci) that is constrained
between 0 and 1, such as a logistic model
logit[E(Y 1
i |Xi), Ci = at] = αat + γT
logit[E(Y 0
i |Xi), Ci = nt] = αnt + γT
logit[E(Y d
i |Xi), Ci = co] = αco + βd + γT
The causal parameter of interest in (19) that we can hope to identify with an IV is β, the log odds ratio for the
effect of treatment for compliers; this is an odds ratio analogue of the CACE. In analogy with two stage least
squares, the two-stage predictor substitution (2SPS) approach to estimating β is to ﬁt a logistic regression of the
treatment D on the IV Z and the covariates Xi, obtaining ˆD and then ﬁt a logistic regression of Y on ˆD and
X. However, because of the noncollapsibility of logistic regression, 2SPS is generally asymptotically biased. See
 for an analytical expression for this bias and simulation studies. Another approach to estimating β in (19) is
two-stage residual inclusion (2SRI) . The ﬁrst stage of 2SRI is the same as that of 2SPS (i.e., ﬁt a logistic
regression of D on Z and X), but in 2SRI, the second stage is to ﬁt a logistic regression of Y on D, X and the
residual from the ﬁrst stage regression; the coefﬁcient on D in the second stage regression is the estimate of β. 2SRI
is asymptotically biased for β in (19) except when there is no unmeasured confounding . There are several
approaches that provide consistent estimates of model (19) under certain additional assumptions. develops a
parametric approach; and develop semiparametric approaches. Relatedly, develops a semiparametric
approach to estimating the parameter
log Odds(Y d=1|X, D = 1)
Odds(Y d=0|X, D = 1),
which is the log odds ratio for the effect of treatment among those who receive treatment. The quantity (20) is
similar to β in (19) but expresses the effect of treatment for those who receive treatment instead of the compliers.
Under IV assumptions (IV-A1)-(IV-A5), to consistently estimate (20), the method in requires the assumption
that the effect of treatment is the same for always-takers and compliers (see (9) in ).
Another approach for binary outcomes is the bivariate probit model that speciﬁes a probit functional form for
i |Xi) and assumes an explicit functional form of the bivariate distribution of the error term from the model
relating treatment to the covariates and IV and the error term from the outcome model . This model
leans on the parametric assumptions of the error terms, leaving the conclusions sensitive to violations of these
assumptions. Additionally, these models suffer from difﬁculty in maximizing the likelihood functions and trouble
with calculating appropriate standard errors .
For good general reviews of IV estimation of causal effects in the binary outcome case, see .
9.2. Multinomial Outcomes
 considered IV estimation for multinomial outcomes (i.e., nominal or ordinal outcomes). For ordinal
outcomes, one approach is to choose coding scores Wj for the categories j = 1, . . . , J; then the CACE is
i |Ci = co)
(Wj × tj) −
(Wj × tj) −1
(Wj × qj) −(1 −πc)
(Wj × sj)]
where tj, vj and sj are the probabilities for the jth category for compliers under treatment and control, and
never-takers respectively; and qj is the probability for observed group Zi = 0, Di = 0 for the jth category. The
coding score needs to be chosen. Among the options are equally spaced scores (or linear transformations of them),
midranks and ridit scores. A sensitivity analysis can be performed with different choices of scores to see how the
results differ. Another approach for ordinal outcomes is to use a measure of stochastic superiority of treatment over
control for compliers:
i |Ci = complier) + 1
i |Ci = complier)
tj+kvj + 1
tj+k[qj −(1 −πc)sj
tj[qj −(1 −πc)sj
SSC = 0.5 indicates no causal effect and SSC > 0.5 indicates beneﬁcial effect of the treatment for compliers
if a higher value of the outcome is a better result. Compared to the CACE, SSC is easy to interpret and avoids
the problem of choosing scores Wj, but without use of weighting scores, it may not describe the strength of the
effect well when some speciﬁc categories are known to be more important than other categories in measuring the
treatment effect.
For nominal outcomes, it is difﬁcult to get a summary measure of the causal effect such as the CACE or SSC for
ordinal outcomes. Instead, the treatment effect on the entire outcome distributions of compliers with and without
treatment can be evaluated, i.e., compare tj to vj , j = 1, ..., J and test the equality of tj and vj , j = 1, ..., J. 
estimated those causal effects with the likelihood method and proposed a bootstrap/double bootstrap version of
a likelihood ratio test for the inference when the true values of parameters are on the boundary of the parameter
space under the null.
9.3. Survival Outcomes
For survival outcomes, a common complication is censoring. For example, one type of censoring is
administrative censoring, which means that a subject survived until the end of the time window of the study.
For estimating the effect of a treatment on a survival outcome using an IV, considered a structural accelerated
failure time model and developed semiparametric estimators for this model. provided a good discussion
of their approach and comparisons with other survival analysis methods. and considered a structural
proportional hazards model in which the hazard of the potential failure time under treatment for a certain group of
subjects is proportional to the hazard of the potential failure time under control for these same subjects. Both the
structural accelerated failure time model and the structural proportional hazards model are semiparametric models,
where the effect of the treatment on the distribution of failure times is modeled parametrically.
Baker extended the models and assumptions for discrete-time survival data and derived closed form
expressions for estimating the difference in the hazards at a speciﬁc time between compliers under treatment and
control based on maximum likelihood. ’s estimator is analogous to the standard IV estimator for a survival
outcome. discussed this standard IV approach and parametric maximum likelihood methods for the difference
in survival at a speciﬁc time between compliers under treatment and control.
Here, the standard IV approach of will be reviewed. Let Sc1(V ), Sc0(V ), Sat(V ) and Snt(V ) be the
potential survival functions at time V of compliers in the treatment and control groups and of always-takers and
never-takers respectively, Sz(V ) be the survival probabilities at time V for the group with assignment Z = z, and
Szd(V ) be the survival probabilities at time V for the group with assignment Z = z and treatment received D = d.
By Table 3 and the monotonicity assumption (IV-A5) that rules out deﬁers, the following holds:
S1(V ) = πcSc1(V ) + πatSat(V ) + πntSnt(V ),
S0(V ) = πcSc0(V ) + πatSat(V ) + πntSnt(V ),
Similar to the standard IV estimator for the CACE (4), the standard IV estimator for the compliers difference in
survival probabilities at time V under treatment vs. control is the following, where ˆSz(V ) is the Kaplan-Meier
estimator of the survival probability at time V for the group with assignment Z = z,
ˆSc1(V ) −ˆSc0(V ) =
ˆS1(V ) −ˆS0(V )
ˆE(D|Z = 1) −ˆE(D|Z = 0)
In addition to (IV-A1)-(IV-A5), an additional assumptions is needed to ensure that the estimator (22) is consistent
for the compliers difference in survival probabilities at time V :
Independence assumption of failure times and censoring times: The distributions of potential failure times T
and censoring times C are independent of each other. Type I censoring (i.e., censoring times are the same for all
subjects) and random censoring are two special cases.
Although the standard IV estimator (22) is very useful, it may give negative estimates for hazards and be
inefﬁcient because it does not make full use of the mixture structure implied by the latent compliance model.
When the survival functions follow some parametric distributions, used the EM algorithm to obtain the
MLE on the difference in survival probabilities for compliers. However, the MLEs could be biased when the
parametric assumptions are not valid. To address this concern, developed a nonparametric estimator based on
empirical likelihood that makes use of the mixture structure to gain efﬁciency over the standard IV method while
not depending on parametric assumptions to be consistent.
9.4. Effect of treatment on distribution of outcomes
As discussed in previous sections, a large literature on methods of analysis for treatment effects focuses on
estimating the effect of treatment on average outcomes, e.g., the CACE . However, in addition to the
average effect, knowledge of the causal effect of a treatment on the outcome distribution and its general functions
can often provide additional insights into the impact of the treatment and therefore be of signiﬁcant interest in
many situations . For example, in a study of the effect of school subsidized meal programs on children’s
weight, both low weight and high weight are adverse outcomes; therefore, knowing the effect of the program on
the entire distribution of outcomes rather than just average weight is important for understanding the impact of
the program. For an individual patient deciding which treatment to take, the patient must weigh the effects of the
possible treatments on the distribution of outcomes, the costs of the treatments and the potential side effects of
the treatments . Therefore, making the best decision requires information on the treatment’s effect on the
entire distribution of outcomes rather than just the average effect because a patient’s utility over outcomes may be
nonlinear over the outcome scale. , . , and provide examples in HIV care, neonatal care
and cancer care respectively.
For distributional treatment effects on nondegenerate outcome variables with bounded support, without any
parametric assumption, used the standard IV approach to estimate the counterfactual cumulative distribution
functions (cdfs) of the outcome of compliers with and without the treatment:
ˆHc1(y)SIV
ˆE{1(Yi ≤y)Di|Zi = 1} −ˆE{1(Yi ≤y)Di|Zi = 0}
ˆE(Di|Zi = 1) −ˆE(Di|Zi = 0)
ˆHc0(y)SIV
ˆE{1(Yi ≤y)(1 −Di)|Zi = 1} −ˆE{1(Yi ≤y)(1 −Di)|Zi = 0}
ˆE{(1 −Di)|Zi = 1} −ˆE{(1 −Di)|Zi = 0}
However, and pointed out that these standard IV estimates of the potential cdfs for compliers may not
be nondecreasing functions as cdfs should be. Furthermore, as discussed in Section 4.2, the standard IV approach
does not make full use of the mixture structure implied by the latent compliance class model (see Table 3) and
hence could be inefﬁcient. Instead, proposed a normal approximation and two multinomial approximations
to the outcome distributions. However, the estimator based on a normal approximation could be biased when the
outcomes are not normal, and for the approach based on multinomial approximations, a systematic approach for
choosing the multinomial approximations is needed. developed a semiparametric instrumental variable method
based on the empirical likelihood approach. Their approach makes full use of the mixture structure implied by the
latent compliance class model without parametric assumptions on the outcome distributions, takes into account the
nondecreasing property of cdfs and can be easily computed from the data. Their method can be applied to general
outcomes and general functions of outcome distributions. showed that their estimator has good properties and
is substantially more efﬁcient than the standard IV estimator (23).
10. Multi-valued IVs
In some settings, the IV has multiple values or is continuous. For example, in the NICU study example from
Section 1.2, the mother’s excess travel time from the nearest high level NICU compared to the nearest low level
NICU is continuous. Clinicians often ﬁnd it easier to think about the validity of the IV assumptions and the
interpretation of the IV estimate in terms of a binary IV. For this reason, we have dichotomized excess travel
time in terms of being less than or equal to 10 minutes or greater than 10 minutes. We could instead use the excess
travel time itself as the IV and estimate the effect of a high level NICU by two stage least squares, i.e., regress
high level NICU on excess travel time and the measured covariates to get predicted high level NICU attendance
and then regress death on predicted high level NICU attendance and the measured covariates. This results in an
estimate that high level NICUs save 7.6 babies per 1000 deliveries with a 95% conﬁdence interval of saving 4.3 to
11.0 babies per 1000 deliveries, a similar inference to that from Table 4 in which we dichotomized the IV.
Theorem 2 of shows that both the dichotomized IV estimate and the continuous IV estimate converge
to weighted averages of treatment effects, where the more “compliant” subjects get greater weight. Speciﬁcally,
suppose Z is discrete but has multiple-values z0, . . . , zK such that an extended monotonicity assumption holds:
i for allz ≥z′,
i.e., a higher level of the IV always leads to at least as high a level of the treatment. For the NICU study example,
we round excess travel time to the nearest integer so that the range of excess travel times is −15 to 120 and let the
IV Z be 120-excess travel time so that z0 = 0, z1 = 1 . . . , z136 = 135 and high values of a Z make a baby more
likely to be delivered at a high level NICU. Now, consider using g(Z) as an IV where g is an increasing function,
e.g., for dichotomizing the IV at zj, g(z) = 1 if Z ≥zj, g(z) = 0 if Z < zj or for treating Z as a continuous IV,
g(z) = z. For simplicity, suppose there are no covariates X. Then, the two stage least squares estimate using the
Figure 4. The two stage least squares estimate for the NICU study using an IV is a weighted average of the average causal effects for subjects who are “compliers at
level z” (subjects who would go to a high level NICU if the excess travel time was at most z but otherwise go to a low level NICU), where the weighting depends on the
coding of the IV. The ﬁgure shows these weights for two IVs, (i) the dichotomized IV of excess travel time ≤10 minutes or excess travel time > 10 minutes and (ii)
the continuous IV of excess travel time.
Excess Travel Time
Dichtomized IV
(excess travel time<=10)
Continuous IV
IV g(Z), i.e.,
Cov(Y, g(Z))/ ˆ
Cov(D, g(Z)) converges to
αzk,zk−1λk,
where αzk,zk−1 is the average causal effect for subjects who are “compliers at zk,” i.e., subjects who would take the
treatment if the IV Z was ≥zk but would not take the treatment if the IV was < zk, and λ1, . . . , λK are nonnegative
weights that add up to 1 where
[P(D = 1|Z = zk) −P(D = 1|Z = zk−1)] ∑K
ℓ=k P(Z = zℓ)[g(zℓ) −E{g(Z)}]
m=1[P(D = 1|Z = zm) −P(D = 1|Z = zm−1)] ∑K
ℓ=m P(Z = zℓ)[g(zℓ) −E{g(Z)}]
 . Figure 4 shows the estimated weights λk for the dichotomized IV of excess travel time ≥10 and the
continuous IV where we used the gam function in R to estimate P(D = 1|Z) nonparametrically and the density
function in R to estimate P(Z = z) nonparametrically. The dichotomized IV and continuous IV have similar
weights but the dichotomized IV puts greater weight on subjects who would change whether or not they would
take the treatment right around 10 minutes of excess travel time.
Multiple values of the IV provides us with the opportunity to identify a richer set of causal effects . Suppose
the IV is continuous and the extended monotonicity assumption (24) holds. The limit of the treatment effect for
subjects who would the take treatment if the IV was equal to z but not take the treatment if the IV was a little
less than z is limϵ→0 E[Y d=1
i = 1, Dz−ϵ
= 0]; refer to this as the marginal treatment effect at z.
Treatment effects of interest can all be expressed as a weighted average of these marginal treatment effects .
Identiﬁcation of the average treatment effect over the whole population requires identiﬁcation of all the marginal
treatment effects. In order for all the marginal treatment effects to be identiﬁed using the IV (and thus the average
treatment effect identiﬁed), it is required that for large values of Z, P(D = 1|Z) approaches 1 and for small values
Figure 5. Scatterplot smooth estimate of P (D = 1|Z) where D = 1 is attending a high level NICU and Z is excess travel time. The estimate was obtained using the
gam function in R. The observed values of excess travel time are shown at the bottom of the plot.
Excess Travel Time
P(High Level NICU|Excess Travel Time)
of Z, P(D = 1|Z) approaches 0 ; shows how to estimate marginal treatment effects and the average
treatment effect when this condition is satisﬁed. For the NICU study, P(D = 1|Z) do not approach 1 or 0 over the
range of excess travel times in the data; see Figure 5.
When the IV is multi-valued, one might want to consider “strengthening the IV” by focusing only on subjects
with high levels of the IV vs. low levels of the IV and removing subjects with middle levels of the IV. showed
that under certain conditions, studies with stronger IVs are less sensitive to bias. developed a method for
strengthening an IV based on near-far matching. In near-far matching, optimal nonbipartite matching is used to
construct pairs that are far apart on their levels of the IV (e.g., excess travel time in the NICU example) but near
on their levels of the measured covariates . Permutation inference or two stage least squares, with dummy
variables for each matched pair included as measured covariates, can be used to estimate the treatment effect using
the constructed matched pairs. Practical aspects of near-far matching are discussed in .
11. Multiple IVs
In some settings, there may be multiple IVs available. For example, used IV methods to estimate the effect
of longer postpartum stays on newborn readmissions. used two IVs, (1) hour of birth and (2) method of
delivery (normal vs. C-section). Hour of birth inﬂuences length of stay because it affects whether a newborn will
spend an extra night in the hospital; for example, found that newborns born in the a.m. have longer lengths
of stay than newborns born in the p.m. Method of delivery inﬂuences length of stay because mothers need more
time to recuperate after a C-section than following a normal delivery, and newborns are rarely discharged before
their mothers. The compliers with respect to each IV are different – the compliers with respect to the hour of birth
IV are newborns who would only stay an extra day if born in the a.m. compared to the p.m. while the compliers
with respect to the method of delivery IV are newborns who would only stay an extra day if delivered by C-section
compared to normal delivery. Each IV identiﬁes the average treatment effect for its group of compliers, so that each
IV is identifying the average treatment effect for a different subgroup.
Two stage least squares can be used to combine the IVs – in the ﬁrst stage, regress D on both Z1 and Z2 (as well
as X) and then use the predicted D as usual in the second stage. Under the assumption of homogeneous treatment
effects (i.e., treatment effects are the same for all subjects or more weakly, average treatment effects are the same
for all the κ + 1 subgroups deﬁned in Section 5.3), for each IV, the complier average causal effect for the compliers
with respect to that IV is the same and equal to the average treatment effect for the whole population, and the two
stage least squares estimate is the optimal way to combine the IVs to estimate this average treatment e ffect under
an additional assumption of constant variance (i.e., the variance of potential outcomes under the control given the
measured covariates X is the same for all X) . When treatment effects are heterogeneous, the complier average
causal effect for the compliers with respect to each IV may be different, and two stage least squares estimates
a weighted average of the complier average causal effects for the different IVs with the complier average causal
effects for the stronger IVs getting greater weight . When there are two or more distinct IVs, it is useful
to report the estimates from the individual IVs in addition to the combined IVs since the IVs are estimating the
average treatment effects for different subgroups (see Section 5.5)
When there are multiple IVs and treatment effects are homogeneous, the overidentifying restrictions test can be
used to test the validity of the IVs . The overidentifying restrictions test tests whether the estimates from
the different IVs are the same. When treatment effects are homogeneous, if the estimates from two different IVs
converge to different limits, this would show that at least one of the IVs is invalid. There are two problems with
using the overidentifying restrictions test to test the validity of IVs. First, if treatment effects are heterogeneous,
then the complier average causal effects for the two IVs may be different even though both IVs are valid; in this
case, the overidentifying restrictions test would falsely indicate that at least one of the IVs is invalid. Second,
even if treatment effects are homogeneous, two IVs A and B may both be biased but in the same way so that the
asymptotic limit of the estimators based on IV A and B respectively are the same; in this case, the overidentifying
restrictions test would give false assurance that the IVs are valid .
12. Multi-valued and Continuously Valued Treatments
The treatment under study may take on multiple or continuous values, for example, the dose of a medication.
Two stage least squares can still be applied. present the following formula that shows that the two stage least
squares estimator converges to a weighted average of the effect of one unit changes in the treatment level. Suppose
the treatment can take on levels 0, 1, . . . , ¯d and that monotonicity holds in the sense that Dz=1
there are no covariates. Then, the two stage least squares estimator converges to
E(Yi|Zi = 1) −E(Yi|Zi = 0)
E(Di|Zi = 1) −E(Di|Zi = 0) =
ωdE[Y d −Y d−1|Dz=1 ≥d > Dz=0],
where ωd =
P (Dz=1≥d>Dz=0)
d=1 P (Dz=1≥d>Dz=0). The numerator of ωd is the proportion of compliers at point d, that is the
proportion of individuals driven by the encouraging level of the IV from a treatment intensity less than d to at least
d. The ωd’s are nonnegative and sum to one. The quantity E[Y d −Y d−1|Dz=1 ≥d > Dz=0] in (25) is the causal
effect of a one unit increase in the treatment from d −1 to d for compliers at point d. (25) shows that the two stage
least squares estimator converges to a weighted average of the causal effects of one unit increases in the treatment
from d −1 to d for compliers at point d, where the points d at which there are more compliers get greater weight.
The weights ωd can be estimated because under the assumption (IV-A5) of monotonicity and (IV-A3) that the IV
is independent of the potential treatment receiveds, we have P(Dz=1 ≥d > Dz=0) = P(Dz=1 ≥d) −P(Dz=0 ≥
d) = P(D ≥d|Z = 1) −P(D ≥d|Z = 0). See for an extension of these formulas to the setting where there
are covariates X that are controlled for.
Researchers often times dichotomize multi-valued or continuous treatments. However, using IV methods with a
dichotomized continuous treatment can lead to an overestimate of the treatment effect. Let β denote the average
causal effect (25) that the two stage least squares estimator for a multi-valued treatment converges to. show
that if this treatment is dichotomized as B = 1 if D ≥l, B = 0 if D < l for some 1 ≤l ≤¯d, then the two stage
least squares estimator using the binary treatment B converges to ϕ× (25) where (25) is the probability limit of the
2SLS estimator using the continuous treatment D and
ϕ = E(D|Z = 1) −E(D|Z = 0)
E(B|Z = 1) −E(B|Z = 0) =
j=1 P(Dz=1 ≥j > Dz=0)
P(Dz=1 ≥l > Dz=0)
The only situation when ϕ = 1 is when the IV has no effect other than to cause people to switch from D = l −1
to D = l. Otherwise, when a multi-valued treatment is incorrectly parameterized as binary, the resulting estimate
tends to be too large relative to the average per-unit effect of the treatment (25). The problem with dichotomizing a
multi-valued treatment is that the IV has a direct effect because the encouraging level of the IV can push a person
to a higher level of treatment even if B would be 1 under both the non-encouraging and encouraging levels of the
IV. Although dichotomizing a continuous treatment results in a biased estimate of the treatment effect (25), the
sign of the treatment effect is still consistently estimated.
If the treatment effect for compliers is linear, i.e., the causal effect of a one unit increase in the treatment from
d −1 to d for compliers at point d is the same for all d, then the two stage least squares estimator estimates this
linear treatment effect. If the treatment effect is nonlinear, then with a binary IV, it is not possible to estimate
anything other than the weighted treatment effect (25). If the IV is continuous, then the IV can be used to form
multiple IVs (e.g., Z, Z2, Z3, etc.) and a nonlinear treatment effect can be estimated . For example, suppose
Y D=d = Y 0 + β1d + β2d2. Then, β1 and β2 can be consistently estimated with a continuous IV Z by using two
least squares where ˆD is estimated by regressing D on Z and Z2, ˆ
D2 is estimated by regressing D2 on Z and
Z2, and β1 and β2 are estimated by regressing Y on ˆD and ˆ
D2. discusses other estimation approaches for
estimating nonlinear treatment effects.
Multi-valued treatments may not be strictly ordered by dose. consider the setting of a treatment with three
levels – control (0) and two active levels A and B, where A and B are not ordered by dose and some subjects may
prefer A to B and some may prefer B to A. develop bounds on causal effects for this setting.
13. Reporting an IV analysis
 and proposes useful reporting standards for an IV analysis to help readers properly interpret and
evaluate the validity of an IV analysis. Here we propose related reporting standards that use the methodologies in
our tutorial.
• Describe theoretical basis for choice of IV. Discuss why the IV is expected to affect the treatment, be
approximately independent of unmeasured confounders and not have a direct effect on the outcome other
than through inﬂuencing the treatment. Section 3 discusses common sources of IVs for health studies and
issues in thinking about their validity. The most compelling IVs often come from settings that can be thought
of as natural experiments, settings in which the assignment of the IV to subjects, though not randomized, seem
to resemble a randomized experiment in that it is haphazard rather than the result of deliberation or considered
judgement .
• Report strength of IV and results from ﬁrst-stage model. The authors should report the ﬁrst stage model relating
the treatment to the IV and the measured confounders, and report measures of the strength of the IV such as
the proportion of compliers and the ﬁrst stage partial F statistic for testing that the coefﬁcient on the IV(s) is
• Report distribution of measured confounders across levels of the IV and treatment. As discussed in Section
6, ideally, an IV should be unrelated to the measured confounders (e.g., characteristics of the patient) as it
would be if it were randomly assigned. To evaluate this, it is useful to construct a table like Table 7. If the
IV is associated with a measured confounder but it can plausibly be argued that the IV is approximately
independent of other confounders after conditioning on a measured confounder, then it is useful to construct
tables like Tables 8 and 9 that condition on the measured confounder. It is also helpful to report the means and
frequencies of the measured confounders across levels of the treatment as in Table 2 and to calculate the bias
ratios as in Tables 7-9. This allows the reader to assess the potential for confounding in the IV relative to the
confounding in the treatment .
• Explore concomitant treatments. As discussed in Section 6, the proposed IV would violate the exclusion
restriction and be invalid if it is associated with concomitant treatments (other than the one under study) which
also inﬂuence the outcome. Such possible violations of the exclusion restriction can be assessed by examining
whether the IV is associated with concomitant treatments.
• Discuss the interpretation of the treatment effect estimated by the IV. The IV method estimates the average
causal effect of the treatment for compliers or, more generally, when compliance status is not deterministic,
a weighted average of causal effects where subgroups in which the instrument has a stronger effect on the
treatment get more weight. To understand what subgroups are getting more weight in the IV estimate, it is
useful to construct a table like Table 6 that shows the relative weight different subgroups are getting in the IV
• Report a sensitivity analysis. The IV assumptions are unlikely to hold perfectly. It is useful to report a
sensitivity analysis like Table 10 to show how sensitive inference are to various violations of the IV assumptions
so that readers can assess how inferences would change under plausible violations of the IV assumptions.
14. Software
Software for implementing IV analyses is available in R, SAS and Stata. Here we illustrate analyzing the NICU
study using the ivpack package, freely downloadable from CRAN, in the freely available software R.
library(ivpack)
# y is the nx1 vector of the outcome (mortality)
# d is the nx1 vector of the treatment (1 if high level NICU, 0 if low level NICU)
# xmat is the nxp matrix of observed covariates (e.g., birthweight, gestational age, etc.)
# z is the IV
# (1 if excess travel time <=10 minutes, 0 if excess travel time greater than 10 minutes)
# Fit first stage model
first.stage.model=lm(d∼z+xmat)
# Calculate Partial F statistic for testing whether instrument has an effect
# in the first stage model
first.stage.model.without.z=lm(d∼xmat)
anova(first.stage.model.without.z,first.stage.model)
Analysis of Variance Table
Model 1: d ∼xmat
Model 2: d ∼z + xmat
RSS Df Sum of Sq
1 192017 40737
2 192016 34964
5772.6 31702 < 2.2e-16 ***
# The partial F statistic is 31702, which is much greater than 10,
# so that IV is strong enough for two stage least squares inference to be reliable.
# Estimate proportion of compliers
first.stage.model.logistic=glm(d∼z+xmat,family=binomial)
newdata.z1=data.frame(z=rep(1,length(z)),xmat);
expected.treatment.zequal1=predict(first.stage.model.logistic,
newdata=newdata.z1,type="response");
newdata.z0=data.frame(z=rep(0,length(z)),xmat)
expected.treatment.zequal0=predict(first.stage.model.logistic,
newdata=newdata.z0,type="response");
proportion.compliers=mean(expected.treatment.zequal1-expected.treatment.zequal0);
proportion.compliers
 0.3953096
# We estimate that 39.53% of the subjects are compliers
# Proportion of compliers that are low birth weight (<1500g), see Table 6
low.birth.weight=bthwght<1500
prop.compliers.low.birth.weight=
mean(low.birth.weight)*(mean(d[z==1&low.birth.weight==1])mean(d[z==0&low.birth.weight==1]))/(mean(d[z==1])-mean(d[z==0]));
prop.compliers.low.birth.weight
 0.02898901
# Bias ratio for low birth weight, see Table 7
bias.ratio.low.birth.weight=
abs(((mean(low.birth.weight[z==1])-mean(low.birth.weight[z==0]))/
(mean(d[z==1])-mean(d[z==0])))/
(mean(low.birth.weight[d==1])-mean(low.birth.weight[d==0])));
bias.ratio.low.birth.weight
 0.5157605
# Two stage least squares analysis
ivmodel=ivreg(y∼d+xmat|z+xmat)
# This summary gives the non-robust standard errors
summary(ivmodel)
Coefficients:
Std. Error t value Pr(>|t|)
(Intercept)
< 2e-16 ***
-5.888e-03
-3.581 0.000342 ***
xmatbthwght
-6.298e-06
< 2e-16 ***
# We estimate that the effect of going to a high level NICU is to
# reduce the mortality rate for compliers by .005888 or 5.9 babies
# per 1000 deliveries
# Standard errors that are robust for heteroskedasticity but not clustering
robust.se(ivmodel)
# Huber-White standard errors that account for clustering due to hospital
# and are also robust to heteroskedasticity
# hospid is an identifier of the hospital the baby was delivered at
cluster.robust.se(ivmodel,hospid)
t test of coefficients:
Std. Error
(Intercept)
5.1830e-01
2.7084e-02
19.1369 < 2.2e-16 ***
-5.8879e-03
1.9021e-03
-3.0955 0.0019653 **
xmatbthwght
-6.2983e-06
1.3268e-06
-4.7471 2.065e-06 ***
# Sensitivity Analysis for IV being associated with unmeasured confounders
# Second row of Table 10
delta=-1/1000
adjusted.y=y-delta*eta*z;
sens.est=ivreg(adjusted.y∼d+xmat|z+xmat)
cluster.robust.se(sens.est,hospid)
t test of coefficients:
Std. Error
(Intercept)
5.1780e-01
2.6995e-02
19.1818 < 2.2e-16 ***
-4.6396e-03
1.8678e-03
-2.4840 0.0129941 *
# Sensitivity Analysis for violation of exclusion restriction
lambda=.001 # having to travel far to a high level NICU increases the
# death rate by 1 per 1000 deliveries
adjusted.y=y-lambda*(1-z)*d
sens.est=ivreg(adjusted.y∼d+xmat|z+xmat)
cluster.robust.se(sens.est,hospid)
t test of coefficients:
Std. Error
(Intercept)
5.1733e-01
2.6922e-02
19.2159 < 2.2e-16 ***
-5.0945e-03
1.8550e-03
-2.7464 0.0060260 **
# Compute the power for an IV study.
# Consider the model Yˆ(d=0)=beta0+u, Yˆd=Yˆ(d=0)+beta1,
D=gamma0+gamma*z+v.
# Power for a study with in which the null hypothesis causal effect is 0,
# the true causal effect is 1, the sample size is 250, the instrument is
# binary with probability .5 (so variance = .25), the standard deviation
# of potential outcome under control is 1, the effect of the instrument
# is to increase the probability of a binary treatment being 1 from .25 to
The correlation between u and v is assumed to be .5.
# significance level for the study will be alpha = .05
# The function sigmav.func computes the SD of v for a binary instrument,
# binary treatment.
sigmav.func(prob.d1.given.z1=.75,prob.d1.given.z0=.25,prob.z1=.5)
# The sigmav.func finds sigmav=.4330127
# Power of the study
power.iv(n=250, lambda=1, gamma=.5,
var.z=.25, sigmau=1, sigmav=.4330127, rho=.5, alpha = 0.05)
 0.8714241
Acknowledgements.
Jing Cheng and Dylan Small were supported by grant RC4MH092722 from the National Institute of Mental
Health. Jing Cheng was also supported by grant NIH/NIDCR U54DE019285 and Dylan Small by grant NSF
SES-1260782. The authors thank Scott Lorch for the use of the data from the NICU study.