Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Representation Learning for NLP, pages 241–251,
Vancouver, Canada, August 3, 2017. c⃝2017 Association for Computational Linguistics
Adversarial Generation of Natural Language
Sandeep Subramanian♠∗Sai Rajeswar♠∗Francis Dutil♠
Christopher Pal ♣♠Aaron Courville♠†
♠MILA, Universit´e de Montr´eal
♣´Ecole Polytechnique de Montr´eal
†CIFAR Fellow
{sandeep.subramanian.1,sai.rajeswar.mudumba,aaron.courville}@umontreal.ca,
 , 
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
have gathered a lot of attention from the
computer vision community, yielding impressive results for image generation. Advances in the adversarial generation of natural language from noise however are not
commensurate with the progress made in
generating images, and still lag far behind likelihood based methods.
paper, we take a step towards generating
natural language with a GAN objective
alone. We introduce a simple baseline that
addresses the discrete output space problem without relying on gradient estimators and show that it is able to achieve
state-of-the-art results on a Chinese poem
generation dataset. We present quantitative results on generating sentences from
context-free and probabilistic context-free
grammars, and qualitative language modeling results. A conditional version is also
described that can generate sequences conditioned on sentence characteristics.
Introduction
Deep neural networks have recently enjoyed some
success at modeling natural language = p(w1) Qn
i=2 P(wi|w1 . . . wi−1).
These models are commonly trained using a technique called teacher forcing where the inputs to the network are ﬁxed
and the model is trained to predict only the next
∗Indicates ﬁrst authors. Ordering determined by coin ﬂip.
item in the sequence given all previous observations. This corresponds to maximum-likelihood
training of these models. However this one-step
ahead prediction during training makes the model
prone to exposure bias .
Exposure bias occurs when
a model is only trained conditioned on groundtruth contexts and is not exposed to its own errors .
An important
consequence to exposure bias is that generated sequences can degenerate as small errors accumulate. Many important problems in NLP such as
machine translation and abstractive summarization are trained via a maximum-likelihood training objective , but require the generation of extended sequences and are evaluated based on sequence-level
metrics such as BLEU and
ROUGE .
One possible direction towards incorporating a
sequence-level training objective is to use Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) . While GANs have yielded impressive results for modeling images , advances in their
use for natural language generation has lagged behind. Some progress has been made recently in
incorporating a GAN objective in sequence modeling problems including natural language generation.
Lamb et al. use an adversarial
criterion to match the hidden state dynamics of
a teacher forced recurrent neural network (RNN)
and one that samples from its own output distribution across multiple time steps. Unlike the approach in Lamb et al. , sequence GANs and maximum-likelihood augmented
GANs use an adversarial loss
at outputs of an RNN. Using a GAN at the outputs of an RNN however isn’t trivial since sampling from these outputs to feed to the discrimi-
nator is a non-differentiable operation. As a result gradients cannot propagate to the generator
from the discriminator. Yu et al. use policy
gradient to estimate the generator’s gradient and
 present an importance sampling
based technique. Other alternatives include RE-
INFORCE , the use of a Gumbel
softmax and the straighthrough
estimator among others.
In this work, we address the discrete output
space problem by simply forcing the discriminator
to operate on continuous valued output distributions. The discriminator sees a sequence of probabilities over every token in the vocabulary from the
generator and a sequence of 1-hot vectors from the
true data distribution as in Fig. 1. This technique
is identical to that proposed by Gulrajani et al.
 , which is parallel work to this. In this paper
we provide a more complete empirical investigation of this approach to applying GANs to discrete
output spaces. We present results using recurrent
as well as convolutional architectures on three language modeling datasets of different sizes at the
word and character-level. We also present quantitative results on generating sentences that adhere
to a simple context-free grammar (CFG), and a
richer probabilistic context-free grammar (PCFG).
We compare our method to previous works that
use a GAN objective to generate natural language,
on a Chinese poetry generation dataset. In addition, we present a conditional GAN that generates sentences conditioned on sentiment and questions.
Generative Adversarial Networks
GANs are a general
framework used in training generative models by
formulating the learning process as a two player
minimax game as formulated in the equation below. A generator network G tries to generate samples that are as close as possible to the true data
distribution P(x) of interest from a ﬁxed noise
distribution P(z). We will refer to the samples
produced by the generator as G(z). A discriminator network is then trained to distinguish between
G(z) and samples from the true data distribution
P(x) while the generator network is trained using gradient signals sent by the discriminator by
minimizing log(1 −D(G(z))). Goodfellow et al.
 have shown that, with respect to an optimal discriminator, the minimax formulation can
be shown to minimize the Jensen Shannon Divergence (JSD) between the generator’s output distribution and the true data distribution.
D V (D, G) =
[log D(x)]
[log(1 −D(G(z)))]
However, in practice, the generator is trained to
maximize log(D(G(z))) instead, since it provides
stronger gradients in the early stages of learning
 .
GANs have been reported to be notoriously
hard to train in practice and several techniques have been proposed
to alleviate some of the complexities involved in
getting them to work including modiﬁed objective functions and regularization . We discuss some of these problems in the following subsection.
Nowozin et al. show that it is possible
to train GANs with a variety of f-divergence measures besides JSD. Wasserstein GANs (WGANs)
 minimize the earth mover’s
distance or Wasserstein distance, while Least
Squared GANs (LSGANs) 
modiﬁes replaces the log loss with an L2 loss.
WGAN-GP incorporate a
gradient penalty term on the discriminator’s loss
in the WGAN objective which acts as a regularizer. In this work, we will compare some of these
objectives in the context of natural language generation.
Importance of Wasserstein GANs
Arjovsky and Bottou argue that part of
the problem in training regular GANs is that it
seeks to minimize the JSD between the G(z)
and P(x). When the generator is trying to optimized log(1 −D(G(z))), the gradients that it
receives vanish as the discriminator is trained to
optimality.
The authors also show that when
trying to optimize the more practical alternative,
−log(D(G(z))), the generator might not suffer
from vanishing gradients but receives unstable
training signals. It is also important to consider
the fact that highly structured data like images and
language lie in low-dimensional manifolds (as is
evident by studying their principal components).
Wassterstein GANs overcome some of the problems in regular GAN train-
ing by providing a softer metric to compare the
distributions lying in low dimensional manifolds.
A key contribution of this work was identifying
the importance of a lipschitz constraint which is
achieved by clamping the weights of the discriminator to lie in a ﬁxed interval.
The lipschitz
constraint and training the discriminator multiple
times for every generator gradient update creates a
strong learning signal for the generator.
Gulrajani et al. present an alternative to
weight clamping that they call a gradient penalty
to enforce lipschitzness since model performance
was reported to be highly sensitive to the clamping hyperparameters.
They add the following
penalty to the discriminator training objective -
(||▽G(z)D(G(z))||2 −1)2. A potential concern
regarding our strategy to train our discriminator
to distinguish between sequence of 1-hot vectors
from the true data distribution and a sequence of
probabilities from the generator is that the discriminator can easily exploit the sparsity in the 1-hot
vectors to reach optimality.
However, Wassterstein distance with a lipschitz constraint / gradient penalty provides good gradients even under an
optimal discriminator and so isn’t a problem for
us in practice. Even though it is possible to extract some performance from a regular GAN objective with the gradient penalty (as we show in
one of our experiments), WGANs still provide better gradients to the generator since the discriminator doesn’t saturate often.
Model architecture
Let z ∼N(0, I) be the input to our generator
network G from which we will attempt to generate natural language. For implementation convenience, the sample z is of shape n × d where n
is the length of sequence and d is a ﬁxed length
dimension of the noise vector at each time step.
The generator then transforms z into a sequence of
probability distributions over the vocabulary G(z)
of size n×k where k is the size of our true data distribution’s vocabulary. The discriminator network
D is provided with fake samples G(z) and samples from the true data distribution P(x). Samples from the true distribution are provided as a
sequence of 1-hot vectors with each vector serving as an indicator of the observed word in the
sample. As described in section 2, the discriminator is trained to discriminate between real and
fake samples and the generator is trained to fool
Figure 1: Model architecture
the discriminator as in Fig. 1.
We investigate recurrent architectures as in
 and convolutional architectures in both the
generator as well as the discriminator. The following subsections detail our architectures.
Recurrent Models
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs),
particularly Long short-term memory networks (LSTMs)
 and Gated
Recurrent Networks are powerful models that have been successful at modeling
sequential data . They transform a sequence
of input vectors x = x1 . . . xn into a sequence
of hidden states h = h1 . . . hn where each hidden state maintains a summary of the input up until then.
RNN language models are autoregressive in nature since the input to the network at
time t depends on the output at time t −1. However, in the context of generating sequences from
noise, the inputs are pre-determined and there is
no direct correspondence between the output at
time t −1 and the input at time t this fundamentally changes the auto-regressiveness of the RNN.
The RNN does however carry forward information about its output at time t through subsequent
time steps via its hidden states h as evident from
its recurrent transition function. In order to incorporate an explicit dependence between subsequent
RNN outputs, we add a peephole connection between the output probability distribution yt−1 at
time t−1 and the hidden state ht at time t as show
in the LSTM equations below. Typical RNN lan-
guage models have a shared afﬁne transformation
matrix Wout that is shared across time all steps
that projects the hidden state vector to a vector of
the same size as the target vocabulary to generate a
sequence of outputs y = y1 . . . yt. Subsequently a
softmax function is applied to each vector to turn it
into a probability distribution over the vocabulary.
yt = softmax(Woutht + bout),
During inference, an output is sampled from the
softmax distribution and becomes the input at the
subsequent time step. While training the inputs
are pre-determined.
In all of our models, we
perform greedy decoding where we always pick
argmax yt. When using the LSTM as a discriminator we use a simple binary logistic regression
layer on the last hidden state hn to determine the
probability of the sample being from the generator’s data distribution or from the real data distribution. P(real) = σ(Wpredhn + bpred).
The LSTM update equations with an output
peephole are :
it = σ(Wxixt + Whiht−1 + Wpiyt−1 + bi)
ft = σ(Wxfxt + Whfht−1 + Wpfyt−1 + bf)
ot = σ(Wxoxt + Whoht−1 + Wpoyt−1 + bo)
ct = tanh(Wxcxt + Whcht−1 + Wpcyt−1 + bc)
ct = ft ⊙ct−1 + it ⊙ct
ht = ot ⊙tanh(ct),
where σ is the element-wise sigmoid function, ⊙
is the hadamard product, tanh is the element-wise
tanh function. W· and b· are learn-able parameters of the model and it, ft, ot and ct constitute the
input, forget, output and cell states of the LSTM
respectively.
Convolutional Models
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have also
shown promise at modeling sequential data using 1-dimensional convolutions . Convolution ﬁlters are
convolved across time and the input dimensions
are treated as channels. In this work, we explore
convolutional generators and discriminators with
residual connections .
Gulrajani et al. use a convolutional
model for both the generator and discriminator.
The generator consists of 5 residual blocks with
2 1-D convolutional layers each. A ﬁnal 1-D convolution layer transforms the output of the residual blocks into a sequence of un-normalized vectors for each element in the input sequence (noise).
These vectors are then normalized using the softmax function. All convolutions are ’same’ convolutions with a stride of 1 followed by batchnormalization and the
ReLU 
activation function without any pooling so as to
preserve the shape of the input. The discriminator architecture is identical to that of the generator
with the ﬁnal output having a single output channel.
Curriculum Learning
In likelihood based training of generative language
models, models are only trained to make one-step
ahead predictions and as a result it is possible to
train these models on relatively long sequences
even in the initial stages of training. However, in
our adversarial formulation, our generator is encouraged to generate entire sequences that match
the true data distribution without explicit supervision at each step of the generation process. As
a way to provide training signals of incremental difﬁculty, we use curriculum learning and train our generator to produce sequences of gradually increasing lengths as training
progresses.
Experiments & Data
GAN based methods have often been critiqued for
lacking a concrete evaluation strategy , however recent work uses an annealed importance based technique to overcome this problem.
In the context of generating natural language,
it is possible to come up with a simpler approach
to evaluate compute the likelihoods of generated
samples. We synthesize a data generating distribution under which we can compute likelihoods in
a tractable manner. We propose a simple evaluation strategy for evaluating adversarial methods of
generating natural language by constructing a data
generating distribution from a CFG or P−CFG.
It is possible to determine if a sample belongs to
the CFG or the probability of a sample under a
P−CFG by using a constituency parser that is provided with all of the productions in a grammar.
Yu et al. also present a simple idea to estimate the likelihood of generated samples by using
a randomly initialized LSTM as their data gener-
ating distribution. While this is a viable strategy
to evaluate generative models of language, a randomly initialized LSTM provides little visibility
into the complexity of the data distribution itself
and presents no obvious way to increase its complexity. CFGs and PCFGs however, provide explicit control of the complexity via their productions. They can also be learned via grammar induction on large treebanks of natural
language and so the data generating distribution is
not synthetic as in .
Typical language models are evaluated by measuring the likelihood of samples from the true
data distribution under the model. However, with
GANs it is impossible to measure likelihoods under the model itself and so we measure the likelihood of the model’s samples under the true data
distribution instead.
We divide our experiments into four categories:
• Generating language that belongs to a toy
CFG and an induced PCFG from the Penn
Treebank .
• Chinese poetry generation with comparisons
to and .
• Generated samples from a dataset consisting
of simple English sentences, the 1-billionword and Penn Treebank datasets.
• Conditional GANs that generate sentences
conditioned on certain sentence attributes
such as sentiment and questions.
Simple CFG
We use a simple and publicly available CFG1 that
contains 248 productions. We then generate two
sets of data from this CFG - one consisting of samples of length 5 and another of length 11. Each
set contains 100,000 samples selected at random
from the CFG. The ﬁrst set has a vocabulary of
36 tokens while the second 45 tokens. We evaluate our models on this task by measuring the
fraction of generated samples that satisfy the rules
of the grammar and also measure the diversity in
our generated samples. We do this by generating
1,280 samples from noise and computing the fraction of those that are valid under our grammar using the Earley parsing algorithm . In
order to measure sample diversity, we simply the
1 
hw-grammar/extra-grammars/holygrail
count the number of unique samples; while this assumes that all samples are orthogonal it still serves
as a proxy measure of the entropy. We compare
various generator, discriminator and GAN objectives on this problem.
Penn Treebank PCFG
To construct a more challenging problem than a
simple CFG, we use sections 0-21 of the WSJ subsection of the Penn Treebank to induce a PCFG
using simple count statistics of all productions.
P(A →BC) = count(A →BC)
count(A →∗)
We train our model on all sentences in the treebank
and restrict the output vocabulary to the top 2,000
most frequently occurring words. We evaluate our
models on this task by measuring the likelihood of
a sample using a Viterbi chart parser . While such a measure mostly
captures the grammaticality of a sentence, it is still
a reasonable proxy of sample quality.
Chinese Poetry
Zhang and Lapata present a dataset of Chinese poems that were used to evaluate adversarial
training methods for natural language in and . The dataset consists
of 4-line poems with a variable number of characters in each line. We treat each line in a poem as a
training example and use lines of length 5 (poem-
5) and 7 (poem-7) with the train/validation/test
split2 speciﬁed in .
BLEU-2 and BLEU-3 to measure model performance on this task. Since there is no obvious ”target” for each generated sentence, both works report corpus-level BLEU measures using the entire
test set as the reference.
Language Generation
We generate language from three different datasets
of varying sizes and complexity. A dataset comprising simple English sentences3 which we will
henceforth refer to as CMU−SE, the version of
the Penn Treebank commonly used in language
modeling experiments and
the Google 1-billion word dataset . We perform experiments at generating language at the word as well as character-level. The
CMU−SE dataset consists of 44,016 sentences
with a vocabulary of 3,122 words, while the Penn
Treebank consists of 42,068 sentences with a vocabulary of 10,000 words. We use a random subset of 3 million sentences from the 1-billion word
dataset and constrain our vocabulary to the top
30,000 most frequently occurring words. We use
a curriculum learning strategy in all of our LSTM
models (with and without the output peephole connection) that starts training on sentences of length
5 at the word level and 13 for characters and increases the sequence length by 1 after a ﬁxed number of epochs based on the size of the data. Convolutional methods in are
able to generate long sequences even without a
curriculum, however we found it was critical in
generating long sequences with an LSTM.
Figure 2: Negative log-likelihood of generated
samples under the PCFG using an LSTM trained
with the WGAN-GP, GAN-GP and a standard
MLE objective on the PTB dataset
Conditional Generation of Sequences
GANs are able to leverage explicit conditioning on high-level attributes of data to generate samples which contain these attributes. Recent work generates
sentences conditioned on certain attributes of language such as sentiment using a variational autoencoders (VAEs) 
and holistic attribute discriminators. In this paper,
we use two features inherent in language - sentiment and questions. To generate sentences that
are questions, we use the CMU−SE dataset and
label sentences that contain a ”?” as being questions and the rest as been statements. To generate
sentences of positive and negative sentiment we
use the Amazon review polarity dataset collected
in and use the ﬁrst 3 million
short reviews with a vocabulary of the top 4,000
most frequently occurring words. Conditioning on
sentence attributes is achieved by concatenating a
single feature map containing either entirely ones
or zeros to indicate the presence or absence of the
attribute as in at the output of each convolutional layer. The conditioning
is done on both the generator and the discriminator. We experiment with conditional GANs using
only convolutional methods since methods adding
conditioning information has been well studied in
these architectures.
All models are trained using the back-propagation
algorithm updating our parameters using the
Adam optimization method and stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with
batch sizes of 64. A learning rate of 2 × 10−3,
β1 = 0.5 and β2 = 0.999 is used in our LSTM
generator and discriminators while convolutional
architectures use a learning rate of 1 × 10−4. The
noise prior and all LSTM hidden dimensions are
set to 128 except for the Chinese poetry generation task where we set it to 64.
Results and Discussion
Table. 1 presents quantitative results on generating sentences that adhere to the simple CFG described in Section 4.1. The Acc column computes
the accuracy with which our model generates samples from the CFG using a sample of 1,280 generations. We observe that all models are able to
ﬁt sequences of length 5 but only the WGAN,
WGAN-GP objectives are able to generalize to
longer sequences of length 11. This motivated us
to use only the WGAN and WGAN-GP objectives
in our subsequent experiments. The GAN-GP criterion appears to perform reasonably as well but
we restrict our experiments to use the WGAN and
WGAN-GP criteria only. GANs have been shown
to exhibit the phenomenon of ”mode dropping”
where the generator fails to capture a large fraction
of the modes present in the data generating distribution . It is therefore important
to study the diversity in our generated samples.
The Uniq column computes the number of unique
samples in a sample 1,280 generations serves as a
rough indicator of sample diversity. The WGAN-
GP objective appears to encourage the generation
Table 1: Accuracy and uniqueness measure of samples generated by different models. LSTM, LSTM-P
refers to the LSTM model with the output peephole and the WGAN-GP and GAN-GP refer to models
that use a gradient penalty in the discriminator’s training objective
MLE 
Sequence GAN 
MaliGAN-basic 
MaliGAN-full 
LSTM (ours)
LSTM Peephole (ours)
Table 2: BLEU scores on the poem-5 and poem-7 datasets
of diverse samples while also ﬁtting the data distribution well.
Fig. 2 shows the negative-log-likelihood of generated samples using a LSTM architecture using
the WGAN-GP, GAN-GP and MLE criteria. All
models used an LSTM generator. The sequence
length is set to 7 and the likelihoods are evaluated
at the end of every epoch on a set of 64 samples.
Table. 2 contains quantitative results on the Chinese poetry generation dataset. The results indicate that our straightforward strategy to overcome
back-propagating through discrete states is competitive and outperforms more complicated methods.
5 contains sequences generated by
conditioned
(positive/negative) and questions/statements.
model is able to pick up on certain consistent patterns in questions as well as when expressing sentiment and use them while generating sentences.
Tables 3 and 4 contain sequences generated at
the word and character-level by our LSTM and
CNN models. Both models are able to produce realistic sentences. The CNN model with a WGAN-
GP objective appears to be able to maintain context over longer time spans.
Conclusion and Future work
In conclusion, this work presents a straightforward
but effective method to train GANs for natural language. The simplicity lies in forcing the discriminator to operate on continuous values by presenting it with a sequence of probability distributions
from the generator and a sequence of 1-hot vectors corresponding to data from the true distribution. We propose an evaluation strategy that involves learning the data distribution deﬁned by a
CFG or PCFG. This lets us evaluate the likelihood of a sample belonging to the data generating
distribution. The use of WGAN and WGAN-GP
objectives produce realistic sentences on datasets
of varying complexity (CMU-SE, Penn Treebank
and the 1-billion dataset). We also show that it is
possible to perform conditional generation of text
on high-level sentence features such as sentiment
and questions. In future work, we would like to explore GANs in other domains of NLP such as non
goal-oriented dialog systems where a clear train-
1-billion-word
An opposition was growing in China .
This is undergoing operation a year .
It has his everyone on a blame .
Everyone shares that Miller seems converted President as Democrat .
Which is actually the best of his children .
Who has The eventual policy and weak ?
Companies I upheld , respectively patented saga and Ambac.
Independence Unit have any will MRI in these Lights
It is a wrap for the annually of Morocco
The town has Registration matched with unk and the citizens
To holl is now my Hubby ,
The gry timers was faller
After they work is jith a
But in a linter a revent
Table 3: Word and character-level generations on the 1-billion word dataset
what everything they take everything away
<s>will you have two moment ? </s>
may tea bill is the best chocolate from
emergency .
<s>i need to understand deposit length .
can you show show if any ﬁsh left inside .
<s>how is the another headache ? </s>
room service , have my dinner please .
<s>how there , is the restaurant popular this
cheese ? </s>
meanwhile henderson said that it has to
bounce for.
<s>i ’d like to fax a newspaper . </s>
I’m at the missouri burning the indexing
manufacturing and through .
<s>cruise pay the next in my replacement .
<s>what ’s in the friday food ? ? </s>
Table 4: Word level generations on the Penn Treebank and CMU-SE datasets
best and top notch newtonmom .
usuall the review omnium nothing nonfunctionable
good buy homeostasis money well spent
kickass cosamin of time and fun .
extreme crap-not working and eeeeeew
great britani ! I lovethis.
a horrible poor imposing se400
<s>when ’s the friday convention on ? </s>
<s>i report my run on one mineral . </s>
<s>how many snatched crew you have ? </s>
<s>we have to record this now . </s>
<s>how can you open this hall ? </s>
<s>i think i deeply take your passenger
Table 5: Coditional generation of text. Top row shows generated samples conditionally trained on amazon review polarity dataset with two attributes ’positive’ and ’negative’. Bottom row has samples conditioned on the ’question’ attribute
ing and evaluation criterion does not exist.
Acknowledgements
The Authors would like to thank Ishaan Gulrajani,
Martin Arjovsky, Guillaume Lample, Rosemary
Ke, Juneki Hong and Varsha Embar for their advice and insightful comments. We are grateful to
the Fonds de Recherche du Qu´ebec – Nature et
Technologie for their ﬁnancial support. We would
also like to acknowledge NVIDIA for donating a
DGX-1 computer used in this work.
We demonstrate that our approach to solve the
problem of discrete outputs produces reasonable
outputs even when applied to images.
Figure 3 shows samples generated on the binarized MNIST dataset . We used a generator and discriminator architecture identical to with
the WGAN-GP criterion. The generator’s outputs
are continuous while samples from the true data
distribution are binarized.
Binarized MNIST samples using a
DCWGAN with gradient penalty