Uniﬁed Perceptual Parsing for Scene
Understanding
Tete Xiao1*, Yingcheng Liu1*, Bolei Zhou2*, Yuning Jiang3, Jian Sun4
1Peking University
2 MIT CSAIL
3 Bytedance Inc.
4 Megvii Inc.
* indicates equal contribution.
{jasonhsiao97, liuyingcheng}@pku.edu.cn,
 , ,
 
Abstract. Humans recognize the visual world at multiple levels: we
eﬀortlessly categorize scenes and detect objects inside, while also identifying the textures and surfaces of the objects along with their diﬀerent
compositional parts. In this paper, we study a new task called Uniﬁed
Perceptual Parsing, which requires the machine vision systems to recognize as many visual concepts as possible from a given image. A multi-task
framework called UPerNet and a training strategy are developed to learn
from heterogeneous image annotations. We benchmark our framework on
Uniﬁed Perceptual Parsing and show that it is able to eﬀectively segment
a wide range of concepts from images. The trained networks are further
applied to discover visual knowledge in natural scenes1.
Keywords: Deep neural network, semantic segmentation, scene understanding
Introduction
The human visual system is able to extract a remarkable amount of semantic
information from a single glance. We not only instantly parse the objects contained within, but also identify the ﬁne-grained attributes of objects, such as
their parts, textures and materials. For example in Figure 1, we can recognize
that this is a living room with various objects such as a coﬀee table, a painting,
and walls inside. At the same time, we identify that the coﬀee table has legs, an
apron and top, as well as that the coﬀee table is wooden and the surface of the
sofa is knitted. Our interpretation of the visual scene is organized at multiple
levels, from the visual perception of the materials and textures to the semantic
perception of the objects and parts.
Great progress in computer vision has been made towards human-level visual
recognition because of the development of deep neural networks and large-scale
image datasets. However, various visual recognition tasks are mostly studied independently. For example, human-level recognition has been reached for object
1 Models are available at 
 
T. Xiao, Y. Liu, B. Zhou, Y. Jiang, J. Sun
- living room is composed of wall, floor, ceiling, coffee
table, cabinet and painting.
- cabinet is made of wood.
- sofa is composed of seat cushion ,
arm, back pillow and seat base.
- coffee table is composed of
leg , apron and top.
- coffee table is made of wood
- sofa is made of fabric.
back pillow
back pillow
seat cushion
seat cushion
- wall is made of brick.
- floor is made of carpet.
stratified
stratified
- coffee table is waffled.
- sofa is knitted.
- wall is stratified.
coffee table
windowpane
Living room
Fig. 1. Network trained for Uniﬁed Perceptual Parsing is able to parse various visual
concepts at multiple perceptual levels such as scene, objects, parts, textures, and materials all at once. It also identiﬁes the compositional structures among the detected
classiﬁcation and scene recognition ; objects and stuﬀare parsed and segmented precisely at pixel-level ; Texture and material perception and recognition have been studied in and . Since scene recognition, object detection,
texture and material recognition are intertwined in human visual perception,
this raises an important question for the computer vision systems: is it possible for a neural network to solve several visual recognition tasks simultaneously?
This motives our work to introduce a new task called Uniﬁed Perceptual Parsing
(UPP) along with a novel learning method to address it.
There are several challenges in UPP. First, there is no single image dataset
annotated with all levels of visual information. Various image datasets are constructed only for speciﬁc task, such as ADE20K for scene parsing , the Describe Texture Dataset (DTD) for texture recognition , and OpenSurfaces for
material and surface recognition . Next, annotations from diﬀerent perceptual
levels are heterogeneous. For example, ADE20K has pixel-wise annotations while
the annotations for textures in the DTD are image-level.
To address the challenges above we propose a framework that overcomes the
heterogeneity of diﬀerent datasets and learns to detect various visual concepts
jointly. On the one hand, at each iteration, we randomly sample a data source,
and only update the related layers on the path to infer the concepts from the
selected source. Such a design avoids erratic behavior that the gradient with
respect to annotations of a certain concept may be noisy. On the other hand,
our framework exploits the hierarchical nature of features from a single network,
i.e., for concepts with higher-level semantics such as scene classiﬁcation, the
classiﬁer is built on the feature map with the higher semantics only; for lowerlevel semantics such as object and material segmentation, classiﬁers are built on
feature maps fused across all stages or the feature map with low-level semantics
Uniﬁed Perceptual Parsing for Scene Understanding
only. We further propose a training method that enables the network to predict
pixel-wise texture labels using only image-level annotations.
Our contributions are summarized as follows: 1) We present a new parsing
task Uniﬁed Perceptual Parsing, which requires systems to parse multiple visual
concepts at once. 2) We present a novel network called UPerNet with hierarchical
structure to learn from heterogeneous data from multiple image datasets. 3) The
model is shown to be able to jointly infer and discover the rich visual knowledge
underneath images.
Related work
Our work is built upon the previous work of semantic segmentation and multitask learning.
Semantic segmentation. To generate pixel-wise semantic predictions for a
given image, image classiﬁcation networks are extended to generate
semantic segmentation masks. Pioneering work by Chen et al. , based on
structure prediction, uses conditional random ﬁeld (CRF) to reﬁne the activations of the ﬁnal feature map of CNNs. The most prevalent framework designed for this pixel-level classiﬁcation task is the Fully Convolutional Network
(FCN) , which replaces fully-connected layers in classiﬁcation networks with
convolutional layers. Noh et al. propose a framework which applies deconvolution to up-sample low resolution feature maps. Yu and Vladlen propose
an architecture based on dilated convolution which is able to exponentially expand the receptive ﬁeld without loss of resolution or coverage. More recently,
ReﬁneNet uses a coarse-to-ﬁne architecture which exploits all information
available along the down-sampling process. The Pyramid Scene Parsing Network (PSPNet) performs spatial pooling at several grid scales and achieves
remarkable performance on several segmentation benchmarks .
Multi-task learning. Multi-task learning, which aims to train models to accomplish multiple tasks at the same time, has attracted attention since long before the era of deep learning. For example, a number of previous research works
focus on the combination of recognition and segmentation . More recently, Elhoseiny et al. have proposed a model that performs pose estimation
and object classiﬁcation simultaneously. Eigen and Fergus propose an architecture that jointly addresses depth prediction, surface normal estimation, and
semantic labeling. Teichmann et al. propose an approach to perform classiﬁcation, detection, and semantic segmentation via a shared feature extractor.
Kokkinos proposes the UberNet , a deep architecture that is able to do seven
diﬀerent tasks relying on diverse training sets. Another recent work proposes
a partially supervised training paradigm to scale up the segmentation of objects
to 3, 000 objects using box annotations only. Comparing our work with previous
works on multi-task learning, only a few of them perform multi-task learning on
heterogeneous datasets, i.e., a dataset that does not necessarily have all levels
of annotations over all tasks. Moreover, although tasks in are formed from
low level to high level, such as boundary detection, semantic segmentation and
T. Xiao, Y. Liu, B. Zhou, Y. Jiang, J. Sun
object detection, these tasks do not form the hierarchy of visual concepts. In
Section 4.2, we further demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of our proposed tasks and
frameworks in discovering the rich visual knowledge from images.
Deﬁning Uniﬁed Perceptual Parsing
We deﬁne the task of Uniﬁed Perceptual Parsing as the recognition of many
visual concepts as possible from a given image. Possible visual concepts are
organized into several levels: from scene labels, objects, and parts of objects,
to materials and textures of objects. The task depends on the availability of
diﬀerent kinds of training data. Since there is no single image dataset annotated
with all visual concepts at multiple levels, we ﬁrst construct an image dataset
by combining several sources of image annotations.
In order to accomplish segmentation of a wide range of visual concepts from multiple levels, we utilize the Broadly and Densely Labeled Dataset (Broden) , a
heterogeneous dataset that contains various visual concepts. Broden uniﬁes several densely labeled image datasets, namely ADE20K , Pascal-Context ,
Pascal-Part , OpenSurfaces , and the Describable Textures Dataset (DTD) .
These datasets contain samples of a broad range of scenes, objects, object parts,
materials and textures in a variety of contexts. Objects, object parts and materials are segmented down to pixel level while textures and scenes are annotated
at image level.
The Broden dataset provides a wide range of visual concepts. Nevertheless,
since it is originally collected to discover the alignment between visual concepts and hidden units of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for network
interpretability , we ﬁnd that samples from diﬀerent classes are unbalanced. Therefore we standardize the Broden dataset to make it more suitable
for training segmentation networks. First, we merge similar concepts across different datasets. For example, objects and parts annotations in ADE20K, Pascal-
Context, and Pascal-Part are merged and uniﬁed. Second, we only include object
classes which appear in at least 50 images and contain at least 50, 000 pixels in
the whole dataset. Also, object parts which appear in at least 20 images can be
considered valid parts. Objects and parts that are conceptually inconsistent are
manually removed. Third, we manually merge under-sampled labels in OpenSurfaces. For example, stone and concrete are merged into stone, while clear plastic
and opaque plastic are merged into plastic. Labels that appear in less than 50
images are also ﬁltered out. Fourth, we map more than 400 scene labels from
the ADE20K dataset to 365 labels from the Places dataset .
Table 1 shows some statistics of our standardized Broden, termed as Broden+. It contains 57, 095 images in total, including 22, 210 images from ADE20K,
10, 103 images from Pascal-Context and Pascal-Part, 19, 142 images from Open-
Surfaces and 5, 640 images from DTD. Figure 2 shows the distribution of objects
Uniﬁed Perceptual Parsing for Scene Understanding
Eval. Metrics
top-1 acc.
ADE , Pascal-Context 
mIoU & pixel acc.
object w/ part
ADE , Pascal-Context 
ADE , Pascal-Part 
mIoU (bg) & pixel acc.
OpenSurfaces 
mIoU & pixel acc.
top-1 acc.
Table 1. Statistics of each label type in the Broden+ dataset. Evaluation metrics for
each type of labels are also listed.
license plate
shop window
seat cushion
back pillow
seat cushion
door frame
computer case
coach roof
lower sash
upper sash
button panel
corner pocket
side pocket
license plate
windshield
pool table
swivel chair
chandelier
1000 10000100000
streetlight
wall socket
coffee table
work surface
television
chandelier
pottedplant
chest of drawers
traffic light
fire place
trade name
refrigerator
candlestick
chest of drawers
Fig. 2. a) Sorted object classes by frequency: we show top 120 classes selected from
the Broden+. Object classes that appear in less than 50 images or contain less than
50, 000 pixels are ﬁltered. b) Frequency of parts grouped by objects. We show only top
30 objects with their top 5 frequent parts. The parts that appear in less than 20 images
are ﬁltered.
as well as parts grouped by the objects to which they belong. We also provide
examples from each source of the Broden+ dataset in Figure 3.
To quantify the performance of models, we set diﬀerent metrics based on the
annotations of each dataset. Standard metrics to evaluate semantic segmentation
tasks include Pixel Accuracy (P.A.), which indicates the proportion of correctly
classiﬁed pixels, and mean IoU (mIoU), which indicates the intersection-over-
T. Xiao, Y. Liu, B. Zhou, Y. Jiang, J. Sun
 
Fig. 3. Samples from the Broden+ dataset. The ground-truth labels for scene and
texture are image-level annotations, while for object, part and material are pixel-wise
annotations. Object and part are densely annotated, while material is partially annotated. Images with texture labels are mostly such localized object regions.
union (IoU) between the predicted and ground truth pixels, averaged over all
object classes. Note that since there might be unlabeled areas in an image, the
mIoU metric will not count the predictions on unlabeled regions. This would
encourage people to exclude the background label during training. However, it
is not suitable for the evaluation of tasks like part segmentation, because for
some objects the regions with part annotations only account for a small number
of pixels. Therefore we use mIoU, but count the predictions in the background
regions, denoted as mIoU-bg, in certain tasks. In this way, excluding background
labels during training will boost P.A. by a small margin. Nonetheless, it will
signiﬁcantly downgrade mIoU-bg performance.
For object and material parsing involving ADE20K, Pascal-Context, and
OpenSurfaces, the annotations are at pixel level. Images in ADE20K and Pascal-
Context are fully annotated, with the regions that do not belong to any predeﬁned classes categorized into an unlabeled class. Images in OpenSurfaces are
partially annotated, i.e., if several regions of material occur in a single image,
more than one region may not be annotated. We use P.A. and mIoU metrics for
these two tasks.
For object parts we use P.A. and mIoU-bg metrics for the above mentioned
reason. The IoU of each part is ﬁrst averaged within an object category, then
averaged over all object classes. For scene and texture classiﬁcation we report
top-1 accuracy. Evaluation metrics are listed in Table 1.
To balance samples across diﬀerent labels in diﬀerent categories we ﬁrst randomly sample 10% of original images as the validation set. We then randomly
choose an image both from the training and validation set, and check if the annotations in pixel level are more balanced towards 10% after swapping these two
images. The process is performed iteratively. The dataset is split into 51, 617
images for training and 5, 478 images for validation.
Uniﬁed Perceptual Parsing for Scene Understanding
$"#$!
!#'#$!
 "
!"#!
!"#!
#$! (!
 #&!
Fig. 4. UPerNet framework for Uniﬁed Perceptual Parsing. Top-left: The Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) with a Pyramid Pooling Module (PPM) appended on the
last layer of the back-bone network before feeding it into the top-down branch in FPN.
Top-right: We use features at various semantic levels. Scene head is attached on the
feature map directly after the PPM since image-level information is more suitable for
scene classiﬁcation. Object and part heads are attached on the feature map fused by
all the layers put out by FPN. Material head is attached on the feature map in FPN
with the highest resolution. Texture head is attached on the Res-2 block in ResNet ,
and ﬁne-tuned after the whole network ﬁnishes training on other tasks. Bottom: The
illustrations of diﬀerent heads. Details can be found in Section 3.
Designing Networks for Uniﬁed Perceptual Parsing
We demonstrate our network design in Figure 4, termed as UPerNet (Uniﬁed
Perceptual Parsing Network), based on the Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) .
FPN is a generic feature extractor which exploits multi-level feature representations in an inherent and pyramidal hierarchy. It uses a top-down architecture
with lateral connections to fuse high-level semantic information into middle and
low levels with marginal extra cost. To overcome the issue raised by Zhou et
al. that although the theoretical receptive ﬁeld of deep CNN is large enough,
the empirical receptive ﬁeld of deep CNN is relatively much smaller , we apply a Pyramid Pooling Module (PPM) from PSPNet on the last layer of the
backbone network before feeding it into the top-down branch in FPN. Empirically we ﬁnd that the PPM is highly compatible with the FPN architecture by
bringing eﬀective global prior representations. For further details on FPN and
PPM, we refer the reader to and .
With the new framework, we are able to train a single network which is able
to unify parsing of visual attributes at multiple levels. Our framework is based
T. Xiao, Y. Liu, B. Zhou, Y. Jiang, J. Sun
on Residual Networks . We denote the set of last feature maps of each stage
in ResNet as {C2, C3, C4, C5}, and the set of feature maps put out by FPN as
{P2, P3, P4, P5}, where P5 is also the feature map directly following PPM. The
down-sampling rates are {4, 8, 16, 32}, respectively. Scene label, the highest-level
attribute annotated at image-level, is predicted by a global average pooling of P5
followed by a linear classiﬁer. It is worth noting that, unlike frameworks based on
a dilated net, the down-sampling rate of P5 is relatively large so that the features
after global average pooling focus more on high-level semantics. For object label,
we empirically ﬁnd that fusing all feature maps of FPN is better than only using
the feature map with the highest resolution (P2). Object parts are segmented
based on the same feature map as objects. For materials, intuitively, if we have
prior knowledge that these areas belong to the object “cup”, we are able to
make a reasonable conjecture that it might be made up of paper or plastics.
This context is useful, but we still need local apparent features to decide which
one is correct. It should also be noted that an object can be made up of various
materials. Based on the above observations, we segment materials on top of P2
rather than fused features. Texture label, given at the image-level, is based on
non-natural images. Directly fusing these images with other natural images is
harmful to other tasks. Also we hope the network can predict texture labels at
pixel level. To achieve such a goal, we append several convolutional layers on
top of C2, and force the network to predict the texture label at every pixel.
The gradient of this branch is prevented from back-propagating to layers of
backbone networks, and the training images for texture are resized to a smaller
size (∼64 × 64). The reasons behind these designs are: 1) Texture is the lowestlevel perceptual attribute, thus it is purely based on apparent features and does
not need any high-level information. 2) Essential features for predicting texture
correctly are implicitly learned when trained on other tasks. 3) The receptive
ﬁeld of this branch needs to be small enough, so that the network is able to
predict diﬀerent labels at various regions when an image at normal scale is fed
in the network. We only ﬁne-tune the texture branch for a few epochs after the
whole network ﬁnishes training on other tasks.
When only trained on object supervision, without further enhancements, our
framework yields almost identical performance as the state-of-the-art PSPNet,
while requiring only 63% of training time for the same number of epochs. It is
worth noting that we do not even perform deep supervision or data augmentations used in PSPNet other than scale jitter, according to the experiments in
their paper . Ablation experiments are provided in Section 4.1.
Implementation details
Every classiﬁer is preceded by a separate convolutional head. To fuse the layers
with diﬀerent scales such as {P2, P3, P4, P5}, we resize them via bilinear interpolation to the size of P2 and concatenate these layers. A convolutional layer
is then applied to fuse features from diﬀerent levels as well as to reduce channel dimensions. All extra non-classiﬁer convolutional layers, including those in
Uniﬁed Perceptual Parsing for Scene Understanding
FPN, have batch normalization with 512-channel output. ReLU is applied after batch normalization. Same as , we use the “poly” learning rate
policy where the learning rate at current iteration equals the initial learning rate
multiplying
power. The initial learning rate and power are set to
0.02 and 0.9, respectively. We use a weight decay of 0.0001 and a momentum
of 0.9. During training the input image is resized such that the length of its
shorter side is randomly chosen from the set {300, 375, 450, 525, 600}. For inference we do not apply multi-scale testing for fair comparison, and the length is
set to 450. The maximum length of the longer side is set to 1200 in avoidance of
GPU memory overﬂow. The layers in the backbone network are initialized with
weights pre-trained on ImageNet .
During each iteration, if a mini-batch is composed of images from several
sources on various tasks, the gradient with respect to a certain task can be
noisy, since the real batch size of each task is in fact decreased. Thus we randomly
sample a data source at each iteration based on the scale of each source, and
only update the path to infer the concepts related to the selected source. For
object and material, we do not calculate loss on unlabeled area. For part, as
mentioned in Section 2.2, we add background as a valid label. Also the loss of a
part is applied only inside the regions of its super object.
Due to physical memory limitations a mini-batch on each GPU involves only
2 images. We adopt synchronized SGD training across 8 GPUs. It is worth noting
that batch size has proven to be important to generate accurate statistics for
tasks like classiﬁcation , semantic segmentation and object detection .
We implement batch normalization such that it is able to synchronize across
multiple GPUs. We do not ﬁx any batch norm layer during training. The number
of training iterations of ADE20k (with ∼20k images) alone is 100k. If trained
on a larger dataset, we linearly increase training iterations based on the number
of images in the dataset.
Design discussion
State-of-the-art segmentation networks are mainly based on fully convolutional
networks (FCNs) . Due to a lack of suﬃcient training samples, segmentation
networks are usually initialized from networks pre-trained for image classiﬁcation . To enable high-resolution predictions for semantic segmentation,
dilated convolution , a technique which removes the stride of convolutional
layers and adds holes between each location of convolution ﬁlters, has been proposed to ease the side eﬀect of down-sampling while maintaining the expansion
rate for receptive ﬁelds. The dilated network has become the de facto paradigm
for semantic segmentation.
We argue that such a framework has major drawbacks for the proposed Uni-
ﬁed Perceptual Parsing task. First, recently proposed deep CNNs , which
have succeeded on tasks such as image classiﬁcation and semantic segmentation usually have tens or hundreds of layers. These deep CNNs are intricately
designed such that the down-sampling rate grows rapidly in the early stage of
the network for the sake of a larger receptive ﬁeld and lighter computational
T. Xiao, Y. Liu, B. Zhou, Y. Jiang, J. Sun
Mean IoU(%)
Pixel Acc.(%)
Overall(%)
SegNet 
DilatedNet 
CascadeNet 
ReﬁneNet (Res-152) 
DilatedNet∗†(Res-50) 
PSPNet†(Res-50) 
FPN+PPM (/4)
FPN+PPM+Fusion (/4)
Table 2. Detailed analysis of our framework based on ResNet-50 v.s. state-of-the-art
methods on ADE20K dataset. Our results are obtained without multi-scale inference or
other techniques. FPN baseline is competitive while requiring much less computational
resources. Further increasing resolution of feature maps brings consistent gain. PPM is
highly compatible with FPN. Empirically we ﬁnd that fusing features from all levels of
FPN yields best performance. ∗: A stronger reference for DilatedNet reported in .
†: Training time is based on our reproduced models. We also use the same codes in
FPN baseline.
complexity. For example, in the ResNet with 100 convolutional layers in total,
there are 78 convolutional layers in the Res-4 and Res-5 blocks combined, with
down-sampling rates of 16 and 32, respectively. In practice, in a dilated segmentation framework, dilated convolution needs to be applied to both blocks to
ensure that the maximum down-sampling rate of all feature maps do not exceed
8. Nevertheless, due to the feature maps within the two blocks are increased to
4 or 16 times of their designated sizes, both the computation complexity and
GPU memory footprint are dramatically increased. The second drawback is that
such a framework utilizes only the deepest feature map in the network. Prior
works have shown the hierarchical nature of the features in the network,
i.e., lower layers tend to capture local features such as corners or edge/color
conjunctions, while higher layers tend to capture more complex patterns such as
parts of some object. Using the features with the highest-level semantics might
be reasonable for segmenting high-level concepts such as objects, but it is naturally unﬁt to segment perceptual attributes at multiple levels, especially the
low-level ones such as textures and materials. In what follows, we demonstrate
the eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency of our UPerNet.
Experiments
The experiment section is organized as follows: we ﬁrst introduce the quantitative
study of our proposed framework on the original semantic segmentation task and
Uniﬁed Perceptual Parsing for Scene Understanding
Training Data
+O +P +S +M +T
70.87 54.19
70.87 54.19
Table 3. Results of Uniﬁed Perceptual Parsing on the Broden+ dataset. O: Object. P:
Part. S: Scene. M: Material. T: Texture. mI.: mean IoU. P.A.: pixel accuracy. mI.(bg):
mean IoU including background. T-1: top-1 accuracy.
the UPP task in Section 4.1. Then we apply the framework to discover visual
common sense knowledge underlying scene understanding in Section 4.2.
Main results
Overall architecture. To demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of our proposed architecture on semantic segmentation, we report the results trained on ADE20K using object annotations under various settings in Table 2. In general, FPN demonstrates competitive performance while requiring much less computational resources for semantic segmentation. Using the feature map up-sampled only once
with a down-sampling rate of 16 (P4), it reaches mIoU and P.A. of 34.46/76.04,
almost identical to the strong baseline reference reported in while only taking
about 1/3 of the training time for the same number of iterations. Performance
improves further when the resolution is higher. Adding the Pyramid Pooling
Module (PPM) boosts performance by a 4.87/3.09 margin, which demonstrates
that FPN also suﬀers from an insuﬃcient receptive ﬁeld. Empirically we ﬁnd
that fusing features from all levels of FPN yields best performance, a consistent
conclusion also observed in .
The performance of FPN is surprising considering its simplicity with feature maps being simply up-sampled by bilinear interpolation instead of timeconsuming deconvolution, and the top-down path is fused with bottom-up path
by an 1x1 convolutional layer followed by element-wise summation without any
complex reﬁnement module. It is the simplicity that accomplishes its eﬃciency.
We therefore adopt this design for Uniﬁed Perceptual Parsing.
Multi-task learning with heterogeneous annotations. We report the results trained on separate or fused diﬀerent sets of annotations. The baseline of object parsing is the model trained on ADE20K and Pascal-Context. It yields mIoU
and P.A. of 24.72/78.03. This result, compared with the results for ADE20K,
is relatively low because Broden+ has many more object classes. The baseline
of material is the model trained on OpenSurfaces. It yields mIoU and P.A. of
T. Xiao, Y. Liu, B. Zhou, Y. Jiang, J. Sun
windowpane
windowpane
windowpane
coffee table
seat cushion
seat cushion
work surface
windowpane
dishwasher
lower sash
upper sash
wood metal
church/indoor
dishwasher
work surface
windowpane
upper sash
lower sash
living room
waiting room
crosshatched
perforated
crosshatched
crosshatched
stratified
stratified
Fig. 5. Predictions on the validation set using UPerNet (ResNet-50). From left to right:
scene classiﬁcation, and object, part, material, and texture parsing.
52.78/84.32. Joint training of object and part parsing yields 23.92/77.48 on object and 30.21/48.30 on part. The performance on object parsing trained plus
part annotations is almost identical to that trained only on object annotations.
After adding a scene prediction branch it yields top-1 accuracy of 71.35% on
scene classiﬁcation, with negligible downgrades of object and part performance.
When jointly training material with object, part, and scene classiﬁcation, it
yields a performance of 54.19/84.45 on material parsing, 23.36/77.09 on object
parsing, and 28.75/46.92 on part parsing. It is worth noting that the object
and part both suﬀer a slight performance degrade due to heterogeneity, while
material enjoys a boost in performance compared with that trained only on
Uniﬁed Perceptual Parsing for Scene Understanding
parking garage(od)
elevator/door
utility room
windowpane
bakery/shop
beach house
streetlight
picnic area
boxing ring
bus interior
ticket booth
work surface
car interior
conference center
corn field
youth hostel
desert/vegetation
trade name
mountain snowy
railroad track
fabric store
fire escape
movie theater(id)
swimming pool(od)
hangar/outdoor
hardware store
oast house
restaurant kitchen
japanese garden
jewelry shop
grandstand
lecture room
library/outdoor
loading dock
locker room
doorway/outdoor
museum(id)
embankment
natural history museum
silver screen
shelf comprises unity room, fabric store, jewelry shop …
heliport is composed of building, person, airplane …
(a) Visualization of scene-object relations. Indoor scenes and outdoor scenes
are clustered into diﬀerent groups (left part of top image and right part of
top image). We are also able to locate a common object appearing in various
scenes, or ﬁnd the objects in a certain scene (bottom left and bottom right).
refrigerator
dishwasher
countertop
windowpane
Polished stone
pool table
work surface
television
chandelier
silver screen
Polished stone
building fire escape
pool table bed
horse head
pool table leg
horse torso
bus window
horse neck
washer door
motorbike wheel
person hair
horse tail
horse muzzle
table drawer
lamp shade
bottle body
bed headboard
coffee table top
sofa seat cushion
tvmonitor screen
ottoman seat base
airplane stern
autobus windshield
toilet lid
dishwasher button panel
toilet water tank
toilet bowl
Polished stone
Rubber/latex
crosshatched
crystalline
stratified
(b) From left to right: visualizations of object-material relations, part-material relations
and material-texture relations. We are able to discover knowledge such as some sinks
are ceramic while others are metallic. We can also ﬁnd out what can be used to describe
a material.
Fig. 6. Visualizing discovered compositional relations between various concepts.
OpenSurfaces. We conjecture that it is attributed to the usefulness of information in object as priors for material parsing. As mentioned above, we ﬁnd that
directly fusing texture images with other natural images is harmful to other
tasks, since there are nontrivial diﬀerences between images in DTD and natural images. After ﬁne-tuning on texture images using the model trained with
all other tasks, we can obtain the quantitative texture classiﬁcation results by
picking the most frequent pixel-level predictions as an image-level prediction.
It yields classiﬁcation accuracy of 35.10. The performance on texture indicates
that only ﬁne-tuning the network on texture labels is not optimal. However, this
is a necessary step to overcome the fusion of natural and synthetic data sources.
T. Xiao, Y. Liu, B. Zhou, Y. Jiang, J. Sun
We hope future research can discover ways to better utilize such image-level
annotations for pixel-level predictions.
Qualitative results. We provide qualitative results of UPerNet, as visualized in
Figure 5. UPerNet is able to unify compositional visual knowledge and eﬃciently
predicts hierarchical outputs simultaneously.
Discovering visual knowledge in natural scenes
Uniﬁed Perceptual Parsing requires a model that is able to recognize as many
visual concepts as possible from a given image. If a model successfully achieves
this goal, it could discover rich visual knowledge underlying the real world, such
as answering questions like “What are the commonalities between living rooms
and bedrooms?” or “What are the materials that make a cup?” The discovery or
even the reasoning of visual knowledge in natural scenes will enable future vision
systems to understand its surroundings better. In this section, we demonstrate
that our framework trained on the Broden+ is able to discover compositional
visual knowledge at multiple levels. That is also the special application for the
network trained on heterogeneous data annotations. We use the validation set of
Places-365 containing 36, 500 images from 365 scenes as our testbed, since
the Places dataset contains images from a variety of scenes and is closer to
real world. We deﬁne several relations in a hierarchical way, namely scene-object
relation, object-part relation, object-material relation, part-material relation and
material-texture relation. Note that only the object-part relations can be directly
read out from the ground-truth annotations, other types of relations can only
be extracted from the network predictions.
Scene-object relations. For each scene, we count how many objects show up
normalized by the frequency of this scene. According to , we formulate the
relation as a bipartite graph G = (V, E) comprised of a set V = Vs ∪Vo of
scene nodes and object nodes together with a set E of edges. The edge with a
weight from vs to vo represents the percent likelihood that object vo shows up
in scene vs. No edge connects two nodes that are both from Vs or both from Vo.
We ﬁlter the edges whose weight is lower than a threshold and run a clustering
algorithm to form a better layout. Due to space limitations, we only sample
dozens of nodes and show the visualization of the graph in Figure 6(a). We
can clearly see hat the indoor scenes mostly share objects such as ceiling, ﬂoor,
chair, or windowpane while the outdoor scenes mostly share objects such as sky,
tree, building, or mountain. What is more interesting is that even in the set of
scenes, human-made and natural scenes are clustered into diﬀerent groups. In the
layout, we are also able to locate a common object appearing in various scenes,
or ﬁnd the objects in a certain scene. The bottom-left and bottom-right pictures
in Figure 6(a) illustrate an example in which we can reasonably conclude that
the shelf often appears in shops, stores, and utility rooms; and that in a heliport
there are often trees, fences, runways, persons, and of course, airplanes.
Object(part)-material relations. Apart from scene-object relations, we are
able to discover object-material relations as well. Thanks to the ability of our
Uniﬁed Perceptual Parsing for Scene Understanding
Scene-object Relations
garage (indoor) is composed of ﬂoor, wall, ceiling, car, door, person, building,
windowpane, box, and signboard.
glacier is composed of mountain, sky, earth, tree, snow, rock, water, and person.
laundromat is composed of wall, ﬂoor, washer, ceiling, door, cabinet, person,
table and signboard.
Object-material Relations
toilet is made of ceramic (65%) and plastic (35%).
microwave is made of glass (55%), and metal (45%).
sidewalk is made of tile (65%), stone (18%), and wood (17%).
Part-material Relations
coﬀee table top is made of wood (69%) and glass (31%).
bed headboard is made of wood (77%) and fabric (23%).
tv monitor screen is made of glass (100%).
Material-texture Relations
brick is stratiﬁed (42%), stained (34%) and crosshatched (24%) .
stone is stained (43%), potholed (31%) and matted (26%) .
mirror is gauzy (54%), crosshatched (26%) and grooved (20%) .
Table 4. Discorved visual knowledge by UPerNet trained for UPP. UPerNet is able to
extract reasonable visual knowledge priors.
model to predict a label of both object and material at each pixel, it is straightforward to align objects with their associated materials by counting at each pixel
what percentage of each material is in every object. Similar to the scene-object
relationship, we build a bipartite graph and show its visualization in the left of
Figure 6(b). Using this graph we can infer that some sinks are ceramic while
others are metallic; diﬀerent ﬂoors have diﬀerent materials, such as wood, tile,
or carpet. Ceiling and wall are painted; the sky is also “painted”, more like a
metaphor. However, we can also see that most of the bed is fabric instead of
wood, a misalignment due to the actual objects on the bed. Intuitively, the material of a part in an object will be more monotonous. We show the part-material
visualization in the middle of Figure 6(b).
Material-texture relations. One type of material may have various kinds of
textures. But what is the visual description of a material? We show the visualization of material-texture relations in the right of Figure 6(b). It is worth
noting that although there is a lack of pixel-level annotations for texture labels,
we can still generate a reasonable relation graph. For example, a carpet can be
described as matted, blotchy, stained, crosshatched and grooved.
In Table 4, we further show some discovered visual knowledge by UPerNet.
For scene-object relations, we choose the objects which appear in at least 30%
of a scene. For object-material, part-material and material-texture relations, we
choose at most top-3 candidates, ﬁlter them with a threshold, and normalize
their frequencies. We are able to discover the common objects that form each
scene, and how much each object or part is made of some material. The visual
T. Xiao, Y. Liu, B. Zhou, Y. Jiang, J. Sun
knowledge extracted and summarized by UPerNet is in consistent with human
knowledge. This knowledge base provides rich information across various types
of concepts. We hope such knowledge base can shed light on understanding
diﬀerent scenes for future intelligent agents, and ultimately, understanding the
real world.
Conclusion
This work studies the task of Uniﬁed Perceptual Parsing, which aims at parsing
visual concepts across scene categories, objects, parts, materials and textures
from images. A multi-task network and training strategy of handling heterogeneous annotations are developed and benchmarked. We further utilize the trained
network to discover visual knowledge among scenes.
Acknowledgement
We would like to show our gratitude to Daniel Karl I. Weidele from MIT-
IBM Watson AI Lab for his comments and revision of an earlier version of
the manuscript.