Normalization: A Preprocessing Stage
S.Gopal Krishna Patro1, Kishore Kumar sahu2
Research Scholar, Department of CSE & IT, VSSUT, Burla, Odisha, India1
Assistant Professor, Department of CSE & IT, VSSUT, Burla, Odisha, India2
Abstract: As we know that the normalization is a pre-processing stage of any type problem statement. Especially
normalization takes important role in the field of soft computing, cloud computing etc. for manipulation of data like
scale down or scale up the range of data before it becomes used for further stage. There are so many normalization
techniques are there namely Min-Max normalization, Z-score normalization and Decimal scaling normalization. So by
referring these normalization techniques we are going to propose one new normalization technique namely, Integer
Scaling Normalization. And we are going to show our proposed normalization technique using various data sets.
Keywords: Normalization, Scaling, Transformation, Integer Scaling, AMZD
I. INTRODUCTION
Normalization is scaling technique or a mapping
technique or a pre processing stage . Where, we can
find new range from an existing one range. It can be
helpful for the prediction or forecasting purpose a lot .
As we know there are so many ways to predict or forecast
but all can vary with each other a lot. So to maintain the
large variation of prediction and forecasting the
Normalization technique is required to make them closer.
But there is some existing normalization techniques as
mentioned in my abstract section namely Min-Max, Zscore & Decimal scaling excluding these technique we are
presenting new one technique called Integer Scaling
technique. This technique comes from the AMZD
(Advanced on Min-Max Z-score Decimal scaling) .
II. RELATED STUDY
The descriptions of existing normalization methodology
are given below:
The technique which provides linear transformation on
original range of data is called Min-Mix Normalization
 . The technique which keeps relationship among
original data is called Min-Mix Normalization. Min-Max
normalization is a simple technique where the technique
can specifically fit the data in a pre-defined boundary
with a pre-defined boundary.
As per Min-Max normalization technique,
  
   ∗( −) + 
A’ contains Min-Max Normalized data one
If pre defined boundary is [C, D]
If A is the range of original data
& B is the mapped one data then,
The technique which gives the normalized values or range
of data from the original unstructured data using the
concepts like mean and standard deviation then the
Parameter is called as Z-score Normalization . So the
unstructured data can be normalized using z-score
parameter, as per given formulae:
′ =  −
vi’ is Z-score normalized one values.
vi is value of the row E of ith column
std (E) = "
or mean value
In this technique, suppose we are having five rows
namely X Y, Z, U, and V with different variables or
columns that are ‘n’ in each row. So in each row above zscore technique can be applied to calculate the normalized
ones. If suppose some row having all the values are
identical, so the standard deviation of that row is equal to
zero then all values for that row are set to zero. Like that
Min-Max normalization the z-score also gives the range
of values between 0 and 1.
The technique which provides the range between -1 and 1
is nothing but Decimal Scaling . So, as per the
decimal scaling technique,
vi is the scaled values
v is the range of values
j is the smallest integer Max(|vi|)<1
But as we all know about these above mentioned
techniques well. But the proposed technique one we will
discuss in coming section details:
III. PROPOSED MODEL
As we have studied so many research article, the
researchers or scholars who are working in the area of soft
computing, data mining etc. and excluding these areas
other areas like Image processing, cloud computing etc.,
of different branches or discipline. If their area of research
related to dataset, then must of the dataset are not well
structured or dataset are unstructured.
So to make the dataset well structured or make it into the
structured one, we proposed one technique, which gives
the scaled or transformed or structured or normalized one
dataset for our research work within the range 0 and 1.
As like Min-Max, z-score, z-score standard deviation,
decimal scaling normalization technique, our proposed
normalization technique (AMZD normalization) also
gives the range of values between 0 and 1.
Our proposed normalization technique having following
features:-
 Individual element scaling or transformation
technique.
 Independent of amount of data (large or medium
or small data set)
 Independent of size of data (number of digits in
each element)
 Scale can be done between 0 and 1.
 Is applicable for integer numbers only.
The proposed normalization technique is given below
with explanation;-
(|+|),#(-./0∗(|1|)
X, is the particular data element
N, is the number of digits in element X
A, is the first digit of data element X
Y, is the scaled one value between 0 and 1
This proposed model can be applicable for any length of
data element of the type integer only. Except the features
we have mentioned above for our proposed normalization
technique following are the similarity among our
proposed model with the existing techniques namely Min-
Max, z-score & decimal scaling is:
 Unstructured to structure one
 Purpose of scaling or formulation
 All works in the numerical data only.
The comparison study through tabulation and graphical
representation is described below. Here we like to
compare our technique with the existing one Min-Max
technique with different data sets.
Below we are comparing our proposed technique with
Min-Max normalization technique through table as well
as through graph with different data sets like BSE sensex,
NNGC and college enrollment data set.
BSE_SENSEX Data Set 
Normalization
Normalization
Fig.1 Comparison Graph on Min-Max Vs Proposed Technique for BSE
Sensex Dataset
NNGC Data Set 
Normalization
Normalization
Fig.2 Comparison Graph on Min-Max Vs Proposed Technique for
NNGC Dataset
Colleges Enrollment Data Set 
Normalization
Normalization
Fig.3 Comparison Graph on Min-Max Vs Proposed Technique for
College Enrollment Dataset
In the above tables and graphs, we have described how
our proposed normalization techniques works within the
range 0 and 1 with respect to the given any range of data.
Following the steps to be followed during normalization:
 Select the range of data of any size.
 Write a code to read that range of data set
container file.
 Use proposed technique to scale down range of
data into between 0 and 1
 Use the newly generated scaled data into further
processing as per our need.
 Then, scale up (if required).
IV. CONCLUSION
As we have studied that, our normalization technique
works well in each and every field of research work like
soft computing (we are working), image processing and
cloud computing etc. so well,. So we planned it to
propose some other types of normalization technique and
also use our technique into the fast going research area
namely time series financial forecasting as well wherever
the data set concept will be arise.