Vol.:(0123456789)
AI and Ethics 3:735–744
 
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Trust and trustworthiness in AI ethics
Karoline Reinhardt1,2
Received: 27 April 2022 / Accepted: 23 July 2022 / Published online: 26 September 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Due to the extensive progress of research in artificial intelligence (AI) as well as its deployment and application, the public
debate on AI systems has also gained momentum in recent years. With the publication of the Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI , notions of trust and trustworthiness gained particular attention within AI ethics-debates; despite an apparent
consensus that AI should be trustworthy, it is less clear what trust and trustworthiness entail in the field of AI. In this paper,
I give a detailed overview on the notion of trust employed in AI Ethics Guidelines thus far. Based on that, I assess their
overlaps and their omissions from the perspective of practical philosophy. I argue that, currently, AI ethics tends to overload
the notion of trustworthiness. It thus runs the risk of becoming a buzzword that cannot be operationalized into a working
concept for AI research. What is needed, however, is an approach that is also informed with findings of the research on trust
in other fields, for instance, in social sciences and humanities, especially in the field of practical philosophy. This paper is
intended as a step in this direction.
Keywords  AI ethics · Fairness · Guidelines · Transparency · Trust · Trustworthiness
* Karoline Reinhardt
 ;
 
International Center for Ethics in the Sciences
and Humanities, Universität Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
Faculty of Arts and Humanities, Junior professorship
for Applied Ethics, Universität Passau, Passau, Germany
1  Introduction
Due to the extensive progress of research in Artificial Intelligence (AI) as well as its deployment and application, the
public debate on AI systems has also gained significant
momentum in recent years. It has become increasingly clear
that computerized algorithms and AI pose not only technical
but also profound ethical challenges . We have thus
witnessed the publication of a number of guidelines issued
by research institutions, private companies and political bodies that deal with various aspects and fields of AI ethics such
as privacy, accountability, non-discrimination and fairness.
With the publication of the Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI by the Independent High-Level Expert Group
on Artificial Intelligence , the notions of trust and
trustworthiness gained particular attention within AI ethicsdebates with regard to AI governance; the term trustworthy
AI (TAI) has since been widely adopted by the AI research
community, public sector organizations, and political bodies issuing AI ethics guidelines. Despite an apparent
consensus that AI should be trustworthy, it is less clear what
trust and trustworthiness entail in the field of AI and what
ethical standards, technical requirements and practices are
needed for the realization of TAI.
In this paper, I give a detailed overview on the notion
of trust employed in AI Ethics Guidelines. Such an overview of the current state of AI ethics is necessary to be able
to define points for further research in the field of TAI. I
focus on the following questions: to what extent and how
is the term currently used in guidelines? What notions of
“trust” and “trustworthiness” are prevalent in these guidelines? What political, social, and moral role is attributed to
trust, there? Which concepts are associated with the term
trustworthiness? (§2) Based on this overview I assess these
findings regarding their overlaps and their omissions from
the perspective of practical philosophy (§3). Practical Philosophy has a long-standing tradition in thinking about the
notion of trust in oneself and in inter-personal,
 social and political settings as
well as in human/artefact interaction, that is for instance
trust in technology . I argue that currently AI ethics
overloads the notion of trust and trustworthiness and turns
AI and Ethics 3:735–744
it into an umbrella term for an inconclusive list of things
deemed “good”. Presently, “trustworthiness”, thus, runs the
risk of becoming a buzzword that cannot be operationalized into a working concept for AI research. On top of that,
we can observe that the notion of “trust” deployed in AI
research so far is mainly an instrumental notion. I, then,
discuss whether the notions of trust and trustworthiness
deployed in the guidelines are apt to capture the nature of
the interaction between humans and AI systems that we want
them to describe. What is needed is, as I argue, an approach
to trust that is also informed with a normative foundation
and elements emphasized in the research on trust in other
fields, for instance, in social sciences and the humanities,
especially in the field of practical philosophy. This paper is
intended as a first step in this direction. In §4, I formulate
points to consider for future research on TAI. In the final
section I draw some more general conclusions on how we
should conceptualize trust regarding AI and which mistakes
we should avoid (§5).
2  Trust and trustworthiness in AI ethics:
an evaluation of guidelines
2.1  Corpus of documents
The past years have seen a rise in publications of AI ethics
guidelines and frameworks with new documents being disseminated every month. In the past two years, a few helpful overviews of ethics guidelines have also been published
 . For my analysis, I combined the samples of
Jobin et al. , Zeng et al. , Fjeld et al. , Hagendorff and Thiebes et al. , and added documents that
were either published after the publication of the five overview articles or excluded for other reasons not relevant for
this survey .1 Different from the other overviews
that cover with one exception the entire landscape of
AI ethics, I focus on the notions of trust and trustworthiness
and key concepts associated with these two notions in the
guidelines. Some view trust and trustworthiness as a central
principle, others merely mention it and yet others
do not discuss this topic at all . Thiebes et al. 
give an overview on eight trustworthy AI guidelines2 Unlike
them, I do not start with a fixed definition of trustworthiness,
but first assess how the term is used.
2.2  Trust, trustors and trustees?
Trust is, in the guidelines I analyzed, generally perceived
as something “good”. Only few guidelines warn against
blind , excessive trust , being overly trusting
 and “abuse of the trust that is artificially built between
humans and machines” . Some suggest that there might
be “appropriate” or “correct” levels of trust . Most
guidelines refer to trust, however, as something to be
advanced , built , created, cultivated,
 earned , elevated , enabled , established , gained , fostered , improved , increased , inspired
 , maintained , promoted , reinforced , and upheld . Rarely it is mentioned,
however, that trust can also decrease , erode ,
be undermined , or even lost and in some cases has
to be restored .
The guidelines differ in the envisioned addressee of trust
building; sometimes it is the general public or society as
a whole that is addressed and the aim is to build public or
social trust . Corporate
ethics guidelines as well as guidelines by business associations, unsurprisingly, tend to emphasize the trust of clients,
consumers, customers, and users, but other organizations do
as well . Less mentioned is human trust or trust between humans and technology , machines or robots . The trust
of citizens , individuals or people (irrespective of
their societal role) , employees , workforce trust
 or stakeholders are only occasionally mentioned. In
guidelines on AI use in the health and care sector clinicians,
physicians, and practitioners also play a role .
The proposed answer to the question who or what is to be
trusted also diverges among guidelines. In the Asilomar AI
Principles, we read about trust and transparency among AI
researchers and developers .3 Others see developers and
1  A few words on the limitations of the corpus of documents are warranted: Guidelines and frameworks are grey literature and therefore
not indexed in scholarly databases. Their retrieval is thus less replicable than searches for academic literature: some of the online sources
referred to in Jobin et  al. and Hagendorff could no longer
be retrieved and were, thus, removed from the corpus. Occasionally,
older versions of documents were replaced by updated more recent
ones. The issue of a possible bias in searching for documents that
Jobin et al. have already discussed was mitigated by including
studies and overviews from various authors. In the corpus of documents we probably still face a bias towards languages using Latin
script and in particular towards results that were written or translated
into English as it was already present in the five overviews that I used
as a basis. In the selection of documents, no distinction has been
made between “framework”, “guideline”, “principles”, “recommendation” and “white paper”. There is of course an extensive overlap
regarding the corpus of documents between the five overviews: More
than 120 documents were considered. After removing duplicates
roughly 100 documents remained and were further analyzed.
2  They treat “beneficial”, “ethical”, “responsible” and “trustworthy”
AI as roughly synonymous which leads to some conceptual blurring.
3  Ethically Aligned Design stresses that an “atmosphere of trust”
among AI researchers is needed for empowering AI researchers to
share their worries and live up to the standards of professional ethics
AI and Ethics 3:735–744
designers also, but not solely, as the appropriate addressees
of calls for trustworthiness .
2.3  What makes AI trustworthy?
In the guidelines, trustworthiness is linked to a whole range
of different principles; transparency does play a major role
and is linked to trust and trustworthiness in a number of
guidelines . Trustworthiness is, however, also linked to reliability and robustness as well as safety
and security .
Traceability and verifiability are sometimes mentioned in relation to trustworthiness .
Other guidelines require TAI to be understandable , interpretable and explainable . IBM explicitly states: “we don’t
blindly trust those who can’t explain their reasoning” .
And it is further mentioned that opacity might lead to a lack
of trust . The notion of predictability of an AI systems
is also sometimes invoked when referring to trustworthiness .
In some guidelines the role of accountability for TAI is
emphasized . Some also
state that questions of liability need to be addressed for AI
to be trustworthy as well as potential misuse scenarios . Monitoring and evaluation processes 
as well as auditing procedures should be in place for TAI
 . Human oversight as well as oversight by
regulators is sometimes one of the key requirements.
The importance of compliance with norms and standards is
highlighted in some guidelines , or, in the terminology of the HLEG: TAI should respect all applicable laws
and regulations and, thus, be lawful . Some guidelines
stress that TAI should be aligned with moral values and
ethical principles . Others state that “an appropriate regulatory approach that reduces accidents can increase
public trust” . Rarely it is mentioned that accreditation,
approval and certification schemes and the formulation of
guidelines can help establish trust .
Also mentioned is the principle of avoiding harm . According to some guidelines, TAI should
not only avoid harm, but also promote good or be beneficial
to people . What this good or benefits consists in,
however, is rarely defined . 4 Sometimes it is stated that
AI systems should serve the needs of the user , or even
enhance “environmental and societal well-being” and
the “good of humanity, individuals, societies and the environment and ecosystems” . Other guidelines emphasize
“economic growth and women’s economic empowerment”
 , or, “inclusive growth, sustainable development and
well-being” . Taking the public interest into account is
also mentioned . In guidelines focusing
on the health care sector, success rate is also invoked as a
variable for determining an algorithm’s trustworthiness .
Diversity, non-discrimination and fairness are further
principles linked to TAI . Risks of biases need to be addressed . Control over one’s data , in general or
the ability to guide machines as they learn are also
mentioned as important. Data security and privacy protection are yet further principles invoked in the guidelines in relation to TAI. TAI
shall also foster human agency, autonomy, 
human-centered values and respect for human
rights . The relation of trust and consent is, though an
important topic in the philosophy of trust , however,
rarely explored in AI ethics guidelines . Even
less frequently, non-manipulation is referred to . Maybe
somewhat surprisingly the question of who developed an AI
 , who trained it and what data was used during training
 , is rarely mentioned as relevant for trust.
Though the connection between trust and a variety of ethical principles is made in the guidelines, no single principle
is linked to trust as making AI trustworthy throughout the
entire corpus of documents. The conceptualization of trust
in general and the definition of what makes AI trustworthy
are thus so far inconclusive.
3  Assessing AI ethics guidelines
3.1  Conceptual overlaps between the guidelines
In what follows, I want to discuss important overlaps
between the guidelines. I will focus on five main points:
firstly, the guidelines that refer to trust at all view building
trust dominantly as a “fundamental requirement for ethical governance” and as something “good” that shall
be promoted. Whereas lack of trust is dominantly seen as
something to be overcome . Ambivalences regarding
trust are rarely discussed. Some hint at the fact that blind
trust may be problematic and “that people are unduly
trusting of autonomous mobile robots”, but that trust is
a rather ambivalent concept is rarely mentioned .
Secondly and strikingly, most guidelines are based on
an instrumental understanding of trust: trust is described as
something that is a precondition to achieve other things, like
the benefits connected to AI or to realize AI’s full potential
4  PDPC, for instance, equates avoiding harm and beneficence .
not only in severe cases of whistleblowing but throughout the entire
process of research and deployment .
Footnote 3 (continued)
AI and Ethics 3:735–744
for society. To give a few examples: in Artificial Intelligence:
Australia’s Ethics Framework issued by the Australian Governments Department of Industry Innovation and Science
 , AI is described as having “the potential to increase
our well-being; lift our economy; improve society by, for
instance, making it more inclusive; and help the environment
by using the planet's resources more dito” . To achieve
these benefits, however, “it will be important for citizens
to have trust in the AI applications” (ibid.). Thus, though
described predominantly as something worth achieving trust
is not perceived as an intrinsic value.
Thirdly, in the guidelines, dimensions of interpersonal
concepts of trust, institutional and social trust and trust in
technology are lumped together. All of them certainly play
a role and should play a role when we discuss TAI. In what
way and to what extent they are and ought to be relevant,
however, as well as the question of what aspects of them are
desirable in liberal democratic societies regarding TAI, still
needs to be worked out and laid out more precisely.
Fourthly, no single principle stands out as being mentioned in all the guidelines as making an AI system trustworthy. As noted above, in the guidelines, “trustworthiness” is
linked to a whole range of different principles. One almost
gets the impression that everything that is considered “good”
is also supposed to inspire trust and on top of that regarded
as a necessary precondition for AI systems to be trustworthy. We thus run the risk of turning trustworthiness into an
umbrella term for all things in general considered “good”.
Or to put it more polemically, we seem to expect AI systems
to fulfill all the principles that we think we ought to fulfill on
an interpersonal, societal, and political level such as justice,
non-discrimination, and reliable protection of human rights,
and fail to do so. This, however, turns trustworthiness in a
buzzword that is not applicable or operationalizable.
Related to this point is, fifthly, that possible trade-offs
and conflicts between these various values and principles
that are supposed to generate trust are rarely reflected and
how they would play out with regard to an AI system’s trustworthiness . Transparency and privacy, for instance, are
things that we cannot have both at the same time, at least not
with regard to the same entity . Other conflicts between
principles will not occur on a conceptual level like the one
between transparency and privacy, but rather with regard to
their application and implementation. Both points combined,
overloading the notion of trustworthiness, and not addressing possible contradictions, tend to turn TAI into an intellectual “land of plenty”, a mythological or fictional place
where everything is available at any time without conflicts.
3.2  Conceptual omissions regarding trust
in the guidelines
In the following, I concentrate on five omissions that are of
particular importance: Firstly, what is overlooked in most of
the guidelines is that trust has to do with uncertainty 
and with vulnerability . We only need to
trust where there is uncertainty about the outcome of a given
situation and that outcome puts us at risk.5 What is more:
the event we then trust to happen can be positive or negative: “One can also trust in the end of the world” . The
object of our trust or event that we trust to happen does not
necessarily need to be beneficent. That trust is an ambivalent
concept is an observation which is often overlooked in the
guidelines.
Related to this point is, secondly, that trust is often a fallback position in situations that are too complex to understand or where the costs of establishing understanding outweigh the supposed gains of doing so: trust helps to reduce
social complexity, as an influential sociological account of
trust argues . Under this perspective, increasing transparency that most guidelines view as conducive to trustbuilding actually decreases the need for trust by decreasing
uncertainty .6 One could say, according to this account
of trust: where I have all the information and have understood all the inner workings of the AI system, I do not really
need to trust it anymore, because then I simply know how
it works.7
Thirdly, we can observe a certain one-sidedness in the
guidelines regarding the idea of how trust is established. The
focus is clearly on the side of those who have an interest in
building trust. Trust is very strongly portrayed as something
that one can bring about, that needs to be improved, maintained, earned and gained: the dominant envisioned actor of
the trust game is the trustee. When reading the guidelines,
it sometimes appears as if bringing about trust were entirely
under control of the trustee. The role of the trustor is not sufficiently reflected. This goes hand in hand with overlooking
the fact that the trust game is ultimately an open-end-game;
5  In the extensive philosophical literature on trust the epistemic preconditions of trust play an important role s. Alcoff , Daukas
 , Fricker , Horsburgh .
6  O’Neill argues that some sorts of transparency might even lead
to spreading mistrust.
7  Of course, there are other aspects of developing and using an AI
model that, even if I know everything about the system itself, are still
based on trust. AI systems, as socio-technical systems, are involved in
a number of different overlapping trust relationships. This is already
present in many guidelines. See for instance, “Trust in the development, deployment and use of AI systems concerns not only the technology’s inherent properties, but also the qualities of the socio-technical systems involving AI applications.” I thank an anonymous
reviewer for pointing this out.
AI and Ethics 3:735–744
it does not suffice for establishing trust that something or
someone is trustworthy. The person who is supposed to trust
has to grant trust as well.
Fourthly, the dynamic and flexible aspects of trust building as well as trust withdrawal are not in focus in the guidelines.8 The fact, as already indicated in the previous point,
that trust is a two-way affair and that the condition of the
person trusting can also play a major role in whether trust
is established or not, is still too little discussed. Reading
the guidelines, one sometimes gets the impression that
trust could and would never be withdrawn once it has been
gained. This, obviously, is not correct and needs to be
addressed in TAI research.
The last apparent omission I want to mention here is of
a less conceptual, but a more practical nature; although it
is occasionally mentioned in the guidelines that TAI systems should benefit the environment and the economy, or at
least not harm them, surprisingly, even in those guidelines
that focus on customer and user trust, the conditions under
which AI products are created hardly plays a role and they
are rarely mentioned as a factor for increasing or decreasing
people’s trust in AI. An exception is for instance Ethical,
Social, and Political Challenges in Artificial Intelligence
in Health that raises the question “who developed it?” and
“What kind of data was the AI trained on? If I am a member of a minority group, will the AI work well for me?” as
central to the question of whether an AI is trustworthy .
What is also rarely mentioned as a factor for TAI is, what
resources are needed to produce AI systems, what working
conditions prevail, what resources they require when they
are in operation and who finances their development .9
Also, whether an AI system could potentially be deployed
for military purposes does not play a major role.10
4  Closing the gaps: future research on the T
4.1  Ethics and TAI
What can ethics do about these shortcomings? Regina
Ammicht Quinn describes four types und understandings
of ethics: a merely ornamental understanding of ethics that
views ethics as “the icing on the cake” when everything is
done; an instrumental understanding of ethics, something
that we need to be done with, a box to check on a form; a
substantial-instrumental understanding of ethics that provides orientation, for instance in the form of guidelines
 . The understanding of ethics she advocates, however,
is a non-instrumental understanding of ethics; under this
perspective, ethics asks to critically reflect on and evaluate our (often implicit) presuppositions and their moral
acceptability.
From an ornamental perspective, we would be content
with the new label TAI and leave it at that. From an instrumental perspective, we provide one box to check on a form
before an AI system is disseminated: “Is it trustworthy?
Check.” From a substantial-instrumental perspective, we
provide checklists for TAI that are more comprehensive: “Is
it transparent? Is it robust? Is it reliable? Is it explainable?”
From a non-instrumental perspective, however, we must
do a lot more footwork. Trust is presumably the basis of
successful individual and social coexistence, it is, however,
not in itself “good” in any moral sense , but a highly
ambivalent concept. An ethical perspective on TAI needs
to take this into account: we have to talk about false trust,
misused trust, the perils of trust and (productive) distrust.
This is not to say that there are no points that connect the
current guideline-understanding and a more philosophically informed understanding of trust. On the contrary, both
converge in a crucial point: the observation that trust is of
instrumental, not of intrinsic, value.
The question is which elements of a philosophically
informed concept need to be present in such a notion of trust
when it comes to AI governance for it to (a) portray trust
relations correctly, and (b) be a viable and ethically sound
concept for AI research. This is not the place to fully develop
such a notion of trust. Nevertheless, I would like to outline a
few aspects that can provide a basis for further explorations
in the next section and point out points for further research
derived from these brief considerations.
4.2  AI governance
Technologies are not developed in a societal vacuum, but
are interwoven with the fabric of our social and political
interactions. They are, as socio-technical systems, embedded
8  One exception is Ethically Aligned Design: This guideline explicitly states that trust is dynamic .
9  Deutsche Telekom raises the question of supplier chains and of
whom one should choose to not work with in “order to engender
trust”. 
10  Exceptions are the Ethics Guideline for Trustworthy AI and
the Recommendations of the Council on AI of the OECD . Ethically Aligned Design discusses autonomous weapon systems. However, the term trust is used here only in the context of the accountability problem with respect to trusted user authentication logs .
It is not a question of whether the possibility of military use has an
influence on the trustworthiness of certain systems or not. IIIM’s Ethics Policy makes a point of discussing military use of AI, not in
relation to its trustworthiness, though.
AI and Ethics 3:735–744
in societal and political contexts . This is particularly
true with regard to AI technologies and algorithmic decision making; algorithms based on machine learning already
shape our lives and social interactions in profound ways
 . Liberal democracies, now, take a certain stance when
it comes to social arrangements: “Liberals are committed
to a conception of freedom and of respect for the capacities
and the agency of individual men and women, and these
commitments generate a requirement that all aspects of the
social should either be made acceptable or be capable of
being made acceptable to every last individual” . Following this perspective, technologies, their development and
deployment as part of our social arrangements must also
meet these requirements. Especially when they are as interwoven with the workings of our social and political institutions as many AI systems are today.
The commitment to respect for the capacities and the
agency of individuals leads also to the idea of checks and
balances that modern democracies are based on. Checks and
balances are essentially institutionalized forms of distrust
and serve to ensure that no branch of government or any
other institution abuses its power . Ultimately, they also
serve to safeguard individual agency. For many theorists of
democracy, distrust is at the root of the basic set up of modern democracies: “Liberalism, and then liberal democracy,
emerged from the distrust of traditional political and clerical
authorities .”
In addition, it is worth noting that guidelines are governance instruments; they are part of the control and regulation
system of private and public institutions. This is particularly obvious when they are issued by political institutions,
such as the above quoted guidelines by the EU Commission or the UNESO, but it also holds for guidelines issued
by private companies. As governance instruments, they are
not only written for developers but are part of a wider system of regulation and control that must be in line with the
above-mentioned requirements on the acceptability of social
arrangements, especially when technologies have profound
impact on these arrangements as many AI systems do.
4.3  Points for further research
I will focus on three aspects: the overlooked ambivalence of
trust, the problematic conflation of trust and trustworthiness,
and the problem of conflict of principles in the guidelines:
Ambivalence of trust
As mentioned above, trust is a highly ambivalent concept;
trust “is important, but it is also dangerous” . It makes
us vulnerable, as has been often pointed out in the literature
on trust . The ambivalence of trust is, however, often
obscured in the guidelines thus far, and should be taken
into account in further research on TAI. One might now
wonder, why should we care about the ambivalent nature of
trust in AI governance?11 The ambivalence of trust has to
be addressed in order not only to appropriately capture the
nature of trust relations, but also because of its practical relevance; trust comes with a number of ethically relevant risks.
The nature of trust is thus not only of interest for classroom
discussions, but of high practical importance. When algorithmic decisions are as interwoven with the fabric of society as they are today and increasingly will be in the future,
this generates the requirement that these aspects of our lives
and the risks that come with them fulfill basic requirements
of justification, as described above. Hence, we might, ultimately, not be in need for more trust in the application of
AI systems, but for structures that institutionalize “distrust”
 , like binding standards, or mandatory auditing and
monitoring. Here, moral, social, and political philosophy
can help to further clarify matters.12
Problematic conflation of trust and trustworthiness
Trust and trustworthiness get easily conflated in the
guidelines as well as in debates on TAI. From an ethical
standpoint it is of utmost importance to keep them apart conceptually; ideally, we only trust things and people that are
trustworthy. However, this is obviously not how trust works.
People trust things and persons that are utterly unworthy
of trust, and they do not trust things and persons that are
utterly trustworthy; to perceive something or someone as
trustworthy and for something or someone to be trustworthy are two different things . This is also relevant
for AI design. To give but one example: when AI systems
behave like humans, for example when they give natural
language recommendations or even have a voice, like some
virtual assistant systems, people tend to trust them more easily. Voices and faces might make it easier to trust a certain
entity, but they tell us nothing about the trustworthiness of
that entity.
The disconnection of trusting and trustworthiness cuts
both ways. Someone or something might be utterly trustworthy and still people won’t trust it. However, in the guidelines, as in the wider debate on trustworthiness, this is often
overlooked. Thiebes et al., for instance, “propose that AI is
perceived as trustworthy by its users […] when it is developed, deployed, and used in ways that not only ensure its
12  One might want to object that it is unclear what good it would
bring to address this issue in practical guidelines and it is surely correct that there would probably be no good in turning a guideline into
an essay about the nature of trust. However, when set up properly,
guidelines are the condensate of a longer deliberation process and the
awareness of the ambivalent nature of trust should inform this deliberation process. I thank an anonymous reviewer for pointing this out
11  I thank an anonymous reviewer for pointing this out.
AI and Ethics 3:735–744
compliance with all relevant laws and its robustness but
especially its adherence to general ethical principles “ 
Maybe it would be perceived as trustworthy, maybe it would
not. As discussed above, it does not suffice to be trustworthy
to gain trust; trust must be granted. Overlooking this observation has profound consequences for how we conceptualize
the interaction called “trusting”. Additionally, it has practical implications:
Putting so much emphasis on designing TAI as a means
for a wider adoption of AI systems might in the end of the
day lead to a great disappointment on the side of developers. Much effort might be put in designing trustworthy AI
and people might still not trust it, let alone adopt it. 13Trust
can be earned, but it also has to be granted. There are good
reasons to design trustworthy AI as there are good reasons
for many of the values and principles mentioned in the
guidelines. But they might ultimately not lead to a wider
adoption of AI systems, simply because trustworthiness
does not automatically lead to trust in the way that many
of the guidelines seem to assume. It might not fulfill the
expectations regarding technology adoption. This is not
to say that we should not care about the principles that AI
systems endorse or violate, we just might need to provide
a different reasoning, or different incentives from gaining
trust. Structures that institutionalize “distrust” like binding
standards can also provide strong incentives to act in certain
ways. Related to this point, the call for more trust needs to
be monitored closely; in some cases, it might stand in for
an avoidance of strict hard law regulations. The dominant
perspective in the corpus of documents is that building trust
is a “fundamental requirement for ethical governance” .
In many cases, however, it might be the more ethical decision to call for a robust legal framework, not for more trust.
On a more conceptual note, accepting that people are
free to make their own decisions when it comes to trust
and that they should not be lured, tricked, or coerced into
trusting no matter how advantageous that would be for others or for themselves, is part of the respect for the capacities and agency of people mentioned above. Taking up the
virtual assistant example: making it easier to trust it might
in some cases even make it less worthy of trust, because
people should not be lured into trusting. Ultimately, this
comes down to a relatively profound argument: taking the
self-determination and autonomy of people serious involves
accepting that trusting is a game with an open end. It is their
choice to trust, or not to trust.
Conflict of principles
Finally, the guidelines thus far join conflicting principles regarding the foundation of trustworthiness. This
is problematic because it leaves developers unclear as to
which principle should be applied in case of conflict, which
should be given priority in specific cases or how conflicting
values should be weighed against each other. This makes
room for arbitrariness and opens the door for cherry-picking, ultimately, putting the whole endeavor of well-founded
trust in AI at risk because practitioners or users cannot be
sure which part of the trustworthiness canon was applied
to what extent to a system in question, and which aspects
were left aside. In further research on TAI, thus, it has to
be addressed how trade-offs and conflicts between principles are to be resolved. One possibility is to significantly
downsize the list of principles mentioned and thus reducing or even eliminating conflict of principles. Another possibility would be to introduce lexical prioritization of the
principles related to trustworthiness. Yet another approach
might challenge the aptness of the notion of trustworthiness
regarding AI altogether.14In any case, this decision should
be well-grounded in not only pragmatic, but also ethically
sound reasons.
5  Conclusions
Though notions of trust and trustworthiness have gained
significant attention in AI research especially after the
publication of Europe’s High-Level Expert Group’s Ethics
guidelines for trustworthy AI, ethics guidelines referring to
trust with regard to AI diverge substantively in no less than
four main areas: (1) why trust is important or of value, (2)
who or what the envisioned trustors and trustees are, (3)
what trustworthiness is and entails, and (4) how it should
be implemented technically. Further clarification on all four
points is needed. Philosophy can help to conceptualize trust
and trustworthiness. At the same time, it is of utmost importance not to turn TAI into an intellectual land of plenty: it
should not be perceived as an umbrella term for everything
that would be nice to have regarding AI systems, both from
a technical as well as an ethical perspective. Furthermore,
we need to discuss possible conflicts between the various
principles associated with trustworthiness in more detail.
Finally, we should also take the ambivalences and perils of
trust into account. In further research, it might turn out that
in the end what we need is not more trust in AI but rather
institutionalized forms of distrust.
Acknowledgements  The research for this paper was conducted as part
of the research project “AITE – Artificial Intelligence, Trustworthiness
and Explainability” funded by the Baden-Württemberg Foundation
(program: Verantwortliche Künstliche Intelligenz). I want to thank the
participants of the AITE-Colloquia and the IZEW-Colloquium for their
13  The contingencies of technology adoption are yet another matter.
14  I am not taking a stance here on which possibility is to be preferred.
AI and Ethics 3:735–744
helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper. Special thanks are
due to research assistants Oduma Abelio, Sandra Dürr and Lukas Kurz
for their support with retrieving the guidelines and their diligence in
proofreading the manuscript.
Author contributions  Not applicable.
Funding  Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt
DEAL. The research for this paper was conducted as part of the
research project “AITE – Artificial Intelligence, Trustworthiness and
Explainability” funded by the Baden-Württemberg Foundation.
Availability of data and materials  Not applicable.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
copy of this licence, visit