I.J. Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, 2012, 1, 35-43
Published Online February 2012 in MECS ( 
DOI: 10.5815/ijigsp.2012.01.05
Copyright © 2012 MECS I.J. Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, 2012, 1, 35-43
3D Brain Tumors and Internal Brain Structures
Segmentation in MR Images
1P.NARENDRAN M.Sc., PGDCA, M.Phil., B.Ed,
Head & Associate Professor, PG & Research Department of Computer Science,
Gobi Arts & Science College (Autonomous),
Gobichettipalayam – 638 453, Erode District, Tamil Nadu, India.
Email ID: 
2 Mr. V.K. NARENDIRA KUMAR M.C.A., M.Phil.,
Assistant Professor, Department of Information Technology,
Gobi Arts & Science College (Autonomous),
Gobichettipalayam – 638 453, Erode District, Tamil Nadu, India.
Email ID: 
3 Dr. K. SOMASUNDARAM
Professor & Head, Dept. of Computer Science & Applications,
Gandhigram rural university,
Gandhigram – 624 302, Tamil Nadu, India.
Email ID: 
Abstract - The main topic of this paper is to segment brain
tumors, their components (edema and necrosis) and
internal structures of the brain in 3D MR images. For
tumor segmentation we propose a framework that is a
combination
region-based
boundary-based
paradigms. In this framework, segment the brain using a
method adapted for pathological cases and extract some
global information on the tumor by symmetry based
histogram analysis. We propose a new and original method
that combines region and boundary information in two
phases: initialization and refinement. The method relies on
symmetry-based
segmentation of the tumor is refined relying on boundary
information of the image. We use a deformable model
which is again constrained by the fused spatial relations of
the structure. The method was also evaluated on 10
contrast enhanced T1-weighted images to segment the
ventricles, caudate nucleus and thalamus.
Index Terms— 3D, Brain, Tumor, Segmentation, MRI,
Image Registration, and Brain Structures.
INTRODUCTION
Tumor is one of the most common brain diseases, so
its diagnosis and treatment have a vital importance for
more than 400000 persons per year in the world (based
on the World Health Organization (WHO) estimates).
On the other hand, in recent years, developments in
medical imaging techniques allow us to use them in
several domains of medicine, for example, computer
3D Brain Tumors and Internal Brain Structures Segmentation in MR Images
Copyright © 2012 MECS I.J. Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, 2012, 1, 35-43
aided pathologies diagnosis, follow-up of these
pathologies, surgical planning, surgical guidance,
statistical and time series (longitudinal) analysis. Among
all the medical image modalities, Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (MRI) is the most frequently used imaging
technique in neuroscience and neurosurgery for these
applications. MRI creates a 3D image which perfectly
visualizes anatomic structures of the brain such as deep
structures and tissues of the brain, as well as the
pathologies.
Segmentation
anatomical
structures and pathologies from MR images is a
fundamental task, since the results often become the
basis for other applications. Methods for performing
segmentation vary widely depending on the specific
application
segmentation of medical images is a challenging task,
because they usually involve a large amount of data,
they have sometimes some artifacts due to patient’s
motion or limited acquisition time and soft tissue
boundaries are usually not well defined. The accurate
segmentation of internal structures of the brain is of
great interest for the study and the treatment of tumors.
It aims at reducing the mortality and improving the
surgical or radio therapeutic management of tumors. In
brain oncology it is also desirable to have a descriptive
human brain model that can integrate tumor information
extracted from MRI data such as its localization, its type,
its shape, its anatomo-functional positioning, as well as
its influence on other brain structures.
Despite numerous efforts and promising results in the
medical imaging community, accurate and reproducible
segmentation and characterization of abnormalities are
still a challenging and difficult task. Existing methods
leave significant room for increased automation,
applicability and accuracy.
II. OBJECTIVES
The first aim of this work is to develop a framework
for a robust and accurate segmentation of a large class of
brain tumors in MR images. Most existing methods are
region-based. They have several advantages, but line
and edge information in computer vision systems are
also important. The proposed method tries to combine
region and edge information, thus taking advantage of
both approaches while cancelling their drawbacks. 3D
contrast enhanced T1-weighted and FLAIR images are
the inputs to perform an automatic segmentation of the
solid part of tumor and the potential associated edema
and necrosis .
We first segment the brain to remove non-brain data.
However, in pathological cases, standard segmentation
methods fail, in particular when the tumor is located
very close to the brain surface. Therefore we propose an
segmentation
approximate symmetry plane. Then we developed two
new and original methods to detect and initially segment
brain tumors. The first one is a fuzzy classification
method which combines membership, typicality and
neighborhood information . The second one relies on
a symmetry-based histogram analysis. The approximate
sagittal symmetry plane is first computed, and the tumor
is then extracted by comparing the histograms of the two
cerebral hemispheres. To refine the initial segmentation,
which is not accurate enough, we use edge information.
A deformable model constrained by spatial relations is
applied for this purpose .
Segmentation
structures
pathological brain is another aim of this paper. The use
of prior knowledge can guide the segmentation task in
medical imaging. Due to the existence of different types
of tumors and consequently different effects on the brain
structures, segmentation using prior knowledge such as
an atlas is a difficult task. In this work we use another
type of prior knowledge which reserves its properties in
pathological cases.
3D Brain Tumors and Internal Brain Structures Segmentation in MR Images
Copyright © 2012 MECS I.J. Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, 2012, 1, 35-43
III. ANATOMY OF THE BRAIN
The nervous system is commonly divided into the
Central Nervous System (CNS) and the peripheral
nervous system. The CNS is made up of the brain, its
cranial nerves and the spinal cord. In this section we
briefly study the cell structures and anatomical
components of the brain. The brain consists mainly of
two tissue types: Gray Matter (GM) and White Matter
(WM). Gray matter is made of neuronal and glial cells,
also known as neuroglia or glia that control brain
activity, while the cortex is a coat of gray matter that
covers the brain and the basal nuclei are the gray matter
nuclei located deep within the white matter. The basal
nuclei include: caudate nucleus, putamen, pallidum and
claustrum. White matter fibers are myelinated axons
which connect the cerebral cortex with other brain
regions. The corpus callosum, a thick band of white
matter fibers, connects the left and right hemispheres of
the brain.
Figure 1: Anatomy of the brain
Anatomically the brain is composed of the cerebrum,
the cerebellum and the brainstem (Figure 1). The
cerebrum, which forms the major part of the brain, is
divided into two major parts by the longitudinal fissure:
the right and left cerebral hemispheres. Each hemisphere
is divided into 4 lobes or areas: the frontal lobe in the
front of the brain, the parietal lobe behind the frontal
lobe, the temporal lobe on each side of the brain and the
occipital lobe at the back of the brain as illustrated in
The central structures of the brain, i.e. the
diencephalon, include the thalamus, hypothalamus and
pituitary gland. The ventricular system that provides the
CSF is divided into four cavities called ventricles, which
are connected by a series of holes referred to as foramen,
and tubes. Two ventricles enclosed in the cerebral
hemispheres are called the lateral ventricles (first and
second). They communicate with the third ventricle. The
third ventricle is in the center of the brain, and its walls
are made up of the thalamus and hypothalamus. The
third ventricle connects with the fourth ventricle through
a long tube.
IV. BRAIN TUMORS
A brain tumor is an intracranial mass produced by an
uncontrolled growth of cells either normally found in the
brain such as neurons, lymphatic tissue, glial cells, blood
vessels, pituitary and pineal gland, skull, or spread from
cancers primarily located in other organs .
Brain tumors are classified based on the type of
tissue involved, the location of the tumor, whether it is
benign or malignant, and other considerations. Primary
(true) brain tumors are the tumors that originated in the
brain and are named for the cell types from which they
originated. They can be benign (non cancerous),
meaning that they do not spread elsewhere or invade
surrounding tissues. They can also be malignant and
invasive (spreading to neighboring area). Secondary or
metastasis brain tumors take their origin from tumor
cells which spread to the brain from another location in
the body. Most often cancers that spread to the brain to
cause secondary brain tumors originate in the lumy,
breast, and kidney or from melanomas in the skin.
3D Brain Tumors and Internal Brain Structures Segmentation in MR Images
Copyright © 2012 MECS I.J. Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, 2012, 1, 35-43
Figure 2: MRI of brain. (a) T1-weighted image without contrast
enhancement. (b) T1-weighted image with contrast enhancement. (c)
T2-weighted image. (d) FLAIR image.
Figure 3: One axial slice of a MR image of the brain showing tumor
Each primary brain tumor, in addition to the
solid portion of the tumor, may have other associated
parts such as edema and necrosis as in Figures 2 and 3.
Edema is one of the most important factors leading to
mortality associated with brain tumors. By definition,
brain edema is an increase in brain volume resulting
from increased sodium and water content and results
from local disruption of the Blood Brain Barrier (BBB).
Edema appears around the tumor mainly in white matter
regions. Tumor associated edema is visible in MRI, as
either hypo intense (darker than brain tissue) or rarely is
intense (same intensity as brain tissue) in T1-weighted
scans, or hyper intense (brighter than brain tissue) in T2weighted and FLAIR MRI (Figure 3). Necrosis is
composed of dead cells in the middle of the brain tumor
and is seen hypo intense in T1-weighted images (Figure
3). A brain tumor may also infiltrate the surrounding
tissues or deform the surrounding structures .
V. CLASSIFICATION OF BRAIN TUMORS
The classification of primary brain tumors is usually
based on the tissue of origin, and occasionally on tumor
location. The degree of tumor malignancy is determined
by the tumor’s histopathology features. Because of the
substantial variety and unusual biology of brain tumors,
it has been extremely difficult to develop a widely
accepted histological classification system .
The earliest brain tumor classifications were
provided by Bailey and Cushing in 1926. Their
classification scheme proposed 14 brain tumor types,
directed important attention to the process of cell
differentiation, and dominated views of gliomas until
1949 when a new system was introduced by Kernohan
and Sayre. Kernohan and Sayre made the important
realization that different histopathology appearances
may not represent separate tumor types but rather
different degrees of differentiation of one tumor type.
They classified tumors into five subtypes: astrocytoma,
oligodendroglioma, ependymoma, gangliocytoma, and
medulloblastoma and very importantly added a fourlevel grading system for astrocytomas . The grading
system was based on increasing malignancy and
decreasing differentiation with increasing tumor grade.
The addition of a grading system was a very important
advance in classifying brain tumors, and provided
information not only regarding tumors’ biologic
behavior but also information that could be used to
guide treatment decisions.
3D Brain Tumors and Internal Brain Structures Segmentation in MR Images
Copyright © 2012 MECS I.J. Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, 2012, 1, 35-43
VI. BRAIN TUMOR SEGMENTATION
Despite numerous efforts and promising results in the
medical imaging community, accurate and reproducible
segmentation and characterization of abnormalities are
still a challenging and difficult task because of the
variety of the possible shapes, locations and image
intensities of various types of tumors. Some of them
may also deform the surrounding structures or may be
associated to edema or necrosis that changes the image
intensity around the tumor. As we surveyed in the
previous chapter, existing methods leave significant
room for increased automation, applicability and
accuracy. Most of them are usually dedicated to fullenhanced tumors or specific types of tumors, and do not
extent easily to more general types .
The automated brain tumor segmentation method
that we have developed consists of two main
components: preprocessing and segmentation. The
inputs of this system are two different modalities of MR
images: CE-T1w and FLAIR that we believe are
sufficient for brain tumor segmentation . In the
segmentation preprocessing section, operations such as:
reduction of intensity inhomogeneity and inter-slice
intensity variation of images, spatial registration
(alignment) of the input images, segmentation of the
brain, computation of the approximate symmetry plane
and histogram analysis based on symmetry plane are
performed.
VII. PREPROCESSING
In the real MRI data there are some problems that
have to be first solved before any segmentation
operation. Therefore we first try to reduce the intensity
in homogeneity and inter slice intensity variations, two
main problems of MRI data, in the input images. Our
system uses two different modalities of MRI, usually not
spatially aligned and often having different resolutions.
Hence it is required to add a registration and
interpolation step. The brain is then segmented by a
combination of histogram analysis, morphological
operations and symmetry analysis. In this step we
compute the approximate symmetry plane that will be
used in the segmentation and sometimes to correct the
brain segmentation result. Finally we analyze the
histograms of the right and left hemispheres to detect the
pathological hemisphere and the type of tumor.
A. Image Preprocessing
Two main problems of MR images are intensity
inhomogeneity or bias field and interslice intensity
variations which are caused by the limitations of the
current MRI equipments (the main factors are RF
excitation field inhomogeneity, non-uniform reception
coil sensitivity, eddy currents driven by field gradients,
RF penetration and standing wave effects). In today MR
images, the bias field is not always visible to the human
significant
misclassification
intensity-based
segmentation is used . Therefore, it is required to
correct intensity inhomogeneity in the image volume.
Figure 4: Bias field correction. (a) An axial slice of the original image.
(b) Same bias field corrected slice. (c) Applied bias field.
An automatic method based on entropy minimization
is used (as seen in Figure 4). In addition to a smoothly
varying field inhomogeneity, two-dimensional multislice
sequence MR images, which are acquired in an
interleaved way, are typically also corrupted with a slice
by slice constant intensity offset. This is usually due to
gradient eddy currents and crosstalk between slices.
Hence, it is required to normalize interslice intensity to
have a correct 3D segmentation. Here a method based on
scale-space analysis of histogram is used .
3D Brain Tumors and Internal Brain Structures Segmentation in MR Images
Copyright © 2012 MECS I.J. Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, 2012, 1, 35-43
B. Image Registration
Image registration is the operation of aligning
images in order to relate corresponding features. For
most kinds of image processing on two or more images,
it is required that the images are aligned, so that one
voxel position represents the same anatomical position
in all images . This step allows the use of modalities
that are not in perfect alignment. An image registration
program has typically four modules: the transformation
model, feature extraction, similarity measure, and an
optimization method. In our system, the CE-T1w image
is used as reference or target image (R) and the FLAIR
image as test or source image (T).
Several transformation models can be used to
transform the test image T, such as rigid, affine,
projection and curved transformations. Here, the
registration concerns 3D head images from the same
person, which makes it reasonable to assume that the
head will not be deformed, and thus can be considered a
rigid body. Hence, the rigid transformation model
(rotation and translation) is therefore sufficient for our
purpose. By using a rigid transformation, we are
assuming that the two images can be aligned using a
parameterization with 6 degrees of freedom. Here we
restrict ourselves to methods that use directly the
intensity images as features, thus avoiding the
preliminary extraction of corresponding features in the
two images.
C. Brain Segmentation
The next step of preprocessing consists of brain
segmentation. Several methods have been proposed to
perform this operation and some of them are available in
software’s such as Brain-Visa, FSL and Brain suite.
Unfortunately most of them fail in the case of the
presence of a tumor in the brain, especially if located on
the border of the brain (Figure 5). To solve this problem,
we propose to perform a symmetry analysis, based on
assumption
symmetrically placed in both hemispheres, while the
whole brain is approximately symmetrical.
First we segment the brain using histogram analysis
and morphological operations. This leads to a partial
segmentation, where a part corresponding to the tumor
may be missing. The algorithm is applied on the gray
level image of the head to compute the approximate
symmetry plane, because the segmented brain is not
symmetric. The computed symmetry planes of the head
and of the segmented brain in normal cases are
approximately
approximation
acceptable in pathological cases for tumor detection
Figure 5: Pathological brain segmentation using existing methods. (a)
One slice of the original image on two examples. (b) Segmented brain
by histogram analysis and morphological operations using Brain Visa.
(c) Segmented brain by BET using FSL. (d) Segmented brain by BSE
using Brain suite.
D. Structure Segmentation
The proposed method for internal brain structures
segmentation, such as for tumors, has two phases:
initialization and refinement. In other words, we first
segment the brain tissues (consequently the internal
structures of the brain) and since this segmentation for
internal brain structures is not fine enough, we then
refine them one by one using prior information. To
3D Brain Tumors and Internal Brain Structures Segmentation in MR Images
Copyright © 2012 MECS I.J. Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, 2012, 1, 35-43
perform these two phases, the segmentation procedure
consists of the following steps :
 Global segmentation of the brain,
 Retrieving spatial relations,
 Selecting the valid spatial relations,
 Fuzzification and fusion of relations and providing
 Searching the initial segmentation of structure,
 Refining the initial segmentation,
 Repeating from step 2 for other structures.
Global segmentation of the brain to segment the
brain tissues and its structures we use two methods, the
first one is the MPFCM method and the second one is
the multiphase level sets.
VIII. PERFORMANCE MEASURES
Characterizing
performance
segmentation methods is a challenge in image analysis.
An important difficulty we have to face in developing
segmentation methods is the lack of a gold standard for
their evaluation. Accuracy of a segmentation technique
refers to the degree to which the segmentation results
agree with the true segmentation. Although physical or
digital phantoms can provide a level of known “ground
truth”, they are still unable to reproduce the full range of
imaging characteristics and normal and abnormal
anatomical variability observed in clinical data.
Manual segmentation of desired objects by domain
experts can be considered as an acceptable approach (it
inter-expert
intra-expert
variability). The result of an automated method is then
compared to the manually segmented object by an
expert or a group of experts, and if the algorithm
generates segmentations sufficiently similar to the ones
provided by the experts, it is accepted. A number of
metrics have been proposed to measure the similarity
between the segmentations, including volume measures
and surface measures.
IX. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In order to implement this 3D brain tumors and
internal brain structures segmentation in MR images
efficiently, VB.NET program is used. This program
could speed up the development of this system because
it has facilities to draw forms and to add library easily
The proposed method was applied to 10 clinical MRI
datasets of various origins and types. We illustrate the
results on four cases, for which manual segmentation of
several structures was available, and which exhibit
tumors with different shapes, locations, sizes, intensities
and contrasts. Evaluation of the segmentation results
was performed through quantitative comparisons with
manual segmentations, using volume and surface
Segmentation
quantitative
evaluations are high accuracy. The voxel size is
typically 1 × 1 × 1.3 mm3, so that the average error is
less than one voxel. The Hausdorff distance represents
the error for the worst point, which explains its higher
values. Although the segmented structures are relatively
small (about 4000 m3), the volume metrics shows good
results. For the similarity index measures, values above
70% are satisfactory. The results show that the
segmentation of caudate nuclei is better than thalamus
due to their well defined borders. The comparison of the
results obtained using the initial segmentation of
MPFCM and multiphase level sets illustrates that there
is not a large difference between them. But the MPFCM
method is faster than the multiphase level sets method.
X. CONCLUSION
In this paper we deal with 3D MR images in order to
segment brain tumors and internal brain structures for
the applications such as treatment and follow-up,
surgery, individual modeling, etc. We first review the
discussed topics and the contributions and following this
we discuss possible future directions. We proposed a
new method for segmentation of pathological brain
structures. This method combines prior information of
structures and image information (region and edge) for
segmentation. To represent the prior information we
3D Brain Tumors and Internal Brain Structures Segmentation in MR Images
Copyright © 2012 MECS I.J. Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, 2012, 1, 35-43
used ontological engineering tools. We also proposed a
simple ontology for a specific classification of tumors
and it can be extended for other classification of tumors
(such as tumor grading). Brain tumor segmentation
method uses contrast enhanced T1- weighted and
FLAIR images for segmentation and it consists of two
preprocessing
segmentation.
preprocessing step, in addition to use the classical
methods for reducing the noise and inhomogeneity and
registration, we proposed a new adapted method for
correct and robust brain segmentation. The brain is
segmented by a combination of histogram analysis,
morphological operations and symmetry analysis. A new
symmetry-based histogram analysis was proposed that is
able to detect automatically the tumor type and the
pathological hemisphere.
The segmentation of the pathological brain structures
is a difficult task due to the different effects of the
different tumors. Using prior information such as an
atlas or adapting it to guide the segmentation is also
difficult because of these different effects. We proposed
a new method that in addition to region and edge
information uses a type of prior information which is
more consistent in pathological cases. The spatial
relations between structures are the prior information
used in this method. Here we deal with three main
problems: explicit representation of spatial relations for
each structure, adaptation of spatial relations for
pathological cases and segmentation method and volume
considered an important parameter such as, storage,
transmission, visualization, and quantitative analysis.