Foundations and Trends R
Machine Learning
Vol. 3, No. 1 1–122
c⃝2011 S. Boyd, N. Parikh, E. Chu, B. Peleato
and J. Eckstein
DOI: 10.1561/2200000016
Distributed Optimization and Statistical
Learning via the Alternating Direction
Method of Multipliers
Stephen Boyd1, Neal Parikh2, Eric Chu3
Borja Peleato4 and Jonathan Eckstein5
1 Electrical Engineering Department, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
94305, USA, 
2 Computer Science Department, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305,
USA, 
3 Electrical Engineering Department, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
94305, USA, 
4 Electrical Engineering Department, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
94305, USA, 
5 Management Science and Information Systems Department and
RUTCOR, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA,
 
Introduction
Precursors
Dual Ascent
Dual Decomposition
Augmented Lagrangians and the Method of Multipliers
Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers
Convergence
Optimality Conditions and Stopping Criterion
Extensions and Variations
Notes and References
General Patterns
Proximity Operator
Quadratic Objective Terms
Smooth Objective Terms
Decomposition
Constrained Convex Optimization
Convex Feasibility
Linear and Quadratic Programming
ℓ1-Norm Problems
Least Absolute Deviations
Basis Pursuit
General ℓ1 Regularized Loss Minimization
Sparse Inverse Covariance Selection
Consensus and Sharing
Global Variable Consensus Optimization
General Form Consensus Optimization
Distributed Model Fitting
Splitting across Examples
Splitting across Features
Nonconvex Problems
Nonconvex Constraints
Bi-convex Problems
10 Implementation
10.1 Abstract Implementation
10.3 Graph Computing Frameworks
10.4 MapReduce
11 Numerical Examples
11.1 Small Dense Lasso
11.2 Distributed ℓ1 Regularized Logistic Regression
11.3 Group Lasso with Feature Splitting
11.4 Distributed Large-Scale Lasso with MPI
11.5 Regressor Selection
12 Conclusions
Acknowledgments
A Convergence Proof
References
Many problems of recent interest in statistics and machine learning
can be posed in the framework of convex optimization. Due to the
explosion in size and complexity of modern datasets, it is increasingly
important to be able to solve problems with a very large number of features or training examples. As a result, both the decentralized collection
or storage of these datasets as well as accompanying distributed solution methods are either necessary or at least highly desirable. In this
review, we argue that the alternating direction method of multipliers
is well suited to distributed convex optimization, and in particular to
large-scale problems arising in statistics, machine learning, and related
areas. The method was developed in the 1970s, with roots in the 1950s,
and is equivalent or closely related to many other algorithms, such
as dual decomposition, the method of multipliers, Douglas–Rachford
splitting, Spingarn’s method of partial inverses, Dykstra’s alternating
projections, Bregman iterative algorithms for ℓ1 problems, proximal
methods, and others. After brieﬂy surveying the theory and history of
the algorithm, we discuss applications to a wide variety of statistical
and machine learning problems of recent interest, including the lasso,
sparse logistic regression, basis pursuit, covariance selection, support
vector machines, and many others. We also discuss general distributed
optimization, extensions to the nonconvex setting, and eﬃcient implementation, including some details on distributed MPI and Hadoop
MapReduce implementations.
Introduction
In all applied ﬁelds, it is now commonplace to attack problems through
data analysis, particularly through the use of statistical and machine
learning algorithms on what are often large datasets. In industry, this
trend has been referred to as ‘Big Data’, and it has had a signiﬁcant
impact in areas as varied as artiﬁcial intelligence, internet applications,
computational biology, medicine, ﬁnance, marketing, journalism, network analysis, and logistics.
Though these problems arise in diverse application domains, they
share some key characteristics. First, the datasets are often extremely
large, consisting of hundreds of millions or billions of training examples;
second, the data is often very high-dimensional, because it is now possible to measure and store very detailed information about each example;
and third, because of the large scale of many applications, the data is
often stored or even collected in a distributed manner. As a result, it
has become of central importance to develop algorithms that are both
rich enough to capture the complexity of modern data, and scalable
enough to process huge datasets in a parallelized or fully decentralized fashion. Indeed, some researchers have suggested that even
highly complex and structured problems may succumb most easily to
relatively simple models trained on vast datasets.
Introduction
Many such problems can be posed in the framework of convex optimization. Given the signiﬁcant work on decomposition methods and
decentralized algorithms in the optimization community, it is natural
to look to parallel optimization algorithms as a mechanism for solving
large-scale statistical tasks. This approach also has the beneﬁt that one
algorithm could be ﬂexible enough to solve many problems.
This review discusses the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM), a simple but powerful algorithm that is well suited to
distributed convex optimization, and in particular to problems arising in applied statistics and machine learning. It takes the form of a
decomposition-coordination procedure, in which the solutions to small
local subproblems are coordinated to ﬁnd a solution to a large global
problem. ADMM can be viewed as an attempt to blend the beneﬁts
of dual decomposition and augmented Lagrangian methods for constrained optimization, two earlier approaches that we review in §2. It
turns out to be equivalent or closely related to many other algorithms
as well, such as Douglas-Rachford splitting from numerical analysis,
Spingarn’s method of partial inverses, Dykstra’s alternating projections method, Bregman iterative algorithms for ℓ1 problems in signal
processing, proximal methods, and many others. The fact that it has
been re-invented in diﬀerent ﬁelds over the decades underscores the
intuitive appeal of the approach.
It is worth emphasizing that the algorithm itself is not new, and that
we do not present any new theoretical results. It was ﬁrst introduced
in the mid-1970s by Gabay, Mercier, Glowinski, and Marrocco, though
similar ideas emerged as early as the mid-1950s. The algorithm was
studied throughout the 1980s, and by the mid-1990s, almost all of the
theoretical results mentioned here had been established. The fact that
ADMM was developed so far in advance of the ready availability of
large-scale distributed computing systems and massive optimization
problems may account for why it is not as widely known today as we
believe it should be.
The main contributions of this review can be summarized as follows:
(1) We provide a simple, cohesive discussion of the extensive
literature in a way that emphasizes and uniﬁes the aspects
of primary importance in applications.
(2) We show, through a number of examples, that the algorithm
is well suited for a wide variety of large-scale distributed modern problems. We derive methods for decomposing a wide
class of statistical problems by training examples and by features, which is not easily accomplished in general.
(3) We place a greater emphasis on practical large-scale implementation than most previous references. In particular, we
discuss the implementation of the algorithm in cloud computing environments using standard frameworks and provide
easily readable implementations of many of our examples.
Throughout, the focus is on applications rather than theory, and a main
goal is to provide the reader with a kind of ‘toolbox’ that can be applied
in many situations to derive and implement a distributed algorithm of
practical use. Though the focus here is on parallelism, the algorithm
can also be used serially, and it is interesting to note that with no
tuning, ADMM can be competitive with the best known methods for
some problems.
While we have emphasized applications that can be concisely
explained, the algorithm would also be a natural ﬁt for more complicated problems in areas like graphical models. In addition, though our
focus is on statistical learning problems, the algorithm is readily applicable in many other cases, such as in engineering design, multi-period
portfolio optimization, time series analysis, network ﬂow, or scheduling.
We begin in §2 with a brief review of dual decomposition and the
method of multipliers, two important precursors to ADMM. This section is intended mainly for background and can be skimmed. In §3,
we present ADMM, including a basic convergence theorem, some variations on the basic version that are useful in practice, and a survey of
some of the key literature. A complete convergence proof is given in
appendix A.
In §4, we describe some general patterns that arise in applications
of the algorithm, such as cases when one of the steps in ADMM can
Introduction
be carried out particularly eﬃciently. These general patterns will recur
throughout our examples. In §5, we consider the use of ADMM for some
generic convex optimization problems, such as constrained minimization and linear and quadratic programming. In §6, we discuss a wide
variety of problems involving the ℓ1 norm. It turns out that ADMM
yields methods for these problems that are related to many state-of-theart algorithms. This section also clariﬁes why ADMM is particularly
well suited to machine learning problems.
In §7, we present consensus and sharing problems, which provide
general frameworks for distributed optimization. In §8, we consider
distributed methods for generic model ﬁtting problems, including regularized regression models like the lasso and classiﬁcation models like
support vector machines.
In §9, we consider the use of ADMM as a heuristic for solving some
nonconvex problems. In §10, we discuss some practical implementation
details, including how to implement the algorithm in frameworks suitable for cloud computing applications. Finally, in §11, we present the
details of some numerical experiments.
Precursors
In this section, we brieﬂy review two optimization algorithms that are
precursors to the alternating direction method of multipliers. While
we will not use this material in the sequel, it provides some useful
background and motivation.
Dual Ascent
Consider the equality-constrained convex optimization problem
subject to
with variable x ∈Rn, where A ∈Rm×n and f : Rn →R is convex.
The Lagrangian for problem (2.1) is
L(x,y) = f(x) + yT (Ax −b)
and the dual function is
g(y) = inf
x L(x,y) = −f∗(−AT y) −bT y,
where y is the dual variable or Lagrange multiplier, and f∗is the convex
conjugate of f; see [20, §3.3] or [140, §12] for background. The dual
Precursors
problem is
with variable y ∈Rm. Assuming that strong duality holds, the optimal
values of the primal and dual problems are the same. We can recover
a primal optimal point x⋆from a dual optimal point y⋆as
x⋆= argmin
provided there is only one minimizer of L(x,y⋆). (This is the case
if, e.g., f is strictly convex.) In the sequel, we will use the notation
argminx F(x) to denote any minimizer of F, even when F does not
have a unique minimizer.
In the dual ascent method, we solve the dual problem using gradient
ascent. Assuming that g is diﬀerentiable, the gradient ∇g(y) can be
evaluated as follows. We ﬁrst ﬁnd x+ = argminx L(x,y); then we have
∇g(y) = Ax+ −b, which is the residual for the equality constraint. The
dual ascent method consists of iterating the updates
xk+1 := argmin
yk+1 := yk + αk(Axk+1 −b),
where αk > 0 is a step size, and the superscript is the iteration counter.
The ﬁrst step (2.2) is an x-minimization step, and the second step (2.3)
is a dual variable update. The dual variable y can be interpreted as
a vector of prices, and the y-update is then called a price update or
price adjustment step. This algorithm is called dual ascent since, with
appropriate choice of αk, the dual function increases in each step, i.e.,
g(yk+1) > g(yk).
The dual ascent method can be used even in some cases when g is
not diﬀerentiable. In this case, the residual Axk+1 −b is not the gradient of g, but the negative of a subgradient of −g. This case requires a
diﬀerent choice of the αk than when g is diﬀerentiable, and convergence
is not monotone; it is often the case that g(yk+1) ̸> g(yk). In this case,
the algorithm is usually called the dual subgradient method .
If αk is chosen appropriately and several other assumptions hold,
then xk converges to an optimal point and yk converges to an optimal
2.2 Dual Decomposition
dual point. However, these assumptions do not hold in many applications, so dual ascent often cannot be used. As an example, if f is a
nonzero aﬃne function of any component of x, then the x-update (2.2)
fails, since L is unbounded below in x for most y.
Dual Decomposition
The major beneﬁt of the dual ascent method is that it can lead to a
decentralized algorithm in some cases. Suppose, for example, that the
objective f is separable (with respect to a partition or splitting of the
variable into subvectors), meaning that
where x = (x1,...,xN) and the variables xi ∈Rni are subvectors of x.
Partitioning the matrix A conformably as
A = [A1 ··· AN],
so Ax = N
i=1 Aixi, the Lagrangian can be written as
Li(xi,y) =
fi(xi) + yT Aixi −(1/N)yT b
which is also separable in x. This means that the x-minimization
step (2.2) splits into N separate problems that can be solved in parallel.
Explicitly, the algorithm is
yk+1 := yk + αk(Axk+1 −b).
The x-minimization step (2.4) is carried out independently, in parallel,
for each i = 1,...,N. In this case, we refer to the dual ascent method
as dual decomposition.
In the general case, each iteration of the dual decomposition method
requires a broadcast and a gather operation. In the dual update
step (2.5), the equality constraint residual contributions Aixk+1
Precursors
collected (gathered) in order to compute the residual Axk+1 −b. Once
the (global) dual variable yk+1 is computed, it must be distributed
(broadcast) to the processors that carry out the N individual xi minimization steps (2.4).
Dual decomposition is an old idea in optimization, and traces back
at least to the early 1960s. Related ideas appear in well known work
by Dantzig and Wolfe and Benders on large-scale linear programming, as well as in Dantzig’s seminal book . The general idea
of dual decomposition appears to be originally due to Everett ,
and is explored in many early references . The use
of nondiﬀerentiable optimization, such as the subgradient method, to
solve the dual problem is discussed by Shor . Good references on
dual methods and decomposition include the book by Bertsekas [16,
chapter 6] and the survey by Nedi´c and Ozdaglar on distributed
optimization, which discusses dual decomposition methods and consensus problems. A number of papers also discuss variants on standard
dual decomposition, such as .
More generally, decentralized optimization has been an active topic
of research since the 1980s. For instance, Tsitsiklis and his co-authors
worked on a number of decentralized detection and consensus problems
involving the minimization of a smooth function f known to multiple agents . Some good reference books on parallel optimization include those by Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis and Censor and
Zenios . There has also been some recent work on problems where
each agent has its own convex, potentially nondiﬀerentiable, objective
function . See for a recent discussion of distributed methods
for graph-structured optimization problems.
Augmented Lagrangians and the Method of Multipliers
Augmented Lagrangian methods were developed in part to bring
robustness to the dual ascent method, and in particular, to yield convergence without assumptions like strict convexity or ﬁniteness of f.
The augmented Lagrangian for (2.1) is
Lρ(x,y) = f(x) + yT (Ax −b) + (ρ/2)∥Ax −b∥2
2.3 Augmented Lagrangians and the Method of Multipliers
where ρ > 0 is called the penalty parameter. (Note that L0 is the
standard Lagrangian for the problem.) The augmented Lagrangian
can be viewed as the (unaugmented) Lagrangian associated with the
f(x) + (ρ/2)∥Ax −b∥2
subject to
This problem is clearly equivalent to the original problem (2.1), since
for any feasible x the term added to the objective is zero. The associated
dual function is gρ(y) = infx Lρ(x,y).
The beneﬁt of including the penalty term is that gρ can be shown to
be diﬀerentiable under rather mild conditions on the original problem.
The gradient of the augmented dual function is found the same way as
with the ordinary Lagrangian, i.e., by minimizing over x, and then evaluating the resulting equality constraint residual. Applying dual ascent
to the modiﬁed problem yields the algorithm
xk+1 := argmin
yk+1 := yk + ρ(Axk+1 −b),
which is known as the method of multipliers for solving (2.1). This is
the same as standard dual ascent, except that the x-minimization step
uses the augmented Lagrangian, and the penalty parameter ρ is used
as the step size αk. The method of multipliers converges under far more
general conditions than dual ascent, including cases when f takes on
the value +∞or is not strictly convex.
It is easy to motivate the choice of the particular step size ρ in
the dual update (2.8). For simplicity, we assume here that f is diﬀerentiable, though this is not required for the algorithm to work. The
optimality conditions for (2.1) are primal and dual feasibility, i.e.,
Ax⋆−b = 0,
∇f(x⋆) + AT y⋆= 0,
respectively. By deﬁnition, xk+1 minimizes Lρ(x,yk), so
0 = ∇xLρ(xk+1,yk)
= ∇xf(xk+1) + AT 
yk + ρ(Axk+1 −b)
= ∇xf(xk+1) + AT yk+1.
Precursors
We see that by using ρ as the step size in the dual update, the iterate
(xk+1,yk+1) is dual feasible. As the method of multipliers proceeds, the
primal residual Axk+1 −b converges to zero, yielding optimality.
The greatly improved convergence properties of the method of multipliers over dual ascent comes at a cost. When f is separable, the augmented Lagrangian Lρ is not separable, so the x-minimization step (2.7)
cannot be carried out separately in parallel for each xi. This means that
the basic method of multipliers cannot be used for decomposition. We
will see how to address this issue next.
Augmented Lagrangians and the method of multipliers for constrained optimization were ﬁrst proposed in the late 1960s by Hestenes
 and Powell . Many of the early numerical experiments on
the method of multipliers are due to Miele et al. . Much
of the early work is consolidated in a monograph by Bertsekas ,
who also discusses similarities to older approaches using Lagrangians
and penalty functions , as well as a number of generalizations.
Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers
ADMM is an algorithm that is intended to blend the decomposability
of dual ascent with the superior convergence properties of the method
of multipliers. The algorithm solves problems in the form
f(x) + g(z)
subject to
Ax + Bz = c
with variables x ∈Rn and z ∈Rm, where A ∈Rp×n, B ∈Rp×m, and
c ∈Rp. We will assume that f and g are convex; more speciﬁc assumptions will be discussed in §3.2. The only diﬀerence from the general
linear equality-constrained problem (2.1) is that the variable, called x
there, has been split into two parts, called x and z here, with the objective function separable across this splitting. The optimal value of the
problem (3.1) will be denoted by
p⋆= inf{f(x) + g(z) | Ax + Bz = c}.
As in the method of multipliers, we form the augmented Lagrangian
Lρ(x,z,y) = f(x) + g(z) + yT (Ax + Bz −c) + (ρ/2)∥Ax + Bz −c∥2
Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers
ADMM consists of the iterations
xk+1 := argmin
Lρ(x,zk,yk)
zk+1 := argmin
Lρ(xk+1,z,yk)
yk+1 := yk + ρ(Axk+1 + Bzk+1 −c),
where ρ > 0. The algorithm is very similar to dual ascent and the
method of multipliers: it consists of an x-minimization step (3.2), a
z-minimization step (3.3), and a dual variable update (3.4). As in the
method of multipliers, the dual variable update uses a step size equal
to the augmented Lagrangian parameter ρ.
The method of multipliers for (3.1) has the form
(xk+1,zk+1) := argmin
Lρ(x,z,yk)
yk+1 := yk + ρ(Axk+1 + Bzk+1 −c).
Here the augmented Lagrangian is minimized jointly with respect to
the two primal variables. In ADMM, on the other hand, x and z are
updated in an alternating or sequential fashion, which accounts for the
term alternating direction. ADMM can be viewed as a version of the
method of multipliers where a single Gauss-Seidel pass [90, §10.1] over
x and z is used instead of the usual joint minimization. Separating the
minimization over x and z into two steps is precisely what allows for
decomposition when f or g are separable.
The algorithm state in ADMM consists of zk and yk. In other words,
(zk+1,yk+1) is a function of (zk,yk). The variable xk is not part of the
state; it is an intermediate result computed from the previous state
(zk−1,yk−1).
If we switch (re-label) x and z, f and g, and A and B in the problem (3.1), we obtain a variation on ADMM with the order of the xupdate step (3.2) and z-update step (3.3) reversed. The roles of x and
z are almost symmetric, but not quite, since the dual update is done
after the z-update but before the x-update.
3.2 Convergence
Scaled Form
ADMM can be written in a slightly diﬀerent form, which is often
more convenient, by combining the linear and quadratic terms in the
augmented Lagrangian and scaling the dual variable. Deﬁning the residual r = Ax + Bz −c, we have
yT r + (ρ/2)∥r∥2
2 = (ρ/2)∥r + (1/ρ)y∥2
2 −(1/2ρ)∥y∥2
= (ρ/2)∥r + u∥2
2 −(ρ/2)∥u∥2
where u = (1/ρ)y is the scaled dual variable. Using the scaled dual variable, we can express ADMM as
xk+1 := argmin
f(x) + (ρ/2)∥Ax + Bzk −c + uk∥2
zk+1 := argmin
g(z) + (ρ/2)∥Axk+1 + Bz −c + uk∥2
uk+1 := uk + Axk+1 + Bzk+1 −c.
Deﬁning the residual at iteration k as rk = Axk + Bzk −c, we see that
the running sum of the residuals.
We call the ﬁrst form of ADMM above, given by (3.2–3.4), the
unscaled form, and the second form (3.5–3.7) the scaled form, since it
is expressed in terms of a scaled version of the dual variable. The two
are clearly equivalent, but the formulas in the scaled form of ADMM
are often shorter than in the unscaled form, so we will use the scaled
form in the sequel. We will use the unscaled form when we wish to
emphasize the role of the dual variable or to give an interpretation
that relies on the (unscaled) dual variable.
Convergence
There are many convergence results for ADMM discussed in the literature; here, we limit ourselves to a basic but still very general result
that applies to all of the examples we will consider. We will make one
Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers
assumption about the functions f and g, and one assumption about
problem (3.1).
Assumption 1. The (extended-real-valued) functions f : Rn →R ∪
{+∞} and g : Rm →R ∪{+∞} are closed, proper, and convex.
This assumption can be expressed compactly using the epigraphs of
the functions: The function f satisﬁes assumption 1 if and only if its
epif = {(x,t) ∈Rn × R | f(x) ≤t}
is a closed nonempty convex set.
Assumption 1 implies that the subproblems arising in the x-update
(3.2) and z-update (3.3) are solvable, i.e., there exist x and z, not necessarily unique (without further assumptions on A and B), that minimize
the augmented Lagrangian. It is important to note that assumption 1
allows f and g to be nondiﬀerentiable and to assume the value +∞.
For example, we can take f to be the indicator function of a closed
nonempty convex set C, i.e., f(x) = 0 for x ∈C and f(x) = +∞otherwise. In this case, the x-minimization step (3.2) will involve solving a
constrained quadratic program over C, the eﬀective domain of f.
Assumption 2. The unaugmented Lagrangian L0 has a saddle point.
Explicitly, there exist (x⋆,z⋆,y⋆), not necessarily unique, for which
L0(x⋆,z⋆,y) ≤L0(x⋆,z⋆,y⋆) ≤L0(x,z,y⋆)
holds for all x, z, y.
By assumption 1, it follows that L0(x⋆,z⋆,y⋆) is ﬁnite for any saddle point (x⋆,z⋆,y⋆). This implies that (x⋆,z⋆) is a solution to (3.1),
so Ax⋆+ Bz⋆= c and f(x⋆) < ∞, g(z⋆) < ∞. It also implies that y⋆
is dual optimal, and the optimal values of the primal and dual problems are equal, i.e., that strong duality holds. Note that we make no
assumptions about A, B, or c, except implicitly through assumption 2;
in particular, neither A nor B is required to be full rank.
3.2 Convergence
Convergence
Under assumptions 1 and 2, the ADMM iterates satisfy the following:
• Residual convergence. rk →0 as k →∞, i.e., the iterates
approach feasibility.
• Objective convergence. f(xk) + g(zk) →p⋆as k →∞, i.e.,
the objective function of the iterates approaches the optimal
• Dual variable convergence. yk →y⋆as k →∞, where y⋆is a
dual optimal point.
A proof of the residual and objective convergence results is given in
appendix A. Note that xk and zk need not converge to optimal values,
although such results can be shown under additional assumptions.
Convergence in Practice
Simple examples show that ADMM can be very slow to converge to
high accuracy. However, it is often the case that ADMM converges to
modest accuracy—suﬃcient for many applications—within a few tens
of iterations. This behavior makes ADMM similar to algorithms like
the conjugate gradient method, for example, in that a few tens of iterations will often produce acceptable results of practical use. However,
the slow convergence of ADMM also distinguishes it from algorithms
such as Newton’s method (or, for constrained problems, interior-point
methods), where high accuracy can be attained in a reasonable amount
of time. While in some cases it is possible to combine ADMM with
a method for producing a high accuracy solution from a low accuracy solution , in the general case ADMM will be practically useful
mostly in cases when modest accuracy is suﬃcient. Fortunately, this
is usually the case for the kinds of large-scale problems we consider.
Also, in the case of statistical and machine learning problems, solving
a parameter estimation problem to very high accuracy often yields little to no improvement in actual prediction performance, the real metric
of interest in applications.
Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers
Optimality Conditions and Stopping Criterion
The necessary and suﬃcient optimality conditions for the ADMM problem (3.1) are primal feasibility,
Ax⋆+ Bz⋆−c = 0,
and dual feasibility,
0 ∈∂f(x⋆) + AT y⋆
0 ∈∂g(z⋆) + BT y⋆.
Here, ∂denotes the subdiﬀerential operator; see, e.g., .
(When f and g are diﬀerentiable, the subdiﬀerentials ∂f and ∂g can
be replaced by the gradients ∇f and ∇g, and ∈can be replaced by =.)
Since zk+1 minimizes Lρ(xk+1,z,yk) by deﬁnition, we have that
0 ∈∂g(zk+1) + BT yk + ρBT (Axk+1 + Bzk+1 −c)
= ∂g(zk+1) + BT yk + ρBT rk+1
= ∂g(zk+1) + BT yk+1.
This means that zk+1 and yk+1 always satisfy (3.10), so attaining optimality comes down to satisfying (3.8) and (3.9). This phenomenon is
analogous to the iterates of the method of multipliers always being dual
feasible; see page 11.
Since xk+1 minimizes Lρ(x,zk,yk) by deﬁnition, we have that
0 ∈∂f(xk+1) + AT yk + ρAT (Axk+1 + Bzk −c)
= ∂f(xk+1) + AT (yk + ρrk+1 + ρB(zk −zk+1))
= ∂f(xk+1) + AT yk+1 + ρAT B(zk −zk+1),
or equivalently,
ρAT B(zk+1 −zk) ∈∂f(xk+1) + AT yk+1.
This means that the quantity
sk+1 = ρAT B(zk+1 −zk)
can be viewed as a residual for the dual feasibility condition (3.9).
We will refer to sk+1 as the dual residual at iteration k + 1, and to
rk+1 = Axk+1 + Bzk+1 −c as the primal residual at iteration k + 1.
3.3 Optimality Conditions and Stopping Criterion
In summary, the optimality conditions for the ADMM problem consist of three conditions, (3.8–3.10). The last condition (3.10) always
holds for (xk+1,zk+1,yk+1); the residuals for the other two, (3.8) and
(3.9), are the primal and dual residuals rk+1 and sk+1, respectively.
These two residuals converge to zero as ADMM proceeds. (In fact, the
convergence proof in appendix A shows B(zk+1 −zk) converges to zero,
which implies sk converges to zero.)
Stopping Criteria
The residuals of the optimality conditions can be related to a bound on
the objective suboptimality of the current point, i.e., f(xk) + g(zk) −
p⋆. As shown in the convergence proof in appendix A, we have
f(xk) + g(zk) −p⋆≤−(yk)T rk + (xk −x⋆)T sk.
This shows that when the residuals rk and sk are small, the objective
suboptimality also must be small. We cannot use this inequality directly
in a stopping criterion, however, since we do not know x⋆. But if we
guess or estimate that ∥xk −x⋆∥2 ≤d, we have that
f(xk) + g(zk) −p⋆≤−(yk)T rk + d∥sk∥2 ≤∥yk∥2∥rk∥2 + d∥sk∥2.
The middle or righthand terms can be used as an approximate bound
on the objective suboptimality (which depends on our guess of d).
This suggests that a reasonable termination criterion is that the
primal and dual residuals must be small, i.e.,
∥rk∥2 ≤ϵpri
∥sk∥2 ≤ϵdual,
where ϵpri > 0 and ϵdual > 0 are feasibility tolerances for the primal and
dual feasibility conditions (3.8) and (3.9), respectively. These tolerances
can be chosen using an absolute and relative criterion, such as
ϵpri = √p ϵabs + ϵrel max{∥Axk∥2,∥Bzk∥2,∥c∥2},
ϵdual = √n ϵabs + ϵrel∥AT yk∥2,
where ϵabs > 0 is an absolute tolerance and ϵrel > 0 is a relative tolerance. (The factors √p and √n account for the fact that the ℓ2 norms are
in Rp and Rn, respectively.) A reasonable value for the relative stopping
Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers
criterion might be ϵrel = 10−3 or 10−4, depending on the application.
The choice of absolute stopping criterion depends on the scale of the
typical variable values.
Extensions and Variations
Many variations on the classic ADMM algorithm have been explored in
the literature. Here we brieﬂy survey some of these variants, organized
into groups of related ideas. Some of these methods can give superior
convergence in practice compared to the standard ADMM presented
above. Most of the extensions have been rigorously analyzed, so the
convergence results described above are still valid (in some cases, under
some additional conditions).
Varying Penalty Parameter
A standard extension is to use possibly diﬀerent penalty parameters ρk
for each iteration, with the goal of improving the convergence in practice, as well as making performance less dependent on the initial choice
of the penalty parameter. In the context of the method of multipliers,
this approach is analyzed in , where it is shown that superlinear
convergence may be achieved if ρk →∞. Though it can be diﬃcult to
prove the convergence of ADMM when ρ varies by iteration, the ﬁxed-
ρ theory still applies if one just assumes that ρ becomes ﬁxed after a
ﬁnite number of iterations.
A simple scheme that often works well is (see, e.g., ):
if ∥rk∥2 > µ∥sk∥2
if ∥sk∥2 > µ∥rk∥2
otherwise,
where µ > 1, τ incr > 1, and τ decr > 1 are parameters. Typical choices
might be µ = 10 and τ incr = τ decr = 2. The idea behind this penalty
parameter update is to try to keep the primal and dual residual norms
within a factor of µ of one another as they both converge to zero.
The ADMM update equations suggest that large values of ρ place a
large penalty on violations of primal feasibility and so tend to produce
3.4 Extensions and Variations
small primal residuals. Conversely, the deﬁnition of sk+1 suggests that
small values of ρ tend to reduce the dual residual, but at the expense of
reducing the penalty on primal feasibility, which may result in a larger
primal residual. The adjustment scheme (3.13) inﬂates ρ by τ incr when
the primal residual appears large compared to the dual residual, and
deﬂates ρ by τ decr when the primal residual seems too small relative
to the dual residual. This scheme may also be reﬁned by taking into
account the relative magnitudes of ϵpri and ϵdual.
When a varying penalty parameter is used in the scaled form of
ADMM, the scaled dual variable uk = (1/ρ)yk must also be rescaled
after updating ρ; for example, if ρ is halved, uk should be doubled
before proceeding.
More General Augmenting Terms
Another idea is to allow for a diﬀerent penalty parameter for each
constraint, or more generally, to replace the quadratic term (ρ/2)∥r∥2
with (1/2)rT Pr, where P is a symmetric positive deﬁnite matrix. When
P is constant, we can interpret this generalized version of ADMM as
standard ADMM applied to a modiﬁed initial problem with the equality
constraints r = 0 replaced with Fr = 0, where F T F = P.
Over-relaxation
In the z- and y-updates, the quantity Axk+1 can be replaced with
αkAxk+1 −(1 −αk)(Bzk −c),
where αk ∈(0,2) is a relaxation parameter; when αk > 1, this technique
is called over-relaxation, and when αk < 1, it is called under-relaxation.
This scheme is analyzed in , and experiments in suggest that
over-relaxation with αk ∈[1.5,1.8] can improve convergence.
Inexact Minimization
ADMM will converge even when the x- and z-minimization steps
are not carried out exactly, provided certain suboptimality measures
Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers
in the minimizations satisfy an appropriate condition, such as being
summable. This result is due to Eckstein and Bertsekas , building
on earlier results by Gol’shtein and Tret’yakov . This technique is
important in situations where the x- or z-updates are carried out using
an iterative method; it allows us to solve the minimizations only approximately at ﬁrst, and then more accurately as the iterations progress.
Update Ordering
Several variations on ADMM involve performing the x-, z-, and yupdates in varying orders or multiple times. For example, we can divide
the variables into k blocks, and update each of them in turn, possibly
multiple times, before performing each dual variable update; see, e.g.,
 . Carrying out multiple x- and z-updates before the y-update can
be interpreted as executing multiple Gauss-Seidel passes instead of just
one; if many sweeps are carried out before each dual update, the resulting algorithm is very close to the standard method of multipliers [17,
§3.4.4]. Another variation is to perform an additional y-update between
the x- and z-update, with half the step length .
Related Algorithms
There are also a number of other algorithms distinct from but inspired
by ADMM. For instance, Fukushima applies ADMM to a dual
problem formulation, yielding a ‘dual ADMM’ algorithm, which is
shown in to be equivalent to the ‘primal Douglas-Rachford’ method
discussed in [57, §3.5.6]. As another example, Zhu et al. discuss
variations of distributed ADMM (discussed in §7, §8, and §10) that
can cope with various complicating factors, such as noise in the messages exchanged for the updates, or asynchronous updates, which can
be useful in a regime when some processors or subsystems randomly
fail. There are also algorithms resembling a combination of ADMM
and the proximal method of multipliers , rather than the standard
method of multipliers; see, e.g., . Other representative publications include .
3.5 Notes and References
Notes and References
ADMM was originally proposed in the mid-1970s by Glowinski and
Marrocco and Gabay and Mercier . There are a number of other
important papers analyzing the properties of the algorithm, including
 . In particular, the convergence of ADMM
has been explored by many authors, including Gabay and Eckstein
and Bertsekas .
ADMM has also been applied to a number of statistical problems, such as constrained sparse regression , sparse signal recovery , image restoration and denoising , trace norm
regularized least squares minimization , sparse inverse covariance selection , the Dantzig selector , and support vector
machines , among others. For examples in signal processing, see
 and the references therein.
Many papers analyzing ADMM do so from the perspective of maximal monotone operators . Brieﬂy, a wide variety
of problems can be posed as ﬁnding a zero of a maximal monotone
operator; for example, if f is closed, proper, and convex, then the subdiﬀerential operator ∂f is maximal monotone, and ﬁnding a zero of ∂f
is simply minimization of f; such a minimization may implicitly contain
constraints if f is allowed to take the value +∞. Rockafellar’s proximal
point algorithm is a general method for ﬁnding a zero of a maximal monotone operator, and a wide variety of algorithms have been
shown to be special cases, including proximal minimization (see §4.1),
the method of multipliers, and ADMM. For a more detailed review of
the older literature, see [57, §2].
The method of multipliers was shown to be a special case of the
proximal point algorithm by Rockafellar . Gabay showed that
ADMM is a special case of a method called Douglas-Rachford splitting for monotone operators , and Eckstein and Bertsekas
 showed in turn that Douglas-Rachford splitting is a special case
of the proximal point algorithm. (The variant of ADMM that performs an extra y-update between the x- and z-updates is equivalent to Peaceman-Rachford splitting instead, as shown by
Glowinski and Le Tallec .) Using the same framework, Eckstein
Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers
and Bertsekas also showed the relationships between a number of
other algorithms, such as Spingarn’s method of partial inverses .
Lawrence and Spingarn develop an alternative framework showing that Douglas-Rachford splitting, hence ADMM, is a special case
of the proximal point algorithm; Eckstein and Ferris oﬀer a more
recent discussion explaining this approach.
The major importance of these results is that they allow the powerful convergence theory for the proximal point algorithm to apply
directly to ADMM and other methods, and show that many of these
algorithms are essentially identical. (But note that our proof of convergence of the basic ADMM algorithm, given in appendix A, is selfcontained and does not rely on this abstract machinery.) Research on
operator splitting methods and their relation to decomposition algorithms continues to this day .
A considerable body of recent research considers replacing the
quadratic penalty term in the standard method of multipliers with a
more general deviation penalty, such as one derived from a Bregman
divergence ; see for background material. Unfortunately,
these generalizations do not appear to carry over in a straightforward
manner from non-decomposition augmented Lagrangian methods to
ADMM: There is currently no proof of convergence known for ADMM
with nonquadratic penalty terms.
General Patterns
Structure in f, g, A, and B can often be exploited to carry out the
x- and z-updates more eﬃciently. Here we consider three general cases
that we will encounter repeatedly in the sequel: quadratic objective
terms, separable objective and constraints, and smooth objective terms.
Our discussion will be written for the x-update but applies to the zupdate by symmetry. We express the x-update step as
x+ = argmin
f(x) + (ρ/2)∥Ax −v∥2
where v = −Bz + c −u is a known constant vector for the purposes of
the x-update.
Proximity Operator
First, consider the simple case where A = I, which appears frequently
in the examples. Then the x-update is
x+ = argmin
f(x) + (ρ/2)∥x −v∥2
As a function of v, the righthand side is denoted proxf,ρ(v) and is
called the proximity operator of f with penalty ρ . In variational
General Patterns
˜f(v) = inf
f(x) + (ρ/2)∥x −v∥2
is known as the Moreau envelope or Moreau-Yosida regularization of f,
and is connected to the theory of the proximal point algorithm .
The x-minimization in the proximity operator is generally referred to
as proximal minimization. While these observations do not by themselves allow us to improve the eﬃciency of ADMM, it does tie the
x-minimization step to other well known ideas.
When the function f is simple enough, the x-update (i.e., the proximity operator) can be evaluated analytically; see for many examples. For instance, if f is the indicator function of a closed nonempty
convex set C, then the x-update is
x+ = argmin
f(x) + (ρ/2)∥x −v∥2
where ΠC denotes projection (in the Euclidean norm) onto C. This holds
independently of the choice of ρ. As an example, if f is the indicator
function of the nonnegative orthant Rn
+, we have x+ = (v)+, the vector
obtained by taking the nonnegative part of each component of v.
Quadratic Objective Terms
Suppose f is given by the (convex) quadratic function
f(x) = (1/2)xT Px + qT x + r,
where P ∈Sn
+, the set of symmetric positive semideﬁnite n × n matrices. This includes the cases when f is linear or constant, by setting P,
or both P and q, to zero. Then, assuming P + ρAT A is invertible, x+
is an aﬃne function of v given by
x+ = (P + ρAT A)−1(ρAT v −q).
In other words, computing the x-update amounts to solving a linear
system with positive deﬁnite coeﬃcient matrix P + ρAT A and righthand side ρAT v −q. As we show below, an appropriate use of numerical
linear algebra can exploit this fact and substantially improve performance. For general background on numerical linear algebra, see or
 ; see [20, appendix C] for a short overview of direct methods.
4.2 Quadratic Objective Terms
Direct Methods
We assume here that a direct method is used to carry out the x-update;
the case when an iterative method is used is discussed in §4.3. Direct
methods for solving a linear system Fx = g are based on ﬁrst factoring
F = F1F2 ···Fk into a product of simpler matrices, and then computing
x = F −1b by solving a sequence of problems of the form Fizi = zi−1,
where z1 = F −1
1 g and x = zk. The solve step is sometimes also called
a back-solve. The computational cost of factorization and back-solve
operations depends on the sparsity pattern and other properties of F.
The cost of solving Fx = g is the sum of the cost of factoring F and
the cost of the back-solve.
In our case, the coeﬃcient matrix is F = P + ρAT A and the righthand side is g = ρAT v −q, where P ∈Sn
+ and A ∈Rp×n. Suppose we
exploit no structure in A or P, i.e., we use generic methods that work
for any matrix. We can form F = P + ρAT A at a cost of O(pn2) ﬂops
(ﬂoating point operations). We then carry out a Cholesky factorization
of F at a cost of O(n3) ﬂops; the back-solve cost is O(n2). (The cost of
forming g is negligible compared to the costs listed above.) When p is
on the order of, or more than n, the overall cost is O(pn2). (When p is
less than n in order, the matrix inversion lemma described below can
be used to carry out the update in O(p2n) ﬂops.)
Exploiting Sparsity
When A and P are such that F is sparse (i.e., has enough zero entries
to be worth exploiting), much more eﬃcient factorization and backsolve routines can be employed. As an extreme case, if P and A are
diagonal n × n matrices, then both the factor and solve costs are
O(n). If P and A are banded, then so is F. If F is banded with
bandwidth k, the factorization cost is O(nk2) and the back-solve cost
is O(nk). In this case, the x-update can be carried out at a cost
O(nk2), plus the cost of forming F. The same approach works when
P + ρAT A has a more general sparsity pattern; in this case, a permuted
Cholesky factorization can be used, with permutations chosen to reduce
General Patterns
Caching Factorizations
Now suppose we need to solve multiple linear systems, say, Fx(i) = g(i),
i = 1,...,N, with the same coeﬃcient matrix but diﬀerent righthand
sides. This occurs in ADMM when the parameter ρ is not changed. In
this case, the factorization of the coeﬃcient matrix F can be computed
once and then back-solves can be carried out for each righthand side.
If t is the factorization cost and s is the back-solve cost, then the total
cost becomes t + Ns instead of N(t + s), which would be the cost if
we were to factor F each iteration. As long as ρ does not change, we
can factor P + ρAT A once, and then use this cached factorization in
subsequent solve steps. For example, if we do not exploit any structure
and use the standard Cholesky factorization, the x-update steps can
be carried out a factor n more eﬃciently than a naive implementation,
in which we solve the equations from scratch in each iteration.
When structure is exploited, the ratio between t and s is typically
less than n but often still signiﬁcant, so here too there are performance
gains. However, in this case, there is less beneﬁt to ρ not changing, so
we can weigh the beneﬁt of varying ρ against the beneﬁt of not recomputing the factorization of P + ρAT A. In general, an implementation
should cache the factorization of P + ρAT A and then only recompute
it if and when ρ changes.
Matrix Inversion Lemma
We can also exploit structure using the matrix inversion lemma, which
states that the identity
(P + ρAT A)−1 = P −1 −ρP −1AT (I + ρAP −1AT )−1AP −1
holds when all the inverses exist. This means that if linear systems
with coeﬃcient matrix P can be solved eﬃciently, and p is small, or
at least no larger than n in order, then the x-update can be computed
eﬃciently as well. The same trick as above can also be used to obtain
an eﬃcient method for computing multiple updates: The factorization
of I + ρAP −1AT can be cached and cheaper back-solves can be used
in computing the updates.
4.2 Quadratic Objective Terms
As an example, suppose that P is diagonal and that p ≤n. A naive
method for computing the update costs O(n3) ﬂops in the ﬁrst iteration and O(n2) ﬂops in subsequent iterations, if we store the factors of
P + ρAT A. Using the matrix inversion lemma (i.e., using the righthand
side above) to compute the x-update costs O(np2) ﬂops, an improvement by a factor of (n/p)2 over the naive method. In this case, the
dominant cost is forming AP −1AT . The factors of I + ρAP −1AT can
be saved after the ﬁrst update, so subsequent iterations can be carried out at cost O(np) ﬂops, a savings of a factor of p over the ﬁrst
Using the matrix inversion lemma to compute x+ can also make
it less costly to vary ρ in each iteration. When P is diagonal, for
example, we can compute AP −1AT once, and then form and factor
I + ρkAP −1AT in iteration k at a cost of O(p3) ﬂops. In other words,
the update costs an additional O(np) ﬂops, so if p2 is less than or equal
to n in order, there is no additional cost (in order) to carrying out
updates with ρ varying in each iteration.
Quadratic Function Restricted to an Aﬃne Set
The same comments hold for the slightly more complex case of a convex
quadratic function restricted to an aﬃne set:
f(x) = (1/2)xT Px + qT x + r,
domf = {x | Fx = g}.
Here, x+ is still an aﬃne function of v, and the update involves solving
the KKT (Karush-Kuhn-Tucker) system
q −ρ(zk −uk)
All of the comments above hold here as well: Factorizations can be
cached to carry out additional updates more eﬃciently, and structure
in the matrices can be exploited to improve the eﬃciency of the factorization and back-solve steps.
General Patterns
Smooth Objective Terms
Iterative Solvers
When f is smooth, general iterative methods can be used to carry
out the x-minimization step. Of particular interest are methods that
only require the ability to compute ∇f(x) for a given x, to multiply a
vector by A, and to multiply a vector by AT . Such methods can scale
to relatively large problems. Examples include the standard gradient
method, the (nonlinear) conjugate gradient method, and the limitedmemory Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno (L-BFGS) algorithm ; see for further details.
The convergence of these methods depends on the conditioning of
the function to be minimized. The presence of the quadratic penalty
term (ρ/2)∥Ax −v∥2
2 tends to improve the conditioning of the problem
and thus improve the performance of an iterative method for updating
x. Indeed, one method for adjusting the parameter ρ from iteration to
iteration is to increase it until the iterative method used to carry out
the updates converges quickly enough.
Early Termination
A standard technique to speed up the algorithm is to terminate the
iterative method used to carry out the x-update (or z-update) early,
i.e., before the gradient of f(x) + (ρ/2)∥Ax −v∥2
2 is very small. This
technique is justiﬁed by the convergence results for ADMM with inexact
minimization in the x- and z-update steps. In this case, the required
accuracy should be low in the initial iterations of ADMM and then
repeatedly increased in each iteration. Early termination in the x- or
z-updates can result in more ADMM iterations, but much lower cost
per iteration, giving an overall improvement in eﬃciency.
Warm Start
Another standard trick is to initialize the iterative method used in
the x-update at the solution xk obtained in the previous iteration.
This is called a warm start. The previous ADMM iterate often gives
a good enough approximation to result in far fewer iterations (of the
4.4 Decomposition
iterative method used to compute the update xk+1) than if the iterative
method were started at zero or some other default initialization. This
is especially the case when ADMM has almost converged, in which case
the updates will not change signiﬁcantly from their previous values.
Quadratic Objective Terms
Even when f is quadratic, it may be worth using an iterative method
rather than a direct method for the x-update. In this case, we can use
a standard (possibly preconditioned) conjugate gradient method. This
approach makes sense when direct methods do not work (e.g., because
they require too much memory) or when A is dense but a fast method
is available for multiplying a vector by A or AT . This is the case, for
example, when A represents the discrete Fourier transform .
Decomposition
Block Separability
Suppose x = (x1,...,xN) is a partition of the variable x into subvectors
and that f is separable with respect to this partition, i.e.,
f(x) = f1(x1) + ··· + fN(xN),
where xi ∈Rni and N
i=1 ni = N. If the quadratic term ∥Ax∥2
separable with respect to the partition, i.e., AT A is block diagonal
conformably with the partition, then the augmented Lagrangian Lρ is
separable. This means that the x-update can be carried out in parallel,
with the subvectors xi updated by N separate minimizations.
Component Separability
In some cases, the decomposition extends all the way to individual
components of x, i.e.,
f(x) = f1(x1) + ··· + fn(xn),
where fi : R →R, and AT A is diagonal. The x-minimization step can
then be carried out via n scalar minimizations, which can in some
cases be expressed analytically (but in any case can be computed very
eﬃciently). We will call this component separability.
General Patterns
Soft Thresholding
For an example that will come up often in the sequel, consider f(x) =
λ∥x∥1 (with λ > 0) and A = I. In this case the (scalar) xi-update is
i := argmin
λ|xi| + (ρ/2)(xi −vi)2
Even though the ﬁrst term is not diﬀerentiable, we can easily compute
a simple closed-form solution to this problem by using subdiﬀerential
calculus; see [140, §23] for background. Explicitly, the solution is
i := Sλ/ρ(vi),
where the soft thresholding operator S is deﬁned as
or equivalently,
Sκ(a) = (a −κ)+ −(−a −κ)+.
Yet another formula, which shows that the soft thresholding operator
is a shrinkage operator (i.e., moves a point toward zero), is
Sκ(a) = (1 −κ/|a|)+a
(for a ̸= 0). We refer to updates that reduce to this form as elementwise soft thresholding. In the language of §4.1, soft thresholding is the
proximity operator of the ℓ1 norm.
Constrained Convex Optimization
The generic constrained convex optimization problem is
subject to
with variable x ∈Rn, where f and C are convex. This problem can be
rewritten in ADMM form (3.1) as
f(x) + g(z)
subject to
where g is the indicator function of C.
The augmented Lagrangian (using the scaled dual variable) is
Lρ(x,z,u) = f(x) + g(z) + (ρ/2)∥x −z + u∥2
so the scaled form of ADMM for this problem is
xk+1 := argmin
f(x) + (ρ/2)∥x −zk + uk∥2
zk+1 := ΠC(xk+1 + uk)
uk+1 := uk + xk+1 −zk+1.
Constrained Convex Optimization
The x-update involves minimizing f plus a convex quadratic function,
i.e., evaluation of the proximal operator associated with f. The zupdate is Euclidean projection onto C. The objective f need not be
smooth here; indeed, we can include additional constraints (i.e., beyond
those represented by x ∈C) by deﬁning f to be +∞where they are violated. In this case, the x-update becomes a constrained optimization
problem over domf = {x | f(x) < ∞}.
As with all problems where the constraint is x −z = 0, the primal
and dual residuals take the simple form
rk = xk −zk,
sk = −ρ(zk −zk−1).
In the following sections we give some more speciﬁc examples.
Convex Feasibility
Alternating Projections
A classic problem is to ﬁnd a point in the intersection of two closed
nonempty convex sets. The classical method, which dates back to the
1930s, is von Neumann’s alternating projections algorithm :
xk+1 := ΠC(zk)
zk+1 := ΠD(xk+1),
where ΠC and ΠD are Euclidean projection onto the sets C and D,
respectively.
In ADMM form, the problem can be written as
f(x) + g(z)
subject to
where f is the indicator function of C and g is the indicator function
of D. The scaled form of ADMM is then
xk+1 := ΠC(zk −uk)
zk+1 := ΠD(xk+1 + uk)
uk+1 := uk + xk+1 −zk+1,
so both the x and z steps involve projection onto a convex set, as in
the classical method. This is exactly Dykstra’s alternating projections
5.1 Convex Feasibility
method , which is far more eﬃcient than the classical method
that does not use the dual variable u.
Here, the norm of the primal residual ∥xk −zk∥2 has a nice interpretation. Since xk ∈C and zk ∈D, ∥xk −zk∥2 is an upper bound on
dist(C,D), the Euclidean distance between C and D. If we terminate
with ∥rk∥2 ≤ϵpri, then we have found a pair of points, one in C and
one in D, that are no more than ϵpri far apart. Alternatively, the point
(1/2)(xk + zk) is no more than a distance ϵpri/2 from both C and D.
Parallel Projections
This method can be applied to the problem of ﬁnding a point in the
intersection of N closed convex sets A1,...,AN in Rn by running the
algorithm in RnN with
C = A1 × ··· × AN,
D = {(x1,...,xN) ∈RnN | x1 = x2 = ··· = xN}.
If x = (x1,...,xN) ∈RnN, then projection onto C is
ΠC(x) = (ΠA1(x1),...,ΠAN (xN)),
and projection onto D is
ΠD(x) = (x,x,...,x),
where x = (1/N)N
i=1 xi is the average of x1,...,xN. Thus, each step
of ADMM can be carried out by projecting points onto each of the sets
Ai in parallel and then averaging the results:
:= ΠAi(zk −uk
Here the ﬁrst and third steps are carried out in parallel, for i = 1,...,N.
(The description above involves a small abuse of notation in dropping
the index i from zi, since they are all the same.) This can be viewed as a
special case of constrained optimization, as described in §4.4, where the
indicator function of A1 ∩··· ∩AN splits into the sum of the indicator
functions of each Ai.
Constrained Convex Optimization
We note for later reference a simpliﬁcation of the ADMM algorithm
above. Taking the average (over i) of the last equation we obtain
uk+1 = uk + xk+1 −zk,
combined with zk+1 = xk+1 + uk (from the second equation) we see
that uk+1 = 0. So after the ﬁrst step, the average of ui is zero. This
means that zk+1 reduces to xk+1. Using these simpliﬁcations, we arrive
at the simple algorithm
:= ΠAi(xk −uk
This shows that uk
i is the running sum of the the ‘discrepancies’ xk
(assuming u0 = 0). The ﬁrst step is a parallel projection onto the sets
Ci; the second involves averaging the projected points.
There is a large literature on successive projection algorithms and
their many applications; see the survey by Bauschke and Borwein 
for a general overview, Combettes for applications to image processing, and Censor and Zenios [31, §5] for a discussion in the context
of parallel optimization.
Linear and Quadratic Programming
The standard form quadratic program (QP) is
(1/2)xT Px + qT x
subject to
with variable x ∈Rn; we assume that P ∈Sn
+. When P = 0, this
reduces to the standard form linear program (LP).
We express it in ADMM form as
f(x) + g(z)
subject to
f(x) = (1/2)xT Px + qT x,
domf = {x | Ax = b}
is the original objective with restricted domain and g is the indicator
function of the nonnegative orthant Rn
5.2 Linear and Quadratic Programming
The scaled form of ADMM consists of the iterations
xk+1 := argmin
f(x) + (ρ/2)∥x −zk + uk∥2
zk+1 := (xk+1 + uk)+
uk+1 := uk + xk+1 −zk+1.
As described in §4.2.5, the x-update is an equality-constrained least
squares problem with optimality conditions
q −ρ(zk −uk)
All of the comments on eﬃcient computation from §4.2, such as storing
factorizations so that subsequent iterations can be carried out cheaply,
also apply here. For example, if P is diagonal, possibly zero, the ﬁrst
x-update can be carried out at a cost of O(np2) ﬂops, where p is the
number of equality constraints in the original quadratic program. Subsequent updates only cost O(np) ﬂops.
Linear and Quadratic Cone Programming
More generally, any conic constraint x ∈K can be used in place of the
constraint x ≥0, in which case the standard quadratic program (5.3)
becomes a quadratic conic program. The only change to ADMM is in
the z-update, which then involves projection onto K. For example, we
can solve a semideﬁnite program with x ∈Sn
+ by projecting xk+1 + uk
+ using an eigenvalue decomposition.
ℓ1-Norm Problems
The problems addressed in this section will help illustrate why ADMM
is a natural ﬁt for machine learning and statistical problems in particular. The reason is that, unlike dual ascent or the method of multipliers,
ADMM explicitly targets problems that split into two distinct parts, f
and g, that can then be handled separately. Problems of this form are
pervasive in machine learning, because a signiﬁcant number of learning
problems involve minimizing a loss function together with a regularization term or side constraints. In other cases, these side constraints are
introduced through problem transformations like putting the problem
in consensus form, as will be discussed in §7.1.
This section contains a variety of simple but important problems
involving ℓ1 norms. There is widespread current interest in many of these
problems across statistics, machine learning, and signal processing, and
applying ADMM yields interesting algorithms that are state-of-the-art,
or closely related to state-of-the-art methods. We will see that ADMM
naturally lets us decouple the nonsmooth ℓ1 term from the smooth loss
term, which is computationally advantageous. In this section, we focus on
the non-distributed versions of these problems for simplicity; the problem
of distributed model ﬁtting will be treated in the sequel.
6.1 Least Absolute Deviations
The idea of ℓ1 regularization is decades old, and traces back to
Huber’s work on robust statistics and a paper of Claerbout 
in geophysics. There is a vast literature, but some important modern
papers are those on total variation denoising , soft thresholding
 , the lasso , basis pursuit , compressed sensing ,
and structure learning of sparse graphical models .
Because of the now widespread use of models incorporating an ℓ1
penalty, there has also been considerable research on optimization algorithms for such problems. A recent survey by Yang et al. compares and benchmarks a number of representative algorithms, including gradient projection , homotopy methods , iterative
shrinkage-thresholding , proximal gradient , augmented Lagrangian methods , and interior-point methods .
There are other approaches as well, such as Bregman iterative algorithms and iterative thresholding algorithms implementable
in a message-passing framework.
Least Absolute Deviations
A simple variant on least squares ﬁtting is least absolute deviations,
in which we minimize ∥Ax −b∥1 instead of ∥Ax −b∥2
2. Least absolute
deviations provides a more robust ﬁt than least squares when the data
contains large outliers, and has been used extensively in statistics and
econometrics. See, for example, [95, §10.6], [171, §9.6], and [20, §6.1.2].
In ADMM form, the problem can be written as
subject to
Ax −z = b,
so f = 0 and g = ∥· ∥1. Exploiting the special form of f and g, and
assuming AT A is invertible, ADMM can be expressed as
xk+1 := (AT A)−1AT (b + zk −uk)
zk+1 := S1/ρ(Axk+1 −b + uk)
uk+1 := uk + Axk+1 −zk+1 −b,
where the soft thresholding operator is interpreted elementwise. As in
§4.2, the matrix AT A can be factored once; the factors are then used
in cheaper back-solves in subsequent x-updates.
ℓ1-Norm Problems
The x-update step is the same as carrying out a least squares ﬁt
with coeﬃcient matrix A and righthand side b + zk −uk. Thus ADMM
can be interpreted as a method for solving a least absolute deviations
problem by iteratively solving the associated least squares problem with
a modiﬁed righthand side; the modiﬁcation is then updated using soft
thresholding. With factorization caching, the cost of subsequent least
squares iterations is much smaller than the initial one, often making
the time required to carry out least absolute deviations very nearly the
same as the time required to carry out least squares.
Huber Fitting
A problem that lies in between least squares and least absolute deviations is Huber function ﬁtting,
ghub(Ax −b),
where the Huber penalty function ghub is quadratic for small arguments
and transitions to an absolute value for larger values. For scalar a, it
is given by
and extends to vector arguments as the sum of the Huber functions
of the components. (For simplicity, we consider the standard Huber
function, which transitions from quadratic to absolute value at the
This can be put into ADMM form as above, and the ADMM algorithm is the same except that the z-update involves the proximity operator of the Huber function rather than that of the ℓ1 norm:
Axk+1 −b + uk
1 + ρS1+1/ρ(Axk+1 −b + uk).
When the least squares ﬁt xls = (AT A)−1b satisﬁes |xls
i | ≤1 for all i, it
is also the Huber ﬁt. In this case, ADMM terminates in two steps.
6.2 Basis Pursuit
Basis Pursuit
Basis pursuit is the equality-constrained ℓ1 minimization problem
subject to
with variable x ∈Rn, data A ∈Rm×n, b ∈Rm, with m < n. Basis pursuit is often used as a heuristic for ﬁnding a sparse solution to an
underdetermined system of linear equations. It plays a central role in
modern statistical signal processing, particularly the theory of compressed sensing; see for a recent survey.
In ADMM form, basis pursuit can be written as
f(x) + ∥z∥1
subject to
where f is the indicator function of {x ∈Rn | Ax = b}. The ADMM
algorithm is then
xk+1 := Π(zk −uk)
zk+1 := S1/ρ(xk+1 + uk)
uk+1 := uk + xk+1 −zk+1,
where Π is projection onto {x ∈Rn | Ax = b}. The x-update, which
involves solving a linearly-constrained minimum Euclidean norm problem, can be written explicitly as
xk+1 := (I −AT (AAT )−1A)(zk −uk) + AT (AAT )−1b.
Again, the comments on eﬃcient computation from §4.2 apply; by
caching a factorization of AAT , subsequent projections are much
cheaper than the ﬁrst one. We can interpret ADMM for basis pursuit as reducing the solution of a least ℓ1 norm problem to solving a
sequence of minimum Euclidean norm problems. For a discussion of
similar algorithms for related problems in image processing, see .
A recent class of algorithms called Bregman iterative methods have
attracted considerable interest for solving ℓ1 problems like basis pursuit.
For basis pursuit and related problems, Bregman iterative regularization
 is equivalent to the method of multipliers, and the split Bregman
method is equivalent to ADMM .
ℓ1-Norm Problems
General ℓ1 Regularized Loss Minimization
Consider the generic problem
l(x) + λ∥x∥1,
where l is any convex loss function.
In ADMM form, this problem can be written as
l(x) + g(z)
subject to
where g(z) = λ∥z∥1. The algorithm is
xk+1 := argmin
l(x) + (ρ/2)∥x −zk + uk∥2
zk+1 := Sλ/ρ(xk+1 + uk)
uk+1 := uk + xk+1 −zk+1.
The x-update is a proximal operator evaluation. If l is smooth, this can
be done by any standard method, such as Newton’s method, a quasi-
Newton method such as L-BFGS, or the conjugate gradient method.
If l is quadratic, the x-minimization can be carried out by solving linear equations, as in §4.2. In general, we can interpret ADMM for ℓ1
regularized loss minimization as reducing it to solving a sequence of ℓ2
(squared) regularized loss minimization problems.
A very wide variety of models can be represented with the loss
function l, including generalized linear models and generalized
additive models . In particular, generalized linear models subsume
linear regression, logistic regression, softmax regression, and Poisson
regression, since they allow for any exponential family distribution. For
general background on models like ℓ1 regularized logistic regression, see,
e.g., [95, §4.4.4].
In order to use a regularizer g(z) other than ∥z∥1, we simply replace
the soft thresholding operator in the z-update with the proximity operator of g, as in §4.1.
An important special case of (6.1) is ℓ1 regularized linear regression,
also called the lasso . This involves solving
(1/2)∥Ax −b∥2
2 + λ∥x∥1,
where λ > 0 is a scalar regularization parameter that is usually chosen by cross-validation. In typical applications, there are many more
features than training examples, and the goal is to ﬁnd a parsimonious model for the data. For general background on the lasso, see [95,
§3.4.2]. The lasso has been widely applied, particularly in the analysis of biological data, where only a small fraction of a huge number of
possible factors are actually predictive of some outcome of interest; see
[95, §18.4] for a representative case study.
In ADMM form, the lasso problem can be written as
f(x) + g(z)
subject to
where f(x) = (1/2)∥Ax −b∥2
2 and g(z) = λ∥z∥1. By §4.2 and §4.4,
ADMM becomes
xk+1 := (AT A + ρI)−1(AT b + ρ(zk −uk))
zk+1 := Sλ/ρ(xk+1 + uk)
uk+1 := uk + xk+1 −zk+1.
Note that AT A + ρI is always invertible, since ρ > 0. The x-update
is essentially a ridge regression (i.e., quadratically regularized least
squares) computation, so ADMM can be interpreted as a method for
solving the lasso problem by iteratively carrying out ridge regression.
When using a direct method, we can cache an initial factorization to
make subsequent iterations much cheaper. See for an example of an
application in image processing.
Generalized Lasso
The lasso problem can be generalized to
(1/2)∥Ax −b∥2
2 + λ∥Fx∥1,
ℓ1-Norm Problems
where F is an arbitrary linear transformation. An important special
case is when F ∈R(n−1)×n is the diﬀerence matrix,
otherwise,
and A = I, in which case the generalization reduces to
(1/2)∥x −b∥2
i=1 |xi+1 −xi|.
The second term is the total variation of x. This problem is often called
total variation denoising , and has applications in signal processing. When A = I and F is a second diﬀerence matrix, the problem (6.3)
is called ℓ1 trend ﬁltering .
In ADMM form, the problem (6.3) can be written as
(1/2)∥Ax −b∥2
subject to
Fx −z = 0,
which yields the ADMM algorithm
xk+1 := (AT A + ρF T F)−1(AT b + ρF T (zk −uk))
zk+1 := Sλ/ρ(Fxk+1 + uk)
uk+1 := uk + Fxk+1 −zk+1.
For the special case of total variation denoising (6.4), AT A + ρF T F
is tridiagonal, so the x-update can be carried out in O(n) ﬂops [90, §4.3].
For ℓ1 trend ﬁltering, the matrix is pentadiagonal, so the x-update is
still O(n) ﬂops.
Group Lasso
As another example, consider replacing the regularizer ∥x∥1 with
i=1 ∥xi∥2, where x = (x1,...,xN), with xi ∈Rni. When ni = 1 and
N = n, this reduces to the ℓ1 regularized problem (6.1). Here the regularizer is separable with respect to the partition x1,...,xN but not
fully separable. This extension of ℓ1 norm regularization is called the
group lasso or, more generally, sum-of-norms regularization .
6.5 Sparse Inverse Covariance Selection
ADMM for this problem is the same as above with the z-update
replaced with block soft thresholding
= Sλ/ρ(xk+1
i = 1,...,N,
where the vector soft thresholding operator Sκ : Rm →Rm is
Sκ(a) = (1 −κ/∥a∥2)+a,
with Sκ(0) = 0. This formula reduces to the scalar soft thresholding operator when a is a scalar, and generalizes the expression given
This can be extended further to handle overlapping groups, which
is often useful in bioinformatics and other applications . In
this case, we have N potentially overlapping groups Gi ⊆{1,...,n} of
variables, and the objective is
(1/2)∥Ax −b∥2
where xGi is the subvector of x with entries in Gi. Because the groups
can overlap, this kind of objective is diﬃcult to optimize with many
standard methods, but it is straightforward with ADMM. To use
ADMM, introduce N new variables xi ∈R|Gi| and consider the problem
(1/2)∥Az −b∥2
subject to
xi −˜zi = 0,
i = 1,...,N,
with local variables xi and global variable z. Here, ˜zi is the global
variable z’s idea of what the local variable xi should be, and is given
by a linear function of z. This follows the notation for general form
consensus optimization outlined in full detail in §7.2; the overlapping
group lasso problem above is a special case.
Sparse Inverse Covariance Selection
Given a dataset consisting of samples from a zero mean Gaussian distribution in Rn,
ai ∼N(0,Σ),
i = 1,...,N,
ℓ1-Norm Problems
consider the task of estimating the covariance matrix Σ under the prior
assumption that Σ−1 is sparse. Since (Σ−1)ij is zero if and only if
the ith and jth components of the random variable are conditionally
independent, given the other variables, this problem is equivalent to the
structure learning problem of estimating the topology of the undirected
graphical model representation of the Gaussian . Determining the
sparsity pattern of the inverse covariance matrix Σ−1 is also called the
covariance selection problem.
For n very small, it is feasible to search over all sparsity patterns
in Σ−1 since for a ﬁxed sparsity pattern, determining the maximum
likelihood estimate of Σ is a tractable (convex optimization) problem.
A good heuristic that scales to much larger values of n is to minimize
the negative log-likelihood (with respect to the parameter X = Σ−1)
with an ℓ1 regularization term to promote sparsity of the estimated
inverse covariance matrix . If S is the empirical covariance matrix
i , then the estimation problem can be written as
Tr(SX) −logdetX + λ∥X∥1,
with variable X ∈Sn
+, where ∥· ∥1 is deﬁned elementwise, i.e., as the
sum of the absolute values of the entries, and the domain of logdet is
++, the set of symmetric positive deﬁnite n × n matrices. This is a
special case of the general ℓ1 regularized problem (6.1) with (convex)
loss function l(X) = Tr(SX) −logdetX.
The idea of covariance selection is originally due to Dempster 
and was ﬁrst studied in the sparse, high-dimensional regime by Meinshausen and B¨uhlmann . The form of the problem above is due to
Banerjee et al. . Some other recent papers on this problem include
Friedman et al.’s graphical lasso , Duchi et al. , Lu , Yuan
 , and Scheinberg et al. , the last of which shows that ADMM
outperforms state-of-the-art methods for this problem.
The ADMM algorithm for sparse inverse covariance selection is
Xk+1 := argmin
Tr(SX) −logdetX + (ρ/2)∥X −Zk + Uk∥2
Zk+1 := argmin
λ∥Z∥1 + (ρ/2)∥Xk+1 −Z + Uk∥2
Uk+1 := Uk + Xk+1 −Zk+1,
6.5 Sparse Inverse Covariance Selection
where ∥· ∥F is the Frobenius norm, i.e., the square root of the sum of
the squares of the entries.
This algorithm can be simpliﬁed much further. The Z-minimization
step is elementwise soft thresholding,
:= Sλ/ρ(Xk+1
and the X-minimization also turns out to have an analytical solution.
The ﬁrst-order optimality condition is that the gradient should vanish,
S −X−1 + ρ(X −Zk + Uk) = 0,
together with the implicit constraint X ≻0. Rewriting, this is
ρX −X−1 = ρ(Zk −Uk) −S.
We will construct a matrix X that satisﬁes this condition and thus minimizes the X-minimization objective. First, take the orthogonal eigenvalue decomposition of the righthand side,
ρ(Zk −Uk) −S = QΛQT ,
where Λ = diag(λ1,...,λn), and QT Q = QQT = I. Multiplying (6.5)
by QT on the left and by Q on the right gives
ρ ˜X −˜X−1 = Λ,
where ˜X = QT XQ. We can now construct a diagonal solution of this
equation, i.e., ﬁnd positive numbers ˜Xii that satisfy ρ ˜Xii −1/ ˜Xii = λi.
By the quadratic formula,
which are always positive since ρ > 0. It follows that X = Q ˜XQT satisﬁes the optimality condition (6.5), so this is the solution to the Xminimization. The computational eﬀort of the X-update is that of an
eigenvalue decomposition of a symmetric matrix.
Consensus and Sharing
Here we describe two generic optimization problems, consensus and
sharing, and ADMM-based methods for solving them using distributed
optimization. Consensus problems have a long history, especially in
conjunction with ADMM; see, e.g., Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis for a
discussion of distributed consensus problems in the context of ADMM
from the 1980s. Some more recent examples include a survey by Nedi´c
and Ozdaglar and several application papers by Giannakis and
co-authors in the context of signal processing and wireless communications, such as .
Global Variable Consensus Optimization
We ﬁrst consider the case with a single global variable, with the objective and constraint terms split into N parts:
i=1 fi(x),
where x ∈Rn, and fi : Rn →R ∪{+∞} are convex. We refer to fi as
the ith term in the objective. Each term can also encode constraints
by assigning fi(x) = +∞when a constraint is violated. The goal is to
7.1 Global Variable Consensus Optimization
solve the problem above in such a way that each term can be handled
by its own processing element, such as a thread or processor.
This problem arises in many contexts. In model ﬁtting, for example, x represents the parameters in a model and fi represents the loss
function associated with the ith block of data or measurements. In this
case, we would say that x is found by collaborative ﬁltering, since the
data sources are ‘collaborating’ to develop a global model.
This problem can be rewritten with local variables xi ∈Rn and a
common global variable z:
i=1 fi(xi)
subject to
xi −z = 0,
i = 1,...,N.
This is called the global consensus problem, since the constraint is that
all the local variables should agree, i.e., be equal. Consensus can be
viewed as a simple technique for turning additive objectives N
i=1 fi(x),
which show up frequently but do not split due to the variable being
shared across terms, into separable objectives N
i=1 fi(xi), which split
easily. For a useful recent discussion of consensus algorithms, see 
and the references therein.
ADMM for the problem (7.1) can be derived either directly from
the augmented Lagrangian
Lρ(x1,...,xN,z,y) =
fi(xi) + yT
i (xi −z) + (ρ/2)∥xi −z∥2
or simply as a special case of the constrained optimization problem (5.1)
with variable (x1,...,xN) ∈RnN and constraint set
C = {(x1,...,xN) | x1 = x2 = ··· = xN}.
The resulting ADMM algorithm is the following:
fi(xi) + ykT
(xi −zk) + (ρ/2)∥xi −zk∥2
i + ρ(xk+1
Consensus and Sharing
Here, we write ykT instead of (yk)T to lighten the notation. The ﬁrst
and last steps are carried out independently for each i = 1,...,N. In
the literature, the processing element that handles the global variable
z is sometimes called the central collector or the fusion center. Note
that the z-update is simply the projection of xk+1 + (1/ρ)yk onto the
constraint set C of ‘block-constant’ vectors.
This algorithm can be simpliﬁed further. With the average (over
i = 1,...,N) of a vector denoted with an overline, the z-update can be
zk+1 = xk+1 + (1/ρ)yk.
Similarly, averaging the y-update gives
yk+1 = yk + ρ(xk+1 −zk+1).
Substituting the ﬁrst equation into the second shows that yk+1 = 0,
i.e., the dual variables have average value zero after the ﬁrst iteration.
Using zk = xk, ADMM can be written as
fi(xi) + ykT
(xi −xk) + (ρ/2)∥xi −xk∥2
i + ρ(xk+1
We have already seen a special case of this in parallel projections (see
§5.1.2), which is consensus ADMM for the case when fi are all indicator
functions of convex sets.
This is a very intuitive algorithm. The dual variables are separately
updated to drive the variables into consensus, and quadratic regularization helps pull the variables toward their average value while still
attempting to minimize each local fi.
We can interpret consensus ADMM as a method for solving problems in which the objective and constraints are distributed across multiple processors. Each processor only has to handle its own objective
and constraint term, plus a quadratic term which is updated each iteration. The quadratic terms (or more accurately, the linear parts of the
quadratic terms) are updated in such a way that the variables converge
to a common value, which is the solution of the full problem.
7.1 Global Variable Consensus Optimization
For consensus ADMM, the primal and dual residuals are
1 −xk,...,xk
sk = −ρ(xk −xk−1,...,xk −xk−1),
so their (squared) norms are
2 = Nρ2∥xk −xk−1∥2
The ﬁrst term is N times the standard deviation of the points
x1,...,xN, a natural measure of (lack of) consensus.
When the original consensus problem is a parameter ﬁtting problem,
the x-update step has an intuitive statistical interpretation. Suppose
fi is the negative log-likelihood function for the parameter x, given the
measurements or data available to the ith processing element. Then
is precisely the maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimate of the
parameter, given the Gaussian prior distribution N(xk + (1/ρ)yk
The expression for the prior mean is also intuitive: It is the average
value xk of the local parameter estimates in the previous iteration,
translated slightly by yk
i , the ‘price’ of the ith processor disagreeing with the consensus in the previous iteration. Note also that the
use of diﬀerent forms of penalty in the augmented term, as discussed
in §3.4, will lead to corresponding changes in this prior distribution;
for example, using a matrix penalty P rather than a scalar ρ will
mean that the Gaussian prior distribution has covariance P rather
Global Variable Consensus with Regularization
In a simple variation on the global variable consensus problem, an
objective term g, often representing a simple constraint or regularization, is handled by the central collector:
i=1 fi(xi) + g(z)
subject to
xi −z = 0,
i = 1,...,N.
Consensus and Sharing
The resulting ADMM algorithm is
fi(xi) + ykT
(xi −zk) + (ρ/2)∥xi −zk∥2
zk+1 := argmin
z + (ρ/2)∥xk+1
i + ρ(xk+1
By collecting the linear and quadratic terms, we can express the zupdate as an averaging step, as in consensus ADMM, followed by a
proximal step involving g:
zk+1 := argmin
g(z) + (Nρ/2)∥z −xk+1 −(1/ρ)yk∥2
In the case with nonzero g, we do not in general have yk = 0, so we
cannot drop the yi terms from z-update as in consensus ADMM.
As an example, for g(z) = λ∥z∥1, with λ > 0, the second step of the
z-update is a soft threshold operation:
zk+1 := Sλ/Nρ(xk+1 −(1/ρ)yk).
As another simple example, suppose g is the indicator function of Rn
which means that the g term enforces nonnegativity of the variable. In
this case, the update is
zk+1 := (xk+1 −(1/ρ)yk)+.
The scaled form of ADMM for this problem also has an appealing
form, which we record here for convenience:
fi(xi) + (ρ/2)∥xi −zk + uk
zk+1 := argmin
g(z) + (Nρ/2)∥z −xk+1 −uk∥2
In many cases, this version is simpler and easier to work with than the
unscaled form.
7.2 General Form Consensus Optimization
General Form Consensus Optimization
We now consider a more general form of the consensus minimization
problem, in which we have local variables xi ∈Rni, i = 1,...,N, with
the objective f1(x1) + ··· + fN(xN) separable in the xi. Each of these
local variables consists of a selection of the components of the global
variable z ∈Rn; that is, each component of each local variable corresponds to some global variable component zg. The mapping from local
variable indices into global variable index can be written as g = G(i,j),
which means that local variable component (xi)j corresponds to global
variable component zg.
Achieving consensus between the local variables and the global variable means that
(xi)j = zG(i,j),
i = 1,...,N,
j = 1,...,ni.
If G(i,j) = j for all i, then each local variable is just a copy of
the global variable, and consensus reduces to global variable consensus, xi = z. General consensus is of interest in cases where ni ≪n,
so each local vector only contains a small number of the global
variables.
In the context of model ﬁtting, the following is one way that general
form consensus naturally arises. The global variable z is the full feature vector (i.e., vector of model parameters or independent variables
in the data), and diﬀerent subsets of the data are spread out among N
processors. Then xi can be viewed as the subvector of z corresponding
to (nonzero) features that appear in the ith block of data. In other
words, each processor handles only its block of data and only the subset of model coeﬃcients that are relevant for that block of data. If in
each block of data all regressors appear with nonzero values, then this
reduces to global consensus.
For example, if each training example is a document, then the features may include words or combinations of words in the document; it
will often be the case that some words are only used in a small subset of the documents, in which case each processor can just deal with
the words that appear in its local corpus. In general, datasets that are
high-dimensional but sparse will beneﬁt from this approach.
Consensus and Sharing
Fig. 7.1. General form consensus optimization. Local objective terms are on the left; global
variable components are on the right. Each edge in the bipartite graph is a consistency
constraint, linking a local variable and a global variable component.
For ease of notation, let ˜zi ∈Rni be deﬁned by (˜zi)j = zG(i,j).
Intuitively, ˜zi is the global variable’s idea of what the local variable
xi should be; the consensus constraint can then be written very simply
as xi −˜zi = 0, i = 1,...,N.
The general form consensus problem is
i=1 fi(xi)
subject to
xi −˜zi = 0,
i = 1,...,N,
with variables x1,...,xN and z (˜zi are linear functions of z).
A simple example is shown in Figure 7.1. In this example, we have
N = 3 subsystems, global variable dimension n = 4, and local variable
dimensions n1 = 4, n2 = 2, and n3 = 3. The objective terms and global
variables form a bipartite graph, with each edge representing a consensus constraint between a local variable component and a global
The augmented Lagrangian for (7.9) is
Lρ(x,z,y) =
fi(xi) + yT
i (xi −˜zi) + (ρ/2)∥xi −˜zi∥2
7.2 General Form Consensus Optimization
with dual variable yi ∈Rni. Then ADMM consists of the iterations
fi(xi) + ykT
xi + (ρ/2)∥xi −˜zk
zk+1 := argmin
˜zi + (ρ/2)∥xk+1
i + ρ(xk+1
where the xi- and yi-updates can be carried out independently in parallel for each i.
The z-update step decouples across the components of z, since Lρ
is fully separable in its components:
)j + (1/ρ)(yk
G(i,j)=g 1
so zg is found by averaging all entries of xk+1
i that correspond
to the global index g. Applying the same type of argument as in the
global variable consensus case, we can show that after the ﬁrst iteration,
i.e., the sum of the dual variable entries that correspond to any given
global index g is zero. The z-update step can thus be written in the
simpler form
where kg is the number of local variable entries that correspond to
global variable entry zg. In other words, the z-update is local averaging
for each component zg rather than global averaging; in the language of
collaborative ﬁltering, we could say that only the processing elements
that have an opinion on a feature zg will vote on zg.
General Form Consensus with Regularization
As in the global consensus case, the general form consensus problem
can be generalized by allowing the global variable nodes to handle an
Consensus and Sharing
objective term. Consider the problem
i=1 fi(xi) + g(z)
subject to
xi −˜zi = 0,
i = 1,...,N,
where g is a regularization function. The z-update involves the local
averaging step from the unregularized setting, followed by an application of the proximity operator proxg,kgρ to the results of this averaging,
just as in the global variable consensus case.
Another canonical problem that will prove useful in the sequel is the
sharing problem
i=1 fi(xi) + g(N
with variables xi ∈Rn, i = 1,...,N, where fi is a local cost function for
subsystem i, and g is the shared objective, which takes as argument the
sum of the variables. We can think of the variable xi as being the choice
of agent i; the sharing problem involves each agent adjusting its variable
to minimize its individual cost fi(xi), as well as the shared objective
i=1 xi). The sharing problem is important both because many
useful problems can be put into this form and because it enjoys a dual
relationship with the consensus problem, as discussed below.
Sharing can be written in ADMM form by copying all the variables:
i=1 fi(xi) + g(N
subject to
xi −zi = 0,
i = 1,...,N,
with variables xi, zi ∈Rn, i = 1,...,N. The scaled form of ADMM is
fi(xi) + (ρ/2)∥xi −zk
zk+1 := argmin
i=1 zi) + (ρ/2)N
i=1 ∥zi −uk
The ﬁrst and last steps can be carried out independently in parallel for
each i = 1,...,N. As written, the z-update requires solving a problem
7.3 Sharing
in Nn variables, but we will show that it is possible to carry it out by
solving a problem in only n variables.
For simplicity of notation, let ai = uk
. Then the z-update
can be rewritten as
g(Nz) + (ρ/2)N
i=1 ∥zi −ai∥2
subject to
z = (1/N)N
with additional variable z ∈Rn. Minimizing over z1,...,zN with z ﬁxed
has the solution
zi = ai + z −a,
so the z-update can be computed by solving the unconstrained problem
g(Nz) + (ρ/2)N
i=1 ∥z −a∥2
for z ∈Rn and then applying (7.13). Substituting (7.13) for zk+1
the u-update gives
= uk + xk+1 −zk+1,
which shows that the dual variables uk
i are all equal (i.e., in consensus)
and can be replaced with a single dual variable u ∈Rm. Substituting
in the expression for zk
i in the x-update, the ﬁnal algorithm becomes
fi(xi) + (ρ/2)∥xi −xk
i + xk −zk + uk∥2
zk+1 := argmin
g(Nz) + (Nρ/2)∥z −uk −xk+1∥2
uk+1 := uk + xk+1 −zk+1.
The x-update can be carried out in parallel, for i = 1,...,N. The zupdate step requires gathering xk+1
to form the averages, and then
solving a problem with n variables. After the u-update, the new value
of xk+1 −zk+1 + uk+1 is scattered to the subsystems.
Attaching Lagrange multipliers νi to the constraints xi −zi = 0, the
dual function Γ of the ADMM sharing problem (7.12) is given by
Γ(ν1,...,νN) =
 −g∗(ν1) −
if ν1 = ν2 = ··· = νN
otherwise.
Consensus and Sharing
Letting ψ = g∗and hi(ν) = f∗
i (−ν), the dual sharing problem can be
written as
i=1 hi(νi) + ψ(ν)
subject to
νi −ν = 0,
with variables ν ∈Rn, νi ∈Rn, i = 1,...,N. This is identical to the
regularized global variable consensus problem (7.2). Assuming strong
duality holds, this implies that yk = ρuk →ν⋆in ADMM, where ν⋆is
an optimal point of (7.15).
Consider the reverse direction. Attaching Lagrange multipliers
di ∈Rn to the constraints νi −ν = 0, the dual of the regularized global
consensus problem is
i=1 fi(di) + g(N
with variables di ∈Rn, which is exactly the sharing problem (7.11).
(This follows because f and g are assumed to be convex and closed, so
f∗∗= f and g∗∗= g.) Assuming strong duality holds, running ADMM
on the consensus problem (7.15) gives that dk
i , where x⋆
optimal point of the sharing problem (7.11).
Thus, there is a close dual relationship between the consensus problem (7.15) and the sharing problem (7.11). In fact, the global consensus
problem can be solved by running ADMM on its dual sharing problem,
and vice versa. This is related to work by Fukushima on ‘dual
ADMM’ methods.
Optimal Exchange
Here, we highlight an important special case of the sharing problem
with an appealing economic interpretation. The exchange problem is
i=1 fi(xi)
subject to
i=1 xi = 0,
with variables xi ∈Rn, i = 1,...,N, where fi represents the cost function for subsystem i. This is a sharing problem where the shared objective g is the indicator function of the set {0}. The components of
the vectors xi represent quantities of commodities that are exchanged
7.3 Sharing
among N agents or subsystems. When (xi)j is nonnegative, it can be
viewed as the amount of commodity j received by subsystem i from the
exchange. When (xi)j is negative, its magnitude |(xi)j| can be viewed as
the amount of commodity j contributed by subsystem i to the exchange.
The equilibrium constraint that each commodity clears, or balances, is
i=1 xi = 0. As this interpretation suggests, this and related
problems have a long history in economics, particularly in the theories
of market exchange, resource allocation, and general equilibrium; see,
for example, the classic works by Walras , Arrow and Debreu ,
and Uzawa .
The exchange problem can be solved via ADMM either by applying
the generic sharing algorithm above and simplifying, or by treating it
as a generic constrained convex problem (5.1), with
x ∈RnN | x1 + ··· + xN = 0}.
This gives the exchange ADMM algorithm
fi(xi) + (ρ/2)∥xi −xk
i + xk + uk∥2
uk+1 := uk + xk+1.
It is also instructive to consider the unscaled form of ADMM for this
fi(xi) + ykT xi + (ρ/2)∥xi −(xk
yk+1 := yk + ρxk+1.
The variable yk converges to an optimal dual variable, which is readily
interpreted as a set of optimal or clearing prices for the exchange. The
proximal term in the x-update is a penalty for xk+1 deviating from xk,
projected onto the feasible set. The x-update in exchange ADMM can
be carried out independently in parallel, for i = 1,...,N. The u-update
requires gathering the xk+1
(or otherwise averaging), and broadcasting
xk+1 + uk+1 back to the processors handling the xi updates.
Exchange ADMM can be viewed as a form of tˆatonnement or price
adjustment process from Walras’ theory of general equilibrium. Tˆatonnement represents the mechanism of the competitive market working towards market equilibrium; the idea is that the market
Consensus and Sharing
acts via price adjustment, i.e., increasing or decreasing the price of each
good depending on whether there is an excess demand or excess supply
of the good, respectively.
Dual decomposition is the simplest algorithmic expression of
tˆatonnement. In this setting, each agent adjusts his consumption xi
to minimize his individual cost fi(xi) adjusted by the cost yT xi, where
y is the price vector. The central collector (called the ‘secretary of market’ in ) works toward equilibrium by adjusting the prices y up or
down depending on whether each commodity or good is overproduced
or underproduced. ADMM diﬀers only in the inclusion of the proximal
regularization term in the updates for each agent. As yk converges to
an optimal price vector y⋆, the eﬀect of the proximal regularization
term vanishes. The proximal regularization term can be interpreted as
each agent’s commitment to help clear the market.
Distributed Model Fitting
A general convex model ﬁtting problem can be written in the form
l(Ax −b) + r(x),
with parameters x ∈Rn, where A ∈Rm×n is the feature matrix, b ∈
Rm is the output vector, l : Rm →R is a convex loss function, and r
is a convex regularization function. We assume that l is additive, so
l(Ax −b) =
where li : R →R is the loss for the ith training example, ai ∈Rn is
the feature vector for example i, and bi is the output or response for
example i. Each li can be diﬀerent, though in practice they are usually
all the same.
We also assume that the regularization function r is separable. The
most common examples are r(x) = λ∥x∥2
2 (called Tikhonov regularization, or a ridge penalty in statistical settings) and r(x) = λ∥x∥1 (sometimes generically called a lasso penalty in statistical settings), where
λ is a positive regularization parameter, though more elaborate regularizers can be used just as easily. In some cases, one or more model
Distributed Model Fitting
parameters are not regularized, such as the oﬀset parameter in a classiﬁcation model. This corresponds to, for example, r(x) = λ∥x1:n−1∥1,
where x1:n−1 is the subvector of x consisting of all but the last component of x; with this choice of r, the last component of x is not regularized.
The next section discusses some examples that have the general
form above. We then consider two ways to solve (8.1) in a distributed
manner, namely, by splitting across training examples and by splitting
across features. While we work with the assumption that l and r are
separable at the component level, we will see that the methods we
describe work with appropriate block separability as well.
Regression
Consider a linear modeling problem with measurements of the form
where ai is the ith feature vector and the measurement noises vi
are independent with log-concave densities pi; see, e.g., [20, §7.1.1].
Then the negative log-likelihood function is l(Ax −b), with li(ω) =
−logpi(−ω). If r = 0, then the general ﬁtting problem (8.1) can be
interpreted as maximum likelihood estimation of x under noise model
pi. If ri is taken to be the negative log prior density of xi, then the
problem can be interpreted as MAP estimation.
For example, the lasso follows the form above with quadratic loss
l(u) = (1/2)∥u∥2
2 and ℓ1 regularization r(x) = λ∥x∥1, which is equivalent to MAP estimation of a linear model with Gaussian noise and a
Laplacian prior on the parameters [156, §5].
Classiﬁcation
Many classiﬁcation problems can also be put in the form of the general
model ﬁtting problem (8.1), with A, b, l, and r appropriately chosen. We
follow the standard setup from statistical learning theory, as described
in, e.g., . Let pi ∈Rn−1 denote the feature vector of the ith example
8.1 Examples
and let qi ∈{−1,1} denote the binary outcome or class label, for i =
1,...,m. The goal is to ﬁnd a weight vector w ∈Rn−1 and oﬀset v ∈R
i w + v) = qi
holds for many examples. Viewed as a function of pi, the expression
i w + v is called a discriminant function. The condition that the sign
of the discriminant function and the response should agree can also be
written as µi > 0, where µi = qi(pT
i w + v) is called the margin of the
ith training example.
In the context of classiﬁcation, loss functions are generally written
as a function of the margin, so the loss for the ith example is
li(µi) = li(qi(pT
i w + v)).
A classiﬁcation error is made if and only if the margin is negative, so
li should be positive and decreasing for negative arguments and zero
or small for positive arguments. To ﬁnd the parameters w and v, we
minimize the average loss plus a regularization term on the weights:
i w + v)) + rwt(w).
This has the generic model ﬁtting form (8.1), with x = (w,v), ai =
(qipi,−qi), bi = 0, and regularizer r(x) = rwt(w). (We also need to scale
li by 1/m.) In the sequel, we will address such problems using the form
(8.1) without comment, assuming that this transformation has been
carried out.
In statistical learning theory, the problem (8.2) is referred to as
penalized empirical risk minimization or structural risk minimization.
When the loss function is convex, this is sometimes termed convex
risk minimization. In general, ﬁtting a classiﬁer by minimizing a surrogate loss function, i.e., a convex upper bound to 0-1 loss, is a
well studied and widely used approach in machine learning; see, e.g.,
 .
Many classiﬁcation models in machine learning correspond to different choices of loss function li and regularization or penalty rwt.
Distributed Model Fitting
Some common loss functions are hinge loss (1 −µi)+, exponential
loss exp(−µi), and logistic loss log(1 + exp(−µi)); the most common regularizers are ℓ1 and ℓ2 (squared). The support vector machine
(SVM) corresponds to hinge loss with a quadratic penalty, while
exponential loss yields boosting and logistic loss yields logistic
regression.
Splitting across Examples
Here we discuss how to solve the model ﬁtting problem (8.1) with
a modest number of features but a very large number of training
examples. Most classical statistical estimation problems belong to this
regime, with large volumes of relatively low-dimensional data. The goal
is to solve the problem in a distributed way, with each processor handling a subset of the training data. This is useful either when there are
so many training examples that it is inconvenient or impossible to process them on a single machine or when the data is naturally collected
or stored in a distributed fashion. This includes, for example, online
social network data, webserver access logs, wireless sensor networks,
and many cloud computing applications more generally.
We partition A and b by rows,
with Ai ∈Rmi×n and bi ∈Rmi, where N
i=1 mi = m. Thus, Ai and bi
represent the ith block of data and will be handled by the ith processor.
We ﬁrst put the model ﬁtting problem in the consensus form
i=1 li(Aixi −bi) + r(z)
subject to
xi −z = 0,
i = 1,...,N,
with variables xi ∈Rn and z ∈Rn. Here, li refers (with some abuse of
notation) to the loss function for the ith block of data. The problem can
now be solved by applying the generic global variable consensus ADMM
8.2 Splitting across Examples
algorithm described in §7.1, given here with scaled dual variable:
li(Aixi −bi) + (ρ/2)∥xi −zk + uk
zk+1 := argmin
r(z) + (Nρ/2)∥z −xk+1 −uk∥2
The ﬁrst step, which consists of an ℓ2-regularized model ﬁtting problem, can be carried out in parallel for each data block. The second
step requires gathering variables to form the average. The minimization in the second step can be carried out componentwise (and usually
analytically) when r is assumed to be fully separable.
The algorithm described above only requires that the loss function
l be separable across the blocks of data; the regularizer r does not need
to be separable at all. (However, when r is not separable, the z-update
may require the solution of a nontrivial optimization problem.)
For the lasso, this yields the distributed algorithm
(1/2)∥Aixi −bi∥2
2 + (ρ/2)∥xi −zk + uk
zk+1 := Sλ/ρN(xk+1 + uk)
Each xi-update takes the form of a Tikhonov-regularized least squares
(i.e., ridge regression) problem, with analytical solution
i Ai + ρI)−1(AT
i bi + ρ(zk −uk
The techniques from §4.2 apply: If a direct method is used, then the factorization of AT
i Ai + ρI can be cached to speed up subsequent updates,
and if mi < n, then the matrix inversion lemma can be applied to let
us factor the smaller matrix AiAT
i + ρI instead.
Comparing this distributed-data lasso algorithm with the serial version in §6.4, we see that the only diﬀerence is the collection and averaging steps, which couple the computations for the data blocks.
An ADMM-based distributed lasso algorithm is described in ,
with applications in signal processing and wireless communications.
Distributed Model Fitting
Sparse Logistic Regression
Consider solving (8.1) with logistic loss functions li and ℓ1 regularization. We ignore the intercept term for notational simplicity; the algorithm can be easily modiﬁed to incorporate an intercept. The ADMM
algorithm is
li(Aixi) + (ρ/2)∥xi −zk + uk
zk+1 := Sλ/ρN(xk+1 + uk)
This is identical to the distributed lasso algorithm, except for the xi
update, which here involves an ℓ2 regularized logistic regression problem that can be eﬃciently solved by algorithms like L-BFGS.
Support Vector Machine
Using the notation of (8.1), the algorithm is
1T (Aixi + 1)+ + (ρ/2)∥xi −zk + uk
(1/λ) + Nρ(xk+1 + uk)
Each xi-update essentially involves ﬁtting a support vector machine to
the local data Ai (with an oﬀset in the quadratic regularization term),
so this can be carried out eﬃciently using an existing SVM solver for
serial problems.
The use of ADMM to train support vector machines in a distributed
fashion was described in .
Splitting across Features
Now we consider the model ﬁtting problem (8.1) with a modest number of examples and a large number of features. Statistical problems
of this kind frequently arise in areas like natural language processing
and bioinformatics, where there are often a large number of potential
8.3 Splitting across Features
explanatory variables for any given outcome. For example, the observations may be a corpus of documents, and the features could include
all words and pairs of adjacent words (bigrams) that appear in each
document. In bioinformatics, there are usually relatively few people
in a given association study, but there can be a very large number of
potential features relating to factors like observed DNA mutations in
each individual. There are many examples in other areas as well, and
the goal is to solve such problems in a distributed fashion with each
processor handling a subset of the features. In this section, we show
how this can be done by formulating it as a sharing problem from §7.3.
We partition the parameter vector x as x = (x1,...,xN), with xi ∈
Rni, where N
i=1 ni = n. Conformably partition the data matrix A as
A = [A1 ···AN], with Ai ∈Rm×ni, and the regularization function as
i=1 ri(xi). This implies that Ax = N
i=1 Aixi, i.e., Aixi can
be thought of as a ‘partial’ prediction of b using only the features referenced in xi. The model ﬁtting problem (8.1) becomes
i=1 Aixi −b
i=1 ri(xi).
Following the approach used for the sharing problem (7.12), we express
the problem as
i=1 ri(xi)
subject to
Aixi −zi = 0,
i = 1,...,N,
with new variables zi ∈Rm. The derivation and simpliﬁcation of
ADMM also follows that for the sharing problem. The scaled form
of ADMM is
ri(xi) + (ρ/2)∥Aixi −zk
zk+1 := argmin
(ρ/2)∥Aixk+1
i + Aixk+1
Distributed Model Fitting
As in the discussion for the sharing problem, we carry out the z-update
by ﬁrst solving for the average zk+1:
zk+1 := argmin
l(Nz −b) + (Nρ/2)∥z −Ax
:= zk+1 + Aixk+1
k+1 = (1/N)N
i=1 Aixk+1
. Substituting the last expression
into the update for ui, we ﬁnd that
k+1 + uk −zk+1,
which shows that, as in the sharing problem, all the dual variables are
equal. Using a single dual variable uk ∈Rm, and eliminating zi, we
arrive at the algorithm
ri(xi) + (ρ/2)∥Aixi −Aixk
i −zk + Ax
zk+1 := argmin
l(Nz −b) + (Nρ/2)∥z −Ax
uk+1 := uk + Ax
k+1 −zk+1.
The ﬁrst step involves solving N parallel regularized least squares
problems in ni variables each. Between the ﬁrst and second steps, we
collect and sum the partial predictors Aixk+1
to form Ax
k+1. The second step is a single minimization in m variables, a quadratically regularized loss minimization problem; the third step is a simple update in
m variables.
This algorithm does not require l to be separable in the training
examples, as assumed earlier. If l is separable, then the z-update fully
splits into m separate scalar optimization problems. Similarly, the regularizer r only needs to be separable at the level of the blocks of features.
For example, if r is a sum-of-norms, as in §6.4.2, then it would be natural to have each subsystem handle a separate group.
8.3 Splitting across Features
In this case, the algorithm above becomes
(ρ/2)∥Aixi −Aixk
i −zk + Ax
2 + λ∥xi∥1
k+1 + ρuk
uk+1 := uk + Ax
k+1 −zk+1.
Each xi-update is a lasso problem with ni variables, which can be solved
using any single processor lasso method.
In the xi-updates, we have xk+1
= 0 (meaning that none of the
features in the ith block are used) if and only if
i + zk −Ax
When this occurs, the xi-update is fast (compared to the case when
̸= 0). In a parallel implementation, there is no beneﬁt to speeding
up only some of the tasks being executed in parallel, but in a serial
setting we do beneﬁt.
Group Lasso
Consider the group lasso problem with the feature groups coinciding
with the blocks of features, and ℓ2 norm (not squared) regularization:
(1/2)∥Ax −b∥2
i=1 ∥xi∥2.
The z-update and u-update are the same as for the lasso, but the xi
update becomes
(ρ/2)∥Aixi −Aixk
i −zk + Ax
2 + λ∥xi∥2
(Only the subscript on the last norm diﬀers from the lasso case.) This
involves minimizing a function of the form
(ρ/2)∥Aixi −v∥2
2 + λ∥xi∥2,
which can be carried out as follows. The solution is xi = 0 if and only
i v∥2 ≤λ/ρ. Otherwise, the solution has the form
i Ai + νI)−1AT
Distributed Model Fitting
for the value of ν > 0 that gives ν∥xi∥2 = λ/ρ. This value can be found
using a one-parameter search (e.g., via bisection) over ν. We can speed
up the computation of xi for several values of ν (as needed for the
parameter search) by computing and caching an eigendecomposition of
i Ai. Assuming Ai is tall, i.e., m ≥ni (a similar method works when
m < ni), we compute an orthogonal Q for which AT
i Ai = Qdiag(λ)QT ,
where λ is the vector of eigenvalues of AT
i Ai (i.e., the squares of the
singular values of Ai). The cost is O(mn2
i ) ﬂops, dominated (in order)
by forming AT
i Ai. We subsequently compute ∥xi∥2 using
diag(λ + ν1)−1QT AT
This can be computed in O(ni) ﬂops, once QT AT
i v is computed, so
the search over ν is costless (in order). The cost per iteration is thus
O(mni) (to compute QT AT
i v), a factor of ni better than carrying out
the xi-update without caching.
Sparse Logistic Regression
The algorithm is identical to the lasso problem above, except that the
z-update becomes
zk+1 := argmin
l(Nz) + (ρ/2)∥z −Ax
where l is the logistic loss function. This splits to the component level,
and involves the proximity operator for l. This can be very eﬃciently
computed by a lookup table that gives the approximate value, followed
by one or two Newton steps (for a scalar problem).
It is interesting to see that in distributed sparse logistic regression,
the dominant computation is the solution of N parallel lasso problems.
Support Vector Machine
The algorithm is
(ρ/2)∥Aixi −Aixk
i −zk + Ax
2 + λ∥xi∥2
zk+1 := argmin
1T (Nz + 1)+ + (ρ/2)∥z −Ax
uk+1 := uk + Ax
k+1 −zk+1.
8.3 Splitting across Features
The xi-updates involve quadratic functions, and require solving ridge
regression problems. The z-update splits to the component level, and
can be expressed as the shifted soft thresholding operation
vi > −1/N + N/ρ
vi ∈[−1/N,−1/N + N/ρ]
vi < −1/N,
where v = Ax
k+1 + uk (and here, the subscript denotes the entry in
the vector zk+1).
Generalized Additive Models
A generalized additive model has the form
where aj is the jth element of the feature vector a, and fj : R →R are
the feature functions. When the feature functions fj are linear, i.e., of
the form fj(aj) = wjaj, this reduces to standard linear regression.
We choose the feature functions by solving the optimization problem
j=1 fj(aij) −bi) + n
j=1 rj(fj),
where aij is the jth component of the feature vector of the ith example,
and bi is the associated outcome. Here the optimization variables are
the functions fj ∈Fj, where Fj is a subspace of functions; rj is now
a regularization functional. Usually fj is linearly parametrized by a
ﬁnite number of coeﬃcients, which are the underlying optimization
variables, but this formulation can also handle the case when Fj is
inﬁnite-dimensional. In either case, it is clearer to think of the feature
functions fj as the variables to be determined.
Distributed Model Fitting
We split the features down to individual functions so N = n. The
algorithm is
rj(fj) + (ρ/2)m
i=1(fj(aij) −fk
j (aij) −zk
zk+1 := argmin
i=1 li(Nzi −bi) + (ρ/2)N
uk+1 := uk + f
k+1 −zk+1,
i = (1/n)n
j (aij), the average value of the predicted
response n
j (aij) for the ith feature.
The fj-update is an ℓ2 (squared) regularized function ﬁt. The zupdate can be carried out componentwise.
Nonconvex Problems
We now explore the use of ADMM for nonconvex problems, focusing
on cases in which the individual steps in ADMM, i.e., the x- and zupdates, can be carried out exactly. Even in this case, ADMM need not
converge, and when it does converge, it need not converge to an optimal
point; it must be considered just another local optimization method.
The hope is that it will possibly have better convergence properties
than other local optimization methods, where ‘better convergence’ can
mean faster convergence or convergence to a point with better objective
value. For nonconvex problems, ADMM can converge to diﬀerent (and
in particular, nonoptimal) points, depending on the initial values x0
and y0 and the parameter ρ.
Nonconvex Constraints
Consider the constrained optimization problem
subject to
Nonconvex Problems
with f convex, but S nonconvex. Here, ADMM has the form
xk+1 := argmin
f(x) + (ρ/2)∥x −zk + uk∥2
zk+1 := ΠS(xk+1 + uk)
uk+1 := uk + xk+1 −zk+1,
where ΠS is projection onto S. The x-minimization step (which is evaluating a proximal operator) is convex since f is convex, but the z-update
is projection onto a nonconvex set. In general, this is hard to compute,
but it can be carried out exactly in some important special cases we
list below.
• Cardinality. If S = {x | card(x) ≤c}, where card gives the
number of nonzero elements, then ΠS(v) keeps the c largest
magnitude elements and zeroes out the rest.
• Rank. If S is the set of matrices with rank c, then ΠS(v)
is determined by carrying out a singular value decomposition, v = 
i , and keeping the top c dyads, i.e., form
ΠS(v) = c
i=1 σiuivT
• Boolean constraints. If S = {x | xi ∈{0,1}}, then ΠS(v) simply rounds each entry to 0 or 1, whichever is closer. Integer
constraints can be handled in the same way.
Regressor Selection
As an example, consider the least squares regressor selection or feature
selection problem,
subject to
card(x) ≤c,
which is to ﬁnd the best ﬁt to b as a linear combination of no more than
c columns of A. For this problem, ADMM takes the form above, where
the x-update involves a regularized least squares problem, and the zupdate involves keeping the c largest magnitude elements of xk+1 + uk.
This is just like ADMM for the lasso, except that soft thresholding is
9.1 Nonconvex Constraints
replaced with ‘hard’ thresholding. This close connection is hardly surprising, since lasso can be thought of as a heuristic for solving the
regressor selection problem. From this viewpoint, the lasso controls the
trade-oﬀbetween least squares error and sparsity through the parameter λ, whereas in ADMM for regressor selection, the same trade-oﬀis
controlled by the parameter c, the exact cardinality desired.
Factor Model Fitting
The goal is to approximate a symmetric matrix Σ (say, an empirical covariance matrix) as a sum of a rank-k and a diagonal positive
semideﬁnite matrix. Using the Frobenius norm to measure approximation error, we have the problem
(1/2)∥X + diag(d) −Σ∥2
subject to
Rank(X) = k,
with variables X ∈Sn, d ∈Rn. (Any convex loss function could be used
in lieu of the Frobenius norm.)
f(X) = inf
d≥0(1/2)∥X + diag(d) −Σ∥2
(Xij −Σij)2 + (1/2)
(Xii −Σii)2
with the optimizing d having the form di = (Σii −Xii)+, i = 1,...,n.
We take S to be the set of positive semideﬁnite rank-k matrices.
ADMM for the factor model ﬁtting problem is then
Xk+1 := argmin
f(X) + (ρ/2)∥X −Zk + Uk∥2
Zk+1 := ΠS(Xk+1 + Uk)
Uk+1 := Uk + Xk+1 −Zk+1,
where Z, U ∈Sn. The X-update is separable to the component level,
and can be expressed as
(1/(1 + ρ))
Σij + ρ(Zk
(1/(1 + ρ))
Σii + ρ(Zk
Σii ≤Zii −Uii
Σii > Zii −Uii.
Nonconvex Problems
The Z-update is carried out by an eigenvalue decomposition, keeping
only the dyads associated with the largest k positive eigenvalues.
Bi-convex Problems
Another problem that admits exact ADMM updates is the general biconvex problem,
subject to
G(x,z) = 0,
where F : Rn × Rm →R is bi-convex, i.e., convex in x for each z and
convex in z for each x, and G : Rn × Rm →Rp is bi-aﬃne, i.e., aﬃne
in x for each ﬁxed z, and aﬃne in z for each ﬁxed x. When F is
separable in x and z, and G is jointly aﬃne in x and z, this reduces
to the standard ADMM problem form (3.1). For this problem ADMM
has the form
xk+1 := argmin
F(x,zk) + (ρ/2)∥G(x,zk) + uk∥2
zk+1 := argmin
F(xk+1,z) + (ρ/2)∥G(xk+1,z) + uk∥2
uk+1 := uk + G(xk+1,zk+1).
Both the x- and z-updates involve convex optimization problems, and
so are tractable.
When G = 0 (or is simply absent), ADMM reduces to simple alternating minimization, a standard method for bi-convex minimization.
Nonnegative Matrix Factorization
As an example, consider nonnegative matrix factorization :
(1/2)∥V W −C∥2
subject to
with variables V ∈Rp×r and W ∈Rr×q, and data C ∈Rp×q. In this
form of the problem, the objective (which includes the constraints) is
bi-aﬃne, and there are no equality constraints, so ADMM becomes
the standard method for nonnegative matrix factorization, which is
9.2 Bi-convex Problems
alternately minimizing over V , with W ﬁxed, and then minimizing over
W, with V ﬁxed.
We can also introduce a new variable, moving the bi-linear term
from the objective into the constraints:
(1/2)∥X −C∥2
F + I+(V ) + I+(W)
subject to
X −V W = 0,
with variables X,V,W, where I+ is the indicator function for elementwise nonnegative matrices. With (X,V ) serving the role of x, and W
serving the role of z above, ADMM becomes
(Xk+1,V k+1) := argmin
F + (ρ/2)∥X −V W k + Uk∥2
W k+1 := argmin
∥Xk+1 −V k+1W + Uk∥2
Uk+1 := Uk + Xk+1 −V k+1W k+1.
The ﬁrst step splits across the rows of X and V , so can be performed
by solving a set of quadratic programs, in parallel, to ﬁnd each row of
X and V separately; the second splits in the columns of W, so can be
performed by solving parallel quadratic programs to ﬁnd each column.
Implementation
This section addresses the implementation of ADMM in a distributed
computing environment. For simplicity, we focus on the global consensus problem with regularization,
i=1 fi(xi) + g(z)
subject to
xi −z = 0,
where fi is the ith objective function term and g is the global regularizer. Extensions to the more general consensus case are mostly straightforward. We ﬁrst describe an abstract implementation and then show
how this maps onto a variety of software frameworks.
Abstract Implementation
We refer to xi and ui as local variables stored in subsystem i, and to z
as the global variable. For a distributed implementation, it is often more
natural to group the local computations (i.e., the xi- and ui-updates),
so we write ADMM as
ui := ui + xi −z
xi := argmin
fi(xi) + (ρ/2)∥xi −z + ui∥2
z := proxg,Nρ (x + u).
10.1 Abstract Implementation
Here, the iteration indices are omitted because in an actual implementation, we can simply overwrite previous values of these variables. Note
that the u-update must be done before the x-update in order to match
(7.6-7.8). If g = 0, then the z-update simply involves computing x, and
the ui are not part of the aggregation, as discussed in §7.1.
This suggests that the main features required to implement ADMM
are the following:
• Mutable state. Each subsystem i must store the current values
of xi and ui.
• Local computation. Each subsystem must be able to solve a
small convex problem, where ‘small’ means that the problem
is solvable using a serial algorithm. In addition, each local
process must have local access to whatever data are required
to specify fi.
• Global aggregation. There must be a mechanism for averaging local variables and broadcasting the result back to each
subsystem, either by explicitly using a central collector or via
some other approach like distributed averaging . If
computing z involves a proximal step (i.e., if g is nonzero),
this can either be performed centrally or at each local node;
the latter is easier to implement in some frameworks.
• Synchronization. All the local variables must be updated
before performing global aggregation, and the local updates
must all use the latest global variable. One way to implement
this synchronization is via a barrier, a system checkpoint at
which all subsystems must stop and wait until all other subsystems reach it.
When actually implementing ADMM, it helps to consider whether to
take the ‘local perspective’ of a subsystem performing local processing
and communicating with a central collector, or the ‘global perspective’
of a central collector coordinating the work of a set of subsystems.
Which is more natural depends on the software framework used.
From the local perspective, each node i receives z, updates ui and
then xi, sends them to the central collector, waits, and then receives the
Implementation
updated z. From the global perspective, the central collector broadcasts
z to the subsystems, waits for them to ﬁnish local processing, gathers
all the xi and ui, and updates z. (Of course, if ρ varies across iterations, then ρ must also be updated and broadcast when z is updated.)
The nodes must also evaluate the stopping criteria and decide when to
terminate; see below for examples.
In the general form consensus case, which we do not discuss here,
a decentralized implementation is possible that does not require z to
be centrally stored; each set of subsystems that share a variable can
communicate among themselves directly. In this setting, it can be convenient to think of ADMM as a message-passing algorithm on a graph,
where each node corresponds to a subsystem and the edges correspond
to shared variables.
Message Passing Interface (MPI) is a language-independent
message-passing speciﬁcation used for parallel algorithms, and is the
most widely used model for high-performance parallel computing today.
There are numerous implementations of MPI on a variety of distributed
platforms, and interfaces to MPI are available from a wide variety of
languages, including C, C++, and Python.
There are multiple ways to implement consensus ADMM in MPI,
but perhaps the simplest is given in Algorithm 1. This pseudocode
uses a single program, multiple data (SPMD) programming style, in
which each processor or subsystem runs the same program code but
has its own set of local variables and can read in a separate subset
of the data. We assume there are N processors, with each processor
i storing local variables xi and ui, a (redundant) copy of the global
variable z, and handling only the local data implicit in the objective
component fi.
In step 4, Allreduce denotes using the MPI Allreduce operation to
compute the global sum over all processors of the contents of the vector
w, and store the result in w on every processor; the same applies to
the scalar t. After step 4, then, w = n
i=1(xi + ui) = N(x + u) and
2 on all processors. We use Allreduce because
10.3 Graph Computing Frameworks
Algorithm 1 Global consensus ADMM in MPI.
initialize N processes, along with xi,ui,ri,z.
1. Update ui := ui + xi −z.
2. Update xi := argminx
fi(x) + (ρ/2)∥x −z + ui∥2
3. Let w := xi + ui and t := ∥ri∥2
4. Allreduce w and t.
5. Let zprev := z and update z := proxg,Nρ(w/N).
6. exit if ρ
N∥z −zprev∥2 ≤ϵconv and
7. Update ri := xi −z.
its implementation is in general much more scalable than simply
having each subsystem send its results directly to an explicit central
collector.
Next, in steps 5 and 6, all processors (redundantly) compute the
z-update and perform the termination test. It is possible to have the
z-update and termination test performed on just one processor and
broadcast the results to the other processors, but doing so complicates
the code and is generally no faster.
Graph Computing Frameworks
Since ADMM can be interpreted as performing message-passing on a
graph, it is natural to implement it in a graph processing framework.
Conceptually, the implementation will be similar to the MPI case discussed above, except that the role of the central collector will often be
handled abstractly by the system, rather than having an explicit central
collector process. In addition, higher-level graph processing frameworks
provide a number of built in services that one would otherwise have to
manually implement, such as fault tolerance.
Many modern graph frameworks are based on or inspired by
Valiant’s bulk-synchronous parallel (BSP) model for parallel
computation. A BSP computer consists of a set of processors networked together, and a BSP computation consists of a series of
global supersteps. Each superstep consists of three stages: parallel
Implementation
computation, in which the processors, in parallel, perform local
computations; communication, in which the processors communicate
among themselves; and barrier synchronization, in which the processes
wait until all processes are ﬁnished communicating.
The ﬁrst step in each ADMM superstep consists of performing local
ui- and xi-updates. The communication step would broadcast the new
xi and ui values to a central collector node, or globally to each individual processor. Barrier synchronization is then used to ensure that
all the processors have updated their primal variable before the central
collector averages and rebroadcasts the results.
Speciﬁc frameworks directly based on or inspired by the BSP model
include the Parallel BGL , GraphLab , and Pregel , among
others. Since all three follow the general outline above, we refer the
reader to the individual papers for details.
MapReduce is a popular programming model for distributed batch
processing of very large datasets. It has been widely used in industry and academia, and its adoption has been bolstered by the open
source project Hadoop, inexpensive cloud computing services available through Amazon, and enterprise products and services oﬀered
by Cloudera. MapReduce libraries are available in many languages,
including Java, C++, and Python, among many others, though Java
is the primary language for Hadoop. Though it is awkward to express
ADMM in MapReduce, the amount of cloud infrastructure available
for MapReduce computing can make it convenient to use in practice,
especially for large problems. We brieﬂy review some key features of
Hadoop below; see for general background.
A MapReduce computation consists of a set of Map tasks, which
process subsets of the input data in parallel, followed by a Reduce task,
which combines the results of the Map tasks. Both the Map and Reduce
functions are speciﬁed by the user and operate on key-value pairs. The
Map function performs the transformation
(k,v) →[(k′
1),...,(k′
10.4 MapReduce
that is, it takes a key-value pair and emits a list of intermediate
key-value pairs. The engine then collects all the values v′
correspond to the same output key k′ (across all Mappers) and passes
them to the Reduce functions, which performs the transformation
r]) →(k′′,R(v′
where R is a commutative and associative function. For example, R
could simply sum v′
i. In Hadoop, Reducers can emit lists of key-value
pairs rather than just a single pair.
Each iteration of ADMM can easily be represented as a MapReduce task: The parallel local computations are performed by Maps,
and the global aggregation is performed by a Reduce. We will describe
a simple global consensus implementation to give the general ﬂavor
and discuss the details below. Here, we have the Reducer compute
Algorithm 2 An iteration of global consensus ADMM in Hadoop/ MapReduce.
function map(key i, dataset Di)
1. Read (xi,ui, ˆz) from HBase table.
2. Compute z := proxg,Nρ((1/N)ˆz).
3. Update ui := ui + xi −z.
4. Update xi := argminx
fi(x) + (ρ/2)∥x −z + ui∥2
5. Emit (key central, record (xi,ui)).
function reduce(key central, records (x1,u1),...,(xN,uN))
1. Update ˆz := N
i=1 xi + ui.
2. Emit (key j, record (xj,uj, ˆz)) to HBase for j = 1,...,N.
i=1(xi + ui) rather than z or ˜z because summation is associative while averaging is not. We assume N is known (or, alternatively,
the Reducer can compute the sum N
i=1 1). We have N Mappers, one
for each subsystem, and each Mapper updates ui and xi using the
ˆz from the previous iteration. Each Mapper independently executes
the proximal step to compute z, but this is usually a cheap operation like soft thresholding. It emits an intermediate key-value pair that
essentially serves as a message to the central collector. There is a single Reducer, playing the role of a central collector, and its incoming
values are the messages from the Mappers. The updated records are
Implementation
then written out directly to HBase by the Reducer, and a wrapper
program restarts a new MapReduce iteration if the algorithm has not
converged. The wrapper will check whether ρ
N∥z −zprev∥2 ≤ϵconv
i=1 ∥xi −z∥2
2)1/2 ≤ϵfeas to determine convergence, as in the
MPI case. (The wrapper checks the termination criteria instead of the
Reducer because they are not associative to check.)
The main diﬃculty is that MapReduce tasks are not designed to
be iterative and do not preserve state in the Mappers across iterations, so implementing an iterative algorithm like ADMM requires
some understanding of the underlying infrastructure. Hadoop contains a number of components supporting large-scale, fault-tolerant
distributed computing applications. The relevant components here are
HDFS, a distributed ﬁle system based on Google’s GFS , and
HBase, a distributed database based on Google’s BigTable .
HDFS is a distributed ﬁlesystem, meaning that it manages the
storage of data across an entire cluster of machines. It is designed for
situations where a typical ﬁle may be gigabytes or terabytes in size and
high-speed streaming read access is required. The base units of storage
in HDFS are blocks, which are 64 MB to 128 MB in size in a typical conﬁguration. Files stored on HDFS are comprised of blocks; each
block is stored on a particular machine (though for redundancy, there
are replicas of each block on multiple machines), but diﬀerent blocks in
the same ﬁle need not be stored on the same machine or even nearby.
For this reason, any task that processes data stored on HDFS (e.g., the
local datasets Di) should process a single block of data at a time, since
a block is guaranteed to reside wholly on one machine; otherwise, one
may cause unnecessary network transfer of data.
In general, the input to each Map task is data stored on HDFS, and
Mappers cannot access local disk directly or perform any stateful computation. The scheduler runs each Mapper as close to its input data
as possible, ideally on the same node, in order to minimize network
transfer of data. To help preserve data locality, each Map task should
also be assigned around a block’s worth of data. Note that this is very
diﬀerent from the implementation presented for MPI, where each process can be told to pick up the local data on whatever machine it is
running on.
10.4 MapReduce
Since each Mapper only handles a single block of data, there will
usually be a number of Mappers running on the same machine. To
reduce the amount of data transferred over the network, Hadoop supports the use of combiners, which essentially Reduce the results of all
the Map tasks on a given node so only one set of intermediate keyvalue pairs need to be transferred across machines for the ﬁnal Reduce
task. In other words, the Reduce step should be viewed as a two-step
process: First, the results of all the Mappers on each individual node
are reduced with Combiners, and then the records across each machine
are Reduced. This is a major reason why the Reduce function must be
commutative and associative.
Since the input value to a Mapper is a block of data, we also need a
mechanism for a Mapper to read in local variables, and for the Reducer
to store the updated variables for the next iteration. Here, we use
HBase, a distributed database built on top of HDFS that provides
fast random read-write access. HBase, like BigTable, provides a distributed multi-dimensional sorted map. The map is indexed by a row
key, a column key, and a timestamp. Each cell in an HBase table can
contain multiple versions of the same data indexed by timestamp; in
our case, we can use the iteration counts as the timestamps to store
and access data from previous iterations; this is useful for checking termination criteria, for example. The row keys in a table are strings, and
HBase maintains data in lexicographic order by row key. This means
that rows with lexicographically adjacent keys will be stored on the
same machine or nearby. In our case, variables should be stored with
the subsystem identiﬁer at the beginning of row key, so information for
the same subsystem is stored together and is eﬃcient to access. For
more details, see .
The discussion and pseudocode above omits and glosses over many
details for simplicity of exposition. MapReduce frameworks like Hadoop
also support much more sophisticated implementations, which may
be necessary for very large scale problems. For example, if there
are too many values for a single Reducer to handle, we can use an
approach analogous to the one suggested for MPI: Mappers emit pairs
to ‘regional’ reduce jobs, and then an additional MapReduce step is carried out that uses an identity mapper and aggregates regional results
Implementation
into a global result. In this section, our goal is merely to give a general ﬂavor of some of the issues involved in implementing ADMM in
a MapReduce framework, and we refer to for further
details. There has also been some recent work on alternative MapReduce systems that are speciﬁcally designed for iterative computation,
which are likely better suited for ADMM , though the implementations are less mature and less widely available. See for
examples of recent papers discussing machine learning and optimization in MapReduce frameworks.
Numerical Examples
In this section we report numerical results for several examples. The
examples are chosen to illustrate a variety of the ideas discussed above,
including caching matrix factorizations, using iterative solvers for the
updates, and using consensus and sharing ADMM to solve distributed
problems. The implementations of ADMM are written to be as simple
as possible, with no implementation-level optimization or tuning.
The ﬁrst section discusses a small instance of the lasso problem
with a dense coeﬃcient matrix. This helps illustrate some of the basic
behavior of the algorithm, and the impact of some of the linear algebrabased optimizations suggested in §4. We ﬁnd, for example, that we can
compute the entire regularization path for the lasso in not much more
time than it takes to solve a single problem instance, which in turn takes
not much more time than solving a single ridge regression problem of
the same size.
We then discuss a serial implementation of the consensus ADMM
algorithm applied to ℓ1 regularized logistic regression, where we split
the problem across training examples. Here, we focus on details of
implementing consensus ADMM for this problem, rather than on actual
Numerical Examples
distributed solutions. The following section has a similar discussion of
the group lasso problem, but split across features, with each regularization group corresponding to a distinct subsystem.
We then turn to a real large-scale distributed implementation using
an MPI-based solver written in C. We report on the results of solving
some large lasso problems on clusters hosted in Amazon EC2, and ﬁnd
that a fairly basic implementation is able to solve a lasso problem with
30 GB of data in a few minutes.
Our last example is regressor selection, a nonconvex problem.
We compare the sparsity-ﬁt trade-oﬀcurve obtained using nonconvex ADMM, directly controlling the number of regressors, with the
same curve obtained using the lasso regularization path (with posterior least squares ﬁt). We will see that the curves are not the same,
but give very similar results. This suggests that the regressor selection
method may be preferable to the lasso when the desired sparsity level
is known in advance: It is much easier to explicitly set the desired sparsity level than tuning the regularization parameter λ to obtain this
All examples except the large-scale lasso are implemented in Matlab, and run on an Intel Core i3 processor running at 3.2 GHz.
The large lasso example is implemented in C using MPI for interprocess communication and the GNU Scientiﬁc Library for linear algebra. Source code and data for these examples (and others) can be
found at www.stanford.edu/˜boyd/papers/admm_distr_stats.html
and most are extensively commented.
Small Dense Lasso
We consider a small, dense instance of the lasso problem (6.2), where
the feature matrix A has m = 1500 examples and n = 5000 features.
We generate the data as follows. We ﬁrst choose Aij ∼N(0,1)
and then normalize the columns to have unit ℓ2 norm. A ‘true’ value
xtrue ∈Rn is generated with 100 nonzero entries, each sampled from an
N(0,1) distribution. The labels b are then computed as b = Axtrue + v,
where v ∼N(0,10−3I), which corresponds to a signal-to-noise ratio
2 of around 60.
11.1 Small Dense Lasso
Fig. 11.1. Norms of primal residual (top) and dual residual (bottom) versus iteration, for
a lasso problem. The dashed lines show ϵpri (top) and ϵdual (bottom).
We set the penalty parameter ρ = 1 and set termination tolerances
ϵabs = 10−4 and ϵrel = 10−2. The variables u0 and z0 were initialized to
Single Problem
We ﬁrst solve the lasso problem with regularization parameter λ =
0.1λmax, where λmax = ∥AT b∥∞is the critical value of λ above which
the solution of the lasso problem is x = 0. (Although not relevant, this
choice correctly identiﬁes about 80% of the nonzero entries in xtrue.)
Figure 11.1 shows the primal and dual residual norms by iteration,
as well as the associated stopping criterion limits ϵpri and ϵdual (which
vary slightly in each iteration since they depend on xk, zk, and yk
through the relative tolerance terms). The stopping criterion was satisﬁed after 15 iterations, but we ran ADMM for 35 iterations to show
the continued progress. Figure 11.2 shows the objective suboptimality
˜pk −p⋆, where ˜pk = (1/2)∥Azk −b∥2
2 + λ∥zk∥1 is the objective value
at zk. The optimal objective value p⋆= 17.4547 was independently veriﬁed using l1 ls .
Numerical Examples
Fig. 11.2. Objective suboptimality versus iteration for a lasso problem. The stopping criterion is satisﬁed at iteration 15, indicated by the vertical dashed line.
Since A is fat (i.e., m < n), we apply the matrix inversion lemma
to (AT A + ρI)−1 and instead compute the factorization of the smaller
matrix I + (1/ρ)AAT , which is then cached for subsequent x-updates.
The factor step itself takes about nm2 + (1/3)m3 ﬂops, which is the
cost of forming AAT and computing the Cholesky factorization. Subsequent updates require two matrix-vector multiplications and forwardbackward solves, which require approximately 4mn + 2m2 ﬂops. (The
cost of the soft thresholding step in the z-update is negligible.) For these
problem dimensions, the ﬂop count analysis suggests a factor/solve
ratio of around 350, which means that 350 subsequent ADMM iterations can be carried out for the cost of the initial factorization.
In our basic implementation, the factorization step takes about 1
second, and subsequent x-updates take around 30 ms. (This gives a factor/solve ratio of only 33, less than predicted, due to a particularly eﬃcient matrix-matrix multiplication routine used in Matlab.) Thus the
total cost of solving an entire lasso problem is around 1.5 seconds—only
50% more than the initial factorization. In terms of parameter estimation, we can say that computing the lasso estimate requires only 50%
11.1 Small Dense Lasso
Fig. 11.3. Iterations needed versus λ for warm start (solid line) and cold start (dashed line).
more time than a ridge regression estimate. (Moreover, in an implementation with a higher factor/solve ratio, the additional eﬀort for the
lasso would have been even smaller.)
Finally, we report the eﬀect of varying the parameter ρ on convergence time. Varying ρ over the 100:1 range from 0.1 to 10 yields a solve
time ranging between 1.45 seconds to around 4 seconds. (In an implementation with a larger factor/solve ratio, the eﬀect of varying ρ would
have been even smaller.) Over-relaxation with α = 1.5 does not significantly change the convergence time with ρ = 1, but it does reduce the
worst convergence time over the range ρ ∈[0.1,10] to only 2.8 seconds.
Regularization Path
To illustrate computing the regularization path, we solve the lasso problem for 100 values of λ, spaced logarithmically from 0.01λmax (where
x⋆has around 800 nonzeros) to 0.95λmax (where x⋆has two nonzero
entries). We ﬁrst solve the lasso problem as above for λ = 0.01λmax,
and for each subsequent value of λ, we then initialize (warm start) z
and u at their optimal values for the previous λ. This requires only one
factorization for all the computations; warm starting ADMM at the
Numerical Examples
Factorization
Single lasso (λ = 0.1λmax)
Cold start regularization path (100 values of λ)
Warm start regularization path (100 values of λ)
Table 11.1. Summary of timings for lasso example.
previous value signiﬁcantly reduces the number of ADMM iterations
required to solve each lasso problem after the ﬁrst one.
Figure 11.3 shows the number of iterations required to solve each
lasso problem using this warm start initialization, compared to the
number of iterations required using a cold start of z0 = u0 = 0 for
each λ. For the 100 values of λ, the total number of ADMM iterations required is 428, which takes 13 seconds in all. By contrast, with
cold starts, we need 2166 total ADMM iterations and 100 factorizations
to compute the regularization path, or around 160 seconds total. This
timing information is summarized in Table 11.1.
Distributed ℓ1 Regularized Logistic Regression
In this example, we use consensus ADMM to ﬁt an ℓ1 regularized logistic regression model. Following §8, the problem is
1 + exp(−bi(aT
with optimization variables w ∈Rn and v ∈R. The training set consists of m pairs (ai,bi), where ai ∈Rn is a feature vector and bi ∈
{−1,1} is the corresponding label.
We generated a problem instance with m = 106 training examples
and n = 104 features. The m examples are distributed among N = 100
subsystems, so each subsystem has 104 training examples. Each feature
vector ai was generated to have approximately 10 nonzero features,
each sampled independently from a standard normal distribution. We
chose a ‘true’ weight vector wtrue ∈Rn to have 100 nonzero values,
and these entries, along with the true intercept vtrue, were sampled
11.2 Distributed ℓ1 Regularized Logistic Regression
independently from a standard normal distribution. The labels bi were
then generated using
bi = sign(aT
i wtrue + vtrue + vi),
where vi ∼N(0,0.1).
The regularization parameter is set to λ = 0.1λmax, where λmax is
the critical value above which the solution of the problem is w⋆= 0.
Here λmax is more complicated to describe than in the simple lasso case
described above. Let θneg be the fraction of examples with bi = −1 and
θpos the fraction with bi = 1, and let ˜b ∈Rm be a vector with entries
θneg where bi = 1 and −θpos where bi = −1. Then λmax = ∥AT˜b∥∞(see
[103, §2.1]). (While not relevant here, the ﬁnal ﬁtted model with λ =
0.1λmax classiﬁed the training examples with around 90% accuracy.)
Fitting the model involves solving the global consensus problem
(8.3) in §8.2 with local variables xi = (vi,wi) and consensus variable
z = (v,w). As in the lasso example, we used ϵabs = 10−4 and ϵrel =
10−2 as tolerances and used the initialization u0
i = 0,z0 = 0. We use
the penalty parameter value ρ = 1 for the iterations.
We used L-BFGS to carry out the xi-updates. We used Nocedal’s
Fortran 77 implementation of L-BFGS with no tuning: We used default
parameters, a memory of 5, and a constant termination tolerance across
ADMM iterations (for a more eﬃcient implementation, these tolerances would start large and decrease with ADMM iterations). We warm
started the xi-updates.
We used a serial implementation that performs the xi-updates
sequentially; in a distributed implementation, of course, the xi-updates
would be performed in parallel. To report an approximation of the timing that would have been achieved in a parallel implementation, we
report the maximum time required to update xi among the K subsystems. This corresponds roughly to the maximum number of L-BFGS
iterations required for the xi-update.
Figure 11.4 shows the progress of the primal and dual residual
norm by iteration. The dashed line shows when the stopping criterion
has been satisﬁed (after 19 iterations), resulting in a primal residual
norm of about 1. Since the RMS consensus error can be expressed as
(1/√m)∥rk∥2 where m = 106, a primal residual norm of about 1 means
that on average, the elements of xi agree with z up to the third digit.
Numerical Examples
Fig. 11.4. Progress of primal and dual residual norm for distributed ℓ1 regularized logistic
regression problem. The dashed lines show ϵpri (top) and ϵdual (bottom).
Fig. 11.5. Left. Objective suboptimality of distributed ℓ1 regularized logistic regression
versus iteration. Right. Progress versus elapsed time. The stopping criterion is satisﬁed at
iteration 19, indicated by the vertical dashed line.
Figure 11.5 shows the suboptimality ˜pk −p⋆for the consensus variable, where
1 + exp(−bi(aT
i wk + vk))
11.3 Group Lasso with Feature Splitting
The optimal value p⋆= 0.3302 × 106 was veriﬁed using l1 logreg
 . The lefthand plot shows ADMM progress by iteration, while the
righthand plot shows the cumulative time in a parallel implementation. It took 19 iterations to satisfy the stopping criterion. The ﬁrst 4
iterations of ADMM took 2 seconds, while the last 4 iterations (before
the stopping criterion is satisﬁed) took less than 0.5 seconds. This is
because as the iterates approach consensus, L-BFGS requires fewer
iterations due to warm starting.
Group Lasso with Feature Splitting
We consider the group lasso example, described in §6.4.2,
(1/2)∥Ax −b∥2
i=1 ∥xi∥2,
where x = (x1,...,xN), with xi ∈Rni. We will solve the problem
by splitting across feature groups x1,...,xN using the formulation
We generated a problem instance with N = 200 groups of features, with ni = 100 features per group, for i = 1,...,200, for a total
of n = 20000 features and m = 200 examples. A ‘true’ value xtrue ∈Rn
was generated, with 9 nonzero groups, resulting in 900 nonzero feature values. The feature matrix A is dense, with entries drawn from
an N(0,1) distribution, and its columns then normalized to have unit
ℓ2 norm (as in the lasso example of §11.1). The outcomes b are generated by b = Axtrue + v, where v ∼N(0,0.1I), which corresponds to a
signal-to-noise ratio ∥Axtrue∥2
2 of around 60.
We used the penalty parameter ρ = 10 and set termination tolerances as ϵabs = 10−4 and ϵrel = 10−2. The variables u0 and z0 are initialized to be zero.
We used the regularization parameter value λ = 0.5λmax, where
λmax = max{∥AT
1 b∥2,...,∥AT
is the critical value of λ above which the solution is x = 0. (Although
not relevant, this choice of λ correctly identiﬁes 6 of the 9 nonzero
groups in xtrue and produces an estimate with 17 nonzero groups.) The
stopping criterion was satisﬁed after 47 iterations.
Numerical Examples
Fig. 11.6. Norms of primal residual (top) and dual residual (bottom) versus iteration, for
the distributed group lasso problem. The dashed lines show ϵpri (top) and ϵdual (bottom).
The xi-update is computed using the method described in §8.3.2,
which involves computing and caching eigendecompositions of AT
The eigenvalue decompositions of AT
i Ai took around 7 milliseconds;
subsequent xi-updates took around 350 microseconds, around a factor of 20 faster. For 47 ADMM iterations, these numbers predict a
total runtime in a serial implementation of about 5 seconds; the actual
runtime was around 7 seconds. For a parallel implementation, we can
estimate the runtime (neglecting interprocess communication and data
distribution) as being about 200 times faster, around 35 milliseconds.
Figure 11.6 shows the progress of the primal and dual residual norm
by iteration. The dashed line shows when the stopping criterion is satisﬁed (after 47 iterations).
Figure 11.7 shows the suboptimality ˜pk −p⋆for the problem versus
iteration, where
˜pk = (1/2)∥Axk −b∥2
11.4 Distributed Large-Scale Lasso with MPI
Fig. 11.7. Suboptimality of distributed group lasso versus iteration. The stopping criterion
is satisﬁed at iteration 47, indicated by the vertical dashed line.
The optimal objective value p⋆= 430.8390 was found by running
ADMM for 1000 iterations.
Distributed Large-Scale Lasso with MPI
In previous sections, we discussed an idealized version of a distributed
implementation that was actually carried out serially for simplicity.
We now turn to a much more realistic distributed example, in which
we solve a very large instance of the lasso problem (6.2) using a distributed solver implemented in C using MPI for inter-process communication and the GNU Scientiﬁc Library (GSL) for linear algebra. In this
example, we split the problem across training examples rather than features. We carried out the experiments in a cluster of virtual machines
running on Amazon’s Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2). Here, we focus
entirely on scaling and implementation details.
The data was generated as in §11.1, except that we now solve a problem with m = 400000 examples and n = 8000 features across N = 80
subsystems, so each subsystem handles 5000 training examples. Note
Numerical Examples
that the overall problem has a skinny coeﬃcient matrix but each of
the subproblems has a fat coeﬃcient matrix. We emphasize that the
coeﬃcient matrix is dense, so the full dataset requires over 30 GB to
store and has 3.2 billion nonzero entries in the total coeﬃcient matrix
A. This is far too large to be solved eﬃciently, or at all, using standard
serial methods on commonly available hardware.
We solved the problem using a cluster of 10 machines. We used
Cluster Compute instances, which have 23 GB of RAM, two quad-core
Intel Xeon X5570 ‘Nehalem’ chips, and are connected to each other
with 10 Gigabit Ethernet. We used hardware virtual machine images
running CentOS 5.4. Since each node had 8 cores, we ran the code
with 80 processes, so each subsystem ran on its own core. In MPI,
communication between processes on the same machine is performed
locally via the shared-memory Byte Transfer Layer (BTL), which provides low latency and high bandwidth communication, while communication across machines goes over the network. The data was sized
so all the processes on a single machine could work entirely in RAM.
Each node had its own attached Elastic Block Storage (EBS) volume
that contained only the local data relevant to that machine, so disk
throughput was shared among processes on the same machine but not
across machines. This is to emulate a scenario where each machine is
only processing the data on its local disk, and none of the dataset is
transferred over the network. We emphasize that usage of a cluster set
up in this fashion costs under $20 per hour.
We solved the problem with a deliberately naive implementation of
the algorithm, based directly on the discussion of §6.4, §8.2, and §10.2.
The implementation consists of a single ﬁle of C code, under 400 lines
despite extensive comments. The linear algebra (BLAS operations and
the Cholesky factorization) were performed using a stock installation
of the GNU Scientiﬁc Library.
We now report the breakdown of the wall-clock runtime. It took
roughly 30 seconds to load all the data into memory. It then took
4-5 minutes to form and then compute the Cholesky factorizations of
I + (1/ρ)AiAT
i . After caching these factorizations, it then took 0.5-2
seconds for each subsequent ADMM iteration. This includes the backsolves in the xi-updates and all the message passing. For this problem,
11.4 Distributed Large-Scale Lasso with MPI
Total dataset size
Number of subsystems
Total dataset dimensions
400000 × 8000
Subsystem dimensions
5000 × 8000
Data loading time
30 seconds
Factorization time
Single iteration time
Total runtime
Table 11.2. Rough summary of a large dense distributed lasso example.
ADMM converged in 13 iterations, yielding a start-to-ﬁnish runtime of
under 6 minutes to solve the whole problem. Approximate times are
summarized in Table 11.2.
Though we did not compute it as part of this example, the extremely
low cost of each iteration means that it would be straightforward
to compute the entire regularization path for this problem using the
method described in §11.1.2. In that example, it required 428 iterations
to compute the regularization path for 100 settings of λ, while it took
around 15 iterations for a single instance to converge, roughly the same
as in this example. Extrapolating for this case, it is plausible that the
entire regularization path, even for this very large problem, could easily
be obtained in another ﬁve to ten minutes.
It is clear that by far the dominant computation is forming
and computing the Cholesky factorization, locally and in parallel, of
i Ai + ρI (or I + (1/ρ)AiAT
i , if the matrix inversion lemma
is applied). As a result, it is worth keeping in mind that the performance of the linear algebra operations in our basic implementation can
be signiﬁcantly improved by using LAPACK instead of GSL for the
Cholesky factorization, and by replacing GSL’s BLAS implementation
with a hardware-optimized BLAS library produced by ATLAS, a vendor library like Intel MKL, or a GPU-based linear algebra package. This
could easily lead to several orders of magnitude faster performance.
In this example, we used a dense coeﬃcient matrix so the code
could be written using a single simple math library. Many real-world
examples of the lasso have larger numbers of training examples or features, but are sparse and do not have billions of nonzero entries, as we
do here. The code we provide could be modiﬁed in the usual manner
Numerical Examples
to handle sparse or structured matrices (e.g., use CHOLMOD 
for sparse Cholesky factorization), and would also scale to very large
problems. More broadly, it could also be adapted with minimal work
to add constraints or otherwise modify the lasso problem, or even
solve completely diﬀerent problems, like training logistic regression
It is worth observing that ADMM scales well both horizontally and
vertically. We could easily have solved much larger problem instances in
roughly the same amount of time than the one described here by having each subsystem solve a larger subproblem (up to the point where
each machine’s RAM is saturated, which it was not here); by running
more subsystems on each machine (though this can lead to performance degradation in key areas like the factorization step); or simply
by adding more machines to the cluster, which is mostly straightforward and relatively inexpensive on Amazon EC2.
Up to a certain problem size, the solver can be implemented by users
who are not expert in distributed systems, distributed linear algebra,
or advanced implementation-level performance enhancements. This is
in sharp contrast to what is required in many other cases. Solving
extremely large problem instances requiring hundreds or thousands of
machines would require a more sophisticated implementation from a
systems perspective, but it is interesting to observe that a basic version can solve rather large problems quickly on standard software and
hardware. To the best of our knowledge, the example above is one of
the largest lasso problems ever solved.
Regressor Selection
In our last example, we apply ADMM to an instance of the (nonconvex)
least squares regressor selection problem described in §9.1, which seeks
the best quadratic ﬁt to a set of labels b from a combination of no more
than c columns of A (regressors). We use the same A and b generated for
the dense lasso example in §11.1, with m = 1500 examples and n = 5000
features, but instead of relying on the ℓ1 regularization heuristic to
achieve a sparse solution, we explicitly constrain its cardinality to be
below c = 100.
11.5 Regressor Selection
Fig. 11.8. Fit versus cardinality for the lasso (dotted line), lasso with posterior least squares
ﬁt (dashed line), and regressor selection (solid line).
The x-update step has exactly the same expression as in the lasso
example, so we use the same method, based on the matrix inversion
lemma and caching, described in that example. The z-update step consists of keeping the c largest magnitude components of x + u and zeroing the rest. For the sake of clarity, we performed an intermediate
sorting of the components, but more eﬃcient schemes are possible. In
any case, the cost of the z-update is negligible compared with that of
the x-update.
Convergence of ADMM for a nonconvex problem such as this one
is not guaranteed; and even when it does converge, the ﬁnal result can
depend on the choice of ρ and the initial values for z and u. To explore
this, we ran 100 ADMM simulations with randomly chosen initial values and ρ ranging between 0.1 and 100. Indeed, some of them did not
converge, or at least, were converging slowly. But most of them converged, though not to exactly the same points. However, the objective
values obtained by those that converged were reasonably close to each
other, typically within 5%. The diﬀerent values of x found had small
Numerical Examples
variations in support (choice of regressors) and value (weights), but the
largest weights were consistently assigned to the same regressors.
We now compare the use of nonconvex regressor selection with the
lasso, in terms of obtaining the sparsity-ﬁt trade-oﬀ. We obtain this
curve for regressor selection by running ADMM for each value of c
between c = 1 and c = 120. For the lasso, we compute the regularization
path for 300 values of λ; for each xlasso found, we then perform a least
squares ﬁt using the sparsity pattern in xlasso to get our ﬁnal x. For
each cardinality, we plot the best ﬁt found among all such x. Figure 11.8
shows the trade-oﬀcurves obtained by regressor selection and the lasso,
with and without posterior least squares ﬁt. We see that while the
results are not exactly the same, they are quite similar, and for all
practical purposes, equivalent. This suggests that regressor selection via
ADMM can be used as well as lasso for obtaining a good cardinality-ﬁt
trade-oﬀ; it might have an advantage when the desired cardinality is
known ahead of time.
Conclusions
We have discussed ADMM and illustrated its applicability to distributed convex optimization in general and many problems in statistical machine learning in particular. We argue that ADMM can serve
as a good general-purpose tool for optimization problems arising in the
analysis and processing of modern massive datasets. Much like gradient
descent and the conjugate gradient method are standard tools of great
use when optimizing smooth functions on a single machine, ADMM
should be viewed as an analogous tool in the distributed regime.
ADMM sits at a higher level of abstraction than classical optimization algorithms like Newton’s method. In such algorithms, the base
operations are low-level, consisting of linear algebra operations and the
computation of gradients and Hessians. In the case of ADMM, the base
operations include solving small convex optimization problems (which
in some cases can be done via a simple analytical formula). For example, when applying ADMM to a very large model ﬁtting problem, each
update reduces to a (regularized) model ﬁtting problem on a smaller
dataset. These subproblems can be solved using any standard serial
algorithm suitable for small to medium sized problems. In this sense,
ADMM builds on existing algorithms for single machines, and so can be
Conclusions
viewed as a modular coordination algorithm that ‘incentivizes’ a set of
simpler algorithms to collaborate to solve much larger global problems
together than they could on their own. Alternatively, it can be viewed
as a simple way of ‘bootstrapping’ specialized algorithms for small to
medium sized problems to work on much larger problems than would
otherwise be possible.
We emphasize that for any particular problem, it is likely that
another method will perform better than ADMM, or that some variation on ADMM will substantially improve performance. However, a
simple algorithm derived from basic ADMM will often oﬀer performance that is at least comparable to very specialized algorithms (even
in the serial setting), and in most cases, the simple ADMM algorithm
will be eﬃcient enough to be useful. In a few cases, ADMM-based methods actually turn out to be state-of-the-art even in the serial regime.
Moreover, ADMM has the beneﬁt of being extremely simple to implement, and it maps onto several standard distributed programming models reasonably well.
ADMM was developed over a generation ago, with its roots stretching far in advance of the Internet, distributed and cloud computing
systems, massive high-dimensional datasets, and the associated largescale applied statistical problems. Despite this, it appears to be well
suited to the modern regime, and has the important beneﬁt of being
quite general in its scope and applicability.
Acknowledgments
We are very grateful to Rob Tibshirani and Trevor Hastie for encouraging us to write this review. Thanks also to Alexis Battle, Dimitri
Bertsekas, Danny Bickson, Tom Goldstein, Dimitri Gorinevsky, Daphne
Koller, Vicente Malave, Stephen Oakley, and Alex Teichman for helpful comments and discussions. Yang Wang and Matt Kraning helped in
developing ADMM for the sharing and exchange problems, and Arezou
Keshavarz helped work out ADMM for generalized additive models. We
thank Georgios Giannakis and Alejandro Ribeiro for pointing out some
very relevant references that we had missed in an earlier version. We
thank John Duchi for a very careful reading of the manuscript and for
suggestions that greatly improved it.
Support for this work was provided in part by AFOSR grant
FA9550-09-0130 and NASA grant NNX07AEIIA. Neal Parikh was supported by the Cortlandt and Jean E. Van Rensselaer Engineering
Fellowship from Stanford University and by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. DGE-0645962.
Eric Chu was supported by the Pan Wen-Yuan Foundation Scholarship.
Convergence Proof
The basic convergence result given in §3.2 can be found in several references, such as . Many of these give more sophisticated results,
with more general penalties or inexact minimization. For completeness,
we give a proof here.
We will show that if f and g are closed, proper, and convex, and
the Lagrangian L0 has a saddle point, then we have primal residual
convergence, meaning that rk →0, and objective convergence, meaning
that pk →p⋆, where pk = f(xk) + g(zk). We will also see that the dual
residual sk = ρAT B(zk −zk−1) converges to zero.
Let (x⋆,z⋆,y⋆) be a saddle point for L0, and deﬁne
V k = (1/ρ)∥yk −y⋆∥2
2 + ρ∥B(zk −z⋆)∥2
We will see that V k is a Lyapunov function for the algorithm, i.e., a
nonnegative quantity that decreases in each iteration. (Note that V k is
unknown while the algorithm runs, since it depends on the unknown
values z⋆and y⋆.)
We ﬁrst outline the main idea. The proof relies on three key inequalities, which we will prove below using basic results from convex analysis
along with simple algebra. The ﬁrst inequality is
V k+1 ≤V k −ρ∥rk+1∥2
2 −ρ∥B(zk+1 −zk)∥2
This states that V k decreases in each iteration by an amount that
depends on the norm of the residual and on the change in z over one
iteration. Because V k ≤V 0, it follows that yk and Bzk are bounded.
Iterating the inequality above gives that
2 + ∥B(zk+1 −zk)∥2
which implies that rk →0 and B(zk+1 −zk) →0 as k →∞. Multiplying the second expression by ρAT shows that the dual residual
sk = ρAT B(zk+1 −zk) converges to zero. (This shows that the stopping criterion (3.12), which requires the primal and dual residuals to
be small, will eventually hold.)
The second key inequality is
≤−(yk+1)T rk+1 −ρ(B(zk+1 −zk))T (−rk+1 + B(zk+1 −z⋆)),
and the third inequality is
p⋆−pk+1 ≤y⋆T rk+1.
The righthand side in (A.2) goes to zero as k →∞, because B(zk+1 −
z⋆) is bounded and both rk+1 and B(zk+1 −zk) go to zero. The righthand side in (A.3) goes to zero as k →∞, since rk goes to zero. Thus
we have limk→∞pk = p⋆, i.e., objective convergence.
Before giving the proofs of the three key inequalities, we derive the
inequality (3.11) mentioned in our discussion of stopping criterion from
the inequality (A.2). We simply observe that −rk+1 + B(zk+1 −zk) =
−A(xk+1 −x⋆); substituting this into (A.2) yields (3.11),
pk+1 −p⋆≤−(yk+1)T rk+1 + (xk+1 −x⋆)T sk+1.
Proof of inequality (A.3)
Since (x⋆,z⋆,y⋆) is a saddle point for L0, we have
L0(x⋆,z⋆,y⋆) ≤L0(xk+1,zk+1,y⋆).
Convergence Proof
Using Ax⋆+ Bz⋆= c, the lefthand side is p⋆. With pk+1 = f(xk+1) +
g(zk+1), this can be written as
p⋆≤pk+1 + y⋆T rk+1,
which gives (A.3).
Proof of inequality (A.2)
By deﬁnition, xk+1 minimizes Lρ(x,zk,yk). Since f is closed, proper,
and convex it is subdiﬀerentiable, and so is Lρ. The (necessary and
suﬃcient) optimality condition is
0 ∈∂Lρ(xk+1,zk,yk) = ∂f(xk+1) + AT yk + ρAT (Axk+1 + Bzk −c).
(Here we use the basic fact that the subdiﬀerential of the sum of a
subdiﬀerentiable function and a diﬀerentiable function with domain
Rn is the sum of the subdiﬀerential and the gradient; see, e.g., [140,
Since yk+1 = yk + ρrk+1, we can plug in yk = yk+1 −ρrk+1 and
rearrange to obtain
0 ∈∂f(xk+1) + AT (yk+1 −ρB(zk+1 −zk)).
This implies that xk+1 minimizes
f(x) + (yk+1 −ρB(zk+1 −zk))T Ax.
A similar argument shows that zk+1 minimizes g(z) + y(k+1)T Bz. It
follows that
f(xk+1) + (yk+1 −ρB(zk+1 −zk))T Axk+1
≤f(x⋆) + (yk+1 −ρB(zk+1 −zk))T Ax⋆
g(zk+1) + y(k+1)T Bzk+1 ≤g(z⋆) + y(k+1)T Bz⋆.
Adding the two inequalities above, using Ax⋆+ Bz⋆= c, and rearranging, we obtain (A.2).
Proof of inequality (A.1)
Adding (A.2) and (A.3), regrouping terms, and multiplying through by
2(yk+1 −y⋆)T rk+1 −2ρ(B(zk+1 −zk))T rk+1
+ 2ρ(B(zk+1 −zk))T (B(zk+1 −z⋆)) ≤0.
The result (A.1) will follow from this inequality after some manipulation and rewriting.
We begin by rewriting the ﬁrst term. Substituting yk+1 = yk +
ρrk+1 gives
2(yk −y⋆)T rk+1 + ρ∥rk+1∥2
2 + ρ∥rk+1∥2
and substituting rk+1 = (1/ρ)(yk+1 −yk) in the ﬁrst two terms gives
(2/ρ)(yk −y⋆)T (yk+1 −yk) + (1/ρ)∥yk+1 −yk∥2
2 + ρ∥rk+1∥2
Since yk+1 −yk = (yk+1 −y⋆) −(yk −y⋆), this can be written as
∥yk+1 −y⋆∥2
2 −∥yk −y⋆∥2
+ ρ∥rk+1∥2
We now rewrite the remaining terms, i.e.,
2 −2ρ(B(zk+1 −zk))T rk+1 +2ρ(B(zk+1 −zk))T (B(zk+1 −z⋆)),
where ρ∥rk+1∥2
2 is taken from (A.5). Substituting
zk+1 −z⋆= (zk+1 −zk) + (zk −z⋆)
in the last term gives
ρ∥rk+1 −B(zk+1 −zk)∥2
2 + ρ∥B(zk+1 −zk)∥2
+2ρ(B(zk+1 −zk))T (B(zk −z⋆)),
and substituting
zk+1 −zk = (zk+1 −z⋆) −(zk −z⋆)
in the last two terms, we get
ρ∥rk+1 −B(zk+1 −zk)∥2
∥B(zk+1 −z⋆)∥2
2 −∥B(zk −z⋆)∥2
Convergence Proof
With the previous step, this implies that (A.4) can be written as
V k −V k+1 ≥ρ∥rk+1 −B(zk+1 −zk)∥2
To show (A.1), it now suﬃces to show that the middle term
−2ρr(k+1)T (B(zk+1 −zk)) of the expanded right hand side of (A.6)
is positive. To see this, recall that zk+1 minimizes g(z) + y(k+1)T Bz
and zk minimizes g(z) + ykT Bz, so we can add
g(zk+1) + y(k+1)T Bzk+1 ≤g(zk) + y(k+1)T Bzk
g(zk) + ykT Bzk ≤g(zk+1) + ykT Bzk+1
to get that
(yk+1 −yk)T (B(zk+1 −zk)) ≤0.
Substituting yk+1 −yk = ρrk+1 gives the result, since ρ > 0.
References
 M. V. Afonso, J. M. Bioucas-Dias, and M. A. T. Figueiredo, “Fast image recovery using variable splitting and constrained optimization,” IEEE Transactions
on Image Processing, vol. 19, no. 9, pp. 2345–2356, 2010.
 M. V. Afonso, J. M. Bioucas-Dias, and M. A. T. Figueiredo, “An Augmented Lagrangian Approach to the Constrained Optimization Formulation of
Imaging Inverse Problems,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, vol. 20,
pp. 681–695, 2011.
 E. Anderson, Z. Bai, C. Bischof, J. Demmel, J. Dongarra, J. D. Croz, A. Greenbaum, S. Hammarling, A. McKenney, and D. Sorenson, LAPACK: A portable
linear algebra library for high-performance computers. IEEE Computing Society Press, 1990.
 K. J. Arrow and G. Debreu, “Existence of an equilibrium for a competitive
economy,” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, vol. 22, no. 3,
pp. 265–290, 1954.
 K. J. Arrow, L. Hurwicz, and H. Uzawa, Studies in Linear and Nonlinear
Programming. Stanford University Press: Stanford, 1958.
 K. J. Arrow and R. M. Solow, “Gradient methods for constrained maxima,
with weakened assumptions,” in Studies in Linear and Nonlinear Programming, (K. J. Arrow, L. Hurwicz, and H. Uzawa, eds.), Stanford University
Press: Stanford, 1958.
 O. Banerjee, L. E. Ghaoui, and A. d’Aspremont, “Model selection through
sparse maximum likelihood estimation for multivariate Gaussian or binary
data,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 9, pp. 485–516, 2008.
References
 P. L. Bartlett, M. I. Jordan, and J. D. McAuliﬀe, “Convexity, classiﬁcation,
and risk bounds,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 101,
no. 473, pp. 138–156, 2006.
 H. H. Bauschke and J. M. Borwein, “Dykstra’s alternating projection algorithm for two sets,” Journal of Approximation Theory, vol. 79, no. 3, pp. 418–
443, 1994.
 H. H. Bauschke and J. M. Borwein, “On projection algorithms for solving
convex feasibility problems,” SIAM Review, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 367–426, 1996.
 A. Beck and M. Teboulle, “A fast iterative shrinkage-thresholding algorithm
for linear inverse problems,” SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences, vol. 2, no. 1,
pp. 183–202, 2009.
 S. Becker, J. Bobin, and E. J. Cand`es, “NESTA: A fast and accurate ﬁrstorder method for sparse recovery,” Available at 
edu/˜emmanuel/papers/NESTA.pdf, 2009.
 J. F. Benders, “Partitioning procedures for solving mixed-variables programming problems,” Numerische Mathematik, vol. 4, pp. 238–252, 1962.
Bensoussan,
d´ecomposition, de d´ecentralisation et de coordination et applications,” Methodes Mathematiques de l’Informatique, pp. 133–257, 1976.
 D. P. Bertsekas, Constrained Optimization and Lagrange Multiplier Methods.
Academic Press, 1982.
 D. P. Bertsekas, Nonlinear Programming. Athena Scientiﬁc, second ed., 1999.
 D. P. Bertsekas and J. N. Tsitsiklis, Parallel and Distributed Computation:
Numerical Methods. Prentice Hall, 1989.
 J. M. Bioucas-Dias and M. A. T. Figueiredo, “Alternating Direction Algorithms for Constrained Sparse Regression: Application to Hyperspectral
Unmixing,” arXiv:1002.4527, 2010.
 J. Borwein and A. Lewis, Convex Analysis and Nonlinear Optimization: Theory and Examples. Canadian Mathematical Society, 2000.
 S. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe, Convex Optimization. Cambridge University
Press, 2004.
 L. M. Bregman, “Finding the common point of convex sets by the method
of successive projections,” Proceedings of the USSR Academy of Sciences,
vol. 162, no. 3, pp. 487–490, 1965.
 L. M. Bregman, “The relaxation method of ﬁnding the common point of convex sets and its application to the solution of problems in convex programming,” USSR Computational Mathematics and Mathematical Physics, vol. 7,
no. 3, pp. 200–217, 1967.
 H. Br´ezis, Op´erateurs Maximaux Monotones et Semi-Groupes de Contractions
dans les Espaces de Hilbert. North-Holland: Amsterdam, 1973.
 A. M. Bruckstein, D. L. Donoho, and M. Elad, “From sparse solutions of
systems of equations to sparse modeling of signals and images,” SIAM Review,
vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 34–81, 2009.
 Y. Bu, B. Howe, M. Balazinska, and M. D. Ernst, “HaLoop: Eﬃcient Iterative
Data Processing on Large Clusters,” Proceedings of the 36th International
Conference on Very Large Databases, 2010.
References
 R. H. Byrd, P. Lu, and J. Nocedal, “A Limited Memory Algorithm for Bound
Constrained Optimization,” SIAM Journal on Scientiﬁc and Statistical Computing, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 1190–1208, 1995.
 E. J. Cand`es and Y. Plan, “Near-ideal model selection by ℓ1 minimization,”
Annals of Statistics, vol. 37, no. 5A, pp. 2145–2177, 2009.
 E. J. Cand`es, J. Romberg, and T. Tao, “Robust uncertainty principles: Exact
signal reconstruction from highly incomplete frequency information,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, p. 489, 2006.
 E. J. Cand`es and T. Tao, “Near-optimal signal recovery from random projections: Universal encoding strategies?,” IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory, vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 5406–5425, 2006.
 Y. Censor and S. A. Zenios, “Proximal minimization algorithm with Dfunctions,” Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications, vol. 73, no. 3,
pp. 451–464, 1992.
 Y. Censor and S. A. Zenios, Parallel Optimization: Theory, Algorithms, and
Applications. Oxford University Press, 1997.
 F. Chang, J. Dean, S. Ghemawat, W. C. Hsieh, D. A. Wallach, M. Burrows,
T. Chandra, A. Fikes, and R. E. Gruber, “BigTable: A distributed storage
system for structured data,” ACM Transactions on Computer Systems, vol. 26,
no. 2, pp. 1–26, 2008.
 G. Chen and M. Teboulle, “A proximal-based decomposition method for convex minimization problems,” Mathematical Programming, vol. 64, pp. 81–101,
 S. S. Chen, D. L. Donoho, and M. A. Saunders, “Atomic decomposition by
basis pursuit,” SIAM Review, vol. 43, pp. 129–159, 2001.
 Y. Chen, T. A. Davis, W. W. Hager, and S. Rajamanickam, “Algorithm 887: CHOLMOD, supernodal sparse Cholesky factorization and
update/downdate,” ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software, vol. 35,
no. 3, p. 22, 2008.
 W. Cheney and A. A. Goldstein, “Proximity maps for convex sets,” Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 448–450, 1959.
 C. T. Chu, S. K. Kim, Y. A. Lin, Y. Y. Yu, G. Bradski, A. Y. Ng, and
K. Olukotun, “MapReduce for machine learning on multicore,” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2007.
 J. F. Claerbout and F. Muir, “Robust modeling with erratic data,” Geophysics,
vol. 38, p. 826, 1973.
 P. L. Combettes, “The convex feasibility problem in image recovery,” Advances
in Imaging and Electron Physics, vol. 95, pp. 155–270, 1996.
 P. L. Combettes and J. C. Pesquet, “A Douglas-Rachford splitting approach
to nonsmooth convex variational signal recovery,” IEEE Journal on Selected
Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 564–574, 2007.
 P. L. Combettes and J. C. Pesquet, “Proximal Splitting Methods in Signal
Processing,” arXiv:0912.3522, 2009.
 P. L. Combettes and V. R. Wajs, “Signal recovery by proximal forwardbackward splitting,” Multiscale Modeling and Simulation, vol. 4, no. 4,
pp. 1168–1200, 2006.
References
 G. B. Dantzig, Linear Programming and Extensions.
RAND Corporation,
 G. B. Dantzig and P. Wolfe, “Decomposition principle for linear programs,”
Operations Research, vol. 8, pp. 101–111, 1960.
 I. Daubechies, M. Defrise, and C. D. Mol, “An iterative thresholding algorithm
for linear inverse problems with a sparsity constraint,” Communications on
Pure and Applied Mathematics, vol. 57, pp. 1413–1457, 2004.
 J. Dean and S. Ghemawat, “MapReduce: Simpliﬁed data processing on large
clusters,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 107–113, 2008.
 J. W. Demmel, Applied Numerical Linear Algebra. SIAM: Philadelphia, PA,
 A. P. Dempster, “Covariance selection,” Biometrics, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 157–
175, 1972.
 D. L. Donoho, “De-noising by soft-thresholding,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 41, pp. 613–627, 1995.
 D. L. Donoho, “Compressed sensing,” IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1289–1306, 2006.
 D. L. Donoho, A. Maleki, and A. Montanari, “Message-passing algorithms
for compressed sensing,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
vol. 106, no. 45, p. 18914, 2009.
 D. L. Donoho and Y. Tsaig, “Fast solution of ℓ1-norm minimization problems
when the solution may be sparse,” Tech. Rep., Stanford University, 2006.
 J. Douglas and H. H. Rachford, “On the numerical solution of heat conduction
problems in two and three space variables,” Transactions of the American
Mathematical Society, vol. 82, pp. 421–439, 1956.
 J. C. Duchi, A. Agarwal, and M. J. Wainwright, “Distributed Dual Averaging
in Networks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2010.
 J. C. Duchi, S. Gould, and D. Koller, “Projected subgradient methods for
learning sparse Gaussians,” in Proceedings of the Conference on Uncertainty
in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2008.
 R. L. Dykstra, “An algorithm for restricted least squares regression,” Journal
of the American Statistical Association, vol. 78, pp. 837–842, 1983.
 J. Eckstein, Splitting methods for monotone operators with applications to
parallel optimization. PhD thesis, MIT, 1989.
 J. Eckstein, “Nonlinear proximal point algorithms using Bregman functions, with applications to convex programming,” Mathematics of Operations
Research, pp. 202–226, 1993.
 J. Eckstein, “Parallel alternating direction multiplier decomposition of convex
programs,” Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications, vol. 80, no. 1,
pp. 39–62, 1994.
 J. Eckstein, “Some saddle-function splitting methods for convex programming,” Optimization Methods and Software, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 75–83, 1994.
 J. Eckstein, “A practical general approximation criterion for methods of multipliers based on Bregman distances,” Mathematical Programming, vol. 96,
no. 1, pp. 61–86, 2003.
 J. Eckstein and D. P. Bertsekas, “An alternating direction method for linear
programming,” Tech. Rep., MIT, 1990.
References
 J. Eckstein and D. P. Bertsekas, “On the Douglas-Rachford splitting method
and the proximal point algorithm for maximal monotone operators,” Mathematical Programming, vol. 55, pp. 293–318, 1992.
 J. Eckstein and M. C. Ferris, “Operator-splitting methods for monotone
aﬃne variational inequalities, with a parallel application to optimal control,”
INFORMS Journal on Computing, vol. 10, pp. 218–235, 1998.
 J. Eckstein and M. Fukushima, “Some reformulations and applications of the
alternating direction method of multipliers,” Large Scale Optimization: State
of the Art, pp. 119–138, 1993.
 J. Eckstein and B. F. Svaiter, “A family of projective splitting methods for
the sum of two maximal monotone operators,” Mathematical Programming,
vol. 111, no. 1-2, p. 173, 2008.
 J. Eckstein and B. F. Svaiter, “General projective splitting methods for sums
of maximal monotone operators,” SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization,
vol. 48, pp. 787–811, 2009.
 E. Esser, “Applications of Lagrangian-based alternating direction methods
and connections to split Bregman,” CAM report, vol. 9, p. 31, 2009.
 H. Everett, “Generalized Lagrange multiplier method for solving problems of
optimum allocation of resources,” Operations Research, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 399–
417, 1963.
 M. J. Fadili and J. L. Starck, “Monotone operator splitting for optimization
problems in sparse recovery,” IEEE ICIP, 2009.
 A. V. Fiacco and G. P. McCormick, Nonlinear Programming: Sequential
Unconstrained Minimization Techniques. Society for Industrial and Applied
Mathematics, 1990. First published in 1968 by Research Analysis Corporation.
 M. A. T. Figueiredo and J. M. Bioucas-Dias, “Restoration of Poissonian
Images Using Alternating Direction Optimization,” IEEE Transactions on
Image Processing, vol. 19, pp. 3133–3145, 2010.
 M. A. T. Figueiredo, R. D. Nowak, and S. J. Wright, “Gradient projection
for sparse reconstruction: Application to compressed sensing and other inverse
problems,” IEEE Journal on Selected Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 1, no. 4,
pp. 586–597, 2007.
 P. A. Forero, A. Cano, and G. B. Giannakis, “Consensus-based distributed
support vector machines,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 11,
pp. 1663–1707, 2010.
 M. Fortin and R. Glowinski, Augmented Lagrangian Methods: Applications to
the Numerical Solution of Boundary-Value Problems. North-Holland: Amsterdam, 1983.
 M. Fortin and R. Glowinski, “On decomposition-coordination methods using
an augmented Lagrangian,” in Augmented Lagrangian Methods: Applications
to the Solution of Boundary-Value Problems, (M. Fortin and R. Glowinski,
eds.), North-Holland: Amsterdam, 1983.
 M. Forum, MPI: A Message-Passing Interface Standard, version 2.2. High-
Performance Computing Center: Stuttgart, 2009.
 Y. Freund and R. Schapire, “A decision-theoretic generalization of on-line
learning and an application to boosting,” in Computational Learning Theory,
pp. 23–37, Springer, 1995.
References
 J. Friedman, T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani, “Sparse inverse covariance estimation with the graphical lasso,” Biostatistics, vol. 9, no. 3, p. 432, 2008.
 M. Fukushima, “Application of the alternating direction method of multipliers to separable convex programming problems,” Computational Optimization
and Applications, vol. 1, pp. 93–111, 1992.
 D. Gabay, “Applications of the method of multipliers to variational inequalities,” in Augmented Lagrangian Methods: Applications to the Solution of
Boundary-Value Problems, (M. Fortin and R. Glowinski, eds.), North-Holland:
Amsterdam, 1983.
 D. Gabay and B. Mercier, “A dual algorithm for the solution of nonlinear variational problems via ﬁnite element approximations,” Computers and Mathematics with Applications, vol. 2, pp. 17–40, 1976.
 M. Galassi, J. Davies, J. Theiler, B. Gough, G. Jungman, M. Booth, and
F. Rossi, GNU Scientiﬁc Library Reference Manual. Network Theory Ltd.,
third ed., 2002.
 A. M. Geoﬀrion, “Generalized Benders decomposition,” Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 237–260, 1972.
 S. Ghemawat, H. Gobioﬀ, and S. T. Leung, “The Google ﬁle system,” ACM
SIGOPS Operating Systems Review, vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 29–43, 2003.
 R. Glowinski and A. Marrocco, “Sur l’approximation, par elements ﬁnis
d’ordre un, et la resolution, par penalisation-dualit´e, d’une classe de problems
de Dirichlet non lineares,” Revue Fran¸caise d’Automatique, Informatique, et
Recherche Op´erationelle, vol. 9, pp. 41–76, 1975.
 R. Glowinski and P. L. Tallec, “Augmented Lagrangian methods for the
solution of variational problems,” Tech. Rep. 2965, University of Wisconsin-
Madison, 1987.
 T. Goldstein and S. Osher, “The split Bregman method for ℓ1 regularized
problems,” SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 323–343,
 E. G. Gol’shtein and N. V. Tret’yakov, “Modiﬁed Lagrangians in convex programming and their generalizations,” Point-to-Set Maps and Mathematical
Programming, pp. 86–97, 1979.
 G. H. Golub and C. F. van Loan, Matrix Computations. Johns Hopkins University Press, third ed., 1996.
 D. Gregor and A. Lumsdaine, “The Parallel BGL: A generic library for distributed graph computations,” Parallel Object-Oriented Scientiﬁc Computing,
 A. Halevy, P. Norvig, and F. Pereira, “The Unreasonable Eﬀectiveness of
Data,” IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 24, no. 2, 2009.
 K. B. Hall, S. Gilpin, and G. Mann, “MapReduce/BigTable for distributed
optimization,” in Neural Information Processing Systems: Workshop on
Learning on Cores, Clusters, and Clouds, 2010.
 T. Hastie and R. Tibshirani, Generalized Additive Models. Chapman & Hall,
 T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman, The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference and Prediction. Springer, second ed., 2009.
References
 B. S. He, H. Yang, and S. L. Wang, “Alternating direction method with selfadaptive penalty parameters for monotone variational inequalities,” Journal
of Optimization Theory and Applications, vol. 106, no. 2, pp. 337–356, 2000.
 M. R. Hestenes, “Multiplier and gradient methods,” Journal of Optimization
Theory and Applications, vol. 4, pp. 302–320, 1969.
 M. R. Hestenes, “Multiplier and gradient methods,” in Computing Methods
in Optimization Problems, (L. A. Zadeh, L. W. Neustadt, and A. V. Balakrishnan, eds.), Academic Press, 1969.
 J.-B. Hiriart-Urruty and C. Lemar´echal, Fundamentals of Convex Analysis.
Springer, 2001.
 P. J. Huber, “Robust estimation of a location parameter,” Annals of Mathematical Statistics, vol. 35, pp. 73–101, 1964.
 S.-J. Kim, K. Koh, S. Boyd, and D. Gorinevsky, “ℓ1 Trend ﬁltering,” SIAM
Review, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 339–360, 2009.
 S.-J. Kim, K. Koh, M. Lustig, S. Boyd, and D. Gorinevsky, “An interior-point
method for large-scale ℓ1-regularized least squares,” IEEE Journal of Selected
Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 606–617, 2007.
 K. Koh, S.-J. Kim, and S. Boyd, “An interior-point method for large-scale ℓ1regularized logistic regression,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 1,
no. 8, pp. 1519–1555, 2007.
 D. Koller and N. Friedman, Probabilistic Graphical Models: Principles and
Techniques. MIT Press, 2009.
 S. A. Kontogiorgis, Alternating directions methods for the parallel solution of
large-scale block-structured optimization problems. PhD thesis, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, 1994.
 S. A. Kontogiorgis and R. R. Meyer, “A variable-penalty alternating directions method for convex optimization,” Mathematical Programming, vol. 83,
pp. 29–53, 1998.
 L. S. Lasdon, Optimization Theory for Large Systems. MacMillan, 1970.
 J. Lawrence and J. E. Spingarn, “On ﬁxed points of non-expansive piecewise
isometric mappings,” Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, vol. 3,
no. 3, p. 605, 1987.
 C. L. Lawson, R. J. Hanson, D. R. Kincaid, and F. T. Krogh, “Basic linear
algebra subprograms for Fortran usage,” ACM Transactions on Mathematical
Software, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 308–323, 1979.
 D. D. Lee and H. S. Seung, “Algorithms for non-negative matrix factorization,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 13, 2001.
 J. Lin and M. Schatz, “Design Patterns for Eﬃcient Graph Algorithms in
MapReduce,” in Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Mining and Learning
with Graphs, pp. 78–85, 2010.
 P. L. Lions and B. Mercier, “Splitting algorithms for the sum of two nonlinear
operators,” SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis, vol. 16, pp. 964–979, 1979.
 D. C. Liu and J. Nocedal, “On the Limited Memory Method for Large Scale
Optimization,” Mathematical Programming B, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 503–528,
References
 Y. Low, J. Gonzalez, A. Kyrola, D. Bickson, C. Guestrin, and J. M. Hellerstein,
“GraphLab: A New Parallel Framework for Machine Learning,” in Conference
on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2010.
 Z. Lu, “Smooth optimization approach for sparse covariance selection,” SIAM
Journal on Optimization, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 1807–1827, 2009.
 Z. Lu, T. K. Pong, and Y. Zhang, “An Alternating Direction Method for
Finding Dantzig Selectors,” arXiv:1011.4604, 2010.
 D. G. Luenberger, Introduction to Linear and Nonlinear Programming.
Addison-Wesley: Reading, MA, 1973.
 J. Mairal, R. Jenatton, G. Obozinski, and F. Bach, “Network ﬂow algorithms
for structured sparsity,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
vol. 24, 2010.
 G. Malewicz, M. H. Austern, A. J. C. Bik, J. C. Dehnert, I. Horn, N. Leiser,
and G. Czajkowski, “Pregel: A system for large-scale graph processing,” in
Proceedings of the 2010 International Conference on Management of Data,
pp. 135–146, 2010.
 A. F. T. Martins, M. A. T. Figueiredo, P. M. Q. Aguiar, N. A. Smith, and E. P.
Xing, “An Augmented Lagrangian Approach to Constrained MAP Inference,”
in International Conference on Machine Learning, 2011.
 G. Mateos, J.-A. Bazerque, and G. B. Giannakis, “Distributed sparse linear
regression,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 58, pp. 5262–5276,
Oct. 2010.
 P. J. McCullagh and J. A. Nelder, Generalized Linear Models. Chapman &
Hall, 1991.
 N. Meinshausen and P. B¨uhlmann, “High-dimensional graphs and variable
selection with the lasso,” Annals of Statistics, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 1436–1462,
 A. Miele, E. E. Cragg, R. R. Iver, and A. V. Levy, “Use of the augmented
penalty function in mathematical programming problems, part 1,” Journal of
Optimization Theory and Applications, vol. 8, pp. 115–130, 1971.
 A. Miele, E. E. Cragg, and A. V. Levy, “Use of the augmented penalty function
in mathematical programming problems, part 2,” Journal of Optimization
Theory and Applications, vol. 8, pp. 131–153, 1971.
 A. Miele, P. E. Mosely, A. V. Levy, and G. M. Coggins, “On the method of
multipliers for mathematical programming problems,” Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications, vol. 10, pp. 1–33, 1972.
 J.-J. Moreau, “Fonctions convexes duales et points proximaux dans un espace
Hilbertien,” Reports of the Paris Academy of Sciences, Series A, vol. 255,
pp. 2897–2899, 1962.
 D. Mosk-Aoyama, T. Roughgarden, and D. Shah, “Fully distributed algorithms for convex optimization problems,” Available at 
stanford.edu/˜tim/papers/distrcvxopt.pdf, 2007.
 I. Necoara and J. A. K. Suykens, “Application of a smoothing technique
to decomposition in convex optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic
Control, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 2674–2679, 2008.
References
 A. Nedi´c and A. Ozdaglar, “Distributed subgradient methods for multiagent optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 54, no. 1,
pp. 48–61, 2009.
 A. Nedi´c and A. Ozdaglar, “Cooperative distributed multi-agent optimization,” in Convex Optimization in Signal Processing and Communications,
(D. P. Palomar and Y. C. Eldar, eds.), Cambridge University Press, 2010.
 Y. Nesterov, “A method of solving a convex programming problem with
convergence rate O(1/k2),” Soviet Mathematics Doklady, vol. 27, no. 2,
pp. 372–376, 1983.
 Y. Nesterov, “Gradient methods for minimizing composite objective function,”
CORE Discussion Paper, Catholic University of Louvain, vol. 76, p. 2007,
 M. Ng, P. Weiss, and X. Yuang, “Solving Constrained Total-Variation Image
Restoration and Reconstruction Problems via Alternating Direction Methods,” ICM Research Report, Available at 
org/DB_FILE/2009/10/2434.pdf, 2009.
 J. Nocedal and S. J. Wright, Numerical Optimization. Springer-Verlag, 1999.
 H. Ohlsson, L. Ljung, and S. Boyd, “Segmentation of ARX-models using sumof-norms regularization,” Automatica, vol. 46, pp. 1107–1111, 2010.
 D. W. Peaceman and H. H. Rachford, “The numerical solution of parabolic
and elliptic diﬀerential equations,” Journal of the Society for Industrial and
Applied Mathematics, vol. 3, pp. 28–41, 1955.
 M. J. D. Powell, “A method for nonlinear constraints in minimization problems,” in Optimization, (R. Fletcher, ed.), Academic Press, 1969.
 A. Ribeiro, I. Schizas, S. Roumeliotis, and G. Giannakis, “Kalman ﬁltering in
wireless sensor networks — Incorporating communication cost in state estimation problems,” IEEE Control Systems Magazine, vol. 30, pp. 66–86, Apr.
 R. T. Rockafellar, Convex Analysis. Princeton University Press, 1970.
 R. T. Rockafellar, “Augmented Lagrangians and applications of the proximal point algorithm in convex programming,” Mathematics of Operations
Research, vol. 1, pp. 97–116, 1976.
 R. T. Rockafellar, “Monotone operators and the proximal point algorithm,”
SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, vol. 14, p. 877, 1976.
 R. T. Rockafellar and R. J.-B. Wets, “Scenarios and policy aggregation in
optimization under uncertainty,” Mathematics of Operations Research, vol. 16,
no. 1, pp. 119–147, 1991.
 R. T. Rockafellar and R. J.-B. Wets, Variational Analysis. Springer-Verlag,
 L. Rudin, S. J. Osher, and E. Fatemi, “Nonlinear total variation based noise
removal algorithms,” Physica D, vol. 60, pp. 259–268, 1992.
 A. Ruszczy´nski, “An augmented Lagrangian decomposition method for block
diagonal linear programming problems,” Operations Research Letters, vol. 8,
no. 5, pp. 287–294, 1989.
 A. Ruszczy´nski, “On convergence of an augmented Lagrangian decomposition
method for sparse convex optimization,” Mathematics of Operations Research,
vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 634–656, 1995.
References
 K. Scheinberg, S. Ma, and D. Goldfarb, “Sparse inverse covariance selection
via alternating linearization methods,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2010.
 I. D. Schizas, G. Giannakis, S. Roumeliotis, and A. Ribeiro, “Consensus in ad
hoc WSNs with noisy links — part II: Distributed estimation and smoothing of
random signals,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 56, pp. 1650–
1666, Apr. 2008.
 I. D. Schizas, A. Ribeiro, and G. B. Giannakis, “Consensus in ad hoc WSNs
with noisy links — part I: Distributed estimation of deterministic signals,”
IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 56, pp. 350–364, Jan. 2008.
 B. Sch¨olkopf and A. J. Smola, Learning with Kernels: Support Vector
Machines, Regularization, Optimization, and Beyond. MIT Press, 2002.
 N. Z. Shor, Minimization Methods for Non-Diﬀerentiable Functions. Springer-
Verlag, 1985.
 J. E. Spingarn, “Applications of the method of partial inverses to convex programming: decomposition,” Mathematical Programming, vol. 32, pp. 199–223,
 G. Steidl and T. Teuber, “Removing multiplicative noise by Douglas-Rachford
splitting methods,” Journal of Mathematical Imaging and Vision, vol. 36,
no. 2, pp. 168–184, 2010.
 C. H. Teo, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, A. J. Smola, and Q. V. Le, “Bundle methods for regularized risk minimization,” Journal of Machine Learning Research,
vol. 11, pp. 311–365, 2010.
 R. Tibshirani, “Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso,” Journal of
the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, vol. 58, pp. 267–288, 1996.
 P. Tseng, “Applications of a splitting algorithm to decomposition in convex
programming and variational inequalities.,” SIAM Journal on Control and
Optimization, vol. 29, pp. 119–138, 1991.
 P. Tseng, “Alternating projection-proximal methods for convex programming and variational inequalities,” SIAM Journal on Optimization, vol. 7,
pp. 951–965, 1997.
 P. Tseng, “A modiﬁed forward-backward splitting method for maximal monotone mappings,” SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, vol. 38, p. 431,
 J. N. Tsitsiklis, Problems in decentralized decision making and computation.
PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1984.
 J. N. Tsitsiklis, D. P. Bertsekas, and M. Athans, “Distributed asynchronous
deterministic and stochastic gradient optimization algorithms,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 31, no. 9, pp. 803–812, 1986.
 H. Uzawa, “Market mechanisms and mathematical programming,” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 872–881, 1960.
 H. Uzawa, “Walras’ tˆatonnement in the theory of exchange,” The Review of
Economic Studies, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 182–194, 1960.
 L. G. Valiant, “A bridging model for parallel computation,” Communications
of the ACM, vol. 33, no. 8, p. 111, 1990.
References
 V. N. Vapnik, The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory. Springer-Verlag,
 J. von Neumann, Functional Operators, Volume 2: The Geometry of Orthogonal Spaces. Princeton University Press: Annals of Mathematics Studies, 1950.
Reprint of 1933 lecture notes.
 M. J. Wainwright and M. I. Jordan, “Graphical models, exponential families, and variational inference,” Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning,
vol. 1, no. 1-2, pp. 1–305, 2008.
 L. Walras, ´El´ements d’´economie politique pure, ou, Th´eorie de la richesse
sociale. F. Rouge, 1896.
 S. L. Wang and L. Z. Liao, “Decomposition method with a variable parameter
for a class of monotone variational inequality problems,” Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications, vol. 109, no. 2, pp. 415–429, 2001.
 T. White, Hadoop: The Deﬁnitive Guide. O’Reilly Press, second ed., 2010.
 J. M. Wooldridge, Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach. South
Western College Publications, fourth ed., 2009.
 L. Xiao and S. Boyd, “Fast linear iterations for distributed averaging,” Systems
& Control Letters, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 65–78, 2004.
 A. Y. Yang, A. Ganesh, Z. Zhou, S. S. Sastry, and Y. Ma, “A Review of Fast
ℓ1-Minimization Algorithms for Robust Face Recognition,” arXiv:1007.3753,
 J. Yang and X. Yuan, “An inexact alternating direction method for
trace norm regularized least squares problem,” Available at 
optimization-online.org, 2010.
 J. Yang and Y. Zhang, “Alternating direction algorithms for ℓ1-problems in
compressive sensing,” Preprint, 2009.
 W. Yin, S. Osher, D. Goldfarb, and J. Darbon, “Bregman iterative algorithms
for ℓ1-minimization with applications to compressed sensing,” SIAM Journal
on Imaging Sciences, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 143–168, 2008.
 M. Yuan and Y. Lin, “Model selection and estimation in regression with
grouped variables,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 49–67, 2006.
 X. M. Yuan, “Alternating direction methods for sparse covariance selection,” Preprint, Available at 
FILE/2009/09/2390.pdf, 2009.
 M. Zaharia, M. Chowdhury, M. J. Franklin, S. Shenker, and I. Stoica, “Spark:
Cluster computing with working sets,” in Proceedings of the 2nd USENIX
Conference on Hot Topics in Cloud Computing, 2010.
 T. Zhang, “Statistical behavior and consistency of classiﬁcation methods based
on convex risk minimization,” Annals of Statistics, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 56–85,
 P. Zhao, G. Rocha, and B. Yu, “The composite absolute penalties family
for grouped and hierarchical variable selection,” Annals of Statistics, vol. 37,
no. 6A, pp. 3468–3497, 2009.