International Journal on Document Analysis and Recognition (IJDAR) 23:89–102
 
ORIGINAL PAPER
Fast multi-language LSTM-based online handwriting recognition
Victor Carbune1 · Pedro Gonnet1 · Thomas Deselaers1 · Henry A. Rowley2 · Alexander Daryin1 · Marcos Calvo1 ·
Li-Lun Wang2 · Daniel Keysers1 · Sandro Feuz1 · Philippe Gervais1
Received: 8 August 2019 / Revised: 20 December 2019 / Accepted: 24 January 2020 / Published online: 8 February 2020
© The Author(s) 2020
We describe an online handwriting system that is able to support 102 languages using a deep neural network architecture. This
new system has completely replaced our previous segment-and-decode-based system and reduced the error rate by 20–40%
relative for most languages. Further, we report new state-of-the-art results on IAM-OnDB for both the open and closed dataset
setting. The system combines methods from sequence recognition with a new input encoding using Bézier curves. This leads
to up to 10× faster recognition times compared to our previous system. Through a series of experiments, we determine the
optimal conﬁguration of our models and report the results of our setup on a number of additional public datasets.
1 Introduction
In this paper, we discuss online handwriting recognition:
Given a user input in the form of an ink, i.e., a list of touch
or pen strokes, output the textual interpretation of this input.
A stroke is a sequence of points (x, y, t) with position (x, y)
and timestamp t.
B Victor Carbune
 
Pedro Gonnet
 
Thomas Deselaers
 
Henry A. Rowley
 
Alexander Daryin
 
Marcos Calvo
 
Li-Lun Wang
 
Daniel Keysers
 
Sandro Feuz
 
Philippe Gervais
 
Google, Zurich, Switzerland
Mountain View, CA, USA
Figure 1 illustrates example inputs to our online handwriting recognition system in different languages and scripts. The
left column shows examples in English with different writing
styles, with different types of content, and that may be written
on one or multiple lines. The center column shows examples
from ﬁve different alphabetic languages similar in structure
to English: German, Russian, Vietnamese, Greek, and Georgian. The right column shows scripts that are signiﬁcantly
different from English: Chinese has a much larger set of more
complex characters, and users often overlap characters with
one another. Korean, while an alphabetic language, groups
letters in syllables leading to a large “alphabet” of syllables.
Hindi writing often contains a connecting “Shirorekha” line,
and characters can form larger structures (grapheme clusters) which inﬂuence the written shape of the components.
Arabic is written right-to-left (with embedded left-to-right
sequences used for numbers or English names), and characters change shape depending on their position within a
word. Emoji are non-text Unicode symbols that we also
recognize.
Online handwriting recognition has recently been gaining
importance for multiple reasons: (a) An increasing number
of people in emerging markets are obtaining access to computing devices, many exclusively using mobile devices with
touchscreens. Many of these users have native languages and
scripts that are not as easily typed as English, e.g., due to the
size of the alphabet or the use of grapheme clusters which
makes it difﬁcult to design an intuitive keyboard layout .
(b) More and more large mobile devices with styluses are
V. Carbune et al.
Fig. 1 Example inputs for online handwriting recognition in different
languages. See text for details
becoming available, such as the iPad Pro,1 Microsoft Surface devices,2 and Chromebooks with styluses.3
Early work in online handwriting recognition looked at
segment-and-decode classiﬁers, such as the Newton .
Another line of work focused on solving online handwriting recognition by making use of hidden Markov models (HMMs) or hybrid approaches combining HMMs
and Feed-forward Neural Networks . The ﬁrst HMMfree models were based on time delay neural networks
(TDNNs) , and more recent work focuses on recurrent neural network (RNN) variants such as long short-term
memory networks (LSTMs) .
How to represent online handwriting data has been a
research topic for a long time. Early approaches were
feature-based, where each point is represented using a set
of features , or using global features to represent
entire characters . More recently, the deep learning revolution has swept away most feature engineering efforts and
replaced them with learned representations in many domains,
e.g., speech , computer vision , and natural language
processing .
Together with architecture changes, training methodologies also changed, moving from relying on explicit
segmentation to implicit segmentation using the
connectionist temporal classiﬁcation (CTC) loss , or
encoder–decoder approaches trained with Maximum Likelihood Estimation . Further recent work is also described
The transition to more complex network architectures and
end-to-end training can be associated with breakthroughs
in related ﬁelds focused on sequence understanding where
deep learning methods have outperformed “traditional” pattern recognition methods, e.g., in speech recognition ,
1 
2 
3 
OCR , ofﬂine handwriting recognition , and computer vision .
In this paper, we describe our new online handwriting recognition system based on deep learning methods.
It replaces our previous segment-and-decode system ,
which ﬁrst over-segments the ink, then groups the segments
into character hypotheses, and computes features for each
character hypothesis which are then classiﬁed as characters
using a rather shallow neural network. The recognition result
is then obtained using a best path search decoding algorithm on the lattice of hypotheses incorporating additional
knowledge sources such as language models. This system
relies on numerous preprocessing, segmentation, and feature extraction heuristics which are no longer present in
our new system. The new system reduces the amount of
customization required, and consists of a simple stack of
bidirectional LSTMs (BLSTMs), a single Logits layer, and
the CTC loss (Sect. 2). We train a separate model for
each script (Sect. 3). To support potentially many languages
per script (see Table 1), language-speciﬁc language models
and feature functions are used during decoding (Sect. 2.5).
For example, we have a single recognition model for Arabic script which is combined with speciﬁc language models
and feature functions for our Arabic, Persian, and Urdu language recognizers. Table 1 shows the full list of scripts and
languages that we currently support.
The new models are more accurate (Sect. 4), smaller, and
faster (Table 2) than our previous segment-and-decode models and eliminate the need for a large number of engineered
features and heuristics.
We present an extensive comparison of the differences
in recognition accuracy for eight languages (Sect. 5) and
compare the accuracy of models trained on publicly available
datasets where available (Sect. 4). In addition, we propose a
new standard experimental protocol for the IBM-UB-1 dataset to enable easier comparison between approaches in
the future (Sect. 4.2).
The main contributions of our paper are as follows:
– We describe in detail our recurrent neural networkbased recognition stack and provide a description of
how we tuned the model. We also provide a detailed
experimental comparison with the previous segmentand-decode-based stack on the supported languages.
– We describe a novel input representation based on
Bézier curve interpolation, which produces shorter input
sequences, which results in faster recognitions.
– Our system achieves a new state of the art on the IAM-
OnDB dataset, both for open and closed training sets.
– We introduce an evaluation protocol for the less commonly used English IBM-UB-1 query dataset. We provide experimental results that quantify the structural
Fast multi-language LSTM-based online handwriting recognition
Table 1 List of languages supported in our system grouped by script
Afrikaans, Azerbaijani, Bosnian, Catalan, Cebuano, Corsican, Czech, Welsh, Danish, German, English,
Esperanto, Spanish, Estonian, Basque, Finnish, Filipino, French, Western Frisian, Irish, Scottish Gaelic,
Galician, Hawaiian, Hmong, Croatian, Haitian Creole, Hungarian, Indonesian, Icelandic, Italian,
Javanese, Kurdish, Latin, Luxembourgish, Lao, Lithuanian, Latvian, Malagasy, Maori, Malay, Maltese,
Norwegian, Dutch, Nyanja, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Slovak, Slovenian, Samoan, Shona, Somali,
Albanian, Sundanese, Swedish, Swahili, Turkish, Xhosa, Zulu
Russian, Belarusian, Bulgarian, Kazakh, Mongolian, Serbian, Ukrainian, Uzbek, Macedonian, Kyrgyz,
Simpliﬁed Chinese, Traditional Chinese, Cantonese
Arabic, Persian, Urdu
Devanagari
Hindi, Marathi, Nepali
Bangla, Assamese
Amharic, Tigrinya
Languages with distinct scripts: Armenian, Burmese, Georgian, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Japanese,
Kannada, Khmer, Korean, Lao, Malayalam, Odia, Punjabi, Sinhala, Tamil, Telugu, Thai, Tibetan,
Vietnamesea
aWhile Vietnamese is a Latin-script language, we have a dedicated model for it because of the large amount of diacritics not used in other Latin-script
Table 2 Character error rates on the validation data using successively
more of the system components described above for English (en), Spanish (es), German (de), Arabic (ar), Korean (ko), Thai (th), Hindi (hi),
and Chinese (zh) along with the respective number of items and characters in the test and training datasets. Average latencies for all languages
and models were computed on an Intel Xeon E5-2690 CPU running at
Internal test data (per language)
Characters
Internal training data (per script)
Characters
15,850,724
Unique supported characters
Segment-and-decode 
BLSTM (comparison) 
Model architecture (this work)
(2) BLSTM-CTC baseline curves
(3) + n-gram LM
(4) + character classes
(5) + word LM
Avg. latency per item
Segment-and-decode 
Number of parameters (per script)
Segment-and-decode 
V. Carbune et al.
Fig. 2 An overview our
recognition models. In our
architecture, the input
representation is passed through
one or more bidirectional LSTM
layers, and a ﬁnal softmax layer
makes a classiﬁcation decision
for the output at each time step
difference between IBM-UB-1, IAM-OnDB, and our
internal dataset.
– We perform ablation studies and report results on numerous experiments highlighting the contributions of the
individual components of the new recognition stack on
our internal datasets.
2 End-to-end model architecture
Our handwriting recognition model draws its inspiration
from research aimed at building end-to-end transcription
models in the context of handwriting recognition , optical
character recognition , and acoustic modeling in speech
recognition . The model architecture is constructed from
common neural network blocks, i.e., bidirectional LSTMs
and fully connected layers (Fig. 2). It is trained in an end-toend manner using the CTC loss .
Our architecture is similar to what is often used in the
context of acoustic modeling for speech recognition , in
which it is referred to as a CLDNN (Convolutions, LSTMs,
and DNNs), yet we differ from it in four points. Firstly, we do
not use convolution layers, which in our own experience do
not add value for large networks trained on large datasets of
relatively short (compared to speech input) sequences typically seen in handwriting recognition. Secondly, we use
bidirectional LSTMs, which due to latency constraints is not
feasible in speech recognition systems. Thirdly, our architecture does not make use of additional fully connected layers
before and after the bidirectional LSTM layers. And ﬁnally,
we train our system using the CTC loss, as opposed to the
HMMs used in .
This structure makes many components of our previous
system unnecessary, e.g., feature extraction and segmentation. The heuristics that were hard-coded into our previous
system, e.g., stroke-reordering and character hypothesis
building, are now implicitly learned from the training data.
The model takes as input a time series (v1, . . . , vT ) of
length T encoding the user input (Sect. 2.1) and passes it
through several bidirectional LSTM layers which learn
the structure of characters (Sect. 2.2).
The output of the ﬁnal LSTM layer is passed through a
softmax layer (Sect. 2.3) leading to a sequence of probability
distributions over characters for each time step.
For CTC decoding (Sect. 3.1), we use beam search to
combine the softmax outputs with character-based language
models, word-based language models, and information about
language-speciﬁc characters as in our previous system .
2.1 Input representation
In our earlier paper , we presented results on our datasets
with a model similar to the one proposed in . In that
model, we used 23 per-point features (similar to ) as
described in our segment-and-decode system to represent
the input. In further experimentation, we found that in substantially deeper and wider models, engineered features are
unnecessary and their removal leads to better results. This
conﬁrms the observation that learned representations often
outperform handcrafted features in scenarios in which sufﬁcient training data are available, e.g., in computer vision 
and in speech recognition . In the experiments presented
here, we use two representations:
2.1.1 Raw touch points
The simplest representation of stroke data is as a sequence
of touch points. In our current system, we use a sequence of
5-dimensional points (xi, yi, ti, pi, ni) where (xi, yi) are the
coordinates of the ith touchpoint, ti is the timestamp of the
touchpoint since the ﬁrst touch point in the current observation in seconds, pi indicates whether the point corresponds to
a pen-up (pi = 0) or pen-down (pi = 1) stroke, and ni = 1
indicates the start of a new stroke (ni = 0 otherwise).4
In order to keep the system as ﬂexible as possible with
respect to differences in the writing surface, e.g., area shape,
4 We acknowledge a redundancy between the features pi and ni which
evolved over time from experimenting with explicit pressure data. We
did not perform additional experiments to avoid this redundancy at this
time but do not expect a large change in results when dropping either
of these features.
Fast multi-language LSTM-based online handwriting recognition
size, spatial resolution, and sampling rate, we perform some
minimal preprocessing:
– Normalization of xi and yi coordinates, by shifting in x
such that x0 = 0, and shifting and scaling the writing
area isometrically such that the y coordinate spans the
range between 0 and 1. In cases where the bounding box
of the writing area is unknown, we use a surrogate area
20% larger than the observed range of touch points.
– Equidistant linear resampling along the strokes with δ =
0.05, i.e., a line of length 1 will have 20 points.
We do not assume that words are written on a ﬁxed baseline or
that the input is horizontal. As in , we use the differences
between consecutive points for the (x, y) coordinates and
the time t such that our input sequence is (xi −xi−1, yi −
yi−1, ti −ti−1, pi, ni) for i > 0, and (0, 0, 0, p0, n0) for
2.1.2 Bézier curves
However simple, the raw input data have some drawbacks,
– Resolution: Not all input devices sample inputs at the
same rate, resulting in different point densities along the
input strokes, requiring resampling which may inadvertently normalize-out details in the input.
– Length: We choose the (re-)sampling rate such as to
represent the smallest features well, which leads to oversampling in less interesting parts of the stroke, e.g., in
straight lines.
– Model complexity: The model has to learn to map small
consecutive steps to larger global features.
Bézier curves are a natural way to describe trajectories in
space, and have been used to represent online handwriting
data in the past, yet mostly as a means of removing outliers
in the input data , up-sampling sparse data , or for
rendering handwriting data smoothly on a screen . Since
a sequence of Bézier curves can represent a potentially long
point sequence compactly, irrespective of the original sampling rate, we propose to represent a sequence of input points
as a sequence of parametric cubic polynomials, and to use
these as inputs to the recognition model.
These Bézier curves for x, y, and t are cubic polynomials
in s ∈ :
x(s) = α0 + α1s + α2s2 + α3s3
y(s) = β0 + β1s + β2s2 + β3s3
t(s) = γ0 + γ1s + γ2s2 + γ3s3
We start by normalizing the size of the entire ink such that
the y values are within the range , similar to how we
process it for raw points. The time values are scaled linearly
to match the length of the ink such that
tN−1 −t0 =
(xi −xi−1)2 + (yi −yi−1)21/2
in order to obtain values in the same numerical range as x
and y. This sets the time difference between the ﬁrst and last
points of the stroke to be equal to the total spatial length of
the stroke.
For each stroke in an ink, the coefﬁcients α, β, and γ are
computed by minimizing the sum of squared errors (SSE)
between each observed point i and its corresponding closest
point (deﬁned by si) on the Bézier curve:
(xi −x(si))2 + (yi −y(si))2 + (ti −t(si))2 .
where N is the number of points in the stroke. Given a set
of coordinates si, computing the coefﬁcients corresponds to
solving the following linear system of equations:
which can be solved exactly for N ≤4, and in the leastsquares sense otherwise, e.g., by solving the normalized
V TZ = V TV Ω.
for the coefﬁcients Ω. We alternate between minimizing the
SSE in Eq. (3) and ﬁnding the corresponding points si, until
convergence. The coordinates si are updated using a Newton
x′(si)(xi −x(si)) + y′(si)(yi −y(si)) = 0,
which is zero when (xi −x(si), yi −y(si)) is orthogonal to
the direction of the curve (x′(si), y′(si)).
If (a) the curve cannot ﬁt the points well (SSE error is
too large) or if (b) the curve has too sharp bends (arc length
longer than 3 times the endpoint distance), we split the curve
into two parts. We determine the split point in case (a) by
ﬁnding the triplet of consecutive points with the smallest
V. Carbune et al.
Fig. 3 Parameterization of each Bézier curve used to feed the network.
Namely: vector between the endpoints (blue), distance between the
control points and the endpoints (green dashed lines, 2 values), and the
two angles between each control point and the endpoints (green arcs, 2
values) (color ﬁgure online)
angle, and in case (b) as the point closest to the maximum
local curvature along the entire Bézier curve. This heuristic
is applied recursively until both the curve matching criteria
As a ﬁnal step, to remove spurious breakpoints, consecutive curves that can be represented by a single curve are
stitched back together, resulting in a compact set of Bézier
curves representing the data within the above constraints. For
each consecutive pair of curves, we try to ﬁt a single curve
using the combined set of underlying points. If the ﬁt agrees
with the above criteria, we replace the two curves by the new
one. This is applied repeatedly until no merging happens
Since the Bézier coefﬁcients α, β, and γ may vary signiﬁcantly in range, each curve is fed to the network as a
10-dimensional vector (dx, dy, d1, d2, α1, α2, γ1, γ2, γ3, p),
– dx, dy: the vector between the endpoints (cp. Fig. 3)
– d1, d2: the distance between the control points and the
endpoints relative to the distance between the endpoints
(cp. Fig. 3),
– α1, α2: the angles between control points and endpoints
in radians (cp. Fig. 3),
– γ1, γ2 and γ3: the time coefﬁcients from Eq. 1,
– p: a Boolean value indicating whether this is a pen-up or
pen-down curve.
Due to the normalization of the x, y, and t coordinates, as
well as the constraints on the curves themselves, most of the
resulting values are in the range [−1, 1].
The resulting sequences of 10-dimensional curve representations are roughly 4× shorter than the corresponding
5-dimensional raw representation (Sect.2.1.1) because each
Bezier curve represents multiple points. This leads to faster
recognition and thus better latency.
In most of the cases, as highlighted through the experimental sections in this paper, the curve representations do
not have a big impact on accuracy but contribute to faster
speed of our models.
2.2 Bidirectional long short-term memory recurrent
neural networks
LSTMs have become one of the most commonly
used RNN cells because they are easy to train and give
good results . In all experiments, we use bidirectional
LSTMs , i.e., we process the input sequence forward
andbackwardandmergetheoutputstatesofeachlayerbefore
feeding them to the next layer. The exact number of layers
and nodes is determined empirically for each script. We give
an overview of the impact of the number of nodes and layers
in Sect. 4. We also list the conﬁgurations for several scripts
in our production system, as of this writing.
2.3 Softmax layer
The output of the LSTM layers at each timestep is fed into
a softmax layer to get a probability distribution over the C
possible characters in the script (including spaces, punctuation marks, numbers or other special characters), plus the
blank label required by the CTC loss and decoder.
2.4 Decoding
The output of the softmax layer is a sequence of T time
steps of (C + 1) classes that we decode using CTC decoding . The logits from the softmax layer are combined with
language-speciﬁc prior knowledge (cp. Sect. 2.5). For each
of these additional knowledge sources, we learn a weight
(called “decoder weight” in the following) and combine them
linearly (cp. Sect. 3). The learned combination is used as
described in to guide the beam search during decoding.
This combination of different knowledge sources allows
us to train one recognition model per script (e.g., Latin script,
or Cyrillic script) and then use it to serve multiple languages
(see Table 1).
2.5 Feature functions: language models and
character classes
Similar to our previous work , we deﬁne several scoring
functions, which we refer to as feature functions. The goal of
these feature functions is to introduce prior knowledge about
the underlying language into the system. The introduction of
BaseBeamScorer
github.com/tensorﬂow/tensorﬂow/blob/master/tensorﬂow/
core/util/ctc/ctc_beam_scorer.h)
CTCBeamSearchDecoder implementation in TensorFlow .
Fast multi-language LSTM-based online handwriting recognition
recurrent neural networks has reduced the need for many of
them, and we now use only the following three:
– Character language models: For each language we support, we build a 7-gram language model over Unicode codepoints from a large web-mined text corpus
using Stupid back-off . The ﬁnal ﬁles are pruned to
10million 7-grams each. Compared to our previous system , we found that language model size has a smaller
impact on the recognition accuracy, which is likely due
to the capability of recurrent neural networks to capture
dependencies between consecutive characters. We therefore use smaller language models over shorter contexts.
– Word language models: For languages using spaces to
separatewords,wealsouseaword-basedlanguagemodel
trainedonasimilarcorpusasthecharacterlanguagemodels , using 3-grams pruned to between 1.25million
and 1.5million entries.
– Character classes: We add a scoring heuristic which
boosts the score of characters from the language’s alphabet. This feature function provides a strong signal for
rare characters that may not be recognized conﬁdently by
the LSTM, and which the other language models might
not weigh heavily enough to be recognized. This feature
function was inspired by our previous system .
In Sect. 4, we provide an experimental evaluation of how
much each of these feature functions contributes to the ﬁnal
result for several languages.
3 Training
The training of our system happens in two stages, on two
different datasets:
1. End-to-end training of the neural network model using
the CTC loss using a large training dataset
2. Tuning of the decoder weights using Bayesian optimization through Gaussian Processes in Vizier , using a
much smaller and distinct dataset.
Using separate datasets is important because the neural network learns the local appearance as well as an implicit
language model from the training data. It will be overcon-
ﬁdent on its training data, and thus, learning the decoder
weights on the same dataset could result in weights biased
toward the neural network model.
3.1 Connectionist temporal classification loss
As our training data do not contain frame-aligned labels,
we rely on the CTC loss for training which treats the
alignment between inputs and labels as a hidden variable.
CTC training introduces an additional blank label which is
used internally for learning alignments jointly with character
hypotheses, as described in .
We train all neural network weights jointly using the standard TensorFlow implementation of CTC training using
theAdamOptimizer withabatchsizeof8,alearningrate
of 10−4, and gradient clipping such that the gradient L2-norm
is ≤9. Additionally, to improve the robustness of our models and prevent overﬁtting, we train our models using random
dropout after each LSTM layer with a dropout rate
of 0.5. We train until the error rate on the evaluation dataset
no longer improves for 5million steps.
3.2 Bayesian optimization for tuning decoder
To optimize the decoder weights, we rely on the Google
Vizier service and its default algorithm, speciﬁcally batched
Gaussian process bandits, and expected improvement as the
acquisition function .
Foreachrecognizertraining,westart7Vizierstudies,each
performing 500 individual trials, and then we pick the con-
ﬁguration that performed best across all of these trials. We
experimentally found that using 7 separate studies with different random initializations regularly leads to better results
than running a single study once. We found that using more
than 500 trials per study does not lead to any additional
improvement.
For each script, we train these weights on a subset of the
languages for which we have sufﬁcient data, and transfer the
weights to all the other languages. For example, for the Latinscript languages, we train the decoder weights on English and
German, and use the resulting weights for all languages in
the ﬁrst row of Table 1.
4 Experimental evaluation
In the following, where possible, we present results for public
datasets in a closed data scenario, i.e., training and testing
models on the public dataset using a standard protocol. In
addition we present evaluation results for public datasets
in an open data scenario against our production setup, i.e.,
in which the model is trained on our own data. Finally, we
showexperimentalresultsforsomeofthemajorlanguageson
our internal datasets. Whenever possible we compare these
results to the state of the art and to our previous system .
4.1 IAM-OnDB
The IAM-OnDB dataset is probably the most used evaluation dataset for online handwriting recognition. It consists
V. Carbune et al.
Fig. 4 CER of models trained on the IAM-OnDB dataset with different numbers of LSTM layers and LSTM nodes using raw (left) and curve
(right) inputs. Solid lines indicate results without any language models or feature functions in decoding, and dashed lines indicate results with the
fully tuned system
Table 3 Comparison of character error rates (lower is better) on the
IAM-OnDB test set for different LSTM layers conﬁgurations
For each LSTM width and input type, we show the best result in bold
of 298,523 characters in 86,272 word instances from a dictionary of 11,059 words written by 221 writers. We use the
standard IAM-OnDBdataset separation: one training set, two
validations sets and a test set containing 5363, 1438, 1518
and 3859 written lines, respectively. We tune the decoder
weights using the validation set with 1438 items and report
error rates on the test set.
We perform a more extensive study of the number of layers and nodes per layer for both the raw and curve input
formats to determine the optimal size of the bidirectional
LSTM network (see Fig. 4, Table 3). We ﬁrst run experiments
without additional feature functions (Fig. 4, solid lines), then
re-compute the results with tuned weights for language models and character classes (Fig. 4, dashed lines). We observe
that for both input formats, using 3 or 5 layers outperforms
more shallow networks, and using more layers gives hardly
any improvement. Furthermore, using 64 nodes per layer is
sufﬁcient, as wider networks give only small improvements,
if at all. We see no signiﬁcant difference in the accuracy
between the raw and the curve representation.
Finally, we show a comparison of our old and new systems
with the literature on the IAM-OnDB dataset in Table 4. Our
method establishes a new state-of-the-art result when relying
Table 4 Error rates on the IAM-OnDB test set in comparison with the
state of the art and our previous system 
Frinken et al. BLSTM 
Graves et al. BLSTM 
Liwicki et al. LSTM 
This work (curve, 5x64, no FF)
This work (curve, 5x64, FF)
Our previous BLSTM *
Combination *
Our segment-and-decode *
This work (production system)*
A “*” in the “system” column indicates the use of an open training set.
“FF” stands for “feature functions” as described in Sect. 2.4
on closed data using IAM-OnDB, as well as when relying on
our in-house data that we use for our production system,
which was not tuned for the IAM-OnDB data and for which
none of the IAM-OnDB data were used for training.
To better understand where the improvements come from,
we discuss the differences between the previous state-of-theart system (Graves et al. BLSTM ) and this work across
four dimensions: input preprocessing and feature extraction,
neural network architecture, CTC training and decoding, and
model training methodology.
Our input preprocessing (Sect. 2.1) differs only in minor
ways: The x-coordinate used is not ﬁrst transformed using a
high-pass ﬁlter, we do not split text-lines using gaps and we
do not remove delayed strokes, nor do we do any skew and
slant correction or other preprocessing.
The major difference comes from feature extraction. In
contrast to the 25 features per point used in , we use
either 5 features (raw) or 10 features (curves). While the 25
features included both temporal (position in the time series)
and spatial features (ofﬂine representation), our work uses
Fast multi-language LSTM-based online handwriting recognition
Fig. 5 CER of models trained on the IBM-UB-1 dataset with different numbers of LSTM layers and LSTM nodes using raw (left) and curve (right)
inputs. Solid lines indicate results without any language models or feature functions in decoding, and dashed lines indicate results with the fully
tuned system
only the temporal structure. In contrast also to our previous system , using a more compact representation (and
reducing the number of points for curves) allows a feature
representation, including spatial structure, to be learned in
the ﬁrst or upper layers of the neural network.
The neural network architecture differs both in internal
structure of the LSTM cell as well as in the architecture con-
ﬁguration. Our internal structure differs only in that we do
not use peephole connections .
As opposed to relying on a single bidirectional LSTM
layer of width 100, we experiment with a number of con-
ﬁguration variants as detailed in Fig. 4. We note that it is
particularly important to have more than one layer in order
to learn a meaningful representation without feature extraction.
We use the CTC forward–backward training algorithm
as described in , and implemented in TensorFlow. The
training hyperparameters are described in Sect. 3.1.
The CTC decoding algorithm incorporates feature functions similarly to how the dictionary is incorporated in the
previous state-of-the-art system. However, we use more feature functions, our language models are trained on a different
corpus, and the combination weights are optimized separately as described in Sec 3.2.
4.2 IBM-UB-1
Another publicly accessible English-language dataset is the
IBM-UB-1 dataset . From the available datasets therein,
we use the English query dataset, which consists of 63,268
handwritten English words. As this dataset has not been
used often in the academic literature, we propose an evaluation protocol. We split this dataset into 4 parts with
non-overlapping writer IDs: 47,108 items for training, 4690
Table 5 Error rates on IBM-UB-1 test set in comparison with our previous system 
This work (curve, 5x64, no FF)
This work (curve, 5x64, FF)
Segment-and-decode from 
This work (production system) (Sect. 5)*
A “*” in the “system” column indicates the use of an open training set
for decoder weight tuning, 6134 for validation and 5336 for
We perform a similar set of experiments as we did for
IAM-OnDB to determine the right depth and width of our
neural network architecture. The results of these experiments
are shown in Fig. 5. The conclusion for this dataset is similar to the conclusions we drew for the IAM-OnDB: using
networks with 5 layers of bidirectional LSTMs with 64 cells
each is sufﬁcient for good accuracy. Less deep and less wide
networks perform substantially worse, but larger networks
only give small improvements. This is true regardless of the
input processing method chosen and again, we do not see a
signiﬁcant difference in the accuracy between the raw and
curve representation in accuracy.
We give some exemplary results and a comparison with
our current production system as well as results for our previous system in Table 5. We note that our current system
is about 38% and 32% better (relative) in CER and WER,
respectively, when compared to the previous segment-anddecode approach. The lack of improvement in error rate when
evaluating on our production system is due to the fact that our
datasets contain spaces while the same setup trained solely
on IBM-UB-1 does not.
6 Information about the exact experimental protocol is available at
 
V. Carbune et al.
4.3 Additional public datasets
We provide an evaluation of our production system trained on
our in-house datasets applied to a number of publicly available benchmark datasets from the literature. More details
about our in-house datasets are available from Table 2. Note
that for all experiments presented in this section, we evaluate our current live system without any tuning speciﬁc to the
tasks at hand.
4.3.1 Chinese isolated characters 
The ICDAR-2013 Competition for Online Handwriting Chinese Character Recognition introduced a dataset for
classifying the most common Chinese characters. We report
the error rates in comparison with published results from the
competition and more recent work done by others in Table 6.
We evaluate our live production system on this dataset.
Our system was not tuned to the task at hand and was trained
as a multi-character recognizer, thus it is not even aware that
eachsampleonlycontainsasinglecharacter.Further,oursystem supports 12,363 different characters, while the competition data only contain 3,755 characters. Note that our system
did not have access to the training data for this task at all.
Wheneveroursystemreturnsmorethanonecharacterfora
sample, we count this as an error. (This happened twice on the
entire test set of 224,590 samples.) Despite supporting almost
four times as many characters than needed for the CASIA
data and not having been tuned to the task, the accuracy of
our system is still competitive with systems that were tuned
for this data speciﬁcally.
4.3.2 Vietnamese online handwriting recognition 
IntheICFHR2018CompetitiononVietnameseOnlineHandwritten Text Recognition using VNOnDB , our produc-
Table 6 Error rates on ICDAR-2013 Competition Database of Online
Handwritten Chinese Character Recognition
Human performance 
Traditional benchmark 
ICDAR-2011 winner 
This work (production system) Sect. 5
ICDAR-2013 winner: UWarwick 
RNN: NET4 
100LSTM-512LSTM-512FC-3755FC 
RNN: ensemble-NET123456 
Our system was trained with an open training set, including a mix of
characters, words, and phrases
Table 7 Results on the VNONDB-Word dataset
Public test set
Secret test set
This work (Sect. 5)
IVTOVTask1
MyScriptTask1
Table 8 Results on the VNONDB-Line dataset
Public test set
Secret test set
This work (Sect. 5)
IVTOVTask2
MyScriptTask2_1
MyScriptTask2_2
tion system was evaluated against other systems. The system
used in the competition is the one reported and described in
this paper. Due to licensing restrictions, we were unable to do
any experiments on the competition training data, or speciﬁc
tuning for the competition, which was not the case for the
other systems mentioned here.
We participated in the two tasks that best suited the purpose of our system, speciﬁcally the “Word” (ref. Table 7) and
the “Text line” (ref. Table 8) recognition levels. Even though
we can technically process paragraph level inputs, our system
was not built with this goal in mind.
In contrast to us, the other teams used the training and
validation sets to tune their systems:
– The IVTOV team’s system is very similar to our system.
It makes use of bidirectional LSTM layers trained end-toend with the CTC loss. The inputs used are delta x and y
coordinates, together with pen-up strokes (Boolean feature quantifying whether a stroke has ended or not). They
report using a two-layer network of 100 cells each and
additional preprocessing for better handling the dataset.
– The MyScript team submitted two systems. The ﬁrst system has an explicit segmentation component along with a
feed-forward network for recognizing character hypotheses, similar in formulation to our previous system .
In addition, they also make use of a bidirectional LSTM
system trained end-to-end with the CTC loss. They do
not provide additional details on which system is which.
We note that the modeling stacks of the systems outperforming ours in this competition are not fundamentally
different (to the best of our knowledge, according to released
descriptions). We therefore believe that our system might
Fast multi-language LSTM-based online handwriting recognition
Fig. 6 CER of models trained on our internal datasets evaluated on our
English-language validation set with different numbers of LSTM layers
and LSTM nodes using raw (left) and curve (right) inputs. Solid lines
indicate results without any language models or feature functions in
decoding, and dashed lines indicate results with the fully tuned system
perform comparably if trained on the competition training
dataset as well.
OnourinternaltestsetofVietnamesedata,ournewsystem
obtains a CER of 3.3% which is 54% relative better than the
old Segment-and-Decode system which had a CER of 7.2%
(see also Fig. 7).
4.4 Tuning neural network parameters on our
internal data
Our in-house datasets consist of various types of training
data, the amount of which varies by script. Sources of training
data include data collected through prompting, commercially
available data, artiﬁcially inﬂated data, and labeled/selflabeled anonymized recognition requests (see for a
more detailed description). This leads to more heterogeneous
datasets than academic datasets such as IBM-UB-1 or IAM-
OnDB which were collected under standardized conditions.
The number of training samples varies from tens of thousands
to several million per script, depending on the complexity
and usage. We provide more information about the size of
our internal training and tests datasets in Table 2.
The best conﬁguration for our system was identiﬁed by
runningmultipleexperimentsoverarangeoflayerdepthsand
widths on our internal datasets. For the Latin-script experiments shown in Fig. 6, the training set we used was a mixture
of data from all the Latin-script languages we support and
evaluation is done on an English validation dataset, also used
for the English evaluation in Table 2.
Similar to experiments depicted in Figs. 4 and 5, increasing the depth and width of the network architecture brings
diminishing returns fairly quickly. However, overﬁtting is
less pronounced probably because our datasets are substantially larger than the publicly available datasets.
For the experiments with our production datasets, we are
using the Bézier curve inputs which perform slightly better in
terms of accuracy than the raw input encoding but are much
faster to train and evaluate because of the shorter sequence
5 System performance and discussion
The setup described throughout this paper that obtained the
best results relies on input processing with Bézier spline
interpolation (Sect. 2.1.2), followed by 4–5 layers of varying width bidirectional LSTMs, followed by a ﬁnal softmax
layer. For each script, we experimentally determined the best
conﬁguration through multiple training runs.
We performed an ablation study with the best conﬁgurations for each of the six most important scripts7 by number
of users and compare the results with our previous work 
(Table 2). The largest relative improvement comes from the
overall network architecture stack, followed by the use of the
character language model and the other feature functions.
In addition, we show the relative improvement in error
rates on the languages for which we have evaluation datasets
of more than 2000 items (Fig. 7). The new architecture performs between 20 and 40% (relative) better over almost all
languages.
5.1 Differences between IAM-OnDB, IBM-UB-1 and
Our internal datasets
To understand how the different datasets relate to each other,
we performed a set of experiments and evaluations with
the goal of better characterizing the differences between the
We trained a recognizer on each of the three training sets
separately, then evaluated each system on all three test sets
7 For Latin script, we report results for 3 languages.
V. Carbune et al.
Fig. 7 A comparison of the CERs for the LSTM and segment-anddecode (SD) system for all languages on our internal test sets with
more than 2000 items. The scatter plot shows the ISO language code
at a position corresponding to the CER for the SD system (x-axis) and
LSTM system (y-axis). Points below the diagonal are improvements of
LSTM over SD. The plot also shows the lines of 20% and 40% relative
improvement
Table 9 CER comparison when training and evaluating IAM-OnDB,
IBM-UB-1 and our Latin training/eval set
Train/test
Own dataset
Own dataset
We want to highlight the fundamental differences between the different
(Table 9). The neural network architecture is the same as the
one we determined earlier (5 layers bidirectional LSTMs of
64 cells each) with the same feature functions, with weights
tuned on the corresponding tuning dataset. The inputs are
processed using Bézier curves.
To better understand the source of discrepancy when training on IAM-OnDB and evaluating on IBM-UB-1, we note
the different characteristics of the datasets:
– IBM-UB-1 has predominantly cursive writing, while
IAM-OnDB has mostly printed writing
– IBM-UB-1 contains single words, while IAM-OnDB has
lines of space-separated words
This results in models trained on the IBM-UB-1 dataset
not being able to predict spaces as they are not present in
the dataset’s alphabet. In addition, the printed writing style
of IAM-OnDB makes recognition harder when evaluating
cursive writing from IBM-UB-1. It is likely that the lack of
structure through words-only data makes recognizing IAM-
OnDB on a system trained on IBM-UB-1 harder than vice
Systems trained on IBM-UB-1 or IAM-OnDB alone perform signiﬁcantly worse on our internal datasets, as our data
distribution covers a wide range of use-cases not necessarily
relevant to, or present, in the two academic datasets: sloppy
handwriting, overlapping characters for handling writing on
small input surfaces, non-uniform sampling rates, and partially rotated inputs.
The network trained on the internal dataset performs well
on all three datasets. It performs better on IAM-OnDB than
the system trained only thereon, but worse for IBM-UB-
1. We believe that using only cursive words when training
allows the network to better learn the sample characteristics,
than when learning about space separation and other structure properties not present in IBM-UB-1.
6 Conclusion
We describe the online handwriting recognition system that
we currently use at Google for 102 languages in 26 scripts.
The system is based on an end-to-end trained neural network
and replaces our old segment-and-decode system. Recognitionaccuracyof thenewsystemimproves by20–40%relative
depending on the language while using smaller and faster
models. We encode the touch inputs using a Bézier curve
representation which performs at least as well as raw touch
inputs but which also allows for a faster recognition because
the input sequence representation is shorter.
We further compare the performance of our system to
the state of the art on publicly available datasets such as
IAM-OnDB, IBM-UB-1, and CASIA and improve over the
previous best published result on IAM-OnDB.
Acknowledgements We would like to thank the following contributors for fruitful discussions, ideas, and support: Ashok Popat, Yasuhisa
Fujii, Dmitriy Genzel, Jake Walker, David Rybach, Daan van Esch, and
Eugene Brevdo. We thank Google’s OCR team for the numerous collaborations throughout the years that have made this work easier, as
well as the speech recognition and machine translation teams at Google
for tools and support for some of the components we use in this paper.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material
in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence,
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material
is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your
Fast multi-language LSTM-based online handwriting recognition
intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the
permitteduse,youwillneedtoobtainpermissiondirectlyfromthecopyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit 
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.