Discrimination-aware Network Pruning
for Deep Model Compression
Jing Liu∗, Bohan Zhuang∗, Zhuangwei Zhuang∗, Yong Guo, Junzhou Huang, Jinhui Zhu, Mingkui Tan∗†
Abstract—We study network pruning which aims to remove redundant channels/kernels and hence speed up the inference of deep
networks. Existing pruning methods either train from scratch with sparsity constraints or minimize the reconstruction error between
the feature maps of the pre-trained models and the compressed ones. Both strategies suffer from some limitations: the former kind is
computationally expensive and difﬁcult to converge, while the latter kind optimizes the reconstruction error but ignores the discriminative
power of channels. In this paper, we propose a simple-yet-effective method called discrimination-aware channel pruning (DCP) to choose
the channels that actually contribute to the discriminative power. To this end, we ﬁrst introduce additional discrimination-aware losses
into the network to increase the discriminative power of the intermediate layers. Next, we select the most discriminative channels for
each layer by considering the discrimination-aware loss and the reconstruction error, simultaneously. We then formulate channel pruning
as a sparsity-inducing optimization problem with a convex objective and propose a greedy algorithm to solve the resultant problem.
Note that a channel (3D tensor) often consists of a set of kernels (each with a 2D matrix). Besides the redundancy in channels, some
kernels in a channel may also be redundant and fail to contribute to the discriminative power of the network, resulting in kernel level
redundancy. To solve this issue, we propose a discrimination-aware kernel pruning (DKP) method to further compress deep networks by
removing redundant kernels. To avoid manually determining the pruning rate for each layer, we propose two adaptive stopping conditions
to automatically determine the number of selected channels/kernels. The proposed adaptive stopping conditions tend to yield more
efﬁcient models with better performance in practice. Extensive experiments on both image classiﬁcation and face recognition demonstrate
the effectiveness of our methods. For example, on ILSVRC-12, the resultant ResNet-50 model with 30% reduction of channels even
outperforms the baseline model by 0.36% in terms of Top-1 accuracy. We also deploy the pruned models on a smartphone (equipped with
a Qualcomm Snapdragon 845 processor). The pruned MobileNetV1 and MobileNetV2 achieve 1.93× and 1.42× inference acceleration
on the mobile device, respectively, with negligible performance degradation. The source code and the pre-trained models are available at
 
Index Terms—Channel Pruning, Kernel Pruning, Network Compression, Deep Neural Networks.
INTRODUCTION
INCE 2012, deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved
great success in many computer vision tasks, e.g., image
classiﬁcation , , , face recognition , , , object
detection , , , image generation , , and video
analysis , , . However, the large model size and high
computational costs remain great obstacles for many applications,
especially on some constrained devices with limited memory
and computational resources. To address this problem, model
compression is an effective approach, which aims to reduce the
model redundancy without signiﬁcant degeneration in performance.
Recent studies on model compression mainly contain three
categories: quantization , , , sparse or low-rank compression , , , and network pruning , , , .
Network quantization seeks to represent weights and activations
Jing Liu is with the School of Software Engineering, South China University
of Technology and also with the Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent
Robot (South China University of Technology), Ministry of Education.
E-mail: 
Zhuangwei Zhuang, Yong Guo, Jinhui Zhu, and Mingkui Tan are with the
School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology.
Mingkui Tan is also with the Pazhou Laboratory, Guangzhou, China.
E-mail: {z.zhuangwei, guo.yong}@mail.scut.edu.cn, {csjhzhu, mingkuitan}@scut.edu.cn.
Bohan Zhuang is with the Faculty of Information Technology, Monash
University, Australia. E-mail: .
Junzhou Huang is with Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
E-mail: .
∗Authors contributed equally. † Corresponding author.
with low bitwidth ﬁxed-point integers, thus convolution operations can be implemented by efﬁcient XNOR-popcount bitwise
operations for substantial speedup. However, the training can be
very difﬁcult since the non-differentiable quantizer that transforms
the continuous weights/activations into the discrete ones would
inevitably bring errors and hamper the model performance .
Sparse connections methods can obtain a high compression rate
in theory, but they may generate irregular convolutional kernels
that need carefully designed sparse matrix operations. Low-rank
compression methods seek to approximate the original ﬁlters of
a pre-trained model with low-rank ﬁlters. Nevertheless, they are
often inefﬁcient for the convolutions with small kernels sizes, e.g.,
1×1 . In contrast, network pruning reduces the model size
and speeds up the inference by removing the redundant modules
(channels , , or kernels , ). In particular, channel
pruning can be well supported by existing deep learning libraries
with little additional effort compared with network quantization and
sparse or low-rank connections. More critically, most compression
methods, such as quantization, can be easily applied on top of
network pruning. For example, pruning redundant channels/kernels
is able to further reduce the model size and accelerate the
inference speed of the quantized models by reducing the number
of parameters .
In network pruning, how to identify the informative (or important) channels/kernels (also known as channel/kernel selection)
is an important problem. Existing methods can be divided into
two categories, namely, training-from-scratch methods , ,
 
 and reconstruction-based methods , , , .
Training-from-scratch methods directly learn the importance of
channels/kernels with sparsity regularization, but it is very difﬁcult
to train very deep networks on large-scale datasets , . The
reconstruction-based methods seek to perform network pruning
by minimizing the reconstruction error of feature maps between
the pruned model and the pre-trained one , . However, the
performance is highly affected by the quality of the pre-trained
model. If the pre-trained model is not well trained, the pruning
performance can be limited. More importantly, these methods
suffer from a critical limitation: the redundant channels/kernels
may be mistakenly kept to minimize the reconstruction error of
feature maps. Consequently, these methods may incur severe
performance degradation on more compact and deeper models,
such as MobileNet , for large-scale datasets.
In this paper, we aim to overcome the drawbacks of both
strategies. In contrast to existing methods , , , ,
we assume and highlight that an informative channel/kernel, no
matter where it is, should have sufﬁcient discriminative power;
otherwise, it should be removed. Based on this intuition, we propose
a discrimination-aware channel pruning (DCP) method to ﬁnd the
channels that actually contribute to the discriminative power of the
network. In DCP, relying on a pre-trained model, we ﬁrst introduce
multiple additional discrimination-aware losses into the network
to increase the discriminative power of the intermediate layers.
Then, we perform channel selection to ﬁnd the most discriminative
channels for each layer by considering both the discriminationaware loss and the reconstruction error of feature maps. In this way,
we are able to make a balance between the discriminative power of
the channels and feature maps reconstruction. Note that a channel
(3D tensor) consists of a set of kernels (each with a 2D matrix). In
practice, some kernels in the selected channels may be redundant
and fail to contribute to the discriminative power of the network,
which leads to kernel level redundancy. To solve this issue, we
propose a discrimination-aware kernel pruning (DKP) method to
ﬁnd the kernels with discriminative power.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows.
• We propose a discrimination-aware channel/kernel pruning
(DCP/DKP) scheme to compress deep models with the
introduction of additional discrimination-aware losses. The
proposed methods ﬁrst ﬁne-tune the model with the additional
losses and the ﬁnal objective. Then, we conduct channel/kernel
selection by simultaneously considering the additional loss
and the reconstruction error of feature maps. In this way,
the proposed method is able to ﬁnd the channels/kernels that
actually contribute to the discriminative power of the network.
• We formulate the channel/kernel selection problem as a
constrained optimization problem and propose a greedy
method by solving the resultant convex optimization problem
to select informative channels/kernels.
• We propose a new adaptive stopping condition to prevent
DCP/DKP from selecting too many channels/kernels when
determining the number of selected channels/kernels. Specifically, the stopping condition incorporates an additional
constraint which enforces the number of selected channels to
be no more than a predeﬁned value for each layer.
• Extensive experiments demonstrate the superior performance
of our methods on a variety of architectures. For example, on
ILSVRC-12 , when pruning 30% channels from ResNet-
50, DCP improves the original model by 0.36% in terms
of Top-1 accuracy. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our
methods, we also deploy the pruned models on a smartphone
(equipped with a Qualcomm Snapdragon 845 processor) and
show signiﬁcant acceleration on the mobile CPU.
This paper extends our preliminary version from several
aspects. 1) We propose two training techniques to reduce the
computational overhead of DCP while still maintaining comparable
or even better performance. 2) We apply the improved DCP to
more compact models (i.e., MobileNetV1 and MobileNetV2) and
achieve promising performance on ILSVRC-12. We further deploy
the pruned models on a smartphone with a Qualcomm Snapdragon
845 processor to investigate the inference acceleration. 3) We apply
the improved DCP to compress the latest face recognition models.
4) We extend DCP for kernel pruning to further compress models at
kernel level. 5) We propose a new adaptive stopping condition for
the optimization. 6) We provide more ablative studies to investigate
the effectiveness of our methods.
RELATED WORK
Network quantization. Quantization-based methods represent the
network weights and/or activations with very low precision, which
yields highly compact DNNs compared to their ﬂoating-point
counterparts. The extreme case is the binary neural networks
(BNNs) where both weights and activations are constrained to
{+1, −1} , , . In this way, one can replace the matrix
multiplication operations with the light-weighted bitwise XNORpopcount operations. As a result, the 1-bit convolutional layer
can achieve up to 32× memory saving and 58× speedup on
CPUs , .
However, BNNs still suffer from signiﬁcant
accuracy decreases. To reduce this accuracy gap, ﬁxed-point
methods have been proposed to represent weights and activations
with higher bitwidth. Uniform ﬁxed-point approaches , 
designed quantizers with a constant quantization step. To improve
the precision of the discrete uniform quantizer, , explicitly
parameterized and optimized the quantization intervals.
Sparse or low-rank connections. To reduce the storage requirements of neural networks, Han et al. suggested that neurons
with zero input or output connections can be safely removed
from the network. With the help of the ℓ1/ℓ2 regularization,
weights are pushed to zeros during training. Subsequently, the
compression rate of AlexNet can reach 35× with the combination
of pruning, quantization, and Huffman coding . Considering
the importance of parameters that are changed during weight
pruning, Guo et al. proposed dynamic network surgery (DNS).
Training with sparsity constraints , has also been studied
to reach a higher compression rate. Deep models often contain
many correlations among channels. To remove such redundancy,
low-rank approximation approaches have been widely studied ,
 , , . For example, Zhang et al. sped up VGGNet
for 4× with negligible performance degradation on ILSVRC-12.
However, low-rank approximation approaches are not efﬁcient for
the convolutions with small kernels size, e.g., 1×1 kernel .
Network pruning. Network pruning aims at removing redundant
modules, e.g., channels or kernels, to accelerate the run-time inference. The resultant pruned models would have fewer parameters
and lower computational overhead. In order to measure the importance of the network module, different metrics , , , ,
 , , , were proposed. With a sparsity regularizer
in the objective function, training-based methods , , ,
 , , were proposed to learn the compact models in the
training phase. Considering efﬁciency, reconstruction-methods ,
AvgPooling
Network 𝑀𝑏
Reconstruction
AvgPooling
AvgPooling
Fine-tuning
Channel Selection
Fig. 1. Illustration of discrimination-aware channel pruning. Here, Lp
S denotes the discrimination-aware loss (e.g., cross-entropy loss or additive
angular margin loss) in the Lp-th layer, LM denotes the reconstruction loss, and Lf denotes the ﬁnal loss. DCP ﬁrst updates the model M and
learns the parameters {θp}P
p=1 with {Lp
p=1 and Lf. Then, DCP performs channel pruning with P + 1 stages. At each stage, for example, in the
p-th stage, DCP conducts the channel selection for each layer in {Lp−1 + 1, . . . , Lp} with the corresponding Lp
 , , , transformed the channel selection problem
into the optimization of the reconstruction error. Recently, several
methods , have been proposed to prune the redundant
ﬁlters in a dynamic such that the pruned ﬁlters can be recovered
during training. Apart from these methods, the pruning rate for
each layer can also be automatically determined by reinforcement
learning , , greedy method or evolutionary search .
Compared with the proposed methods, most existing methods use
heuristic metrics to identify informative modules. Speciﬁcally, both
our proposed methods and reconstruction-based methods use the
reconstruction error during channel selection. However, unlike
these methods, our proposed DCP/DKP introduce additional losses
to select those channels/kernels that actually contribute to the
discriminative power of deep networks. Moreover, compared with
those methods that use reinforcement learning or evolutionary
algorithms , DCP/DKP use an adaptive stopping condition to
automatically determine the sparsity for each layer.
PRELIMINARY
Let {xi, yi}N
i=1 be the training samples, where N indicates the
number of samples. Given an L-layer deep network M, let
W ∈Rn×c×hf ×zf represents the model parameters w.r.t. the l-th
convolutional layer (or block). Here, hf and zf denote the height
and width of the ﬁlters, respectively; c and n denote the number of
input channels and output ﬁlters, respectively. The parameter W
contains n×c kernels in total. Each kernel, for example, the kernel
Wj,k ∈Rhf ×zf w.r.t. the k-th input channel and j-th ﬁlter, is a
matrix with the dimension of hf × zf. Let X ∈RN×c×hin×zin
and O ∈RN×n×hout×zout be the input feature maps and the
involved output feature maps, respectively. Here, hin and zin
denote the height and width of the input feature maps, respectively;
hout and zout represent the height and width of the output feature
maps, respectively. Moreover, let Xi,k ∈Rhin×zin be the input
feature map of the k-th channel for the i-th sample. The output
feature map w.r.t. the j-th ﬁlter of W (i.e., Wj) for the i-th
sample, denoted by Oi,j ∈Rhout×zout, is obtained by performing
convolution on the input feature maps Xi of the i-th sample using
the kernel Wj:
Xi,k ∗Wj,k,
where ∗denotes the convolutional operation.
Given a pre-trained model M b, Channel Pruning aims to
prune those redundant channels in W to reduce the model
size and accelerate the inference speed in Eq. (1). In order
to choose channels, we introduce a variant of the ℓ2,0-norm1
||W||2,0 = Pc
j=1 ||Wj,k||F ), where Ω(a) = 1 if
a ̸= 0 and Ω(a) = 0 if a = 0, and || · ||F represents the
Frobenius norm. In order to induce sparsity, we impose an ℓ2,0norm constraint on W:
||W||2,0 =
||Wj,k||F ) ≤κl
c denotes the desired number of channels at layer l. Or
equivalently, given a predeﬁned pruning rate η ∈(0, 1), it follows
c = ⌈(1 −η)c⌉. When some channels of W are removed,
the computation w.r.t. these channels can be effectively avoided.
As a result, the pruned models would have fewer parameters and
lower computational costs than the original models.
PROPOSED METHOD
Identifying the informative channels, also known as channel
selection, is an important problem in channel pruning. Most existing
methods , conduct channel pruning by minimizing the
reconstruction error of feature maps between the pre-trained model
and the pruned one. However, merely minimizing the reconstruction
error may cause some redundant channels to be mistakenly selected,
even though they are actually irrelevant to the discriminative power
of the network. This issue will be even severer when the network
becomes deeper.
In this paper, we highlight that an informative channel, no
matter where it is, should contribute to the discriminative power
of the network; otherwise, it should be removed. Based on this
intuition, we propose a discrimination-aware channel pruning
(DCP) scheme to ﬁnd the channels that actually contribute to the
discriminative power. To this end, relying on a pre-trained model,
we ﬁrst introduce multiple discrimination-aware losses into the
network to increase the discriminative power of the intermediate
layers. Then, we conduct channel selection to select the most
1. We can also use other norms to compute the number of selected channels.
discriminative channel by considering both the discriminationaware loss and the reconstruction error of the feature maps. In the
following, we will illustrate the details of our method.
Motivation
We seek to perform channel pruning by keeping those channels that
actually contribute to the discriminative power of the network. In
practice, however, it is very difﬁcult to measure the discriminative
power of channels due to the complex operations (such as ReLU
activation and Batch Normalization) in CNNs. One may consider
a channel as an important one if the ﬁnal loss Lf would sharply
increase without it. However, for deep models, its shallow layers
often have little discriminative power due to the long path of
propagation. As a result, it is not practical to evaluate the
discriminative power when the network is very deep.
To increase the discriminative power of the intermediate layers,
one can introduce additional losses to the intermediate layers of
the deep networks , , . In this paper, we insert P
discrimination-aware losses {Lp
p=1 evenly into the network, as
shown in Figure 1. Let {L1, ..., LP , LP +1} be the layers at which
we put the losses, with LP +1 = L being the ﬁnal layer. It is worth
mentioning that, we can add one loss to each layer of the network,
where we have Ll = l. However, this can be very computationally
expensive yet not necessary.
Construction of discrimination-aware loss
The construction of discrimination-aware loss Lp
S is very important
in our method. As shown in Figure 1, Lp
S uses the output of layer
Lp as the input feature maps. To make the computation of the
loss feasible, we impose an average pooling operation over the
feature maps. Moreover, to accelerate the convergence, we apply
batch normalization , and ReLU before performing
the average pooling. In this way, the input feature maps for the loss
at layer Lp, denoted by Fp(W), can be computed by
Fp(W) = AvgPooling(ReLU(BN(Op))),
where Op represents the output feature maps of layer Lp. Let F(p,i)
be the feature maps w.r.t. the i-th example. The discriminationaware loss w.r.t. the p-th loss is formulated as
I{y(i) = t} log
where I{·} is the indicator function, θp ∈Rnp×m denotes the
classiﬁer weights of the fully connected layer, np denotes the
number of input channels of the fully connected layer and m is the
number of classes. Note that we can also use other losses as the
additional loss, such as the additive angular margin loss . (See
results in Section 6.2).
Optimization problem for channel pruning
Since a pre-trained model contains very rich information about the
learning task, similar to , we hope to reconstruct the feature
maps in the pre-trained model by minimizing the reconstruction
error of feature maps between the pre-trained model M b and the
pruned one. Formally, the reconstruction error can be measured by
the mean squared error (MSE) between the feature maps of the
baseline network and the pruned one as follows:
2N · n · hout · zout
i,j −Oi,j||2
Algorithm 1 Discrimination-aware channel pruning
Input: Pre-trained model M b, training data {xi, yi}N
i=1, and hyperparameters {κl
Output: Pruned model M.
1: Initialize M using M b.
2: Insert losses {Lp
p=1 to layers {L1, ..., LP }, respectively.
3: Learn {θp}P
p=1 and Fine-tune M with {Lp
p=1 and Lf.
4: Initialize M b using M.
5: for p ∈{1, ..., P + 1} do
for l ∈{Lp−1 + 1, ..., Lp} do
Do Channel Selection for layer l using Algorithm 2.
9: end for
i,j ∈Rhout×zout denotes the feature maps of M b. By
considering both discrimination-aware loss and reconstruction error,
we have a joint loss function as follows:
L(W) = λLM(W) + Lp
where λ balances the two terms.
Proposition 1. (Convexity of the loss function) Let W be the
model parameters of a considered layer. Given the discriminationaware loss and the mean square loss deﬁned in Eqs. (4) and (5),
the joint loss function L(W) is convex w.r.t. W.2
By introducing the ℓ2,0-norm constraint, the optimization
problem for discrimination-aware channel pruning becomes
s.t. ||W||2,0 ≤κl
c is the number of channels to be selected. In our method,
the sparsity of W can be either determined by a predeﬁned pruning
rate (See Section 3) or automatically adjusted by the adaptive
stopping conditions in Section 4.6.
Discrimination-aware channel pruning
By introducing P losses {Lp
p=1 to the intermediate layers, the
proposed discrimination-aware channel pruning (DCP) method
is shown in Algorithm 1. Starting from a pre-trained model
M b, DCP ﬁrst updates the model M and learns the parameters
p=1. Then, DCP performs channel pruning with (P + 1)
stages. Algorithm 1 is called discrimination-aware in the sense that
the additional losses and the ﬁnal loss are considered to ﬁne-tune
the model. Moreover, the additional losses will be used to select
channels, as discussed below.
At the beginning of channel pruning, we ﬁrst construct
additional losses {Lp
p=1 and insert them at layer {L1, ..., LP }
(See Figure 1). Next, we learn the parameters {θp}P
p=1 and ﬁnetune the model M at the same time with both the additional
losses {Lp
p=1 and the ﬁnal loss Lf. During ﬁne-tuning, all
the parameters in M are updated. Here, with ﬁne-tuning, the
parameters regarding the additional losses can be well learned. 3
After doing ﬁne-tuning with {Lp
p=1 and Lf, the discriminative
power of the intermediate layers can be signiﬁcantly improved.
Then, we initialize the baseline model M b with the ﬁne-tuned
model M and perform channel pruning with (P + 1) stages. At
each stage, for example, in the p-th stage, we consider the layers
of the current stage independently, and conduct channel selection
2. The proof can be found in Section 7 in .
3. The details of the ﬁne-tuning algorithm can be found in .
Algorithm 2 Greedy algorithm for channel selection
Input: Training data {xi, yi}N
i=1, model M, hyperparameters κl
Output: Selected channel index set A and model parameters WA.
1: Initialize A0 ←∅, W0 = 0, and t = 1.
2: while (stopping conditions are not achieved) do
Compute gradients of L w.r.t. Wt−1: Gt−1 = ∂L/∂Wt−1.
Find the B largest ||Gt−1
:,k ||F and record their indices in Jt.
Let At ←At−1 ∪Jt.
Solve the following Subproblem to update Wt−1
Wt−1 L(Wt−1), s.t. Wt−1
Set Wt ←Wt−1 and let t ←t + 1.
8: end while
for the layers in {Lp−1 + 1, ..., Lp} with corresponding Lp
LM. Following , , we perform channel selection from the
shallower layers to the deeper layers in this paper.
Greedy algorithm for channel selection
Due to the non-convexity of ℓ2,0-norm, directly optimizing Problem (7) is very difﬁcult. To address this issue, following the general
greedy methods in , , , , , we propose a greedy
algorithm to solve Problem (7).
We show the details of the proposed greedy algorithm in
Algorithm 2. At the beginning of the channel selection, we remove
all the channels by setting W0 = 0. In each iteration, we ﬁrst select
those channels that actually contribute to the discriminative power
of the network. Then, we solve Subproblem (8) with the selected
channels only. We will give the details of selecting the channels
with discriminative power and the subproblem optimization in the
following subsections.
Discrimination-aware channel selection
At each iteration of Algorithm 2, we compute the gradients
= ∂L/∂Wt−1
:,k , where Wt−1
denotes the parameters for
the k-th input channel at iteration t. Since we set W0 = 0 at
the beginning of channel selection, the initial loss value will be
very large. Apparently, selecting any channel at the t-th iteration
will decrease the loss function, and the channel with the largest
gradient ||Gt−1
:,k ||F will decrease the loss function the most. With
the selection criteria, we choose B channels corresponding to the
B largest ||Gt−1
:,k ||F as active channels and record their indices into
Jt. Let At ⊂{1, . . . , c} be the index set of the selected channels
up to iteration t, i.e., At = ∪iJi, i = 1, . . . , t. In general, once
a channel is added into Jt, it is unlikely to be selected in the
following iteration. However, if we do not solve Subproblem (8)
accurately, some of the selected channels may have a large value
:,k ||F , thus they might be chosen again. To avoid this issue,
we propose choosing channels from {1, . . . , c}\At−1 to form Jt.
In this way, there will be no overlapping channels among the Ji’s,
where i = 1, . . . , t.
Subproblem optimization
Once At is determined, we optimize Wt−1 w.r.t. the selected
channels by minimizing Subproblem (8). Here, Wt−1
t denotes the
subtensor indexed by Ac
t is the complementary set of At,
t = {1, . . . , c}\At. To solve the Subproblem in Eq. (8), we
apply stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and update Wt−1
where Wt−1
At denotes the subtensor indexed by At, and γ denotes
the learning rate.
Note that when optimizing Subproblem (8), Wt−1
is warmstarted from the ﬁne-tuned model M. As a result, the optimization
can be completed very quickly. Moreover, since Subproblem (8)
is convex with respect to Wt−1 for one layer, we do not need to
consider all the data for optimization. To make a trade-off between
the efﬁciency and performance, we sample a subset of images
randomly from the training data for optimization. 4 Last, since we
use SGD to update Wt−1
At , the learning rate γ should be carefully
adjusted to achieve an accurate solution.
Stopping conditions
Given a predeﬁned hyperparameter κl
c in Problem (7), Algorithm 2
will be stopped if ||Wt||2,0 > κl
c. However, κl
c is hard to be
determined in practice. To solve this issue, we adopt the following
two stopping conditions to terminate Algorithm 2.
Stopping condition 1: Since L is convex, L(Wt) will monotonically decrease with the iteration index t in Algorithm 2. Therefore,
we can adopt the following stopping condition:
|L(Wt−1) −L(Wt)|
where ϵ is a tolerance value.
Stopping condition 2: Directly using stopping condition 1 can
automatically determine the number of selected channels. However,
in practice, if most of the channels are relatively informative and
each of them contributes to the loss function, then the objective
function value w.r.t. Eq. (6) may decrease very slowly during
the greedy selection process. In this case, stopping condition 1
may tend to select more channels or even all channels to achieve
sufﬁciently small loss function value w.r.t. Eq. (6). To address
this, we propose stopping condition 2 which incorporates an
additional constraint to force the number of selected channels to be
no more than a predeﬁned value for each layer. Speciﬁcally, given
a minimum pruning rate ηmin, we use the following condition:
|L(Wt−1) −L(Wt)|
||Wt||2,0 > ⌈(1 −ηmin)c⌉.
If the above condition is achieved, the pruning process will
be stopped earlier, and the number of selected channels will
be automatically determined, i.e., ||Wt||2,0. As a result, the
pruned models tend to have lower computational costs. Note that
stopping condition 2 is built on top of stopping condition 1.
In practice, stopping condition 1 alone often works well and
stopping condition 2 is satisﬁed accordingly. The comparisons of
different stopping conditions are shown in Section 7.6.
Techniques for efﬁcient implementations
For model compression methods, training cost has always been
a key factor in real-world applications. Regarding this issue, we
propose two methods to improve the training efﬁciency of DCP.
Single round ﬁne-tuning. In Algorithm 1, ﬁne-tuning plays
a crucial role in improving the discriminative power of the
intermediate layers. However, it leads to high computational costs.
In our conference version , we perform ﬁne-tuning and channel
selection stage-wisely. In total, we ﬁne-tune the network P + 1
4. We explore the number of samples in Section 11 in .
times, which increases the computational cost of channel pruning.
To improve the efﬁciency of channel pruning, we ﬁne-tune the
network only once in step 3 of Algorithm 1, which reduces the
times of ﬁne-tuning. Moreover, the ﬁne-tuning process is the same
for the network with the same architecture but different pruning
rates. Therefore, we can store the model after ﬁne-tuning. In this
way, the pruned networks with the same architecture but different
pruning rates can skip ﬁne-tuning in step 3 of Algorithm 1, which
greatly reduces the computational cost of channel pruning. We
show the effect of single round ﬁne-tuning in Section 7.3.1.
Feature reusing. In Algorithm 2, we need to compute the input
feature maps of layer l to compute the loss function. To obtain the
input feature maps, we have to feed N images into the network
from layer 1 to layer l −1. In , this process is repeated for
each iteration, which incurs high computational overhead. Since
we do not change the input feature maps during channel selection,
we can store and reuse the input feature maps once they have been
computed. In this way, we avoid the repeated calculation of the
input feature maps, which greatly reduces the computational cost
of channel selection. An empirical study on the effect of feature
reusing can be found in Section 7.3.2.
DISCRIMINATION-AWARE KERNEL PRUNING
The proposed DCP can select the channels that actually contribute
to the discriminative power of the network. However, there exists a
limitation for DCP. Speciﬁcally, channel pruning assumes that all
kernels in a channel are equally important, which may hamper the
performance of the pruned model. In fact, some kernels may not
contribute to the discriminative power of the network, resulting in
performance degradation of the pruned model. More critically, in
DCP, once a channel is pruned (or not selected), even if there may
still exist some informative kernels related to it, we are no longer
able to ﬁnd and keep those useful kernels related to the removed
channel, which may result in suboptimal performance.
To solve this issue, we propose a kernel pruning method called
discrimination-aware kernel pruning (DKP) to further compress
deep networks by removing redundant kernels. Similar to DCP, we
introduce a variant of the ℓ2,0-norm constraint on W to conduct
kernel pruning:
k=1 Ω(||Wj,k||F ) ≤κl
ker is the desired number of kernels at layer l. When some
kernels are removed, the corresponding computational cost w.r.t.
the kernels can be effectively reduced.
Starting from a pre-trained model, DKP introduces P additional
losses {Lp
p=1 evenly to the intermediate layers. Then, DKP ﬁnetunes the model using the addition losses {Lp
p=1 and the ﬁnal
loss Lf to improve the discriminative power of the intermediate
layers. After that, DKP conducts kernel selection for each layer in
a layer/stage-wise manner.
Similar to DCP, we introduce a variant of the ℓ2,0-norm
constraint into the loss function in Eq. (6). Thus, the optimization
problem for DKP can be formulated as:
s.t. ||W||ker
To solve Problem (13), we propose a greedy algorithm for kernel
selection similar to Algorithm 2. At the beginning of the kernel
selection, DKP removes all the kernels by setting W0 = 0. Instead
of choosing the channels, we choose B kernels with the largest
gradients ||Gt−1
j,k ||F = ∂L/∂Wt−1
j,k and put their indices into Jt.
Then, we update At by At = At−1 ∪Jt. Once At is determined,
we optimize Wt−1 w.r.t. the selected kernels by minimizing
Subproblem (8), which is similar to DCP. In practice, we may
directly apply DKP to compress models (denoted by DKP Only)
or sequentially perform kernel selection after performing channel
pruning (denoted by DCP+DKP). We investigate the effectiveness
of DKP in Section 6.3.
Comparisons with DCP. Unlike DCP that focuses on channel
selection, DKP seeks to select the informative kernels related to
each channel, making it possible for model compression in a ﬁner
way (channel level vs. kernel level). Note that in each greedy
optimization step, we can include a relatively large number of
kernels (namely, a large B). Moreover, similar to DCP, during the
subproblem optimization, we do not need to solve the problem
exactly. So the complexity of DKP is similar to DCP. In fact,
DKP has a comparable training cost with DCP in practice. For
example, when pruning 90% FLOPs from VGGNet on CIFAR-10,
the training cost of DKP is 3.25 GPU hours while the cost of DCP
is 2.92 GPU hours. More empirical comparisons between DKP and
DCP can be found in Section 6.3.
EXPERIMENTS
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method, we
apply DCP to various architectures, such as ResNet , MobileNetV1 and MobileNetV2 , etc. We conduct experiments on both image classiﬁcation and face recognition. In order
to verify the effectiveness of DKP, we apply DKP to ResNet 
and VGGNet . All implementations are based on PyTorch .
We organize the experiments as follows. First, we evaluate the
proposed DCP on image classiﬁcation in Section 6.1. Second, we
apply DCP to face recognition in Section 6.2. Last, we evaluate the
proposed DKP in Section 6.3.
Experiments on image classiﬁcation
Compared methods
To investigate the effectiveness of the proposed methods, we include
the following methods for study: DCP: The proposed channel
pruning method with a pre-deﬁned pruning rate η. Adapt-DCP:
DCP with adaptive stopping condition 2 introduced in Section 4.6.
WM: We shrink the width of a network by a ﬁxed ratio and train it
from scratch, which is known as the width multiplier . WM+:
Based on WM, we evenly insert additional losses into the network
and train it from scratch. Random-DCP: Relying on DCP, we
randomly choose channels instead of using the gradient-based
strategy introduced in Algorithm 2.
We also consider several state-of-the-art channel pruning
methods for comparison. On CIFAR-10, we compare DCP
with NISP , ThiNet , CP , AMC , SFP ,
FPGM , PREC , Network Slimming , NRE ,
and DR . On ILSVRC-12, we compare DCP with SFP ,
GAL , Taylor-FO-BN , SPP , CP , GDP ,
FPGM , ThiNet , SSR-L2 , NetAdapt , AMC ,
and MetaPruning . Following , , we measure the
computational cost of the pruned models by the number of ﬂoating
point operations (FLOPs).
Datasets and implementation details
We evaluate the proposed DCP on two image classiﬁcation datasets,
including CIFAR-10 and ILSVRC-12 . CIFAR-10 consists
Performance comparisons on CIFAR-10. ”-” denotes that the results are not reported. Top-1 Err. ↑is the Top-1 error gap between the pruned model
and the baseline model.
Top-1 Err. (%)
Top-1 Err. (%)
#Param. ↓(%)
#FLOPs ↓(%)
ThiNet 
Random-DCP
ThiNet 
Network Slimming 
Random-DCP
MobileNetV1
Random-DCP
MobileNetV2
Random-DCP
∗The results were obtained by our implementations.
of 50k training samples and 10k testing images with 10 classes.
ILSVRC-12 contains 1.28 million training samples and 50k testing
images for 1,000 classes.
Based on the pre-trained model, we apply our method to
select informative channels. We ﬁrst introduce additional losses
to increase the discriminative power of the intermediate layers. In
practice, we determine the number of additional losses according to
the depth of the network (See Section 7.8). Speciﬁcally, we insert
3 additional losses to ResNet-50 and ResNet-56, and 2 additional
losses to VGGNet, ResNet-18, MobileNetV1, and MobileNetV2.
Then, we ﬁne-tune the model with both the additional losses and
the ﬁnal loss. On CIFAR-10, we ﬁne-tune 100 epochs using a
mini-batch size of 128. The learning rate starts from 0.1 and is
divided by 10 at epochs 40 and 60. On ILSVRC-12, we ﬁne-tune
60 epochs using a mini-batch size of 256. The learning rate is
initialized to 0.01 and divided by 10 at epochs 36, 48, and 54.
After doing ﬁne-tuning, we conduct channel selection in a
stage-wise manner by considering the corresponding additional
loss and the reconstruction error of the feature maps. For ResNet-56
and ResNet-50, we set η and ηmin to 0.5 and 0.4, respectively. For
VGGNet, MobileNetV1 and MobileNetV2, η and ηmin are set to
0.3 and 0.2, respectively. In our experiment, λ and B are set to 1.0
and 2.0, respectively.
After doing channel selection, we ﬁne-tune the whole network
with the selected channels only. We use SGD with nesterov for
optimization. The momentum and weight decay are set to 0.9 and
1 × 10−4, respectively. On CIFAR-10, we ﬁne-tune 400 epochs
using a mini-batch size of 128. The learning rate is initialized to
0.1 and divided by 10 at epochs 160 and 240. For ResNet-18 and
ResNet-50 on ILSVRC-12, we ﬁne-tune the network for 60 epochs
with a mini-batch size of 256. The learning rate starts at 0.01 and
is divided by 10 at epochs 36, 48 and 54. For MobileNetV1 and
MobileNetV2 on ILSVRC-12, we ﬁne-tune for 150 epochs and
250 epochs with a mini-batch size of 256. Following , , we
set the weight decay to 4 × 10−5. The learning rate is initialized
to 0.09 and decreased to 0 following the cosine function .
Comparisons on CIFAR-10
We apply DCP to prune ResNet-56, VGGNet, MobileNetV1, and
MobileNetV2 and compare the performance on CIFAR-10. We
report the results in Table 1.
From Table 1, we have the following observations. First, the
models pruned by DCP signiﬁcantly outperform those pruned
by Random-DCP. For example, on VGGNet, DCP reduces the
error by 0.28% compared with Random-DCP, which implies the
effectiveness of the proposed channel selection strategy. Second, the
inserted additional losses improve the performance of the networks.
Speciﬁcally, WM+ of VGGNet achieves better performance than
WM. Third, our proposed DCP shows much better performance
than WM+. For example, on VGGNet, DCP outperforms WM+ by
Performance comparisons on ILSVRC-12. ”-” denotes that the results are not reported. ”Top-1 Err. ↑” and ”Top-5 Err. ↑” denote the Top-1 and Top-5
error gap between the pruned model and the baseline model.
Top-1 Err. (%)
Top-1 Err. (%)
Top-5 Err. (%)
Top-5 Err. (%)
#Param. ↓(%)
#FLOPs ↓(%)
Taylor-FO-BN 
ThiNet 
SSR-L2 
WM∗(Scratch-B) 
MobileNetV1
NetAdapt 
MetaPruning 
MobileNetV2
MetaPruning 
∗The results were obtained by our implementations.
Inference acceleration of the pruned models on ILSVRC-12. We report
the forward time tested on a mobile CPU (Qualcomm Snapdragon 845).
#Param. (M)
#FLOPs (M)
Mobile CPU
MobileNetV1
MobileNetV2
0.41% on the testing accuracy. Fourth, compared with DCP, Adapt-
DCP further improves the performance of the pruned models with
much fewer parameters and FLOPs. Speciﬁcally, when applying
Adapt-DCP on VGGNet, the pruned model with 91.69% and
69.81% reductions in parameters and FLOPs even lowers the
testing error by 0.26% compared with DCP.
Compared with several state-of-the-art methods, our method
achieves the best performance. For example, ThiNet prunes
VGGNet by 48.29% of the parameters and 50.08% of the FLOPs
with a 0.14% drop in terms of the Top-1 accuracy. In contrast, our
proposed DCP achieves the same speedup ratio with a 0.31%
improvement in terms of the Top-1 accuracy. Moreover, for
VGGNet, Adapt-DCP outperforms NRE and DR and
obtains a 91.69% reduction in the model size and 69.81% in
FLOPs. These results show the superior performance of our
proposed DCP and Adapt-DCP.
Comparisons on ILSVRC-12
To verify the effectiveness of the proposed method on the largescale dataset, we evaluate our method on ILSVRC-12 and report
the Top-1 and Top-5 errors with single view evaluation in Table 2.
We ﬁrst apply DCP to compress ResNet-50. Compared with WM
(Scratch-B) , which leads to 1.45% increase in terms of the
Top-1 error, DCP only results in 1.02% degradation in terms
of the Top-1 accuracy, which demonstrates the effectiveness of
the pruning scheme in DCP. Compared with FPGM , DCP
achieves 0.30% improvement in terms of the Top-1 accuracy with
a 55.50% reduction in FLOPs. More critically, the model pruned
by Adapt-DCP with the smaller model size even outperforms DCP
by 0.16% and 0.10% on Top-1 and Top-5 accuracy, respectively.
We also apply DCP to prune compact and efﬁcient neural
networks, such as MobileNetV1 and MobileNetV2 .
Compared with AMC and MetaPruning , our proposed
DCP achieves better performance. For example, on MobileNetV2,
DCP outperforms AMC by 0.36% in terms of the Top-1
accuracy. Moreover, Adapt-DCP pruned MobileNetV2 outperforms
MetaPruning by 0.11% in terms of the Top-1 accuracy. These
results demonstrate the effectiveness of DCP and Adapt-DCP.
Model deployment to mobile devices
We further deploy the pruned models to a mobile device. We
perform the evaluations on a Xiaomi 8 smartphone, which is
equipped with a 2.8 GHz Qualcomm Snapdragon 845 mobile
processor. The test-phase computation is carried out on a single
large CPU core without GPU acceleration. We report the results in
Compared with the pre-trained model, MobileNetV1 with a
pruning rate of 30% achieves nearly 2× acceleration on the mobile
phone. Moreover, the execution of our pruned MobileNetV2 only
requires 44.25ms, which is much lower than the pre-trained one.
These results show that our methods are able to compress the
compact models to signiﬁcantly reduce the inference time.
Performance comparisons of different methods on face recognition. “VR” refers to Veriﬁcation TAR (True Accepted Rate) and “FAR10−6” refers to the
False Accepted Rate at 10−6. We do not report the inference time of SphereFace and CosFace due to its large model size and computational costs.
Validation Accuracy (%)
VR@FAR10−6 (%)
#Param. (M)
#FLOPs (G)
Mobile CPU
Times (ms)
SphereFace 
CosFace 
LResNet34E-IR 
LResNet34E-IR (prune 25% channels)
LResNet34E-IR (prune 50% channels)
MobileFaceNet 
MobileFaceNet (prune 25% channels)
Comparisons of DCP and DKP on CIFAR-10. The Top-1 error (%) of the
pre-trained ResNet-56 and VGGNet are 6.26 and 6.02, respectively.
Top-1 Err. (%)
Experiments on Face Recognition
Compared methods
We apply the proposed DCP to LResNet34E-IR and MobileFaceNet on face recognition. To evaluate the proposed
DCP method, we consider several face recognition models for
comparison, including SphereFace and CosFace .
Datasets and implementation details
We evaluate the proposed DCP method on four benchmark
datasets, including LFW , CFP-FP , AgeDB-30 , and
MegaFace . LFW contains 13,233 face images from 5,749
identities. CFP consists of 500 identities, each with 10 frontal
and 4 proﬁle images. AgeDB-30 contains 12,240 images of
440 identities. MegaFace is a very challenging benchmark
dataset to evaluate the performance of face recognition methods at
a scale of million distractors.
We use the reﬁned MS-Celeb-1M released by for
training. The training dataset consists of 5.8M face images from
85k individuals. With the same settings as , we ﬁrst train
LResNet34E-IR and MobileFaceNet from scratch. Then,
we apply our proposed DCP to compress the pre-trained models.
Before channel pruning, we ﬁrst insert 2 additive angular
margin losses into LResNet34E-IR and MobileFaceNet. Then,
we ﬁne-tune 15 epochs with both the discrimination-aware losses
and the ﬁnal loss. The learning rate is initialized to 0.01 and divided
by 10 at epochs 4, 8, and 12.
Comparisons of DCP and DKP on ILSVRC-12. The Top-1 and Top-5
error (%) of the pre-trained ResNet-18 are 30.36 and 11.02, respectively.
After doing ﬁne-tuning, we perform channel selection to select
the informative channels. After doing channel selection, we ﬁnetune the whole network for 28 epochs. The learning rate is
initialized to 0.01 and divided by 10 at epochs 8, 16 and 24.
We use SGD with a mini-batch size of 512 for optimization.
Performance comparisons
We report the results in Table 4. From the results, we observe
that the pruned models with small pruning rates achieve nearly
the same performance as the pre-trained model. For example,
for LResNet34E-IR, the pruned model with a pruning rate of
25% even outperforms the pre-trained model on CFP-FP and
MegaFace. Moreover, for MobileFaceNet, the pruned model
achieves comparable performance as the pre-trained model with
only 0.79M parameters and 28.71ms for inference, which is suitable
for resource-limited devices.
Compared with SphereFace and CosFace , our pruned
LResNet34E-IR achieves comparable performance with a much
smaller number of parameters and FLOPs. Even with a pruning
rate of 50%, our pruned LResNet34E-IR still achieves comparable
performance to the pre-trained model. These results demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed DCP on face recognition.
Effectiveness of DKP
Compared methods
To investigate the effectiveness of DKP, apart from DCP and Adapt-
DCP, we include the following methods for comparisons. DKP
Only: The proposed kernel pruning method with a ﬁxed pruning
rate. DCP+DKP: We sequentially perform channel selection and
kernel selection. Adapt-DKP: DKP Only with adaptive stopping
condition 2.
Datasets and implementation details
We evaluate the performance of the pruned models on CIFAR-10
and ILSVRC-12. For kernel selection, we use the same additional
losses introduced in DCP. We set B to a value that is equal to the
Parameter Reduction (%)
Accuracy Reduction (%)
(a) Accuracy reduction vs. parameter reduction
FLOPs Reduction (%)
Accuracy Reduction (%)
(b) Accuracy reduction vs.. FLOPs reduction
Fig. 2. Comparisons of DCP and DKP in terms of Top-1 accuracy
reduction vs. parameter/FLOPs reduction. We apply DCP/DKP to prune
VGGNet on CIFAR-10 with different pruning rates.
number of kernels in a channel. After doing kernel selection, we
ﬁne-tune the whole network with the selected kernels only.
Performance comparisons
We apply DKP to select informative kernels from ResNet-56,
VGGNet, and ResNet-18. From Table 5 and Table 6, directly
adopting DKP to prune models achieve the best performance on
both CIFAR-10 and ILSVRC-12. For example, for ResNet-18,
DKP outperforms DCP by 0.18% in terms of the Top-1 accuracy
with 47.12% and 46.56% reductions in the parameters and FLOPs.
Moreover, with Adapt-DKP, the resultant models obtain comparable
performance but lower computational costs than the ones of Adapt-
DCP. Note that the improvement of DCP+DKP over DCP is smaller
than that of DKP Only. In DCP+DKP, we simply perform kernel
selection after doing channel selection. As a result, the performance
highly depends on DCP. Speciﬁcally, once a channel is pruned
(or not selected), even if there may still exist some informative
kernels related to it, we are no longer able to ﬁnd and keep those
useful kernels related to the removed channel, which may result in
suboptimal performance and the marginal improvement over DCP.
From Figure 2, DKP Only consistently outperforms DCP under
different pruning rates. To be speciﬁc, VGGNet pruned by DKP
Only with a 90.41% reduction in parameters reduces the Top-1
error by 0.46% compared with the one pruned by DCP. These
results demonstrate the effectiveness of DKP.
ABLATION STUDIES
In this section, we conduct ablative studies for the proposed DCP.
1) We investigate the effect of using different pruning rates in
Section 7.1. 2) We explore the effect of using different λ in
Section 7.2. 3) We explore the effect of efﬁcient training strategies
in Section 7.3. 4) We explore the effect of using different B
Comparisons on ResNet-18 and ResNet-50 with different pruning rates.
We report the Top-1 and Top-5 error (%) on ILSVRC-12.
Pruning results of ResNet-56 and MobileNetV1 with different λ. We
report the testing error (%) on CIFAR-10.
1(LM only)
MobileNetV1
in Section 7.4. 5) We discuss the effect of the tolerance ϵ in
the proposed stopping conditions in Section 7.5. 6) We compare
different stopping conditions in Section 7.6. 7) We visualize the
feature maps w.r.t. the pruned/selected channels of ResNet-18 in
Section 7.7. 8) We explore the inﬂuence of the number of additional
losses in Section 7.8.
Performance with different pruning rates
To study the effect of using different pruning rates η, we prune
30%, 50%, and 70% channels from ResNet-18 and ResNet-50,
and evaluate the pruned models on ILSVRC-12. The experimental
results are shown in Table 7.
From the results, the pruned models perform worse with the
increase of the pruning rate. However, our pruned ResNet-50
with a pruning rate of 30% outperforms the pre-trained model
with 0.36% and 0.11% improvement in terms of the Top-1 and
Top-5 accuracy, respectively. It may attribute that DCP serves
as a regularization as it effectively reduces model redundancy
by selecting the most discriminative channels for each layer.
Additionally, the performance degradation of ResNet-50 is smaller
than that of ResNet-18 under the same pruning rate. For example,
when pruning 50% of the channels, it only leads to 1.02% increase
in terms of the Top-1 error for ResNet-50. In contrast, it results
in 2.28% increase of the Top-1 error for ResNet-18. It can be
attributed to that, compared with ResNet-18, ResNet-50 is more
redundant with more parameters, thus it is easier to be pruned.
Effect of the trade-off hyperparameter λ
We prune 30% channels of ResNet-56 and MobileNetV1 on CIFAR-
10 with different λ values. We report the testing error in Table 8.
From the table, the performance of the pruned models ﬁrst improves
and then degrades with the increasing λ. Here, a larger λ implies
that more emphasis is placed on the reconstruction error (See Eq.
(6)). This demonstrates the effectiveness of the discriminationaware strategy for channel selection. It is worth mentioning that
both the reconstruction error and the cross-entropy loss contribute to
better performance of the pruned models, which strongly supports
the motivation to select the important channels by Lp
Effect of efﬁcient single round ﬁne-tuning. We report the testing error (%)
and the time of channel pruning on CIFAR-10 and ILSVRC-12.
Time (hour)
(CIFAR-10)
(ILSVRC-12)
Effect of feature reusing. We report the testing error (%) and the time of
channel pruning on CIFAR-10 and ILSVRC-12.
Time (hour)
(CIFAR-10)
without feature reusing
with feature reusing
(ILSVRC-12)
without feature reusing
with feature reusing
Pruning results of ResNet-56 with different B. We report the testing error
(%) and the time of channel pruning on CIFAR-10.
Testing Err. (%)
Time (hour)
Note that setting λ to 1.0 does not lead to the best performance
considering different architectures and datasets. For simplicity, we
set λ to 1.0 by default in our experiments.
Effect of the improved training techniques
Effect of the single round ﬁne-tuning
To evaluate the effectiveness of the single round ﬁne-tuning, we
prune 50% channels of ResNet-56 on CIFAR-10 and 70% channels
of ResNet-18 on ILSVRC-12. We compare the proposed DCP with
the conference version and report the testing error and time
of channel pruning in Table 9. From the table, the proposed DCP
with single round ﬁne-tuning signiﬁcantly reduces the training
time while maintaining comparable performance to the previous
DCP . For example, DCP pruned ResNet-18 on ILSVRC-
12 reduces the computational cost by 6.14× compared with the
conference version. These results demonstrate the effectiveness and
efﬁciency of the improved ﬁne-tuning strategy.
Effect of the feature reusing
To study the effect of the feature reusing, we prune 50% channels
of ResNet-56 on CIFAR-10 and 70% channels of ResNet-18 on
ILSVRC-12. We report the testing error and time of channel
pruning in Table 10. As shown in the table, pruning with the feature
reusing achieves comparable performance to the model without the
feature reusing. However, pruning with the feature reusing greatly
reduces the time of channel pruning. For example, DCP pruned
ResNet-18 with the feature reusing reduces the computational cost
by 1.72×. Due to the superior performance of the feature reusing,
we use it by default in our experiments.
Effect of ϵ for channel selection. We prune VGGNet with different ϵ and
report the testing error (%) on CIFAR-10.
Top-1 Err. (%)
#Param. ↓(%)
#FLOPs ↓(%)
with stopping
condition 1
with stopping
condition 2
Pruning results of ResNet-56 with different stopping conditions. We
report the testing error (%) on CIFAR-10.
#Param. ↓(%)
#FLOPs ↓(%)
with stopping condition 1
with stopping condition 2
Effect of the hyperparameter B
To evaluate the effect of B, we prune 50% channels of ResNet-56
on CIFAR-10 with different B and report the results in Table 11.
Here, a larger B indicates that we select more channels at each
iteration in Algorithm 2. As a result, fewer iterations are required.
From Table 11, the channel pruning time decreases with the
increase of B while the performance of DCP degrades. For example,
DCP pruned ResNet-56 with B = 4 reduces the computational cost
by 4.85×. To make a trade-off between accuracy and complexity,
we set B to 2 in our experiments.
Effect of the tolerance ϵ in stopping conditions
We test different tolerance values in Eq. (10) and Eq. (11). Here, we
prune VGGNet on CIFAR-10 with ϵ ∈{1 × 10−4, 3 × 10−4, 5 ×
10−4}. We show the experimental results in Table 12. In general,
a smaller ϵ will lead to a more rigorous stopping condition. Hence,
more channels will be selected. As a result, the performance
of the pruned models is improved with the decrease of ϵ. This
experiment demonstrates the effectiveness of stopping conditions
for automatically determining the pruning rate.
Effect of different stopping conditions
We investigate the effect of different stopping conditions mentioned
in Section 4.6. To this end, we prune VGGNet and ResNet-
56 using Adapt-DCP with different stopping conditions and
report the results in Tables 12 and 13. From the results, the
resultant models with stopping condition 2 obtain comparable
performance but signiﬁcantly lower computational costs than the
ones of stopping condition 1. For example, VGGNet pruned
with stopping condition 2 reduces 69.81% FLOPs while the one
pruned with stopping condition 1 only reduces 30.80% FLOPs
when ϵ = 1e−4. To further explore the effect of different stopping
conditions, we visualize the number of FLOPs w.r.t. each layer of
the pruned ResNet-56 and VGGNet. From Figure 3, the proposed
stopping condition 2 is able to prevent DCP from selecting too
many channels, and signiﬁcantly reduces the computational cost
of the compressed models. Due to the superior performance of
stopping condition 2 in FLOPs reduction, we use it by default.
Residual Block Index
Stopping condition 1
Stopping condition 2
(a) FLOPs w.r.t. each layer in the pruned ResNet-56.
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Layer Index
Stopping condition 1
Stopping condition 2
(b) FLOPs w.r.t. each layer in the pruned VGGNet.
Fig. 3. Number of FLOPs w.r.t. each layer in the pruned ResNet-56 and VGGNet with different stopping conditions.
Fig. 4. Visualization of the feature maps from the second layer of the ﬁrst residual block in ResNet-18 on ILSVRC-12. Feature maps with and without
the red bounding boxes are the pruned and selected channels, respectively.
Visualization of feature maps
We further visualize all the feature maps w.r.t. the pruned and
selected channels from the ﬁrst residual block in ResNet-18 in
Figure 4. From the results, the feature maps of the pruned channels
are less informative than those of the selected channels. Moreover,
the proposed DCP is able to remove those highly activated channels
that are redundant or nearly identical along with the weakly
activated channels. For example, DCP removes the 49-th channel
since it is similar to the 45-th channel (cosine similarity: 0.82). Even
a channel with high activation values (e.g., the 5-th channel), DCP
still removes it as it does not contribute to the discriminative power
of the network. These results prove that the proposed DCP selects
the channels with strong discriminative power for the network.
Effect of the number of additional losses
We prune 50% channels from ResNet-56 and 30% channels from
MobileNetV1 with different number of additional losses on CIFAR-
10. From Table 14, adding more losses results in better performance.
For example, ResNet-56 with three additional losses outperforms
the one with one additional loss. However, adding too many losses
may lead to a little gain in performance but signiﬁcantly increase
Effect of the number of additional losses. We prune 50% channels from
ResNet-56 and 30% channels from MobileNetV1. We report the testing
error on CIFAR-10. The testing error (%) of pre-trained ResNet-56 and
MobilenNet v1 are 6.26 and 6.04, respectively.
#Additional Losses
Err. gap (%)
MobileNetV1
the computational cost. Heuristically, we ﬁnd that adding losses
every 5-10 blocks is sufﬁcient to make a good trade-off between
accuracy and complexity.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed a discrimination-aware channel
pruning (DCP) method for the compression of deep neural networks.
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst introduce additional losses to improve the
discriminative power of the network and then perform channel
selection in a layer-wise manner. In order to select informative
channels, we have formulated the channel pruning as a sparsityinduced optimization problem and proposed a greedy algorithm
to solve it. Based on DCP, we have further proposed several
techniques to accelerate the channel pruning process. Moreover, we
have also proposed a discrimination-aware kernel pruning (DKP)
method to perform model compression at the kernel level. Extensive
results on both image classiﬁcation and face recognition tasks have
demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed methods.
In the future, we may extend our method in two aspects. First,
in the proposed DCP, we perform channel/kernel selection in a
layer-wise manner. This strategy, however, may result in suboptimal
performance as only a single layer is considered each time. To
address this, we may consider multiple layers/blocks each time
to improve the pruning performance. Second, we will extend
the proposed DCP scheme for model quantization. Speciﬁcally,
based on DCP, we can conduct the quantization for each selected
channel/kernel, and use the reconstruction residual to choose the
next channel/kernel. In this way, we can perform channel/kernel
pruning and quantization simultaneously.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially supported by Key-Area Research and
Development Program of Guangdong Province 2018B010107001,
National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) 61836003
(key project), National Natural Science Foundation of China
(NSFC) 62072190, and Program for Guangdong Introducing
Innovative and Enterpreneurial Teams 2017ZT07X183.