Improved Training of Wasserstein GANs
Ishaan Gulrajani1∗, Faruk Ahmed1, Martin Arjovsky2, Vincent Dumoulin1, Aaron Courville1,3
1 Montreal Institute for Learning Algorithms
2 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
3 CIFAR Fellow
 
{faruk.ahmed,vincent.dumoulin,aaron.courville}@umontreal.ca
 
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are powerful generative models, but
suffer from training instability. The recently proposed Wasserstein GAN (WGAN)
makes progress toward stable training of GANs, but sometimes can still generate
only poor samples or fail to converge. We ﬁnd that these problems are often due
to the use of weight clipping in WGAN to enforce a Lipschitz constraint on the
critic, which can lead to undesired behavior. We propose an alternative to clipping
weights: penalize the norm of gradient of the critic with respect to its input. Our
proposed method performs better than standard WGAN and enables stable training of a wide variety of GAN architectures with almost no hyperparameter tuning,
including 101-layer ResNets and language models with continuous generators.
We also achieve high quality generations on CIFAR-10 and LSUN bedrooms. †
Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are a powerful class of generative models that cast
generative modeling as a game between two networks: a generator network produces synthetic data
given some noise source and a discriminator network discriminates between the generator’s output
and true data. GANs can produce very visually appealing samples, but are often hard to train, and
much of the recent work on the subject has been devoted to ﬁnding ways of stabilizing
training. Despite this, consistently stable training of GANs remains an open problem.
In particular, provides an analysis of the convergence properties of the value function being
optimized by GANs. Their proposed alternative, named Wasserstein GAN (WGAN) , leverages
the Wasserstein distance to produce a value function which has better theoretical properties than the
original. WGAN requires that the discriminator (called the critic in that work) must lie within the
space of 1-Lipschitz functions, which the authors enforce through weight clipping.
Our contributions are as follows:
1. On toy datasets, we demonstrate how critic weight clipping can lead to undesired behavior.
2. We propose gradient penalty (WGAN-GP), which does not suffer from the same problems.
3. We demonstrate stable training of varied GAN architectures, performance improvements
over weight clipping, high-quality image generation, and a character-level GAN language
model without any discrete sampling.
∗Now at Google Brain
†Code for our models is available at 
 
Background
Generative adversarial networks
The GAN training strategy is to deﬁne a game between two competing networks. The generator
network maps a source of noise to the input space. The discriminator network receives either a
generated sample or a true data sample and must distinguish between the two. The generator is
trained to fool the discriminator.
Formally, the game between the generator G and the discriminator D is the minimax objective:
x∼Pr[log(D(x))] +
˜x∼Pg[log(1 −D(˜x))],
where Pr is the data distribution and Pg is the model distribution implicitly deﬁned by ˜x =
G(z), z ∼p(z) (the input z to the generator is sampled from some simple noise distribution
p, such as the uniform distribution or a spherical Gaussian distribution).
If the discriminator is trained to optimality before each generator parameter update, then minimizing the value function amounts to minimizing the Jensen-Shannon divergence between Pr and Pg
 , but doing so often leads to vanishing gradients as the discriminator saturates. In practice, 
advocates that the generator be instead trained to maximize E˜x∼Pg[log(D(˜x))], which goes some
way to circumvent this difﬁculty. However, even this modiﬁed loss function can misbehave in the
presence of a good discriminator .
Wasserstein GANs
 argues that the divergences which GANs typically minimize are potentially not continuous with
respect to the generator’s parameters, leading to training difﬁculty. They propose instead using
the Earth-Mover (also called Wasserstein-1) distance W(q, p), which is informally deﬁned as the
minimum cost of transporting mass in order to transform the distribution q into the distribution p
(where the cost is mass times transport distance). Under mild assumptions, W(q, p) is continuous
everywhere and differentiable almost everywhere.
The WGAN value function is constructed using the Kantorovich-Rubinstein duality to obtain
where D is the set of 1-Lipschitz functions and Pg is once again the model distribution implicitly
deﬁned by ˜x = G(z), z ∼p(z). In that case, under an optimal discriminator (called a critic in the
paper, since it’s not trained to classify), minimizing the value function with respect to the generator
parameters minimizes W(Pr, Pg).
The WGAN value function results in a critic function whose gradient with respect to its input is
better behaved than its GAN counterpart, making optimization of the generator easier. Empirically,
it was also observed that the WGAN value function appears to correlate with sample quality, which
is not the case for GANs .
To enforce the Lipschitz constraint on the critic, propose to clip the weights of the critic to lie
within a compact space [−c, c]. The set of functions satisfying this constraint is a subset of the
k-Lipschitz functions for some k which depends on c and the critic architecture. In the following
sections, we demonstrate some of the issues with this approach and propose an alternative.
Properties of the optimal WGAN critic
In order to understand why weight clipping is problematic in a WGAN critic, as well as to motivate
our approach, we highlight some properties of the optimal critic in the WGAN framework. We prove
these in the Appendix.
Proposition 1. Let Pr and Pg be two distributions in X, a compact metric space. Then, there is a
1-Lipschitz function f ∗which is the optimal solution of max∥f∥L≤1 Ey∼Pr[f(y)] −Ex∼Pg[f(x)].
Let π be the optimal coupling between Pr and Pg, deﬁned as the minimizer of: W(Pr, Pg) =
infπ∈Π(Pr,Pg) E(x,y)∼π [∥x −y∥] where Π(Pr, Pg) is the set of joint distributions π(x, y) whose
marginals are Pr and Pg, respectively. Then, if f ∗is differentiable‡, π(x = y) = 0§, and xt =
tx + (1 −t)y with 0 ≤t ≤1, it holds that P(x,y)∼π
∇f ∗(xt) =
Corollary 1. f ∗has gradient norm 1 almost everywhere under Pr and Pg.
Difﬁculties with weight constraints
We ﬁnd that weight clipping in WGAN leads to optimization difﬁculties, and that even when optimization succeeds the resulting critic can have a pathological value surface. We explain these
problems below and demonstrate their effects; however we do not claim that each one always occurs
in practice, nor that they are the only such mechanisms.
Our experiments use the speciﬁc form of weight constraint from (hard clipping of the magnitude
of each weight), but we also tried other weight constraints (L2 norm clipping, weight normalization),
as well as soft constraints (L1 and L2 weight decay) and found that they exhibit similar problems.
To some extent these problems can be mitigated with batch normalization in the critic, which 
use in all of their experiments. However even with batch normalization, we observe that very deep
WGAN critics often fail to converge.
8 Gaussians
25 Gaussians
Swiss Roll
(a) Value surfaces of WGAN critics trained to optimality on toy datasets using (top) weight clipping
and (bottom) gradient penalty. Critics trained with
weight clipping fail to capture higher moments of the
data distribution. The ‘generator’ is held ﬁxed at the
real data plus Gaussian noise.
Discriminator layer
Gradient norm (log scale)
Weight clipping (c = 0.001)
Weight clipping (c = 0.01)
Weight clipping (c = 0.1)
Gradient penalty
Weight clipping
Gradient penalty
(b) (left) Gradient norms of deep WGAN critics during training on the Swiss Roll dataset either explode
or vanish when using weight clipping, but not when
using a gradient penalty. (right) Weight clipping (top)
pushes weights towards two values (the extremes of
the clipping range), unlike gradient penalty (bottom).
Figure 1: Gradient penalty in WGANs does not exhibit undesired behavior like weight clipping.
Capacity underuse
Implementing a k-Lipshitz constraint via weight clipping biases the critic towards much simpler
functions. As stated previously in Corollary 1, the optimal WGAN critic has unit gradient norm
almost everywhere under Pr and Pg; under a weight-clipping constraint, we observe that our neural
network architectures which try to attain their maximum gradient norm k end up learning extremely
simple functions.
To demonstrate this, we train WGAN critics with weight clipping to optimality on several toy distributions, holding the generator distribution Pg ﬁxed at the real distribution plus unit-variance Gaussian noise. We plot value surfaces of the critics in Figure 1a. We omit batch normalization in the
‡We can actually assume much less, and talk only about directional derivatives on the direction of the line;
which we show in the proof always exist. This would imply that in every point where f ∗is differentiable (and
thus we can take gradients in a neural network setting) the statement holds.
§This assumption is in order to exclude the case when the matching point of sample x is x itself. It is
satisﬁed in the case that Pr and Pg have supports that intersect in a set of measure 0, such as when they are
supported by two low dimensional manifolds that don’t perfectly align .
Algorithm 1 WGAN with gradient penalty. We use default values of λ = 10, ncritic = 5, α =
0.0001, β1 = 0, β2 = 0.9.
Require: The gradient penalty coefﬁcient λ, the number of critic iterations per generator iteration
ncritic, the batch size m, Adam hyperparameters α, β1, β2.
Require: initial critic parameters w0, initial generator parameters θ0.
1: while θ has not converged do
for t = 1, ..., ncritic do
for i = 1, ..., m do
Sample real data x ∼Pr, latent variable z ∼p(z), a random number ϵ ∼U .
ˆx ←ϵx + (1 −ϵ)˜x
L(i) ←Dw(˜x) −Dw(x) + λ(∥∇ˆxDw(ˆx)∥2 −1)2
w ←Adam(∇w 1
i=1 L(i), w, α, β1, β2)
Sample a batch of latent variables {z(i)}m
i=1 ∼p(z).
θ ←Adam(∇θ 1
i=1 −Dw(Gθ(z)), θ, α, β1, β2)
13: end while
critic. In each case, the critic trained with weight clipping ignores higher moments of the data distribution and instead models very simple approximations to the optimal functions. In contrast, our
approach does not suffer from this behavior.
Exploding and vanishing gradients
We observe that the WGAN optimization process is difﬁcult because of interactions between the
weight constraint and the cost function, which result in either vanishing or exploding gradients
without careful tuning of the clipping threshold c.
To demonstrate this, we train WGAN on the Swiss Roll toy dataset, varying the clipping threshold c
in [10−1, 10−2, 10−3], and plot the norm of the gradient of the critic loss with respect to successive
layers of activations. Both generator and critic are 12-layer ReLU MLPs without batch normalization. Figure 1b shows that for each of these values, the gradient either grows or decays exponentially
as we move farther back in the network. We ﬁnd our method results in more stable gradients that
neither vanish nor explode, allowing training of more complicated networks.
Gradient penalty
We now propose an alternative way to enforce the Lipschitz constraint. A differentiable function
is 1-Lipschtiz if and only if it has gradients with norm at most 1 everywhere, so we consider directly constraining the gradient norm of the critic’s output with respect to its input. To circumvent
tractability issues, we enforce a soft version of the constraint with a penalty on the gradient norm
for random samples ˆx ∼Pˆx. Our new objective is
˜x∼Pg [D(˜x)] −
x∼Pr [D(x)]
Original critic loss
(∥∇ˆxD(ˆx)∥2 −1)2
Our gradient penalty
Sampling distribution We implicitly deﬁne Pˆx sampling uniformly along straight lines between
pairs of points sampled from the data distribution Pr and the generator distribution Pg. This is
motivated by the fact that the optimal critic contains straight lines with gradient norm 1 connecting
coupled points from Pr and Pg (see Proposition 1). Given that enforcing the unit gradient norm
constraint everywhere is intractable, enforcing it only along these straight lines seems sufﬁcient and
experimentally results in good performance.
Penalty coefﬁcient All experiments in this paper use λ = 10, which we found to work well across
a variety of architectures and datasets ranging from toy tasks to large ImageNet CNNs.
No critic batch normalization Most prior GAN implementations use batch normalization in both the generator and the discriminator to help stabilize training, but batch normalization
changes the form of the discriminator’s problem from mapping a single input to a single output to
mapping from an entire batch of inputs to a batch of outputs . Our penalized training objective
is no longer valid in this setting, since we penalize the norm of the critic’s gradient with respect
to each input independently, and not the entire batch. To resolve this, we simply omit batch normalization in the critic in our models, ﬁnding that they perform well without it. Our method works
with normalization schemes which don’t introduce correlations between examples. In particular, we
recommend layer normalization as a drop-in replacement for batch normalization.
Two-sided penalty We encourage the norm of the gradient to go towards 1 (two-sided penalty)
instead of just staying below 1 (one-sided penalty). Empirically this seems not to constrain the
critic too much, likely because the optimal WGAN critic anyway has gradients with norm 1 almost
everywhere under Pr and Pg and in large portions of the region in between (see subsection 2.3). In
our early observations we found this to perform slightly better, but we don’t investigate this fully.
We describe experiments on the one-sided penalty in the appendix.
Experiments
Training random architectures within a set
We experimentally demonstrate our model’s ability to train a large number of architectures which
we think are useful to be able to train. Starting from the DCGAN architecture, we deﬁne a set of
architecture variants by changing model settings to random corresponding values in Table 1. We
believe that reliable training of many of the architectures in this set is a useful goal, but we do not
claim that our set is an unbiased or representative sample of the whole space of useful architectures:
it is designed to demonstrate a successful regime of our method, and readers should evaluate whether
it contains architectures similar to their intended application.
Table 1: We evaluate WGAN-GP’s ability to train the architectures in this set.
Nonlinearity (G)
[ReLU, LeakyReLU, softplus(2x+2)
Nonlinearity (D)
[ReLU, LeakyReLU, softplus(2x+2)
 
 
Batch norm (G)
[True, False]
Batch norm (D; layer norm for WGAN-GP)
[True, False]
Base ﬁlter count (G)
 
Base ﬁlter count (D)
 
From this set, we sample 200 architectures and train each on 32×32 ImageNet with both WGAN-GP
and the standard GAN objectives. Table 2 lists the number of instances where either: only the standard GAN succeeded, only WGAN-GP succeeded, both succeeded, or both failed, where success
is deﬁned as inception score > min score. For most choices of score threshold, WGAN-GP
successfully trains many architectures from this set which we were unable to train with the standard
GAN objective. We give more experimental details in the appendix.
Outcomes of training 200 random architectures, for different success thresholds. For
comparison, our standard DCGAN scored 7.24.
Min. score
Only WGAN-GP
Both succeeded
Both failed
WGAN (clipping)
WGAN-GP (ours)
Baseline (G: DCGAN, D: DCGAN)
G: No BN and a constant number of ﬁlters, D: DCGAN
G: 4-layer 512-dim ReLU MLP, D: DCGAN
No normalization in either G or D
Gated multiplicative nonlinearities everywhere in G and D
tanh nonlinearities everywhere in G and D
101-layer ResNet G and D
Figure 2: Different GAN architectures trained with different methods. We only succeeded in training every architecture with a shared set of hyperparameters using WGAN-GP.
Training varied architectures on LSUN bedrooms
To demonstrate our model’s ability to train many architectures with its default settings, we train six
different GAN architectures on the LSUN bedrooms dataset . In addition to the baseline DC-
GAN architecture from , we choose six architectures whose successful training we demonstrate:
(1) no BN and a constant number of ﬁlters in the generator, as in , (2) 4-layer 512-dim ReLU
MLP generator, as in , (3) no normalization in either the discriminator or generator (4) gated
multiplicative nonlinearities, as in , (5) tanh nonlinearities, and (6) 101-layer ResNet generator
and discriminator.
Although we do not claim it is impossible without our method, to the best of our knowledge this
is the ﬁrst time very deep residual networks were successfully trained in a GAN setting. For each
architecture, we train models using four different GAN methods: WGAN-GP, WGAN with weight
clipping, DCGAN , and Least-Squares GAN . For each objective, we used the default set
of optimizer hyperparameters recommended in that work (except LSGAN, where we searched over
learning rates).
For WGAN-GP, we replace any batch normalization in the discriminator with layer normalization
(see section 4). We train each model for 200K iterations and present samples in Figure 2. We only
succeeded in training every architecture with a shared set of hyperparameters using WGAN-GP.
For every other training method, some of these architectures were unstable or suffered from mode
Improved performance over weight clipping
One advantage of our method over weight clipping is improved training speed and sample quality.
To demonstrate this, we train WGANs with weight clipping and our gradient penalty on CIFAR-
10 and plot Inception scores over the course of training in Figure 3. For WGAN-GP,
Generator iterations
Inception Score
Convergence on CIFAR-10
Weight clipping
Gradient Penalty (RMSProp)
Gradient Penalty (Adam)
Wallclock time (in seconds)
Inception Score
Convergence on CIFAR-10
Weight clipping
Gradient Penalty (RMSProp)
Gradient Penalty (Adam)
Figure 3: CIFAR-10 Inception score over generator iterations (left) or wall-clock time (right) for
four models: WGAN with weight clipping, WGAN-GP with RMSProp and Adam (to control for
the optimizer), and DCGAN. WGAN-GP signiﬁcantly outperforms weight clipping and performs
comparably to DCGAN.
we train one model with the same optimizer (RMSProp) and learning rate as WGAN with weight
clipping, and another model with Adam and a higher learning rate. Even with the same optimizer,
our method converges faster and to a better score than weight clipping. Using Adam further improves
performance. We also plot the performance of DCGAN and ﬁnd that our method converges
more slowly (in wall-clock time) than DCGAN, but its score is more stable at convergence.
Sample quality on CIFAR-10 and LSUN bedrooms
For equivalent architectures, our method achieves comparable sample quality to the standard GAN
objective. However the increased stability allows us to improve sample quality by exploring a wider
range of architectures. To demonstrate this, we ﬁnd an architecture which establishes a new state of
the art Inception score on unsupervised CIFAR-10 (Table 3). When we add label information (using
the method in ), the same architecture outperforms all other published models except for SGAN.
Table 3: Inception scores on CIFAR-10. Our unsupervised model achieves state-of-the-art performance, and our conditional model outperforms all others except SGAN.
Unsupervised
ALI (in )
5.34 ± .05
DCGAN (in )
6.16 ± .07
Improved GAN (-L+HA) 
6.86 ± .06
EGAN-Ent-VI 
7.07 ± .10
7.72 ± .13
WGAN-GP ResNet (ours)
7.86 ± .07
Supervised
SteinGAN 
DCGAN (with labels, in )
Improved GAN 
8.09 ± .07
AC-GAN 
8.25 ± .07
SGAN-no-joint 
8.37 ± .08
WGAN-GP ResNet (ours)
8.42 ± .10
8.59 ± .12
We also train a deep ResNet on 128 × 128 LSUN bedrooms and show samples in Figure 4. We
believe these samples are at least competitive with the best reported so far on any resolution for this
Modeling discrete data with a continuous generator
To demonstrate our method’s ability to model degenerate distributions, we consider the problem of
modeling a complex discrete distribution with a GAN whose generator is deﬁned over a continuous
space. As an instance of this problem, we train a character-level GAN language model on the Google
Billion Word dataset . Our generator is a simple 1D CNN which deterministically transforms a
latent vector into a sequence of 32 one-hot character vectors through 1D convolutions. We apply a
softmax nonlinearity at the output, but use no sampling step: during training, the softmax output is
Figure 4: Samples of 128×128 LSUN bedrooms. We believe these samples are at least comparable
to the best published results so far.
passed directly into the critic (which, likewise, is a simple 1D CNN). When decoding samples, we
just take the argmax of each output vector.
We present samples from the model in Table 4. Our model makes frequent spelling errors (likely
because it has to output each character independently) but nonetheless manages to learn quite a lot
about the statistics of language. We were unable to produce comparable results with the standard
GAN objective, though we do not claim that doing so is impossible.
Table 4: Samples from a WGAN-GP character-level language model trained on sentences from
the Billion Word dataset, truncated to 32 characters. The model learns to directly output one-hot
character embeddings from a latent vector without any discrete sampling step. We were unable to
achieve comparable results with the standard GAN objective and a continuous generator.
Busino game camperate spent odea
Solice Norkedin pring in since
In the bankaway of smarling the
ThiS record ( 31. ) UBS ) and Ch
SingersMay , who kill that imvic
It was not the annuas were plogr
Keray Pents of the same Reagun D
This will be us , the ect of DAN
Manging include a tudancs shat "
These leaded as most-worsd p2 a0
His Zuith Dudget , the Denmbern
The time I paidOa South Cubry i
In during the Uitational questio
Dour Fraps higs it was these del
Divos from The ’ noth ronkies of
This year out howneed allowed lo
She like Monday , of macunsuer S
Kaulna Seto consficutes to repor
The difference in performance between WGAN and other GANs can be explained as follows. Consider the simplex ∆n = {p ∈Rn : pi ≥0, P
i pi = 1}, and the set of vertices on the simplex (or
one-hot vectors) Vn = {p ∈Rn : pi ∈{0, 1}, P
i pi = 1} ⊆∆n. If we have a vocabulary of
size n and we have a distribution Pr over sequences of size T, we have that Pr is a distribution on
n = Vn × · · · × Vn. Since V T
n is a subset of ∆T
n, we can also treat Pr as a distribution on ∆T
assigning zero probability mass to all points not in V T
Pr is discrete (or supported on a ﬁnite number of elements, namely V T
n, but Pg can easily be
a continuous distribution over ∆T
n. The KL divergences between two such distributions are inﬁnite,
Generator iterations
Negative critic loss
validation
Generator iterations
Negative critic loss
validation
Generator iterations
Negative critic loss
validation
Figure 5: (a) The negative critic loss of our model on LSUN bedrooms converges toward a minimum
as the network trains. (b) WGAN training and validation losses on a random 1000-digit subset of
MNIST show overﬁtting when using either our method (left) or weight clipping (right). In particular,
with our method, the critic overﬁts faster than the generator, causing the training loss to increase
gradually over time even as the validation loss drops.
and so the JS divergence is saturated. Although GANs do not literally minimize these divergences
 , in practice this means a discriminator might quickly learn to reject all samples that don’t lie
n (sequences of one-hot vectors) and give meaningless gradients to the generator. However,
it is easily seen that the conditions of Theorem 1 and Corollary 1 of are satisﬁed even on this
non-standard learning scenario with X = ∆T
n. This means that W(Pr, Pg) is still well deﬁned,
continuous everywhere and differentiable almost everywhere, and we can optimize it just like in any
other continuous variable setting. The way this manifests is that in WGANs, the Lipschitz constraint
forces the critic to provide a linear gradient from all ∆T
n towards towards the real points in V T
Other attempts at language modeling with GANs typically use discrete models
and gradient estimators . Our approach is simpler to implement, though whether it scales
beyond a toy language model is unclear.
Meaningful loss curves and detecting overﬁtting
An important beneﬁt of weight-clipped WGANs is that their loss correlates with sample quality
and converges toward a minimum. To show that our method preserves this property, we train a
WGAN-GP on the LSUN bedrooms dataset and plot the negative of the critic’s loss in Figure 5a.
We see that the loss converges as the generator minimizes W(Pr, Pg).
Given enough capacity and too little training data, GANs will overﬁt. To explore the loss curve’s
behavior when the network overﬁts, we train large unregularized WGANs on a random 1000-image
subset of MNIST and plot the negative critic loss on both the training and validation sets in Figure 5b. In both WGAN and WGAN-GP, the two losses diverge, suggesting that the critic overﬁts
and provides an inaccurate estimate of W(Pr, Pg), at which point all bets are off regarding correlation with sample quality. However in WGAN-GP, the training loss gradually increases even while
the validation loss drops.
 also measure overﬁtting in GANs by estimating the generator’s log-likelihood. Compared
to that work, our method detects overﬁtting in the critic (rather than the generator) and measures
overﬁtting against the same loss that the network minimizes.
Conclusion
In this work, we demonstrated problems with weight clipping in WGAN and introduced an alternative in the form of a penalty term in the critic loss which does not exhibit the same problems. Using
our method, we demonstrated strong modeling performance and stability across a variety of architectures. Now that we have a more stable algorithm for training GANs, we hope our work opens
the path for stronger modeling performance on large-scale image datasets and language. Another
interesting direction is adapting our penalty term to the standard GAN objective function, where it
might stabilize training by encouraging the discriminator to learn smoother decision boundaries.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Mohamed Ishmael Belghazi, L´eon Bottou, Zihang Dai, Stefan Doerr, Ian
Goodfellow, Kyle Kastner, Kundan Kumar, Luke Metz, Alec Radford, Colin Raffel, Sai Rajeshwar,
Aditya Ramesh, Tom Sercu, Zain Shah and Jake Zhao for insightful comments.