Formal Analysis of Deep Binarized Neural Networks
Nina Narodytska
VMware Research, USA
 
Understanding properties of deep neural networks
is an important challenge in deep learning. Deep
learning networks are among the most successful
artiﬁcial intelligence technologies that is making impact in a variety of practical applications. However,
many concerns were raised about ‘magical’ power
of these networks. It is disturbing that we are really
lacking of understanding of the decision making
process behind this technology. Therefore, a natural
question is whether we can trust decisions that neural networks make. One way to address this issue is
to deﬁne properties that we want a neural network to
satisfy. Verifying whether a neural network fulﬁlls
these properties sheds light on the properties of the
function that it represents. In this work, we take the
veriﬁcation approach. Our goal is to design a framework for analysis of properties of neural networks.
We start by deﬁning a set of interesting properties
to analyze. Then we focus on Binarized Neural Networks that can be represented and analyzed using
well-developed means of Boolean Satisﬁability and
Integer Linear Programming. One of our main results is an exact representation of a binarized neural
network as a Boolean formula. We also discuss how
we can take advantage of the structure of neural
networks in the search procedure.
Introduction
Deep neural networks have become ubiquitous in machine
learning with applications ranging from computer vision to
speech recognition and natural language processing. Neural
networks demonstrate excellent performance on many practical problems, often beating specialized algorithms for these
problems, which led to their rapid adoption in industrial applications. With such a wide adoption, important questions arise
regarding our understanding of the decision making process of
these neural networks: Is there a way to analyze deep neural
networks? Can we explain their decisions? How robust are
these networks to perturbations of inputs? How critical is the
choice of one architecture over an other? Recently, a new line
of research on understanding neural networks has emerged that
looks into a wide range of such questions, from interpretability of neural networks to verifying their properties [Bau et
al., 2017; Szegedy et al., 2014; Pulina and Tacchella, 2010;
Huang et al., 2017; Katz et al., 2017; Cheng et al., 2017b;
Narodytska et al., 2017; Leofante et al., 2018].
There are a number of ways to analyze a neural network.
One way is to query the network directly, e.g. analyzing of
important parts of the input using numerical optimization techniques, extracting interpretable information from the network,
e.g. using decision trees, and approximating the network with
a simpler function [Simonyan et al., 2013; Ribeiro et al., 2016;
Koh and Liang, 2017; Frosst and Hinton, 2017]. These approaches scale to large networks. However, they fail to provide
formal guarantees about properties of the network. An alternative approach is based on formal veriﬁcation techniques. The
idea is to encode the network and the property we aim to verify
as a formal statement, using ILP, SMT or SAT, for example. If
the encoding provides an exact representation of the network
then we can study any property related to this network, e.g.
how sensitive the network is to perturbations of the input.
In this work we focus on an important class of neural networks: Binarized Neural Networks (BNNs) [Hubara et al.,
2016]. These networks have a number of important features
that are useful in resource constrained environments, like embedded devices or mobile phones. Firstly, these networks are
memory efﬁcient, as their parameters are primarily binary.
Secondly, they are computationally efﬁcient as all activations
are binary, which enables the use of specialized algorithms for
fast binary matrix multiplication. These networks have been
shown to achieve performance comparable to traditional deep
networks that use ﬂoating point precision [Hubara et al., 2016].
Recently, BNNs have been deployed for various embedded
applications ranging from image classiﬁcation [McDanel et
al., 2017] to object detection [Kung et al., 2017].
We start by discussing a set of interesting properties of neural network, including properties that relate inputs and outputs
of the network, e.g. robustness and invertibility, and properties
that relate two networks, like network equivalence. We discuss
how binarized neural networks can be represented as Boolean
or ILP formulas and how the properties that we identify can
be represented in the same formalism. Finally, we consider
main challenges that we face in using decision procedures in
reasoning about BNNs and how we can potentially address
them by exploiting the strutural properties of neural networks.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
Neural Networks
We denote [m] = {1, . . . , m}. Vectors are in
column-wise fashion, denoted by boldface letters. For a vector
v ∈Rm, we use (v1, . . . , vm) to denote its m elements.
We deﬁne the supervised image classiﬁcation problem that
we focus on. We are given a set of training images drawn
from an unknown distribution ν over Zn, where n represents
the “size” of individual images. Each image is associated
with a label generated by an unknown function L : Zn →[s],
where [s] = {1, . . . , s} is a set of possible labels. During
the training phase, given a labeled training set, the goal is to
learn a neural network classiﬁer that can be used for inference:
given a new image drawn from the same distribution ν, the
classiﬁer should predict its true label. During the inference
phase, the network is ﬁxed. In this work, we study properties
of such ﬁxed networks generated post training. Let X denote
the domain from which inputs are drawn. For example, in the
case of images, X = Zn.
Analysis of Neural Networks
In this section, we deﬁne several important properties of neural
networks, ranging from robustness to properties related to
network structure. We consider a general feedforward neural
network denoted by F. Let F(x) represent the output of F on
input x and ℓx = L(x) be the ground truth label of x. For
example, x can be an image of a bus and ℓx its ground truth
label, i.e. ‘bus’.
Robustness
Robustness is an important property that guards the network
against tampering of its outcome by perturbing the inputs.
Robustness is by far the most researched notion in formal
methods literature of veriﬁcation of neural networks [Katz
et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2017; Cheng et al., 2017a; Bunel
et al., 2017; Fischetti and Jo, 2017]. It is also known as
vulnerability to adversarial attacks in the neural networks
literature [Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015].
We make two simpliﬁcations compared to the related work.
First, we look at the robustness property in the context of
the classiﬁcation problem. However, these deﬁnitions can be
extended to networks with richer outputs. Second, we consider
the L∞norm to measure distance for simplicity. [Leofante et
al., 2018] give a survey of neural networks properties from the
formal veriﬁcation point of view in the general case.
There are two forms of robustness that are widely considered in the literature: global and local robustness. Global
robustness means that for any valid input, there is no small
perturbation that can change the decision of the network on
this input. Global robustness is a strong property that is challenging to verify for many applications.
Deﬁnition 1 (Global Robustness). A feedforward neural network F is globally ϵ-robust if for any x, x ∈X and τ,
∥τ∥∞≤ϵ we have that F(x + τ) = ℓx.
Local robustness is a property that is deﬁned for a single
input x. It is a much weaker property that can be efﬁciently
checked for small realistic inputs.
Deﬁnition 2 (Local Robustness). A feedforward neural network F is locally ϵ-robust for an input x, x ∈X, if there does
not exist τ, ∥τ∥∞≤ϵ, such that F(x + τ) ̸= ℓx.
There are many variants of robustness that can be positioned between local and global robustness. One example
is to deﬁne a relaxation of the global robustness property by
allowing a violation of the property on a small fraction of
inputs, that comes from the notion of universal adversarial
attacks [Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016].
Invertibility
Invertibility of the neural network is an interesting property that recently was considered in the veriﬁcation literature [Ehlers, 2017; Korneev et al., 2018]. The main idea is to
explore a set of inputs that map to a given output. For example,
what the inputs of the network are (if exist) that map to a given
output. In general, we need to deﬁne declarative constraints
on the inputs otherwise a lot of noisy images will be generated.
Let C(X) denote the constrained domain of inputs. These
constraints come from the practical application.
Deﬁnition 3 (Local Invertibility). A feedforward neural network F is locally invertible for an output s if there exists x,
x ∈C(X), such that F(x) = s.
A related problem here is how to enumerate multiple, preferably diverse by some measure, inputs of the network that map
to a given output.
Network Equivalence
We consider is equivalence of networks. Informally, two networks F1 and F2 are equivalent if they generate same outputs
on all inputs drawn from the domain X.
Deﬁnition 4 (Network Equivalence). Two feedforward neural
networks F1 and F2 are equivalent if for all x ∈X, F1(x) =
An important case of using network equivalence is certifying a network alteration. Consider a scenario where a
part of the trained network has been altered to form a new
network. This change could arise due to model reduction operations that are commonly performed on deep networks to
make them amenable to execution on resource-constrained
devices [Reagen et al., 2017] or they could arise from other
sources of noise including adversarial corruption of the network. The question now is whether the altered network is
equivalent to the original network?
Next we consider a class of networks that we focus on in
this work.
Binarized Neural Networks
A binarized neural network (BNN) is a feedforward network where weights and activations are predominantly binary [Hubara et al., 2016]. It is convenient to describe the
structure of a BNN in terms of composition of blocks of layers rather than individual layers. Each block consists of a
collection of linear and non-linear transformations. Blocks are
assembled sequentially to form a BNN.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
Structure of kth Internal block, BLKk : {−1, 1}nk →{−1, 1}nk+1 on input xk ∈{−1, 1}nk
y = Akxk + bk , where Ak ∈{−1, 1}nk+1×nk and bk ∈Rnk+1
+ γki, where y = (y1, . . . , ynk+1), and αki, γki, µki, σki ∈R. Assume σki > 0.
xk+1 = sign(z) where z = (z1, . . . , znk+1) ∈Rnk+1 and xk+1 ∈{−1, 1}nk+1
Structure of Output Block, O : {−1, 1}nd →[s] on input xd ∈{−1, 1}nd
w = Adxd + bd, where Ad ∈{−1, 1}s×nd and bd ∈Rs
o = argmax(w), where o ∈[s]
Table 1: Structure of internal and outputs blocks, which stacked together form a binarized neural network. In the training phase, there might be
an additional hard tanh layer after batch normalization. Ak and bk are parameters of the LIN layer, whereas αki, γki, µki, σki are parameters
of the BN layer. µ’s and σ’s correspond to mean and standard deviation computed in the training phase. The BIN layer is parameter free.
Figure 1: A schematic view of a binarized neural network. The
internal blocks also have an additional hard tanh layer.
Internal Block.
Each internal block (denoted as BLK) in
a BNN performs a series of transformations over a binary
input vector and outputs a binary vector. While the input and
output of a BLK are binary vectors, internal layers of BLK
can produce real-valued intermediate outputs. A common
construction of an internal BLK is composed of three main operations:1 a linear transformation (LIN), batch normalization (BN), and binarization
(BIN). Table 1 presents the formal deﬁnition of these transformations. The ﬁrst step is a linear (afﬁne) transformation of
the input vector. The linear transformation can be based on a
fully connected layer or a convolutional layer. The linear transformation is followed by a scaling which is performed with
a batch normalization operation [Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015].
Finally, binarization is performed using the sign function to
obtain a binary output vector. Figure 1 shows two BLKs connected sequentially.
Output Block.
The output block (denoted as O) produces
the classiﬁcation decision for a given image. It consists of two
layers (see Table 1). The ﬁrst layer applies a linear (afﬁne)
transformation that maps its input to a vector of integers, one
for each output label class. This is followed by a ARGMAX
layer, which outputs the index of the largest entry in this vector
as the predicted label.
Network of Blocks. BNN is a deep feedforward network
formed by assembling a sequence of internal blocks and an output block. Suppose we have d −1 blocks, BLK1, . . . , BLKd−1
that are placed consecutively, so the output of a block is an
input to the next block in the list. Let xk be the input to BLKk
1In the training phase, there is an additional hard tanh layer
after batch normalization layer that is omitted in the inference
phase [Hubara et al., 2016].
and xk+1 be its output. The input of the ﬁrst block is the input
of the network. We assume that the input of the network is a
vector of integers, which is true for the image classiﬁcation
task if images are in the standard RGB format. Note that these
integers can be encoded with binary values {−1, 1} using a
standard encoding. Therefore, we keep notations uniform for
all layers by assuming that inputs are all binary. The output of
the last layer, xd ∈{−1, 1}nd, is passed to the output block
O to obtain the label.
Deﬁnition 5 (Binarized Neural Network). A binarized neural
network BNN : {−1, 1}n →[s] is a feedforward network that
is composed of d blocks, BLK1, . . . , BLKd−1, O. Formally,
given an input x,
BNN(x) = O(BLKd−1(. . . BLK1(x) . . .)).
Progress in Formal Analysis of BNNs
We overview results that we have obtained so far on analysis
of BNNs [Narodytska et al., 2017; Korneev et al., 2018].
Encoding of BNNs
Our ﬁrst contribution is to propose an exact encoding of BNNs
as a Boolean formula in the sense that all valid pairs of inputs
and outputs of a given network are exactly solutions of the
Boolean formula. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
work on verifying properties of deep neural networks using
an exact Boolean encoding of the network. Independently,
a similar encoding was proposed by [Cheng et al., 2017b].
As we mentioned above, while the input and the output of
each block are binary vectors, the intermediate values are real.
The key insight was that we should consider a composition of
functions rather than functions of individual layers separately.
Using this approach, we showed that a safe rounding can
be performed and the network can be encoded as a set of
reiﬁed cardinality constraints. In turn, these constraints can
be compactly encoded into a Boolean formula using one of
the commonly used encodings, e.g. we used the sequential
counters encoding [Sinz, 2005]. Hence, we can use powerful
SAT solvers to perform property veriﬁcation.
Robustness of BNNs
We considered a problem of local robustness of BNNs. To be
able to verify this property, ﬁrst, we encoded it as a Boolean
formula. Second, to check the feasibility of the approach we
performed a series of experiments on three small datasets,
MNIST and it variants. We trained a medium size binarized
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
network to perform classiﬁcation. Then we encoded it as a
Boolean formula and added the veriﬁcation condition formula.
We showed that if the resulting formula is unsatisﬁable then
the local robustness property holds for the input image.
For the majority of benchmarks we showed that the property
does not hold and a perturbation that leads to its violation
exists. However, for some benchmark images we showed that
these images are certiﬁably ϵ-robust.
The main lesson we learn from this work is that veriﬁcation of neural networks is a challenging problem for modern decision procedures. Even a medium size network with
an input of size 784 results in large formulas that are hard
to tackle using a SAT solver. One observation we made is
that we can exploit the structure of these encodings to solve
the resulting SAT formulas more efﬁciently based on the
idea of counterexample-guided search [Clarke et al., 2000;
McMillan, 2005; McMillan, 2003]. Namely, the SAT encoding follows the modular structure of the network. Let us
illustrate our approach with a simple network consisting of two
internal blocks and an output block as in Figure 1. Suppose
we want to verify the local robustness property of the network .
The network can be encoded as a conjunction of two Boolean
formulas: Gen (generator) that encodes the ﬁrst block of the
network, and Ver (veriﬁer) that encodes the rest of the network. The Gen and Ver are embedded in a counterexampleguided search procedure and they communicate via variables
shared by the two formulas. This allows us to guide the search
procedure and improve performance on some benchmarks.
Invertibility of BNNs
We considered the problem of invertibility of BNNs [Korneev
et al., 2018]. We started from a trained BNN that takes an
image of porous media and outputs a vector of parameters that
describe its physical properties. Images of porous media2 are
black and white images that represent an abstraction of the
physical structure. Solid parts are encoded as a set of connected black pixels; a void area is encoded a set of connected
white pixels. The given BNN represents an approximation of
a partial differential equation solver for computing dispersion
coefﬁcients for the given geometry of a porous medium.
We considered the problem of invertibility of a BNN: Given
an output vector, can we construct an input image subset to
some additional constraints? The physical meaning is to synthesize a new porous media with the given set of properties
where properties are deﬁned by the values of dispersion coefﬁcients. In this work we demonstrated that invertibility problem
for BNNs can be encoded as an integer linear program where
all variables are integers and used ILP and SMT solvers to
tackle this problem. We were able to generate images for a
small dataset with 16 by 16 pixels images given 3 layered
neural network.
Future work
The area of the formal veriﬁcation of neural networks is
just emerging [Pulina and Tacchella, 2010; Pulina and Tac-
2Speciﬁcally, we are looking at a transitionally periodic “unit
cell” of porous medium assuming that porous medium has a periodic
structure [Hornung, 1997].
chella, 2012; Bastani et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2017;
Katz et al., 2017; Bunel et al., 2017; Cheng et al., 2017a;
Dutta et al., 2017; Tjeng and Tedrake, 2017; Narodytska et
al., 2017; Leofante et al., 2018]. There are a number of interesting research directions. First, it is important to build
new decision procedures that are tailored for solving problems
of veriﬁcation of neural networks. For example, a promising
research direction is to take advantage of the modular structure
of neural networks that is naturally preserved in the encoding.
Second, we observe that so far research on veriﬁcation of neural networks is focused on the discriminative problem, e.g. the
classiﬁcation problem. However, to the best of our knowledge,
there is no work on analysing generative models formally,
like neural networks produced with the generative adversarial
framework [Goodfellow et al., 2014]. For example, we need
to understand what interesting properties to analyze for these
structures are. The third promising research direction is using
formal analysis to increase our understanding of the decision
making process of neural networks, for example, extracting
explanations that support neural network decisions.