Big Data Analytics, Machine Learning and Artiﬁcial
Intelligence in Next-Generation Wireless Networks
Mirza Golam Kibria, Kien Nguyen, Gabriel Porto Villardi, Ou Zhao, Kentaro Ishizu and Fumihide Kojima
Abstract—The next-generation wireless networks are evolving
into very complex systems because of the very diversiﬁed service
requirements, heterogeneity in applications, devices, and networks. The mobile network operators (MNOs) need to make the
best use of the available resources, for example, power, spectrum,
as well as infrastructures. Traditional networking approaches,
i.e., reactive, centrally-managed, one-size-ﬁts-all approaches and
conventional data analysis tools that have limited capability
(space and time) are not competent anymore and cannot satisfy
and serve that future complex networks in terms of operation
and optimization in a cost-eﬀective way. A novel paradigm of
proactive, self-aware, self-adaptive and predictive networking
is much needed. The MNOs have access to large amounts of
data, especially from the network and the subscribers. Systematic
exploitation of the big data greatly helps in making the network
smart, intelligent and facilitates cost-eﬀective operation and
optimization. In view of this, we consider a data-driven nextgeneration wireless network model, where the MNOs employ
advanced data analytics for their networks. We discuss the
data sources and strong drivers for the adoption of the data
analytics and the role of machine learning, artiﬁcial intelligence in
making the network intelligent in terms of being self-aware, selfadaptive, proactive and prescriptive. A set of network design and
optimization schemes are presented with respect to data analytics.
The paper is concluded with a discussion of challenges and
beneﬁts of adopting big data analytics and artiﬁcial intelligence
in the next-generation communication system.
Index Terms—Big data analytics, Machine learning, Artiﬁcial
intelligence, Next-generation wireless.
I. Introduction
In a service-driven next-generation network, a single infrastructure needs to eﬃciently and ﬂexibly provide diversiﬁed
services such as enhanced mobile broadband, ultra-reliable
and low-latency communications and massive machine type
communications. It should also support coexistent accesses of
multiple standards such the ﬁfth generation (5G), long-term
evolution (LTE) and Wi-Fi, and coordinate a heterogeneous
network with diﬀerent types of base stations (BSs), for example, macro, micro, femto, pico BSs and diverse user devices as
well as applications . The challenge to eﬃciently operate a
network capable of facilitating such ﬂexibility while satisfying
the demands from diversiﬁed services is huge for a mobile
network operator (MNO). On top of this, the MNOs face huge
challenges in extending their coverages and keeping up with
the ever-increasing capacity demands with a limited pool of
capital and scarcity of resources such as spectrum. Manual
conﬁguration for network planning, control, and optimization
The author is with Wireless Systems Laboratory, Wireless Networks
Research Center, National Institute of Information and Communications
Technology (NICT), 3-4 Hikarino-oka, Yokosuka 239-0847, Japan (e-mails:
{mirza.kibria, kienng, gpvillardi, zhaoou, ishidu, f-kojima}@nict.go.jp).
will make things even more complex. Moreover, the humanmachine interaction can, sometimes, be time-consuming, susceptible to error and expensive. Consequently, automation of
various entities and functions of the cellular networks has been
one of the principal concerns of the MNOs in consideration
of reducing the operational expenses.
Operators have been optimizing their networks all along,
but even today, the prevailing approach is to independently
optimize single key performance indicators (KPIs), or an
element within the network independently , thus using a
small number of data sources. The MNOs mostly depend on
KPIs accumulated at diﬀerent locations/parts of the network
to make decisions employing various data analysis tools.
Network monitoring and optimization are still predominantly
performed on old/recorded data, but this greatly restricts their
capacity. The MNOs, in general, have/can have access to a
huge amount of data from their own networks and subscribers.
With the appropriate analytics, big data can convey broader
intuitiveness and understanding since it draws from multiple
sources to reveal previously unknown patterns and correlations
 . It beneﬁts to acquire a thorough understanding of various
unknown values and delivers new measures in enhancing the
performance from diﬀerent levels of wireless networks.
The value that analytics brings to optimization comes from
expanding the range of data sources and taking a customercentric, quality of experience (QoE)-based approach to optimizing end-to-end network performance. In widening the
range of data sources, analytics requires more eﬀort than
traditional optimization, but it also provides a uniﬁed and
converged platform for multiple targets of optimization. Now,
within the 3rd generation partnership project (3GPP), network
data analytics (NWDA) has been introduced to deliver slice
and traﬃc steering and splitting (between 3GPP and non-
3GPP access) related analytics automatically . The european
telecommunications standards institute (ETSI) has created the
industry speciﬁcation group called experimental network intelligence (ENI) that deﬁnes a cognitive network management
architecture based on artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) techniques and
context-aware policies. The ENI model helps the MNOs in
automating the network conﬁguration and monitoring process.
From the operational expenses point of view, the system
needs to be smart, self-aware, self-adaptive and must be able
to run the network services economically and manage and
operate the networks autonomously . Conventional reactive
maintenance is no more eﬃcient. With big data analytics, the
predictive and proactive maintenance of the network elements
can be performed. With the volume of the data, the speed
of data ﬂowing in and the range and type of data sources,
 
3D Beamforming
Multi-Access
Connectivity
Mobile Edge
Ultra-Dense
Massive MIMO
Massive MIMO
Fig. 1. Graphical illustration of the next-generation communication system with some technological elements. Slicing, virtualization, (mobile) edge-computing,
massive multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO), 3-dimensional (3D) beamforming, (ultra-dense) small cell networks, device-to-device(D2D) cell-free massive
MIMO, multi-connectivity, cloud-radio access network (RAN), millimetre-wave, cloud-architecture/computing, etc., are the fundamental technologies to achieve
the targets of the next-generation network.
the network even go beyond prediction, i.e., it can assist and
or prescribe the operations and maintenance unit with decision
options and impacts of the actions, etc. Machine learning (ML)
and AI can help in uncovering the unknown properties of
wireless networks, identify correlations and anomalies that we
cannot see by inspection, and suggest novel ways to optimize
network deployments and operations.
II. Drivers and Evolution of Analytics in Next-generation
Wireless Systems and Computational Intelligence
A. Drivers to Adoption of Analytics
The ever-increasing complexity of the networks and complicated traﬃc patterns make the big data analytics appealing and
very important for the MNOs. The MNOs were earlier very
cautious about the adoption of big data analytics, however,
multiple drivers are turning the MNOs cautious stance towards
the comprehension that deep optimization of the networks and
the services are extremely necessary for near future. As a consequence, there exists a consistent and rational commitment to
capturing a deep knowledge and understanding of the network
dynamics and make the best use of them through optimization.
Three predominant drivers strengthening the adoption of big
data analytics can be identiﬁed as Cost and Service drivers,
Usage drivers and Technology drivers. In the following, we
discuss them in more details.
Cost and Service drivers: The subscribers, in general, are
more demanding but less eager to raise the wireless pay out.
In such environment, there is an urgent need for optimization
of the usage of network resources. Furthermore, the networkcentric service model is transforming into a user-centric service model based on the QoE. As a result, the MNOs need
to better understand the QoE and its relationship with the
network’s KPIs. In addition, the MNOs need to retain its
customers. As a result, the MNOs need to (i) manage its traﬃc
based on service and application, (ii) improve eﬃciency to
retain proﬁt margins, (iii) improve network performance and
QoE without increasing cost and (iv) keep churn as low as
possible, etc.
Usage drivers: The traﬃc patterns, subscriber equipments,
and subscribers’ proﬁles are all heterogeneous in nature. In
a user-oriented service model, analytics supports the MNOs
maintain and regulate traﬃc types, wireless devices, and subscribers diversely based on the MNOs’ strategies and each’s
requirements. Furthermore, the wireless traﬃc load is growing
faster than the capacity, and the MNOs are facing tough
challenges to increase network capacity in a cost-eﬀective way.
Therefore, intensifying the resource utilization is required.
Analytics take the network load into account and helps the
MNOs to manage network traﬃcs more eﬃciently in real time.
Technology drivers: The next-generation wireless networks have many technology components such as network resource virtualization, edge-computing, mobile edgecomputing, network-slicing, etc. It integrates multiple airinterfaces, network layers and accommodates a range of
Internal Data
Collected from network
(network-related, subscriberrelated)
Structured Data
Network-related
Technical-fault, link availability, network latency, backhaul status,
connection set-up time, drive-test, data-plane traffic flow statistics,
control-plane protocol and interface,
Subscriber-related
Unstructured Data
Call center transcripts, textmessages, personal assistant
data, etc.
data, deployment, sensor data
Handset data, customer account data,
usage history, calling-pattern
locations, mobility patterns, etc.
traffic (by type, by application),
External Data
Collected from third parties
(external factors, subscriber-related)
Structured Data
Unstructured Data
Demagraphic data, mapping
data (terrain, in-building,
etc), public data (traffic,
Social media data- Facebook,
Twitter, online forums, text
documents, Google+, blogs,
e-mails, video, etc.
Fig. 2. Data sets and the sources of data available to the MNOs for big data
analytics, machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence.
use-cases. The MNOs need robust analytics framework to
orchestrate the virtualized network resources eﬃciently. The
analytics also help the MNOs to balance the centralized
and distributed functionality. The data analytics facilitates the
MNOs to ﬁgure out the most competent way to slice the
network and traﬃc, i.e., the number of slices, splitting traﬃc
across slices, etc, which depend on the type of traﬃc and how
varies over time and space.
B. Types of Analytics
There exists a succession of evolution in big data analytics,
starting from descriptive analytics to diagnostic analytics to
predictive analytics, and excelling towards prescriptive analytics as shown in Fig. 3, out of which three (descriptive,
predictive and prescriptive analytics) are dominant. The MNOs
currently are in descriptive phase and use mainly the visualization tools to get insights on what has happened, the network
performance, traﬃc proﬁle, etc. The MNOs can make use of
the diagnostic analytics to ﬁgure out the root-causes of the
network anomalies and ﬁnd out the faulty KPIs and network
functions/elements. In order to get the diagnostic analytics,
the analytics tool employs techniques like drill-down, deep
learning, data discovery, correlations, etc.
Predictive analytics is a great tool for making predictions.
Note that it can never report or be certain about what will happen, however, predictive analytics can only produce forecasting about what might happen, for example, future locations of
the subscribers, future traﬃc pattern and network congestion,
etc. Predictive analytics deliver predictions about the future
events based on the real-time and archived data by making
use of various statistical techniques such as machine learning,
data mining, modeling as some statistical process and gametheoretic analysis. Prescriptive analytics goes steps ahead of
just predicting the future events by suggesting decision options
for slicing (i.e., how to slice, how many slices), virtualization,
edge-computing, etc., along with the implications of each decision option. Therefore, the prescriptive analytics need an eﬃcient predictive model, actionable data and a feedback system
for tracking down the results generated by the action taken.
The decision options(e.g., for network expansion, resource
usage) are produced considering the MNOs preferences, system constraints (backhaul, fronthaul, spectrum, transmission
power), etc. Prescriptive analytics can also suggest the ﬁnest
course of actions for any pre-deﬁned target, for example, of a
particular KPI.
The MNOs have access to large amounts of data which
can be categorized into two classes such as internal data
and external data as shown in Fig. 2. The internal data
corresponds to data belonging to the MNOs and/or produced in
the network, which is network related and subscriber related.
The external data is collected from the third parties. Both the
internal and external data can be further classiﬁed into two
categories, which are structured data and unstructured data.
The structured is stored in a relational database, i.e., each ﬁeld
in the database has a name and the relationship between the
ﬁelds are well-deﬁned. On the other hand, the unstructured
data (for example, call center transcripts, messages, etc) is
not usually saved in a relational database. A comprehensive
coverage on the features and sources of mobile big data can
be found in , .
C. Computational Intelligence
MNOs have access to a collection of data sets (i.e., these
data can be highly dimensional, heterogeneous, complex,
unstructured and unpredictable) that are so large and complex
that the traditional data processing and analysis approaches
cannot be employed due to their limited processing space
and/or processing time. Computational intelligence, a set of
nature-inﬂuenced computational techniques and approaches,
play a very crucial role in the big data analysis . It enables
the analytics agent to computationally process and analyze
the historical and real-time data, and eventually ﬁnds out
and explain the underlying patterns, correlations, as well as
to intensely understand the speciﬁc tasks. The computational
analysis tools and methodologies convert the MNOs’ massive
amount of raw data (unprocessed, structured/unstructured) into
meaningful data/information.
For feature selection, data-size and feature space compliance, active-incremental-manifold-imbalance learning on
big data, uncertainty modeling, sample selection, classiﬁcation/clustering, etc., there are many tools and methodologies
that can be applied for big data analysis. For example, fuzzy
logic, neural algorithms, rough sets, swarm intelligence, evolutionary computing, stochastic algorithms, physical algorithms,
immune algorithms, learning theory, probabilistic methods
are the tool and methodologies that the MNOs’ big data
analytics agents can employ for computationally processing
and analyzing the available data.
In general, for big data analytics, the MNO can follow two
distinct approaches, namely top-down approach and bottom-up
approach . In the top-down approach, the MNOs deﬁne their
Usage Drivers
Subscriber-centric service model,
Traffic management based on
service and application, low churn,
QoS and QoE enhancement
without increasing cost, etc.
Differentiated traffic, devices and
users, Traffic grows faster than
Virtualization, Edge-computing,
Network slicing, Policy and
subscriber management, 5G
Collecting data, Cleaning data,
Filtering the data, Correlating data
from multiple sources, Finding the
relevant data
Understand network performance and
QoE, Identify network anomalies,
Perform optimization, Predict
performance, disruption and
requirements
Automate the control and operation,
for example, self-configuration, selfoptimization, self-healing.
Analyzing at different depth levels,
for different purposes. For
example, high-level (end-to-end
system performance) or drill down
to particular network element, user,
location, time, KPIs, etc
Drivers of adoption
Flow: Control of data
Collection to Action
Network performance
Subscriber perspectives
RAN perspectives
Mobility pattern, Traffic
Nerwork expansion plan
Resource utlization plan
User behavior, future location.
Faulty/Problem elements/
Resource usage, QoS.
Traffic pattern and congestion
Suggestions on corrective actions
Find faulty KPIs and
Find the root-causes
Identify network anomalies
Measure KPIs, KQIs
Decision options and/or planning
for slicing, virtualization, edgecomputing and impact of each
decision option and/or planning
Service impairements
Descriptive Analytics
Diagonostic Analytics
Predictive Analytics
Prescriptive Analytics
network elements
network efficiency
areas and their impacts on
Technology Drivers
Cost and Service Drivers
Data Analysis
Data Management
Internal & External Data
Analytics Function
Network Functions
Policy Function
Policy Provision
Drivers from diﬀerent directions that strengthen the case for the adoption of analytics in next-generation communication systems. Flow of
processes/actions of the MNO that employs analytics. Here, the Analytics Function collects the data and analyze them. The Policy Function obtains the
analytics reports produced by the Analytics Function and may dynamically and intelligently deliver analytics-based policy rules for UE and the network
functions.
targets to be achieved or problems to be resolved, and then
decide what data sets are required. Whereas, in the bottom-up
approach, the MNOs already have access to massive amounts
of data and then exploit the big data on hand to get the insights.
The top-down approach delivers incremental beneﬁts and it is
very challenging to execute. It also, in most of the cases, does
not bring on surprising and adventitious results. On the other
hand, the bottom-up approach facilitates a more outright and
transparent view of the network performance, subscribers’ behaviors, resource utilization, etc., and may bring on completely
new opportunities for the MNOs. The bottom-up approach is
also likely to capture the subscribers’ perspectives the RAN
perspectives and may beget new business opportunities for the
III. Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence for
Managing Complexity
The ML and AI are two very powerful tools that are
emerging as solutions for managing large amounts of data,
especially for making predictions and providing suggestions
based on the data sets. They are, however, very often appear
to be used interchangeably in spite of some parallels. ML is
sometimes brought up as a subspace of AI based around the
concept that we can let the machines learn for themselves by
providing them access to large amounts of data. On the other
hand, AI is the extended and wider perception of machines
becoming capable of carrying out tasks in an intelligent way.
Compared to the generalized AI (a generalized AI system,
in theory, can handle any task), applied AI is more suitable
for next-generation communication systems as the applied AI
system can be devised to adeptly controlling and optimizing
the wireless networks. Unlike ML models, AI models reach
out the world, accustom to the changes and rebuild themselves
 . While ML is great for predictive analytics , AI
goes beyond predictions and prescribe plans/suggestions with
implications to realize a beneﬁt.
Managing wireless networks that grow in size and complexity becomes very diﬃcult since there is need to integrate
new elements and technologies to beneﬁt from the technological advances. The amount of data such large and complex
networks produces are too large and too complex. Machine
learning and artiﬁcial intelligence are useful for analytics as
they can extract valuable information from the raw data and
generate insightful advice and predictions. ML and AI are
expected to assume the primary role in the development and
evolution of analytics, but analytics will not reduce to them.
ML is largely developed from AI, hence the two overlap.
ML has tools to extract relevant information, suggestions,
and predictions from the data sets that are too large and too
complex. While AI has a wider scope: to replicate human
intelligence or some aspects of it and other cognitive functions.
Furthermore, for non-recurring events, there is no historical
data to rely on, hence the real behavior of the network will
diverge from the predictions . The ML and AI are becoming
potential to help MNOs to address areas which are new and
there are no historical data, or too complex to understand with
traditional approaches. The ML and AI tools can correlate
multiple sources of data and ﬁnd what is relevant. They
may also reveal interrelations and dependencies that were
not previously identiﬁed because their automated mechanisms
have the capability of anatomizing and inspecting data more
intensely and more methodically. Although human expertise
is useful in conﬁning the focus to produce solutions and to
manage complex problems, it has limited capability in ﬁnding
novel solutions and insights. The future of wireless networks
will undoubtedly rely on AI. In , the authors have provided
a panned overview on the range of wireless communication
problems and issues that can be eﬃciently addressed using AI
while providing detailed examples for the use-case scenarios.
IV. Data-Driven Coverage and Capacity Optimization of
Next-Generation Cellular Wireless Networks
The conventional network-centric architecture cannot capture all of the nuances that can aﬀect service quality. Mobile
operators need solutions that provide them with an analysis
capability that captures all the information relating to the
network and subscribers into a single enterprise geolocation
platform that can help remove the assumptions involved in
fault isolation and reduce mean time to repair. The MNOs are
suitably positioned to exploit big data analytics because of
their access to huge amounts of data. The big data analytics
engine/agent can produce/predict the following analytics based
on its data, primarily from two sources, such as the network
data and the subscriber data, which are then exploited to design
and optimize the network.
• Subscriber Proﬁle (SP): In this context, the subscriber
proﬁle consists of the device proﬁle, service-level agreement (SLA), subscriber’s aﬀordability (price per unit
of data-rate), quality of service (QoS)/policy, behavioral
proﬁle, etc. It plays a vital role in the abovementioned
controlling and optimization process. The priority of the
subscriber in the network is deﬁned in the subscriber
proﬁle when resource allocation, congestion control and
traﬃc oﬄoading is performed. Behavioral data provides
information how the user behaves in using various applications/services. For example, how frequently and when
the user makes video/audio call and the average length
of the call duration? Through analytics, we can speculate
on a lot of these user attributes.
• Subscriber Perspective (Sub-P): Subscriber perspective
is an attribute/measure that associates MNO’s network
activity with the user’s SLA, pricing, QoS, QoE, etc.,
and it delivers a subscriber-centric outlook of the network
for analytics . Subscriber perspective is, in general,
deﬁned by the Cost Over Quality Ratio, which sometimes
gets polished through a variety of attributes linked to the
requested service class and perceived friendliness to the
service, i.e., QoS violation, delay violation, etc. It enables
the MNO to measure or make a perception about the RAN
quality from the subscriber point of view, and put them
in a better position to provide a high QoE.
• RAN Perspective (RAN-P): RAN perspective is a measure that provides the MNO the subscriber-centric RAN
quality, i.e., the RAN performance from the subscriber’s
point of view . The user equipment’s view of the
signaling information such as signal strength, error codes,
available networks, etc., are extremely helpful to the
MNO for analytics. From the user’s predicted trajectory,
spatial deployment of the BSs and signaling metrics, the
MNO can generate heat map for coverage and determine
the RAN quality. Advanced cell mining that statistically
analyzes the performance data enables the MNO to identify radio cell irregularities and other negative syndromes
via anomaly (i.e., SLA violation) diagnosis and trend
study of the time series data, and control traﬃc and
RAN congestion problems. With RAN Perspective, the
full end-to-end subscriber experience can be measured in
terms of Service Availability and correspondingly mapped
to the exact location in the network. The MNO can
also use Subscriber Satisfaction Coeﬃcient to deﬁne the
RAN perspective. Note that the signaling metric cannot
be easily retrieved from mobile gateways or retrieved
by network probes. An eﬃcient retrieving method is
discussed in that uses SIM-based applet stored in
users devices to collect the signal strength and quality
metrics, thus the subscriber devices act as network probes
in measuring the RAN perspective.
• Subscriber Mobility Pattern (SMP): In order to guarantee the QoS requirements and to eﬃciently maintain
resources utilization, traﬃc oﬄoading and routing, knowing the mobility information of a user in advance is
very crucial. Human travel pattern analyses reveal that
people travel along speciﬁc paths with reasonably high
predictability . The trajectory of a mobile user can be
predicted based on user’s present location, the movement
direction and the aggregate history of SMP. It is possible
to predict the spatiotemporal trajectory (trajectory with
both spatial and temporal information), i.e., not only the
mobile user’s future location but also the time of arrival
and the duration of stay can be predicted. Mobility pattern
is generally based on user positioning, which can be
estimated using the signals from the cellular system.
• Radio Environment Map (REM): The MNOs can better
plan, build, control and optimize their networks conforming to the spatiotemporal radio atmosphere, through
prediction of radio signal attenuation. Many schemes
have been developed that give the MNOs the means
to predict the distribution of radio signal attenuation at
diﬀerent operating frequencies and in many diﬀerent radio
Speed: v1 m/s
Speed: v2 m/s
Speed: v3 m/s
Fig. 4. Left: Example of the trajectory of a mobile user who visited the vicinity of during an observational period. The circles correspond to the serving
BSs, i.e., give the approximate locations. The gray lines depict the Voronoi lattice. The width of the line between two BSs is proportional to how often the
user moves between the BSs and the sizes of the circles are proportional to the resources/traﬃc consumed. Middle: Example of the small-scale (e.g., within
few seconds/minutes) trajectory of the user for more accurate/exact location of the user. Right: The circles represent the BSs and sizes of the circles are
proportional to the traﬃc loads on the BSs, i.e., the traﬃc pattern and/or congestion status in the network can be measured. Note that results here do not
comes from a real ﬁeld experience.
environments. The radio map along with the mobile user’s
predicted trajectory facilitates the prediction of average
channel gains. There are several diﬀerent methods to
construct the radio map, for example, radio map based
on drive test measurements, radio map based on measurements through user terminal equipped with global
positioning system .
• Traﬃc Proﬁle (TP): In order to attain as well as predict
the network’s congestion status, tempo-spatial traﬃc load
variation needs to be known, i.e., the knowledge of
temporal traﬃc trace, BS spatial deployment and BSs’
operating characteristics (transmission power, height, etc)
are very important. The authors in report that the
network’s traﬃc load dynamics demonstrates periodical
characteristics over days and hours, thus implying high
predictability of the traﬃc load. The traﬃc proﬁle along
with the SMP can be used to estimate and predict the
traﬃc arrival rate, congestion status of the network with
required time resolution/granularity.
It is very crucial to have a sturdy, well-balanced loaddistributed cellular system in a dynamic network and radio
environment with mobile users using bursty applications and
services. The next-generation network can employ the systems analytics, user and service analytics, radio analytics for
control and optimization of the network in the following
scenarios.
• Resource Allocation Strategy Advanced resource allocation is very crucial for enhancing the spectrum and
power utilization eﬃciency of the communication systems. Leveraging the big data analytics based prediction
ability in optimizing the resource allocation has been
reported to be very advantageous. With the help of SMP
and TP, the MNO can approximate the typical resource
usage per-cell per-user in the network since (i) the average
channel gains are predictable from the trajectory of the
user and (ii) based on content popularity, user’s behavioral
proﬁle and currently running application, the preferred
Allocation
Subscriber-
Centric Wireless
Congestion
Data-Driven
Control and
Optimization of
High Capacity
Shared Network
Subscriber-
Centric Traffic
Routing and
Beamforming
Traffic Profile
Perspective
Perspective
Environment
Subscriber
Fig. 5. Some data analytics and their application in control and optimization
of next-generation wireless communication systems.
contents can be predicted even before the individual users
put forward their service requests. As a result, with the
help of big data predictive analytics, the operators are able
to predict changes in the users’ service demands and thus
can manage and optimize the resource allocation in real
time. Integrated backhaul and access in mmWave
• Subscriber-Centric Traﬃc Routing Providing the best
QoE as the end users’ subjective perception is one of
the most important requirements. Service delay, jitter
aﬀect the mobile users’ QoEs very badly. Data-driven
solutions can deliver traﬃc to diﬀerent users depending
on their subscription proﬁle, types of applications, and
preferences. A QoE-aware network continuously adopts
the changing environment in order to deliver acceptable
QoE. The SMP, the network utilization proﬁle, and TP
can help the operator to devise eﬃcient routing protocol
while considering the backhaul load, the SLA and the
corresponding cost. Depending on users preferences and
interests, and currently running application, the system
can proactively cache the popular content, and use the
backhaul route that is closer to the local caching server.
• Subscriber-Centric Wireless Oﬄoad Due to an exponential surge in mobile data traﬃc carrier over macro
cell layer, the MNOs are more and more ﬁnding out
approaches to optimize the traﬃc in the network while
ensuring seamless connectivity and minimum guaranteed
QoS to its subscribers. Traﬃc oﬄoading from macro
cell layer to small cell layer (speciﬁcally towards WiFi
networks) is a great way to relieve congestion in macro
layer and enhance the overall network throughput. Blindly
oﬄoading the mobile users may result in dissatisfaction
of the subscribers of the higher tier and breaching SLAs.
Therefore, it is necessary to devise eﬃcient solutions that
aid the MNOs to decide and oﬄoad mobile users to WiFi,
based on user proﬁle and network congestion conditions.
Data-driven contextual intelligence originated from correlating the customer proﬁle (types of application, spending
pattern, SLA) with SMP, TP, and REM, can decide which
customer should be oﬄoaded, and even to which small
cell/WiFi the customer needs to be oﬄoaded.
• Optimized Cell Placement Small cell placement plays
a vital role in deﬁning the capacity of a heterogeneous
network. Strategic small cell placement is very important
in areas where subscribers concentrate while taking care
of coverage goals, radio frequency interference issues and
its potential in relieving congestion from the macro layer
by oﬄoading traﬃc. Rapidly placing the small cells at
the very best locations is a complex issue as the number
of small cells is much larger. Traditional macro cell layer
management tool and even the self-organized networking
tool may not compensate for improper cell placement.
However, the data-driven solution can eﬃciently administer the small cell placement issue exploiting the knowledge of long-term user density, traﬃc intensity. Datadriven solutions incorporating the long-term TP, REM can
devise optimized dynamic small cell placement strategy
that identiﬁes key locations where small cells need to
be deployed and/or re-arranged in order to enhance the
network capacity, minimize interference and improve the
traﬃc oﬄoading capability. The 3D geolocator tool that
uses predictive “ﬁnger printing” algorithms to locate
traﬃc hotspots can simplify the cell placement task.
• Radio Access Network Congestion Control The combination of limited network resources and ever-growing
demands result in unavoidable RAN congestion, which
degrades users’ quality of experience. Expansion of existing RAN provides a solution to this problem, but
it is expensive. A ﬂexible, as well as a cost-eﬀective
solution is to deploy a proactive policy control mechanism
preventing deﬁciency of RAN resources. Smart congestion control solution considering location information, the
load level of network elements and users’ service level
agreements is able to deliver perceptibility at particular
sub-cell level and caters priority to some set of subscribers
based on their tiers. Since the congestion events are shortlived (typically congestion occurs at busy times of the
day) and users future locations are predictable, with the
help of data-driven predictive analytics incorporating the
correlation between SMP, radio map and traﬃc proﬁle,
advanced proactive RAN congestion control mechanism
can be deployed where the occurrence of RAN congestion
is predicted. RAN congestion controlling can be done
in many ways, for example, by reducing the QoS for
subscribers belonging to the lowest tier of users, rejecting
new session establishment, terminating certain sessions.
• Advanced Load Balancing Note that the proﬁle of
mobile users and traﬃc in each cell is distinctive, and
the proﬁles change from time to time. When a number
of users disassociate with one cell and move to the
neighboring cell, the network’s traﬃc load distribution,
i.e., the traﬃc proﬁle may change severely, and as a
consequence, some cells in the network may get overloaded causing service downgrade. Currently, the load
balancing methods employed by the MNOs are almost
manual, thus not eﬃcient, and at the same time, they are
not accurate enough. Predictive analytics by data mining
and correlating the network and/or subscriber data such
TP and SMP can not only help in understanding the
cells’ current load situation, but also in identifying the
heavily loaded parts of the network and predicting the
traﬃc variation in advance. Consequently, the MNOs can
perform advanced load balancing and cell planning by
adding capacity, expanding the coverage of unloaded or
lightly loaded cells in order to unburden the neighboring
overburdened/overloaded cell. The data-driven advanced
load balancing will enable the MNOs to optimize the
utilization of available network resources.
• Advanced Beamforming Beamforming is an integral
technology component in next-generation communication
systems for enhancing the coverage and data rates. A
BS with multiple antennas can generate multiple beams
simultaneously . Under static beamforming (ﬁxed
beam pattern without beam-steering), for a mobile
user, the quality of the serving beam may deteriorate,
and hence a diﬀerent beam from the same BS (from
same sector or diﬀerent sector) or an adjacent BS
that serves the user well needs to be selected. The
ML can help the serving node to dynamically select
the best beam for the user. The ML also enables
dynamic switching ON/OFF the beams based on TP
and SMP for energy and interference minimization.
Holographic
beamforming1
electronic
beam-switching/beam-steering)
analytics and ML can help in dynamically rerouting the
traﬃc, dynamic adjacent cell access, steering coverage
where it is needed to accommodate usage patterns, for
example, rush hour traﬃc, events, etc., as shown in Fig. 6.
1In holographic beamforming, the complex propagating wave across surface
scattering antenna or the transmitting aperture becomes a holographic proﬁle,
i.e., the collective proﬁle across the antenna-array elements represents the
desired hologram for transmission.
Access in Motion or On the Move
broadband connectivity
Directivity on Demand
Trafﬁc rerouting
Adjacent cell assistant
Fig. 6. Data analytics and ML, and AI techniques can be used in analog, digital, and hybrid beamforming in terms of generating the optimal beam patterns,
dynamically selecting the most suitable beam, and performing beam-steering operation. In this ﬁgure, holographic beamforming has been taken as the use-case
Fig. 6(a) contemplates adaptive/dynamic rerouting of
traﬃc when there is an obstacle or physical interference
between two communicating nodes. The rerouting path
can be dynamically selected based on TP and other informations such as resource availability. Dynamic adjacent
cell assistant in Fig. 6(b) with holographic beamforming
facilitates serving a distant user outside the general coverage area of the assisting BS when the original serving
BS has bandwidth shortage/overloaded or becomes nonfunctional. Depending on the received informations and
making use of TP and REM, the holographic beamforming antenna can dynamically conﬁgure a high directivity beam towards the distant user . Similarly,
dynamically steering coverages where it is required as
shown in Fig. 6(c) combined with 3D geolocator tool and
conﬁguring long-range, high-capacity links along with
electronic speed beam-switching to provide access in
motion as shown in Fig. 6(d) can be enhanced by analytics
from internal data, external data and ML.
Apart from the control and optimization scenarios mentioned above, accurately and eﬃciently accomplishing the
maintenance of the network elements, backhaul monitoring
(potential bottlenecks in backhaul networks), fronthaul management and orchestration, intelligent network slicing, energy
optimization, monitoring of critical network health variables
are some of the key pain and troublesome issues the MNOs
are very often challenged with. With big data analytics, the
predictive maintenance of the network elements can be performed. The predictive maintenance inspects the operational
status of the network elements through sensors in real-time.
With the help of big data analytics, the potential risks can be
identiﬁed, thus the possible faults are found earlier. This helps
the operation and maintenance team of the MNO to become
proactive to work out predictive maintenance planning.
Furthermore, there are plenty of other applications of data
analytics, ML, and AI in next-generation communication
systems. For example, the MNOs can employ analytics for
obtaining good insights about the physical layer and
the medium access control (MAC) layer, for example, for
the optimal constellations in interference channels where the
optimal schemes are unknown, for the best beamformer, for
pre-caching/buﬀering, for the most suitable forward error
correction code, for the optimum MAC protocols, predictive
scheduling, etc. Intelligent wireless network architecture, RAN
optimization in terms of transmission control protocol (TCP)
window optimization, mobility management optimization can
also be achieved through the use of big data analytics .
Data aided transmission, network optimization, for example,
channel modelling, multiple user access and novel applications
such as unmanned aerial vehicle/drone communications, smart
grid, etc., have been discussed in .
V. Challenges and Benefits
Although employing big data analytics for control and optimization of wireless networks is very attracting to the MNOs,
it comes with some challenges. The process of managing and
leveraging of a huge amount of data, designing algorithms
for dynamic and eﬀective processing of sizable data sets
and then exploiting the insights from the data analytics in
networks can pose unique challenges. The prime concerns
for the MNOs emerge from the extent of eﬀort, skills, and
workforce needed to manage and operate a big data platform.
However, the most important and diﬃcult challenge is more
likely to stem from the loss of direct control that the MNOs
still have over the wireless network. The loss of direct control
is incurred from the combination of automation and real-time
operations within the big data analytics framework. However,
the huge complexity of the next-generation networks makes
the automation inevitable, and handover or relinquish that level
of direct control is imperative. On top of these, a substantial
investment is necessary.
Despite all the challenges, the MNOs are more considerate towards data analytics platform since the challenges are
outweighed by the beneﬁts. The big data analytics infuses
eﬃciency into the provisioning of services and end-to-end
network. Analytics facilitates the MNOs to gain from the better
planning, increased utilization of network resources, eﬃcient
maintenance of the network elements and lower operation
costs. It gives the MNOs the ﬂexibility to deﬁne and execute
their own network utilization strategy. It helps the operators to
make new service and oﬀer plans that are suited to subscribers’
needs. Although the MNOs are already performing these
kinds of service provisioning, analytics delivers richer insights.
Analytics helps to improve subscriber management and policy
implementation. With the aid of natural language processing
and interfacing with the smart digital assistants in the user devices, an autonomous customer care can be facilitated. Another
beneﬁt the MNOs get by employing analytics is diﬀerentiation, which is compelling to strengthening an MNO’s market
positioning. Analytics can support the MNOs to employ new
techniques to traﬃc handlings such as network-slicing (i.e.,
the way to slice the network) and edge-computing (i.e., the
way to balance centralized and distributed functionality).
VI. Conclusion
We consider a data-driven next-generation wireless network
model, where the MNOs employs advanced data analytics, ML
and AI for eﬃcient operation, control, and optimization. We
present the main drivers of big data analytics adoption and
discuss how ML, AI and computational intelligence play their
important roles in data analytics for next-generation wireless
networks. We present a set of network design and optimization
schemes with respect to data analytics. Finally, we discuss the
beneﬁts and challenges that the MNOs encounter in adopting
big data analytics.
Acknowledgement
This research was conducted under a contract of R&D
for Expansion of Radio Wave Resources, organized by the
Ministry of Internal Aﬀairs and Communications, Japan.
The ﬁrst author would like to thank Monica Paolini from
Senza Fili Consulting for the insightful comments.