IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 16, NO. 2, APRIL 1997
A Geometric Snake Model for Segmentation
of Medical Imagery
Anthony Yezzi, Jr., Member, IEEE, Satyanad Kichenassamy, Arun Kumar,
Peter Olver, and Allen Tannenbaum,* Member, IEEE
Abstract— In this note, we employ the new geometric active
contour models formulated in and for edge detection and
segmentation of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed
tomography (CT), and ultrasound medical imagery. Our method
is based on deﬁning feature-based metrics on a given image which
in turn leads to a novel snake paradigm in which the feature of
interest may be considered to lie at the bottom of a potential
well. Thus, the snake is attracted very quickly and efﬁciently to
the desired feature.
Index Terms— Active contours, active vision, edge detection,
gradient ﬂows, segmentation, snakes.
I. INTRODUCTION
HE technique of snakes or active contours has become
quite popular for a variety of applications in the past
few years. This methodology is based upon the utilization
of deformable contours which conform to various object
shapes and motions. Snakes have been used for edge and
curve detection, segmentation, shape modeling, and visual
tracking. Active contours have also been widely applied for
various applications in medical imaging. For example, snakes
have been employed for the segmentation of myocardial
heart boundaries as a prerequisite from which such vital
information such as ejection-fraction ratio, heart output, and
ventricular volume ratio can be computed. (See , ,
and the references therein.) In this paper, we will apply a
new snake paradigm which the authors have developed ,
 for edge detection and segmentation of various kinds
of medical imagery including magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), computed tomography (CT), and ultrasound.
In the classical theory of snakes, one considers energy
minimization methods where controlled continuity splines
are allowed to move under the inﬂuence of external image
Manuscript received August 31, 1995; revised October 14, 1996. This
work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant
DMS-9204192 and Grant ECS-9122106, in part by the Air Force Ofﬁce of
Scientiﬁc Research under Grant F49620-94-1-0058DEF, and in part by the
Army Research Ofﬁce under Grant DAAH04-94-G-0054 and Grant DAAH04-
93-G-0332. The Associate Editor responsible for coordinating the review
of this paper and recommending its publication was J. S. Duncan. Asterisk
indicates corresponding author.
A. Yezzi, Jr. is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA.
S. Kichenassamy and P. Olver are with the Department of Mathematics,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA.
A. Kumar is with the Department of Aerospace Engineering, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA.
*A. Tannenbaum is with the Department Electrical Engineering, University
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA (e-mail: ).
Publisher Item Identiﬁer S 0278-0062(97)02399-9.
dependent forces, internal forces, and certain constraints set
by the user , , . As is well known, there may be
a number of problems associated with this approach such as
initializations, existence of multiple minima, and the selection
of the elasticity parameters. Moreover, natural criteria for the
splitting and merging of contours (or for the treatment of
multiple contours) are not readily available in this framework.
(See, however, the recent solution to this problem proposed
by McInerney and Terzopoulos .)
In this work, we will apply a new active contour method
which was developed , . (Independently, similar methods have been recently formulated , .) Our method
uniﬁes the curve evolution approaches for active contours ,
 and the classical energy methods mentioned above ,
 , . Since the geometric curve evolution equations can
in fact treat merging and splitting of contours, our model gives
the user the capability of automatically handling topological
changes within the gradient ﬂow energy framework. Moreover,
our model has an important advantage over the geometric
snakes of , as well. Indeed, the approach in these
works amounts to curve evolution together with a multiplicative stopping term. These models will only slow down the
active contour at an edge, and so the snake will in general
pass through the desired feature (see Sections II and IV for
more discussion about these points). Our model handles the
topological complexities while providing extra stopping power
to the capture the features of interest, based on ﬁrst principles
from geometric energy minimization. (The geometric snakes
of and are not derived from a minimization of energy.)
Thus, the approach to active contours which we give below
may be regarded as the natural uniﬁcation of the two main
snake models previously considered.
More precisely, our technique employs ideas from Euclidean
curve shortening evolution which deﬁnes the gradient direction
in which the Euclidean perimeter is shrinking as fast as
possible; see Section III. We therefore note that we can derive
new active contour models by multiplying the Euclidean arclength by a function tailored to the features of interest to which
we want to ﬂow and then writing down the resulting gradient
evolution equations. Mathematically, this amounts to deﬁning
a new metric in the plane tailored to the given image and then
computing the corresponding gradient ﬂow. This leads to some
new snake models which efﬁciently attract the given active
contour to the features of interest (which basically lie at the
bottom of a potential well). Further, the method allows us to
naturally write down three-dimensional (3-D) active surface
0278–0062/97$10.00 1997 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgia Institute of Technology. Downloaded on April 22,2010 at 20:01:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 16, NO. 2, APRIL 1997
models for 3-D image segmentation which we do in ,
 , and . One can completely justify this method using
viscosity theory which is done as well in and (some
remarks regarding some of the salient points in this regard are
made in the Appendix).
The contents of this paper may be summarized as follows.
In Section II, we brieﬂy sketch some background from the
classical theory of snakes. In Section III, we give the relevant
from curve evolution theory, which allows us to formulate
our new active contour paradigm in Section IV. In Sections
V and VI, we indicate how these methods may be extended
for volumetric segmentation based on mean curvature ﬂow.
Finally in Section VII, we apply our methods to some speciﬁc
medical images, and then we draw our conclusions in Section
VIII. We also include an Appendix with some of the relevant
mathematical details for the convenience of the reader.
II. BACKGROUND ON SNAKES
In this section, we brieﬂy review the energy based optimization approach to deformable contours as discussed in , ,
 , and . For complete details, we refer the interested
reader to the collection of papers in [7, especially ].
be a closed contour in
. (Note that the superscript
denotes transpose.) We
now deﬁne an energy functional on the set of such contours
(“snakes”),
Following standard practice, we take
to be of the form
is the internal deformation energy and
external potential energy which depends on the image. (Other
external constraint forces may be added.) Perhaps the most
common choice for the internal energy is the quadratic functional
control the “tension” and “rigidity” of the
snake, respectively. (Note that the subscripts denote derivatives with respect to
in the latter expression, and
the standard Euclidean norm.)
be the given grey-scale image.
Then the external potential energy depends on the image
. It can be deﬁned by
is a scalar potential function deﬁned on the
image plane. The local minima of
attract the snake. For
example, we may choose
for a suitably chosen constant , in which case the snake will
be attracted to intensity edges. Here
denotes a Gaussian
smoothing ﬁlter of standard deviation
Solving the problem of snakes amounts to ﬁnding, for a
given set of weights
, the curve
that minimizes
. As argued in , the classical snakes method provides
an accurate location of the edges sufﬁciently near a given
initialization of the curve, it has the ability to extract smooth
shapes, and can retrieve angles. (Of course, one must tune
the parameters
to the given problem.) On the other
hand, it does not directly allows simultaneous treatment of
multiple contours. The classical (energy) approach of snakes
cannot deal with changes in topology, unless special topology
handling procedures are added , . The topology of
the initial curve will be the same as the one of the (possibly
wrong) ﬁnal solution. This is the basic formulations of twodimensional (2-D) active contours. Other related and 3-D
formulations have been proposed in the literature (e.g., ,
 , and ). Reviewing all of them is beyond the scope
of the present paper. We should add that there have been a
number of nice papers which improve the traditional snake
methodology. (See , , and the references therein).
One also typically considers dynamic time-varying models
becomes a function of time as well; see . In
this case, one deﬁnes a kinetic energy and the corresponding
Lagrangian (the difference between the kinetic energy and the
deﬁned above). Applying the principle of least action,
one derives the corresponding Lagrange equation which one
tries to solve numerically employing various approximations.
In the approach to be given below in Section IV, we will also
use an energy method. However, in contrast to more ad hoc
approaches, we believe that our energy is intrinsic to the given
geometry of the problem, as is the corresponding gradient
ﬂow. It will also be able to handle topological changes in
a completely automatic fashion.
III. CURVE EVOLUTION THEORY
The mathematical foundation of our new active contour
model is based on Euclidean curve shortening. Since this is
essential in understanding our proposed snake models, we will
now sketch the some of the key concepts from curve evolution
theory in the plane
the curvature, and
the inward unit normal, one
considers families of plane curves ﬂowing according to the
geometric heat equation
This equation has a number of properties which make it very
useful in image processing. In fact, it has become the basis
of a nonlinear scale-space for shape representation , ,
 , .
In particular, (1) is the Euclidean curve shortening ﬂow, in
the sense that the Euclidean perimeter shrinks as quickly as
possible when the curve evolves according to (1) , .
Since, we will need a similar argument for the snake model
we discuss in Section IV, let us work out the details.
be a smooth family of closed curves where
parametrizes the family and
the given curve, say
(Note we assume that
and similarly for the
ﬁrst derivatives). Deﬁne the length functional
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgia Institute of Technology. Downloaded on April 22,2010 at 20:01:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
YEZZI et al.: GEOMETRIC SNAKE MODEL FOR SEGMENTATION OF MEDICAL IMAGERY
Then differentiating (taking the “ﬁrst variation”), and using
integration by parts, we see that
But observing now that
is the arc-length, and using the deﬁnition of curvature, the last
integral is
Hence, we see
Thus, the direction in which
is decreasing most rapidly
Thus, (1) deﬁnes a gradient ﬂow.
A much deeper fact is that simple closed curves converge
to “round” points when evolving according to (1) without
developing singularities. This means that if we consider an
associated family of dilated curves of constant area (look at
the evolving family of shrinking curves under a “magnifying
glass”), the curves of the family approach a circle; see 
and . This fact is the basis for the nonlinear geometric
scale-spaces studied in vision recently , , , , as
well as the active contour models considered below.
In Section IV, we will see that a level set representation of
(2) will be utilized in all the active contour models. Roughly,
this is an evolution of the graph of a function all of whose
level sets evolve according to (2). How to associate such a
level set representation will be sketched in the Appendix. See
 , and for all the details. For future reference,
the level set version of (1) is given by the function
evolving according to
(See Section B of the Appendix.)
IV. NEW ACTIVE CONTOUR PARADIGM
In two key papers, Caselles et al. and Malladi et al. 
formulate snake models based on the level set interpretation of
the Euclidean curve shortening equation. Indeed, their model is
Here, the function
depends on the given image and is
used as a “stopping term.” For example, the function
may be deﬁned in such a way that it has very small magnitude
in the vicinity of an edge and so acts to stop the evolution when
the contour gets close to an edge. In and , the term
is chosen, where
is the (grey-scale) image and
Gaussian (smoothing) ﬁlter. (In ,
, and in ,
). The function
evolves in (4) according to
the associated level set ﬂow for planar curve evolution in the
normal direction with speed a function of curvature which was
introduced in the fundamental work of Osher–Sethian ,
 , , , .
As we have just seen, the Euclidean curve shortening part
of this evolution, namely
may be derived as a gradient ﬂow for shrinking the perimeter
as quickly as possible using only local information. As is
explained in , the constant inﬂation term
is added in (4)
in order to keep the evolution moving in the proper direction.
Note that we are taking
to be negative in the interior and
positive in the exterior of the zero level set contour.
The inﬂationary constant may be considered both with a
positive sign (inward evolution of the evolution of the contour
in the direction of decreasing
) and with a negative sign
(outward or expanding evolution). (Note, the sign convention
we have taken for
above.) In the latter case, this can be
referred to as expanding “balloons” or “bubbles” , .
One should also note that there are many possibilities for a
stopping term besides intensity: texture, optical ﬂow, stereo
disparity, etc.
The models proposed in and have the important
advantage over the classical models discussed in Section II
of being able to automatically handle different topologies. On
the other hand, (4) does not come from the minimization of
an energy functional as in the classical model. In fact, for
inward evolutions, (4) consists of terms which shrink the initial
contour (the inﬂation and the curvature term), and the stopping
term consisting of
. Thus, the model seems a bit ad hoc and
the powerful energy intuition of the classical case is lacking.
From a more practical point of view, unless the stopping
term is exactly zero (which never occurs in real images), the
evolving contour will not in general completely stop at the
given edge. (There is an extensive mathematical discussion of
this in ; see also, the Appendix.) We would therefore like
a model with additional stopping power as well.
Therefore, we would like to ﬁnd a model which combines
the advantages of both the classical energy and the geometric
curve evolution models. This is precisely the type of model
we are about to give. The idea is to ﬁnd an energy functional
based on ﬁrst principles and right down the corresponding
ﬂow. This will lead to a new curve evolution method which
will unify these two fundamental methods.
Our approach is based on modifying the model equation
(4) using the gradient evolution ideas given in Section III. We
accomplish this, by changing the ordinary Euclidean arc-length
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgia Institute of Technology. Downloaded on April 22,2010 at 20:01:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 16, NO. 2, APRIL 1997
function along a curve
with parameter
is a positive differentiable function. The resulting metric is called a conformal metric and appears in a variety
of applications including phase transitions. (See and the
references therein.)
We now modify the computation made in Section III, i.e.,
we compute the gradient ﬂow for curve shortening relative to
the new metric
. Consequently, we set
Then, taking the ﬁrst variation of the modiﬁed length function
, and using integration by parts just as above, we get that
which means that the direction in which the
perimeter is
shrinking as fast as possible is given by
[See the Appendix for all of the mathematical details involved
in the derivation of (6)]. This is precisely the gradient ﬂow
corresponding to the minimization of the length functional
The level set implementation of this ﬂow may be computed
This evolution attracts the contour very quickly to the
feature which lies at the bottom of the potential well described
by the gradient ﬂow (7). As in and , we may also add
a constant inﬂation term, and so derive a modiﬁed model of
(4) given by
Notice that for
as in (5),
will look like a “doublet”
near an edge. (An edge is deﬁned by a step function, and
involves two derivatives of the grey-scale image function
One may easily check that the effect of
is to attract the
evolving contour as it approaches an edge, and to push the
contour back out if it should pass the edge , . Thus,
the model we have, combines that of and together with
the extra stopping power derived from the new gradient term.
We should also note that (8) was derived using ﬁrst principles
from energy minimization exactly as in the standard snakes
approaches (see and the references therein).
Of course, one may choose other candidates for
to pick out other features as we remarked above. The point
is that the metric
has the property that it becomes small
is small and vice versa. Thus, at such points lengths
decrease and so one needs less “energy” in order to move.
Consequently, it seems that such a metric is natural for
attracting the deformable contour to an edge when
We have implemented this snake model based on the
algorithms of Osher–Sethian , , , , and
Malladi et al. . In Section VII, we apply (8) to a number
of medical imaging modalities.
V. MEAN CURVATURE SURFACE EVOLUTION
It is easy to extend the 2-D active contour model just
presented to the 3-D case. The key to our segmentation
approach is a modiﬁcation of the ordinary area functional,
and the corresponding gradient ﬂow. In order to motivate this,
we need to brieﬂy summarize some of the literature on mean
curvature motion and the resulting theory of minimal surfaces.
For all the key concepts in differential geometry, we refer the
reader to .
denote a compact embedded
surface with (local) coordinates
denote the mean
curvature, that is,
is the arithmetic mean of the principal
curvatures. (Recall that at each point
, the surface
principal curvatures given by the maximum and minimum
of plane curves which are cut out on the surface by planes
meeting it orthogonally at
denote the inward
unit normal. Set
Then the inﬁnitesimal area on
is given by
It is a classical fact that the gradient ﬂow associated to the
area functional for surfaces can be deﬁned in terms of the
mean curvature (see and the references therein). More
precisely, for a family of surfaces depending on a parameter
, consider the area functional
Taking the ﬁrst variation, and using integration by parts, it is
easy to compute that
Therefore, the direction in which the area is shrinking most
rapidly (using only local information) is given by
Consequently, this ﬂow is very closely connected to the theory
of minimal surfaces (surfaces of minimal area with given
boundary conditions).
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgia Institute of Technology. Downloaded on April 22,2010 at 20:01:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
YEZZI et al.: GEOMETRIC SNAKE MODEL FOR SEGMENTATION OF MEDICAL IMAGERY
VI. 3-D ACTIVE CONTOUR MODELS
In this section, we will formulate our geometric 3-D contour
models based on the mean surface motion sketched in Section
V. Our method is derived by modifying the Euclidean area by
a function which depends on the salient image features which
we wish to capture.
Indeed, let
be a positive differentiable
function deﬁned on some open subset of
. The function
will play the role of a “stopping” function. Thus,
the function
will depend on the given grey-level
image. Explicitly, the term
may chosen to be small
near a 3-D edge, and so acts to stop the evolution when the 3-
D contour reaches the edge. For example, as in the 2-D case,
we can choose
is the (grey-scale) volumetric image and
is a Gaussian (smoothing) ﬁlter.
What we propose to do is to replace the Euclidean area
given above by a modiﬁed (conformal) area depending on
Indeed, for a family of surfaces (with parameter ), consider
-area functional
Then, exactly as above, taking the ﬁrst variation and using a
simple integration by parts argument, we get that
(See, the Appendix). The corresponding gradient ﬂow is then
Notice that Euclidean conformal area
is small near an
edge. Thus, we would expect and initial 3-D contour to ﬂow
to the potential well indicated by the evolution (11).
The level set version of (11) , , and is given in
terms of the evolving level set function
As before, a constant inﬂation term
may be added to give
(Once again, this inﬂationary constant may be taken to be
either positive (inward evolution) or negative in which case
it would have an outward or expanding effect. As in the 2-D
case, we take
to be negative in the interior and positive in
the exterior of the zero level set.)
It is important to note that there is a mathematically a major
difference between the 2-D and 3-D models discussed here.
Indeed, the geometric heat equation will shrink a simple closed
curve to a round point without developing singularities, even if
the initial curve is nonconvex. The geometric model equation
(4) is based on this ﬂow. For surfaces, it is well known
that singularities may develop in the mean curvature ﬂow
(9) nonconvex smooth surfaces. (The classical example is the
dumbbell.) We should note however that the mean curvature
ﬂow does indeed shrink smooth compact convex surfaces to
round “spherical” points; see . Because of these problems,
several researchers have proposed replacing mean curvature
ﬂow by ﬂows which depend on the Gaussian curvature
Indeed, deﬁne
Then Caselles and Sbert
 have shown that the afﬁne invariant ﬂow
will (smoothly) shrink rotationally symmetric compact surfaces to ellipsoidal shaped points. Thus, one could replace
the mean curvature part by
in (13). Another
possibility would be to use
as has been proposed in .
See also, . (Note that Chow has shown that convex
surfaces ﬂowing under
shrink to spherical points.) These
possible evolutions for 3-D segmentation have been discussed
in our recent paper .
VII. APPLICATIONS TO MEDICAL IMAGERY
We will now apply the active contour model derived above
to some medical imagery. The numerical methods we have
used come from the level set evolution techniques developed
by Osher–Sethian , , , , , and Malladi et
al. . To speed up the evolutions, we have used the local
versions of these algorithms precisely as described in . The
equations described in this paper have been coded for the
case of active contours on 2-D images. In Section A of the
Appendix, we make some remarks about this method.
For 2-D active contours, the evolution equation as derived
above is [(8)]
is a constant inﬂation force and
the curvature of the level sets of
. This equation
describes a propagating front, and we are interested in its
propagation in the plane of an image. It is known that
a propagating front may not remain smooth at all times
(for example, it may cross itself). For evolution beyond
the discontinuities the solutions are required to satisfy an
entropy condition to ensure that the front remains physically
meaningful at all times. The discrete approximations to the
spatial derivatives are thus, derived from the entropy condition.
Osher and Sethian have given such entropy satisfying
schemes and these have been used successfully in shape
modeling . We can regard a decomposition of our speed
function as
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgia Institute of Technology. Downloaded on April 22,2010 at 20:01:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 16, NO. 2, APRIL 1997
Contour extraction from MRI heart image via bubble.
Contour extraction from MRI heart image via different bubble
placement.
is regarded as the constant passive advection term
and the curvature
is the diffusive term of the speed function. The inﬂation part in (8), i.e.,
is approximated
using upwind schemes. The diffusive part, i.e.,
approximated using usual central differences .
There are several stability considerations for the choice
of the step sizes. In , it is noted that for the evolution
equation used in that work the requirement is
Contour extraction from MRI heart image via snake.
Therefore, if small spatial step sizes are used, it forces a
small time step and the resulting evolution can be very slow.
One possibility for speeding up the evolution is to use a
larger inﬂationary force and move the front faster (recall
the advection term causes a constant contraction/expansion
of the front). However, in our experience with using the
approach in this results in large motion of the front
causing “overshooting” of the edge of the feature of interest
in the image, because
might not be rigorously zero on the
desired contour. This problem is resolved by the evolution in
(8) in which
has a behavior similar to a doublet near
an edge. Thus, it exerts a “stronger” stopping effect and
arrests the evolution of the contour close to an edge. In our
simulations, we have observed that this arresting behavior of
term allows use of large inﬂationary forces,
resulting in features being extracted in relatively fewer time
A. Contour Extraction Results
We now describe a number of 2-D images from which
we extracted the contours using the snake/bubble technique
which we have previously described. We have chosen images
from three of the key modalities, MR, ultrasound, and CT to
demonstrate our techniques. All of the simulations were done
on a Sparc10 workstation. The differences in unit iteration
times among the various images are functions of the initial
contours as well as the type of image. For example, the number
of iterations depends on how close the initial contour is placed
to the region of interest (ROI). This is explicitly illustrated
in Figs. 1 and 2. On the other hand, for numerous initial
placements we were always successful in ﬁnding the relevant
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgia Institute of Technology. Downloaded on April 22,2010 at 20:01:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
YEZZI et al.: GEOMETRIC SNAKE MODEL FOR SEGMENTATION OF MEDICAL IMAGERY
Myocardial contour extraction via merging bubbles.
Contour extraction of cyst from ultrasound breast image via merging bubbles.
The value we took for the inﬂation parameter
in all of the
extractions below was one.
1) In Fig. 1, using an initial bubble, we ﬁnd the boundary
of the left ventricle in an MRI heart image. The contour
was found in 45 iterations which took about 3 s.
2) In Fig. 2, we demonstrate the insensitivity of our methods to bubble placement. Therefore, using a very different placement of the bubble, we ﬁnd once again the
boundary of the left ventricle. The contour was found
in about 60 iterations which ran for about 4 s.
3) In Fig. 3, the snake (inward) evolution is utilized for
the same purpose in another MRI heart image. The
contour was found in 30 iterations which also ran for
about 2.5 s.
4) In Fig. 4, we place two bubbles to ﬁnd the myocardium
surrounding the left ventricle. Notice how the expanding bubbles automatically merge. The evolution took
about 80 steps which ran for about 8.5 s.
5) Fig. 5, illustrates bubbles capturing the edge of a cyst
in a breast ultrasound image. We start with three
bubbles in order to demonstrate once again the ability of
the algorithm to automatically handle merging. Notice
that we successfully ﬁnd the contour in a very noisy
environment. Because of the noise, we presmoothed the
image using ten iterations of the afﬁne curve shortening
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgia Institute of Technology. Downloaded on April 22,2010 at 20:01:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 16, NO. 2, APRIL 1997
Contour extraction from CT bone image via snake.
nonlinear ﬁlter , , , . The cyst boundary
was found in 75 steps which took about 5 s.
6) In Fig. 6, we indicate the detection of a multiply
connected contour in a CT bone image using inward
evolving snakes. Notice how we get automatic splitting
of the contour to catch the two bone regions. In this
case, the evolution took about 67 steps which ran
It is very interesting to compare the contour extraction
results in Figs. 1–4 with similar MR cardiac images using
standard snakes, e.g., in . Using the traditional methodology one must start quite close to the contour of interest in
order to be able to capture in. In Figs. 1–4 this is certainly not
the case. Moreover, Figs. 1 and 2, illustrate the fact that initial
bubbles placed quite far from one another still can extract the
relevant contour.
The results from Figs. 4–6 demonstrate the speed and utility
of our methods for treating topological changes, multiple
contours, and ﬁnding boundaries for segmentation even in
noisy environments. Because of the ease of simplicity of use
and speed of the algorithm, it seems ideal for use on a wide
variety of medical imagery as indicated above. For bubbles,
just place the bubble in the ROI, and let it grow to capture
the desired boundary. (For this technique to work in general,
the initial bubble must be placed completely inside the given
feature of interest.)
VIII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have applied the novel active contour
model formulated in and to a number of medical
images coming from a variety of common modalities. The
power of this technique in extracting features from even rather
noisy medical images has been demonstrated. Our approach
is geometric, based on image-dependent Riemannian metrics
and the associated gradient ﬂows for active contour models.
Fast, reliable implementations of the 3-D mean curvature
equations for the volumetric segmentation of medical images
are reported in .
MATHEMATICAL JUSTIFICATION OF THE MODELS
In this Appendix, we will provide some mathematical details
of the equations we study here. This section is optional and has
been included in order to make this paper as self-contained as
possible. Obviously, we can only sketch some of the relevant
background here, and so we refer the interested reader to the
papers referenced in our discussion below.
A. Derivation of Active Contour Model
First we will derive the model equation (6). We use the
same notation as in Section IV. Accordingly, let
be a smooth family of closed curves where
parametrizes the
family and
the given curve, say
. Taking the ﬁrst
variation of the length functional
we get that
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgia Institute of Technology. Downloaded on April 22,2010 at 20:01:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
YEZZI et al.: GEOMETRIC SNAKE MODEL FOR SEGMENTATION OF MEDICAL IMAGERY
(integration by parts)
Using the fact that
from which we derive, the required equation
The derivation of the mean curvature ﬂow (11) in Section VI
is very similar; see, and .
B. Level Set Representations
We now go over the level set representation for curves
ﬂowing according to functions of the curvature. This is the
basis of the numerical algorithm chosen for the active contour
model given in Section VII. The level set approach for such
evolutions is due to Osher and Sethian , , , .
be a family of curves satisfying
the following evolution equation:
There are a number of problems which must be solved
when implementing curve evolution equations such as (16) on
computer. For example, singularities may develop. A typical
instance of this phenomenon is when
in (16); here, even
a smooth initial curve can develop singularities. The question
is how to continue the evolution after the singularities appear.
A natural way is to choose the solution which agrees with the
Huygens principle , , or as Sethian observed, if the
front is viewed as a burning ﬂame, this solution is based on the
principle that once a particle is burnt, it stays burnt , .
One can show that, from all the weak solutions corresponding
to (16), the one derived from the Huygens principle is unique,
and can be obtained via the entropy condition constraint.
In any numerical algorithm, we have the key requirements of
accuracy and stability. The numerical algorithm must approximate the evolution equation, and it must be robust. Sethian 
showed that a simple, Lagrangian, difference approximation,
requires an impractically small time step in order to achieve
stability. The basic problem with Lagrangian formulations is
that the marker particles on the evolving curve come very
close during the evolution.
The algorithm proposed by Osher and Sethian , ,
 , provides a reliable numerical solution for curve (and
hypersurface) evolution. It is based on the Hamilton–Jacobi
and viscosity theory. Indeed, ﬁrst the curve is embedded in a
2-D surface, and then the equations of motion are solved using
a combination of straightforward discretization, and numerical
techniques derived from hyperbolic conservation laws.
The embedding step is done in the following manner: The
is represented by the zero level set of a smooth
and Lipschitz continuous function
Assume that
is negative in the interior and positive in the
exterior of the zero level set. We consider the zero level set,
We have to ﬁnd an evolution equation of
, such that the
evolving curve
is given by the evolving zero level
By differentiating (17) with respect to
Note that for the zero level, the following relation holds:
In this equation, the left side uses terms of the surface
while the right side is related to the curve
. The combination
of (16) to (20) gives
and the curve
, evolving according to (16), is obtained by the
zero level set of the function
, which evolves according to
(21). Sethian called this scheme an Eulerian formulation
for front propagation, because it is written in terms of a ﬁxed
coordinate system. Finally, one can compute that
(This is the curvature of an implicitly deﬁned curve; see .)
Therefore, we derive the level set representation of Euclidean
curve shortening (3) as a special case of (21).
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgia Institute of Technology. Downloaded on April 22,2010 at 20:01:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 16, NO. 2, APRIL 1997
C. Viscosity Theory
Next, we make some remarks about the existence and
uniqueness of the models we consider in this paper. (Again full
mathematical details may be found in .) The equations we
study here are special cases of a nonlinear diffusion equation
of the form
Because of the form of the
in the equations we consider, and the fact that
may vanish, studying (22) requires
some care; in particular, the solutions are not expected to be
sufﬁciently regular for the equation to make sense, and we
need to use a type of generalized solutions known as viscosity
solutions. Deﬁning these is beyond the scope of this paper,
and so we refer the interested reader to for a general
discussion of the theory and for their application to the
equations studied here. We will just summarize some of the
relevant conclusions of now.
The key point is that there exists a unique solution for (22)
in a suitable viscosity sense. (See [26, Th. 1]). Moreover,
slight differences between images will not become artiﬁcially
enhanced by our active contour methods. We have also shown
that the level curves of the function
do approach the desired
. These results show that the model of
the present paper is justiﬁed from a theoretical standpoint.
We should also note that if
is not rigorously zero on the
desired contour, the evolution has no reason to stop. In fact,
one would rather expect it to shrink the snake to a point. This
explains why in dealing with poor images, one may see the
snake passing through the features of interest. This is a further
advantage of the additional doublet stopping term
care must therefore be given to the choice of
, so that the
evolution slows down signiﬁcantly near the desired contour.
Moreover, the appropriate amount of inﬂation of (8) can
be estimated (from above). Without the gradient term, it is
safe to take an inﬂation term of the order of the curvature of
the desired contour. Finally, we can give precise estimates on
sensitivity of the ﬁnal contour as a function of initial contour
placement (see [26, Theorem 2]).