0042-6989(95)000321
Vision Res. Vol. 35, No. 18, pp. 2643 2657, 1995
Copyright © 1995 Elsevier Science Lid
Printed in Great Britain. All rights reserved
0042-6989/95 $9.50 + 0.00
A Bayesian Framework for Understanding
Texture Segmentation in the Primary
Visual Cortex
TAI SING LEE*t
Received 22 December 1993; in revised form 21 December 1994
This paper presents a mathematical theory for understanding the computations involved in texture
segmentation in the primary visual cortex. We propose that texture segmentation is a part of the early
visual system's overall strategy to infer surfaces of objects in a visual scene. Based on this insight,
we use the Bayesian inference paradigm to formulate the texture segmentation problem into a
maximum a posteriori surface inference problem. The dynamical system for finding the optimal
solution of this problem can be characterized by two concurrent and interactive processes: a gradual
sharpening of the boundary signals and a simultaneous smoothing of the surface signals. The behavior
of these dynamical processes was studied using both analytical and computational methods. We present
some computational results and mathematical predictions. This theory suggests a novel framework for
understanding the functional roles of the complex cells in the primary visual cortex.
Texture segmentation Surface interpolation Bayesian inference Neural model of V1
INTRODUCTION
Texture segmentation is a visual process that partitions
a visual scene into regions of different textures. It is a
preattentive and parallel process that covers a large area
of the visual field simultaneously and is completed within
100msec . The result of this global analysis
is used to direct a small aperture of focal attention to
interesting areas of the visual scene for further detailed
analysis of form .
In this paper, we present a Bayesian inference model
for texture segmentation. This model is developed by
Lee, Mumford and Yuille . A model of similar
spirit has also been developed by Geman, Geman,
Graffigne and Dong using the Markov Random
Field approach and directional residue statistical
measures. In this paper, we analyze the dynamics of the
model and discuss the relevance of this model to the
understanding of the computation in the primary visual
Julesz suggested that preattentive texture seg-
mentation arises from differential stimulation of different
feature detectors in the brain. Based on this idea, Turner
 , Fogel and Sagi , Voorhees and Poggio
 , Bovik, Clark and Geisler , Malik and
*Division of Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, U.S.A. [Email .]
]'Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, U.S.A.
Perona have developed successively more refined
models for texture segmentation. All of these models
involve several serial processing stages of filter response
computation, Gaussian smoothing, and edge detection.
In our model, the surface interpolation process and the
boundary detection process are combined into an inter-
active and concurrent system, with the resulting advan-
tage of better boundary localization. Our model is the
first model to use explicitly the idea of surface interp-
olation in texture segmentation. Furthermore, ours is
also the first to explicitly assign probabilistic priors on
texture variations in scale and orientation. This measure
enables the model to tolerate deformation of texture
within a surface due to perspective and surface shape of
3D objects.
This Bayesian approach yields a 'neural network
model' which is similar in spirit to Grossberg and
Mingola's Boundary Contour and Feature Con-
tour systems proposed for brightness perception in the
visual cortex. However, there are important differences
between the two. One is that their feature system employs
only passive diffusion, it is constrained by but not
affecting the boundary system. In contrast, the boundary
and surface systems in our model are tightly coupled and
interactive. A much more important difference is that,
because of the complexity of the computation, the simple
gradient descent relaxation method their model utilizes
would tend to trap the system in an inferior hypothesis.
Our approach, on the other hand, utilizes a gradual
relaxation strategy to seek better hypotheses.
TAI SING LEE
Our approach also differs from the other models in
that we started with a computational theory that recog-
nizes texture segmentation as a process for inferring
surface region and surface boundaries, and then devel-
oped the algorithm and implementation to realize the
theory. The basic biological insight provided by this
model is that complex cells in the primary visual cortex
should not be narrowly interpreted as local feature
detectors but rather as computational units for interpret-
ing surface and extracting surface boundaries. The goal
of this paper is to propose a functional framework based
on this model for understanding the complex cells in the
primary visual cortex.
In the first part of the paper, we will present the
Bayesian model for texture segmentation, deriving the
basic properties of the dynamical system of the model
and illustrating them with computational results. In the
second part of the paper, we will discuss the biological
and psychological evidence that lead us to suggest the
possible existence of such a system in the brain.
BAYESIAN INFERENCE AND ENERGY FUNCTIONAL
The basic idea of Bayesian inference is that our
interpretation of a visual scene is strongly influenced by
our expectation and our prior knowledge of the world.
The conditional probability of certain surface quality
statistics f and location of surface boundary B given a
measurement g is, by Bayes' rule,
P(g If, B)P(f, B)
P(f, B Ig) -
P(g) is independent of f and B and is therefore a
normalization factor. The maximum a posteriori esti-
mate of P(f, BIg) can be obtained by finding thefand
B that maximize P(g l f, B)P(f, B), where P(g If, B) is
the constraint off and B on data g, and P(f, B) specifies
the prior constraints on surface statistics.)C and surface
boundaries B.
Julesz showed that some textures with identical
first, second and third order global statistics can be
preattentively discriminated. Therefore, the crucial
determinants of texture discrimination are not global
statistical measures but are the density of the so-called
textons and their gradients.
Textons can be considered as descriptors of surface
properties. Among the textons Julesz listed are oriented
line segments, line terminators, crossings of line segments,
and blobs. The simple cells in the primary visual cortex
are ideal detectors of these textons . Their receptive fields can be ideally modelled by
the following self-similar family of Gabor wavelets (Lee,
- 50 (2(x cos 0 + y sin 0)) 2
0 ~.¥, .v" ~), O) - 5,~
• exp -5~(-xsinO+ycosO)
.[exp(i(o)x cos 0 + ~)y sin 0)) - exp(-~)]
FIGURE 1. Receptive fields of an ensemble of simple cells can be modeled by a family of Gabor wavelets under biological
constraints: 1.5 octave frequency bandwidth, 24 deg orientation bandwidth and 2:1 aspect ratio.
BAYESIAN MODEL FOR TEXTURE SEGMENTATION
Direct Input to Complex Cells: Texton
Statistics within B controlled window,
g statistical
window computes
statistics of
Complex Cells
Q Q Q SimpleCells
B (boundary)
Boundary signals can cut away the lateral input of simple
cells to the complex cells, i,e. modifying the g statistical window.
FIGURE 2. Complex ceils compute the average response of the simple cells or the density of the textons within a g statistical
window. The g statistical window is controlled by the boundary of the region. Four circular g windows are shown in the upper
figure along the dashed line. The inner two windows compute the simple ceils' responses within the full extent of the windows,
while half of each of the outer two windows has been cut off by the boundary. In such cases, only the responses within the
boundaries, i.e. the gray part of the windows, are used. The size of the g window can be controlled by the selective inactivation
of the feedforward connection as shown in the lower figure.
where ~o is the radial frequency and 0 is the wavelet
orientation.
(x = 0, y = 0) and its L 2 norm is normalized to 1, i.e.
(qs, ~ ) = 1. The aspect ratio is 2:1, the frequency band-
width is 1.5 octaves, and the orientation bandwidth is
24 deg. A discrete set of this family of wavelets is shown
in Fig. 1.
The wavelet transform is given by, with
~WI(x, y, a, O)
=ffl(x-xo,y-yo)~k(x,y,a,O)dxdy.
#7 at each x, y a, 0 would be represented by the firing
rates of four simple cells (positive and negative co-
efficients of the even and off symmetric wavelets) in the
Julesz's psychological data suggested that there
is a A-neighborhood (at least twice the element size) in
which texton densities and their gradients are computed.
Also, textons organize into texture percept only if their
spatial separation is smaller than the diameter of a
A-neighborhood window. This window scales with the
Gabor wavelets and the texton density within it is given
as follows:
g(x'Y'a'°)=l f f~.~,,o,x.y, R(W'I(Y,.~,a,O))dA (4)
where A is the area within a a dependent neighborhood
window N~ centered at (x, y). The spatial extent of the
N~ window within which the statistical average of ~WI
is computed should be constrained by the boundary (see
Fig. 2). However, this constraint is not considered in the
present model. R(.) is either the rectification of or the power modulus of the simple
cell responses . Since
Gabor wavelets are both feature detectors and frequency
analyzers, g(x, y, a, 0) is considered as the local distri-
bution of texton statistics as well as of the spectral power
in an image. The contrast normalization mechanism
in the visual cortex can be used to normalize this local distribution as
g(x, I', •, O)
g(x,y,a,O)
f~,~(x,y,&ff)d6ff +~l
where r/ is a constant.
The measured local distribution g, the relatively global
estimate of the texture statistics distribution f of the
surfaces and the estimate of the boundaries B of the
surfaces are constrained by the following multivariate
normal distribution, with standard deviation p,~,
P(glf, B)=~
The priors (natural constraints) on the surface statistics
f and boundaries B are summarized as follows:
(1) Spatial homogeneity: statistics of surface qualities
on the surface of an object tend to be continuous and
(2) Variation of texture in scale and orientation due
to perspective and 3D surface shape will introduce a
gradual and systematic shift in the statistical distri-
(3) An abrupt change in these statistics is indicative of
occlusion boundaries between surfaces.
(4) Any given visual scene is to be segmented into a
limited number of surface regions with boundaries of a
finite length.
Prior 1 is formulated probabilistically by assuming
partials f, and~ within a surface follow two i.i.d, normal
distributions. Prior 2 is formulated probabilistically by
assuming partialsfogo and f0 within a surface also follow
two i.i.d, normal distributions. Prior 3 is the prior that
produces segmentation at locations of large texton
gradient. Prior 4 is the prior specifying the amount of
segmentation boundaries allowed within an image.
For homogeneous and stationary texture, the stan-
dard deviation of the global statistical distribution of g
within a surface along each dimension is small. For very
granular textures, the global statistic ofg exhibits signifi-
cant spatial fluctuation and its distribution will have a
large variance. Similarly, for nonstationary texture such
as pebbles on a beach in perspective or a wheat field
swaying in the wind, global statistics of g within the
surface will also have large variance in scale and orien-
tation. Large variance in g along certain a dimension
requires large smoothing force applied to f, i.e. assuming
a small variance in the distribution of partial 8falong the
corresponding dimension.
The exponents of the prior constraints and the
data constraints can be formulated into the following
continuous energy functional,
E(f, BIg) oc - log(P(f, B Ig))
--g(a, O, x, y)]2 d log a dO dx dy
+ f f f f, o
d log a dO dx dy + ~ fR dz
where D is the spatial domain, L) is the spatial frequency
domain; (x,y)~D, (a,O)~l). B is a set of C 1 curves
cutting up D into different regions, land g are functions
of four continuous variables x, y, a and 0. g is the
a-dependent
The parameters 2.., 2.,., y~, 70, are inversely pro-
portional to the standard deviations of g within each
surface region along dimensions x, y, or, 0, normalized
with respect to/~d. The smoothing effect they produce in
each dimension introduces tolerance to signal variations
along the corresponding dimension.
The maximum a posterior estimate off and B, which
is the texture segmentation result of the image, can be
minimizing
functional
E([~ Big), with respect tofand B.
The three integrals in equation (7) represent three
competing forces in action: the force of reality (first
term) demands fidelity to data; the force of homogeneity
(second term) smooths out variation within a region
and splits apart significantly different regions; and
the force of tolerance (third term) prevents excessive
splitting due to over-sensitivity, i.e. it controls the
formation of breaks. These three forces act in concert
to arrive at a balanced compromise according to the
assumed prior statistical distributions specified by the
parameters.
OPTIMIZATION DYNAMICS AND SYSTEM
The battle of these forces are best illustrated by a
dynamical system that can be used to find the maximum
a posterior estimatefand B. Since the energy functional
is not convex, a simple gradient descent strategy will
have the system trapped in a local minimum. A strategy
to overcome this problem is called gradual relaxation: a
convex functional is developed to approximate the real
functional and it is slowly transformed back to the real
functional in a series of successive stages of decreasing
convexity. At each stage, the estimates off and B are
found by gradient descent. These estimates are used as
starting points for the subsequent gradient descent in the
next stage.
The energy functional [equation (7)] can be formu-
lated as a series of approximating functionals E~, the
deformation of which is controlled by a continuation
BAYESIAN MODEL FOR TEXTURE SEGMENTATION
True Energy j
Convex Energy L
FIGURE 3. The energy landscapes of a sequence of deforming energy
functionals and the successive gradient descent of a 'ball' in this
sequence of landscapes: the system first converges to the global
minimum of the convex landscape, which is then used as the starting
point for the next descent in the new energy landscape. This strategy
of successive gradual relaxation will allow the system to converge to
a state that is close to a global minimum of the original energy
functional .
parameter x, in an approach similar to that taken by
Ambrosio and Tortorelli and Richardson .
E'~=ffffR[(f--g)2
+ 22 II vf 112(1 - l)2 + x~t tl v/II 2
logad0dxdy
where f, g, 7~, 7o, and ~ are defined earlier, and
2 = 2x = ~y (assuming isotropic distribution of g over
space). The earlier binary boundary B is replaced by
continuous
II Vf II = v/(df/Ox) 2 + (t?f/Oy) 2, and similarly for ]l VI II =
x/(31/ax)2+(Ol/Oy)2, x, the continuation parameter,
starts at 1 and decreases slowly over time. In the limit
as x ~ 0, E, converges to E0, the original energy func-
tional. Figure 3 illustrates the idea of successive gradient
descent in a series of deforming energy landscapes.
The descent equations for f and l for minimizing this
energy functional can be obtained from the associated
Euler-Lagrange equations by setting
~a,O,x,y,x,t)
= rf{--f(a, O, x,y, x, t)
+g(a, O, x,y, x, t)
+ 7~ O2~oga+ 7°~TO
+ V" [22Vf(1 --/(x, y, re, t))2]}
d/(x, y, x, t)
- rt~xV2l(x,y, x, t)
+ 22(1 -- l)II Vf II a - T~x " (12)
The parameters r: and rt are positive rate constants which
control the rate of descent. At each ~, as x changes
slowly from 1 to 0, the system relaxes to an equilibrium,
i.e. df/dt and dl/dt are driven to 0.
These equations describe the dynamics of the system.
They suggest that the optimization is achieved by two
concurrent and
interactive processes of boundary-
contraction and surface-expansion mediated by the three
forces described. The flow of computation in this model
is illustrated in Fig. 4. As time evolves, the surface
statistical
diffuse in all four dimensions
(a, O, x,y), but their diffusion in space is modulated
by the boundary signal l(x, y). Therefore, the diffusion
is nonlinear because it would be slowed down or
blocked by the boundary signals. On the other hand,
the boundary signals 1 undergo gradual contraction
over space. They are activated by the gradient in the
surface signals II VT II and they contract spatially over
Output Surface Statistics
Representation
Output Boundary
Representation
Statistics Gradient]
[Interpolatio
v~. System
oo.,o,, t I
I Toom ,n.
statistics /
Feedback to limit diffusion
Gabor wavelet responses
Gabor wavelet responses
to surface features
to luminance boundary
FIGURE 4. The computational flow of the model: the surface system computes the statistics of the simple cells and these
statistical signals diffuse in both the spatial and spectral domains in the process of surface interpolation; the boundary system
is activated by the gradient in the statistical signals and it feedbacks to constrain the diffusion process in the surface system.
TAI SING LEE
I--" k=O.5000
I I ,I ill l, \ \\
,1' ill! '\, \\\
" "-" - """
Space [x-axis] (discontinuity in f is at x=0)
FIGURE 5. The spatial contraction of the boundary signals over time: in this image, V[¢ 0 at x = 0 and V[-0
elsewhere.
Initially, the boundary signal has a wide spatial spread. As ~,- decreases, the spatial spread of its response contracts toward
the discontinuity al x = 0. The boundary responses at ~,- - 1, 0.5, 0. I, 0.0001 are shown in the figure.
time as K--* 0. Therefore, the system is characterized
by a gradual sharpening of the boundary signals as
well as a simultaneous nonlinear smoothing of the surface
The gradual contraction of the boundary signals can
be understood by considering the system's response to
a boundary. Let the system's responses in all texture
statistical channels f be piecewise constant in x and r
except at the boundary x = 0. In this case, the gradient
off along y is all zero, and the gradient along x is all
zero except at x = 0; however, at x = 0, because of the
collective gradient Vf is nonzero and greater than the
threshold, the boundary signal is active, i.e. l(x = O) = 1.
Therefore the second term in equation (12)just vanishes,
and at the equilibrium of each K relaxation stage (i.e.
dl/dt = 0), the dynamical equation [equation (12)] yields
V2l controls the lateral interaction between the boundary
signals l. As h--~ 0, the spatial extent of the lateral
inhibition extends within the surface, and the boundary
signal l contracts to a sharp line as shown in Fig. 5.
The smoothing of f is obvious from equation (1 1). The
influence of the boundary process makes it a nonlinear
diffusion equation, i.e. at the boundary, the diffusion
is slowed down or interrupted. But far away from
the boundary, the diffusion is linear. The dynamical
equation becomes,
- 7o;'OJ~ =g(x,y, log a, 0).
The predicted response of f at a particular point
(xo,yo, a0, 00) in the spatial-spectral space, away from
the boundary is given by convolving a Green's function
with the input signal,
f(xo, Yo, log o0, 00)
g(x, y, log or, 0) + dx dy d log cr dO
where C is a constant; G(x, ),, o, 0), the Green's function
to equation (14), is given by,
G (x -- x~, y - Yo, log cr - log a0, 0 - 00) = -- KI (r) (16)
where K~ is the modified Bessel function of the second
kind of order 1 and
BAYESIAN MODEL FOR TEXTURE SEGMENTATION
is the distance away from the position (x0,Y0, ao, 0o)
being considered.
For easier visualization, the Green's function in 1D is
G(x) = ~ e -Ixl/~.
The implication of this analysis is that the process of
surface statistics interpolation can be implemented in
two ways: one is by the nonlinear diffusion off, and the
other is by the feedforward input from the simple cells
with the weight (Green's function) of the feedforward
connection dynamically controlled by the global statist-
ical parameters 2, a, 7~, Y0 as well as by the boundary B.
COMPUTER EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The continuous energy functional [equation (7)] and
its variation by the continuation method [equation (8)]
allows us to analyze the dynamical system analytically
and arrive at some basic understandings of the system
with respect to boundary contraction and surface com-
pletion. We also implement the model in a parallel
MASPAR computer to study its performance.
Both computer and biological implementation of the
model requires discretization of the representation.
Interestingly, the cortical sampling density in the spatial-
spectral domain exceeds the minimum requirement
(16 orientation columns, 4 frequency steps per octave,
half receptive field overlap) for a tight frame which
functions basically like a continuous representation . Therefore, the brain does have the representa-
tional machinery to implement the continuous energy
functional. For computer implementation, because of
the limit in computational resources, we have used a far
coarser representation: 8 orientation steps and 3 scale
steps with 1 octave apart. The frame is still relatively
tight in this case, so that reasonable reconstruction can
:::: :.: :
, .....:...
iiii~ii{:::i i!!
be obtained using simple linear summation (see Fig. 6).
Therefore, this coarse representation is a reasonable
approximation of the continuous representation in our
implementation.
A computational network has been set up to imple-
ment the discrete version of the continuous energy
functional for computing the maximum a posterior
estimates off and B. The architecture of computational
implementation is shown in Fig. 7. The surface system
is composed of a set of 24 lattices of nodes, each lattice
corresponding to a wavelet channel of a particular
orientation and frequency tuning. Each of these lattices
(shown in Fig. 7 as the spatial lattice supported by
the telephone poles) resembles Blake and Zisserman
 's weak-membrane. The membranes in this model
are coupled together to allow inter-membrane spectral
diffusion so that the system can tolerate texture variation
in scale and orientation. Therefore, this model has been
called the coupled-membrane model .
Many of the algorithms developed for minimizing the
discrete version of the energy functional exploit the same
strategy of gradual relaxation. Their dynamics are qualitatively
similar to the continuous dynamics discussed earlier.
For discrete implementation in computer, we generalized
the graduated nonconvexity algorithm of Blake and
Zisserman to seek the best estimate of f and B. The
computational results are used to evaluate the perform-
ance of the energy functional as well as to illustrate
qualitatively the effect of boundary sharpening and
surface spreading.
Figures 8 and 9 show the converged boundary signals
of the texture system in response to a set of textured
images. Responses to Mondrian and Brodatz demon-
strated the system's ability to tolerate stochastic noise in
granular textures. Responses to image Shell demon-
strated the tolerance to gradual shifts in the orientation
of the texture. Responses to Vase and Sierra demon-
Original Image
Reconstruction
FIGURE 6. Reconstruction of the standard image 'Lena': despite the coarse sampling density (8 orientations per cycle, l scale
step per octave), the reconstruction resulting from simple linear summation of the product of the wavelets' coefficients and
their receptive fields produce a nice interference-free reconstruction, suggesting that the representation is complete within a
certain frequency band and is fairly continuous, thus can reasonably represent the input signals for our model.
TA1 SING LEE
Spatial lattice of a wavelet
(texton) statistics channel
Diffusion Process is controlled
by the boundary signal I(x,y)
channels of different scales
and orientations in the spectral map
ctral map at a particular location,
/ \,; , o0.
distribution of the signals in scale
and orientation 0 space.
statistical measurement of the
signal I(x,y)
response of a particular wavelet channel
FIGURE 7. The architecture of computation of the Bayesian model: the 4D information is arranged as a spectral bundle. A
set of 2D spectral maps are embedded in the 2D spatial space in a manner similar to hypercolumns embedded in a retinotopic
coordinate in the primary visual cortex. Nodes of a wavelet channel are locally interconnected for spatial diffusion, and each
channel is also connected to its proximal wavelet channels for spectral diffusion. The boundary signals can interrupt the spatial
diffusion of the surface statistics signals.
strated the system's tolerance to gradual shifts in the
scale or size of the texture elements.
The gradual sharpening of the boundary signals can
be seen in Fig. 9, which shows the boundary signals of
the system in response to the images Mondrain and Eye
in successive relaxation stages. Initially, the boundary
signal is fuzzy, fragmented and sketchy, resembling an
artist's initial sketch. Over time, it converges to a sharp
The initial response of a channel depends on the
frequency and orientation tuning of the channel. But as
optimization progresses, the signals can be seen to
diffuse within the channel across space as well as into
other channels. This effect can be seen in the surface
signals of the system in response to image Shell as shown
in Fig. 10. At the end, each channel seems to carry a
trace of the global impression of the image, indicating
that the texture statistics within each surface region have
become homogeneous.
In general, this system takes about l0 iteration stages
and about 2 hr on the MASPAR parallel computer to
converge. However, theoretically, each iteration stage
can be performed in one 'dynamic relaxation' analog
neural network in milliseconds. Therefore, the 10~c
stages can be completed within 100 msec in the brain.
The model has at least three major limitations: first,
complete contour of the surface boundary is not guaran-
teed because there is no hard constraint or surface-
region label to enforce complete partitioning of the
different surface regions; second, the parameters of
the surface priors, i.e. the variances of the statistical
distributions, are uniformly set a priori for the whole
visual scene. For a system that automatically perform
texture segmentation for different realistic images, these
parameters should be adaptively estimated within each
region. This lack of adaptation of parameters according
to local image statistics leads to the emergence of
spurious boundary signals on the surface of the shell
(Shell), as well as on the surface of the sand dune
(Sierra). We have developed a more advanced model to
address these problems .
PSYCHOLOGICAL IMPLICATION
This Bayesian model provides a useful framework for
understanding the computation in the visual system that
BAYESIAN MODEL FOR TEXTURE SEGMENTATION
i .i: !~!i'i~'& " " ":"
~:.'%?::iF!J:iJi.'~i:%it:i!?:
. :::iii::ii::i!i>':!i:{!i~i!~i!!~9.!i~
:t~. tiii: .t:?i~ % .t;~ :-%.. % ".~:.,:
'~%.'~.:.!~ ~ :9.::it. ~! %'
FIGURE 8. The boundary output of the Bayesian model in response to a set of texture images. Parameters used for Vase,
Mondrian and Shell are 2 = 6, ~ = 0.02, 7, = 2, 70 = 1. Parameters for Brodatz and Sierra are 2 = 12, • = 0.005, V, = 4, V0 = 4.
For the image Eye, only the luminance channel is relevant, therefore segmentation can be achieved using a single
weak-membrane with parameters 2 = 6, a = 0.03.
results in the perceptual experience of texture segmenta-
tion elucidated in the studies of Julesz , Beck et al.
 and Treisman . In this and the next sec-
tions, we attempt to build some conceptual links between
the behaviors of the model and the psychological as well
as the physiological observations.
First, psychologically, brightness, color and texture
signals are found to be able to fill in artificial or natural
scotoma to complete a surface . This psychological phenomenon of filling-in is
related to the nonlinear diffusion for interpolating the
surface statistical signals f in the texture segmentation
process. However, the diffusion of surface statistical
signals in our model is responsible for completing the
percept of surface, rather than for creating the percept
of interpolated texture pattern. The surface interpolation
process has a time course of 100-200msec ,
whereas the reconstruction of texture patterns to fill
up the scotoma might take seconds . The texture filling-in process
might have two components: surface interpolation and
image reconstruction. Our model might capture the
diffusive process of surface interpolation, but not the
mechanism for perceptual image reconstruction.
Julesz has pointed out that during the 100 msec
span of preattentive texture segmentation, the texton
atoms have not been glued together to form a texton
molecule; that the region grouping process seems to be
operated by 'averaging' the density of texton atoms such
as oriented segments. Because the averaging process is
applied to the atoms of texture molecules, the preatten-
tive system is blind to the positional and configurational
information of textons, i.e. the structure of the molecules
...... _ L{ :;:Z.
TA1 SING LEE
FIGURE 9. The evolution of the boundary signals over three successive ~- 0, = 0.5, ~,- ~ 0.1, K
0) relaxation stages for
Mondrian [top row] (c¢ = 0.02, 2 = 6, ~'~ = 2, ?0 = l) and for Eye [bottom row] (~ = 0.03, ). = 6). The initial response resembles
an artist's sketch, and the final response resembles a Matisse's drawing.
themselves. This phenomenon is consistent with the
both phenomena related to surface interpolation
nonlinear spatial diffusion of the surface statistical
process but that the perceptual reconstruction of
signals f in the wavelet channels of our model. The
the filled-in patterns require additional processes in a
insight provided by the model is that the 'averaging'
longer time frame which are not captured in this
process and the part of the 'filling-in' process are
• ~::"i'.':" ".7.; 7": "" ",':'"" -:r ........ ~: .......... :,"; ~ '::; 7- ;--'";; ;:7.'" 7; !i;I :~ :i'"" 7 7"" "'" "; "" T ~';17~'i:.-:--" 71::""" ", ;" ":" ""'F.'. "17~" "~7":~7"" ".':'. :- ;-:"
!::i!ti[:~:~
b::~ ::: i:~:t:i
..............................
i:i~::::.;i:.:::k::::~:;
.:: ..: ::+,:,
i ............
~ i!:., .%.. ,~..~
,!! !t:, <
!~.:~..~:::.:.....z:..:~i::;:.~,~:;~
:~,-::.:.:.~,~:.~::~:~:,
............... ::-..-. :::-F -G
-- ............... :-~;~ ............ !:ii~!~;it::;i:-t:.i;i:ii!-;-~i',~
i ........ ::~i
ili!; di !i
Initial response map of the surface statistical channels.
Final response map of the surface statistical channels.
FIGURE 10. The normalized surface statistics of the model in response to image Shell. Within each response map, there are
3 x 8 little squares, each showing the spatial response of a particular wavelet channel. The first column on the left is computed
from horizontally tuned wavelets. Orientation selectivity rotates with the columns. The top row is the finest scale and scales
increase with row. The initial response is very localized in spectral and spatial space. The final response shows significant
diffusion in all dimensions, with the shell's unified surface cartoon appearing in every channcl.
BAYESIAN MODEL FOR TEXTURE SEGMENTATION
An unique component of our model is its explicit
priors on the statistical variations in the scale and
orientation domains within a surface region. These
priors introduce a smoothing interaction between texton
statistics channels of different scales and orientations.
The magnitude of this smoothing interaction depends
on the global texture statistics within a surface region.
When a surface contains random or non-stationary
texture, significant smoothing in scale and orientation
space will occur to capture the variance of texton
statistics. Such smoothing will reduce the difference of
the texton statistical distributions of two random texture
regions. In this case, segmentation requires a larger
difference in scale or orientation in the textures of the
two regions. Therefore, our model suggests that texture
segmentation is not a local process, but is a context-
sensitive global process involving surface interpolation.
The global statistics of a surface determines the texture
gradient threshold and the speed of texture segmenta-
tion. This is consistent with Enns and Nothdurft's
 findings that texture segmentation is context
sensitive and that a larger texture gradient is required
for segmenting regions of increasing random texture
The model also provides an interesting insight to some
common experiences. The gradual refinement of the
boundary signals in the system is similar to the evolution
from a quick sketch to a clean line drawing of an artist.
People perceive cartoons, caricatures and line-drawings
much faster than real images. In a cartoon, the outline
of the figures resembles the output of the boundary
system and the coloring of the cartoon figures resembles
the output of the surface system. By discarding and
simplifying the images, cartoons allow us to skip several
steps in our visual processing, leading to more immediate
perception of forms.
BIOLOGICAL IMPLICATION
We propose that texture segmentation, as a part of
the surface inference process, is mostly accomplished
in the primary visual cortex. This proposal is based
on several pieces of evidence, first, surface perception
can be induced preattentively by stereo information
 . Since cells
lose their specificity for stereo disparity and become
binocular beyond V1, the creation of the surface percept
likely takes place within V1. Second, the receptive
fields of V1 cells resemble Julesz's textons. Therefore,
the representation of textons and the computation
of texton density and gradients likely locate in V1
so that the segmentation and pop-out information
can be immediately fedback to the subcortical areas
to direct reflexive eye movement. Third, even if the
texton statistics are computed in extrastriate cortices,
texture boundary would still be represented in V1
because only V1 cells have the high spatial specificity
required for boundary localization. In fact, Knierim and
Van Essen , Lamme , Zipser, Lee, Lamme
and Schiller , and Lee, Mumford and Schiller
 have found ample evidence that V1 cells are
sensitive to texture contrast.
Neurons in the primary visual cortex have been
roughly classified into simple, complex and hyper-
complex cells. Simple cells have high spatial specificity
and behave more or less like linear wavelet filters.
Complex cells are distinguished from simple cells by two
fundamental properties: (1) they showed unmodulated
responses to drifting sinusoidal gratings; (2) they are
sensitive to contrast but insensitive to the direction of
contrast. Hypersimple and hypercomplex cells are
simple and complex cells with additional end-stopping or
side-stopping properties. Although the receptive fields
of simple cells can be modeled by Gabor wavelets and
therefore can be understood as representational elements
as discussed earlier, simple cells can also be understood
as the first and the second Gaussian directional deriva-
tives on the luminance signals. Complex
cells can be considered as computing the statistics of
the first and second derivatives of the luminance (simple
cells' responses) and hypercomplex cells as taking the
first and second derivatives of the complex cell re-
sponses. To push this idea one step further, we conjec-
ture that the complex cells are not just computing surface
feature statistics, but are also actively interpolating the
surface, thus constituting the surface system. The hyper-
complex cells are not just computing texture gradient,
but are also detecting boundary as well, thus constituting
the boundary system. In this view, simple cells, complex
cells and hypercomplex cells can be understood within a
unified framework: they are computational units for a
boundary detection and surface interpolation system for
luminance, textures and likely for other visual cues such
as color, motion, stereo disparity as well.
Many of the well known context-sensitive phenomena
of complex and hypercomplex cells, i.e. sensitivity of
visual neurons of global features that fall outside their
classical receptive fields, can be understood as behaviors
of computational units in this Bayesian surface
interpolation framework. The iso-orientation surround
inhibition , side-stopping , cross-orientation
surround facilitation or orientation contrast sensitivity
 are suggestive of the texture contrast
sensitivity and lateral-inhibition characteristic of the
cells participating in boundary detection. On the other
hand, complex cells that are not sensitive to the surround
stimuli or are facilitated by
surround stimuli composed of iso-orientation and iso-
frequency features are suggestive of the cells involving
in surface interpolation. In fact, the unmodulated re-
sponses of complex cells to drifting sinusoidal gratings
could arise simply from the diffusion within the surface
statistics channel.
Some insights provided by the model have been
confirmed by recent neurophysiological experiments.
Lee et al. found that some complex cells'
TA1 SING LEE
responses to texture boundaries contract spatially over
time, similar to the gradual sharpening of boundary
signals predicted by the model [see equations (12) and
(13)]; that the time required for the emergence of the
sharp boundary signals is proportional to the area of the
texture region, confirming that texture boundary detec-
tion is not a local process, but is coupled with a global
surface interpolation mechanism. Moreover, Lamme
 and Zipser et al. found that VI cells are
sensitive simultaneously to many segmentation cues,
thus providing a substrate for cue-invariant surface
interpolation and boundary detection. Lastly, Pettet and
Gilbert , De Weerd, Gattass, Desimone and
Ungerleider have found V I cells in artificial
scotoma could develop response to surrounding stimuli
even when there is nothing falling on to their classical
receptive fields. These could be the neural correlates of
the filling-in effect related to surface interpolation.
Two additional predictions of our model about the
surface interpolation mechanism remain to be tested:
(l) complex cells performing surface interpolation
will exhibit a spatial smoothing effect within a surface
region, i.e. the spatial variation of their responses
over a texture region will decrease over time; (2) they
should also exhibit the spectral diffusion effect, i.e.
their spatial frequency or orientation bandwidth will
expand over time when the texture within the surface
is random or non-stationary. This spectral bandwidth
expansion is dependent on the statistics of the images.
It is proportional to the variance of the texture statistics
within the whole surface region. Because of this,
traditional sinusoidal gratings will produce very little
bandwidth expansion because their spectral content is
very concentrated.
VI complex cells are probably too pluralistic to be
classified simply into surface cells and boundary cells.
These two classes of cells might represent the two
extremes of a continuum, i.e. there will be cells that
perform a variable amount of both tasks. The cortex
develops and maintains itself in a very flexible way.
It can adopt whatever happens to be there to perform
the necessary function. The circuitry that evolves to
make use of a whole spectrum of cells to realize the
surface interpolation function would necessarily be quite
pluralistic as well.
POSSIBLE NEURAL CIRCUITS AND MECHANISMS
The basic circuitry for implementing this Bayesian
model is relatively simple and biologically plausible.
Since the surface interpolation process involves primar-
ily local horizontal interaction within the complex cell
channels, it can be mediated by the well known horizon-
tal axonal collaterals of the pyramidal complex cells in
layers II +III of VI. These collaterals enable complex
cells to connect to other cells up to 4-6mm (i.e.
4-6 hypercolumns) away . Cells
of similar tuning in different hypercolumns are inter-
connected and these connections tend to be excitatory in
nature . The fact that the
interaction is not limited to cells of the same orientation
specificity but extends to cells of similar orientation
preference provides a physical substrate for spectral
diffusion. The simplest neural circuit for implementing
equation (l l) (surface signal propagation) and equation
(12) (boundary signal contraction) is shown in Figure I 1.
In this circuit, complex cells of similar specificities in
adjacent hypercolumns are interconnected with excit-
atory connections to mediate the spreading of the sur-
face signals fin four dimensions. The boundary complex
cells l(x,y), on the other hand, are activated by the
'texton density gradient' (Vf) computed within a scale-
dependent local window. The interaction between sur-
face complex cells can be interrupted by shunting
inhibition from the boundary cells, i.e. the (1 - l(x, y))
term. This interruption can be done by shunting the
corresponding dendritic trees of the surface complex
cells via basket cells, or it can be done via an ensemble
of inhibitory interneurons such as the double bouquet
cells whose vertical axons form a dense, long and narrow
~curtain' from layer II to V isolating one cortical column
t¥om another .
The lateral interaction within VI can produce non-
linear smoothing of the surface statistics signals within
a surface region. A weak excitatory coupling is sufficient
to produce local coherent oscillation or synchronized
firings among surface cells within a surface . Temporal synchronization of groups of
neurons could label the surface of an object and evidence of stimulus-
specific synchronization of Vl neurons have emerged
over the past few years . More
global synchronization can be produced through global
feedback of the extrastriate cortices
a feature that is
not captured in our present model.
Since most part of the visual scene are surfaces,
surface cells would tend to be activated more often than
boundary cells, thus more strongly labeled by cyto-
chrome oxidase. This leads to the hypothesis that the
cytochrome oxidase (CO) rich blobs in V1 are populated
by cells coding surface signals and the interblobs are
populated by cells coding boundary signals. This
hypothesis is consistent with Rockland and Lund's
 findings that the CO blobs are included in the
densely connected lattices in the superficial layer of V I.
What is the mechanism for controlling the dynamics
of successive gradual relaxation (i.e. the parameter •) in
this neural network?
The work of Geiger and Yuille has related
the stage of gradual relaxation with the slope of the
activation function of the boundary process using the
mean field approximation of statistical physics,
1 + exp{-z/g }
where z = [2-' II Vf(x, ~)p[2 _ ~]. The continuation par-
ameter g is proportional to ~c in equation (13) and z is
the input to the boundary cell.
Since ~ controls the slope of the activation curve, the
optimization process could be mediated by a phasic
BAYESIAN MODEL FOR TEXTURE SEGMENTATION
Output to Extrastriste Cortices
Layer I1+111
Surface Complex
cell (pyramidal)
Boundary Complex
cell (pyramidal)
Axonal branching
Crossing axons
(no interconnection)
On Simple ceil
Inhibitory Interneuron
(stellate)
(basket or double bouquet)
Off Simple cell 0
Gradient Cell
(stellate)
(detect difference)
Excitatory connection
Inhibitory connection
(shunting inhibition)
FIGURE 11. A hypothetical neural circuit for surface interpolation and boundary detection in VI: the LGN cells project to
ON and OFF simple cells which then converge to complex cells. The surface complex cells are interconnected by the excitatory
horizontal axonal collaterals. The gradient detectors compute gradients in the response of each channel, and they sum to
activate the boundary complex cells which in turn can interrupt the mutual excitation of the surface cells by shunting inhibition.
increase in the boundary cell's sensitivity. During each
optimization, as ~ moves toward 0, the slope of the
sigmoidal activation function of the boundary cell will
slowly increase, converging to a step function at the end.
This gradual increase in discriminability, coupled with
the diffusive expansion of the surface signals, produces
the gradual sharpening of the boundary signals.
One plausible neural mechanism for implementing
this kind of phasic increase in sensitivity is the PGO
waves that have been observed to propagate from the
brain stem to the LGN and the occipital cortex
during and after each saccadic eye movement . These cholinergic waves
appear to produce a phasic increase in arousal level
leading to excitability enhancement in the visual cortical
cells . The duration of
each burst of these PGO waves is about 150-350 msec,
consistent with the 100msec time-frame required for
texture discrimination and the completion
of brightness filling-in .
During the 250msec fixation period between two
saccades, there are about 10 bursts of spikes . We can envision each burst of spikes
corresponds to one gradient descent at a relaxation
stage. Thus, the optimization process involving about 10
relaxation stages can be completed during the fixation
CONCLUSION
We suggested that texture segmentation is a part of the
computational process for Bayesian surface inference.
This computation can be described in a highly idealized
sense as the minimization of a certain energy functional.
The dynamical processes involved in the gradual relax-
ation algorithm used to minimize the functional are
characterized by a gradual sharpening of the boundary
signals and a simultaneous smoothing of the surface
signals in a 4D spatial-spectral domain.
The relevance of this class of models to the visual
system in solving the ill-posed early vision problems
has been suggested by a number of workers .
Neural network models of similar favor have also
been proposed by Grossberg and Mingola . By
introducing the proper psychological and physiological
constraints, we establish a tighter link between the
computational
theory, neural network models and
biological reality. The model provides a functional
framework for understanding complex cells as boundary
cells and surface cells in a surface interpolation system.
The model also provides specific predictions on bound-
ary and surface complex cells. Some of these predictions
have been confirmed.
We must recognize that the energy functional dis-
cussed in this paper is a highly simplified and idealized
description of reality. The actual working of the brain,
even at the level of preattentive vision, is far more
complicated than any simple energy functional can
possibly represent. Despite its limitations, the present
simple model is illustrative of the basic characteristics
of the system and can provide some basic insights to
the processes of texture segmentation and surface
interpolation in the primary visual cortex.