Transport Properties of the Inﬁnite Dimensional Hubbard Model
Th. Pruschke, D.L. Cox
Department of Physics, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio 43210-1106
M. Jarrell
Department of Physics, University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45221-0011
(Received )
Results for the optical conductivity and resistivity of the Hubbard model in inﬁnite spatial dimensions are presented. At half ﬁlling we observe a gradual crossover
from a normal Fermi-liquid with a Drude peak at ω = 0 in the optical conductivity to
an insulator as a function of U for temperatures above the antiferromagnetic phase
transition.
When doped, the “insulator” becomes a Fermi-liquid with a corresponding temperature dependence of the optical conductivity and resistivity.
We ﬁnd a T 2coeﬃcient in the low temperature resistivity which suggests that the carriers in the
system acquire a considerable mass-enhancement due to the strong local correlations.
At high temperatures, a crossover into a semi-metallic regime takes place.
PACS numbers: 71.30.h, 72.15.-v, 72.20.-i
Typeset Using REVTEX
The one-band Hubbard Hamiltonian on a simple (hyper-)cubic lattice 
i,σcj,σ + h.c.
where tij is restricted to nearest neighbours, is from its structure one of the simplest models in
condensed matter physics. It is generally believed to contain the essential physics necessary
to qualitatively describe the properties of transition metal oxides and possibly the normal
state of the high temperature superconductors. Although a lot of work has been invested over
the years , a reliable or even exact description of the physical properties of the Hubbard
model (1) for general values of its parameters could not be achieved except for the limit
of one spatial dimension . Especially the interesting issues of a possible metal-insulator
transition or unconventional low temperature phases still remain unanswered.
A breakthrough towards a better understanding of highly correlated systems in general,
and the Hubbard model (1) in particular, was achieved by the introduction of the limit
of inﬁnite spatial dimensions d →∞ . In this limit the dynamics of the system become
essentially local , which considerably simpliﬁes the task of calculating quantities of interest
 . A particularly interesting result is that the one particle self energy Σ(k, z) becomes
purely local . Consequently one can map the thermodynamic potential, and thus the
solution of the model (1), onto an eﬀective Anderson impurity problem . Recently, this
method has been used by the present authors for a detailed study of the phase diagram 
and thermodynamic and transport properties of the Hubbard model using diﬀerent
approaches to solve the underlying impurity problem .
In this letter we give a brief description of our results for the optical conductivity and
resistivity of the Hubbard Hamiltonian in the limit d →∞.
In particular, we want to
address the abovementioned issues of a possible metal-insulator transition and what kind
of low temperature behaviour the Hubbard model shows close to half ﬁlling and at realistic
values of U in an artiﬁcially stabilized paramagnetic phase. It must be stressed that the
latter constraint is essential since the Hubbard model always undergoes an antiferromagnetic
transition close to half ﬁlling for suﬃciently low temperatures . Before turning to a
detailed discussion of our results let us give a brief summary: At half ﬁlling, one indeed
encounters a crossover from a normal metal with a Drude peak in the optical conductivity
at small values of the Coulomb parameter U to an “insulator” with essentially zero dcconductivity at large U. In addition, a charge excitation peak at ω = U develops with
increasing U arising from the ﬁeld-induced transitions from the lower Hubbard band (LHB)
to the upper Hubbard band (UHB). Oﬀhalf ﬁlling, we always ﬁnd a Fermi-liquid at low
temperatures. However, the corresponding Fermi-liquid parameter are strongly enhanced
and the resistivity shows nonmonotonic behaviour with a maximum at higher temperatures.
The optical conductivity, on the other hand, has a strongly temperature dependent Drude
peak and again the additional charge excitation peak at ω ≈U.
In linear response theory the conductivity can be expressed as
l⟨⟨nkσ|nk′σ⟩⟩(z)
where vkl denotes the l-th component of the group velocity vk = ∇ǫk of the carriers. The
expression in curly brackets in (4) has the perturbation expansion shown in Fig. 1. For
d →∞, momentum conservation at the irreducible vertex part Γ becomes unimportant,
i.e. the two k sums for the second and all higher order contributions in Fig. 1 can be
performed independently. Since vk and ǫk have diﬀerent parity, these contributions vanish
identically , and we are left with the simple bubble diagram. Inserting the usual tightbinding expression ǫk = −2t P cos(kla), the bubble diagram can be evaluated using standard
techniques and leads to the ﬁnal form
dǫA0(ǫ)A(ǫ, ω′)A(ǫ, ω′ + ω)f(ω′) −f(ω′ + ω)
for the optical conductivity.
Here, A0(ǫ) = 1/
4πdt2 exp[−ǫ2/(4dt2)] denotes the oneparticle density of states for the noninteracting system, A(ǫ, ω) the one with U > 0, f(ω) is
Fermi’s function and σ0 collects all remaining constants and is given by
σ0 = 4dπe2a2t2
V ol ≈10−2 . . . 10−3[µΩcm]−1
for typical values 2
dt ≈1eV and a = O(a0). For convenience we shall choose 4dt2 = 1 in
the following.
The only unknown quantity entering into (5) is the one-particle density of states A(ǫ, ω)
or equivalently the one-particle self energy Σ(k, z)
As mentioned earlier, in
d = ∞, the task of determining Σ(z) reduces to the solution of an eﬀective single impurity
Anderson model and there exist several reliable methods to handle this problem exactly
by e.g. quantum Monte Carlo methods or approximately within the so called NCA
 . Because the quantum Monte Carlo does not provide the self-energy for real frequencies,
the latter approach proves to be more adequate here. We emphasize that the one-particle
spectra obtained by the NCA were carefully compared to the exact quantum Monte Carlo
results and found to be in excellent quantitative agreement over a wide range of model
parameters and temperatures. The results presented here can thus be expected to be very
close to the exact ones.
In Fig. 2 we show the variation of the one-particle density of states (Fig. 2a) and the
optical conductivity (Fig. 2b) for the half-ﬁlled case for various values of U calculated at a
temperature β = 4. The DOS suggests a profound change in the qualitative behaviour of
the system. Starting from a single central peak at µ for U →0, the characteristic LHB and
UHB develop. The broad central peak, still present at intermediate U, gradually vanishes
and is replaced by a pseudo-gap at µ. This behaviour is reﬂected in the optical conductivity
in Fig. 2b. While for small U only a Drude peak is present, the additional charge excitation
peak at ω = U shows up with increasing U.
At the same time the weight for ω →0
is drastically reduced. For U = 5 we ﬁnd a situation one would expect for an insulator:
Vanishing dc-conductivity and a peak at ω = U reﬂecting these induced transitions from
the LHB to the UHB. The inset in Fig. 2b gives a logarithmic blow-up of the situation for
small ω, clearly showing the reduction of the dc-conductivity by four orders of magnitude
as we go from U = 1 to U = 5.
Away from half ﬁlling, one important question is whether the Hubbard model (1) is a
conventional Fermi liquid or not? In Fig. 3 results for the DOS and optical conductivity
for some selected temperatures at ﬁxed U = 4 and ﬁlling ne = 0.97 are shown. As for the
DOS (Fig. 3a), we again observe the temperature independent LHB and UHB separated
by a pseudo-gap above µ. With decreasing temperature, however, a narrow quasiparticle
band develops at µ. This band can be traced to a version of the Kondo-eﬀect in this model
and one consequently has to expect a physical behaviour similar to the well studied heavy
fermion systems. In fact, the optical conductivity in Fig. 3b shows a strongly temperature
dependent Drude peak in addition to the charge excitation peak at ω ≈U. One also clearly
sees that the spectral weight built up at ω →0 is taken from this peak at ω ≈U. The inset
gives again an enlarged view of the situation for ω →0.
It is of course interesting to study the temperature dependence of σ(0) or ρ(T) = 1/σ(0)
more closely. If the system were a Fermi-liquid at low temperatures, we should observe
ρ(T) ∼(T/T0)2, where T0 is the eﬀective bandwidth for the quasiparticles. Figure 4 shows
the resistivity for U = 4 and ne = 0.97 along with the low temperature data versus T 2 in
the inset. The latter nicely fall onto the curve ρ(T) = a · (T/T0)2, where a = O(1) and T0
is roughly the width of the quasiparticle peak at µ in the DOS in Fig. 3a. From this result
one clearly has to conjecture that at least for high spatial dimensions the low temperature
(paramagnetic) phase of the Hubbard model for ﬁllings ne < 1 is a (possibly heavy) Fermiliquid. At higher temperatures the resistivity changes from a metallic to a semi-metallic
behaviour. This is also consistent with the vanishing of the quasiparticle peak at µ for high
temperatures.
To summarize, we presented characteristic results for the optical conductivity and resistivity of the Hubbard model in d →∞.
The data shown were calculated within an
approximate method to solve the impurity Anderson model, which essentially determines
the physics of the Hubbard model in this limit. Let us stress that this approximation was
shown to very accurate in its domain of applicability . The results at half ﬁlling suggest a
crossover from a normal metal to an insulator as a function of U with a Uc ≈3 . . . 4. Further
results not presented here show that this scenario does not change qualitatively for lower
temperatures. Oﬀhalf ﬁlling we encounter a Fermi-liquid at low temperatures together with
a crossover to a semi-metal at high temperatures. In both cases the optical conductivity
reﬂects the relevant low temperature energy scales of the model, the bare bandwidth t at
small U and the Coulomb energy plus possibly a dynamically generated scale T0 for the
quasiparticles in the Fermi-liquid for large U.
The general behaviour of the two quantities studied here ﬁts at least qualitatively into
the picture of the normal state properties of high-Tc superconductors. There are, though,
obvious diﬀerences, the most important is probably the missing linear low temperature
resistivity generally found in the cupratres.
One must, however, bear in mind that our
results are strictly valid only for d →∞and that especially in 2D dimensional eﬀects will of
course be important. For example, one aspect clearly absent in d →∞are spin-ﬂuctuations.
As was shown recently the coupling to these degrees of freedom may easily change the
power-law in ρ(T). Thus, with a proper account for corrections due to ﬁnite dimensions,
our results may well be a ﬁrst step towards the solution of outstanding questions in the ﬁeld
of highly correlated systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the National Science Foundation grant number DMR-
88357341, the National Science Foundation grant number DMR-9107563, the Ohio State
University center of materials research and by the Ohio Supercomputing Center.