Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Neural Machine Translation and Generation, pages 45–54
Melbourne, Australia, July 20, 2018. c⃝2018 Association for Computational Linguistics
Controllable Abstractive Summarization
Angela Fan
David Grangier
Facebook AI Research
Menlo Park, California, USA
Michael Auli
Current models for document summarization
disregard user preferences such as the desired
length, style, the entities that the user might
be interested in, or how much of the document the user has already read. We present
a neural summarization model with a simple
but effective mechanism to enable users to
specify these high level attributes in order to
control the shape of the final summaries to
better suit their needs. With user input, our
system can produce high quality summaries
that follow user preferences. Without user input, we set the control variables automatically
– on the full text CNN-Dailymail dataset,
we outperform state of the art abstractive
systems (both in terms of F1-ROUGE1 40.38
vs. 39.53 F1-ROUGE and human evaluation).
Introduction
Summarization condenses a document into a short
paragraph or a single sentence while retaining core
information. Summarization algorithms are either
extractive or abstractive. Extractive algorithms form
summaries by pasting together relevant portions of the
input, while abstractive algorithms may generate new
text that is not present in the initial document .
This work focuses on abstractive summarization
and, in contrast to previous work, describes mechanisms that enable the reader to control important
aspects of the generated summary. The reader can
select the desired length of the summary depending
on how detailed they would like the summary to be.
The reader can require the text to focus on entities they
have a particular interest in. We let the reader choose
the style of the summary based on their favorite
source of information, e.g., a particular news source.
Finally, we allow the reader to specify that they
only want to summarize a portion of the article, for
example the remaining paragraphs they haven’t read.
Our work builds upon sequence-to-sequence
models ,
which have been extensively applied to abstractive
summarization . These conditional language models
use an encoder network to build a representation
of the input document and a decoder network to
generate a summary by attending to the source
representation .
We introduce a straightforward and extensible
controllable summarization model to enable personalized generation and fully leverage that automatic
summaries are generated at the reader’s request. We
show that (1) our generated summaries follow the
specified preferences and (2) these control variables
guide the learning process and improve generation
even when they are set automatically during inference.
Our comparison with state-of-the-art models on
the standard CNN/DailyMail benchmark , a multi-sentence summarization news
corpus, highlights the advantage of our approach.
On both the entity-anonymized (+0.76 F1-ROUGE1)
and full text versions (+0.85 F1-ROUGE1) of the
dataset, we outperform previous pointer-based models
trained with maximum likelihood despite the relative
simplicity of our model. Further, we demonstrate
in a blind human evaluation study that our model
generates summaries preferred by human readers.
User Controllable Summarization
We introduce our summarization model and describe
the control variables users can modify.
Convolutional Sequence-to-Sequence
Our approach builds upon the convolutional model
of Gehring et al. . The encoder and decoder
are deep convolutional networks (LeCun et al.,
Both start with a word embedding layer
followed by alternating convolutions with Gated
Linear Units (GLU) . The
decoder is connected to the encoder through attention
modules that performs a
weighted sum of the encoder outputs. The weights are
predicted from the current decoder states, allowing the
decoder to emphasize the parts of the input document
which are the most relevant for generating the next
token. We use multi-hop attention, i.e. attention is
applied at each layer of the decoder.
In addition to attending over encoder states , we also use intra-attention in the
decoder to enable the model to refer back to previously
generated words. This allows the decoder to keep
track of its progress and reduces the generation of repeated information . To combine encoder and decoder attention, we
alternate between each type of attention at every layer.
Much prior work on the CNN-Dailymail benchmark employed pointer networks to copy rare
entities from the input , which
introduces additional complexity to the model.
Instead, we rely on sub-word tokenization and weight
We show this simple approach is very
effective. Specifically, we use byte-pair-encoding
(BPE) for tokenization, a proven strategy that has
been shown to improve the generation of proper
nouns in translation . We
share the representation of the tokens in the encoder
and decoder embeddings and in the last decoder layer.
Length-Constrained Summarization
Summarization allows a reader with limited time
to quickly comprehend the essence of a document.
Controlling summary length enables reading with
different time budgets:
a document might be
summarized as a five-word headline, a single sentence
or a paragraph, each providing more and more detail.
To enable the user to control length, we first quantize summary length into discrete bins, each representing a size range. Length bins are chosen so that they
each contain roughly an equal number of training documents. We then expand the input vocabulary with
special word types to indicate the length bin of the
desired summary, which allows generation to be conditioned upon this discrete length variable. For training,
we prepend the input of our summarizer with a marker
that indicates the length of the ground-truth summary.
At test time, we control the length of generated
text by prepending a particular length marker token.
Our experiments (§5.2) provide quantitative and
qualitative evidence that the model effectively uses
this variable: output length is easily controlled by
changing the length marker and supplying ground
truth markers drastically improves summary quality.
We compare our method to Kikuchi et al. and
demonstrate that our straightforward length control
strategy is more effective.
Entity-Centric Summarization
The reader might be interested in a document to learn
about specific entities, such as people or locations.
For example, a sports fan reading about a recent game
might want to focus the summary on the performance
of their favorite player.
To enable entity-centric
summaries, we first anonymize entities by replacing
all occurrences of a given entity in a document by
the same token. For training, we also anonymize the
corresponding reference summary. For a (document,
summary) pair, each entity is replaced with a token
from the set (@entity0, ..., @entityN). This abstracts
away the surface form, allowing our approach to scale
to many entities and generalize to unseen ones.
We then express that an entity should be present
in the generated summary by prepending the entity
token to the input — prepending @entity3 expresses
that the model should generate a summary where
@entity3 is present. In effect, this instructs the model
to focus on sentences that mention the marked entities.
At training time, we prepend each document with
markers referring to an entity from the ground-truth
summary. To ensure the entity request is informative,
we provide an entity that is present in the ground-truth
but not present in the summary generated by the baseline model. At test time, we may specify any entity
marker that we wish the summary to contain. Our
experiments (§5.2) evaluate the effect of prepending
different markers to the input. We show that higher
accuracy is achieved when we specify entities from
the first few sentences of a document or if we supply
markers taken from the reference summary to illustrate
specific user preferences. We extend this approach to
multiple entity markers and experiment with appending all ground-truth entities for training and provide
all entities from Lead-3 at test time. We show that providing more entities improves summarization quality.
Source-Specific Summarization
Text sources such as newspapers and magazines often
have specific style guidelines to provide a consistent
experience. Readers are accustomed to the styles of
their favorite sources. Therefore, we enable users
to specify a preferred source style for a summary.
Similar to length and entities, we introduce special
marker tokens (@genSource0, ..., @genSourceN) to
express source desiderata. For training, we preprend
the input with the marker corresponding to the
ground-truth source. At inference, we control the
style of generated summary by prepending different
Our experiments (§4) evaluate whether
providing the true source-style produces summaries
that are closer to the reference summary.
additionally provide examples of distinct summaries
resulting from changing source-style conditioning.
Remainder Summarization
Beyond reading summaries of full documents, readers
may want the flexibility of only summarizing certain
portions of a document. For example, a reader who
has read the first few paragraphs would want a summary of the remaining text to cover what they missed.
Training and evaluating remainder summarization
requires specific data, namely a dataset of full
documents with position markers separating the
already read portion from the remainder part along
with the corresponding summaries. Such a dataset
is not readily available and would be challenging to
collect. To enable remainder summarization without
such data, we align summaries to full documents. Our
procedure matches each reference summary sentence
to its best matching document sentence based on
ROUGE-L. For any position in the document, we
remove sentences aligned before this point from the
full summary and consider this shorter summary as
the summary of the remainder. In our experiment, we
consider as read portions all article positions located
at the middle of two alignment points, except for
alignment points separated by less than 2 sentences.
We consider the following methods:
(1) full summary baseline: the baseline model
predicts a full summary, disregarding the separation
of the read portion from the remainder.
(2) post-inference alignment: a full summary is
generated from the baseline model and the summary
is shortened with our alignment procedure. The decoded summary sentences that align to the remainder
portion compose the summary of the remainder.
(3) remainder only: the model is trained to map the
document remainders to the remainder summaries on
pre-aligned training data. This model is not given the
read portion of the article.
(4) read and remainder: the model receives both
read portion of the article and the remainder separated
by a special token.
It is trained to predict the
remainder summary. We distinguish the read and
remainder part of the article by using distinct sets of
position embeddings.
We compare these methods in Section 4 and show
the advantage of the model that receives both the
user-read portion and the remainder of the document.
Related Work
Sequence-to-Sequence for Summarization
Automatic summarization has been an active research
field for 60 years . Extractive and abstractive methods have benefited from advances in natural
language processing, pattern recognition, and machine
learning . Recently, sequenceto-sequence neural networks 
have been applied to abstractive summarization 
following their success in translation , parsing and image captioning . Neural abstractive summarization has built
upon advances from machine translation and related
fields: attention enables
generation to focus on parts of the source document
while pointers help abstractive
summarization to copy entities from the input .
However, summarization also has distinct challenges. The generation of multi-sentence summaries
differs from single sentence translation: left-to-right
decoders need to be aware of their previous generation at a larger time scale, otherwise models tend
to produce repeated text. To address this impediment, introduce coverage modeling,
 propose intra-decoder attention,
and equip the decoder with
an estimator of unigram frequency. Previous work has
also explored learning objectives: 
investigates replacing maximum likelihood training with Reinforcement Learning (RL) to optimize
ROUGE, the most common automatic metric to assess
summarization. Combining both strategies is found
to perform best in human evaluations, as training with
RL alone often produces non-grammatical text.
Our work builds upon prior research: like , we rely on convolutional networks,
which enable faster training. This contrasts with prior
work using recurrent networks . We borrow intraattention from and expand it to
multi-hop intra-attention inspired by multi-hop source
attention from . To facilitate
copying input entities, we share the word representations between encoder and decoder , and also rely on BPE tokenization . This combination allows us to forgo
an additional pointer mechanism unlike . Unlike , we did not explore training
objectives and maximized the likelihood of the training summaries given the source document. Our model
is amenable to RL, but this aspect is largely orthogonal
to our main goal, i.e. controllable summarization.
Controllable Text Generation
Text generation is an established research area .
The field follows recent advances
in generative models, such as the introduction of
variational auto-encoders 
and adversarial networks .
This is exemplified by work focusing on natural
language generation such as .
Building upon unconditioned generation, controllable generation is an emerging research field.
Research in computer vision includes style transfer or controllable image
generation . Text generation
work focuses on controlling tense or sentiment with
variational auto-encoders . Shen et al.
 relies on adversarial training for manipulating
sentence sentiment and Sennrich et al. 
propose using side constraints for polite neural
machine translation models. Takeno et al. 
extend the side constraints to control further aspects
of translation output, such as length. Others have
worked on style, for example Ficler and Goldberg
 propose using a conditional language model
to generate text with stylistic requirements and Kobus
et al. propose using tokens and additional features to translate text in different domains. Filippova
 proposes controlling length for generating
answers in a question answering task.
et al. explores length control for sentence
compression using decoding-time restrictions and
training-time length token embeddings.
Motivated by simplicity, our work relies on
conditional language modeling and does not require
adversarial training, latent variable models such as
variational auto-encoders, or pointer networks. While
latent variable models are popular for the generation
of continuous outputs such as images, (conditional)
language models are flexible enough to capture
the multimodal nature of the data. We leave the
assessment of how additional latent variables might
improve upon our results to future work.
Experimental Setup
We use the CNN-Dailymail dataset
 . It
consists of news articles along with multi-sentence
summaries, with a total of 287k train, 13k valid and
11k test articles. On average, the articles are 758
token long, and the summaries are 55 token long.
Most of our experiments are performed with articles
truncated at 400 tokens, as suggested by . We evaluate on two versions of the data: the
entity anonymized version and the full
text version . We use BPE with 30K
types for most experiments.
For non-BPE models, input and output vocabularies
have resp. 47k and 21k word types, corresponding
to types with more than 20 train occurrences.
Further, we compare length control with on DUC-2004 single-sentence summarization task. We train on English Gigaword following
the protocol of Rush et al. . The data consist
of 3.6 million pairs (first sentence, headline of news
articles). Following , we evaluate
on the 500 documents in the DUC2004 task-1. We
use a source and target vocabulary of 30k words.
Architecture, Training, and Generation: We
implement models with the fairseq library1.
CNN-Dailymail, our model has 8 layers in the
encoder and decoder, each with kernel width 3. We
use 512 hidden units for each layer, embeddings of
size 340, and dropout 0.2. For DUC, we have 6 layers
in the encoder and decoder with 256 hidden units.
Similar to Gehring et al. , we train using
Nesterov accelerated gradient method with gradient clipping 0.1 , momentum 0.99, and learning rate 0.2. We
reduce the learning rate by an order of magnitude
when the validation perplexity ceases to improve,
and end training when the learning rate drops below
10−5. Summaries are generated using beam search
1github.com/facebookresearch/fairseq
with beam size 5. To avoid repetition, we prevent the
decoder from generating the same trigram more than
once, following Paulus et al. .
Evaluation: On the CNN-Dailymail benchmark,
our automatic evaluation reports F1-ROUGE scores
for ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2, and ROUGE-L .
We compare to existing abstractive baselines . We also compare with Lead-3 which selects
the first three sentences of the article as the summary.
Note that, although simple, this baseline is not
outperformed by all models.
For human evaluation, we conduct a human
evaluation study using Amazon Mechanical Turk and
the test set generation output of See et al. . 500
articles from the test set were randomly selected and
evaluated by 5 raters. The raters were presented with
the first 400 words of each news article and asked to
select the summarization output they preferred.
For the DUC-2004, we report recall ROUGE for
ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2, and ROUGE-L at 30, 50, and
75 byte lengths following Kikuchi et al. .
We evaluate the design choices of our model and the
impact of manipulating the control variables. We analyze the performance of the remainder summarization
task and demonstrate the advantage of modeling both
the read and remainder portions of the document.
Convolutional Summarization
Table 1 details the effect of our design choices for
our baseline. Adding a constraint to avoid repeated
trigrams at generation time improves F1-ROUGE1
by +2.86. Adding intra-attention to enable the model
to examine past generations over long distances
improves the accuracy obtained with the trigram
constraint by a further 0.51 F1-ROUGE1. The modest
improvement is likely because the two features
address a similar problem of avoiding repeated generations. Switching tokenization from word to BPE gives
another +0.79 F1-ROUGE1. BPE improves the ability
to copy proper nouns and rare inflections, both of
which are difficult to model in word-based vocabularies. This agrees with translation results . Lastly, we find tuning the min/max length
on the validation set and applying the constraints to
the test set improves F1-ROUGE1 by 0.25.
+ trigram decoding
+ intra-attention
+ tuning min/max len
Table 1: Baseline without control variables. Each row
add a feature on top of the previous row features.
baseline, no control
Length constraint
Entity centric
Source specific
Length+Entity+Source
Summarization with oracle control to
simulate user preference.
Nallapati et al. 
Maximum Likelihood
Nallapati et al. 
35.46 13.30 32.65
Paulus et al. 
37.86 14.69 34.99
Paulus et al. + intra-attn
38.30 14.81 35.49
fairseq no control (ours)
37.48 15.12 34.16
+ fixed control
38.68 15.40 35.47
+ Lead-3 ent
39.06 15.38 35.77
Reinforcement Learning
Paulus et al. 
39.87 15.82 36.90
Table 3: Fixed control variables on entity-anonymized
text. Even with fixed variables, the controllable model
improves ROUGE compared to ML alternatives.
Controllable Summarization
Our summarizer lets users control the length of the
generated summary, entities on which it focuses on,
and source style it imitates (see§2). We first evaluate
the effect of providing the oracle reference variables
at decoding time. This simulates a user setting their
preferences to specific values. We then assess the
effect of providing non-reference control variables.
Table 2 reports our results for each variable and
their combined effect. All control variables improve
the summary quality, but length control has the most
Maximum Likelihood
See et al. 
fairseq no control (ours)
+ fixed control
+ Lead-3 ent
Table 4: Summarization with fixed control variables
on original text.
Even with a fixed setting, the
controlled summarization model improves ROUGE.
impact, followed by entity control and source style.
Further, the advantages of each control variable cumulatively produce an even stronger summary: we obtain
+2.2 F1-ROUGE1 when combining control variables.
Length control improves accuracy by 1.68 F1-
ROUGE1 (Table 2).
This improvement is due to
two effects: length mismatch is heavily penalized
by F1-ROUGE. Moreover, the baseline struggles at
predicting correct lengths. The latter is due to large
uncertainty in summary length, i.e. even humans have
difficulty predicting the correct length.
Figure 1 reports the average summary length when
decoding all examples in the test set using each of
the 10 possible length markers. The model is shown
to respect length markers. Table 8 demonstrates the
effect of the length marker on a specific example.
Entity control has less impact on ROUGE compared to length control at +0.69 vs. +1.68 F1-ROUGE1
(Table 2). This is mainly because our summaries often
already contain most entities from the ground-truth
without the need for additional instruction. Table 6
further analyzes entity control for 100 test documents.
We decode repeatedly requiring each entity from lead-
3. We then repeat the experiment with each entity
from the full article. We report how often the entitycentric model generates a summary that actually contains the requested entity. For Lead-3 entities, the
model mentions the requested entity 61% of the time,
while for all entities from the input, the model mentions required entities 34% of the time. In both settings, these rates are much higher than the baseline.
The model has difficulty generating summaries with
entities which are unlikely to appear in the human
references, e.g. unimportant entities far from the beginning of the article.
Source-style control is the least impactful control
in terms of ROUGE, we report +0.2 F1-ROUGE1 in
Table 2. Changing the source style variable changes
the summary as shown in Table 8. Generally, we
observe that generated summaries in the Dailymailstyle are more repetitive and slightly longer than the
CNN-style summaries. This matches the differences
between the two sources in the reference text. The
impact of style requests might be greater with a richer
set of styles — in future work, we plan to evaluate on
datasets where varied styles are available.
Summarization with Automatic Control
Our primary objective is to allow readers to control the
attributes of generated summaries. However, we can
also set the control variables automatically in absence
of reader desiderata. For length and source-style, we
set the variable to a constant value that maximizes
ROUGE on the validation set. For entity control, we
randomly sample an entity that appears in lead-3 and
provide it as the entity of interest.
Table 3 reports results on the entity-anonymized version of the dataset like and Table 4 reports results on the full text
data like . In both cases, our method
is advantageous over alternatives. Further, providing
all of the entities at training time and only lead-3
entities at test time improves quality. On the original
text, we report 40.38 F1-ROUGE1 as opposed to 39.53
for . On the entity-anonymized text,
we report 39.06 F1-ROUGE1 as opposed to 38.30
for the best maximum likelihood setting of . We hypothesize that providing all lead-3
entities encourages copying from lead-3. Our model
does not outperform the reinforcement learning
model of which optimizes
ROUGE. However, training objectives are orthogonal
to our work on control variables and we expect
reinforcement learning to equally benefit our model.
Table 5 compares results on DUC-2004 to the best
method presented by . We find
that adding length embedding improves the ROUGE-1
and ROUGE-L scores for 30, 50, and 75 byte evaluation. Notably, ROUGE improves more for shorter text
evaluation, likely because requesting a shorter document allows the model to plan its generation. Comparing to Kikuchi et al. , our results are stronger
while our method is very simple – explore embedding the remaining length at
each timestep during decoding and creating a separate
memory cell to control length. In contrast, we simply
provide the desired length as a special token and show
this simple approach is effective. Lastly, we note that
length-control has less effect on DUC-2004 compared
LenInit(0,L) 
Baseline without control
+ fixed length (ours)
Table 5: ROUGE for fixed length control variable on DUC-2004 Task 1.
Figure 1: Length control vs summary length. Length
control can take 10 discrete values.
Entity-centric
Full input
Fraction of requested entity actually
occurring in decoded summaries. Entities originate
either from lead-3 or from the full document.
to CNN-Dailymail since truncated recall-ROUGE evaluation does not penalize length mismatch strongly.
Overall, the improvements from automatic control
show that a better model can be obtained by providing
additional information during training – we present
the first model trained with maximum likelihood to
match the strong Lead-3 baseline. When the model
is not required to predict the summary length or the
entities of interest, it can assign more capacity to
generating text conditioned on these variables. This
is particularly useful for variables which are hard
to predict from the input due to intrinsic uncertainty
like length. In subsequent work, we plan to explore
architectures to explicitly divide the prediction of
control variables and sequence-to-sequence mapping.
Full summary
Post-inference align.
Remainder only
Read + remainder
Read + rem. + length
Table 7: Remainder Summarization.
Remainder Summarization
Summarizing the remainder of an article helps the
reader to quickly grasp what they have not yet read.
Table 7 presents our results relying on aligned data introduced in§2.5. Generally, this task is more difficult
than summarizing the entire article. First, the length of
both read portions and summaries varies greatly. It is
difficult for the model to distinguish information specific to the remaining portion of the document from
the general point of the article. Despite this, when
models trained on summarizing the remainder are
tasked with summarizing only full documents, the performance is not much worse (37.02 F1-ROUGE1 compared to 37.73 F1-ROUGE1 of the baseline in Table 1).
Our baseline always presents the full summary, regardless of the portion of the article presented as input.
It achieves an F1-ROUGE1 score of 28.12. Among
our three proposed methods, forming the remainder
summaries post-inference performs poorly as it depends largely on alignment quality. The news articles
are repetitive, so one summary sentence can align to
multiple locations in the source. Training the model
to perform remainder summarization significantly
improves our results. Models that receive only the remainder and produce a summary achieve F1-ROUGE1
of 30.30, while models that receive both the read and
remainder portions are slightly better 
fixed ctrl+Lead-3 ent.
Table 9: Human evaluation: 59% of ratings prefer our
summaries (500 CNN-DM test articles, 5 raters each).
Human Evaluation
Our study compares summarization with fixed value
control variables on full text CNN-Dailymail with
 . Table 9 shows that human raters
prefer our model about
59% of the time based
2.5k judgments. Our model can therefore improve
summary quality in a discernible way. As an aside,
we find that ROUGE and ratings agree in two-thirds of
the cases, where at least four out of five humans agree.
Conclusion
We proposed a controllable summarization model to
allow users to define high-level attributes of generated
summaries, such as length, source-style, entities of
interest, and summarizing only remaining portions of
a document. We simulate user preferences for these
variables by setting them to oracle values and show
large ROUGE gains. The control variables are effective
without user input which we demonstrate by assigning
them fixed values tuned on a held-out set. This outperforms comparable state of the art summarization
models for both ROUGE and human evaluation.
Acknowledgments We thank Yann Dauphin for helpful discussions. We thanks Abigail See for sharing
her summaries and Romain Paulus for clarifying their
setup. We thank Jonas Gehring and Denis Yarats for
writing the fairseq toolkit used for these experiments.