Temporal Segment Networks: Towards Good
Practices for Deep Action Recognition
Limin Wang1, Yuanjun Xiong2, Zhe Wang3, Yu Qiao3, Dahua Lin2,
Xiaoou Tang2, and Luc Van Gool1
1Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
2Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS, China
Abstract. Deep convolutional networks have achieved great success for
visual recognition in still images. However, for action recognition in
videos, the advantage over traditional methods is not so evident. This
paper aims to discover the principles to design eﬀective ConvNet architectures for action recognition in videos and learn these models given
limited training samples. Our ﬁrst contribution is temporal segment network (TSN), a novel framework for video-based action recognition. which
is based on the idea of long-range temporal structure modeling. It combines a sparse temporal sampling strategy and video-level supervision to
enable eﬃcient and eﬀective learning using the whole action video. The
other contribution is our study on a series of good practices in learning
ConvNets on video data with the help of temporal segment network.
Our approach obtains the state-the-of-art performance on the datasets
of HMDB51 (69.4%) and UCF101 (94.2%). We also visualize the learned
ConvNet models, which qualitatively demonstrates the eﬀectiveness of
temporal segment network and the proposed good practices. 1
Keywords: Action Recognition; Temporal Segment Networks; Good
Practices; ConvNets
Introduction
Video-based action recognition has drawn a signiﬁcant amount of attention from
the academic community , owing to its applications in many areas
like security and behavior analysis. In action recognition, there are two crucial
and complementary aspects: appearances and dynamics. The performance of a
recognition system depends, to a large extent, on whether it is able to extract
and utilize relevant information therefrom. However, extracting such information is non-trivial due to a number of complexities, such as scale variations, view
point changes, and camera motions. Thus it becomes crucial to design eﬀective
representations that can deal with these challenges while preserve categorical
information of action classes. Recently, Convolutional Networks (ConvNets) 
1 Models and code at 
 
L. Wang, Y. Xiong, Z. Wang, Y. Qiao, D. Lin, X. Tang, L. Van Gool
have witnessed great success in classifying images of objects, scenes, and complex events . ConvNets have also been introduced to solve the problem
of video-based action recognition . Deep ConvNets come with great
modeling capacity and are capable of learning discriminative representation from
raw visual data with the help of large-scale supervised datasets. However, unlike
image classiﬁcation, end-to-end deep ConvNets remain unable to achieve signiﬁcant advantage over traditional hand-crafted features for video-based action
recognition.
In our view, the application of ConvNets in video-based action recognition
is impeded by two major obstacles. First, long-range temporal structure plays
an important role in understanding the dynamics in action videos .
However, mainstream ConvNet frameworks usually focus on appearances
and short-term motions, thus lacking the capacity to incorporate long-range
temporal structure. Recently there are a few attempts to deal with
this problem. These methods mostly rely on dense temporal sampling with a
pre-deﬁned sampling interval. This approach would incur excessive computational cost when applied to long video sequences, which limits its application in
real-world practice and poses a risk of missing important information for videos
longer than the maximal sequence length. Second, in practice, training deep
ConvNets requires a large volume of training samples to achieve optimal performance. However, due to the diﬃculty in data collection and annotation, publicly
available action recognition datasets (e.g. UCF101 , HMDB51 ) remain
limited, in both size and diversity. Consequently, very deep ConvNets ,
which have attained remarkable success in image classiﬁcation, are confronted
with high risk of over-ﬁtting.
These challenges motivate us to study two problems: 1) how to design an effective and eﬃcient video-level framework for learning video representation that
is able to capture long-range temporal structure; 2) how to learn the ConvNet
models given limited training samples. In particular, we build our method on top
of the successful two-stream architecture while tackling the problems mentioned above. In terms of temporal structure modeling, a key observation is that
consecutive frames are highly redundant. Therefore, dense temporal sampling,
which usually results in highly similar sampled frames, is unnecessary. Instead a
sparse temporal sampling strategy will be more favorable in this case. Motivated
by this observation, we develop a video-level framework, called temporal segment
network (TSN). This framework extracts short snippets over a long video sequence with a sparse sampling scheme, where the samples distribute uniformly
along the temporal dimension. Thereon, a segmental structure is employed to aggregate information from the sampled snippets. In this sense, temporal segment
networks are capable of modeling long-range temporal structure over the whole
video. Moreover, this sparse sampling strategy preserves relevant information
with dramatically lower cost, thus enabling end-to-end learning over long video
sequences under a reasonable budget in both time and computing resources.
To unleash the full potential of temporal segment network framework, we
adopt very deep ConvNet architectures introduced recently, and explored
TSNs: Towards Good Practices for Deep Action Recognition
a number of good practices to overcome the aforementioned diﬃculties caused by
the limited number of training samples, including 1) cross-modality pre-training;
2) regularization; 3) enhanced data augmentation. Meanwhile, to fully utilize
visual content from videos, we empirically study four types of input modalities
to two-stream ConvNets, namely a single RGB image, stacked RGB diﬀerence,
stacked optical ﬂow ﬁeld, and stacked warped optical ﬂow ﬁeld.
We perform experiments on two challenging action recognition datasets,
namely UCF101 and HMDB51 , to verify the eﬀectiveness of our method.
In experiments, models learned using the temporal segment network signiﬁcantly
outperform the state of the art on these two challenging action recognition
datasets. We also visualize the our learned two-stream models trying to provide some insights for future action recognition research.
Related Works
Action recognition has been extensively studied in past few years .
Previous works related to ours fall into two categories: (1) convolutional networks
for action recognition, (2) temporal structure modeling.
Convolutional Networks for Action Recognition. Several works have
been trying to design eﬀective ConvNet architectures for action recognition in
videos . Karpathy et al. tested ConvNets with deep structures
on a large dataset (Sports-1M). Simonyan et al. designed two-stream ConvNets containing spatial and temporal net by exploiting ImageNet dataset for
pre-training and calculating optical ﬂow to explicitly capture motion information. Tran et al. explored 3D ConvNets on the realistic and large-scale
video datasets, where they tried to learn both appearance and motion features
with 3D convolution operations. Sun et al. proposed a factorized spatiotemporal ConvNets and exploited diﬀerent ways to decompose 3D convolutional
kernels. Recently, several works focused on modeling long-range temporal structure with ConvNets . However, these methods directly operated on a
longer continuous video streams. Limited by computational cost these methods
usually process sequences of ﬁxed lengths ranging from 64 to 120 frames. It is
non-trivial for these methods to learn from entire video due to their limited temporal coverage. Our method diﬀers from these end-to-end deep ConvNets by its
novel adoption of a sparse temporal sampling strategy, which enables eﬃcient
learning using the entire videos without the limitation of sequence length.
Temporal Structure Modeling. Many research works have been devoted
to modeling the temporal structure for action recognition .
Gaidon et al. annotated each atomic action for each video and proposed
Actom Sequence Model (ASM) for action detection. Niebles et al. proposed
to use latent variables to model the temporal decomposition of complex actions,
and resorted to the Latent SVM to learn the model parameters in an iterative approach. Wang et al. and Pirsiavash et al. extended the temporal
decomposition of complex action into a hierarchical manner using Latent Hierarchical Model (LHM) and Segmental Grammar Model (SGM), respectively. Wang
L. Wang, Y. Xiong, Z. Wang, Y. Qiao, D. Lin, X. Tang, L. Van Gool
et al. designed a sequential skeleton model (SSM) to capture the relations
among dynamic-poselets, and performed spatio-temporal action detection. Fernando modeled the temporal evolution of BoVW representations for action
recognition. These methods, however, remain unable to assemble an end-to-end
learning scheme for modeling the temporal structure. The proposed temporal
segment network, while also emphasizing this principle, is the ﬁrst framework
for end-to-end temporal structure modeling on the entire videos.
Action Recognition with Temporal Segment Networks
In this section, we give detailed descriptions of performing action recognition
with temporal segment networks. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst introduce the basic concepts in the framework of temporal segment network. Then, we study the good
practices in learning two-stream ConvNets within the temporal segment network framework. Finally, we describe the testing details of the learned twostream ConvNets.
Temporal Segment Networks
As we discussed in Sec. 1, an obvious problem of the two-stream ConvNets in
their current forms is their inability in modeling long-range temporal structure.
This is mainly due to their limited access to temporal context as they are designed to operate only on a single frame (spatial networks) or a single stack of
frames in a short snippet (temporal network). However, complex actions, such
as sports action, comprise multiple stages spanning over a relatively long time.
It would be quite a loss failing to utilize long-range temporal structures in these
actions into ConvNet training. To tackle this issue, we propose temporal segment network, a video-level framework as shown in Figure 1, to enable to model
dynamics throughout the whole video.
Speciﬁcally, our proposed temporal segment network framework, aiming to
utilize the visual information of entire videos to perform video-level prediction,
is also composed of spatial stream ConvNets and temporal stream ConvNets.
Instead of working on single frames or frame stacks, temporal segment networks
operate on a sequence of short snippets sparsely sampled from the entire video.
Each snippet in this sequence will produce its own preliminary prediction of
the action classes. Then a consensus among the snippets will be derived as
the video-level prediction. In the learning process, the loss values of video-level
predictions, other than those of snippet-level predictions which were used in twostream ConvNets, are optimized by iteratively updating the model parameters.
Formally, given a video V , we divide it into K segments {S1, S2, · · · , SK}
of equal durations. Then, the temporal segment network models a sequence of
snippets as follows:
TSN(T1, T2, · · · , TK) = H(G(F(T1; W), F(T2; W), · · · , F(TK; W))).
TSNs: Towards Good Practices for Deep Action Recognition
Spatial ConvNet
Temporal ConvNet
Class Score
Spatial ConvNet
Temporal ConvNet
Spatial ConvNet
Temporal ConvNet
Temporal Segment Networks
Fig. 1. Temporal segment network: One input video is divided into K segments and
a short snippet is randomly selected from each segment. The class scores of diﬀerent
snippets are fused by an the segmental consensus function to yield segmental consensus,
which is a video-level prediction. Predictions from all modalities are then fused to
produce the ﬁnal prediction. ConvNets on all snippets share parameters.
Here (T1, T2, · · · , TK) is a sequence of snippets. Each snippet Tk is randomly
sampled from its corresponding segment Sk. F(Tk; W) is the function representing a ConvNet with parameters W which operates on the short snippet Tk
and produces class scores for all the classes. The segmental consensus function
G combines the outputs from multiple short snippets to obtain a consensus of
class hypothesis among them. Based on this consensus, the prediction function H
predicts the probability of each action class for the whole video. Here we choose
the widely used Softmax function for H. Combining with standard categorical cross-entropy loss, the ﬁnal loss function regarding the segmental consensus
G = G(F(T1; W), F(T2; W), · · · , F(TK; W)) is formed as
L(y, G) = −
where C is the number of action classes and yi the groundtruth label concerning
class i. In experiments, the number of snippets K is set to 3 according to previous
works on temporal modeling . The form of consensus function G remains
an open question. In this work we use the simplest form of G, where Gi =
g(Fi(T1), . . . , Fi(TK)). Here a class score Gi is inferred from the scores of the
same class on all the snippets, using an aggregation function g. We empirically
evaluated several diﬀerent forms of the aggregation function g, including evenly
averaging, maximum, and weighted averaging in our experiments. Among them,
evenly averaging is used to report our ﬁnal recognition accuracies.
This temporal segment network is diﬀerentiable or at least has subgradients,
depending on the choice of g. This allows us to utilize the multiple snippets
to jointly optimize the model parameters W with standard back-propagation
algorithms. In the back-propagation process, the gradients of model parameters
L. Wang, Y. Xiong, Z. Wang, Y. Qiao, D. Lin, X. Tang, L. Van Gool
W with respect to the loss value L can be derived as
where K is number of segments temporal segment network uses.
When we use a gradient-based optimization method, like stochastic gradient descent (SGD), to learn the model parameters, Eq. 3 guarantees that the
parameter updates are utilizing the segmental consensus G derived from all
snippet-level prediction. Optimized in this manner, temporal segment networkcan learn model parameters from the entire video rather than a short snippet.
Meanwhile, by ﬁxing K for all videos, we assemble a sparse temporal sampling
strategy, where the sampled snippets contain only a small portion of the frames.
It drastically reduces the computational cost for evaluating ConvNets on the
frames, compared with previous works using densely sampled frames .
Learning Temporal Segment Networks
Temporal segment network provides a solid framework to perform video-level
learning, but to achieve optimal performance, a few practical concerns have to
be taken care of, for example the limited numberof training samples. To this
end, we study a series of good practices in training deep ConvNets on video
data, which are also directly applicable in learning temporal segment networks.
Network Architectures. Network architecture is an important factor in
neural network design. Several works have shown that deeper structures improve
object recognition performance . However, the original two-stream ConvNets employed a relatively shallow network structure (ClarifaiNet ). In
this work, we choose the Inception with Batch Normalization (BN-Inception) 
as building block, due to its good balance between accuracy and eﬃciency. We
adapt the original BN-Inception architecture to the design of two-stream ConvNets. Like in the original two-stream ConvNets , the spatial stream ConvNet
operates on a single RGB images, and the temporal stream ConvNet takes a stack
of consecutive optical ﬂow ﬁelds as input.
Network Inputs. We are also interested in exploring more input modalities
to enhance the discriminative power of temporal segment networks. Originally,
the two-stream ConvNets used RGB images for the spatial stream and stacked
optical ﬂow ﬁelds for the temporal stream. Here, we propose to study two extra
modalities, namely RGB diﬀerence and warped optical ﬂow ﬁelds.
A single RGB image usually encodes static appearance at a speciﬁc time
point and lacks the contextual information about previous and next frames. As
shown in Figure 2, RGB diﬀerence between two consecutive frames describe the
appearance change, which may correspond to the motion salient region. Inspired
by , We experiment with adding stacked RGB diﬀerence as another input
modality and investigate its performance in action recognition.
The temporal stream ConvNets take optical ﬂow ﬁeld as input and aim to
capture the motion information. In realistic videos, however, there usually exists camera motion, and optical ﬂow ﬁelds may not concentrate on the human
TSNs: Towards Good Practices for Deep Action Recognition
Fig. 2. Examples of four types of input modality: RGB images, RGB diﬀerence, optical
ﬂow ﬁelds (x,y directions), and warped optical ﬂow ﬁelds (x,y directions)
action. As shown in Figure 2, a remarkable amount of horizontal movement is
highlighted in the background due to the camera motion. Inspired by the work
of improved dense trajectories , we propose to take warped optical ﬂow ﬁelds
as additional input modality. Following , we extract the warped optical ﬂow
by ﬁrst estimating homography matrix and then compensating camera motion.
As shown in Figure 2, the warped optical ﬂow suppresses the background motion
and makes motion concentrate on the actor.
Network Training. As the datasets for action recognition are relatively
small, training deep ConvNets is challenged by the risk of over-ﬁtting. To mitigate this problem, we design several strategies for training the ConvNets in
temporal segment networks as follows.
Cross Modality Pre-training. Pre-training has turned out to be an eﬀective
way to initialize deep ConvNets when the target dataset does not have enough
training samples . As spatial networks take RGB images as input, it is natural to exploit models trained on the ImageNet as initialization. For other
modalities such as optical ﬂow ﬁeld and RGB diﬀerence, they essentially capture
diﬀerent visual aspects of video data and their distributions are diﬀerent from
that of RGB images. We come up with a cross modality pre-training technique
in which we utilize RGB models to initialize the temporal networks. First, we
discretize optical ﬂow ﬁelds into the interval from 0 to 255 by a linear transformation. This step makes the range of optical ﬂow ﬁelds to be the same with
RGB images. Then, we modify the weights of ﬁrst convolution layer of RGB
models to handle the input of optical ﬂow ﬁelds. Speciﬁcally, we average the
weights across the RGB channels and replicate this average by the channel number of temporal network input. This initialization method works pretty well for
temporal networks and reduce the eﬀect of over-ﬁtting in experiments.
Regularization Techniques. Batch Normalization is an important component to deal with the problem of covariate shift. In the learning process, batch
normalization will estimate the activation mean and variance within each batch
and use them to transform these activation values into a standard Gaussian distribution. This operation speeds up the convergence of training but also leads
to over-ﬁtting in the transferring process, due to the biased estimation of acti-
L. Wang, Y. Xiong, Z. Wang, Y. Qiao, D. Lin, X. Tang, L. Van Gool
vation distributions from limited number of training samples. Therefore, after
initialization with pre-trained models, we choose to freeze the mean and variance
parameters of all Batch Normalization layers except the ﬁrst one. As the distribution of optical ﬂow is diﬀerent from the RGB images, the activation value of ﬁrst
convolution layer will have a diﬀerent distribution and we need to re-estimate the
mean and variance accordingly. We call this strategy partial BN. Meanwhile,
we add a extra dropout layer after the global pooling layer in BN-Inception
architecture to further reduce the eﬀect of over-ﬁtting. The dropout ratio is set
as 0.8 for spatial stream ConvNets and 0.7 for temporal stream ConvNets.
Data Augmentation. Data augmentation can generate diverse training samples and prevent severe over-ﬁtting. In the original two-stream ConvNets, random cropping and horizontal ﬂipping are employed to augment training samples.
We exploit two new data augmentation techniques: corner cropping and scalejittering. In corner cropping technique, the extracted regions are only selected
from the corners or the center of the image to avoid implicitly focusing on the
center area of a image. In multi-scale cropping technique, we adapt the scale
jittering technique used in ImageNet classiﬁcation to action recognition. We
present an eﬃcient implementation of scale jittering. We ﬁx the size of input image or optical ﬂow ﬁelds as 256×340, and the width and height of cropped region
are randomly selected from {256, 224, 192, 168}. Finally, these cropped regions
will be resized to 224 × 224 for network training. In fact, this implementation
not only contains scale jittering, but also involves aspect ratio jittering.
Testing Temporal Segment Networks
Finally, we present our testing method for temporal segment networks. Due to
the fact that all snippet-level ConvNets share the model parameters in temporal
segment networks, the learned models can perform frame-wise evaluation as normal ConvNets. This allows us to carry out fair comparison with models learned
without the temporal segment network framework. Speciﬁcally, we follow the
testing scheme of the original two-stream ConvNets , where we sample 25
RGB frames or optical ﬂow stacks from the action videos. Meanwhile, we crop
4 corners and 1 center, and their horizontal ﬂipping from the sampled frames to
evaluate the ConvNets. For the fusion of spatial and temporal stream networks,
we take a weighted average of them. When learned within the temporal segment
networkframework, the performance gap between spatial stream ConvNets and
temporal stream ConvNets is much smaller than that in the original two-stream
ConvNets. Based on this fact, we give more credits to the spatial stream by setting its weight as 1 and that of temporal stream as 1.5. When both normal and
warped optical ﬂow ﬁelds are used, the weight of temporal stream is divided to
1 for optical ﬂow and 0.5 for warped optical ﬂow. It is described in Sec. 3.1 that
the segmental consensus function is applied before the Softmax normalization.
To test the models in compliance with their training, we fuse the prediction
scores of 25 frames and diﬀerent streams before Softmax normalization.
TSNs: Towards Good Practices for Deep Action Recognition
Experiments
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the evaluation datasets and the implementation details of our approach. Then, we explore the proposed good practices for
learning temporal segment networks. After this, we demonstrate the importance
of modeling long-term temporal structures by applying the temporal segment
network framework. We also compare the performance of our method with the
state of the art. Finally, we visualize our learned ConvNet models.
Datasets and Implementation Details
We conduct experiments on two large action datasets, namely HMDB51 
and UCF101 . The UCF101 dataset contains 101 action classes and 13, 320
video clips. We follow the evaluation scheme of the THUMOS13 challenge 
and adopt the three training/testing splits for evaluation. The HMDB51 dataset
is a large collection of realistic videos from various sources, such as movies and
web videos. The dataset is composed of 6, 766 video clips from 51 action categories. Our experiments follow the original evaluation scheme using three training/testing splits and report average accuracy over these splits.
We use the mini-batch stochastic gradient descent algorithm to learn the network parameters, where the batch size is set to 256 and momentum set to 0.9.
We initialize network weights with pre-trained models from ImageNet . We
set a smaller learning rate in our experiments. For spatial networks, the learning rate is initialized as 0.001 and decreases to its
10 every 2, 000 iterations.
The whole training procedure stops at 4, 500 iterations. For temporal networks,
we initialize the learning rate as 0.005, which reduces to its
10 after 12, 000 and
18, 000 iterations. The maximum iteration is set as 20, 000. Concerning data augmentation, we use the techniques of location jittering, horizontal ﬂipping, corner
cropping, and scale jittering, as speciﬁed in Section 3.2. For the extraction of
optical ﬂow and warped optical ﬂow, we choose the TVL1 optical ﬂow algorithm
 implemented in OpenCV with CUDA. To speed up training, we employ a
data-parallel strategy with multiple GPUs, implemented with our modiﬁed version of Caﬀe and OpenMPI 2. The whole training time on UCF101 is around
2 hours for spatial TSNs and 9 hours for temporal TSNs with 4 TITANX GPUs.
Exploration Study
In this section, we focus on the investigation the good practices described in
Sec. 3.2, including the training strategies and the input modalities. In this exploration study, we use the two-stream ConvNets with very deep architecture
adapted from and perform all experiments on the split 1 of UCF101 dataset.
We propose two training strategies in Section 3.2, namely cross modality pretraining and partial BN with dropout. Speciﬁcally, we compare four settings: (1)
training from scratch, (2) only pre-train spatial stream as in , (3) with cross
2 
L. Wang, Y. Xiong, Z. Wang, Y. Qiao, D. Lin, X. Tang, L. Van Gool
Table 1. Exploration of diﬀerent training strategies for two-stream ConvNets on the
UCF101 dataset (split 1).
Training setting
Spatial ConvNets Temporal ConvNets Two-Stream
Baseline 
From Scratch
Pre-train Spatial(same as )
+ Cross modality pre-training
+ Partial BN with dropout
modality pre-training, (4) combination of cross modality pre-training and partial
BN with dropout. The results are summarized in Table 1. First, we see that the
performance of training from scratch is much worse than that of the original twostream ConvNets (baseline), which implies carefully designed learning strategy
is necessary to reduce the risk of over-ﬁtting, especially for spatial networks.
Then, We resort to the pre-training of the spatial stream and cross modality pretraining of the temporal stream to help initialize two-stream ConvNets and it
achieves better performance than the baseline. We further utilize the partial BN
with dropout to regularize the training procedure, which boosts the recognition
performance to 92.0%.
We propose two new types of modalities in Section 3.2: RGB diﬀerence and
warped optical ﬂow ﬁelds. Results on comparing the performance of diﬀerent
modalities are reported in Table 2. These experiments are carried out with all
the good practices veriﬁed in Table 1. We ﬁrst observe that the combination of
RGB images and RGB diﬀerences boosts the recognition performance to 87.3%
. This result indicates that RGB images and RGB diﬀerence may encode complementary information. Then it is shown that optical ﬂow and warped optical
ﬂow yield quite similar performance (87.2% vs. 86.9%) and the fusion of them
can improve the performance to 87.8%. Combining all of four modalities leads
to an accuracy of 91.7%. As RGB diﬀerence may describe similar but unstable motion patterns, we also evaluate the performance of combining the other
three modalities and this brings better recognition accuracy (92.3% vs 91.7%).
We conjecture that the optical ﬂow is better at capturing motion information
and sometimes RGB diﬀerence may be unstable for describing motions. On the
other hand, RGB diﬀerence may serve as a low-quality, high-speed alternative
for motion representations.
Evaluation of Temporal Segment Networks
In this subsection, we focus on the study of the temporal segment network framework. We ﬁrst study the eﬀect of segmental consensus function and then compare
diﬀerent ConvNet architectures on the split 1 of UCF101 dataset. For fair comparison, we only use RGB images and optical ﬂow ﬁelds for input modalities in
this exploration. As mentioned in Sec 3.1, the number of segments K is set to 3.
TSNs: Towards Good Practices for Deep Action Recognition
Table 2. Exploration of diﬀerent input modalities for two-stream ConvNets on the
UCF101 dataset (split 1).
Performance
RGB Diﬀerence
RGB Image + RGB Diﬀerence
Optical Flow
Warped Flow
Optical Flow + Warped Flow
Optical Flow + Warped Flow + RGB
All Modalities
Table 3. Exploration of diﬀerent segmental consensus functions for temporal segment
networks on the UCF101 dataset (split 1).
Consensus Function Spatial ConvNets Temporal ConvNets Two-Stream
Weighted Average
In Eq. (1), a segmental consensus function is deﬁned by its aggregation function g. Here we evaluate three candidates: (1) max pooling, (2) average pooling,
(3) weighted average, for the form of g. The experimental results are summarized
in Table 3. We see that average pooling function achieves the best performance.
So in the following experiments, we choose average pooling as the default aggregation function. Then we compare the performance of diﬀerent network architectures and the results are summarized in Table 4. Speciﬁcally, we compare three
very deep architectures: BN-Inception , GoogLeNet , and VGGNet-16
 , all these architectures are trained with the good practices aforementioned.
Among the compared architectures, the very deep two-stream ConvNets adapted
from BN-Inception achieves the best accuracy of 92.0%. This is in accordance with its better performance in the image classiﬁcation task. So we choose
BN-Inception as the ConvNet architecture for temporal segment networks.
With all the design choices set, we now apply the temporal segment network (TSN) to the action recognition. The result is illustrated in Table 4. A
component-wise analysis of the components in terms of the recognition accuracies is also presented in Table 5. We can see that temporal segment networkis
able to boost the performance of the model even when all the discussed good
practices are applied. This corroborates that modeling long-term temporal structures is crucial for better understanding of action in videos. And it is achieved
by temporal segment networks.
L. Wang, Y. Xiong, Z. Wang, Y. Qiao, D. Lin, X. Tang, L. Van Gool
Table 4. Exploration of diﬀerent very deep ConvNet architectures on the UCF101
dataset (split 1). “BN-Inception+TSN” refers to the setting where the temporal segment networkframework is applied on top of the best performing BN-Inception 
architecture.
Training setting
Spatial ConvNets Temporal ConvNets Two-Stream
Clarifai 
BN-Inception
BN-Inception+TSN
Table 5. Component analysis of the proposed method on the UCF101 dataset (split
1). From left to right we add the components one by one. BN-Inception is used as
the ConvNet architecture.
Component Basic
Two-Stream 
Cross-Modality
Pre-training
Partial BN
with dropout
Segment Networks
Comparison with the State of the Art
After exploring of the good practices and understanding the eﬀect of temporal segment network, we are ready to build up our ﬁnal action recognition
method. Speciﬁcally, we assemble three input modalities and all the techniques
described as our ﬁnal recognition approach, and test it on two challenging
datasets: HMDB51 and UCF101. The results are summarized in Table 6, where
we compare our method with both traditional approaches such as improved
trajectories (iDTs) , MoFAP representations , and deep learning representations, such as 3D convolutional networks (C3D) , trajectory-pooled deepconvolutional descriptors (TDD) , factorized spatio-temporal convolutional
networks (FSTCN) , long term convolution networks (LTC) , and key volume mining framework (KVMF) . Our best result outperforms other methods
by 3.9% on the HMDB51 dataset, and 1.1% on the UCF101 dataset. The superior performance of our methods demonstrates the eﬀectiveness of temporal
segment networkand justiﬁes the importance of long-term temporal modeling.
Model Visualization
Besides recognition accuracies, we would like to attain further insight into the
learned ConvNet models. In this sense, we adopt the DeepDraw toolbox.
This tool conducts iterative gradient ascent on input images with only white
noises. Thus the output after a number of iterations can be considered as class
visualization based solely on class knowledge inside the ConvNet model. The
original version of the tool only deals with RGB data. To conduct visualization on optical ﬂow based models, we adapt the tool to work with our temporal
TSNs: Towards Good Practices for Deep Action Recognition
Table 6. Comparison of our method based on temporal segment network(TSN) with
other state-of-the-art methods. We separately present the results of using two input
modalities (RGB+Flow) and three input modalities (RGB+Flow+Warped Flow).
DT+MVSV 
55.9% DT+MVSV 
iDT+FV 
57.2% iDT+FV 
iDT+HSV 
61.1% iDT+HSV 
MoFAP 
61.7% MoFAP 
Two Stream 
59.4% Two Stream 
VideoDarwin 
63.7% C3D (3 nets) 
65.5% Two stream +LSTM 
FSTCN (SCI fusion) 
59.1% FSTCN (SCI fusion) 
TDD+FV 
63.2% TDD+FV 
64.8% LTC 
63.3% KVMF 
TSN (2 modalities)
68.5% TSN (2 modalities)
TSN (3 modalities)
69.4% TSN (3 modalities)
ConvNets. As a result, we for the ﬁrst time visualize interesting class information in action recognition ConvNet models. We randomly pick ﬁve classes from
the UCF101 dataset, Taichi, Punch, Diving, Long Jump, and Biking for visualization. The results are shown in Fig. 3. For both RGB and optical ﬂow, we
visualize the ConvNet models learned with following three settings: (1) without
pre-training; (2) only with pre-training; (3) with temporal segment network.
Generally speaking, models with pre-training are more capable of representing visual concepts than those without pre-training. One can see that both spatial
and temporal models without pre-training can barely generate any meaningful
visual structure. With the knowledge transferred from the pre-training process,
the spatial and temporal models are able to capture structured visual patterns.
It is also easy to notice that the models, trained with only short-term information such as single frames, tend to mistake the scenery patterns and objects
in the videos as signiﬁcant evidences for action recognition. For example, in the
class “Diving”, the single-frame spatial stream ConvNet mainly looks for water and diving platforms, other than the person performing diving. Its temporal
stream counterpart, working on optical ﬂow, tends to focus on the motion caused
by waves of surface water. With long-term temporal modeling introduced by
temporal segment network, it becomes obvious that learned models focus more
on humans in the videos, and seem to be modeling the long-range structure of
the action class. Still consider “Diving” as the example, the spatial ConvNet
with temporal segment networknow generate a image that human is the major
visual information. And diﬀerent poses can be identiﬁed in the image, depicting
various stages of one diving action. This suggests that models learned with the
proposed method may perform better, which is well reﬂected in our quantitative
experiments. We refer the reader to supplementary materials for visualization of
more action classes and more details on the visualization process.
L. Wang, Y. Xiong, Z. Wang, Y. Qiao, D. Lin, X. Tang, L. Van Gool
Without Pretrain
With Pretrain
Segment Network
Spatial ConvNets
Without Pretrain
With Pretrain
Temporal ConvNets
Segment Network
Fig. 3. Visualization of ConvNet models for action recognition using DeepDraw .
We compare three settings: (1) without pre-train; (2) with pre-train; (3) with temporal
segment network. For spatial ConvNets, we plot three generated visualization as color
images. For temporal ConvNets, we plot the ﬂow maps of x (left) and y (right) directions in gray-scales. Note all these images are generated from purely random pixels.
Conclusions
In this paper, we presented the Temporal Segment Network (TSN), a video-level
framework that aims to model long-term temporal structure. As demonstrated
on two challenging datasets, this work has brought the state of the art to a new
level, while maintaining a reasonable computational cost. This is largely ascribed
to the segmental architecture with sparse sampling, as well as a series of good
practices that we explored in this work. The former provides an eﬀective and
eﬃcient way to capture long-term temporal structure, while the latter makes
it possible to train very deep networks on a limited training set without severe
overﬁtting.
Acknowledgment. This work was supported by the Big Data Collaboration Research grant from SenseTime Group (CUHK Agreement No. TS1610626), Early
Career Scheme (ECS) grant (No. 24204215), ERC Advanced Grant VarCity (No.
273940), Guangdong Innovative Research Program (2015B010129013, 2014B050
505017), and Shenzhen Research Program (KQCX2015033117354153, JSGG2015
0925164740726, CXZZ20150930104115529), and External Cooperation Program
of BIC, Chinese Academy of Sciences (172644KYSB20150019).
TSNs: Towards Good Practices for Deep Action Recognition