Stable Signal Recovery from
Incomplete and Inaccurate Measurements
Emmanuel Candes†, Justin Romberg†, and Terence Tao♯
† Applied and Computational Mathematics, Caltech, Pasadena, CA 91125
♯Department of Mathematics, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095
February, 2005; Revised June 2005
Suppose we wish to recover a vector x0 ∈Rm (e.g. a digital signal or image) from
incomplete and contaminated observations y = Ax0 + e; A is a n by m matrix with far
fewer rows than columns (n ≪m) and e is an error term. Is it possible to recover x0
accurately based on the data y?
To recover x0, we consider the solution x♯to the ℓ1-regularization problem
subject to
∥Ax −y∥ℓ2 ≤ǫ,
where ǫ is the size of the error term e. We show that if A obeys a uniform uncertainty
principle (with unit-normed columns) and if the vector x0 is suﬃciently sparse, then
the solution is within the noise level
∥x♯−x0∥ℓ2 ≤C · ǫ.
As a ﬁrst example, suppose that A is a Gaussian random matrix, then stable recovery
occurs for almost all such A’s provided that the number of nonzeros of x0 is of about the
same order as the number of observations. As a second instance, suppose one observes
few Fourier samples of x0, then stable recovery occurs for almost any set of n coeﬃcients
provided that the number of nonzeros is of the order of n/[log m]6.
In the case where the error term vanishes, the recovery is of course exact, and this
work actually provides novel insights on the exact recovery phenomenon discussed in
earlier papers. The methodology also explains why one can also very nearly recover
approximately sparse signals.
Keywords. ℓ1-minimization, basis pursuit, restricted orthonormality, sparsity, singular
values of random matrices.
Acknowledgments. E. C. is partially supported by a National Science Foundation grant
DMS 01-40698 (FRG) and by an Alfred P. Sloan Fellowship. J. R. is supported by National
Science Foundation grants DMS 01-40698 and ITR ACI-0204932. T. T. is supported in part
by grants from the Packard Foundation.
Introduction
Exact recovery of sparse signals
Recent papers have developed a series of powerful results about the exact recovery
of a ﬁnite signal x0 ∈Rm from a very limited number of observations. As a representative
result from this literature, consider the problem of recovering an unknown sparse signal
x0(t) ∈Rm; that is, a signal x0 whose support T0 = {t : x0(t) ̸= 0} is assumed to have
small cardinality. All we know about x0 are n linear measurements of the form
yk = ⟨x0, ak⟩
k = 1, . . . , n
where the ak ∈Rm are known test signals. Of special interest is the vastly underdetermined
case, n ≪m, where there are many more unknowns than observations. At ﬁrst glance, this
may seem impossible. However, it turns out that one can actually recover x0 exactly by
solving the convex program1
subject to
provided that the matrix A ∈Rn×m obeys a uniform uncertainty principle.
The uniform uncertainty principle, introduced in and reﬁned in , essentially states that
the n × m measurement matrix A obeys a “restricted isometry hypothesis.” To introduce
this notion, let AT , T ⊂{1, . . . , m} be the n × |T| submatrix obtained by extracting the
columns of A corresponding to the indices in T. Then deﬁnes the S-restricted isometry
constant δS of A which is the smallest quantity such that
(1 −δS) ∥c∥2
ℓ2 ≤∥AT c∥2
ℓ2 ≤(1 + δS) ∥c∥2
for all subsets T with |T| ≤S and coeﬃcient sequences (cj)j∈T . This property essentially
requires that every set of columns with cardinality less than S approximately behaves like
an orthonormal system. It was shown (also in ) that if S veriﬁes
δS + δ2S + δ3S < 1,
then solving (P1) recovers any sparse signal x0 with support size obeying |T0| ≤S.
Stable recovery from imperfect measurements
This paper develops results for the “imperfect” (and far more realistic) scenarios where the
measurements are noisy and the signal is not exactly sparse. Everyone would agree that
in most practical situations, we cannot assume that Ax0 is known with arbitrary precision.
More appropriately, we will assume instead that one is given “noisy” data y = Ax0+e, where
e is some unknown perturbation bounded by a known amount ∥e∥ℓ2 ≤ǫ. To be broadly
applicable, our recovery procedure must be stable: small changes in the observations should
result in small changes in the recovery. This wish, however, may be quite hopeless. How can
we possibly hope to recover our signal when not only the available information is severely
incomplete but in addition, the few available observations are also inaccurate?
1(P1) can even be recast as a linear program .
Consider nevertheless (as in for example) the convex program searching, among all
signals consistent with the data y, for that with minimum ℓ1-norm
subject to
∥Ax −y∥ℓ2 ≤ǫ.
The ﬁrst result of this paper shows that contrary to the belief expressed above, the solution
to (P2) recovers an unknown sparse object with an error at most proportional to the noise
level. Our condition for stable recovery again involves the restricted isometry constants.
Theorem 1 Let S be such that δ3S + 3δ4S < 2. Then for any signal x0 supported on T0
with |T0| ≤S and any perturbation e with ∥e∥ℓ2 ≤ǫ, the solution x♯to (P2) obeys
∥x♯−x0∥ℓ2 ≤CS · ǫ,
where the constant CS may only depend on δ4S. For reasonable values of δ4S, CS is well
behaved; e.g. CS ≈8.82 for δ4S = 1/5 and CS ≈10.47 for δ4S = 1/4.
It is interesting to note that for S obeying the condition of the theorem, the reconstruction
from noiseless data is exact. It is quite possible that for some matrices A, this condition
tolerates larger values of S than (3).
We would like to oﬀer two comments. First, the matrix A is rectangular with many more
columns than rows. As such, most of its singular values are zero. As emphasized earlier,
the fact that the severely ill-posed matrix inversion keeps the perturbation from “blowing
up” is rather remarkable and perhaps unexpected.
Second, no recovery method can perform fundamentally better for arbitrary perturbations
of size ǫ. To see why this is true, suppose one had available an oracle letting us know, in
advance, the support T0 of x0. With this additional information, the problem is well-posed
and one could reconstruct x0 by the method of Least-Squares for example,
T0AT0)−1A∗
elsewhere.
In the absence of any other information, one could easily argue that no method would
exhibit a fundamentally better performance. Now of course, ˆx −x0 = 0 on the complement
of T0 while on T0
ˆx −x0 = (A∗
T0AT0)−1A∗
and since by hypothesis, the eigenvalues of A∗
T0AT0 are well-behaved2
∥ˆx −x0∥ℓ2 ≈∥A∗
T0e∥ℓ2 ≈ǫ,
at least for perturbations concentrated in the row space of AT0.
In short, obtaining a
reconstruction with an error term whose size is guaranteed to be proportional to the noise
level is the best one can hope for.
Remarkably, not only can we recover sparse input vectors but one can also stably recover
approximately sparse vectors, as we have the following companion theorem.
2Observe the role played by the singular values of AT0 in the analysis of the oracle error.
Theorem 2 Suppose that x0 is an arbitrary vector in Rm and let x0,S be the truncated
vector corresponding to the S largest values of x0 (in absolute value). Under the hypothesis
of Theorem 1, the solution x♯to (P2) obeys
∥x♯−x0∥ℓ2 ≤C1,S · ǫ + C2,S · ∥x0 −x0,S∥ℓ1
For reasonable values of δ4S the constants in (5) are well behaved; e.g. C1,S ≈12.04 and
C1,S ≈8.77 for δ4S = 1/5.
Roughly speaking, the theorem says that minimizing ℓ1 stably recovers the S-largest entries
of an m-dimensional unknown vector x from n measurements only.
We now specialize this result to a commonly discussed model in mathematical signal processing, namely, the class of compressible signals. We say that x0 is compressible if its
entries obey a power law
|x0|(k) ≤Cr · k−r,
where |x0|(k) is the kth largest value of x0 (|x0|(1) ≥|x0|(2) ≥. . . ≥|x0|(m)), r > 1, and
Cr is a constant which depends only on r. Such a model is appropriate for the wavelet
coeﬃcients of a piecewise smooth signal, for example. If x0 obeys (7), then
∥x0 −x0,S∥ℓ1
r · S−r+1/2.
Observe now that in this case
∥x0 −x0,S∥ℓ2 ≤C′′
r · S−r+1/2,
and for generic elements obeying (7), there are no fundamentally better estimates available.
Hence, we see that with n measurements only, we achieve an approximation error which is
almost as good as that one would obtain by knowing everything about the signal x0 and
selecting its S-largest entries.
As a last remark, we would like to point out that in the noiseless case, Theorem 2 improves
upon an earlier result from Cand`es and Tao, see also ; it is sharper in the sense that 1)
this is a deterministic statement and there is no probability of failure, 2) it is universal in
that it holds for all signals, 3) it gives upper estimates with better bounds and constants,
and 4) it holds for a wider range of values of S.
It is of course of interest to know which matrices obey the uniform uncertainty principle
with good isometry constants. Using tools from random matrix theory, give several
examples of matrices such that (3) holds for S on the order of n to within log factors.
Examples include (proofs and additional discussion can be found in ):
• Random matrices with i.i.d. entries. Suppose the entries of A are i.i.d. Gaussian with
mean zero and variance 1/n, then show that the condition for Theorem 1
holds with overwhelming probability when
S ≤C · n/ log(m/n).
In fact, gives numerical values for the constant C as a function of the ratio n/m.
The same conclusion applies to binary matrices with independent entries taking values
±1/√n with equal probability.
• Fourier ensemble.
Suppose now that A is obtained by selecting n rows from the
m × m discrete Fourier transform and renormalizing the columns so that they are
unit-normed. If the rows are selected at random, the condition for Theorem 1 holds
with overwhelming probability for S ≤C · n/(log m)6 . (For simplicity, we have
assumed that A takes on real-valued entries although our theory clearly accommodates
complex-valued matrices so that our discussion holds for both complex and real-valued
Fourier transforms.)
This case is of special interest as reconstructing a digital signal or image from incomplete Fourier data is an important inverse problem with applications in biomedical
imaging (MRI and tomography), Astrophysics (interferometric imaging), and geophysical exploration.
• General orthogonal measurement ensembles. Suppose A is obtained by selecting n
rows from an m by m orthonormal matrix U and renormalizing the columns so that
they are unit-normed. Then shows that if the rows are selected at random, the
condition for Theorem 1 holds with overwhelming probability provided
(log m)6 ,
where µ := √m maxi,j |Ui,j|. Observe that for the Fourier matrix, µ = 1, and thus
(8) is an extension of the Fourier ensemble.
This fact is of signiﬁcant practical relevance because in many situations, signals of
interest may not be sparse in the time domain but rather may be (approximately)
decomposed as a sparse superposition of waveforms in a ﬁxed orthonormal basis Ψ;
e.g. in a nice wavelet basis. Suppose that we use as test signals a set of n vectors taken
from a second orthonormal basis Φ. We then solve (P1) in the coeﬃcient domain
subject to
where A is obtained by extracting n rows from the orthonormal matrix U = ΦΨ∗. The
recovery condition then depends on the mutual coherence µ between the measurement
basis Φ and the sparsity basis Ψ which measures the similarity between Φ and Ψ;
µ(Φ, Ψ) = √m max |⟨φk, ψj⟩|, φk ∈Φ, ψj ∈Ψ.
Prior work and innovations
The problem of recovering a sparse vector by minimizing ℓ1 under linear equality constraints
has recently received much attention, mostly in the context of Basis Pursuit, where the goal
is to uncover sparse signal decompositions in overcomplete dictionaries. We refer the reader
to and the references therein for a full discussion.
We would especially like to note two works by Donoho, Elad, and Temlyakov , and Tropp
 that also study the recovery of sparse signals from noisy observations by solving (P2)
(and other closely related optimization programs), and give conditions for stable recovery.
In , the sparsity constraint on the underlying signal x0 depends on the magnitude of
the maximum entry of the Gram matrix M(A) = maxi,j:i̸=j |(A∗A)|i,j.
Stable recovery
occurs when the number of nonzeros is at most (M−1 + 1)/4. For instance, when A is a
Fourier ensemble and n is on the order of m, we will have M at least of the order 1/√n
(with high probability), meaning that stable recovery is known to occur when the number
of nonzeros is about at most O(√n). In contrast, the condition for Theorem 1 will hold
when this number is about n/(log m)6, due to the range of support sizes for which the
uniform uncertainty principle holds. In , a more general condition for stable recovery
is derived. For the measurement ensembles listed in the previous section, however, the
sparsity required is still on the order of √n in the situation where n is comparable to m. In
other words, whereas these results require at least O(√m) observations per unknown, our
results show that—ignoring log-like factors—only O(1) are, in general, suﬃcient.
More closely related is the very recent work of Donoho who shows a version of (5) in
the case where A ∈Rn×m is a Gaussian matrix with n proportional to m, with unspeciﬁed
constants for both the support size and that appearing in (5). Our main claim is on a
very diﬀerent level since it is (1) deterministic (it can of course be specialized to random
matrices), and (2) widely applicable since it extends to any matrix obeying the condition
δ3S +3δ4S < 2. In addition, the argument underlying Theorem 1 is short and simple, giving
precise and sharper numerical values. Finally, we would like to point out connections with
fascinating ongoing work which develops fast randomized algorithms for sparse Fourier
transforms .
Suppose x0 is a ﬁxed vector with |T0| nonzero terms, for example.
Then shows that it is possible to randomly sample the frequency domain |T0|poly(log m)
times (poly(log m) denotes a polynomial term in log m), and reconstruct x0 from these
frequency data with positive probability. We do not know whether these algorithms are
stable in the sense described in this paper, and whether they can be modiﬁed to be universal,
i.e. reconstruct all signals of small support.
Proof of Theorem 1: sparse case
The proof of the theorem makes use of two geometrical special facts about the solution x♯
1. Tube constraint. First, Ax♯is within 2ǫ of the “noise free” observations Ax0 thanks
to the triangle inequality
∥Ax♯−Ax0∥ℓ2 ≤∥Ax♯−y∥ℓ2 + ∥Ax0 −y∥ℓ2 ≤2ǫ.
Geometrically, this says that x♯is known to be in a cylinder around the n-dimensional
plane Ax0.
2. Cone constraint. Since x0 is feasible, we must have ∥x♯∥ℓ1 ≤∥x0∥ℓ1. Decompose x♯
as x♯= x0 + h. As observed in 
∥x0∥ℓ1 −∥hT0∥ℓ1 + ∥hT c
0 ∥ℓ1 ≤∥x0 + h∥ℓ1 ≤∥x0∥ℓ1,
where T0 is the support of x0, and hT0(t) = h(t) for t ∈T0 and zero elsewhere
(similarly for hT c
0 ). Hence, h obeys the cone constraint
0 ∥ℓ1 ≤∥hT0∥ℓ1
Figure 1: Geometry in R2. Here, the point x0 is a vertex of the ℓ1 ball and the shaded area
represents the set of points obeying both the tube and the cone constraints. By showing that every
vector in the cone of descent at x0 is approximately orthogonal to the nullspace of A, we will ensure
that x♯is not too far from x0.
which expresses the geometric idea that h must lie in the cone of descent of the
ℓ1-norm at x0.
Figure 1 illustrates both these geometrical constraints. Stability follows from the fact that
the intersection between (9) (∥Ah∥ℓ2 ≤2ǫ) and (10) is a set with small radius. The reason
why this holds is because every vector h in the ℓ1-cone (10) is approximately orthogonal
to the nullspace of A. We shall prove that ∥Ah∥ℓ2 ≈∥h∥ℓ2 and together with (9), this
establishes the theorem.
We begin by dividing T c
0 into subsets of size M (we will choose M later) and enumerate T c
as n1, n2, . . . , nN−|T0| in decreasing order of magnitude of hT c
0 . Set Tj = {nℓ, (j −1)M +1 ≤
ℓ≤jM}. That is, T1 contains the indices of the M largest coeﬃcients of hT c
0 , T2 contains
the indices of the next M largest coeﬃcients, and so on.
With this decomposition, the ℓ2-norm of h is concentrated on T01 = T0 ∪T1. Indeed, the
kth largest value of hT c
0 |(k) ≤∥hT c
and, therefore,
1/k2 ≤∥hT c
Further, the ℓ1-cone constraint gives
ℓ2 ≤∥hT0∥2
ℓ1/M ≤∥hT0∥2
ℓ2 · |T0|/M
ℓ2 = ∥hT01∥2
ℓ2 + ∥hT c
ℓ2 ≤(1 + |T0|/M) · ∥hT01∥2
Observe now that
∥Ah∥ℓ2 = ∥AT01hT01 +
∥AT01hT01∥ℓ2 −∥
∥AT01hT01∥ℓ2 −
∥ATjhTj∥ℓ2
1 −δM+|T0| ∥hT01∥ℓ2 −
Set ρ = |T0|/M. As we shall see later,
∥hTj∥ℓ2 ≤√ρ · ∥hT0∥ℓ2
which gives
∥Ah∥ℓ2 ≥C|T0|,M · ∥hT01∥ℓ2,
C|T0|,M :=
1 −δM+|T0| −√ρ
It then follows from (11) and ∥Ah∥ℓ2 ≤2ǫ that
1 + ρ · ∥hT01∥ℓ2 ≤
· ∥Ah∥ℓ2 ≤2√1 + ρ
provided that the denominator is of course positive.
We may specialize (14) and take M = 3|T0|. The denominator is positive if δ3|T0|+3δ4|T0| < 2
(this is true if δ4|T0| < 1/2, say) which proves the theorem. Note that if δ4S is a little smaller,
the constant in (5) is not large. For δ4S ≤1/5, CS ≈8.82, while for δ4S ≤1/4, CS ≈10.47
as claimed.
It remains to argue about (12).
Observe that by construction, the magnitude of each
coeﬃcient in Tj+1 is less than the average of the magnitudes in Tj:
|hTj+1(t)| ≤∥hTj∥ℓ1/M.
ℓ2 ≤∥hTj∥2
and (12) follows from
M ≤∥hT0∥ℓ1/
|T0|/M · ∥hT0∥ℓ2.
Proof of Theorem 2: general case
Suppose now that x0 is arbitrary. We let T0 be the indices of the largest |T0| coeﬃcients
of x0 (the value |T0| will be decided later) and just as before, we divide up T c
0 into sets
T1, . . . , TJ of equal size |Tj| = M, j ≥1, by decreasing order of magnitude. The cone
constraint (10) may not hold but a variation does. Indeed, x = x0 + h is feasible and,
therefore,
∥x0,T0∥ℓ1 −∥hT0∥ℓ1 −∥x0,T c
0 ∥ℓ1 + ∥hT c
0 ∥ℓ1 ≤∥x0,T0 + hT0∥ℓ1 + ∥x0,T c
0 ∥ℓ1 ≤∥x0∥ℓ1,
which gives
0 ∥ℓ1 ≤∥hT0∥ℓ1 + 2∥x0,T c
The rest of the argument now proceeds essentially as before. First, h is in the some sense
concentrated on T01 = T0 ∪T1 since with the same notations
01∥ℓ2 ≤∥hT0∥ℓ1 + 2∥x0,T c
∥hT0∥ℓ2 + 2∥x0,T c
which in turn implies
∥h∥ℓ2 ≤(1 + √ρ)∥hT01∥ℓ2 + 2√ρ · η,
η := ∥x0,T c
Better estimates via Pythagoras’ formula are of course possible (see (11)) but we ignore
such reﬁnements in order to keep the argument as simple as possible. Second, the same
reasoning as before gives
∥hTj∥ℓ2 ≤∥hT c
≤√ρ · (∥hT0∥ℓ2 + 2η)
∥Ah∥ℓ2 ≥C|T0|,M · ∥hT01∥ℓ2 −2√ρ
1 + δM · η,
where C|T0|,M is the same as in (13). Since ∥Ah∥≤2ǫ, we again conclude that
∥hT01∥ℓ2 ≤
1 + δM η),
(note that the constant in front of the ǫ factor is the same as in the truly sparse case) and
the claim (6) follows from (16). Specializing the bound to M = 3|T0| and assuming that
δS ≤1/5 gives the numerical values reported in the statement of the theorem.
Numerical Examples
This section illustrates the eﬀectiveness of the recovery by means of a few simple numerical
experiments. Our simulations demonstrate that in practice, the constants in (5) and (6)
seem to be quite low.
Our ﬁrst series of experiments is summarized in Tables 1 and 2. In each experiment, a length
1024 signal was measured with the same 300 × 1024 Gaussian measurement ensemble. The
measurements were then corrupted by additive white Gaussian noise: yk = ⟨x0, ak⟩+ ek
with ek ∼N(0, σ2) for various noise levels σ. The squared norm of the error ∥e∥2
chi-square random variable with mean σ2n and standard deviation σ2√
2n; owing to well
known concentration inequalities, the probability that ∥e∥2
ℓ2 exceeds its mean plus two or
three standard deviations is small. We then solve (P2) with
ǫ2 = σ2(n + λ
and select λ = 2 although other choices are of course possible.
Table 1 charts the results for sparse signals with 50 nonzero components. Ten signals were
generated by choosing 50 indices uniformly at random, and then selecting either −1 or 1 at
each location with equal probability. An example of such a signal is shown in Figure 2(a).
Previous experiments have demonstrated that we were empirically able to recover such
signals perfectly from 300 noiseless Gaussian measurements, which is indeed the case for
each of the 10 signals considered here. The average value of the recovery error (taken over
the 10 signals) is recorded in the bottom row of Table 1. In this situation, the constant in
(5) appears to be less than 2.
Table 2 charts the results for 10 compressible signals whose components are all non-zero,
but decay as in (7). The signals were generated by taking a ﬁxed sequence
xsort(t) = (5.819) · t−10/9,
randomly permuting it, and multiplying by a random sign sequence (the constant in (18)
was chosen so that the norm of the compressible signals is the same —
50 — as the
sparse signals in the previous set of experiments). An example of such a signal is shown in
Figure 2(c). Again, 10 such signals were generated, and the average recovery error recorded
in the bottom row of Table 2.
For small values of σ, the recovery error is dominated by the approximation error — the
second term on the right hand side of (6). As a reference, the 50 term nonlinear approximation errors of these compressible signals is around 0.47; at low signal-to-noise ratios our
recovery error is about 1.5 times this quantity. As the noise power gets large, the recovery
error becomes less than ǫ, just as in the sparse case.
Finally, we apply our recovery procedure to realistic imagery.
Photograph-like images,
such as the 256 × 256 pixel Boats image shown in Figure 3(a), have wavelet coeﬃcient
sequences that are compressible (see ). The image is a 65536 dimensional vector, making
the standard Gaussian ensemble too unwieldy3. Instead, we make 25000 measurements
of the image using a scrambled real Fourier ensemble; that is, the test functions ak(t) are
real-valued sines and cosines (with randomly selected frequencies) which are temporally
scrambled by randomly permuting the m time points. In other words, this ensemble is
obtained from the (real-valued) Fourier ensemble by a random permutation of the columns.
For our purposes here, the test functions behave like a Gaussian ensemble in the sense that
from n measurements, one can recover signals with about n/5 nonzero components exactly
from noiseless data. There is a computational advantage as well, since we can apply A and
its adjoint AT to an arbitrary vector by means of an m point FFT. To recover the wavelet
coeﬃcients of the object, we simply solve
subject to
∥AW ∗α −y∥ℓ2 ≤ǫ,
where A is the scrambled Fourier ensemble, and W is the discrete Daubechies-8 orthogonal
wavelet transform.
We will attempt to recover the image from measurements perturbed in two diﬀerent manners. First, as in the 1D experiments, the measurements were corrupted by additive white
Gaussian noise with σ = 5·10−4 so that σ·√n = .0791. As shown in Figure 4, the noise level
3Storing a double precision 25000 × 65536 matrix would use around 13.1 gigabytes of memory, about the
capacity of three standard DVDs.
is signiﬁcant; the signal-to-noise ratio is ∥Ax0∥ℓ2/∥e∥ℓ2 = 4.5. With ǫ = .0798 as in (17),
the recovery error is ∥α♯−α0∥ℓ2 = 0.1303 (the original image has unit norm). For comparison, the 5000 term nonlinear approximation error for the image is ∥α0,5000 −α0∥ℓ2 = 0.050.
Hence the recovery error is very close to the sum of the approximation error and the size
of the perturbation.
Another type of perturbation of practical interest is round-oﬀor quantization error. In
general, the measurements cannot be taken with arbitrary precision, either because of limitations inherent to the measuring device, or that we wish to communicate them using some
small number of bits. Unlike additive white Gaussian noise, round-oﬀerror is deterministic
and signal dependent—a situation our methodology deals with easily.
The round-oﬀerror experiment was conducted as follows.
Using the same scrambled
Fourier ensemble, we take 25000 measurements of Boats, and round (quantize) them to
one digit (we restrict the values of the measurements to be one of ten preset values, equally
spaced). The measurement error is shown in Figure 4(c), and the signal-to-noise ratio is
∥Ax0∥ℓ2/∥e∥ℓ2 = 4.3. To choose ǫ, we use a rough model for the size of the perturbation.
To a ﬁrst approximation, the round-oﬀerror for each measurement behaves like a uniformly
distributed random variable on (−q/2, q/2), where q is the distance between quantization
levels. Under this assumption, the size of the perturbation ∥e∥2
ℓ2 would behave like a sum
of squares of uniform random variables
Xk ∼Uniform
Here, mean(Y ) = nq2/12 and std(Y ) = √nq2/[6
5]. Again, Y is no larger than mean(Y )+
λ std(Y ) with high probability, and we select
ǫ2 = nq2/12 + λ√nq2/[6
where as before, λ = 2. The results are summarized in the second column of Table 3. As
in the previous case, the recovery error is very close to the sum of the approximation and
measurement errors. Also note that despite the crude nature of the perturbation model,
an accurate value of ǫ is chosen.
Although the errors in the recovery experiments summarized in the third row of Table 3
are as we hoped, the recovered images tend to contain visually displeasing high frequency
oscillatory artifacts. To address this problem, we can solve a slightly diﬀerent optimization
problem to recover the image from the same corrupted measurements. In place of (P ′
subject to
∥Ax −y∥ℓ2 ≤ǫ
(xi+1,j −xi,j)2 + (xi,j+1 −xi,j)2 =
is the total variation of the image x: the sum of the magnitudes of the (discretized) gradient. By substituting (TV ) for (P ′
2), we are essentially changing our model for photographlike images. Instead of looking for an image with a sparse wavelet transform that explains
the observations, program (TV ) searches for an image with a sparse gradient (i.e. without
spurious high frequency oscillations). In fact, it is shown in that just as signals which are
exactly sparse can be recovered perfectly from a small number of measurements by solving
Table 1: Recovery results for sparse 1D signals. Gaussian white noise of variance σ2 was added to
each of the n = 300 measurements, and (P2) was solved with ǫ chosen such that ∥e∥2 ≤ǫ with high
probability (see (17)).
Table 2: Recovery results for compressible 1D signals. Gaussian white noise of variance σ2 was
added to each measurement, and (P2) was solved with ǫ as in (17).
(P2) with ǫ = 0, signals with gradients which are exactly sparse can be recovered by solving
(TV ) (again with ǫ = 0).
Figure 3(b) and (c) and the fourth row of Table 3 show the (TV ) recovery results. The
reconstructions have smaller error and do not contain visually displeasing artifacts.
Discussion
The convex programs (P2) and (TV ) are simple instances of a class of problems known as
second-order cone programs (SOCP’s). As an example, one can recast (TV ) as
subject to
−ui,j ≤∥Gi,jx∥ℓ2 ≤ui,j, ∥Ax −b∥ℓ2 ≤ǫ,
where Gi,jx = (xi+1,j −xi,j, xi,j+1 −xi,j) . SOCP’s can nowadays be solved eﬃciently
by interior-point methods and, hence, our approach is computationally tractable.
From a certain viewpoint, recovering via (P2) is using a priori information about the nature
of the underlying image, i.e.
that it is sparse in some known orthobasis, to overcome
the shortage of data. In practice, we could of course use far more sophisticated models
to perform the recovery.
Obvious extensions include looking for signals that are sparse
Table 3: Image recovery results. Measurements of the Boats image were corrupted in two diﬀerent
ways: by adding white noise (left column) with σ = 5 · 10−4 and by rounding oﬀto one digit (right
column). In each case, the image was recovered in two diﬀerent ways: by solving (P ′
2) (third row)
and solving (T V ) (fourth row). The (T V ) images are shown in Figure 3.
White noise
Figure 2: (a) Example of a sparse signal used in the 1D experiments.
There are 50 non-zero
coeﬃcients taking values ±1. (b) Sparse signal recovered from noisy measurements with σ = 0.05.
(c) Example of a compressible signal used in the 1D experiments. (d) Compressible signal recovered
from noisy measurements with σ = 0.05.
Figure 3: (a) Original 256×256 Boats image. (b) Recovery via (T V ) from n = 25000 measurements
corrupted with Gaussian noise. (c) Recovery via (T V ) from n = 25000 measurements corrupted
by round-oﬀerror. In both cases, the reconstruction error is less than the sum of the nonlinear
approximation and measurement errors.
Figure 4: (a) Noiseless measurements Ax0 of the Boats image. (b) Gaussian measurement error
with σ = 5 · 10−4 in the recovery experiment summarized in the left column of Table 3. The signalto-noise ratio is ∥Ax0∥ℓ2/∥e∥ℓ2 = 4.5. (c) Round-oﬀerror in the recovery experiment summarized
in the right column of Table 3. The signal-to-noise ratio is ∥Ax0∥ℓ2/∥e∥ℓ2 = 4.3.
in overcomplete wavelet or curvelet bases, or for images that have certain geometrical
structure. The numerical experiments in Section 3 show how changing the model can result
in a higher quality recovery from the same set of measurements.