MULTI-SCALE STRUCTURAL SIMILARITY FOR IMAGE QUALITY ASSESSMENT
Zhou Wang1, Eero P. Simoncelli1 and Alan C. Bovik2
(Invited Paper)
1Center for Neural Sci. and Courant Inst. of Math. Sci., New York Univ., New York, NY 10003
2Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Univ. of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712
Email: , , 
The structural similarity image quality paradigm is based on the
assumption that the human visual system is highly adapted for
extracting structural information from the scene, and therefore a
measure of structural similarity can provide a good approximation to perceived image quality. This paper proposes a multi-scale
structural similarity method, which supplies more ﬂexibility than
previous single-scale methods in incorporating the variations of
viewing conditions. We develop an image synthesis method to
calibrate the parameters that deﬁne the relative importance of different scales. Experimental comparisons demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.
1. INTRODUCTION
Objective image quality assessment research aims to design quality measures that can automatically predict perceived image quality. These quality measures play important roles in a broad range
of applications such as image acquisition, compression, communication, restoration, enhancement, analysis, display, printing and
watermarking. The most widely used full-reference image quality
and distortion assessment algorithms are peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) and mean squared error (MSE), which do not correlate
well with perceived quality (e.g., – ).
Traditional perceptual image quality assessment methods are
based on a bottom-up approach which attempts to simulate the
functionality of the relevant early human visual system (HVS)
components. These methods usually involve 1) a preprocessing
process that may include image alignment, point-wise nonlinear
transform, low-pass ﬁltering that simulates eye optics, and color
space transformation, 2) a channel decomposition process that transforms the image signals into different spatial frequency as well as
orientation selective subbands, 3) an error normalization process
that weights the error signal in each subband by incorporating the
variation of visual sensitivity in different subbands, and the variation of visual error sensitivity caused by intra- or inter-channel
neighboring transform coefﬁcients, and 4) an error pooling process that combines the error signals in different subbands into a
single quality/distortion value. While these bottom-up approaches
can conveniently make use of many known psychophysical features of the HVS, it is important to recognize their limitations. In
particular, the HVS is a complex and highly non-linear system and
the complexity of natural images is also very signiﬁcant, but most
models of early vision are based on linear or quasi-linear operators that have been characterized using restricted and simplistic
stimuli. Thus, these approaches must rely on a number of strong
assumptions and generalizations , . Furthermore, as the number of HVS features has increased, the resulting quality assessment
systems have become too complicated to work with in real-world
applications, especially for algorithm optimization purposes.
Structural similarity provides an alternative and complementary approach to the problem of image quality assessment –
 . It is based on a top-down assumption that the HVS is highly
adapted for extracting structural information from the scene, and
therefore a measure of structural similarity should be a good approximation of perceived image quality. It has been shown that
a simple implementation of this methodology, namely the structural similarity (SSIM) index , can outperform state-of-the-art
perceptual image quality metrics. However, the SSIM index algorithm introduced in is a single-scale approach. We consider
this a drawback of the method because the right scale depends on
viewing conditions (e.g., display resolution and viewing distance).
In this paper, we propose a multi-scale structural similarity method
and introduce a novel image synthesis-based approach to calibrate
the parameters that weight the relative importance between different scales.
2. SINGLE-SCALE STRUCTURAL SIMILARITY
Let x = {xi|i = 1, 2, · · · , N} and y = {yi|i = 1, 2, · · · , N} be
two discrete non-negative signals that have been aligned with each
other (e.g., two image patches extracted from the same spatial location from two images being compared, respectively), and let µx,
x and σxy be the mean of x, the variance of x, and the covariance
of x and y, respectively. Approximately, µx and σx can be viewed
as estimates of the luminance and contrast of x, and σxy measures
the the tendency of x and y to vary together, thus an indication of
structural similarity. In , the luminance, contrast and structure
comparison measures were given as follows:
l(x, y) = 2 µx µy + C1
µ2x + µ2y + C1 ,
c(x, y) = 2 σx σy + C2
σ2x + σ2y + C2 ,
σx σy + C3 ,
where C1, C2 and C3 are small constants given by
C1 = (K1 L)2 , C2 = (K2 L)2 and C3 = C2/2,
similarity
Fig. 1. Multi-scale structural similarity measurement system. L: low-pass ﬁltering; 2 ↓: downsampling by 2.
respectively. L is the dynamic range of the pixel values (L = 255
for 8 bits/pixel gray scale images), and K1 ≪1 and K2 ≪1 are
two scalar constants. The general form of the Structural SIMilarity
(SSIM) index between signal x and y is deﬁned as:
SSIM(x, y) = [l(x, y)]α · [c(x, y)]β · [s(x, y)]γ ,
where α, β and γ are parameters to deﬁne the relative importance
of the three components. Speciﬁcally, we set α = β = γ = 1, and
the resulting SSIM index is given by
SSIM(x, y) =
(2 µx µy + C1) (2 σxy + C2)
(µ2x + µ2y + C1) (σ2x + σ2y + C2) ,
which satisﬁes the following conditions:
1. symmetry: SSIM(x, y) = SSIM(y, x);
2. boundedness: SSIM(x, y) ≤1;
3. unique maximum: SSIM(x, y) = 1 if and only if x = y.
The universal image quality index proposed in corresponds
to the case of C1 = C2 = 0, therefore is a special case of (6). The
drawback of such a parameter setting is that when the denominator
of Eq. (6) is close to 0, the resulting measurement becomes unstable. This problem has been solved successfully in by adding
the two small constants C1 and C2 (calculated by setting K1=0.01
and K2=0.03, respectively, in Eq. (4)).
We apply the SSIM indexing algorithm for image quality assessment using a sliding window approach. The window moves
pixel-by-pixel across the whole image space. At each step, the
SSIM index is calculated within the local window. If one of the
image being compared is considered to have perfect quality, then
the resulting SSIM index map can be viewed as the quality map
of the other (distorted) image. Instead of using an 8 × 8 square
window as in , a smooth windowing approach is used for local
statistics to avoid “blocking artifacts” in the quality map . Finally, a mean SSIM index of the quality map is used to evaluate
the overall image quality.
3. MULTI-SCALE STRUCTURAL SIMILARITY
3.1. Multi-scale SSIM index
The perceivability of image details depends the sampling density
of the image signal, the distance from the image plane to the observer, and the perceptual capability of the observer’s visual system. In practice, the subjective evaluation of a given image varies
when these factors vary. A single-scale method as described in
the previous section may be appropriate only for speciﬁc settings.
Multi-scale method is a convenient way to incorporate image details at different resolutions.
We propose a multi-scale SSIM method for image quality assessment whose system diagram is illustrated in Fig. 1. Taking
the reference and distorted image signals as the input, the system
iteratively applies a low-pass ﬁlter and downsamples the ﬁltered
image by a factor of 2. We index the original image as Scale 1,
and the highest scale as Scale M, which is obtained after M −1
iterations. At the j-th scale, the contrast comparison (2) and the
structure comparison (3) are calculated and denoted as cj(x, y)
and sj(x, y), respectively. The luminance comparison (1) is computed only at Scale M and is denoted as lM(x, y). The overall
SSIM evaluation is obtained by combining the measurement at different scales using
SSIM(x, y) = [lM(x, y)]αM ·
[cj(x, y)]βj[sj(x, y)]γj . (7)
Similar to (5), the exponents αM, βj and γj are used to adjust the relative importance of different components. This multiscale SSIM index deﬁnition satisﬁes the three conditions given in
the last section. It also includes the single-scale method as a special case. In particular, a single-scale implementation for Scale M
applies the iterative ﬁltering and downsampling procedure up to
Scale M and only the exponents αM, βM and γM are given nonzero values. To simplify parameter selection, we let αj=βj=γj for
all j’s. In addition, we normalize the cross-scale settings such that
j=1 γj=1. This makes different parameter settings (including
all single-scale and multi-scale settings) comparable. The remaining job is to determine the relative values across different scales.
Conceptually, this should be related to the contrast sensitivity function (CSF) of the HVS , which states that the human visual sensitivity peaks at middle frequencies (around 4 cycles per degree
of visual angle) and decreases along both high- and low-frequency
directions. However, CSF cannot be directly used to derive the
parameters in our system because it is typically measured at the
visibility threshold level using simpliﬁed stimuli (sinusoids), but
our purpose is to compare the quality of complex structured images at visible distortion levels.
3.2. Cross-scale calibration
We use an image synthesis approach to calibrate the relative importance of different scales. In previous work, the idea of synthesizing
images for subjective testing has been employed by the “synthesisby-analysis” methods of assessing statistical texture models, in
which the model is used to generate a texture with statistics matching an original texture, and a human subject then judges the similarity of the two textures – . A similar approach has also
been qualitatively used in demonstrating quality metrics in ,
 , though quantitative subjective tests were not conducted. These
synthesis methods provide a powerful and efﬁcient means of testing a model, and have the added beneﬁt that the resulting images
suggest improvements that might be made to the model .
distortion
Fig. 2. Demonstration of image synthesis approach for cross-scale
calibration. Images in the same row have the same MSE. Images in
the same column have distortions only in one speciﬁc scale. Each
subject was asked to select a set of images (one from each scale),
having equal quality. As an example, one subject chose the marked
For a given original 8bits/pixel gray scale test image, we synthesize a table of distorted images (as exempliﬁed by Fig.
where each entry in the table is an image that is associated with
a speciﬁc distortion level (deﬁned by MSE) and a speciﬁc scale.
Each of the distorted image is created using an iterative procedure,
where the initial image is generated by randomly adding white
Gaussian noise to the original image and the iterative process employs a constrained gradient descent algorithm to search for the
worst images in terms of SSIM measure while constraining MSE
to be ﬁxed and restricting the distortions to occur only in the speciﬁed scale. We use 5 scales and 12 distortion levels (range from
23 to 214) in our experiment, resulting in a total of 60 images, as
demonstrated in Fig. 2. Although the images at each row has the
same MSE with respect to the original image, their visual quality
is signiﬁcantly different. Thus the distortions at different scales are
of very different importance in terms of perceived image quality.
We employ 10 original 64×64 images with different types of content (human faces, natural scenes, plants, man-made objects, etc.)
in our experiment to create 10 sets of distorted images (a total of
600 distorted images).
We gathered data for 8 subjects, including one of the authors.
The other subjects have general knowledge of human vision but
did not know the detailed purpose of the study. Each subject was
shown the 10 sets of test images, one set at a time. The viewing distance was ﬁxed to 32 pixels per degree of visual angle. The subject
was asked to compare the quality of the images across scales and
detect one image from each of the ﬁve scales (shown as columns
in Fig. 2) that the subject believes having the same quality. For
example, one subject chose the images marked in Fig. 2 to have
equal quality. The positions of the selected images in each scale
were recorded and averaged over all test images and all subjects.
In general, the subjects agreed with each other on each image more
than they agreed with themselves across different images. These
test results were normalized (sum to one) and used to calculate the
exponents in Eq. (7). The resulting parameters we obtained are β1
= γ1 = 0.0448, β2 = γ2 = 0.2856, β3 = γ3 = 0.3001, β4 = γ4 =
0.2363, and α5 = β5 = γ5 = 0.1333, respectively.
4. TEST RESULTS
We test a number of image quality assessment algorithms using
the LIVE database (available at ), which includes 344 JPEG
and JPEG2000 compressed images (typically 768×512 or similar
size). The bit rate ranges from 0.028 to 3.150 bits/pixel, which
allows the test images to cover a wide quality range, from indistinguishable from the original image to highly distorted. The
mean opinion score (MOS) of each image is obtained by averaging 13∼25 subjective scores given by a group of human observers.
Eight image quality assessment models are being compared, including PSNR, the Sarnoff model (JNDmetrix 8.0 ), singlescale SSIM index with M equals 1 to 5, and the proposed multiscale SSIM index approach.
The scatter plots of MOS versus model predictions are shown
in Fig. 3, where each point represents one test image, with its
vertical and horizontal axes representing its MOS and the given
objective quality score, respectively. To provide quantitative performance evaluation, we use the logistic function adopted in the
video quality experts group (VQEG) Phase I FR-TV test to
provide a non-linear mapping between the objective and subjective
scores. After the non-linear mapping, the linear correlation coef-
ﬁcient (CC), the mean absolute error (MAE), and the root mean
squared error (RMS) between the subjective and objective scores
are calculated as measures of prediction accuracy. The prediction
consistency is quantiﬁed using the outlier ratio (OR), which is de-
Table 1. Performance comparison of image quality assessment
models on LIVE JPEG/JPEG2000 database .
single-scale SSIM; MS-SSIM: multi-scale SSIM; CC: non-linear
regression correlation coefﬁcient; ROCC: Spearman rank-order
correlation coefﬁcient; MAE: mean absolute error; RMS: root
mean squared error; OR: outlier ratio.
SS-SSIM (M=1)
SS-SSIM (M=2)
SS-SSIM (M=3)
SS-SSIM (M=4)
SS-SSIM (M=5)
ﬁned as the percentage of the number of predictions outside the
range of ±2 times of the standard deviations. Finally, the prediction monotonicity is measured using the Spearman rank-order correlation coefﬁcient (ROCC). Readers can refer to for a more
detailed descriptions of these measures. The evaluation results for
all the models being compared are given in Table 1.
From both the scatter plots and the quantitative evaluation results, we see that the performance of single-scale SSIM model
varies with scales and the best performance is given by the case
of M=2. It can also be observed that the single-scale model tends
to supply higher scores with the increase of scales. This is not
surprising because image coding techniques such as JPEG and
JPEG2000 usually compress ﬁne-scale details to a much higher
degree than coarse-scale structures, and thus the distorted image
“looks” more similar to the original image if evaluated at larger
scales. Finally, for every one of the objective evaluation criteria,
multi-scale SSIM model outperforms all the other models, including the best single-scale SSIM model, suggesting a meaningful
balance between scales.
5. DISCUSSIONS
We propose a multi-scale structural similarity approach for image
quality assessment, which provides more ﬂexibility than singlescale approach in incorporating the variations of image resolution
and viewing conditions. Experiments show that with an appropriate parameter settings, the multi-scale method outperforms the best
single-scale SSIM model as well as state-of-the-art image quality
In the development of top-down image quality models (such as
structural similarity based algorithms), one of the most challenging problems is to calibrate the model parameters, which are rather
“abstract” and cannot be directly derived from simple-stimulus
subjective experiments as in the bottom-up models. In this paper, we used an image synthesis approach to calibrate the parameters that deﬁne the relative importance between scales. The improvement from single-scale to multi-scale methods observed in
our tests suggests the usefulness of this novel approach. However,
this approach is still rather crude. We are working on developing it
into a more systematic approach that can potentially be employed
in a much broader range of applications.
6. REFERENCES
 A. M. Eskicioglu and P. S. Fisher, “Image quality measures and their performance,” IEEE Trans. Communications,
vol. 43, pp. 2959–2965, Dec. 1995.
 T. N. Pappas and R. J. Safranek, “Perceptual criteria for image quality evaluation,” in Handbook of Image and Video
Proc. (A. Bovik, ed.), Academic Press, 2000.
 Z. Wang and A. C. Bovik, “A universal image quality index,” IEEE Signal Processing Letters, vol. 9, pp. 81–84, Mar.
 Z. Wang, H. R. Sheikh, and A. C. Bovik, “Objective video
quality assessment,” in The Handbook of Video Databases:
Design and Applications (B. Furht and O. Marques, eds.),
pp. 1041–1078, CRC Press, Sept. 2003.
 Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli, “Image quality assessment: From error measurement to
structural similarity,” IEEE Trans. Image Processing, vol. 13,
Jan. 2004.
 Z. Wang, L. Lu, and A. C. Bovik, “Video quality assessment
based on structural distortion measurement,” Signal Processing: Image Communication, special issue on objective video
quality metrics, vol. 19, Jan. 2004.
 B. A. Wandell, Foundations of Vision. Sinauer Associates,
Inc., 1995.
 O. D. Faugeras and W. K. Pratt, “Decorrelation methods of
texture feature extraction,” IEEE Pat. Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 323–332, 1980.
 A. Gagalowicz, “A new method for texture ﬁelds synthesis:
Some applications to the study of human vision,” IEEE Pat.
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 520–533, 1981.
 D. Heeger and J. Bergen, “Pyramid-based texture analysis/synthesis,” in Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH, pp. 229–238, Association for Computing Machinery, August 1995.
 J. Portilla and E. P. Simoncelli, “A parametric texture model
based on joint statistics of complex wavelet coefﬁcients,”
Int’l J Computer Vision, vol. 40, pp. 49–71, Dec 2000.
 P. C. Teo and D. J. Heeger, “Perceptual image distortion,” in
Proc. SPIE, vol. 2179, pp. 127–141, 1994.
 H. R. Sheikh,
A. C. Bovik,
assessment
research at LIVE,”
 
research/quality/.
 Sarnoff Corporation, “JNDmetrix Technology,”
//www.sarnoff.com/products_services/
video_vision/jndmetrix/.
 VQEG, “Final report from the video quality experts group
on the validation of objective models of video quality assessment,” Mar. 2000. 
JPEG images
JPEG2000 images
Fitting with Logistic Function
JPEG images
JPEG2000 images
Fitting with Logistic Function
Single−scale SSIM (M=1)
JPEG images
JPEG2000 images
Fitting with Logistic Function
Single−scale SSIM (M=2)
JPEG images
JPEG2000 images
Fitting with Logistic Function
Single−scale SSIM (M=3)
JPEG images
JPEG2000 images
Fitting with Logistic Function
Single−scale SSIM (M=4)
JPEG images
JPEG2000 images
Fitting with Logistic Function
Single−scale SSIM (M=5)
JPEG images
JPEG2000 images
Fitting with Logistic Function
Multi−scale SSIM
JPEG images
JPEG2000 images
Fitting with Logistic Function
Fig. 3. Scatter plots of MOS versus model predictions. Each sample point represents one test image in the LIVE JPEG/JPEG2000 image
database . (a) PSNR; (b) Sarnoff model; (c)-(g) single-scale SSIM method for M = 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, respectively; (h) multi-scale SSIM