Proceedings of The 9th International Natural Language Generation conference, pages 265–273,
Edinburgh, UK, September 5-8 2016. c⃝2016 Association for Computational Linguistics
Crowd-sourcing NLG Data: Pictures Elicit Better Data.
Jekaterina Novikova, Oliver Lemon and Verena Rieser
Interaction Lab
Heriot-Watt University
Edinburgh, EH14 4AS, UK
{j.novikova, o.lemon, v.t.rieser}@hw.ac.uk
Recent advances in corpus-based Natural Language Generation (NLG) hold the promise of
being easily portable across domains, but require costly training data, consisting of meaning representations (MRs) paired with Natural Language (NL) utterances. In this work,
we propose a novel framework for crowdsourcing high quality NLG training data, using automatic quality control measures and
evaluating different MRs with which to elicit
We show that pictorial MRs result in
better NL data being collected than logicbased MRs: utterances elicited by pictorial
MRs are judged as signiﬁcantly more natural,
more informative, and better phrased, with a
signiﬁcant increase in average quality ratings
(around 0.5 points on a 6-point scale), compared to using the logical MRs. As the MR
becomes more complex, the beneﬁts of pictorial stimuli increase. The collected data will
be released as part of this submission.
Introduction
The overall aim of this research is to develop methods that will allow the full automation of the creation
of NLG systems for new applications and domains.
Currently deployed technologies for NLG utilise
domain-dependent methods including hand-written
grammars or domain-speciﬁc language templates for
surface realisation, both of which are costly to develop and maintain. Recent corpus-based methods
hold the promise of being easily portable across domains, e.g. , but require high
quality training data consisting of meaning representations (MR) paired with Natural Language (NL)
utterances, augmented by alignments between MR
elements and NL words. Recent work removes the need
for alignment, but the question of where to get indomain training data of sufﬁcient quality remains.
In this work, we propose a novel framework for
crowd-sourcing high quality NLG training data, using automatic quality control measures and evaluating different meaning representations. So far, we
collected 1410 utterances using this framework. The
data will be released as part of this submission.
Background
Apart from , this research is
the ﬁrst to investigate crowdsourcing for collecting
NLG data. So far, crowdsourcing is mainly used for
evaluation in the NLG community, e.g. . Recent efforts in
corpus creation via crowdsourcing have proven to
be successful in related tasks. For example, showed that crowdsourcing can result in datasets of comparable quality to
those created by professional translators given appropriate quality control methods. demonstrate that crowd workers can produce
NL descriptions from abstract MRs, a method which
also has shown success in related NLP tasks, such as
Spoken Dialogue Systems or Semantic Parsing . However, when
collecting corpora for training NLG systems, new
challenges arise:
(1) How to ensure the required high quality of the
collected data?
(2) What types of meaning representations can elicit
spontaneous, natural and varied data from crowdworkers?
To address (1), we ﬁrst ﬁlter the crowdsourced
data using automatic and manual validation procedures.
We evaluate the quality of crowdsourced
NLG data using automatic measures, e.g. measuring
the semantic similarity of a collected NL utterance.
To address (2), we conduct a principled study regarding the trade-off between semantic expressiveness of the MR and the quality of crowd-sourced
utterances elicited for the different semantic representations. In particular, we investigate translating MRs into pictorial representations as used in,
 for evaluating spoken dialogue systems. We
compare these pictorial MRs to text-based MRs
used by previous crowd-sourcing work . These text-based
MRs take the form of Dialogue Acts, such as inform(type[hotel],pricerange[expensive]). However,
there is a limit in the semantic complexity that
crowd workers can handle .
Also, observed that the semantic formalism unfortunately inﬂuences the collected
language, i.e. crowd-workers are “primed” by the
words/tokens and ordering used in the MR.
Experimental setup
The experiment was designed to investigate whether
we can elicit high-quality Natural Language via
crowdsourcing, using different modalities of meaning representation: textual/logical and pictorial MR.
We use the CrowdFlower platform to set up our experiments and to access an online workforce.
Data collection: pictures and text
The data collected is intended as training input to a
statistical NL generation process, but where alignment between words and the MR is left unspeciﬁed
as in, e.g. . The input to the generation process is a pair
of MR and NL reference text. Each MR consists of
an unordered set of attributes and their values. The
NL reference text is a Natural Language utterance,
possibly consisting of several sentences, which is
provided by a crowd worker for the corresponding
MR. An example MR-NL pair is shown in Figure 1.
For the data collection, a set of sixty MRs was
Figure 1: Example of an MR-NL pair.
prepared, consisting of three, ﬁve, or eight attributes
and their corresponding values in order to assess different complexities. The eight attributes used in the
MRs are shown in Table 1. The order of attributes is
randomised so that crowdworkers are not “primed”
by ordering used in the MRs .
Example value
verbatim string
The Wrestlers, ...
dictionary
restaurant, pub, ...
familyFriendly
priceRange
dictionary
cheap, expensive, ...
dictionary
Japanese, Italian, ...
verbatim string
market square, ...
dictionary
riverside, city centre, ...
customerRating
enumerable
1 of 5 (low), 4 of 5 (high), ...
Table 1: Domain attributes and attribute types.
75 distinct MRs were prepared in a way that
ensures a balance between the number of used
attributes in the ﬁnal dataset. We excluded MRs that
do not contain the attribute name from the set of
MRs with three and ﬁve attributes, because we found
that such MRs are problematic for crowd workers
to create a natural grammatically-correct utterances.
For example, crowd workers found it difﬁcult to create an utterance of a high quality based on the MR
priceRange[low], area[riverside],
customerRating[low].
The textual/logical MRs in our experiment (see
Figure 1) have the form of a sequence with attributes
provided in a random order, separated by commas,
and the values of the attributes provided in square
brackets after each attribute.
The pictorial MRs (see Figure 2) are semiautomatically generated pictures with a combination
of icons corresponding to the appropriate attributes.
The icons are located on a background showing a
map of a city, thus allowing to represent the meaning of attributes area and near.
Figure 2: Examples of pictorial MRs. Left: for a family-friendly, Sushi/Japanese restaurant, cheap, neither
near the centre of town nor near the river. Right: for a restaurant by the river, serving pasta/Italian food,
highly rated and expensive, not child-friendly, located near Cafe Adriatic.
Validation procedures
There are several reasons why crowdsourcing might
generate poor quality data: (1) The task may be
too complex or the instructions might not be clear
enough for crowd workers to follow; (2) the ﬁnancial incentives may be not attractive enough for
crowd workers to act conscientiously; and (3) openended job designs without a gold-standard reference
test may allow them to simply randomly click or
type “gibberish” text instead of performing the task.
In our experiment, we provided crowd workers
with clear and concise instructions of each task. The
instructions contained the goal of the data collection,
a list of rules describing what is required and what
is optional, and three examples of utterances paired
with an MR. Instructions for the textual/logical MR
and the pictorial MR were intended to be as identical
as possible for the two conditions, with only slight
unavoidable differences, such as the format of the
example MR provided (logical or pictorial).
In terms of ﬁnancial compensation, crowd workers were paid the standard pay on CrowdFlower,
which is $0.02 per page (each containing 1 MR).
Workers were expected to spend about 20 seconds
per page. Participants were allowed to complete up
to 20 pages, i.e. create utterances for up to 20 MRs.
Mason and Watts in their study of ﬁnancial incentives on Mechanical Turk, found (counterintuitively) that increasing the amount of compensation for a particular task does not tend to improve the
quality of the results. Furthermore, Callison-Burch
and Dredze observed that there can be an inverse relationship between the amount of payment
and the quality of work, because it may be more
tempting for crowd workers to cheat on high-paying
tasks if they do not have the skills to complete them.
Following these ﬁndings, we did not increase the
payment for our task over the standard level.
In order to check for random inputs/“gibberish”
and to control quality of the data, we introduced a
validation procedure, which consisted of two main
parts (see sections 3.3 and 3.4 for details):
(1) Automatic pre-validation. The purpose of the
automatic validation is to block the submissions of
utterances of inappropriate quality.
(2) Human evaluation of collected data. The purpose of human post-evaluation is to rate the quality
of collected utterances.
Automatic Pre-validation
The ﬁrst pre-validation step is to select participants
that are likely to be native speakers of English.
Previous crowdsourcing experiments used different
methods to ensure that crowd workers meet this criteria. One option is to create a qualiﬁcation exam
that will screen out non-native speakers. However,
as discussed by , this method is not
reliable, as workers can re-take qualiﬁcation exams
multiple times to avoid disqualiﬁcation.
Furthermore, qualiﬁcation exams severely decrease participation rates, as many crowd workers routinely avoid
jobs that require qualiﬁcation . Alternatively, Sprouse and Callison-Burch and
Dredze argue for self-identiﬁcation of the
participants, while using their IP addresses to ensure that their geolocation information is consistent
with this. In accordance with this, we used IP ad-
dresses to ensure that participants are located in one
of three English-speaking countries - Canada, the
United Kingdom, or the United States. In addition,
both in the name of the task and in the instructions,
we included a requirement that “Participants must
be native speakers of British or American English”.
The second pre-validation step checks whether
participants spend at least 20 seconds to complete
a page of work. This is a standard CrowdFlower
option to control the quality of contributions, and it
ensures that the contributor is removed from the job
if they complete the task too fast.
As a ﬁnal pre-validation step, we created four
JavaScript validators to ensure the submitted utterances are well formed English sentences:
(1) The ﬁrst validator checked if the ready-tosubmit utterance only contains legal characters, i.e.
letters, numbers and symbols “, . : ;£’”.
(2) The second validator checked whether the
length of the utterance (in characters) is not smaller
than the required minimal length. The required minimal length was calculated as follows:
min.length = length.of.MR−
number.of.attributes.in.MR × 10;
Here, length.of.MR is the total number of characters
in the provided MR. Number.of.attributes.in.MR is
either 3, 5 or 8 depending on the number of attributes
in the provided MR. 10 is an average length of an attribute name, including two associated square brackets. Thus, min.length is simply an approximation
of the total number of characters used for attribute
values in each speciﬁc MR.
(3) The third validator checked whether the readyto-submit utterance contained all the required elements, e.g. the name of the described venue or the
name of the venue near the described one.
(4) The last validator checked that participants do
not submit the same utterance several times.
The automatic validators were tested on the data
collected during a pilot test phase and were able to
correctly identify and reject 100% of bad submissions.
Human evaluation of collected data
While automatic validators help reject some invalid
cases, human feedback is needed to assess the quality of the collected data. In a 2nd phase we evaluated
the collected data through a large-scale subjective
rating experiment using the CrowdFlower system.
6-point Likert scales were used to collect judgements on the data, via the following criteria:
1. Informativeness. Q1: “Is this utterance informative? (i.e. do you think it provides enough
useful information about the venue?)”
2. Naturalness.
Q2: “Is this utterance natural?
(e.g. could it have been produced by a native
speaker?)”
3. Phrasing. Q3: “Is this utterance well phrased?
(i.e. do you like how it is expressed?)”
Finally, crowd workers were asked to judge whether
the utterance is grammatically correct.
Results: Collected data
In order to maintain a balanced workload distribution between the two MR conditions, we divided the
workload into two batches: each batch was posted
in the morning of two different workdays. Such a
workload distribution was previously described in
 as appropriate for a betweensubject design. Each batch corresponded to one of
two conditions: the ﬁrst batch contained only textual/logical MRs, and the second one used only pictorial MRs. The analysis presented in the following
sections is based on this experimental design.
435 tasks were completed by 134 crowd workers: 70 crowd workers completed 212 tasks based
on textual/logical MRs, and 64 crowd workers completed 223 tasks on pictorial MRs. This resulted in
collecting 1410 utterances, 744 on textual, and 666
on pictorial MRs. 13 crowd workers completed the
tasks on both types of MR. The utterances created
by these 13 subjects for the pictorial MRs were excluded from the analysis, so that it would not violate
a between-subject experimental design with a possible learning bias. The ﬁnal dataset therefore contained 744 utterances elicited using the textual MRs
and 498 utterances elicited using the pictorial MRs,
with 1133 distinct utterances. The dataset will be
released with this submission.
We now use objective measures to assess the effect of the MR modality on the collected NL text.
Time taken to collect data
The data collection for the ﬁrst batch (only textual/logical MRs) was completed in about 26 hours,
Textual MR
Pictorial MR
3 attributes
5 attributes
8 attributes
Length, char
3 attributes
5 attributes
8 attributes
No of sentences
3 attributes
5 attributes
8 attributes
Nature of the data collected with each
MR. Italics denote averages across all numbers of
attributes.
while the second one (only pictorial MRs) was completed in less than 18 hours.
The average duration per task was 352 sec for
the pictorial MR, and 347 sec for the textual/logical
method, as shown in Table 2. A two-way ANOVA
was conducted to examine the effect of MR modality and the number of attributes on average task duration. The difference between two modalities was
not signiﬁcant, with p = 0.76. There was no statistically signiﬁcant interaction between the effects of
modality and the number of attributes in the MR, on
time taken to collect the data. A main effects analysis showed that the average duration of utterance
creation was signiﬁcantly longer for larger numbers
of attributes, F(2,1236) = 24.99, p < 0.001, as expected.
Average length of utterance (characters)
The length of collected utterances was calculated as
a total number of characters in the utterance, including punctuation.
The average length of utterance was 101 characters for the textual/logical MR, and 93 characters for
the pictorial method, as shown in Table 2. A twoway ANOVA was conducted to examine the effect
of MR modality and the number of attributes on the
length of utterance. There was a statistically signiﬁcant interaction between the effects of modality
and the number of attributes in the MR, F(2,1236) =
23.74, p < 0.001. A main effects analysis showed
that the average length of utterance was signiﬁcantly
larger not only for a larger number of attributes, with
p < 0.001, but also for the utterances created based
on a textual/logical MR which had a higher number
of attributes, p < 0.001.
Average number of sentences per utterance
The task allowed crowd workers to create not only
single sentences, but also multi-sentence utterances
for any provided MR.
The average number of sentences per utterance
was 1.43 for the textual/logical MR, and 1.31 for
the pictorial method, as shown in Table 2. A twoway ANOVA was conducted to examine the effect
of MR modality and the number of attributes on the
number of sentences per utterance. There was a statistically signiﬁcant interaction between the effects
of modality and the number of attributes in the MR,
F(2,1236) = 3.83, p < 0.05. A main effects analysis showed that the average number of sentences
was signiﬁcantly larger not only for a larger number
of attributes, with p < 0.001, but also for the utterances created based on a textual/logical MR which
had a higher number of attributes, p < 0.001.
Semantic similarity
We now examine the semantic similarity of the collected sentences. The concept of semantic similarity
aims to measure how well the collected utterances
cover the meaning provided in the MRs. This concept is similar to that of Informativeness (see section 5.2), as a higher value for semantic similarity
shows that more information, originally provided in
the MR, was expressed in the NL utterance. However, these two concepts are not interchangeable, as
we will explain later in Section 5.1.
We used a semi-automatic labelling process to assess the semantics of the collected data and compared them to the given MRs. We ﬁrst performed
spell-checking by using Microsoft Word. Overall,
about 7% of the collected utterances contained one
or more spelling errors. Note that this result is in line
with , who report 8% spelling
errors for crowd-sourced utterances. We corrected
these by hand. Next, we used an automated process to assess whether the collected data covers all
required semantic concepts in the MR, using text
similarity. In particular, we calculated a similarity
score between the provided MR and the collected
utterance, using the UMBC Semantic Text Similarity measure provided by , which
ranked top in the *SEM 2013 Semantic Textual Sim-
ilarity shared task. This measure is based on distributional similarity and Latent Semantic Analysis
(LSA), and is further complemented with semantic
relations extracted from WordNet. The score was
calculated using a Web API1 to query the UMBC
Semantic Similarity service.
We ﬁnd that textual MRs elicit text which is signiﬁcantly more similar to the underlying MR than
using pictures (similarity score of 0.62 for pictures
vs. 0.82 for text, p < 0.005, where 1 indicates perfect overlap). We attribute this difference to the fact
that utterances in response to pictorial MRs are more
varied and thus receive lower scores.
For example, the similarity score between“cheap” (in MR)
and “cheap” (in a corresponding utterance) is 1,
whereas the similarity between “cheap” and “low
price” is 0.36 using the UMBC Semantic Text Similarity measure.
As a next step, we normalised the results of semantic similarity on a 1-6 scale, in order to make the
results comparable to the human ratings on 6-point
Likert scales and compare semantic similarity to the
self-evaluation results. In order to make results comparable, we labelled the semantic similarity of a corresponding utterance as higher than average if the
result was higher than 4 (53% of all collected utterances), lower than average if the result was lower
than 3 (4.3% of all collected utterances), and average otherwise (43% of all the utterances). This metric is then used to automatically assess the amount
of relevant information from the MR which is preserved in the corresponding NL text, see section 5.1.
Results: human evaluation of the
collected data
While automated or semi-automated metrics provide some useful information about the collected
utterances, human feedback is necessary to properly assess their quality.
In this section, we ﬁrst
compare the data collected using self-evaluation and
crowd evaluation methods, and later we analyse Informativeness, Naturalness, and Phrasing of the collected utterances.
We mostly use parametric statistical methods in our analysis.
It has been debated for over 50 years whether Likert-type measurement scales should be analysed using parametric
1 
or non-parametric statistical methods . The use of parametric statistics, however, was justiﬁed repeatedly by , and more recently by as a “perfectly appropriate” statistical method for Likert scales that
may be used by researchers “with no fear of coming to the wrong conclusion” . We
therefore present and analyse mean averages (rather
than the mode) for the collected judgements.
Self-evaluation vs. Crowd evaluation
In our experiment we used two methods to evaluate
the quality of collected utterances: self-evaluation
and an independent crowd-based evaluation. During the self-evaluation, crowd workers were asked to
rank their own utterances. Note that data collected
using the self-evaluation method was not intended to
allow us to compare the quality of utterances elicited
via pictorial and textual MRs.
Rather, this data
was collected in order to understand whether selfevaluation may be a reliable technique to evaluate
the quality of created utterances in future studies.
In the self-evaluation, for each of their own NL
utterances, crowd workers could select either higher
than average, average, or lower than average values
for Informativeness, Naturalness, and Phrasing.
For the independent crowd evaluation, a new
CrowdFlower task was created. In this task, crowd
workers were asked to look at one utterance at a time
and to rate each utterance using the same procedure.
In order to compare the results of self-evaluation
with the results of the independent crowd evaluation,
we labelled the results of perceived Informativeness,
Naturalness and Phrasing as higher than average,
average and lower than average in both modes.
Cohen’s kappa coefﬁcient was used to measure inter-rater agreement between the two groups
of evaluators, i.e. self-evaluators and independent
crowd evaluators. The statistics did not reveal a signiﬁcant level of agreement between the two groups
of evaluators neither for the scores of Informativeness (κ = 0.014, p = 0.36), nor Phrasing (κ = 0.007,
p = 0.64), nor Naturalness (κ = -0.007, p = 0.62).
The lack of agreement with the independent evaluation already indicates a potential problem with the
self-evaluation method. However, in order to further assess which group was more reliable in eval-
uating utterances, we compared their Informativeness scores with the Semantic Similarity score of
the corresponding utterances. As discussed before,
the concepts of Informativeness and Semantic Similarity are similar to each other, so better agreement
between these scores indicates higher reliability of
evaluation results. In particular, utterances with high
Semantic Similarity would be expected to have high
ratings for Informativeness, as they express more of
the concepts from the original MR.
The percentage agreement between the Informativeness and Semantic Similarity was 31.1%, while
for the utterances evaluated independently by the
crowd it was 60.3%.
The differences in percentage agreements for the utterances with good semantic similarity was even higher: 32.1% for selfevaluators vs. 75.1% for crowd evaluators.
strongly suggests that the evaluation quality of selfevaluators is less reliable than that of the crowd.
Therefore, we focus on the data collected from
crowd evaluation for the analysis presented in the
following sections.
Informativeness
Informativeness was deﬁned (on the questionnaires)
as whether the utterance “provides enough useful information about the venue”. Also see section 3.4.
The average score for Informativeness was 4.28 for
the textual/logical MR, and 4.51 for the pictorial
method, as shown in Table 3. A two-way ANOVA
was conducted to examine the effect of MR modality and the number of attributes on the perceived Informativeness. There was no statistically signiﬁcant
interaction between the effects of modality and the
number of attributes in the MR, F(2,1236) = 1.79,
A main effects analysis showed that
the average Informativeness of utterances elicited
through the pictorial method (4.51) was signiﬁcantly
higher than that of utterances elicited using the textual/logical modality (4.28), with p < 0.01. This
is an increase of 0.23 points on the 6-point scale
(=4.6%) in average Informativeness rating for the
pictorial condition.
As expected, Informativeness increases with the
number of attributes in the MR, in both conditions.
Naturalness
Naturalness was deﬁned (on the questionnaires) as
whether the utterance “could have been produced by
a native speaker”. The average score for Naturalness was 4.09 for the textual/logical MRs, and 4.43
for the pictorial method, as shown in Table 3. A
two-way ANOVA was conducted to examine the effects of MR modality and the number of attributes
on the perceived Naturalness. There was no statistically signiﬁcant interaction between the effects of
modality and the number of attributes in the MR,
F(2,1236) = 0.73, p = 0.48. A main effects analysis showed that the average Naturalness of utterances elicited using the pictorial modality (4.43) was
signiﬁcantly higher than that of utterances elicited
using the textual/logical modality (4.09), with p <
0.001. This is an increase of about 0.34 points on
the scale (=6.8%) for average Naturalness rating for
the pictorial condition.
Phrasing was deﬁned as whether utterances are formulated in a way that the judges perceived as good
English (see section 3.4).
The average score for
Phrasing was 4.01 for the textual/logical MR, and
4.40 for the pictorial method, as shown in Table 3.
A two-way ANOVA was conducted to examine the
effect of MR modality and the number of attributes
on the perceived Phrasing. There was no statistically
signiﬁcant interaction between the effects of modality and the number of attributes in MR, F(2,1236) =
0.85, p = 0.43. A main effects analysis showed that
the average Phrasing score for the utterances elicited
using the pictorial modality was signiﬁcantly higher
than that of the utterances elicited using the textual/logical modality, with p < 0.001. This is an
increase of +0.39 points (about 7.8%) in average
Phrasing rating for the pictorial condition.
As the complexity of the MR increases (i.e. number of attributes) we note that the pictorial MR outperforms the textual MR still further, with an 11%
boost in Phrasing ratings (+0.55 – from 3.98 to 4.53
on a 6-point scale – for 8 attributes) and a similar
9.6% (+0.48) increase for Naturalness ratings.
A Pearson product-moment correlation method
was used to determine a strong correlation (r =
0.84, p < 0.001) between Naturalness and Phrasing, suggesting that evaluators treat these concepts
as very similar.
However, these concepts are not
identical, as the evaluation results show.
Textual MR
Pictorial MR
Informativeness
3 attributes
5 attributes
8 attributes
Naturalness
3 attributes
5 attributes
8 attributes
3 attributes
5 attributes
8 attributes
Human evaluation of the data collected
with each MR (** = p < 0.01 and *** = p < 0.001
for Pictorial versus Textual conditions). Italics denote averages across all numbers of attributes.
Discussion
We have shown that pictorial MRs have speciﬁc
beneﬁts for elicitation of NLG data from crowdworkers. This may be because, with pictures, dataproviders are not primed by lexical tokens in the
MRs, resulting in more spontaneous and natural language, with more variability. For example, rather
than seeing child-friendly[yes] in a logical/textual
MR, and then being inclined to say “It is childfriendly”, crowd-workers who see an icon representing a child seem more likely to use a variety
of phrases, such as “good for kids”.
As a concrete example of this phenomenon, from the collected data, consider the picture on the left of ﬁgure 2, which corresponds to the logical MR: name
[Loch Fyne], eatType [restaurant], familyFriendly
[yes], priceRange [cheap], food [Japanese].
The logical MR elicited utterances such as “Loch
Fyne is a family friendly restaurant serving cheap
Japanese food” whereas the pictorial MR elicited
e.g. “Serving low cost Japanese style cuisine, Loch
Fyne caters for everyone, including families with
small children.”
Pictorial stimuli have also been used in other, related NLP tasks.
For example in crowd-sourced
evaluations of dialogue systems, e.g. .
However, no
analysis was performed regarding the suitability
of such representations. In , for example, pictures were used to set dialogue goals for users (e.g. to ﬁnd an expensive Italian restaurant in the town centre). This experiment
therefore also has a bearing on the whole issue of
human NL responses to pictorial task stimuli, and
shows for example that pictorial task presentations
can elicit more natural variability in user inputs to a
dialogue system. Pictorial method can also scale up
to more than just single-entity descriptions, e.g. it
is possible to show on a map several different pictures representing different restaurants, thus eliciting comparisons. Of course, there is a limit in the
meaning complexity that pictures can express.
Conclusions and Future Work
We have shown that it is possible to rapidly create
high quality NLG data sets for training novel corpusbased Machine Learning methods using crowdsourcing. This now forges the path towards rapidly
creating NLG systems for new domains. We ﬁrst
show that self-evaluation by crowd workers, of their
own provided data, does not agree with an independent crowd-based evaluation, and also that their
Informativeness judgements do not agree with an
objective metric of semantic similarity.
demonstrate that pictures elicit better data – that
is, judged by independent evaluators as signiﬁcantly
more informative, more natural, and better-phrased
– than logic-based Meaning Representations. There
is no signiﬁcant difference in the amount of time
needed to collect the data, but pictorial representations lead to signiﬁcantly increased scores for these
metrics (e.g. of around 0.5 on a 6-point Likert scale).
An error analysis shows that pictorial MRs result
in more spontaneous, natural and varied utterances.
We have done this by proposing a new crowdsourcing framework, where we introduce an initial automatic validation procedure, which was able to reject
100% of bad submissions. The collected data will
be released as part of this submission.
In future work, we will use the collected data to
test and further develop corpus-based NLG methods,
using Imitation Learning. This technique promises
to be able to learn NLG strategies automatically
from unaligned data, similar to recent work by
 .
Acknowledgments
This research received funding from the EPSRC projects GUI
(EP/L026775/1) and DILiGENt (EP/M005429/1).