Deep learning for healthcare: review, opportunities and
challenges
Riccardo Miotto*, Fei Wang*, Shuang Wang, Xiaoqian Jiang and Joel T. Dudley
Corresponding author: Fei Wang, Department of Healthcare Policy and Research, Weill Cornell Medicine at Cornell University, New York, NY, USA. Tel.:
þ1-646-962-9405; Fax: þ1-646-962-0105; E-mail: 
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
Gaining knowledge and actionable insights from complex, high-dimensional and heterogeneous biomedical data remains a
key challenge in transforming health care. Various types of data have been emerging in modern biomedical research,
including electronic health records, imaging, -omics, sensor data and text, which are complex, heterogeneous, poorly annotated and generally unstructured. Traditional data mining and statistical learning approaches typically need to ﬁrst perform
feature engineering to obtain effective and more robust features from those data, and then build prediction or clustering
models on top of them. There are lots of challenges on both steps in a scenario of complicated data and lacking of sufﬁcient
domain knowledge. The latest advances in deep learning technologies provide new effective paradigms to obtain end-toend learning models from complex data. In this article, we review the recent literature on applying deep learning technologies to advance the health care domain. Based on the analyzed work, we suggest that deep learning approaches could be
the vehicle for translating big biomedical data into improved human health. However, we also note limitations and needs
for improved methods development and applications, especially in terms of ease-of-understanding for domain experts and
citizen scientists. We discuss such challenges and suggest developing holistic and meaningful interpretable architectures to
bridge deep learning models and human interpretability.
Key words: deep learning; health care; biomedical informatics; translational bioinformatics; genomics; electronic health
Introduction
Health care is coming to a new era where the abundant biomedical data are playing more and more important roles. In this
context, for example, precision medicine attempts to ‘ensure
that the right treatment is delivered to the right patient at the
right time’ by taking into account several aspects of patient’s
data, including variability in molecular traits, environment,
electronic health records (EHRs) and lifestyle .
The large availability of biomedical data brings tremendous
opportunities and challenges to health care research. In particular,
exploring the associations among all the different pieces of information in these data sets is a fundamental problem to develop reliable medical tools based on data-driven approaches and machine
learning. To this aim, previous works tried to link multiple data
sources to build joint knowledge bases that could be used for predictive analysis and discovery . Although existing models
demonstrate great promises (e.g. ), predictive tools based on
machine learning techniques have not been widely applied in
medicine . In fact, there remain many challenges in making full
use of the biomedical data, owing to their high-dimensionality,
Riccardo Miotto, PhD, is a senior data scientist in the Institute for Next Generation Healthcare, Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences at the Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY.
Fei Wang, PhD, is an assistant professor in the Division of Health Informatics, Department of Healthcare Policy and Research at Weill Cornell Medicine at
Cornell University, New York, NY.
Shuang Wang, PhD, is an assistant professor in the Department of Biomedical Informatics at the University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA.
Xiaoqian Jiang is an assistant professor in the Department of Biomedical Informatics at the University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA.
Joel T. Dudley, PhD, is the executive director of the Institute for Next Generation Healthcare and associate professor in the Department of Genetics and
Genomic Sciences at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY.
Submitted: 5 December 2016; Received (in revised form): 19 February 2017
C The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: 
, 19(6), 2018, 1236–1246
doi: 10.1093/bib/bbx044
Advance Access Publication Date: 6 May 2017
Briefings in Bioinformatics
heterogeneity,
dependency,
irregularity
 . These challenges are further complicated by various medical
ontologies
generalize
Systematized
Nomenclature of Medicine-Clinical Terms (SNOMED-CT) , Unified
Medical Language System (UMLS) , International Classification of
Disease-9th version (ICD-9) ), which often contain conflicts and
inconsistency . Sometimes, the same clinical phenotype is also
expressed in different ways across the data. As an example, in the
EHRs, a patient diagnosed with ‘type 2 diabetes mellitus’ can be identified by laboratory values of hemoglobin A1C >7.0, presence of
250.00 ICD-9 code, ‘type 2 diabetes mellitus’ mentioned in the freetext clinical notes and so on. Consequently, it is nontrivial to harmonize all these medical concepts to build a higher-level semantic
structure and understand their correlations .
A common approach in biomedical research is to have a
domain expert to specify the phenotypes to use in an ad hoc
manner. However, supervised definition of the feature space
scales poorly and misses the opportunities to discover novel patterns. Alternatively, representation learning methods allow to
automatically discover the representations needed for prediction
representation-learning algorithms with multiple levels of representation, obtained by composing simple but nonlinear modules
that each transform the representation at one level (starting with
the raw input) into a representation at a higher, slightly more
abstract level . Deep learning models demonstrated great performance and potential in computer vision, speech recognition
and natural language processing tasks .
Given its demonstrated performance in different domains and
the rapid progresses of methodological improvements, deep learning paradigms introduce exciting new opportunities for biomedical
informatics. Efforts to apply deep learning methods to health care
are already planned or underway. For example, Google DeepMind
has announced plans to apply its expertise to health care and
Enlitic is using deep learning intelligence to spot health problems
on X-rays and Computed Tomography (CT) scans .
However, deep learning approaches have not been extensively evaluated for a broad range of medical problems that could
benefit from its capabilities. There are many aspects of deep
learning that could be helpful in health care, such as its superior
performance, end-to-end learning scheme with integrated feature learning, capability of handling complex and multi-modality
data and so on. To accelerate these efforts, the deep learning
research field as a whole must address several challenges relating to the characteristics of health care data (i.e. sparse, noisy,
heterogeneous, time-dependent) as need for improved methods
and tools that enable deep learning to interface with health care
information workflows and clinical decision support.
In this article, we discuss recent and forthcoming applications
of deep learning in medicine, highlighting the key aspects to significantly impact health care. We do not aim to provide a comprehensive background on technical details (see e.g. )
or general application of deep learning (see e.g. ). Instead, we
focus on biomedical data only, in particular those originated from
clinical imaging, EHRs, genomes and wearable devices. While
additional sources of information, such as metabolome, antibodyome and other omics information are expected to be valuable for health monitoring, at this point deep learning has not
been significantly used in these domains. Thus, in the following,
we briefly introduce the general deep learning framework, we
review some of its applications in the medical domain and we
discuss the opportunities, challenges and applications related to
these methods when used in the context of precision medicine
and next-generation health care.
Deep learning framework
Machine learning is a general-purpose method of artificial intelligence that can learn relationships from the data without the
need to define them a priori . The major appeal is the ability
to derive predictive models without a need for strong assumptions about the underlying mechanisms, which are usually
unknown or insufficiently defined . The typical machine
learning workflow involves four steps: data harmonization, representation learning, model fitting and evaluation . For decades, constructing a machine learning system required careful
engineering and domain expertise to transform the raw data
into a suitable internal representation from which the learning
subsystem, often a classifier, could detect patterns in the data
set. Conventional techniques are composed of a single, often
linear, transformation of the input space and are limited in their
ability to process natural data in their raw form .
Deep learning is different from traditional machine learning
in how representations are learned from the raw data. In fact,
deep learning allows computational models that are composed
of multiple processing layers based on neural networks to learn
representations of data with multiple levels of abstraction .
The major differences between deep learning and traditional artificial neural networks (ANNs) are the number of hidden layers,
their connections and the capability to learn meaningful abstractions of the inputs. In fact, traditional ANNs are usually limited to
three layers and are trained to obtain supervised representations
that are optimized only for the specific task and are usually not
generalizable . Differently, every layer of a deep learning system produces a representation of the observed patterns based on
the data it receives as inputs from the layer below, by optimizing
a local unsupervised criterion . The key aspect of deep learning is that these layers of features are not designed by human
engineers, but they are learned from data using a generalpurpose learning procedure. Figure 1 illustrates such differences
at a high level: deep neural networks process the inputs in a
layer-wise nonlinear manner to pre-train (initialize) the nodes in
subsequent hidden layers to learn ‘deep structures’ and representations that are generalizable. These representations are then
fed into a supervised layer to fine-tune the whole network using
the backpropagation algorithm toward representations that are
optimized for the specific end-to-end task.
The unsupervised pre-training breakthrough , new
methods to prevent overfitting , the use of general-purpose
graphic processing units to speedup computations and the
development of high-level modules to easily build neural networks (e.g. Theano , Caffe , TensorFlow ) allowed
deep models to establish as state-of-the-art solutions for several tasks. In fact, deep learning turned out to be good at discovering
structures
high-dimensional
obtained remarkable performances for object detection in
images , speech recognition and natural language
understanding and translation . Relevant clinical-ready
successes have been obtained in health care as well (e.g. detection of diabetic retinopathy in retinal fundus photographs ,
classification of skin cancer , predicting of the sequence specificities of DNA- and RNA-binding proteins ), initiating the
way toward a potential new generation of intelligent toolsbased deep learning for real-world medical care.
Literature review
The use of deep learning for medicine is recent and not thoroughly explored. In the next sections, we will review some of
Deep learning for healthcare
the main recent literature (i.e. 32 papers) related to applications
of deep models to clinical imaging, EHRs, genomics and wearable device data.
Table 1 summarizes all the papers mentioned in this literature review, in particular highlighting the type of networks and
the medical data considered. To the best of our knowledge,
there are no studies using deep learning to combine neither all
these data sources, nor a part of them (e.g. only EHRs and clinical images, only EHRs and genomics) in a joint representation
for medical analysis and prediction. A few preliminary studies
evaluated the combined use of EHRs and genomics (e.g. see
 ), without applying deep learning though; for this reason,
they were not considered relevant to this review. The deep
architectures applied to the health care domain have been
mostly based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) ,
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) , Restricted Boltzmann
Machines (RBMs) and Autoencoders (AEs) . Table 2
briefly reviews these models and provides the main ideas
behind their structures.
Clinical imaging
Following the success in computer vision, the first applications of
deep learning to clinical data were on image processing, especially
on the analysis of brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scans
to predict Alzheimer disease and its variations . In other
medical domains, CNNs were used to infer a hierarchical representation of low-field knee MRI scans to automatically segment cartilage and predict the risk of osteoarthritis . Despite using 2D
images, this approach obtained better results than a state-of-theart method using manually selected 3D multi-scale features. Deep
learning was also applied to segment multiple sclerosis lesions in
multi-channel 3D MRI and for the differential diagnosis of
benign and malignant breast nodules from ultrasound images .
More recently, Gulshan et al. used CNNs to identify diabetic retinopathy in retinal fundus photographs, obtaining high sensitivity
and specificity over about 10000 test images with respect to certified ophthalmologist annotations. CNNs also obtained performances on par with 21 board-certified dermatologists on classifying
biopsy-proven clinical images of different types of skin cancer (keratinocyte carcinomas versus benign seborrheic keratoses and
malignant melanomas versus benign nevi) over a large data set of
130000 images .
Electronic health records
More recently deep learning has been applied to process aggregated EHRs, including both structured (e.g. diagnosis, medications, laboratory tests) and unstructured (e.g. free-text clinical
notes) data. The greatest part of this literature processed the
EHRs of a health care system with a deep architecture for a specific, usually supervised, predictive clinical task. In particular, a
common approach is to show that deep learning obtains better
conventional
respect to certain metrics, such as Area Under the Receiver
Operating Characteristic Curve, accuracy and F-score . In
this scenario, while most papers present end-to-end supervised
networks, some works also propose unsupervised models to
derive latent patient representations, which are then evaluated
classifiers
regression).
Several works applied deep learning to predict diseases from
the patient clinical status. Liu et al. used a four-layer CNN to
predict congestive heart failure and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and showed significant advantages over the baselines. RNNs with long short-term memory (LSTM) hidden units,
pooling and word embedding were used in DeepCare , an
end-to-end deep dynamic network that infers current illness
states and predicts future medical outcomes. The authors also
proposed to moderate the LSTM unit with a decay effect to handle irregular timed events (which are typical in longitudinal
EHRs). Moreover, they incorporated medical interventions in
the model to dynamically shape the predictions. DeepCare was
evaluated for disease progression modeling, intervention recommendation and future risk prediction on diabetes and mental health patient cohorts. RNNs with gated recurrent unit (GRU)
were used by Choi et al. to develop Doctor AI, an end-to-end
model that uses patient history to predict diagnoses and medications for subsequent encounters. The evaluation showed significantly
generalizability by adapting the resulting model from one institution
substantial
Differently, Miotto et al. proposed to learn deep patient representations
three-layer
Denoising Autoencoder (SDA). They applied this novel representation on disease risk prediction using random forest as classifiers.
evaluation
comprising 78 diseases from diverse clinical domains and
Figure 1. Comparison between ANNs and deep architectures. While ANNs are usually composed by three layers and one transformation toward the ﬁnal outputs, deep
learning architectures are constituted by several layers of neural networks. Layer-wise unsupervised pre-training allows deep networks to be tuned efﬁciently and to
extract deep structure from inputs to serve as higher-level features that are used to obtain better predictions.
Miotto et al.
Table 1. Summary of the articles described in the literature review with highlighted the deep learning architecture applied and the medical
domain considered
Application
Liu et al. 
Early diagnosis of Alzheimer disease from brain MRIs
Brosch et al. 
Manifold of brain MRIs to detect modes of variations in Alzheimer
Prasoon et al. 
Automatic segmentation of knee cartilage MRIs to predict the
risk of osteoarthritis
Yoo et al. 
Segmentation of multiple sclerosis lesions in multi-channel 3D MRIs
Cheng et al. 
Diagnosis of breast nodules and lesions from ultrasound images
Denoising AE
Gulshan et al. 
Detection of diabetic retinopathy in retinal fundus photographs
Esteva et al. 
Dermatologist-level classiﬁcation of skin cancer
Electronic
Liu et al. 
Prediction of congestive heart failure and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease from longitudinal EHRs
Lipton et al. 
Diagnosis classiﬁcation from clinical measurements of
patients in pediatric intensive unit care
Pham et al. 
DeepCare: a dynamic memory model for predictive medicine
based on patient history
Miotto et al. 
Deep Patient: an unsupervised representation of patients that
can be used to predict future clinical events
Denoising AE
Miotto et al. 
Prediction of future diseases from the patient clinical status
Denoising AE
Liang et al. 
Automatically assign diagnosis to patients from their clinical status
Tran et al. 
Predict suicide risk of mental health patients by low-dimensional
representations of the medical concepts embedded in the EHRs
Che et al. 
Discovering and detection of characteristic patterns of
physiology in clinical time series
Stacked AE
Lasko et al. 
Model longitudinal sequences of serum uric acid measurements to
suggest multiple population subtypes and to distinguish the
uric-acid signatures of gout and acute leukemia
Stacked AE
Choi et al. 
Doctor AI: use the history of patients to predict diagnoses and
medications for a subsequent visit
Nguyen et al. 
Deepr: end-to-end system to predict unplanned readmission
after discharge
Razavian et al. 
Prediction of Disease Onsets from Longitudinal Lab Tests
Dernoncourt et al. 
De-identiﬁcation of patient clinical notes
Zhou et al. 
Predict chromatin marks from DNA sequences
Kelley et al. 
Basset: open-source platform to predict DNase I hypersensitivity
across multiple cell types and to quantify the effect of SNVs on
chromatin accessibility
Alipanahi et al. 
DeepBind: predict the speciﬁcities of DNA- and RNA-binding
Angermueller
et al. 
Predict methylation states in single-cell bisulﬁte sequencing
Koh et al. 
Prevalence estimate for different chromatin marks
Fakoor et al. 
Classiﬁcation of cancer from gene expression proﬁles
Stacked Sparse
Lyons et al. 
Prediction of protein backbones from protein sequences
Stacked Sparse
Hammerla et al. 
HAR to detect freezing of gait in PD patients
Zhu et al. 
Estimation of EE using wearable sensors
Jindal et al. 
Identiﬁcation of Photoplethysmography signals for health
monitoring
Nurse et al. 
Analysis of electroencephalogram and local ﬁeld potentials signals
Sathyanarayana
et al. 
Predict the quality of sleep from physical activity wearable
data during awake time
We report 32 different papers using deep learning on clinical images, EHRs, genomics and mobile data. As it can be seen, most of the papers apply CNNs and AEs,
regardless the medical domain. To the best of our knowledge, no works in the literature jointly process these different types of data (e.g. all of them, only EHRs and
clinical images, only EHRs and mobile data) using deep learning for medical intelligence and prediction.
RNN ¼ recurrent neural network; CNN ¼ convolutional neural network; RBM ¼ restricted Boltzmann machine; AE ¼ autoencoder; LSTM ¼ long short-term memory;
GRU ¼ gated recurrent unit.
Deep learning for healthcare
temporal windows (up to a 1 year). The results showed that the
deep representation leads to significantly better predictions
than using raw EHRs or conventional representation learning
algorithms (e.g. Principal Component Analysis (PCA), k-means).
Moreover, they also showed that results significantly improve
when adding a logistic regression layer on top of the last AE to
fine-tune the entire supervised network . Similarly, Liang et
al. used RBMs to learn representations from EHRs that
revealed novel concepts and demonstrated better prediction
accuracy on a number of diseases.
Deep learning was also applied to model continuous time signals, such as laboratory results, toward the automatic identification of specific phenotypes. For example, Lipton et al. used
RNNs with LSTM to recognize patterns in multivariate time series
of clinical measurements. Specifically, they trained a model to
classify 128 diagnoses from 13 frequently but irregularly sampled
clinical measurements from patients in pediatric intensive unit
care. The results showed significant improvements with respect
to several strong baselines, including multilayer perceptron
trained on hand-engineered features. Che et al. used SDAs
regularized with a prior knowledge based on ICD-9s for detecting
characteristic patterns of physiology in clinical time series. Lasko
et al. used a two-layer stacked AE (without regularization) to
model longitudinal sequences of serum uric acid measurements
to distinguish
signatures
leukemia. Razavian et al. evaluated CNNs and RNNs with
LSTM units to predict disease onset from laboratory test measures alone, showing better performances than logistic regression
with hand-engineered, clinically relevant features.
Neural language deep models were also applied to EHRs, in particular to learn embedded representations of medical concepts,
such as diseases, medications and laboratory tests, that could be
used for analysis and prediction . As an example, Tran et al. 
used RBMs to learn abstractions of ICD-10 codes on a cohort of
7578 mental health patients to predict suicide risk. A deep architecture based on RNNs also obtained promising results in removing
protected health information from clinical notes to leverage the
automatic de-identification of free-text patient summaries .
The prediction of unplanned patient readmissions after discharge recently received attention as well. In this domain,
Nguyen et al. proposed Deepr, an end-to-end architecture
based on CNNs, which detects and combines clinical motifs in
the longitudinal patient EHRs to stratify medical risks. Deepr performed well in predicting readmission within 6 months and was
able to detect meaningful and interpretable clinical patterns.
Deep learning in high-throughput biology is used to capture the
internal structure of increasingly larger and high-dimensional
data sets (e.g. DNA sequencing, RNA measurements). Deep
models enable the discovery of high-level features, improving
performances
traditional
increasing
interpretability and providing additional understanding about the
structure of the biological data. Different works have been proposed in the literature. Here we review the general ideas and
refer the reader to for more comprehensive reviews.
The first applications of neural networks in genomics replaced
conventional machine learning with deep architectures, without
changing the input features. For example, Xiong et al. used a
fully connected feed-forward neural network to predict the splicing
activity of individual exons. The model was trained using >1000
predefined features extracted from the candidate exon and adjacent introns. This method obtained higher prediction accuracy of
splicing activity compared with simpler approaches, and was able
to identify rare mutations implicated in splicing misregulation.
DNA sequence, without the need to define features a priori (e.g.
Table 2. Review of the neural networks shaping the deep learning architectures applied to the health care domain in the literature
Architecture
Description
CNNs are inspired by the organization of cat’s visual cortex . CNNs rely on local connections and tied weights across the
units followed by feature pooling (subsampling) to obtain translation invariant descriptors . The basic CNN architecture
consists of one convolutional and pooling layer, optionally followed by a fully connected layer for supervised prediction. In
practice, CNNs are composed by > 10 convolutional and pooling layers to better model the input space. The most successful
applications of CNNs were obtained in computer vision . CNNs usually require a large data set of labeled documents
to be properly trained.
RNNs are useful to process streams of data . They are composed by one network performing the same task for every
element of a sequence, with each output value dependent on the previous computations. In the original formulation, RNNs
were limited to look back only a few steps owing to vanishing and exploding gradient problems. LSTM and GRU 
networks addressed this problem by modeling the hidden state with cells that decide what to keep in (and what to erase
from) memory given the previous state, the current memory and the input value. These variants are efﬁcient at capturing
long-term dependencies and led to excellent results in Natural Language Processing applications .
A RBM is a generative stochastic model that learns a probability distribution over the input space . RBMs are a variant of
Boltzmann machines, with the restriction that their neurons must form a bipartite graph. Pairs of nodes from each of the
two groups (i.e. visible and hidden units) can have a symmetric connection between them, but there are no connections
between nodes within a group. This restriction allows for more efﬁcient training algorithms than the general class of
Boltzmann machines, which allows connections between hidden units. RBMs had success in dimensionality reduction 
and collaborative ﬁltering . Deep learning systems obtained by stacking RBMs are called Deep Belief Networks .
An AE is an unsupervised learning model where the target value is equal to the input . AEs are composed by a decoder,
which transforms the input to a latent representation, and by a decoder, which reconstructs the input from this
representation. AEs are trained to minimize the reconstruction error. By constraining the dimension of the latent
representation to be different from input (and consequently from the output), it is possible to discover relevant patterns
in the data. AEs are mostly used for representation learning and are often regularized by adding noise to the
original data (i.e. denoising AEs ).
Miotto et al.
 ). CNNs use less parameters than a fully connected
network by computing convolution on small regions of the
input space and by sharing parameters between regions. This
allowed training the models on larger sequence windows of
DNAs, improving the detection of the relevant patterns. For
example, Alipanahi et al. proposed DeepBind, a deep architecture based on CNNs that predicts specificities of DNA- and
RNA-binding proteins. In the reported experiment, DeepBind
was able to recover known and novel sequence of motifs, quantify the effect of sequence alterations and identify functional
single nucleotide variations (SNVs). Zhou and Troyanskaya 
used CNNs to predict chromatin marks from DNA sequence.
Similarly, Kelley et al. developed Basset, an open-source
framework to predict DNase I hypersensitivity across multiple
cell types and to quantify the effect of SNVs on chromatin
accessibility. CNNs were also used by Angermueller et al. to
predict DNA methylation states in single-cell bisulfite sequencing studies and, more recently, by Koh et al. to denoise
genome-wide
immunoprecipitation
sequencing data to obtain a more accurate prevalence estimate
for different chromatin marks.
While CNNs are the most widely used architectures to
extract features from fixed-size DNA sequence windows, other
deep architectures have been proposed as well. For example,
sparse AEs were applied to classify cancer cases from gene
expression profiles or to predict protein backbones . Deep
researchers
significantly
state-of-the-art
genomic medicine .
Sensor-equipped smartphones and wearables are transforming a
variety of mobile apps, including health monitoring . As the
difference between consumer health wearables and medical devices begins to soften, it is now possible for a single wearable device
to monitor a range of medical risk factors. Potentially, these devices could give patients direct access to personal analytics that can
contribute to their health, facilitate preventive care and aid in the
management of ongoing illness . Deep learning is considered
to be a key element in analyzing this new type of data. However,
only a few recent works used deep models within the health care
sensing domain, mostly owing to hardware limitations. In fact,
running an efficient and reliable deep architecture on a mobile
device to process noisy and complex sensor data is still a challenging task that is likely to drain the device resources .
Several studies investigated solutions to overcome such hardware
limitations. As an example, Lane and Georgiev proposed a
low-power deep neural network inference engine that exploited
both Central Processing Unit (CPU) and Digital Signal Processor
(DSP) of the mobile device, without leading to any major overburden of the hardware. They also proposed DeepX, a software accelerator capable of lowering the device resources required by deep
learning that currently act as a severe bottleneck to mobile adoption. This architecture enabled large-scale deep learning to execute efficiently on mobile devices and significantly outperformed
cloud-based off-loading solutions .
We did not find any relevant study applying deep learning
commercial
monitoring.
However, a few works processed data from phones and medical
monitor devices. In particular, relevant studies based on deep
learning were done on Human Activity Recognition (HAR).
While not directly exploring a medical application, many studies argue that the accurate predictions obtained by deep models
on HAR can leverage clinical applications as well. In the health
care domain, Hammerla et al. evaluated CNNs and RNNs
with LSTM to predict the freezing of gait in Parkinson disease
(PD) patients. Freezing is a common motor complication in PD,
where affected individuals struggle to initiate movements such
as walking. Results based on accelerometer data from above the
ankle, above the knee and on the trunk of 10 patients showed
that RNNs obtained the best results, with a significantly large
improvement over the other models, including CNNs. While the
size of this data set was small, this study highlights the potential of deep learning in processing activity recognition measures
for clinical use. Zhu et al. obtained promising results in predicting Energy Expenditure (EE) from triaxial accelerometer and
heart rate sensor data during ambulatory activities. EE is considered important in tracking personal activity and preventing
chronic diseases such as obesity, diabetes and cardiovascular
diseases. They used CNNs and significantly improved performances over regression and a shallow neural network.
In other clinical domains, deep learning, in particular CNNs and
RBMs, improved over conventional machine learning in analyzing
portable neurophysiological signals such as Electroencephalogram,
Potentials
Photoplethysmography
Differently, Sathyanarayana et al. applied deep learning to predict poor or good sleep using actigraphy measurements of the physical activity of patients during awake time. In particular, by using a
data set of 92 adolescents and one full week of monitored data, they
showed that CNNs were able to obtain the highest specificity and
sensitivity, with results 46% better than logistic regression.
Challenges and opportunities
Despite the promising results obtained using deep architectures, there remain several unsolved challenges facing the clinical application of deep learning to health care. In particular, we
highlight the following key issues:
• Data volume: Deep learning refers to a set of highly intensive
computational models. One typical example is fully connected
multi-layer neural networks, where tons of network parameters
need to be estimated properly. The basis to achieve this goal is
the availability of huge amount of data. In fact, while there are
no hard guidelines about the minimum number of training documents, a general rule of thumb is to have at least about 10 the
number of samples as parameters in the network. This is also
one of the reasons why deep learning is so successful in domains
where huge amount of data can be easily collected (e.g. computer
vision, speech, natural language). However, health care is a
different domain; in fact, we only have approximately 7.5 billion
people all over the world , with a great
part not having access to primary health care. Consequently, we
cannot get as many patients as we want to train a comprehensive deep learning model. Moreover, understanding diseases and
their variability is much more complicated than other tasks,
such as image or speech recognition. Consequently, from a big
data perspective, the amount of medical data that is needed to
train an effective and robust deep learning model would be
much more comparing with other media.
• Data quality: Unlike other domains where the data are clean and
well-structured, health care data are highly heterogeneous,
ambiguous, noisy and incomplete. Training a good deep learning
model with such massive and variegate data sets is challenging
and needs to consider several issues, such as data sparsity,
redundancy and missing values.
Deep learning for healthcare
• Temporality: The diseases are always progressing and changing
over time in a nondeterministic way. However, many existing
deep learning models, including those already proposed in the
medical domain, assume static vector-based inputs, which cannot handle the time factor in a natural way. Designing deep
learning approaches that can handle temporal health care data
is an important aspect that will require the development of novel
solutions.
• Domain complexity: Different from other application domains (e.g.
image and speech analysis), the problems in biomedicine and
health care are more complicated. The diseases are highly heterogeneous and for most of the diseases there is still no complete
knowledge on their causes and how they progress. Moreover, the
number of patients is usually limited in a practical clinical scenario and we cannot ask for as many patients as we want.
• Interpretability: Although deep learning models have been successful in quite a few application domains, they are often treated
as black boxes. While this might not be a problem in other more
deterministic domains such as image annotation (because the end
user can objectively validate the tags assigned to the images), in
health care, not only the quantitative algorithmic performance is
important, but also the reason why the algorithms works is relevant. In fact, such model interpretability (i.e. providing which phenotypes are driving the predictions) is crucial for convincing the
medical professionals about the actions recommended from the
predictive system (e.g. prescription of a speciﬁc medication, potential high risk of developing a certain disease).
All these challenges introduce several opportunities and future
research possibilities to improve the field. Therefore, with all of
them in mind, we point out the following directions, which we
believe would be promising for the future of deep learning in
health care.
• Feature enrichment: Because of the limited amount of patients in
the world, we should capture as many features as possible to
characterize each patient and ﬁnd novel methods to jointly process them. The data sources for generating those features need to
include, but not to be limited to, EHRs, social media (e.g. there
are prior research leveraging patient-reported information on
social media for pharmacovigilance ), wearable devices,
environments, surveys, online communities, genome proﬁles,
omics data such as proteome and so on. The effective integration
of such highly heterogeneous data and how to use them in a
deep learning model would be an important and challenging
research topic. In fact, to the best of our knowledge, the literature
does not provide any study that attempts to combine different
types of medical data sources using deep learning. A potential
solution in this domain could exploit the hierarchical nature of
deep learning and process separately every data source with the
appropriate deep model, and stack the resulting representations
in a joint model toward a holistic abstraction of the patient data
(e.g. using layers of AEs or deep Bayesian networks).
• Federated inference: Each clinical institution possesses its own patient
population. Building a deep learning model by leveraging the
patients from different sites without leaking their sensitive information becomes a crucial problem in this setting. Consequently learning deep model in this federated setting in a secure way will be
another important research topic, which will interface with other
mathematical domains, such as cryptography (e.g. homomorphic
encryption and secure multiparty computation ).
• Model privacy: Privacy is an important concern in scaling up deep
learning (e.g. through cloud computing services). In fact, a recent
work by Trame`r et al. has demonstrated the vulnerability of
Machine Learning (ML)-as-a-service (i.e. ‘predictive analytics’) on
a set of common models including deep neural networks. The
attack abides all authentication or access-control mechanisms
parameters
Application Program Interface (APIs), which breaks the model
and personal privacy. This issue is well known to the privacy
community, and researchers have developed a principled framework called ‘differential privacy’ to ensure the indistinguishability of individual samples in training data through their
functional outputs . However, naive approaches might render outputs useless or cannot provide sufﬁcient protection ,
which makes the development of practically useful differential
privacy solutions nontrivial. For example, Chaudhuri et al. 
developed differential private methods to protect the parameters
trained for the logistic regression model. Preserving the privacy
of deep learning models is even more challenging, as there are
more parameters to be safeguarded and several recent works
have pushed the fronts in this area . Yet, considering all
the personal information likely to be processed by deep models
in clinical applications, the deployment of intelligent tools for
next-generation health care needs to consider these risks and
attempt to implement a differential privacy standard.
• Incorporating expert knowledge: The existing expert knowledge for
invaluable
Because of the limited amount of medical data and their various
quality problems, incorporating the expert knowledge into the
deep learning process to guide it toward the right direction is an
important research topic. For example, online medical encyclopedia and PubMed abstracts should be mined to extract reliable
content that can be included in the deep architecture to leverage
the overall performances of the systems. Also semi-supervised
learning, an effective scheme to learn from large amount of unlabeled samples with only a few labeled samples, would be of great
potential because of its capability of leveraging both labeled
(which encodes the knowledge) and unlabeled samples .
• Temporal modeling: Considering that the time factor is important
in all kinds of health care-related problems, in particular in those
involving EHRs and monitoring devices, training a time-sensitive
deep learning model is critical for a better understanding of the
patient condition and for providing timely clinical decision support. Thus, temporal deep learning is crucial for solving health
care problems (as already shown in some of the early studies
reported in the literature review). To this aim, we expect that
RNNs as well as architectures coupled with memory (e.g. )
and attention mechanisms (e.g. ) will play a more signiﬁcant
role toward better clinical deep architectures.
• Interpretable modeling: Model performance and interpretability
are equally important for health care problems. Clinicians are
unlikely to adopt a system they cannot understand. Deep learning models are popular because of their superior performance.
Yet, how to explain the results obtained by these models and
how to make them more understandable is of key importance
toward the development of trustable and reliable systems. In our
opinion, research directions will include both algorithms to
explain the deep models (i.e. what drives the hidden units of the
networks to turn on/off along the process—see e.g. ) as well
as methods to support the networks with existing tools that
explain the predictions of data-driven systems (e.g. see ).
Applications
Deep learning methods are powerful tools that complement traditional machine learning and allow computers to learn from the
data, so that they can come up with ways to create smarter
Miotto et al.
applications. These approaches have already been used in a number of applications, especially for computer vision and natural language processing. All the results available in the literature
illustrate the capabilities of deep learning for health care data analysis as well. In fact, processing medical data with multi-layer neural networks increased the predictive power for several specific
applications in different clinical domains. Additionally, because of
their hierarchical learning structure, deep architectures have the
potential to integrate diverse data sets across heterogeneous data
types and provide greater generalization given the focus on representation learning and not simply on classification accuracy.
Consequently, we believe that deep learning can open the
way toward the next generation of predictive health care systems
that can (i) scale to include many millions to billions of patient
records and (ii) use a single, distributed patient representation to
effectively support clinicians in their daily activities—rather than
multiple systems working with different patient representations
and data. Ideally, this representation would join all the different
data sources, including EHRs, genomics, environment, wearables,
social activities and so on, toward a holistic and comprehensive
description of an individual status. In this scenario, the deep
learning framework would be deployed into a health care platform (e.g. a hospital EHR system) and the models would be constantly updated to follow the changes in the patient population.
Such deep representations can then be used to leverage
clinician activities in different domains and applications, such
as disease risk prediction, personalized prescriptions, treatment
recommendations, clinical trial recruitment as well as research
and data analysis. As an example, Wang et al. recently won the
Parkinson’s Progression Marker’s Initiative data challenge on
subtyping Parkinson’s disease using a temporal deep learning
approach . In fact, because Parkinson’s disease is highly
progressive, the traditional vector or matrix-based approach
may not be optimal, as it is unable to accurately capture the disease progression patterns, as the entries in those vectors/matrices are typically aggregated over time. Consequently, the
authors used the LSTM RNN model and identified three interesting subtypes for Parkinson’s disease, wherein each subtype
demonstrates common disease progression trends. We believe
that this work shows the great potential of deep learning models in real-world health care problems and how it could lead to
more reliable and robust automatic systems in the near future.
Last, more broadly, deep learning can serve as a guiding principle to organize both hypothesis-driven research and exploratory
investigation in clinical domains (e.g. clustering, visualization of
patient cohorts, stratification of disease populations). For this
potential to be realized, statistical and medical tasks must be integrated at all levels, including study design, experiment planning,
model building and refinement and data interpretation.
Key Points
• The fastest growing types of data in biomedical research,
such as EHRs, imaging, -omics proﬁles and monitor
data, are complex, heterogeneous, poorly annotated and
generally unstructured.
• Early applications of deep learning to biomedical data
showed effective opportunities to model, represent and
learn from such complex and heterogeneous sources.
• State-of-the-art deep learning approaches need to be
improved in terms of data integration, interpretability,
effectively
applied to the clinical domain.
• Deep learning can open the way toward the next generation of predictive health care systems, which can
scale to include billions of patient records and rely on
a single holistic patient representation to effectively
support clinicians in their daily activities.
• Deep learning can serve as a guiding principle to
organize both hypothesis-driven research and exploratory investigation in clinical domains based on different sources of data.
This study was supported by the following grants from the
Research Institute (R00-HG008175) to S.W.; and National
Library of Medicine (R21-LM012060); National Institute of
Biomedical
Bioengineering
(U01EB023685);
(R01GM118609) to X.J.; National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases (R01-DK098242-03); National
Cancer Institute (U54-CA189201-02); and National Center for
Advancing Translational Sciences (UL1TR000067) Clinical and
Translational Science Awards to J.T.D. This study was also
supported by the National Science Foundation: Information
and Intelligent Systems (1650723) to F.W. The funders had no
role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to
publish or preparation of the manuscript.