IMPROVING SEQUENCE-TO-SEQUENCE SPEECH RECOGNITION TRAINING WITH
ON-THE-FLY DATA AUGMENTATION
Thai-Son Nguyen1, Sebastian St¨uker1, Jan Niehues2, Alex Waibel1
1 Institute for Anthropomatics and Robotics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
2Department of Data Science and Knowledge Engineering (DKE), Maastricht University
Sequence-to-Sequence (S2S) models recently started to show
state-of-the-art performance for automatic speech recognition
(ASR). With these large and deep models overﬁtting remains
the largest problem, outweighing performance improvements
that can be obtained from better architectures. One solution
to the overﬁtting problem is increasing the amount of available training data and the variety exhibited by the training
data with the help of data augmentation. In this paper we examine the inﬂuence of three data augmentation methods on
the performance of two S2S model architectures. One of the
data augmentation method comes from literature, while two
other methods are our own development a time perturbation
in the frequency domain and sub-sequence sampling. Our experiments on Switchboard and Fisher data show state-of-theart performance for S2S models that are trained solely on the
speech training data and do not use additional text data.
Index Terms—
Sequence-to-sequence, Self-attention,
Data Augmentation, Speed Perturbation, Sub-sequence
1. INTRODUCTION
In automatic speech recognition (ASR), data augmentation
has been used for producing additional training data in order
to increase the quality of the training data, i.e. their amount
and variety. This then improves the robustness of the models
and avoids overﬁtting. As in , both unsupervised and
artiﬁcial training data has been augmented to improve model
training in low-resource conditions. The addition of training
data with perturbation of the vocal tract length or audio
speed helps ASR models to be robust to speaker variations. Simulated far-ﬁeld speech and noisy speech 
have been used to supplement clean close-talk training data.
Sequence-to-sequence attention-based models were
introduced as a promising approach for end-to-end speech
recognition. Several advances have been proposed
for improving the performance of S2S models. While many
works focus on designing better network architectures, the authors in have recently pointed out that overﬁtting is the
most critical issue when training their sequence-to-sequence
model on popular benchmarks. By proposing a data augmentation method together with a long training schedule to reduce
overﬁtting, they have achieved a large gain in performance superior to many modiﬁcations in network architecture.
To date, there have been different sequence-to-sequence
encoder-decoder models reporting superior performance over the HMM hybrid models on standard ASR benchmarks. While uses Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
networks, for both encoder and decoder, employs selfattention layers to construct the whole S2S network.
In this paper, we investigate three on-the-ﬂy data augmentation methods for S2S speech recognition, two of which
are proposed in this work and the last was recently discovered . We contrast and analyze both LSTM-based and
self-attention S2S models that were trained with the proposed
augmentation methods by performing experiments on the
Switchboard (SWB) and Fisher telephone conversations task.
We found that not only the two models behave differently
with the augmentation methods, but also the combination of
different augmentation methods and network architectures
can signiﬁcantly reduce word error rate (WER). Our ﬁnal
S2S model achieved a WER of 5.2% on the SWB test set and
10.2% WER on the Callhome (CH) test set. This is already
on par with human performance. We made our source code
available as open source1, as well as the model checkpoints
of the experiments in this paper.
2. DATA AUGMENTATION
We investigated three data augmentation methods for sequenceto-sequence encoder-decoder models. The ﬁrst two modify
the input sequences from different inspirations and aim to
improve the generalization of the log-mel spectrogram encoder. The third approach improves the decoder by adding
sub-samples of target sequences. All of the proposed methods
are computationally cheap and can be performed on-the-ﬂy
and can be optimized together with the model.
2.1. Dynamic Time Stretching
Many successful S2S models adopt log-mel frequency features as input. In the frequency domain, one major difﬁculty
1The source code is available at 
 
for the recognition models is to recognize temporal patterns
which occur with varying duration. To make the models more
robust to temporal variations, the addition of audio data with
speed perturbation in the time domain such as in has been
shown to be effective. In contrast, in our work we manipulate
directly the time series of the frequency vectors which are the
features of our S2S models, in order to achieve the effect of
speed perturbation. Speciﬁcally, given a sequence of consecutive feature vectors seq, we stretch every window of w feature
vectors by a factor of s obtained from an uniform distribution
of range [low, high], resulting in a new window of size w ∗s.
There are different approaches to perform window stretching,
in this work we adopt nearest-neighbor interpolation for its
speed, as it is fast enough to augment many speech utterances
on a CPU while model training for other utterances is being
performed on a GPU. The dynamic time stretching algorithm
is implemented by the following python code:
t i m e s t r e t c h ( seq ,w, low =0.8 , high = 1 . 2 5 ) :
i d s = None ;
t i m e l e n = len ( seq )
range ( t i m e l e n
/ / w + 1 ) :
s = random . uniform ( low ,
e = min ( time len , w∗( i +1))
r = numpy . arange (w∗i ,
r = numpy . round ( r ) . astype ( i n t )
i d s = numpy . c o n c a t e n a t e ( ( ids ,
seq [ i d s ]
2.2. SpecAugment
Recently found that LSTM-based S2S models tend to
overﬁt easily to the training data, even when regularization
methods such as Dropout are applied. Inspired by the
data augmentation from computer vision, proposed to deform the spectrogram input with three cheap operations such
as time warping, frequency and time masking before feeding
it to their sequence-to-sequence models. Time warping shifts
a random point in the spectrogram input with a random distance, while frequency and time masking apply zero masks
to some consecutive lines in both the frequency and the time
dimensions. In this work, we study the two most effective
operations which are the frequency and time masking. Experimenting on the same dataset, we beneﬁt from optimized
conﬁgurations in . Speciﬁcally, we consider T ∈ 
– the number of times that both, frequency and time masking,
are applied. For each time, f consecutive frequency channels
and t consecutive time steps are masked where f and t are
randomly chosen from and . When T = 2, we
obtain a similar setting for 40 log-mel features as the SWB
mild (SM) conﬁguration in . We experimentally ﬁnd T
for different model architectures in our experiments.
2.3. Sub-sequence Sampling
Different from other S2S problems, the input-output of
speech recognition models are the sequences of speech feature vectors and label transcripts which are monotonically
SS Variant 1
SS Variant 2
SS Variant 3
Fig. 1. Sub-sequence Sampling.
aligned. The alignment can be also estimated automatically
via the traditional force-alignment process. Taking advantage
of this property, we experiment with the ability to sub-sample
training utterances to have more variants of target sequences.
Since the approach of generating sub-sequences with arbitrary lengths does not work, we propose a constraint sampling
depicted in Figure 1. Basically, given an utterance, we allow
three different variants of sub-sequences with equal distributions. The ﬁrst and second variants constraint sub-sequences
to having either the same start or end as the original sequence
while the third variant needs to have their start and end point
within the utterance. All sub-sequences need to have at least
half the size of the original sequence. During training, we
randomly select a training sample with probability alpha
and replace it with one of the sampled sub-sequence variants. We also allow static mode in which only one ﬁxed
instance of sub-sequence per utterance per variant is generated. This mode is equivalent to statically adding three sets
of sub-sequences to the original training set.
We use two different S2S models to investigate the on-the-ﬂy
data augmentation methods proposed in Section 2. In the ﬁrst
model, we use LSTMs and a new approach for building the
decoder network. For the second model, we follow the work
in to replace LSTMs with deep self-attention layers in
both the encoder and decoder.
3.1. LSTM-based S2S
Before the LSTM layers in the encoder, we place a two-layer
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) with 32 channels and a
time stride of two to down-sample the input spectrogram by a
factor of four. In the decoder, we adopt two layers of unidirectional LSTMs as language modeling for the sequence of subword units and the approach of Scaled Dot-Product (SDP) Attention to generate context vectors from the hidden states
of the two LSTM networks. Speciﬁcally, our implementation
for LSTM-based S2S works as follows:
enc = LSTM(CNN(spectrogram))
emb = Embedding(subwords)
dec = LSTM(emb)
context = SDPAttention(dec, enc, enc)
y = Distribution(context + dec)
Different from previous works , we adopt a
simpler recurrent function in the decoder (i.e. without Inputfeeding ), and a more complicated attention module.
The adopted attention function learns an additional linear
transformation for each input parameter (known as query,
key and value) and use the multi-head mechanism together
with Dropout and LayerNorm for efﬁciently learning contentbased attention . In fact, the implementation of the attention function is shared with the deep self-attention network
from Section 3.2. In addition to that, we share the parameters
between Embedding and Distribution to improve the word
embedding. Because this implementation does not require us
to customize LSTM cells (which is needed by Input-feeding),
we can achieve high parallelization 2 to speed up training.
3.2. Self-Attention S2S
We follow to build an encoder-decoder model with deep
self-attention layers.
Speciﬁcally, we use many stochastic
self-attention layers (e.g., 36 and 12) for the encoder and the
decoder for better generalization of the deep architecture. Instead of using a CNN for down-sampling the input spectrogram, we stack four consecutive feature vectors after applying
the augmentation methods. Compared to , we use BPE
sub-word units instead of characters for target sequences. For
more details refer to .
4. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Our experiments were conducted the Switchboard (300
hours) and the Fisher+Switchboard corpora.
Hub5’00 evaluation data was used as the test set. For input
features, we use 40 dimensional log-mel ﬁlterbanks normalized per conversation. For labels, SentencePiece was used for
generating 4,000 BPE sub-word units from all the transcripts.
We use Adam with an adaptive learning rate schedule
deﬁned by (lr, warm-up, decay) in which the learning rate
lr increases for the ﬁrst warm-up steps and then decreases
linearly. We adopted the approach in for the exact calculation of the learning rate at every step. In addition to that,
we further decay the learning rate exponentially with a factor
of 0.8 after every decay step. We save the model parameters
of 5 best epochs according to the cross-validation sets and
average them at the end.
5. RESULTS
5.1. Baseline Performance
Using the SWB material and an unique label set of 4k subwords, we trained both of the proposed S2S models for 50
epochs. We adopt a mini-batch size of 8,000 label tokens
which contains about 350 utterances. In our experiments, the
LSTM-based models tend to overﬁt after 12k updates (i.e.
perplexity increases on the cross-validation set) while the
self-attention models converge slower and saturate at 40k updates. We were able to increase the size of the LSTM-based
2Highly optimized LSTM implementation offered by cuDNN library
6x1024 (SP)
Transformer
36x12 (SP)
Table 1. Baseline models using Switchboard 300h.
TimeStretch
SpecAugment
Transformer
The performance of the models trained with
TimeStretch and SpecAugment augmentation.
as well as the depth of the self-attention models for performance improvement. We stop at six layers of 1,024 units for
the encoder of the LSTM-based and 36-12 encoder-decoder
layers of self-attention models, and then use them as baselines for further experiments. Table 1 shows the WER of the
baselines. We also include the results of the baseline models
when trained on the speed-perturbed dataset .
5.2. Time Stretching and SpecAugment
Both Time Stretching and SpecAugment are augmentation
methods which modify the input sequences aiming to improve the generalization of the encoder network. We trained
several models for evaluating the effects of these methods
individually as well as the combinations as shown in Table 2.
For Time Stretching, WER slightly changed when using
different window sizes. However the 8.6% and 12.4% rel.
improvement over the baseline performance of the LSTMbased and self-attention models clearly shows its effectiveness. With a window size of 100ms, the models can nearly
achieve the performance of the static speed perturbation augmentation.
As shown in , SpecAugment is a very effective method
for avoiding overﬁtting on the LAS model.
Using this
method, we can also achieve a large WER improvement
for our LSTM-based models. However, our observation is
slightly different from , as SpecAugment slows down the
convergence of the training on the training set and significantly reduces the loss on the validation set (as for Time
Sub-sequence
SpecAugment
Transformer
& TimeStretch
0.7 (static)
0.7 (static)
The performance of the models trained with Subsequence augmentation.
Stretching) but does not change from overﬁtting to underﬁtting. The losses of the ﬁnal model and the baseline model
computed on the original training set are similar.
SpecAugment is also effective for our self-attention models. However, the improvements are not as large as for the
LSTM-based models. This might be due to the self-attention
models not suffering from the overﬁtting problem as much as
the LSTM-based models. It is worth noting that for the selfattention models, we use not only Dropout but also Stochastic Layer to prevent overﬁtting. When tuning T for both
models, we observed different behaviours. The LSTM-based
models work best when T = 2, but for self-attention, different values of T produce quite similar results. This might be
due to the fact that the self-attention encoder has direct connections to all input elements of different time steps while the
LSTM encoder uses recurrent connections.
When combining two augmentation methods within a
single training (i.e. applying Time Stretching ﬁrst and then
SpecAugment for input sequences), we can achieve further
improvements for both models.
This result indicates that
both methods help the models to generalize across different
aspects and can supplement each other. We keep using the
optimized settings (T = 2 and w = ∞for LSTM-based and
T = 1 for self-attention) for the rest of the experiments.
5.3. Combining with Sub-sequence
Table 3 presents the models’ performance when we applied
Sub-sequence augmentation with different alpha values. We
observe contrary results for different models: improving the
self-attention but downgrading the performance of the LSTMbased models. These observations are indeed consistent with
the overﬁtting problems observed with the two models. The
LSTM-based models even overﬁt more quickly to the dataset
with sub-sequence samples while self-attention models do
not, so that they can beneﬁt from Sub-sequence. However,
when using a static set of sub-sequences, we obtained clear
improvement for LSTM-based models but had comparable
performance for self-attention models. This reveals an interesting observation for the differences between self-attention
and LSTM when interpreting them as language models in the
decoder. The static approach is also better when combined
with other augmentation methods.
300h Switchboard
Zeyer et al. 2018 
Yu et al. 2018 
Pham et al. 2019 
Park et al. 2019 
Kurata et al. 2019 
LSTM-based
Transformer
2000h Switchboard+Fisher
Povey et al. 2016 
Saon et al. 2017 
Han et al. 2018 
Weng et al. 2018 
Audhkhasi et al. 2018 
LSTM-based (no augment.)
Transformer (no augment.)
LSTM-based
Transformer
Table 4. Final performance on Switchboard 300h and Fisher
2000h training sets.
5.4. Performance on Full Training Set
We report the ﬁnal performance of our models trained on the
2,000h in Table 4. Slightly different from 300h, we used a
larger mini-batch size of 12k tokens and do not use the exponential decay of the learning rate. We also increased the
model size by a factor of 1.5 while keeping the same depth.
We need 7 hours to ﬁnish one epoch for the LSTM-based
models, 3 hours for the self-attention models. With the bigger training set, the LSTM-based models saturate after 100k
updates while the self-attention models need 250k updates.
Even with the large increase in training samples, the proposed
augmentation is still effective since we observe clear gaps between the models with and without augmentation. For the
ﬁnal performance, we found that the ensemble of the LSTMbased and self-attention models are very efﬁcient for the reduction of WER. Our best performance on this benchmark is
competitive compared to the best performance reported in the
literature so far, and it is notable that we did not employ any
additional text data, e.g., for language modeling.
6. CONCLUSION
We have shown the improvements obtained from three data
augmentation techniques when applied to two different architectures of S2S modeling. By utilizing these techniques
we were able to achieve state of the art performance on the
Switchboard and CallHome test sets when not utilizing additional language models. Future work will evaluate different
algorithms for stretching the window of feature vectors and
different strategies for sub-sampling.
7. REFERENCES
 Naoyuki Kanda, Ryu Takeda, and Yasunari Obuchi,
“Elastic spectral distortion for low resource speech
recognition with deep neural networks,” in ASRU 2013.
 A Ragni, KM Knill, SP Rath, and MJF Gales, “Data
augmentation for low resource languages,” in Proc. of
Interspeech 2014.
 Navdeep Jaitly and Geoffrey E Hinton,
“Vocal tract
length perturbation (vtlp) improves speech recognition,”
in Proc. ICML Workshop on Deep Learning for Audio,
Speech and Language, 2013.
 Tom Ko, Vijayaditya Peddinti, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur, “Audio augmentation for speech recognition,” in Sixteenth Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Association, 2015.
 Tom Ko, Vijayaditya Peddinti, Daniel Povey, Michael L
Seltzer, and Sanjeev Khudanpur,
“A study on data
augmentation of reverberant speech for robust speech
recognition,” in ICASSP 2017.
 Awni Hannun, Carl Case, Jared Casper, Bryan Catanzaro, Greg Diamos, Erich Elsen, Ryan Prenger, et al.,
“Deep speech: Scaling up end-to-end speech recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.5567, 2014.
 Jan K Chorowski, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Dmitriy Serdyuk,
Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio, “Attention-based
models for speech recognition,” in Advances in neural
information processing systems, 2015.
 William Chan, Navdeep Jaitly, Quoc V Le, and Oriol
“Listen, attend and spell,”
arXiv preprint
 
 Chung-Cheng Chiu, Tara N Sainath, Yonghui Wu, Rohit Prabhavalkar, Patrick Nguyen, Zhifeng Chen, Anjuli Kannan, Ron J Weiss, Kanishka Rao, Ekaterina Gonina, et al.,
“State-of-the-art speech recognition with
sequence-to-sequence models,” in ICASSP 2018.
 Albert Zeyer, Kazuki Irie, Ralf Schl¨uter, and Hermann
Ney, “Improved training of end-to-end attention models
for speech recognition,” Proc. Interspeech 2018.
 Chao Weng, Jia Cui, Guangsen Wang, Jun Wang,
Chengzhu Yu, Dan Su, and Dong Yu, “Improving attention based sequence-to-sequence models for end-toend english conversational speech recognition,” Proc.
Interspeech 2018.
 Daniel S Park, William Chan, Yu Zhang, Chung-Cheng
Chiu, Barret Zoph, Ekin D Cubuk, and Quoc V Le,
“Specaugment: A simple data augmentation method for
automatic speech recognition,”
Proc. of Interspeech
 Ngoc-Quan Pham, Thai-Son Nguyen, Jan Niehues,
Markus Muller, and Alex Waibel,
“Very deep selfattention networks for end-to-end speech recognition,”
Proc. of Interspeech 2019.
 Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky,
Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov, “Dropout: a
simple way to prevent neural networks from overﬁtting,”
The journal of machine learning research, 2014.
 Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser,
and Illia Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Advances in neural information processing systems, 2017.
 William Chan, Navdeep Jaitly, Quoc Le, and Oriol
Vinyals, “Listen, attend and spell: A neural network for
large vocabulary conversational speech recognition,” in
ICASSP 2016.
 Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba, “Adam: A method
for stochastic optimization,”
Proc. of ICLR, 2015,
 
 Gakuto Kurata and Kartik Audhkhasi, “Guiding ctc posterior spike timings for improved posterior fusion and
knowledge distillation,” Proc. Interspeech 2019.
 Daniel Povey, Vijayaditya Peddinti, Daniel Galvez, Pegah Ghahremani, Vimal Manohar, Xingyu Na, Yiming Wang, and Sanjeev Khudanpur, “Purely sequencetrained neural networks for asr based on lattice-free
mmi,” Interspeech 2016.
 George Saon, Gakuto Kurata, Tom Sercu, Kartik Audhkhasi, Samuel Thomas, Dimitrios Dimitriadis, Xiaodong Cui, Bhuvana Ramabhadran, Michael Picheny,
Lynn-Li Lim, et al., “English conversational telephone
speech recognition by humans and machines,” Proc. Interspeech 2017.
 Kyu J Han, Akshay Chandrashekaran, Jungsuk Kim,
and Ian Lane, “The capio 2017 conversational speech
recognition system,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.00059,
 Kartik Audhkhasi, Brian Kingsbury, Bhuvana Ramabhadran, George Saon, and Michael Picheny, “Building
competitive direct acoustics-to-word models for english
conversational speech recognition,” in ICASSP 2018.