Learning by Demonstration
with Critique from a Human Teacher
Brenna Argall
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
 
Brett Browning
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
 
Manuela Veloso
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
 
Learning by demonstration can be a powerful and natural
tool for developing robot control policies. That is, instead
of tedious hand-coding, a robot may learn a control policy
by interacting with a teacher. In this work we present an algorithm for learning by demonstration in which the teacher
operates in two phases. The teacher ﬁrst demonstrates the
task to the learner. The teacher next critiques learner performance of the task. This critique is used by the learner
to update its control policy. In our implementation we utilize a 1-Nearest Neighbor technique which incorporates both
training dataset and teacher critique. Since the teacher critiques performance only, they do not need to guess at an effective critique for the underlying algorithm. We argue that
this method is particularly well-suited to human teachers,
who are generally better at assigning credit to performances
than to algorithms. We have applied this algorithm to the
simulated task of a robot intercepting a ball. Our results
demonstrate improved performance with teacher critiquing,
where performance is measured by both execution success
and eﬃciency.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
I.2.9 [Artiﬁcial Intelligence]: Robotics
General Terms
Algorithms, Experimentation
INTRODUCTION
Learning by demonstration can be an eﬀective tool for the
development of policies to control robot behavior. We argue
that teaching by demonstration is a natural approach for a
∗This work was supported by United States Department of
the Interior under Grant No. NBCH-1040007. The content
of the information in this publication does not necessarily
reﬂect the position or policy of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), US Department of Interior, US Government, and no oﬃcial endorsement should be
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
HRI’07, March 10–12, 2007, Arlington, Virginia, USA.
Copyright 2007 ACM 978-1-59593-617-2/07/0003 ...$5.00.
human teacher, as humans already employ demonstration
to teach other humans. As such, it enriches our knowledge
of human-robot interactions, while making robotics more
accessible to the general public. In comparison to the alternative of hand-coding, demonstration opens robot policy
development to non-experts in the ﬁeld. Beyond providing
the demonstration, a human teacher may additionally help
a robot learner by oﬀering a critique on performance. We
argue that this role is also well-suited for human teachers,
who are generally good at evaluating task performance.
When learning by demonstration, a robot learns a control
policy from the demonstrated actions of a teacher.
work in this area places the majority of the learning burden
on the robot, with an exception being the work of Nicolescu
and Mataric . One way a teacher can help shoulder some
of this burden is by commenting on learner performance. In
our presented algorithm, the robot ﬁrst derives a control
policy from the demonstrations of a teacher. The teacher
then indirectly modiﬁes the learner’s control policy through
a critiquing process. In particular, the learner, and not the
teacher, applies the teacher’s critique to the policy update.
We argue that this indirect policy modiﬁcation technique is
well-suited to human teachers.
That is, humans are generally good at assigning performance credit, but have less
intuition about assigning credit to underlying algorithms.
Additionally, a robot learner and human teacher will undoubtedly diﬀer in physics and logic. Under this formulation, a robot mechanism does not need to be performable,
or understood, by the human teacher to receive credit.
We contribute an algorithm for learning a robot’s control policy, in which the teacher provides both task demonstrations and performance critiques. We argue that the critiquing task is natural and appropriate for a human teacher,
and simpler than hand coding a control policy. To validate
our approach we implemented a realistic simulation of a differential drive robot, modelled on the SegwayRMP, performing a ball interception task. Our results show that human
teacher critiquing does improve task performance. We measure task performance by interception success and eﬃciency.
In the next section, we present background information
and review related work. Section 3 formalizes this learning
problem, while Section 4 describes our algorithm. In Section 5 the problem domain is presented, and in Section 6
experiemental results. In the ﬁnal section we conclude.
RELATED WORK
Applications of machine learning to robot behaviors occur
at many levels, from high level reasoning to low level motion control policies . In this paper, we focus on learning
low level skills by demonstration.
Teaching a robot by demonstration provides training data
in the form of example executions by a teacher. A task is executed by a teacher, and the details of this execution, usually
in the form of paired observations and actions, are passed
on to the learner. The learner then generalizes from these
demonstrations in order to eﬀectively execute the task itself. Work which has applied demonstration learning to the
development of low level robot control policies includes: 
learned the reward function used in control policy computations, learned a heirarchy of neural networks for motion
control, and represented motor behaviors sparsely with
via points. Local learning was used for motion control policy development by Atekson et al. . The work presented
in this paper also uses local learning techniques, and like combines this with teaching by demonstration.
In general, the example executions of a teacher will not
apply directly to a learner. Many techniques rely upon an
unknown mapping from teacher observations and actions to
robot observations and actions. This correspondence issue
has been addressed by , with circumventing
part of this problem by having the learner follow the teacher
and record its own observations. Furthermore, the demonstration data provided by the teacher may not be well-suited
for the generalization techniques employed by the learner.
Other diﬃculties arise when good teacher data is unavailable for certain parts of the observation space, though we
do not address this issue in this work. Any of these reasons
may lead to poor learner performance.
One way to help the learner is to oﬀer a critique on its
performance. Helping the learner in this manner is a topic
which has been explored at a high level, with the goal of
social interactions for their robot, by Nicolescu and Mataric
 . The algorithm presented in this paper similarly makes
uses of the advice of a teacher. However, our approach incorporates the critique of a teacher at a low level, into the
motion control policy computation. The use of a critique is
also a key diﬀerence between our approach and traditional
reinforcement learning frameworks. By having the teacher
reward learner executions, we exploit the use of a human to
overcome the challenge of credit assignment.
PROBLEM FORMALISM
To formally describe our teaching approach, we ﬁrst make
use of the Markov Decision Process (MDP) framework to de-
ﬁne the robot control problem, and then we will introduce
the teacher. Thus, we have a robot repeatedly taking actions
in the world according to some control policy and observing
their outcome, with the goal of maximizing the reward it
collects. More formally, let us describe the problem as the
tuple < S, A, P, R >, where S deﬁnes the set of states describing the robot and its world, A is the set of actions the
robot can perform, and P : S × A × S →ℜis a probability
function describing the state-action transitions.
each time step the state of the world is given by st ∈S and
the robot selects some action at ∈A. The probability of
being in a given state using a 1-step Markov independence
assumption is then deﬁned by:
st+1|st, at, st−1, at−1, · · · , a0´
st+1|st, at´
In our framework, we assume that the robot cannot directly observe the state of the world. Rather, the robot observes a mapping of the world state deﬁned as H : S →O,
a mapping from the world states onto O, the set of observations. We assume that the mapping is suﬃciently rich for
the robot to perform the task even with this mapping. The
robot chooses actions based on its observation of the world
state with its control policy π : O →A (see Figure 1A).
The reward function R : S × A →ℜdeﬁnes the payoﬀ
achieved by the robot given the state of the world and the
action taken. Learning for the robot consists of changing its
control policy π so as to increase the reward it collects.
Figure 1: (A) A single time step of learner control
policy execution. (B) Update of internal memory M
using teacher critique.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of teaching rather
than reinforcement learning. Thus, we introduce a teacher
that is able to interact with the robot in two modes: by
demonstrating an example, and by critiquing the robot’s
performance on a given example. We do not consider the
mapping problem, and so demonstration consists of giving the robot a set of performed trajectories.
teacher executions produce trajectories, which are sequences
of state-action pairs showing the trace of the teacher’s performance when starting from some initial condition in the
world. The teacher provides the robot with the set TR =
{tr1, · · · , trK} derived from these trajectories, where tri =
i ), · · · , (oki
i )) and each (ot
i) pair ot
describe the observation and corresponding action selected
at time t. Note that o0
, where s0
i ∈S is the initial
world state. We will refer to these trajectories TR as the
training set.
The second mode of interaction with the teacher is critiquing, whereby the robot attempts the problem starting
from some initial state of the world and the teacher critiques
the resulting learner execution trace. The teacher provides
a signal g ∈{0, 1} that labels each time step as either good
(1), or bad (0). Thus, the robot can form a critiqued trajectory for the test run as tc =
(o0, a0, g0), · · · , (oL, aL, gL)
In our model the robot stores an internal memory M, from
which its policy π is derived. M is seeded with the training
set TR, such that M = G(TR). It is updated according
to M ′ = U(M, g), and thus incorporates into π the critique
stored in tc (Fig. 1B).
Finally, we formulate the teaching problem as: “To devise
an algorithm to modify the robot’s control policy π based on
the demonstrated training set TR provided by the teacher
and the memory M of critiqued robot performance, so as to
maximize its reward.” The goal of our system is therefore
to improve the learner policy, such that the summed reward
from R is maximized.
Note that this approach makes the key assumption that
the teacher has some unknown control policy Πteach : S →
A that can be represented in the robot’s observation space
as πteach : O →A and still perform well (although not
necessarily optimally).
In this section we present our algorithm for learning by
demonstration with critiquing.
Learning for our system occurs in two phases.
the ﬁrst training phase, example trajectories of observationaction pairs are built during teacher task execution. The
set of these trajectories are provided by the teacher as the
training dataset TR. This dataset will be used by the learner
to form its internal representation M.
Given TR, Icritiq
While !done learning
i ∈Icritiq
While !teacher satisﬁed
initialize world to s0
While !task done
execute at according to π = NN(ot, M)
tc ←teacher critique of execution
For gi ∈tc
M ←U(M, gi)
Figure 2: Psuedo-code for the demonstration with
critiquing algorithm.
In the second critiquing phase, the learner executes its
control policy π and updates it based on the critique of the
teacher (psuedo-code in Fig. 2). In particular, the learner
begins by building an internal data representation M from
M is used to compute π using local learning techniques. To initialize the world, initial condition s0
i is sampled from the set Icritiq ∈S of initial states (explicitly described in Section 5.4). The learner executes π (lines 07-09).
The teacher observes and critiques this execution, producing tc.
Based upon teacher feedback tc, the learner updates M (lines 11-13) and subsequently π. The teacher may
request the learner to execute this updated π, to monitor
the eﬀects of the critique. This cycle of execution-critiqueupdate (lines 05-14) continues until the teacher is satisﬁed
with learner performance. After this, a new initial condition s0
i is sampled from Icritiq to reinitialize the world, and
learner execution begins again.
The entire algorithm of learning from demonstration with
critiquing may therefore be described as follows:
(a) Teacher generates training dataset TR.
(b) Learner derives M from TR, policy π from M.
2. Critique
(a) Learner executes π from initial conditions.
(b) Teacher observes and critiques learner performance,
producing tc with labels g.
(c) Learner updates memory M based on critique,
thereby modifying π.
(d) Repeat from (2a), to the satisfaction of the teacher.
With this algorithm, the learner uses the teacher’s critique
to modify its internal represenation of how the demonstration data is used.
The critique is therefore applied in a
manner meaningful to the learner, and appropriate to its
control policy update. Having the learner apply the critique
eliminates the eﬀort and potential error in the teacher guessing eﬀective ways to critique the actual policy derivation, or
the actual policy update.
We exploit the use of a human to overcome the issue of
credit assignment, by having the teacher reward an execution trajectory point.
This is a key diﬀerence between
our work and traditional reinforcement learning frameworks.
The reward generated by the system is represented within
the teacher’s evaluation and critique of learner performance,
and steps towards the maximization of this reward are taken
when the learner incorporates the critique into its policy update. The learner itself, however, has no explicit concept of
reward maximization. We thus try to optimize the expected
average reward, as estimated by the teacher, and therefore
do so in an indirect manner.
Learner Execution and Teacher Critique
The ﬁrst part of the critiquing phase is marked by learner
execution. The internal data representation M is constructed
by associating a scaling factor mj
i with each training set
observation-action pair
∈TR. Thus,
The values mj
i are initially set to 1.
Local learning techniques on M are used to derive the policy π. In particular, we used a 1-Nearest Neighbor (1-NN)
approach because it has been successfully applied to other
robot control problems , and is comparatively simple and
straightforward to implement. When using 1-NN, the closest datapoint is found within the training set, according to
some distance metric, and its associated action is selected
for execution.
Formally, the learner constructs a current query point ot
from its observations. The scaled distance to each observation point oj
i ∈M is computed, according to some metric
The value mj
i is the scaling factor.
The minimun is
determined,
at = arg mini,jD(ot, oj
and the action aj
i ∈M, associated with this minimum, is
The second part of the critiquing phase is marked by
teacher critique.
For each learner execution, the teacher
selects entire chunks of the trajectory to be ﬂagged as good
g = 1 or bad g = 0. Chunk sizes are determined dynamically by the teacher, and may range from a single point
to all points in the trajectory (typical chunk size in this
work was on the order of 20-30 points). Though here it is
binary, this critique may easily extend to incorporate continuous values. The learner then takes this information and
updates its control policy by updating M. Speciﬁcally, a
i ∈M is increased if its associated action aj
taken during a portion of the learner execution which has
been ﬂagged as poor. Formally, for each time step t of the
learner execution trace, the algorithm determines the action
i ∈M that was executed by the learner. We update mj
according to
where κ > 0 is some constant. To monitor the eﬀects of
the critique, the teacher may then request that the learner
repeat execution with the updated policy π.
To update mj
i in this manner means that datapoints whose
recommendations gave poor results (according to the critique of the teacher) will be seen as further away during the
nearest neighbor distance calculation. This method of relating success to distance scaling is similar to that employed
by Bentivegna in . The amount by which mj
i is increased
is scaled inversely with distance, so that points will not be
unjustly penalized if recommending for remote areas of the
observation space.
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we describe the experiment domain for our
algorithm. To ground our explanation, and to validate our
approach, we use a ball interception task. That is, a robot
must learn to intercept a moving ball (Fig. 3). In particular,
we look at interception using a diﬀerential drive robot. Since
a diﬀerential drive robot may only drive forward or turn, and
cannot go sideways, interception of a moving ball becomes a
diﬃcult task. It also depends heavily upon the dynamics of
the world, and so writing an appropriate control policy can
be challenging in the absence of accurate predictive world
motion models.
These ﬁrst results were gathered in simulation, but care
was taken to keep the simulated domain realistic. We are
currently in the process of applying this algorithm to a real
robot platform (Fig. 4A).
Domain Description
The state of the world S ∈ℜ9 is an 9-dimensional vector
consisting of the diﬀerential-drive robot position, orientation, linear and rotational speed st
R, θt, vt, ωt´
and the ball position and speed st
The robot may directly make observations about its own
state and ball position. Observations available to the robot
were chosen to consist of (φt, ˙φt, ˙θt, dt, ˙dt, dt
R) ∈O (Fig. 4B):
• φt Robot-relative ball angle
• ˙φt 1-time step diﬀerence φt −φt−1
• ˙θt 1-time step diﬀerence on the global robot angle
Robot-relative ball distance ∥(xt
1-time step diﬀerence dt −dt−1
R 1-time step diﬀerence on the global robot distance
traveled ∥(xt
Figure 3: The motion of a real robot represented
within our simulated world (top). A simulated ball
interception task (bottom).
We assume the robot uses a diﬀerential-drive mechanism
with a low-level controller that takes desired robot velocity
input commands1. Thus, at =
. The actions
encoded within the training set consist of ∆ωt
cmd and ∆vt
cmd 1-time step diﬀerence in commanded rotational
robot speed ωt
cmd 1-time step diﬀerence in commanded
translational robot speed vt
1While other arrangements are possible, this approach is
common to many robot platforms
Figure 4: (A) A SegwayRMP robot.
(B) State of
the world observed by our simulated robot.
Note that within this formulation, observations and actions within the training set may be grouped according to
which action command they inﬂuence. Speciﬁcally, (φt, ˙φt, ˙θt,
cmd) inﬂuence action command ωt
cmd, and (dt, ˙dt, ˙dt
cmd) inﬂuence vt
Simulated Dynamics
Here we describe the dynamics of our simulated domain.
For the robot, motion is propagated by simple diﬀerential
drive simulation (Fig. 3) of the robot’s global location in
space xR, yR and global orientation θR
R + vtcos(θt)
R + vtsin(θt)
θt + ωt · dt .
For the ball, motion is propagated by a constant velocity
model with a simple exponential decay on the initial ball
velocity ˙x0
B to mimic frictional loss,
B + αt ˙xt
B + αt ˙yt
where α ∈ is the decay constant. These positions generated within the domain are bounded above and below,
with both the ball and the robot being constrained to remain within these bounds. We assume there are dynamic
limitations on the performance of the robot whereby its linear and rotational accelerations are limited to [−˙vmax, ˙vmax]
and [−˙ωmax, ˙ωmax], and its linear and rotational velocity
bounded within [−vmax, vmax] and [−ωmax, ωmax], respectively.
Performance Evaluation
To measure the performance of our algorithm, trajectory
executions were evaluated for success and eﬃciency. Since
these measures were used by our teacher when forming a
critique, it was along such criterion that we expected to see
learner performance improve. A successful interception is
deﬁned by (a) the relative distance to the ball falling below
some threshold and (b) the ball and robot both remaining
within bounds. Execution eﬃciency is measured by trajectory length.
The teacher demonstrates during the training phase from
initial world conditions in the set Itrain, and the learner
during the critiquing phase from those in the set Icritiq. We
deﬁne a critiquing round as execution from a single initial
condition in Icritiq.
To evaluate the beneﬁt of critiquing, we introduce a third
testing phase, within initial conditions Itest. This phase was
carried out after every n critiquing rounds, for evaluation
purposes only. For our implementation, n = 20. The learner
would execute the most recent update on its policy π, but no
teacher critiquing would occur. Executions were evaluated
for interception success and eﬃciency, as deﬁned above.
Algorithm Application
We now present the speciﬁcs of applying our algorithm to
the stated problem domain. The teacher interacts in two
diﬀerent phases of our system. During the critiquing phase,
the teacher was a human. Since this intial work was done
in simulation, during the training phase the teacher was a
hand-written control policy.
Our intent is that when applying this algorithm to our real robot, teacher interaction
during the training phase will also be performed by a human.
The hand-written control policy which guided our teacher’s
motion was a set of simple rules to adjust rotational and
translational speed. We treat this control policy as a black
box. It is worthwhile to note is that this control policy is
not optimal for the domain, and does not always successfully intercept the ball. This is because it was hand coded
by a human without knowledge of what that optimal solution might be, and our goal was not to optimize this policy,
but rather to investigate the knowledge transfer between
teacher and robot.
Single time step from an executioncritique-update cycle. (A) The learner executes policy π from M. (B) This execution is critiqued by the
teacher, the learner updates M ′ ←M and then executes an updated policy π′ from M ′.
A single execution-critique-update cycle within the critiquing phase is shown in Figure 5.
During our nearest
neighbor calculations, the distance metric used was Euclidean,
Here Σ is a diagonal matrix which encodes the range of
each observation dimension, and thus removes the eﬀect of
diﬀerent units in each dimension. The factor mj
i scales the
entire distance calculation based upon the past recommendation success of observation point oj
i. In its update (Eq.3),
κ = 0.1 was set based upon typical ’close’ distances within
the domain. Additionallly, the amount by which mj
increase between time steps was bounded above by 1. Thus
i of a poorly performing data point was increased by
the maximum amount of 1 if located within distance κ of the
query point, and by an amount less than 1 (which decayed
exponentially with distance) otherwise.
The physical dimensions of the simulated world correspond to a Segway scale and were 5.0m x 10.0m. The world
was robot-centric.
At each execution run start the robot
was located at the center of the world (0, 0), and oriented
towards (1, 0). Due to symmetry, a control policy developed
for one 5.0m x 5.0m quadrant easily translates into a control
policy for the full 5.0m x 10.0m world, by simply ﬂipping the
sign on all x locations and rotational velocity commands ωt.
We operated within the quadrant of positive x, y positions,
with (0, 0) located in the lower left corner.
The acceleration and velocity constraints which were set
for the simulated robot are comparable for our real diﬀerential drive robot (Table 1). Ball speeds were also set to be
bounded such that ∥˙xt
B∥< 2.5m/s and decayed according to Eq.7 with α = 0.99.
7.0 rad/s2
Table 1: Acceleration and Velocity Constraints
Each initial condition consisted of initial ball position and
speed, and robot state. Three distinct sets of initial conditions existed for each phase, so that Itest ̸= Icritiq ̸=
Itrain. They were generated from a uniform subsampling
of S, within set ranges. Itest and Icritiq were sampled continuously, and Itrain from a grid. The size of each set was
100, 120 and 127, respectively. The ranges of the subsampling were: x0
B ∈[0.0, 5.0] and ˙x0
B ∈[−2.5, 0.0]. Note
that within such ranges, the ball is constrained to travel
initially towards the robot. The initial conditions were additionally pruned for feasiblity with simple checks, such as
whether the robot travelling at top speed could even reach
the location where the ball would go out of bounds before
the ball did.
Now we present the results of applying our algorithm to
the stated problem domain. In particular, we show learner
performance to improve with critiquing. This performance
improvement is shown through an increase in interception
successes, as well as the more eﬃcient execution of successful trajectories. On both of these measures, learner performance not only improves, but comes to exceed the performance of its teacher. An example cycle of learner execution
and teacher critique, along with the subsequent improvement in learner execution, is demonstrated in Figure 6.
More Successful Executions
Learner performance was found to improve with teacher
critiquing. This improvement was seen both within individual subsets of the critiquing phase, as well as under validation by an independent test set.
Testing with the independent test set was performed intermittently throughout the critiquing phase, to mark learner
progress. Figure 7 shows learner improvement, where each
datapoint represents the result of executing from all conditions within Itest.
The learner begins executions using
Figure 6: Example learner execution made more ef-
ﬁcient by critiquing. (A) The robot initially intercepts the ball, but the loop in its trajectory is ineﬃcient. (B) The teacher critiques this trajectory,
ﬂagging the loop as poor. (C) The robot repeats the
execution successfully without a loop. Arrow heads
indicate direction of travel, and the red circle the
distance threshold for successful interception. Note
that the hand-written control policy of our teacher
does not successfully intercept the ball.
the initial internal memory M derived from TR (Initial M),
which it updates after each critiquing round. After the ﬁnal critiquing round, a ﬁnal version of M exists (Final M).
Learner percent success, using the initial and ﬁnal versions
of M, are shown in Table 2. The percent improvement on
learner performance (Table 3) on the test set was 25.00%
(calculated as the diﬀerence in the number of successes using
Inital M and Final M, over the number of successes using
Initial M). For comparison, these same initial conditions
were tested with the teacher’s hand-written control policy.
The learner’s performance improved upon the teacher’s by
12.90%. To check performance with the set upon which the
learner was critiqued, the same results were gathered with
initial conditions Icritiq, with similar results.
Condition Set
Table 2: Execution Percent Success
Condition Set
Impr over Self
Impr over Teacher
Table 3: Learner Percent Improvement in Success
Figure 7: Improvement in learner performance on
the test set with critiquing rounds (solid line).
(Hand-written control policy test set performance
provided for comparison, dashed line).
That the learner was able to perform better than the
hand-coded control policy underlines the beneﬁts of critiquing
within this domain. The hand-coded policy is not optimal
for the domain.
By critiquing our robot’s executions, we
were able to correct for some demonstration error and improve the robot’s performance beyond the capabilities of
the demonstration control policy, and all in a simple and
straightforward manner.
More Efﬁcient Executions
Learner executions were found to become more eﬃcient
with critiquing. That is, the robot intercepts the ball faster,
indicated by a reduction in trajectory length. In particular, we compared the average lengths of learner execution
with the initial version of M, learner execution with the ﬁnal version of M, and teacher execution (Table 4). With
the independent test set, critiquing enabled the learner to
reduce the length of its executions by 27.98% (Table 5).
Note that we consider only scenarios in which both learner
and teacher are initially successful, since for the same initial
ball position and velocity a successful interception is always
faster, and therefore has a shorter trajecotry length, than
an unsuccessful one.
Condition Set
Table 4: Average Execution Length (seconds)
Condition Set
Impr over Self
Impr over Teacher
Table 5: Percent Reduction in Execution Length
The criteria by which the teacher critiqued learner performance was a combination of ball interception success and
human intuition. These criteria depended heavily upon the
teacher determining when the execution began to ’go wrong’,
and passing judgement on whether the robot was doing
something ’smart’. For example, taking a very convoluted
path to the ball would be considered ’not smart’, even if the
interception was successful (Fig. 6). To formally deﬁne a
metric for credit assignment which determines ’wrongness’
and ’smartness’, however, would be quite diﬃcult. It is exactly in these sort of intuitive judgement calls when having
the critiquing teacher be human becomes so important to
the system.
Retention of Initial Critique Success
In the critiquing phase, M is updated after each critiquing
round. For most past executions, we would expect this new
information to improve learner performance. For some, however, it is possible that performance might decline.
When updating mj
i (Eq. 3), our metric does not take into
consideration where query points are in relation to training
data points. Rather, only the distance between is considered.
Consider two query points located at identical distances to, but in orthogonal directions from, a given training point. The training point’s recommended action might
be appropriate for one query point but not the other, and
so its execution would incur diﬀerent successes, and therefore also diﬀerent critiques, for each. By such reasoning, it
is possible in general that trajectory executions may incur
critiques which eﬀectively reverse the critiques of earlier executions, or penalize recommendations which actually are
appropriate under diﬀerent conditions. Therefore, a trajectory which executed successfully under a prior version of M
may possibly perform poorly under a later version of M.
Consequently, whether a critique was initially successful is
not necessarily captured by whether the trajectory executes
successfully under the ﬁnal version of M. The incorporation
of query point orientation into the update of mj
i is thus a
potential improvement for this algorithm.
To investigate the initial success of a given critique, we
ﬁrst looked at a trajectory’s execution success before receiving its critique, using internal memory M. We then compared this to the success of the repeat execution immediately
following the critiquing round, using the modiﬁed M ′. Table 6 presents a summary of initial execution successes (in
groups of 20 averaged critiquing rounds, for compactness).
Indeed, the average post-critique, modiﬁed M ′ success of
74.17% exceeds 71.67% (Table 2), the average percent success of executing Icritiq with the ﬁnal version of M that
results from completing all critiquing rounds.
This indicates that not all successful critiques are properly retained
within M, though we take note that a net result of improved
performance is in any case still observed.
Starting M,
Modiﬁed M ′,
pre-critique
post-critique
Table 6: Pre- and Post-Critique Percent Success
Reduction in Effective Critiquing
Our results show a reduction in eﬀective teacher critiquing
as the robot executes within the environment. By eﬀective
critiquing, we mean a trajectory which successfully intercepts the ball following a critique from the teacher. Note
that this decrease was paralleled by an overall increase in
robot performance on the test set.
Number of critiquing rounds which resulted in successful interceptions (solid line).
(Total number of critiquing rounds shown for reference,
dashed line).
In total, 36/120 of the trajectories executed from the initial conditions of Icritiq were chosen by the teacher for critique. After critiquing a trajectory, the teacher would ask
the learner to repeat execution, to verify that actions which
had been ﬂagged as poor were corrected. On average, the
learner was asked to repeat a critiqued execution 2.61 times.
Repetitions were no longer requested once the teacher determined a successful trajectory (a) had been satisfactorily
executed, (b) was infeasible for the robot given world constraints, or (c) was infeasible given the underlying training
data. Note that the later two reasons might be cause for the
teacher to never critique a trajectory in the ﬁrst place, if believing successful execution to be infeasible for the robot.
In particular, we identify two distinct sources for learner
execution error. First are errors which result from learner
application of the underlying training data, which may be
corrected by our algorithm and the critique of the teacher.
Second are errors that result from an inadequacy in training
data or physical capability, which cannot be corrected by our
algorithm. As this ﬁrst form of error reduces, so do the options for our teacher to provide eﬀective critiques within the
domain. Indeed, the number of eﬀectively critiqued trajectories did not increase linearly with the number of executed
trajectories (Fig. 8).
CONCLUSIONS
We contribute an algorithm for learning a robot’s control
policy, which makes use of both the demonstrations and critique of a teacher. We have argued that this critiquing task
is well-suited for a human teacher, and simpler than handcoding a control policy. We validate the algorithm with a
ﬁrst application in simulation, and it produces an eﬀective
control policy for the domain. The results of our simulation application demonstrate that the critique of a human
teacher does improve task performance, where task performance is measured by both execution success and eﬃciency.
On both measures learner performance not only improved,
but came to exceed the performance of its teacher. Future
work will focus on implementing this algorithm on a SegwayRMP robots performing a similar task.