Cognition and Anatomy in Three Variants of Primary Progressive
Maria Luisa Gorno-Tempini, MD, PhD1, Nina F. Dronkers, PhD2,3, Katherine P. Rankin,
PhD1, Jennifer M. Ogar, MS2, La Phengrasamy, BA1, Howard J. Rosen, MD1, Julene K.
Johnson, PhD1, Michael W. Weiner, MD1,4, and Bruce L. Miller, MD1
1Department of Neurology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco
2Center for Aphasia and Related Disorders, VA Northern California Health Care System, Martinez
3Department of Neurology and Linguistics, University of California Davis, Davis
4Magnetic Resonance Unit, VA San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
We performed a comprehensive cognitive, neuroimaging, and genetic study of 31 patients with
primary progressive aphasia (PPA), a decline in language functions that remains isolated for at least
2 years. Detailed speech and language evaluation was used to identify three different clinical variants:
nonfluent progressive aphasia (NFPA; n = 11), semantic dementia (SD; n = 10), and a third variant
termed logopenic progressive aphasia (LPA; n = 10). Voxel-based morphometry (VBM) on MRIs
showed that, when all 31 PPA patients were analyzed together, the left perisylvian region and the
anterior temporal lobes were atrophied. However, when each clinical variant was considered
separately, distinctive patterns emerged: (1) NFPA, characterized by apraxia of speech and deficits
in processing complex syntax, was associated with left inferior frontal and insular atrophy; (2) SD,
characterized by fluent speech and semantic memory deficits, was associated with anterior temporal
damage; and (3) LPA, characterized by slow speech and impaired syntactic comprehension and
naming, showed atrophy in the left posterior temporal cortex and inferior parietal lobule.
Apolipoprotein E ε4 haplotype frequency was 20% in NFPA, 0% in SD, and 67% in LPA. Cognitive,
genetic, and anatomical features indicate that different PPA clinical variants may correspond to
different underlying pathological processes.
Isolated speech and language difficulties are often the first symptoms of focal forms of
neurodegenerative diseases, particularly frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) and
corticobasal degeneration (CBD).1,2 Alzheimer’s disease (AD) patients also have been shown
to present with atypical focal cognitive manifestations, including fluent and nonfluent
progressive aphasia.3–7 When speech and language deficits remain the only complaint for at
least 2 years, the term primary progressive aphasia (PPA) has been applied.8
Pathologically, the most frequent finding in PPA is an FTLD-type of damage such as dementia
lacking distinctive pathology (DLDH)9–11 or Pick’s disease.12,13 Cases with AD,3
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease,1,4 and FTLD with motor neuron disease (FTLD-MND) pathology
also have been reported15 (for review, see Mesulam,16 Grossman,17 and Black18). Kertesz
first included CBD in the FTLD/Pick’s spectrum of diseases and recently reported four PPA
cases with pathologically proven CBD.12,19
Address correspondence to Dr Gorno-Tempini, UCSF Memory and Aging Center, 350 Parnassus Avenue, Suite 706, Box 1207. San
Francisco, CA 94143. E-mail: .
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Ann Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 1.
 
Ann Neurol. 2004 March ; 55(3): 335–346.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Different clinical presentations of PPA have been reported, but large studies that investigate
both cognitive and neuroimaging findings in the same group of patients are still lacking. Here,
we consider the clinical variants that have been more consistently described. The nonfluent
progressive aphasia variant (NFPA) or “PPA with agrammatism” is characterized by “labored”
speech, agrammatism in production, and/or comprehension, variable degrees of anomia, and
phonemic paraphasias, in the presence of relatively preserved word comprehension.1,20,21
Semantic dementia (SD), also sometimes called “fluent progressive aphasia,” is characterized
by fluent, grammatically correct speech, loss of word and object meaning, surface dyslexia,
and relatively preserved syntactic comprehension skills.22 The most recent clinical criteria for
FTLD include NFPA and SD as two possible clinical presentations of FTLD.1 SD also has
been included in the PPA spectrum, as a “PPA-plus” syndrome.16 In the early 1990s an
additional syndrome was described called “progressive aphemia” or “anarthria,” in which
patients showed mainly a severe speech disorder.23–25 A “logopenic” variant also has been
described, with word-finding difficulties and decreased output but relatively preserved syntax
and phonology.26,27 Recently, Mesulam16 has introduced another type of PPA called “PPA
with comprehension (verbal semantics) deficits” characterized by fluent speech and anomia
but not the multimodal semantic deficits typical of SD. Kertesz and colleagues27 raised the
possibility that some of these clinical variants could represent different stages of the same
Neuroimaging and neuropathology findings have shown that isolated speech and language
deficits in PPA correspond to a mainly left hemisphere anatomical involvement.1,3,7,28
However, the association of specific PPA clinical variants with discrete regions in the speech
and language network remains vague. The anatomical basis of the cognitive impairment in SD
has been investigated previously,29–32 but no study has directly compared SD with other
variants of PPA. Functional imaging studies have shown left frontal hypomethabolism in the
nonfluent clinical variant.23,33,34 Recent work from the Mesulam’s group35 compared a
group of PPA patients and normal controls using voxel-based morphometry (VBM), although
cases were not classified as having a particular clinical variant of PPA. Atrophy was found in
the left superior temporal gyrus and inferior parietal lobule.
In this study, we performed a VBM analysis in a neurologically, cognitively, and genetically
well-characterized cohort of 31 PPA patients to identify the overall network of brain regions
involved in PPA, and the specific patterns of atrophy associated with each PPA clinical variant.
Localization of gray matter loss and differences in APOE ε4 haplotype frequency in each
clinical variant provide useful information regarding the possible underlying causative
diagnosis in PPA.
Patients and Methods
Patients and Control Group
Cognitive, neuroimaging, and genetic data were collected for 31 patients with PPA diagnosed
at the University of California at San Francisco (UCSF) Memory and Aging Center (Table 1).
Clinical history, neurological examination, and a general neuropsychological screening
(including a short naming test and two word-generation tasks) were used to obtain the PPA
diagnosis. Neuroimaging findings were used only to exclude other causes of focal brain damage
including extensive white matter disease. Apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotyping was obtained
using standard procedures.36
Clinical history demonstrated that speech and language deficits were the presenting symptoms
and remained isolated for at least 2 years. At the time of study, all patients were at least 3 years
into the disease, and language/speech deficits were still the main cause of functional
impairment. Exclusion criteria for PPA included history of everyday episodic memory
Gorno-Tempini et al.
Ann Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
impairment as first and/or primary symptom and significant deficits in tests of visual memory
and/or visuospatial functions on neuropsychological screening. Patients also were excluded if
they showed motor and ocular signs typical of progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), CBD, or
Patients were included in the study prospectively within a 2-year period. During the same time
period, 15 additional patients were referred to UCSF for prominent language or speech
disorder. They were excluded from the study because the screening visit showed generalized
cognitive impairment (five AD probable and four nontestable patients); significant vascular
changes on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; two cases); significant asymmetric
extrapyramidal syndrome, dystonia, or alien limb (three CBD cases); or upper and lower motor
neuron signs (one FTLD-MND case).
Sixty-four age- and sex-matched healthy subjects were used as controls for the VBM study.
None of the control subjects had any history of neurological or psychiatric disorders, and all
showed normal MRI. The mean age was 68.2 years (range, 56 – 81 years; 32 men, 32 women).
Cognitive data from 10 of the 64 subjects were used as a control for the cognitive analysis.
The study was approved by the UCSF committee on human research. All subjects provided
written informed consent before participating.
Cognitive Testing
Each patient participated in a neuropsychological screening battery and a detailed speech and
language evaluation. The neuropsychological screening was used to determine if patients met
inclusion criteria for PPA. Once PPA was diagnosed, the speech and language battery was used
to identify different PPA clinical variants. Only language testing, not neuroimaging findings,
was used to classify patients into clinical variants.
Neuropsychological Screening Battery—General intellectual function was assessed
using the Mini-Mental State Examination.37 Initial language screening included the
abbreviated Boston Naming Test (15 items)38 (BNT) and semantic (number of animals/1 min)
and phonemic (number of D words/1 min) word generation. The California Verbal Learning
Test–Mental Status Version39 (CVLT-MS), a modified version of the Rey–Osterrieth complex
figure with a 10-minute free recall delay trial and the Faces subtest from the Wechsler Memory
Scales–Third Edition (WMS-III)40 were used to evaluate verbal and nonverbal episodic
memory. Visuospatial abilities were assessed by the copying of a modified Rey–Osterrieth
figure and a transparentcube, and by the Number Location Test from the Visual Object Space
Perception Battery.41 A sequencing task (modified Trails B test42) and backward digit span
assessed executive functioning. Ability to perform five arithmetic calculations also was
assessed. Praxis was evaluated by asking patients to perform seven buccofacial, transitive limb,
and intransitive limb praxis tasks, each rated on a two-point scale. All tests were administered
both to patients and the 10 age-matched normal controls to determine the normative range of
scores for nonstandardized tests.
Speech and Language Evaluation—The tasks used to assess speech and language
functioning addressed the symptoms and signs specified in the current clinical criteria for PPA.
SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PRODUCTION: Speech was tested using the Motor Speech
Evaluation.43 The Motor Speech Evaluation elicits speech samples with such tasks as vowel
prolongation, oral reading, picture description, and the repetition of syllables, monosyllabic,
and multisyllabic words and phrases. The examiner determines the presence or absence of
dysarthria and apraxia of speech as well as a severity rating (1–7) for each task. Apraxia of
Gorno-Tempini et al.
Ann Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
speech is a “motor speech disorder resulting from impairment of the capacity to program
sensorimotor commands for the positioning and movements of muscles for the volitional
production of speech.”44 As described by Wertz and colleagues,43 apraxic errors include
initiation difficulty, sound substitutions, omissions or transpositions of syllables, slow rate,
equal or even stress, and inappropriate stops and starts. Typically, difficulty articulating
multisyllabic words is diagnostic of apraxia of speech.
Spontaneous speech and syntactic production were evaluated using the “Spontaneous Speech”
section from the Western Aphasia Battery45 (WAB). The Repetition subtest of the WAB also
LEXICAL RETRIEVAL AND SEMANTIC MEMORY: Confrontation naming was
evaluated using the 60-item version of the BNT. An experimental three-alternative, verbally
presented, forced-choice word recognition task for the missed items also was added. The
“Pyramid and Palm Trees” test evaluated verbal and visual semantic abilities.46 The “Auditory
Word Recognition” subtest of the WAB tested comprehension of spoken single words.
SYNTACTIC COMPREHENSION: Sentence and syntactic comprehension was tested
using the WAB “Sequential Commands” and, more extensively, by selected subtests of the
Curtiss–Yamada Comprehensive Language Evaluation–Receptive47 (CYCLE-R). Eleven
subtests of the CYCLE-R were administered, each containing five sentences. Patients were
asked to match the meaning of an auditorially presented sentence with the corresponding line
drawing in a three- or four-picture array. All subtests involved complete declarative sentences
referring to a full state of affairs (referent/s and predication). They spanned a range of sentence
types, comprising different levels of morphosyntactic complexity, ranging from simple
constructions (simple declaratives and possession: levels 2 and 3) to more elaborated structures
(active voice, passive voice, double embedding: levels 4, 5, 6) and complex structures (object
clefting, subject relative clauses, negative passives, object relative clauses, and object relative
clauses with relativized object: levels 7, 8, 9). The numbers denominating the levels correspond
to the age at which children normally learn to comprehend the considered type of sentence.
READING SKILLS: Single-word reading was tested by the “Regularity and Reading” subtest
of the Psycholinguistic Assessments of Language Processing in Aphasia48 (PALPA). Reading
aloud of the “Grandfather passage” was assessed as part of the Motor Speech Evaluation.
Primary Progressive Aphasia Subgroup Classification—Patients initially were
classified as having PPA using clinical history and general neuropsychological examination.
Data from a detailed speech and language evaluation then were used to further classify patients
into different clinical subgroups.
NFPA was defined using criteria for the “PPA with agrammatism”16 variant of PPA and for
the “Progressive Aphasia nonfluent” variant of FTLD.1 NFPA is characterized by nonfluent
speech output, “labored articulation,” agrammatism, difficulty with comprehension of complex
syntactic structures, word-finding deficits, and preserved single-word comprehension (see also
Hodges and Patterson,20 Rhee and colleagues,49 and Hillis and colleagues50). Specifically,
patients needed to show at least two of the following: (1) motor speech deficits; (2)
agrammatism in language production; (3) spared single-word comprehension and impaired
comprehension of only the most complex syntactic structures (CYCLE, levels 8/9).
SD was defined using the description by Hodges and colleagues22, 51 as well as the Neary
criteria for FTLD. SD patients present with fluent, grammatical speech; confrontation naming
deficits; semantic deficits for words and, initially less severely, for objects; surface dyslexia;
and relatively spared syntactic comprehension. Specifically, patients needed to show at least
Gorno-Tempini et al.
Ann Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
three of the following: (1) no grammatical errors and normal language output (circumlocutions
and usage of nonspecific words were accepted); (2) scores below two standard deviations from
the control mean in the 60-item BNT; (3) scores below two standard deviations from the control
mean in the Pyramid and Palm Trees test; and (4) normal syntactic comprehension as measured
by the CYCLE.
Ten patients who met general PPA clinical criteria based on history and neuropsychological
screening did not show a pattern of speech and language deficit compatible with NFPA or SD.
To be consistent with previous reports, we used the term logopenic for this group because their
language output was slow in rate, grammatically simple but correct, and halted by frequent
word-finding pauses. Nonfluent, logopenic speech, and relative sparing of semantics and
single-word comprehension in the presence of severe syntactic deficits excluded an SD
diagnosis. Preserved articulation, absence of agrammatism, and generalized syntactic
comprehension excluded NFPA. The pattern of language impairment specific to this group are
given in the Results section.
Statistical Analysis of Cognitive Data—A post hoc statistical analysis of the speech and
language results was conducted to better characterize the specific deficits and illustrate the
patterns of impairment in each group. Analyses of variance were used to show overall group
differences, and the Scheffe’s method was used for post hoc comparisons. Normative data
reported in test booklets were used for the BNT and the PALPA reading test. The Kruskal–
Wallis and the Mann–Whitney U tests were used when non-parametric testing was necessary.
To characterize nonlanguage cognitive performance in each PPA variant, we also conducted
a post hoc statistical analysis of the neuropsychological data. Statistical analyses were
performed with SPSS (version 10.0.5 for Windows; SPSS, Chicago, IL).
Formal statistical analysis of the genetic data was not performed because of the low number
of subjects in the groups. Frequencies of APOE ε4 haplotype are reported.
Imaging Data
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING SCANNING—MRI scans were obtained on a 1.5T
Magnetom VISION system (Siemens, Iselin, NJ). A volumetric magnetization prepared rapid
gradient-echo MRI (MPRAGE, TR/TE/TI = 10/4/300 milliseconds) was used to obtain T1weighted images of the entire brain, 15-degree flip angle, coronal orientation perpendicular to
the double spin-echo sequence, 1.0 × 1.0 mm2 in-plane resolution and 1.5mm slab thickness.
VOXEL-BASED MORPHOMETRY—VBM is a technique for the detection of regional
brain atrophy by voxel-wise comparison of gray matter volumes between groups of subjects.
52,53 The technique comprises an image preprocessing step (spatial normalization,
segmentation, modulation, and smoothing) followed by statistical analysis. Both stages are
implemented in the SPM99 software package (www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm). To optimize the
spatial normalization, we created an ad hoc age-matched template image. Affine and nonlinear
transformations were applied to spatially normalize patients’ and controls’ images to the
template. Each normalized image then was segmented into gray, white, and cerebrospinal fluid
compartments. Gray matter voxel values were multiplied by the Jacobian determinants derived
from the spatial normalization step to preserve the initial volumes. Images then were spatially
smoothed with a 12mm full-width at half-maximum isotropic Gaussian kernel. Total
intracranial volume was used as a confounding covariate in an analysis of covariance. Age and
sex for each subject were entered into the design matrix as nuisance variables. Regionally
specific differences in gray matter volumes were assessed using the general linear model, and
the significance of each effect was determined using the theory of Gaussian fields. Specific
statistical analyses were performed to investigate the overall network of regions involved in
Gorno-Tempini et al.
Ann Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
PPA and regions specific to each PPA subgroup. We accepted a statistical threshold of p value
less than 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons.
VBM recently has been shown to be sensitive in detecting changes in gray matter volumes in
neurodegenerative disorders.53 The spatial resolution of the technique is 12mm, and the risk
of false-negatives when considering single subjects limits its routine clinical use.
Cognitive Data: Post Hoc Analysis of Speech and Language Performance in Each Primary
Progressive Aphasia Variant
NONFLUENT PROGRESSIVE APHASIA—As expected, the NFPA group scored lowest
in the WAB fluency task (Table 2). The major reason for dysfluency was significant apraxia
of speech that was found in 9 of 11 patients. Four patients also showed mild dysarthria. Varying
degrees of morphological and syntactic errors were present in speech production, repetition,
and passage reading tasks. Single-word comprehension was unimpaired, confrontation naming
on the BNT was at the 50th percentile (with good recognition of the unnamed items), and
semantic memory was within normal limits. Syntactic comprehension was impaired only for
the most complex structures (CYCLE level 9), whereas performance on the WAB “Sequential
Commands” was within normal limits. Similar to the other patient groups, the NFPA group
performed below the first percentile in the single-word reading task. Errors were equally
distributed between regular and irregular words.
SEMANTIC DEMENTIA—The SD group did not differ significantly from controls on the
WAB picture description task (see Table 2). Speech was normal in rate, well articulated, and
grammatically correct. Nonspecific words, such as “thing,” or supraordinate category names
(ie, “animal” for “dog”) often were used to circumvent word-finding difficulties. Only three
patients had reached a stage in the disease in which they had difficulty comprehending
conversational speech and showed generalized object and/or face recognition deficits. Word
and sentence repetition were spared. SD patients showed a significant overall deficit in singleword comprehension, particularly for shapes, whereas comprehension of color names was
relatively spared. The SD group showed the worst performance on the 60-item BNT, along
with severely impaired scores on BNT recognition and on the semantic association test. SDs
performed within normal limits in the comprehension of even the most complex syntactic
structures (CYCLE level 9). In the context of an overall deficit in single-word reading, SD
patients had greater difficulty reading irregular than regular words (ratio regular/irregular of
LOGOPENIC PROGRESSIVE APHASIA—Patients obtained a score intermediate
between NFPAs and SDs in the WAB picture description task. They showed a pattern of speech
output that has been defined as “logopenic,” that is, slow, made of syntactically simple but
correct sentences, with frequent word-finding pauses. Typically, the logopenic group had
generalized difficulty on syntactic comprehension tasks, and, unlike the SD and NFPAs groups,
LPAs were significantly impaired in all but the simplest (levels 2 and 3) CYCLE subtests.
Repetition also was significantly impaired compared with controls (p < 0.05). Logopenic
patients performed below the first percentile on confrontation naming but were able to
recognize 73% of the unnamed items.
Single-word comprehension and semantic association abilities were within normal limits.
Considering that patients were at least 3 years into the disease and showed logopenic speech,
relative spared semantics with marked syntactic comprehension deficits, a diagnosis of initial
SD is unlikely. Reading of single words was below the first percentile with errors almost
equally distributed between regular and irregular words.
Gorno-Tempini et al.
Ann Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cognitive Data: Post Hoc Analysis of General Neuropsychological Performance
There were no significant differences among groups in sex, age, education, or disease duration
(Table 3). Consistent with our inclusion and exclusion criteria, none of the three patient groups
differed from the control group on the visuospatial and visual memory tests. All groups were
significantly impaired compared with controls on word-generation tasks, verbal immediate
recall (CVLT-MS: trials 1– 4 total), and verbally mediated executive tasks (digits-backward
and modified Trails). CDR scores were significantly lower in each patient group compared
with controls.
NONFLUENT PROGRESSIVE APHASIA—The NFPA group performed significantly
better on verbal memory tasks than the other two patient groups (p < 0.05), although their
scores were still lower than controls (p < 0.05; see Table 3). They did not differ from the other
groups on nonverbal memory or executive testing. In contrast with the other groups, they
performed within normal limits on MMSE and short BNT. They also showed the worst
performance on the praxis test.
SEMANTIC DEMENTIA—The SD group had significantly lower scores than the other two
groups on tests of verbal recognition (p < 0.01). However, SDs performed significantly better
than either the LPAs or the NFPAs on a test of verbal working memory (backward digit span;
p < 0.01). Their semantic word-generation scores were significantly lower than the NFPA
group, although phonemic word-generation scores among the groups were equivalent.
LOGOPENIC PROGRESSIVE APHASIA—The LPA group scored worst on calculations.
Their immediate and 30-second recall of verbal information was significantly worse than the
NFPA patients (p < 0.05), but their 10-minute recognition memory and their nonverbal memory
did not differ significantly from controls.
Neurological and Genetic Findings
NONFLUENT PROGRESSIVE APHASIA—In six patients, neurological examination
showed mild motor symptoms, such as diffuse motor slowing, reduced dexterity, and mild
rigidity in the right arm and hand. No patient showed dystonia, myoclonus, alien hand
syndrome, or reported frequent falls. Conjugated eye movement examination showed slowness
of lateral gaze, more marked toward the right in seven patients. No supranuclear gaze palsy
was observed. No signs of MND and no swallowing troubles were detected. The frequency of
APOE ε haplotype in this group was 20% (Table 3).
SEMANTIC DEMENTIA—Neurological examination was completely normal in all patients.
The frequency of the APOE ε4 haplotype in this group was 0%.
LOGOPENIC PROGRESSIVE APHASIA—Neurological examination showed minimal
extrapyramidal signs in the right arm and hand of one patient. The frequency of APOE ε4
haplotype in this group was 67%.
Neuroimaging Data
ALL PPAS VERSUS CONTROLS—When all 31 PPA patients were compared with
controls, a wide network of brain regions (see Fig, A) including the whole left perisylvian
region, the anterior temporal lobes bilaterally (more extensively on the left), and the basal
ganglia bilaterally (p < 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons) was found to be significantly
atrophied.
By separately comparing each clinical variant to the control group, we identified which regions
were differentially involved in each clinical variant.
Gorno-Tempini et al.
Ann Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NONFLUENT PROGRESSIVE APHASIA—When the NFPA group was compared with
controls, significant atrophy was found in the pars opercularis, triangularis (BA 44/45, ie,
Broca’s area), and a small region of the pars orbitalis (BA 47) of the left inferior frontal gyrus
(p < 0.001 corrected for multiple comparisons; Table 4; in red in Fig, B). Highly significant
gray matter loss was also found in the left precentral gyrus of the insula (p < 0.001 corrected).
Atrophy extended to the inferior precentral sulcus and gyrus (BA 4/6; p < 0.001 corrected) and
anteriorly to the middle frontal gyrus (BA 8; p < 0.001 corrected). Significant atrophy also was
found in the caudate nucleus bilaterally extending to the putamen on the left (p < 0.01
corrected).
SEMANTIC DEMENTIA—The SD group showed a large cluster of significant atrophy versus
controls including the medial and lateral portions of the anterior temporal lobes bilaterally (see
Table 4; green area in Fig, B). The clusters included bilateral amygdala/anterior hippocampus
(p < 0.001 corrected), bilateral anterior inferior, middle and superior temporal gyri (BA
38/20/21; p < 0.001 corrected), and the anterior fusiform gyri bilaterally (BA 37; p < 0.001
corrected). The posterior portion of the insula, bilateral caudate nuclei, and the ventromedial
frontal region also were involved (p < 0.001 corrected; see Fig, B).
LOGOPENIC PROGRESSIVE APHASIA—In the logopenic group, a large cluster of gray
matter loss included the angular gyrus (BA 39/40; p < 0.001 corrected), the posterior third of
the middle temporal gyrus and of the superior temporal sulcus (BA 21; p < 0.001 corrected).
In LPA atrophy thus was located more posteriorly than in the SD group (see Table 4; in blue
in Fig, B), but the two variants overlapped in the middle and posterior thirds of the middle
temporal gyrus (at a Talairach coordinate of around − 20). Smaller clusters of significant
atrophy also were found in the left anterior hippocampus, in the right angular gyrus (BA 39)
and in the precuneus (BA 31).
Discussion
We performed a comprehensive study of 31 PPA patients and found that, when appropriate
speech and language measures are used to identify three divergent clinical presentations,
patterns of specific focal atrophy emerge: left inferior frontal and anterior insular regions in
NFPA, bilateral anterior temporal lobes in SD, and left temporoparietal area in LPA. Duration
of disease was similar across groups, and neuropsychological, neurological, and genetic
findings confirmed the differences between the three clinical variants. We discuss the
correspondence between cognitive and anatomical focality in PPA and suggest that FTLD
pathology might not always be the underlying process in patients who meet clinical criteria for
When all 31 PPA patients were compared with controls, the whole network of brain regions
involved in speech and language processing showed atrophy (left perisylvian and anterior
temporal areas), confirming previous findings of asymmetrical involvement of the left
hemisphere in PPA. When linguistic features were used to identify three different clinical
variants, specific patterns of focal anatomical damage emerged.
Nonfluent Progressive Aphasia
The main features of the NFPA group were significant apraxia of speech, syntactic deficits for
complex morphosyntactic structures, and atrophy in the left inferior frontal gyrus, premotor
cortex, and anterior insula regions. These results are consistent with previous findings on the
role of these regions in motor speech and syntax processing. The left precentral gyrus of the
insula has been associated with apraxia of speech in vascular patients,54 and one case of
nonfluent progressive aphasia due to AD showed neuronal loss that included the left insula.
Gorno-Tempini et al.
Ann Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
55 The finding of significant left anterior insula atrophy in a group of progressive
neurodegenerative patients who show significant apraxia of speech confirms this anatomicalcognitive association and provides an important localization tool for the clinician. The role of
Broca’s area and of more anterior left pre-frontal regions in syntactic comprehension and/or
motor speech56,57 is still debated. Lesions confined to Broca’s area result in mild and transient
language disturbances,58 whereas the full clinical picture of Broca’s aphasia is caused by larger
lesions in the left frontal lobe.58 On the other hand, recent functional neuroimaging studies
have shown Broca’s area activation in learning grammatical rules.59,60 Metabolic imaging
studies previously have shown frontal lobe hypometabolism in a few cases of “progressive
aphemia”23,25 who show different levels of language comprehension deficits. It is likely that
NFPA and “progressive aphemia” represent parts of a clinical spectrum, in which damage in
the insula/premotor inferior frontal area and/or in more anterior prefrontal regions causes
various degrees of speech and/or syntactic impairment.
The NFPA group was also the only group to show significant buccofacial and limb apraxia
and moderate extrapyramidal signs in the right hand and arm. No signs of MND were found.
Consistently, this group showed atrophy in the inferior frontal premotor areas involved with
the control of facial movements61 and the caudate nuclei, more extensively on the left.
Pathological confirmation will be necessary to definitely determine the cause in each of these
clinical syndromes. However, significant left frontal atrophy argues that NFPA could be the
left frontal variant of FTLD. Previous pathological studies have demonstrated that Pick’s or
DLDH type pathology can show a similar anatomical distribution.9 Alternatively, asymmetric
motor findings, praxis deficits, and atrophy in brain regions involved in motor functions raise
the possibility of a CBD cause.2 Longer clinical follow-up will determine whether the motor
involvement in NFPA could predict an evolution to the FTLD-MND syndrome.62
Semantic Dementia
The cognitive and anatomical features of SD have been extensively studied. Our findings
emphasize the need for more specific cognitive measures to correctly differentiate mild, early
presentations of SD from the more classic language deficits found in the logopenic variant. In
particular, we confirmed the striking dissociation in SD between impaired performance in
confrontation naming, semantic association tasks, and single-word comprehension versus
intact syntactic comprehension. Preserved speech fluency (rate, grammatical content, and
articulatory abilities) was also important in differentiating SD from NFPA and LPA.
We found bilateral anterior temporal atrophy in SD, confirming previous studies that associated
these regions with semantic memory deficits.29–32 SD has been associated mainly with FTLDlike pathology,12 but large pathological studies are still needed. The finding that APOE ε4
frequency in the SD group was 0% further supports this view.
Logopenic Progressive Aphasia
We identified a third group of patients who met general clinical criteria for PPA, but who, after
detailed speech and language evaluation, did not meet criteria for NFPA or SD. Because
patients showed a slow rate of speech output and word-finding pauses, and consistently with
previous reports, we called this group “logopenic.” Agrammatism in production and
articulation deficits were not typical of LPA patients. Single-word comprehension, recognition
of nonnamed items, and performance on the semantic association test were relatively spared,
whereas syntactic comprehension was markedly impaired. The deficit was not limited to the
most complex structures, as in the NFPA, but also included other constructions, such as simple
passives. This finding, together with a significant deficit in sentence repetition, suggests that
a short-term phonological memory deficit could be the core mechanism underlying the clinical
Gorno-Tempini et al.
Ann Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
presentation of LPA. Our VBM results are compatible with this idea, showing that the left
posterior temporal and parietal lobules were the areas most atrophied in LPA. Both patient
studies and functional imaging activation studies have, in fact, pointed to the inferior parietal
lobule as the site for the phonological store portion of the phonological loop.63–65
A recent study from the Mesulam’s group reported the findings of a VBM analysis on 11 PPA
patients, who were not classified as belonging to a specific clinical variant.35 Results showed
a left temporoparietal pattern of atrophy very similar to the one we found in LPA. This is
consistent with the fact that, based on the available data, most of their patients demonstrated
logopenic speech output without articulation difficulties, and thus might correspond to our
LPA variant. Our group of LPA patients also showed small clusters of atrophy in the right
parietal lobe and in the left anterior hippocampus. Although anterior hippocampal atrophy also
has been found in SD,29,32 neuroimaging and pathological evidence has shown that damage
to the left temporoparietal junction is typical of probable AD presenting mainly with language
symptoms.5,66–69 Furthermore, parietal involvement has been associated with probable AD
both in neuroimaging analysis in vivo34,70 and in pathological studies postmortem.71
Although pathological confirmation is needed for final diagnosis, the temporoparietal pattern
of atrophy and genetic evidence of a higher than expected frequency of the APOE ε4
haplotype72–74 in LPA (67%) suggest that many of these patients might have an atypical form
of AD. Alternatively, the possibility that this genetic profile could influence the location or
type of FTLD-like pathology also should be considered.
In conclusion, a comprehensive speech and language evaluation was necessary to identify three
clinical variants of PPA. A specific and focal pattern of brain atrophy within the speech and
language network and distinctive neuropsychological and genetic profiles were associated with
each clinical syndrome. The different cognitive, anatomical, and genetic profiles in NFPA, SD,
and LPA suggest that PPA is highly heterogeneous and that different variants may correspond
to different pathological profiles. Further studies combining detailed cognitive evaluation,
image analysis in vivo, and pathological findings are necessary to confirm this hypothesis.
Acknowledgements
The study was supported by grants from the John Douglas French Alzheimer’s Foundation (M.L.G.T., B.L.M.), the
McBean Foundation (B.L.M.), the Larry Hillblom Foundation , the Koret Foundation (99-0102,
B.L.M.), the NIH (National Institute on Aging, AG 19724, B.L.M.), and the State of California (03-75271 DHS/ADP/
ARCC and 01-15945 DHS/ADP, B.L.M.).
We thank patients and their families for the time and effort they dedicate to our research. We also thank G. Yu, and
J. Goldman, H. Feiler, D. Phayre, and K. Wilhelmsen for providing genetic data.