The Effect of Negation on Sentiment Analysis and
Retrieval Effectiveness
Lifeng Jia
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607, USA
 
Clement Yu
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607, USA
 
Weiyi Meng
Department of Computer Science
SUNY at Binghamton
Binghamton, NY 13902, USA
 
We investigate the problem of determining the polarity of
sentiments when one or more occurrences of a negation term such
as “not” appear in a sentence. The concept of the scope of a
negation term is introduced. By using a parse tree and typed
dependencies generated by a parser and special rules proposed by
us, we provide a procedure to identify the scope of each negation
term. Experimental results show that the identification of the
scope of negation improves both the accuracy of sentiment
analysis and the retrieval effectiveness of opinion retrieval.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search
and Retrieval – retrieval models, selection process; I.2.7
[Artificial Intelligence]: Natural Language Processing – text
General Terms: Algorithms, Experimentation, Languages
Keywords: Scope of Negation, Candidate Scope of Negation,
Sentiment Analysis, Retrieval Effectiveness, Opinion Retrieval
1. INTRODUCTION
In opinion retrieval, an opinionated document satisfies two
conditions: it is relevant to the query and has an opinion about the
query . The TREC 2007 blog track introduced a new
“polarity classification” task. The task is to provide sentiment
analysis on opinionated documents, i.e. it is to determine whether
a given opinionated document carries positive, negative or mixed
(both positive and negative) opinions. To determine the polarity
of an opinionated document, we first classify the polarities of
individual sentences and then aggregate the sentence level results
into a document level polarity. The polarity of a sentence is very
often recognized by certain sentimental words or phrases within it.
However, their contextual polarities are dependent on the scope of
each negation word or phrase preceding them, because their
polarities might be flipped by negation words or phrases.
Existing research has been conducted on
determining the impact of negation words or phrases on the
sentimental polarity of a sentence. In , the scope of a negation
word or phrase is assumed to be those words between that
negation and the first punctuation mark following it. suggest
that the scope of a negation term to be its next 5 words. In ,
the polarity of a sentimental term is flipped within the vicinity of
negation, which implies that the scope of negation is several
words to its right. Besides these heuristics in identifying the scope
of a negation word or phrase, some research evaluated the impact
of negation differently. introduces the concept of contextual
valence shifter, which consists of negation, intensifier and
diminisher. Contextual valence shifters have an impact of flipping
the polarity, increasing or decreasing the degree to which a
sentimental term is positive or negative. categorizes negations
into function negations, such as “not”, and contextual negation,
such as “eliminate”. Both kinds of negations can flip the polarity
of sentimental terms. The same problem but in the medical/health
domain was investigated in . However the precision involving
the negative word “not” is very low, at 63%. In this paper, we
assume that sentimental terms are either individual word or multiword phrases whose polarities have been pre-determined by
methods such as and negation terms are either
individual negation words or negation phrases. We concentrate on
the impact of negation terms on sentiment analysis. Negation
terms are not restricted to “not”. The most common negation
words are: no, not (or its contraction n’t), never, less, without,
barely, hardly and rarely; the most common negation phrases are:
no longer, no more, no way, no where, by no means, at no time,
not ... anymore. We restrict our analysis to the set of negative
terms given above in this paper.
The objectives of the paper are to determine the polarities of the
parts of a sentence, which may be affected by each occurrence of
a negation term and then utilize the polarity information to
improve retrieval effectiveness. Our study has the following
contributions. (a) We introduce the concept of the scope of a
negation term and provide a methodology to determine it. To our
knowledge, this study is the first one in which the scope of a
negation term is defined and a non-trivial procedure is provided
for its computation. (b) We study different methods of
determining the polarity of the candidate scope acted on by each
occurrence of a negation term in a sentence, where a candidate
scope represents a logical unit of a sentence containing the scope.
Experiments are performed to compare the effectiveness of these
methods. (c) We incorporate our technique of determining
polarity into an opinion retrieval system and compare it
against other existing techniques. Experimental results show that
our technique outperforms the other techniques in retrieval
effectiveness.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
CIKM’09, November 2–6, 2009, Hong Kong, China.
Copyright 2009 ACM 978-1-60558-512-3/09/11...$10.00.
2. PRELIMINARY DEFINITIONS
To identify the scope of a negation term, t, our strategy is to first
compute a candidate scope, which is a minimal “logical unit” of
the sentence containing the scope. Then, we prune those words
that are within the candidate scope but not within the scope.
Clearly, the candidate scope of t is a subset of the words
appearing after t in the sentence. The “logical unit” is the set of
descendant terminal (leaf) nodes of a non-terminal node in a parse
tree of the sentence. To ensure that the candidate scope is
minimal, we restrict the candidate scope not to extend to another
independent clause of the sentence. We give the following
computational procedure to approximate the candidate scope.
Procedure ComputedCandidateScope: Suppose a negation term
t occurs in a sentence S. Obtain a parse tree for S, say using
Stanford’s parser . Find the least common ancestor, LCA, of
the node representing t and the node representing the word, say t’,
immediately after t. Then, all descendant leaf nodes of LCA
starting from t’ and extending to its right hand side form the
candidate scope of t. Intuitively, it is the set of words whose
polarities may be flipped by t. The logical unit of the sentence,
which is the descendant leaf nodes of LCA with the exception of t
and its preceding words, is the computed candidate scope.
In order to precisely locate the scope of a negation term in a
sentence, we need to analyze the sentence syntactically. The parse
tree and typed dependencies of a sentence provide helpful
assistance in syntax analysis. A parse tree is an ordered and
rooted tree that represents the syntactic structure of the sentence
according to some formal grammar. The definitions of typed
dependency and five concrete typed dependencies, namely
“conjunction”, “copula” “open clausal complement”, “direct
object” and “indirect object” are given in and are omitted
due to limitation of space. They will be utilized in determining the
3. IDENTIFY THE SCOPE OF NEGATION
In this section, we discuss how to recognize the scope of a
negation term from the candidate scope, utilizing the concepts
defined in the last section.
3.1 Delimiters
The candidate scope of a negation term is not always its exact
scope. Therefore, after obtaining the candidate scope, we need to
identify its actual scope. In order to do it, the concepts of a
“delimiter” and a “conditional word delimiter” are introduced. A
delimiter d when encountered in the candidate scope CS of a
negation term eliminates certain words, including d and the words
after it from CS, whereas a conditional delimiter behaves as a
delimiter, if certain conditions are satisfied.
Definition 3.1 Delimiter: A delimiter has the capability to
eliminate some words from the candidate scope of a negation
term. The set of words eliminated by the delimiter is given by
either one of the two following rules:
All words including the delimiter and those after it are
eliminated, if there is no conjunction, satisfying rule (2).
Only a portion of the succeeding words is eliminated by
the delimiter. Let w be a delimiter. If w’, a succeeding
word of w forms a typed dependency of conjunction by
either “AND” or “OR” with some word w” that precedes
w and w” is not eliminated from the candidate scope, then
the words from w to w’ (including w but excluding w’) are
eliminated.
Examples of delimiters are “when”, “whenever”, “whether”,
“because”, “unless”, “until”, “since” and “hence”.
Definition 3.2 Conditional Word Delimiter: A conditional word
delimiter may or may not serve as a delimiter. It serves as a
delimiter and eliminates a subset of words from the candidate
scope if it satisfies some specific conditions. Examples of
conditional word delimiters include “so”, “as”, “which”, “who”,
“why”, “where”, “for”, “like” and quotation marks. If a
conditional delimiter serves as a delimiter, one of the above two
rules (1) and (2), which is applicable to a delimiter, is applied to
eliminate some words from the candidate scope. The types of
conditions, which make a conditional delimiter a delimiter,
include:(a) the part of speech of the conditional delimiter; (b) the
location of the negation term relative to the conditional delimiter;
and (c) the word leading to an adjective clause. Due to space
limitations, only a small number of conditions are listed above.
3.2 Heuristic Rules for Scope Detection
Besides certain specific words, which are word delimiters and
conditional word delimiters, we also propose rules involving
sentimental verbs, sentimental adjectives and sentimental nouns
such that the word immediately after one of these sentimental
terms acts as a delimiter. Furthermore, a heuristic rule concerning
double objects is proposed.
Sentimental Verb Rule: Whenever a negation term in a sentence
negates a sentimental verb, the word w immediately after the verb
serves as a delimiter.
Sentimental Adjective Rule: Whenever a sentimental adjective
forms a “cop” or “xcomp” typed dependency with the closest
preceding copula or verb, which is negated by a negation term,
the term immediately after this adjective serves as a delimiter.
Sentimental Noun Rule: Whenever a sentiment noun acts as the
object of a verb, which is negated by a negation term, the term
immediately after this noun is a delimiter.
Double Object Rule: Whenever a negation term negates a verb
taking double objects, only the direct object should be in the
scope and the indirect object should be excluded.
3.3 Exceptions of Scope of Negation
For a sentence with a negation term, we have introduced various
kinds of methods in identifying the scope of that negation term.
However, sometimes a negation term in a sentence does not have
any scope. In this section, we summarize several situations when
a negation term does not have a scope.
Exception Situation 1: Whenever a negation term is a part of
some special phrase without any negation sense, there is no scope
for this negation term. Examples of these special phrases include
“not only”, “not just”, “not to mention” and “no wonder”.
Exception Situation 2: A negation term does not have a scope
when it occurs in a negative rhetorical question. A negative
rhetorical question is identified by the following heuristic. (1) It is
a question; and (2) it has a negation term within the first three
words of the question.
Exception Situation 3: A negation term does not have a scope
when the sentence itself is a “restricted comparative sentence”.
Such a sentence is approximated by the pattern: modal word (such
as “can”) immediately followed by a negation term, immediately
followed by a copular verb (or get) or another tense of the verb
and followed by a comparative word.
3.4 Scope Identification Procedure
After introducing various techniques to identify the scope of a
negation term, we now present a procedure, which identifies the
scope of each occurrence of a negation term. This procedure takes
a sentence with one or more occurrences of negation terms as
input and outputs their scopes within the sentence. If a sentiment
term is within the scopes of i negation terms, then its polarity is
flipped i times.
For each occurrence of a negation term t within a sentence S,
Case 1: If the occurrence of t in S satisfies Exception Situations
1, 2 or 3, then the entire candidate scope of t is discarded.
Case 2: If all three conditions in Case 1 fail, obtain the candidate
scope, CS, of t according to the parse tree of the sentence S and
then identify the scope from CS by processing according to the
following cases.
Case 2.1: There are no word delimiters within CS and none of the
sentimental verb, adjective and noun rules and the double object
rule is satisfied. In this case, the scope is the candidate scope.
Case 2.2: When a word delimiter or a conditional word delimiter
satisfying the conditions to serve as a delimiter is encountered, the
scope is obtained from CS by applying delimiter rules (1) or (2) in
Definition 3.1.
Case 2.3: When the conditions in any of the three sentimental
rules are satisfied, the scope is obtained from CS by applying the
delimiter rules (1) or (2) in Definition 3.1.
Case 2.4: When the condition in the double object rule is
satisfied, the candidate scope is modified by discarding the
indirect object.
It is possible that different parts of a candidate scope of a negation
term satisfy the conditions of Cases 2.2, 2.3 or 2.4. For each
satisfied part, the candidate scope is modified accordingly.
4. SENTIMENT ANALYSIS
4.1 Sentiment Analysis on Candidate Scope
To analyze the polarity of a candidate scope CS, if CS contains
some sentimental terms, the contextual polarities of sentimental
terms are first determined by taking into the consideration of their
predetermined polarities and the scopes of negation terms (if exist)
preceding them; CS is then classified to be positive or negative if
all contextual polarities of sentimental terms are of the same
polarity; otherwise, CS is classified to be mixed. If no sentimental
terms occur in CS, the polarity of CS is neutral. Let this simple
combination method be denoted by SM.
Besides SM above, we also employ decision tree to determine the
polarity of CS. The decision tree has 8 independent features and
requires training examples. These features indicate the syntactic
roles of the sentimental terms within CS and are explained below.
Each of these features can take on one of the four values:
{positive, negative, mixed, neutral}. The 8 features are: (1)SI: the
sentimental polarity of the subject of an independent clause.
(2)PI: the sentimental polarity of the predicate of an independent
clause. (3)OI: the sentimental polarity of the object of an
independent clause. (4)MI: the sentimental polarity of the
modifier of an independent clause. (5)SD: the sentimental polarity
of the subject of a dependent clause. (6)PD: the sentimental
polarity of the predicate of a dependent clause. (7)OD: the
sentimental polarity of the object of a dependent clause. (8)MD:
the sentimental polarity of the modifier of a dependent clause.
For a sentence, all feature values are assigned accordingly. In
general, for each candidate scope, CS, a vector of 8 features is
computed and fed into Quinlan’s C4.5 decision tree program 
to generate the classifier. Let the decision tree method be denoted
4.2 Retrieval Effectiveness on TREC
Collection
The scope identification technique described in Section 3 is
incorporated into an opinion retrieval system to improve
the retrieval effectiveness of polarity classification of TREC
documents for given queries. A brief description is as follows.
Given a query, opinionated relevant documents are first retrieved
by an opinion retrieval system and then opinionative
sentences are classified into to be positively or negatively
opinionative ones by a polarity classifier, which uses features
consisting of positive and negative sentimental terms. If a feature
is within the scopes of an odd number of negation terms, its
negated feature is used instead. All features which are present in
the remaining part of the sentence are not modified. The classifier
used to classify each sentence is SVM-Light , which produces
either a positive score or a negative score for each sentence. Each
opinionative document is assigned a positive score and a negative
score by summing its positive/negative scores of its opinionative
sentences. If a document has a certain proportion of positive score
to negative score, then it is classified to be positive, negative or
mixed. Two ranked lists of opinionated documents are produced,
one for the positively ranked documents, and the other for the
negatively ranked documents.
5. EXPERIMENTS
To evaluate the effectiveness of our method on polarity
determination, we conduct two sets of experiments. In each set of
experiments, we compare our method with other methods, which
handle the negation terms in different ways. The first set of
experiments involves the accuracy of computing the polarity of a
sentence. The second set of experiments involves the ranking of
positively and negatively ranked opinionated documents retrieved
from 3.2 million TREC documents with respect to 150 TREC
5.1 Experimental Results
5.1.1 Sentiment Analysis on Candidate Scope
We now evaluate the accuracy of our method, SCT, in identifying
the scope of negation by a dataset that consists of 1000 sentences.
These sentences are randomly sampled from the review corpus
crawled from Rateitall.com. Instead of computing the scope of
negation, T, using our proposed method, three heuristics in
identifying T are as follows: (a) T is within K words to the right
of the negation term . For (a), we test values of K = 3, 4
and 5 and K = 4 gives the best results. Thus, we report results for
K = 4 only in this Section. This method (a) is denoted by SC4. (b)
T is the set of words containing the first sentimental term to the
right of the negation word. This method (b) is denoted by SC1st.
(c) T is the set of all the words within CS and this method is
denoted by SCCS. The polarity of the candidate scope can be
determined automatically using either SM or DT. For example,
SCT+DT represents that the scope of negation is first identified
by SCT and then the polarity of candidate scope is determined by
Table 1: The Accuracies of Various Methods.
5.1.2 Retrieval Effectiveness on TREC Collection
In the second set of experiments, we rank the positively and
negatively opinionative documents in the TREC blogosphere
collection including all 150 queries released from 2006 to 2008.
In the blog track of TREC 2008, the key measure to evaluate the
retrieval effectiveness is the Mean Average Precision (MAP).
Thus, we utilize the same measure here. Our method to rank these
two sets of documents for each query has been described in
Section 4.2. It is denoted by SCT, and is compared against other
methods. Specifically, the methods to be compared against are
listed below. (1) The method that is utilized in is denoted by
SCBL. It only flips the polarity of the closest sentimental term. (2)
The scope of each negation term is within K word to the right of
the negation term. Two methods with K = 4 and K = 5 are
proposed in and are denoted as SC4 and SC5. (3) Two
methods have been proposed to determine the polarity of an
expression within a sentence. An author in suggested that we
utilize the method denoted by SCNegEx , which achieved the
best accuracy of sentiment analysis at the sentence level in the
corpus of SemEval-07 . We follow this suggestion. The gold
standard provided by TREC is utilized. Table 2 shows the
effectiveness of the various methods in ranking positive and
negative documents.
Table 2: MAP scores of 5 methods on all TREC queries
150 TREC Queries: 851-950 and 1001-1050
Improvement
Improvement
6. CONCLUSION
We study the impact of each occurrence of a negation term in a
sentence on its polarity. We introduce the concept of scope of the
negation term t, which is precisely the sequence of words after t
and is affected by t. Techniques are provided to compute it. Two
sets of experiments are performed to compare our method against
other existing methods. Experimental results show that our
method outperforms other methods in both the accuracy of
sentiment analysis and the retrieval effectiveness of polarity
classification in opinion retrieval.
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We acknowledge the support of NSF via the grants: IIS-0842546
and IIS-0842608
8. REFERENCES
 WW. Chapman, W. Bridewell, P. Hanbury P, GF. Cooper
and BG. Buchanan. A simple algorithm for identifying
negated findings and diseases in discharge summaries. J
Biomed Inform. 2001 Oct. 34(5):301-10.
 Yejin Choi and Claire Cardie. Learning with Compositional
Semantics as Structural Inference for Subsentential
Sentiment Analysis. In Proc. of EMNLP 2008.
 G. Grefenstette, Y. Qu, J. Shanahan and D. Evans.
Coupling Niche Browsers and Affect Analysis for an
Opinion Mining Application. In Proc. of RIAO 2004.
 Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. Mining and summarizing
customer reviews. In Proc. of SIGKDD 2004.
 T Joachims. Making large-scale SVM learning practical.
Advances in Kernel Methods:Support Vector Learning.
 Alistair Kennedy, Diana Inkpen. Sentiment Classification of
Movie Reviews Using Contextual Valence Shifters.
Computational Intelligence, Vol. 22, , pp. 110-125.
 Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. Accurate
Unlexicalized Parsing. In Proc. of ACL 2003, pp. 423-430.
 Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill MacCartney and
Christopher D. Manning. Generating Typed Dependency
Parses from Phrase Structure Parses. In Proc. of LREC 2006.
 Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Christopher D. Manning.
Stanford typed dependencies manual, September 2008.
 I. Ounis, M. Rijke, C. Macdonald, G. Mishne, I. Soboroff.
Overview of the TREC-2006 Blog Track. In TREC 2006.
 I. Ounis, C. Macdonald and I. Soboroff. Overview of the
TREC-2007 Blog Track. In TREC 2007.
 Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
Thumbs up? Sentiment classification using machine learning
techniques. In Proc. of EMNLP 2002.
 J. R. Quinlan. C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning.
Morgan-Kaufman, 1993.
 Carlo Strapparava, Rada Mihalcea. Semeval-2007 task 14:
Affective text. In Proc. of SemEval, 2007.
 M. Taboada, J. Grieve. Analyzing appraisal automatically. In
AAAI Spring Symposium on Exploring Attitude and Affect
in Text: Theories and Applications. 2004, pp 158-161.
 T. Wilson, J. Wiebe, P. Hoffmann. Recognizing contextual
polarity in phrase-level sentiment analysis. In Proc. of
HLT/EMNLP 2005.
 K. Yang. WIDIT in TREC 2008 Blog Track: Leveraging
Multiple Sources of Opinion Evidence. In TREC 2008.
 W. Zhang, C. Yu and W. Meng. Opinion Retrieval from
Blogs. In Proc. of CIKM 2007.
 W. Zhang, L. Jia, C. Yu and W. Meng. Improve the
Effectiveness of the Opinion Retrieval and Opinion Polarity
Classification. In Proc. of CIKM 2008.