COMPRESSIVE TRANSFORMERS
FOR LONG-RANGE
SEQUENCE MODELLING
Jack W. Rae∗∗† ‡
Anna Potapenko*†
Siddhant M. Jayakumar†
Chloe Hillier†
Timothy P. Lillicrap†‡
We present the Compressive Transformer, an attentive sequence model which
compresses past memories for long-range sequence learning. We ﬁnd the Compressive Transformer obtains state-of-the-art language modelling results in the
WikiText-103 and Enwik8 benchmarks, achieving 17.1 ppl and 0.97 bpc respectively. We also ﬁnd it can model high-frequency speech effectively and can be
used as a memory mechanism for RL, demonstrated on an object matching task.
To promote the domain of long-range sequence learning, we propose a new openvocabulary language modelling benchmark derived from books, PG-19.
INTRODUCTION
Humans have a remarkable ability to remember information over long time horizons. When reading
a book, we build up a compressed representation of the past narrative, such as the characters and
events that have built up the story so far. We can do this even if they are separated by thousands
of words from the current text, or long stretches of time between readings. During daily life, we
make use of memories at varying time-scales: from locating the car keys, placed in the morning,
to recalling the name of an old friend from decades ago. These feats of memorisation are not
achieved by storing every sensory glimpse throughout one’s lifetime, but via lossy compression. We
aggressively select, ﬁlter, or integrate input stimuli based on factors of surprise, perceived danger,
or repetition — amongst other signals .
Memory systems in artiﬁcial neural networks began with very compact representations of the past.
Recurrent neural networks ) learn to represent the history of observations in a compressed state vector. The state is compressed because it uses far less space than the
history of observations — the model only preserving information that is pertinent to the optimization
of the loss. The LSTM is perhaps the most ubiquitous RNN
variant; it uses learned gates on its state vector to determine what information is stored or forgotten
from memory.
However since the LSTM, there has been great beneﬁt discovered in not bottlenecking all historical information in the state, but instead in keeping past activations around in an external memory
and attending to them. The Transformer is a sequence model which stores
the hidden activation of every time-step, and integrates this information using an attention operator
 . The Transformer will thus represent the past with a tensor (depth × memory size × dimension) of past observations that is, in practice, an order of magnitude larger than an
LSTM’s hidden state. With this granular memory, the Transformer has brought about a step-change
in state-of-the-art performance, within machine translation , language modelling , video captioning , and a multitude
of language understanding benchmarks amongst others.
One drawback in storing everything is the computational cost of attending to every time-step and
the storage cost of preserving this large memory. Several works have focused on reducing the
computational cost of attention with sparse access mechanisms . However sparse attention does not solve the storage
problem, and often requires custom sparse kernels for efﬁcient implementation. Instead we look
back to the notion of compactly representing the past. We show this can be built with simple dense
linear-algebra components, such as convolutions, and can reduce both the space and compute cost
of our models.
We propose the Compressive Transformer, a simple extension to the Transformer which maps past
hidden activations (memories) to a smaller set of compressed representations (compressed memories). The Compressive Transformer uses the same attention mechanism over its set of memories
and compressed memories, learning to query both its short-term granular memory and longer-term
coarse memory. We observe this improves the modelling of text, achieving state-of-the-art results
in character-based language modelling — 0.97 bpc on Enwik8 from the Hutter Prize 
— and word-level language modelling — 17.1 perplexity on WikiText-103 .
Speciﬁcally, we see the Compressive Transformer improves the modelling of rare words.
We show the Compressive Transformer works not only for language, but can also model the
waveform of high-frequency speech with a trend of lower likelihood than the TransformerXL and
Wavenet when trained over 400,000 steps. We also show the Compressive Transformer can be used as a memory component within an RL agent, IMPALA ,
and can successfully compress and make use of past observations.
Furthermore we present a new book-level language-modelling benchmark PG-19, extracted from
texts in Project Gutenberg1, to further promote the direction of long-context sequence modelling.
This is over double the size of existing LM benchmarks and contains text with much longer contexts.
RELATED WORK
There have been a variety of recent attempts to extend the range of attention, particularly in the
Transformer, or to replace the attention operation with something less expensive. Wu et al. 
show that a convolution-like operator that runs in linear time can actually exceed the performance
of the quadratic-time self-attention layer in the Transformer at sentence-to-sentence translation and
sentence-level language modelling. However such a mechanism inhibits the ﬂow of information
across a large number of time-steps for a given layer, and has not shown to be beneﬁcial for longrange sequence modelling.
Dai et al. propose the TransformerXL, which keeps past activations around in memory. They
also propose a novel relative positional embedding scheme which they see outperforms the Transformer’s original absolute positional system. Our model incorporates both of these ideas, the use of
a memory to preserve prior activations and their relative positional embedding scheme.
The Sparse Transformer uses ﬁxed sparse attention masks to attend to roughly
√n locations in memory. This approach still requires keeping all memories around during training,
however with careful re-materialization of activations and custom kernels, the authors are able to
train the model with a reasonable budget of memory and compute. When run on Enwik8, the much
larger attention window of 8, 000 improves model performance, but overall it does not signiﬁcantly
outperform a simpler TransformerXL with a much smaller attention window.
The use of dynamic attention spans is explored in Sukhbaatar et al. . Different attention heads
can learn to have shorter or longer spans of attention — and they observe this achieves state-ofthe-art in character-based language modelling. This idea could easily be combined with our contribution — a compressive memory. However an efﬁcient implementation is not possible on current
dense-linear-algebra accelerators, such as Google’s TPUs, due to the need for dynamic and sparse
computation. Our approach builds on simple dense linear algebra components, such as convolutions.
We present the Compressive Transformer, a long-range sequence model which compacts past activations into a compressed memory. The Compressive Transformer is a variant of the Transformer
1 
Compressed Memory
Figure 1: The Compressive Transformer keeps a ﬁne-grained memory of past activations, which are
then compressed into coarser compressed memories. The above model has three layers, a sequence
length ns = 3, memory size nm = 6, compressed memory size ncm = 6. The highlighted memories
are compacted, with a compression function fc per layer, to a single compressed memory — instead
of being discarded at the next sequence. In this example, the rate of compression c = 3.
 , a deep residual network which only uses attention to propagate information
over time (namely multi-head attention). We build on the ideas of the TransformerXL which maintains a memory of past activations at each layer to preserve a longer history of context. The TransformerXL discards past activations when they become sufﬁciently old (controlled by
the size of the memory). The key principle of the Compressive Transformer is to compress these old
memories, instead of discarding them, and store them in an additional compressed memory.
DESCRIPTION
We deﬁne nm and ncm to be the number of respective memory and compressive memory slots in the
model per layer. The overall input sequence S = x1, x2, . . . , x|s| represents input observations (e.g.
tokens from a book). These are split into ﬁxed-size windows of size ns for the model to process in
parallel. The model observes x = xt, . . . , xt+ns at time t, which we refer to as the sequence (e.g. in
Figure 1). As the model moves to the next sequence, its ns hidden activations are pushed into a ﬁxedsized FIFO memory (like the TransformerXL). The oldest ns activations in memory are evicted, but
unlike the TransformerXL we do not discard them. Instead we apply a compression operation,
fc : Rns×d →R⌊ns
c ⌋×d, mapping the ns oldest memories to ⌊ns
c ⌋compressed memories which we
then store in a secondary FIFO compressed memory. d denotes the hidden size of activations and c
refers to the compression rate, a higher value indicates more coarse-grained compressed memories.
The full architecture is described in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Compressive Transformer
At time zero
// Initialize memory to zeros (l × nm × d)
// Initialize compressed memory to zeros (l × ncm × d)
3: h(1) ←xWemb
// Embed input sequence(ns × d)
4: for layer i = 1, 2, . . . , l do
mem(i) ←concat(cm(i)
// ((ncm + nm) × d)
˜a(i) ←multihead attention(i)(h(i), mem(i)
// MHA over both mem types (ns × d)
a(i) ←layer norm(˜a(i) + h(i))
// Regular skip + layernorm (ncm × d)
old mem(i) ←m(i)
// Oldest memories to be forgotten (ns × d)
new cm(i) ←f (i)
c (old mem(i))
// Compress oldest memories by factor c (⌊ns
t+1 ←concat(m(i)
t , h(i))[−nm :]
// Update memory (nm × d)
←concat(cm(i)
t , new cm(i))[−ncm :]
// Update compressed memory (ncm × d)
h(i+1) ←layer norm(mlp(i)(a(i)) + a(i))
// Mixing MLP (ns × d)
Algorithm 2 Attention-Reconstruction Loss
1: Lattn ←0
2: for layer i = 1, 2, . . . , l do
h(i) ←stop gradient(h(i))
// Stop compression grads from passing...
old mem(i) ←stop gradient(old mem(i))
// ...into transformer network.
Q, K, V ←stop gradient(attention params at layer i)
// Re-use attention weight matrices.
def attn(h, m) ←σ((hQ) (mK))(mV)
// Use content-based attention (no relative).
new cm(i) ←f (i)
c (old mem(i))
// Compression network (to be optimized).
Lattn ←Lattn + ||attn(h(i), old mem(i)) −attn(h(i), new cm(i))||2
COMPRESSION FUNCTIONS AND LOSSES
For choices of compression functions fc we consider (1) max/mean pooling, where the kernel and
stride is set to the compression rate c;
(2) 1D convolution also with kernel & stride set to c;
(3) dilated convolutions; (4) most-used where the memories are sorted by their average attention
(usage) and the most-used are preserved. The pooling is used as a fast and simple baseline. The mostused compression scheme is inspired from the garbage collection mechanism in the Differentiable
Neural Computer where low-usage memories are erased. The convolutional
compression functions contain parameters which require training.
One can train the compression network using gradients from the loss; however for very old memories
this requires backpropagating-through-time (BPTT) over long unrolls. As such we also consider
some local auxiliary compression losses. We consider an auto-encoding loss where we reconstruct
the original memories from the compressed memories Lae = ||old mem(i) −g(new cm(i))||2,
where g : R
c ×d →Rns×d is learned. This is a lossless compression objective — it attempts
to retain all information in memory. We also consider an attention-reconstruction loss described
in Algorithm 2 which reconstructs the content-based attention over memory, with content-based
attention over the compressed memories. This is a lossy objective, as information that is no longer
attended to can be discarded, and we found this worked best. We stop compression loss gradients
from passing into the main network as this prevents learning. Instead the Transformer optimizes
the task objective and the compression network optimizes the compression objective conditioned on
task-relevant representations; there is no need to mix the losses with a tuning constant.
TEMPORAL RANGE
The TransformerXL with a memory of size n has a maximum temporal range of l × n with an
attention cost of O(n2
s + nsn) for a detailed discussion). The Compressive
Transformer now has a maximum temporal range of l × (nm + c ∗ncm) with an attention cost of
s + ns(nm + ncm)). For example, setting ncm = nm = n/2 and c = 3 we obtain a maximum
temporal range that is two times greater than the TransformerXL with an identical attention cost.
Thus if we can learn in the c > 1 compressed setting, the temporal range of the model can be
signiﬁcantly increased.
PG-19 BENCHMARK
As models begin to incorporate longer-range memories, it is important to train and benchmark them
on data containing larger contexts. Natural language in the form of text provides us with a vast
repository of data containing long-range dependencies, that is easily accessible. We propose a new
language modelling benchmark, PG-19, using text from books extracted from Project Gutenberg 2.
We select Project Gutenberg books which were published over 100 years old, i.e. before 1919
(hence the name PG-19) to avoid complications with international copyright, and remove short texts.
The dataset contains 28, 752 books, or 11GB of text — which makes it over double the size of
BookCorpus and Billion Word Benchmark.
2The authors intend to release the PG-19 dataset along with the split into train, validation and test subsets.
Table 1: Comparison to existing popular language modelling benchmarks.
Avg. length (words)
Train Size
News (sentences)
Penn Treebank
News (articles)
WikiText-103
Wikipedia (articles)
RELATED DATASETS
The two most benchmarked word-level language modelling datasets either stress the modelling of
stand-alone sentences ) or the modelling of a
small selection of short news articles ). Merity
et al. proposed the WikiText-103 dataset, which contains text from a high quality subset of
English-language wikipedia articles. These articles are on average 3, 600 words long. This dataset
has been a popular recent LM benchmark due to the potential to exploit longer-range dependencies
 . However recent Transformer models, such
as the TransformerXL appear to be able to exploit temporal dependencies on the
order of several thousand words. This motivates a larger dataset with longer contexts.
Books are a natural choice of long-form text, and provide us with stylistically rich and varied natural
language. Texts extracted from books have been used for prior NLP benchmarks; such as the Children’s Book Test and LAMBADA . These benchmarks use
text from Project Gutenberg, an online repository of books with expired US copyright, and Book-
Corpus , a prior dataset of 11K unpublished (at time of authorship) books. CBT
and LAMBADA contain extracts from books, with a speciﬁc task of predicting held-out words. In
the case of LAMBADA the held-out word is speciﬁcally designed to be predictable for humans with
access to the full textual context — but difﬁcult to guess with only a local context.
CBT and LAMBADA are useful for probing the linguistic intelligence of models, but are not ideal
for training long-range language models from scratch as they truncate text extracts to at most a
couple of paragraphs, and discard a lot of the books’ text. There has been prior work on training
models on book data using BookCorpus directly ) however
BookCorpus is no longer distributed due to licensing issues, and the source of data is dynamically
changing — which makes exact benchmarking difﬁcult over time.
The NarrativeQA Book Comprehension Task uses Project Gutenberg texts
paired with Wikipedia articles, which can be used as summaries. Due to the requirement of needing
a corresponding summary, NarrativeQA contains a smaller selection of books: 1,527 versus the
28,752 books in PG-19. However it is reasonable that PG-19 may be useful for pre-training book
summarisation models.
STATISTICS
A brief comparison of PG-19 to other LM datasets can be found in Table 1. We intentionally do not
limit the vocabulary by unk-ing rare words, and release the dataset as an open-vocabulary benchmark. To compare models we propose to continue measuring the word-level perplexity. This can
still be computed for any chosen character-based, byte-based or subword-based scheme. To do this,
one calculates the total cross-entropy loss L = −P
t log(pt|p<t) over the given validation or test
subset using a chosen tokenization scheme, and then one normalizes this value by the number of
words: L/nwords where nwords is the total number of words in the given subset, taken from Table
2. The word-level perplexity is thus eL/nwords. For sake of model comparisons, it is important to
use the exact number of words computed in Table 2 as the normalisation constant.
Alongside quantitative analyses, we build an LDA topic model for a qualitative
inspection of the text. We present key words for several topics in the Supplementary Table 10. These
topics include art, education, naval exploration, geographical description, war, ancient civilisations,
and more poetic topics concerning the human condition — love, society, religion, virtue etc. This
contrasts to the more objective domains of Wikipedia and news corpora.
Table 2: PG-19 statistics split by subsets.
1,973,136,207
Table 3: Eval. perplexities on PG-19.
36L TransformerXL
36L Compressive Transf.
Table 4: State-of-the-art results on Enwik8.
7L LSTM 
LN HyperNetworks Ha et al. 
LN HM-LSTM Chung et al. 
ByteNet 
RHN Zilly et al. 
mLSTM Krause et al. 
64L Transf. Al-Rfou et al. 
24L TXL 
Sparse Transf. 
Adaptive Transf. 
24L TXL (ours)
24L Compressive Transformer
Table 5: Compression approaches on Enwik8.
Compression fn
Compression loss
Max Pooling
Auto-encoding
Mean Pooling
Dilated conv
EXPERIMENTS
We optimised all models with Adam . We used a learning rate schedule
with a linear warmup from 1e-6 to 3e-4 and a cosine decay back down to 1e-n6. For characterbased LM we used 4, 000 warmup steps with 100, 000 decay steps, and for word-based LM we used
16, 000 warmup steps with 500, 000 decay steps. We found that decreasing the optimisation update
frequency helped (see Section 5.5.1), namely we only applied parameter updates every 4 steps after
60, 000 iterations. However we found the models would optimise well for a range of warmup/warmdown values. We clipped the gradients to have a norm of at most 0.1, which was crucial to successful
optimisation.
We benchmark the Compressive Transformer against the TransformerXL on the newly proposed PG-
19 books dataset. Because it is open-vocabulary, we train a subword vocabulary of size 32000 with
SubwordTextEncoder from the tfds package in TensorFlow and use the dataset statistics to compute
word-level perplexity, as described in Section 4.2. We train a 36 layer Compressive Transformer with
a window size of 512, both memory and compressed memory size of 512, and compression rate C =
2. We compare this to a 36 layer TransformerXL trained with window size 512 and attention window
1024. The model was trained on 256 TPUv3 cores with a total batch size of 512 and converged after
processing around 100 billion subword tokens. We display the results in Table 3 where we see the
Compressive Transformer obtains a test perplexity of 33.6 versus the TransformerXL’s 36.3. Despite
the dataset size, it is clearly a challenging domain. This can suit as a ﬁrst baseline on the proposed
long-range language modelling benchmark. We show samples from this model in Supplementary
Section E. The model is able to generate long-form narrative of varying styles: from character
dialogue, ﬁrst person diary entries, to descriptive third-person text.
We compare the TransformerXL and the Compressive Transformer on the standard character-level
language modelling benchmark Enwiki8 taken from the Hutter Prize , which contains
100M bytes of unprocessed Wikipedia text. We select the ﬁrst 90MB for training, 5MB for validation, and the latter 5MB for testing — as per convention. We train 24-layer models with a sequence
window size of 768. During training, we set the TransformerXL’s memory size to 2304, and for
the Compressive Transformer we use memory of size 768 and compressed memory of size 1152
with compression rate C = 3. During evaluation, we increased the TransformerXL memory size
to 4096 and the compressed memory in our model to 3072 (after sweeping over the validation set),
obtaining the numbers reported in Table 4. We show the effect of scaling the compressed memory
size and evaluation performance in Supplementary Section B. The proposed model achieves the new
state-of-the-art on this dataset with 0.97 bits-per-character.
We compare compression functions and the use of auxiliary losses in Table 5. We sweep over
compression rates of 2, 3, and 4 and report results with the best performing value for each row.
BPTT signiﬁes that no auxiliary compression loss was used to train the network other than the
overall training loss. To feed gradients into the compression function we unrolled the model over
double the sequence length and halved the batch size to ﬁt the larger unroll into memory.
WIKITEXT-103
We train an eighteen-layered Compressive Transformer on the closed-vocabulary word-level language modelling benchmark WikiText-103, which contains articles from Wikipedia. We train the
model with a compressed memory size, memory size, and a sequence window size all equal to 512.
We trained the model over 64 Tensor Processing Units (TPU) v3 with a batch size of 2 per core —
making for a total batch size of 128. The model converged in a little over 12 hours. We found the
single-layer convolution worked best, with a compression rate of c = 4. This model obtained 17.6
perplexity on the test set. By tuning the memory size over the validation set — setting the memory
size to 500, and compressed memory size to 1, 500 — we obtain 17.1 perplexity. This is 1.2 perplexity points over prior state of the art, and means the model places a ≈5% higher probability on
the correct word over the prior SotA TransformerXL.
It is worth noting that in Table 6 we do not list methods that use additional training data, or that make
use of test-time labels to continue training the model on the test set ). If we incorporate a very naive dynamic evaluation approach of loading a model
checkpoint and continuing training over one epoch of the test set, then we obtain a test perplexity
of 16.1. This is slightly better than the published 16.4 from Krause et al. — which uses a
more sophisticated dynamic evaluation approach on top of the TransformerXL. However in most
settings, one does not have access to test-time labels — and thus we do not focus on this setting.
Furthermore there has been great progress in showing that more data equates to much better language modelling; Shoeybi et al. ﬁnd a large transformer 8B-parameter transformer trained
on 170GB of text obtains 10.7 word-level perplexity on WikiText-103. However it is not clear to
what extent the WikiText-103 test set may be leaked inside these larger training corpora. For clarity
of model comparisons, we compare to published results trained on the WikiText-103 training set.
Certainly the direction of larger scale and more data appear to bring immediate gains to the quality
of existing language models. Both data scale and quality alongside intelligent model design are
complementary lines of research towards better sequence modelling.
We break perplexity down by word frequency in Table 7 and see the Compressive Transformer makes only a small modelling improvement for frequent words (2.6% over the TransformerXL baseline) but obtains a much larger improvement of ≈20% for infrequent words. Furthermore, we see 10X improvement in modelling rare words over the prior state-of-the-art LSTM
language model published in 2018 — which demonstrates the rate of progress in this area.
COMPRESSIBILITY OF LAYERS
We can use compression to better understand the model’s mode of operation. We inspect how
compressible Transformer’s activations are as they progress through higher layers in the network.
One may expect representations to become more difﬁcult to compress at higher layers, if more
semantic information is represented there. We monitor the compression loss at each layer of our
best-performing Compressive Transformer models trained on Enwik8 and WikiText-103 and display
these in Supplementary Section A Figure 6. We note that the compression loss is about one order of
magnitude higher for word-level language modelling (WikiText-103) over character-level langauge
modelling (Enwik8). Furthermore the ﬁrst layer of the Transformer is highly compressible. However
there is not a clear trend of compression cost increasing with layer depth.
Table 6: Validation and test perplexities on WikiText-103.
LSTM 
Temporal CNN 
GCNN-14 
Quasi-RNN Bradbury et al. 
RMC 
LSTM+Hebb. 
Transformer 
18L TransformerXL, M=384 
18L TransformerXL, M=1024 (ours)
18L Compressive Transformer, M=1024
Table 7: WikiText-103 test perplexity broken down by word frequency buckets. The most frequent
bucket is words which appear in the training set more than 10, 000 times, displayed on the left. For
reference, a uniform model would have perplexity |V | = 2.6e5 for all frequency buckets. *LSTM
comparison from Rae et al. 
TransformerXL (ours)
Compressive Transformer
Relative gain over TXL
We inspect where the network is attending to on average, to determine whether it is using its compressed memory. We average the attention weight over a sample of 20, 000 sequences from a trained
model on Enwik8. We aggregate the attention into eighteen buckets, six for each of the compressed
memory, memory, and sequence respectively. We set the size of the sequence, memory and compressed memory all to be 768. We plot this average attention weight per bucket in Figure 2 with a
1σ standard error. We see most of the attention is placed on the current sequence; with a greater
weight placed on earlier elements of the sequence due to the causal self-attention mechanism which
masks future attention weights. We also observe there is an increase in attention from the oldest
activations stored in the regular memory, to the activations stored in the compressed memory. This
goes against the trend of older memories being accessed less frequently — and gives evidence
that the network is learning to preserve salient information.
OPTIMISATION SCHEDULE
We make an observation about an interesting but undesirable meta-learning phenomenon during
long-context training. When the learning rate is tuned to be much smaller (or set to zero) during
training, performance degrades drastically both for the TransformerXL and the Compressive Transformer. This is displayed in Figure 3.
Usually we consider distributional shift from the training data to the test data, but we can also
observe a shift in the model when transferring from a training to evaluation mode (even when the
model is evaluated on the training data). In this case, this is due to the online updating of parameters
whilst processing long contiguous articles. We would like the model to generalise well to scenarios
where it is not continuously optimised. Updating the parameters only at article boundaries (and then
resetting the state) could be one solution for long-range memory models, but this would slow down
learning signiﬁcantly.
Instead, we propose reducing the frequency of optimisation updates during training. We ﬁnd this
allows for the best of both worlds — fast initial learning with frequent updates, and better generalisation near the end of training with less frequent updates (e.g. every 4 steps). Reducing the
optimisation frequency increases the effective batch size, which has also been shown to be prefer-
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Compressed Memory Memory Sequence
Average attention weight
Figure 2: Attention weight on Enwik8. Average attention weight from the sequence over
the compressed memory (oldest), memory, and
sequence (newest) respectively. The sequence
self-attention is causally masked, so more attention is placed on earlier elements in the sequence. There is an increase in attention at the
transition from memory to compressed memory.
Training iterations
Training BPC
Change learning rate
during training
Learning Rate
3e-4 update period=2
Figure 3: Learning rate analysis. Reducing the
learning rate (e.g. to zero) during training (on
Enwik8) harms training performance. Reducing the frequency of optimisation updates (effectively increasing the batch size) is preferable.
able to learning rate decay in image modelling . We observed a ﬁnal performance
improvement in our TransformerXL baseline on Enwik8, from 0.995 — which approximately replicates the published result — to 0.984 — which matches the most recent SotA architecture. We note,
the additional space and compute cost of accumulating gradients is negligible across iterations, so
there was no performance regression in using this scheme.
We train the Compressive Transformer on the waveform of speech to assess its performance on
different modalities. Speech is interesting because it is sampled at an incredibly high frequency, but
we know it contains a lot of information on the level of phonemes and entire phrases.
To encourage long-term reasoning, we refrain from conditioning the model on speaker identity or
text features, but focus on unconditional speech modelling. We train the model on 24.6 hours of
24kHz North American speech data. We chunk the sequences into windows of size 3840, roughly
80ms of audio, and compare a 20-layer Compressive Transformer to a 20-layer TransformerXL
and a 30-layer WaveNet model — a state-of-the-art audio generative model
used to serve production speech synthesis applications at Google . All networks
have approximately 40M parameters, as WaveNet is more parameter-efﬁcient per layer. We train
each network with 32 V100 GPUs, and a batch size of 1 per core (total batch size of 32) using
synchronous training.
WaveNet processes an entire chunk in parallel, however the TransformerXL and Compressive Transformer are trained with a window size of 768 and a total memory size of 1, 568 (for the Compressive Transformer we use 768 memory + 768 compressed). We thus unroll the model over the sequence. Despite this sequential unroll, the attention-based models train at only half the speed of
WaveNet. We see the test-set negative-log-likelihood in Figure 4, and observe that a Compressive
Transformer with a compression rate of 4 is able to outperform the TransformerXL and maintain
a slim advantage over WaveNet. However we only trained models for at most one week (with
32GPUs) and it would be advantageous to continue training until full convergence — before deﬁnitive conclusions are made.
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
Compression is a good ﬁt for video input sequences because subsequent frames have high mutual
information. Here we do not test out the Compressive Transformer on video, but progress straight to
a reinforcement learning agent task that receives a video stream of visual observations — but must
ultimately learn to use its memory to reason over a policy.
50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 300000 350000 400000
Training Iterations
Compressive Transformer 20L C=4
TransformerXL 20L
Wavenet 30L
Figure 4: Speech Modelling. We see the Compressive Transformer is able to obtain competitive results against the state-of-the-art WaveNet
in the modelling of raw speech sampled at
Human Normalised Score
Compression Rate
Figure 5: Vision and RL. We see the Compressive Transformer integrates visual information across time within an IMPALA RL agent,
trained on an object matching task.
We test the Compressive Transformer as a drop-in replacement to an LSTM in the IMPALA setup
 . Otherwise, we use the same training framework and agent architecture as
described in the original work with a ﬁxed learning rate of 1.5e-5 and entropy cost coefﬁcient of
2e-3. We test the Compressive Transformer on a challenging memory task within the DMLab-30
 domain, rooms select nonmatching object. This requires the agent to explore
a room in a visually rich 3D environment and remember the object present. The agent can then
advance to a second room where it must select the object not present in the original room. This
necessitates that the agent both remember events far in the past, and also learn to efﬁciently reason
about them.
We ﬁx both the memory and compressed memory sizes to 64. In Figure 5, we present results for a
range of compression rates, averaged over 3 seeds. We see that the best performing agents endowed
with the Compressive Transformer are able to solve the task to human-level. We note that the model
with compression rate 1 is unable to learn the task to the same proﬁciency. The speed of learning
and stability seem to increase proportionally with higher rates of compression (up to a limit) – i.e.
the effective memory window of the agent – and we ﬁnd compression rate 4 to once again be the
best performing. We see this as a promising sign that the architecture is able to efﬁciently learn,
and suitably use, compressed representations of its visual input and hope to test this more widely in
future work.
CONCLUSION
In this paper we explore the notion of compression as a means of extending the temporal receptive
ﬁeld of Transformer-based sequence models. We see a beneﬁt to this approach in the domain of
text, with the Compressive Transformer outperforming existing architectures at long-range language
modelling. To continue innovation in this area, we also propose a new book-level LM benchmark,
PG-19. This may be used to compare long-range language models, or to pre-train on other longrange reasoning language tasks, such as NarrativeQA .
We see the idea of compressive memories is applicable not only to the modality of text, but also
audio, in the form of modelling the waveform of speech, and vision, within a reinforcement-learning
agent trained on a maze-like memory task. In both cases, we compare to very strong baselines
 and IMPALA ).
The main limitation of this work is additional complexity, if the task one wishes to solve does not
contain long-range reasoning then the Compressive Transformer is unlikely to provide additional
beneﬁt. However as a means of scaling memory and attention, we do think compression is a simpler
approach to dynamic or sparse attention — which often requires custom kernels to make efﬁcient.
One can build effective compression modules from simple neural network components, such as
convolutions. The compression components are immediately efﬁcient to run on GPUs and TPUs.
Memory systems for neural networks began as compressed state representations within RNNs. The
recent wave of progress using attention-based models with deep and granular memories shows us
that it is beneﬁcial to refrain from immediately compressing the past. However we hypothesise that
more powerful models will contain a mixture of granular recent memories and coarser compressed
memories. Future directions could include the investigation of adaptive compression rates by layer,
the use of long-range shallow memory layers together with deep short-range memory, and even the
use of RNNs as compressors. Compressive memories should not be forgotten about just yet.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Chris Dyer, Felix Gimeno, and Koray Kavukcuoglu for reviewing the manuscript. We
thank Peter Dayan, Adam Santoro, Jacob Menick, Emilio Parisotto, Hyunjik Kim, Simon Osindero, Sergey Bartunov, David Raposo, and Daan Wierstra for ideas regarding model design. We
thank Yazhe Li and Aaron Van de Oord for their help and advice in instrumenting speech modelling
experiments. Finally, we thank our wider DeepMind colleagues for supporting this project with
stimulating discussions, engineering infrastructure, and positive reinforcement signals.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Model and Experiment design: JR, TL, AP, SJ
Dataset creation: AP, JR, CH
Text experiments: JR, AP
RL experiments: SJ
Speech experiments: JR
This research was funded by DeepMind.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interests.