Learning to Read Irregular Text with Attention Mechanisms
Xiao Yang, Dafang He, Zihan Zhou, Daniel Kifer, C. Lee Giles
The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
{xuy111, duh188}@psu.edu, , , 
We present a robust end-to-end neural-based model
to attentively recognize text in natural images. Particularly, we focus on accurately identifying irregular (perspectively distorted or curved) text, which
has not been well addressed in the previous literature. Previous research on text reading often works
with regular (horizontal and frontal) text and does
not adequately generalize to processing text with
perspective distortion or curving effects. Our work
proposes to overcome this difﬁculty by introducing
two learning components: (1) an auxiliary dense
character detection task that helps to learn text speciﬁc visual patterns, (2) an alignment loss that provides guidance to the training of an attention model.
We show with experiments that these two components are crucial for achieving fast convergence and
high classiﬁcation accuracy for irregular text recognition. Our model outperforms previous work on
two irregular-text datasets: SVT-Perspective and
CUTE80, and is also highly-competitive on several
regular-text datasets containing primarily horizontal and frontal text.
Introduction
Reading text from natural images is a challenging problem.
The rich semantic information carried by the text is useful for
many applications such as navigation, trafﬁc sign reading for
autonomous driving, and assistive technologies for the visually impaired. While reading text in scanned documents has
been extensively studied and many production quality Optical Character Recognition (OCR) systems exist, reading text
in natural images remains a difﬁcult task. The imperfect imagery conditions in natural images, such as low resolution,
blurring, and challenging perspective distortions have limited
computers from accurately reading text in the wild.
A text reading system often consists of two parts: 1) scene
text detection that localizes each word in natural images and
2) scene text recognition that takes a cropped image of a single word and outputs the depicted text. This work focuses
on improving the second part. In particular, we ﬁnd most existing studies consider horizontal and frontal text . These systems are not
Figure 1: Examples of irregular (perspectively distorted or curved)
text in natural images.
readily generalizable to processing irregular (perspectively
distorted or curved) text. However, irregular text is pervasive
in natural images. As shown in Figure 1, text captured by a
side-view camera suffers from perspective distortion and text
on bottles, products, or shop signs may have curved character
placement. Therefore, developing a robust model to read both
regular and irregular text is important for real world problems.
Here, we present an end-to-end, deep neural-based model
that can accurately read irregular text. Inspired by the attention mechanism of human vision system and its analogy
in several vision tasks, our model ﬁrst learns high-level visual representations using a deep convolutional neural network (CNN), then attentively recognize sequence of characters with a recurrent neural network (RNN).
A related work to ours is Lee and Osindero who
proposed a recursive recurrent net with attention modeling
(R2AM) for regular text recognition. But their approach is not
directly applicable to handle irregular text reading. We observe that irregular character placement in rotated or curved
text signiﬁcantly increase the difﬁculty of neural nets training. To address this problem, we ﬁrst introduce an auxiliary dense character detection task.
This task encourages
the learning of visual representations, by a fully convolutional network (FCN), that are favorable to the text patterns.
Second, we propose an alignment loss to regularize the estimated attention at each time-step. Finally, we use a coordinate map as a second input to enforce spatial-awareness,
which is helpful for the movement of attention. The architecture of our end-to-end model is illustrated in Figure 2. To
train the proposed model, we generate a large-scale synthetic
dataset containing perspectively distorted and curved scene
text. Character-level bounding box annotations are also provided in addition to word annotations.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)
Figure 2: Our architecture consists of three components: 1) a convolutional feature extractor network f; 2) a fully-convolutional neural
network g for dense character detection and 3) a recurrent neural network r that attentively recognizes text. A coordinate map is constructed
to introduce spatial-awareness.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• We present an end-to-end deep neural-based model that
utilizes an attention mechanism to recognize both regular
and irregular text. The proposed method outperforms previous methods on two irregular-text dataset: SVT-Perspective
and CUTE80 with a large margin, while achieves highlycompetitive performance on several regular-text datasets.
• We introduce an auxiliary dense character detection task
using a FCN to learn text-speciﬁc visual patterns, and an
alignment loss to encourage an effective attention model. Experiments show that the proposed two components accelerate
training and improve performance.
• We develop a large-scale synthetic dataset that contains
irregular scene text with character-level bounding box annotations. Hopefully such a dataset will support future studies
in this area.
Related Work
Scene Text Recognition: Several various methods have been
proposed for scene text recognition. Conventional methods
often follow a pipeline where individual characters are ﬁrst
detected and recognized and then combined into words based
on a set of heuristic rules or a language model. Early work
relied on low-level features for character detection and recognition. For example, Neumann et al. deﬁned a set
of handcrafted features such as aspect ratio, hole area ratio, etc. to train a Support Vector Machine classiﬁer. HOG
descriptors[Wang et al., 2011; Zhu et al., 2006] were extracted as features to train a character classiﬁer which is then
applied to the cropped word image in a sliding-window manner. However, the performance of these methods is limited
by the low capability of handcrafted features in terms of expressiveness. With the recent advances in neural-based models, many researchers explored deep neural architectures and
achieved better results. In [Bissacco et al., 2013], a fully connected network with 5 hidden layers was employed for character recognition, after which a n-gram approach was used for
language modeling. Wang et al. proposed a CNN to
recognize character and a non-maximum suppression method
to obtain ﬁnal word predictions. In [Jaderberg et al., 2014b], a
weight-shared CNN with Maxout non-linearity [Goodfellow
et al., 2013] was applied for both text/non-text classiﬁcation
and character classiﬁcation. A word-breakpoints score function was subsequently optimized to obtain word predictions.
The aforementioned pipeline requires the segmentation of
individual characters, which can be very challenging because
of the complicated background clutter and the inadequate distance between consecutive characters. The performance is
therefore limited. To circumvent the need for explicitly isolating characters, several recent work casts scene text recognition problem as a sequential labeling problem, where text
is represented by a sequence of characters. [He et al., 2016;
Shi et al., 2016a] proposed using RNN for sequential predictions based on visual features learned by a deep CNN. A CTC
Loss [Graves et al., 2006] was adopted to calculate the conditional probability between the predicted and the target sequences. Since CTC Loss is only deﬁned for 1-dimensional
(1D) sequence, their model is not adequately generalizable to
reading irregular text, where characters are arranged on a 2D
image plane.
Lee and Osindero proposed a R2AM model, where
a recursive CNN was operated to learn broader contextual information, then an attention model was applied to perform
“soft” 1D feature selection and decoding. Although the attention model has the potential to perform 2D feature selection [Xu et al., 2015], we show in experiments that directly
training R2AM on irregular text is difﬁcult because of the
non-horizontal character placement. Our model generalizes
R2AM to performing 2D attentive feature selection with the
help of the proposed dense character detection task and the
attention alignment loss. Shi et al. [2016b] attempted to recognize irregular text by ﬁrst rectifying curved or perspectively
distorted text to obtain approximately regular text, then recognizing the rectiﬁed image. However, with the proposed 2D
form attention mechanism in this work, the rectiﬁcation step
becomes unnecessary. Furthermore, we show that the proposed method is capable of recognizing text with more extreme distortions, in which case the rectiﬁcation module in
[Shi et al., 2016b] fails to generate satisfying correction.
Fully Convolutional Networks: Fully convolution networks (FCN) was ﬁrst proposed by Long et al. aiming at pixel-wise prediction for semantic segmentation task.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)
Figure 3: A simple example showing the process of building a coordinate map M. For a 40-by-40 color image, M is a 5-by-5 2-channel
image. Each location in M is ﬁlled with the normalized coordinates.
Many variations are introduced afterwards that have led
to rapid improvement of accuracy [Pinheiro et al., 2016;
Noh et al., 2015]. Recently, FCN-based methods have gained
much attention in object detection and text detection community as well. For example, Li et al. used FCN and
a position-sensitive Region-of-Interest (RoI) pooling layer to
obtain class prediction for each candidate region. In [Gupta
et al., 2016], a fully-convolutional regression network was
stacked on top a CNN to detect text. We introduce a novel
dense character detection task into our end-to-end text recognition framework using FCN. However, the purpose is not
to localize individual characters (which could be a very challenging task) as in the conventional pipeline, but rather to help
learning better visual representations.
Attentive Text Recognition
In this section, we describe the architecture of our model.
Overall, the model takes an W × H image x and outputs a
sequence of characters C = {C1, C2, · · · , CT } depicted.
As shown in Figure 2, our model consists of three components: 1) a convolutional feature extractor network f that
learns high-level visual representations f(x) from an input
image; 2) a deep fully-convolutional neural network g that
takes f(x) as input and outputs pixel-wise predictions ˆy =
g(f(x)), where ˆy(i,j) ∈{0, 1} (1 ≤i ≤W, 1 ≤j ≤H)
indicates whether the location (i, j) is inside a character’s
bounding box; 3) a recurrent neural network r that attentively
decodes the learned representations and a spatial-aware coordinate map M into a sequence of characters C. During testing, g is omitted in order to save computation costs. The proposed model is end-to-end: it takes an input image and outputs the corresponding word, precluding any pre-processing
and post-processing steps. Both the input image and the word
depicted can be of varying size or length.
Deep CNNs are good at learning highly semantic features,
however, such feature are translation invariant. Spatial information can provide useful guidance to moving attention.
For instance, if the attention model is “focusing” on the leftmost character at present, then it is expected to move its
attention to the right part at the next time-step.
To introduce spatial-awareness, we construct a 2-channel coordinate
map M which has the same height h and width w as f(x).
Each location in M is ﬁlled with the normalized coordinate:
M(u, v) = [(u −w/2)/w, (v −h/2)/h]. Figure 3 illustrates
the construction process via a simple example.
Recognizing text can be essentially considered as a task
of modeling sequence interdependencies and learning a mapping between region-of-interests (attention) and characters.
Therefore we introduce an attention-based RNN r which is
the key component that enables irregular text reading. The
decoder r generates one character at a time, hence decomposes the probability of yielding C as:
log P(C|x) =
log P(Ct|C<t, V )
where C<t denotes characters before Ct and V is the concatenation of the learned visual representations f(x) and a
convolutional transformation (implemented by a single convolution layer with an output channels of 128) of M along
the number-of-channel dimension.
The conditional probability can be parameterized as:
P(Ct|C<t, V ) = Softmax(T (ht))
where T is a transformation function (e.g. a feedforward neural network) that outputs a vocabulary-sized vector, and ht is
the hidden state of r. A variation of RNN – Gated Recurrent
Unit (GRU) [Cho et al., 2014] is used to model long-term
dependencies. As a result, ht can be computed as:
ht = GRU(ht−1, Ct−1, ctxt)
with ctxt being the context vector that is a dynamic representation of the relevant part of V at time-step t. We adopt a
deterministic 2D soft attention mechanism where ctxt is the
weighted sum of the underneath features:
(i,j) V(i,j)
The weight αt
(i,j) for each V(i,j) is computed by:
v=1 exp(et
(i,j) = fatt(ht−1, V(i,j))
where τ is a temperature hyper-parameter and et
(i,j) is the
alignment score which indicates how relevant the visual representation at V(i,j) is to the decoded character Ct. Low temperature will result in a more concentrated attention αt. The
alignment function fatt is parameterized by a single layer
multi-layer perceptron such that:
fatt(ht−1, V(i,j)) = v⊺tanh(Wht−1 + UV(i,j))
where v, W and U are weight matrices to be learned.
The decoding loss Ldec is deﬁned as the negative log likelihood to measure the differences between the predicted and
the target character sequence:
Ldec = −log P(C|x)
Directly optimizing Ldec is difﬁcult due to the model complexity. Therefore an auxiliary dense character detection task
is introduced to help learning text-speciﬁc visual patterns. We
further deﬁne an attention alignment loss Latt (Section 3.2)
to penalize attention when they are not consistent with the
location of the corresponding character. During training, the
objective is formulated as:
L = Ldec + λ1Lfcn + λ2Latt
where Lfcn is the dense character detection loss (Section 3.1). The hyper-parameters λ1 and λ2 are meant to balance the three terms.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)
FCN for Better Representation Learning
Since the proposed model contains an attention-based RNN
on top of a deep CNN, it can be difﬁcult to train. Many researchers in image captioning community tackle this problem by using pretrained models to obtain visual representations, hence the major workload is on
the training of the RNN. However, based on our experimental results, models trained on large-scale “objects” datasets
like ImageNet [Deng et al., 2009] are not optimal for text
recognition/detection task. Using the convolutional part of a
pretrained VGG16 [Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014] model
as our feature extractor f can not lead to model convergence
(Figure 5). We hypothesize that models trained on ImageNet
emphasize more on semantic objects such as face or body,
while text is characterized by the combination of various lowlevel strokes.
One may consider using models trained for character
recognition task as f such as that in [Jaderberg et al., 2014b].
However, since these models aim at classifying isolated characters, training samples are tightly cropped characters. As
a consequence, broader contextual information is not fully
exploited. Such information is of vital importance. In natural images, consecutive characters may occur very close to
each other, therefore a successful text recognition system is
expected to distinguish characters with the presence of surrounding characters.
Furthermore, for irregular text, surrounding characters are important cues for ﬁnding the orientation of the text.
We hereby introduce a dense character detection task using
FCN. This task is helpful for utilizing contextual information,
as words instead of isolated characters are fed as input. The
goal is to obtain a pixel-wise character/non-character prediction ˆy = g(f(x)) based on the learned visual features f(x).
To obtain precise character detection results, f(x) is encouraged to capture text-speciﬁc information with the presence of
surrounding characters or background noises in its neurons’
receptive ﬁelds. Since spatial information within a receptive
ﬁeld is largely lost during pooling in f, we adopt unpooling
technique [Noh et al., 2015] which reuses the pooled “index”
to retain spatial information during upscaling in g.
The dense character detection loss Lfcn is a binary softmax loss that is performed at each location. The groundtruth
y(i,j) is assigned to 1 if location (i, j) is inside a character’s
bounding box.
Attention Alignment Loss
In the early stage of model training, parameters are quite random, leading to an ineffective attention model and therefore
incorrect predictions. An intuitive solution is to introduce extra guidance for attention model. For tasks like image captioning or visual question answering, it is difﬁcult to deﬁne
the groundtruth for attention. Words like “a”, “the” or some
adjectives can hardly be assigned to a speciﬁc relevant region.
However, for text recognition task, there is naturally a clear
corresponding relationship.
Therefore we can construct the groundtruth for attention
α = {α(i,j)} in the following way (time-step t is omitted in
notations for brevity): Given a character C and its bounding
box b = {xb, yb, wb, hb} represented by the center coordinate
(xb, yb) and the size (wb, hb), we assume a truncated Gaussian distribution for αgt = {αgt
(i,j) = N ((i, j)⊺|µ, Σ)
µ = (xb, yb)⊺
where w and h are width and height of the visual representations f(x).
The proposed model estimates attention α at each timestep during training, which can be seen as another 2D discrete
distribution. Hence an attention alignment loss Latt can be
introduced to measure the disagreement between these two
distributions:
Latt = l(α, αgt)
Multiple choices exist for function l(·, ·). For instance, one
can simply deﬁne l as the element-wise L1 or L2 loss:
l(α, αgt) =
|α(i,j) −αgt
l(α, αgt) =
(α(i,j) −αgt
or as a Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence:
l(α, αgt) = DKL(αgt||α)
An alternative choice is to use the Wasserstein distance
(WD), also known as Earth Mover’s distance. Formally, for
two distribution P1 and P2, the 2nd WD is deﬁned as:
WD2(P1, P2) =
γ∈Γ(P1,P2) E(x,y)∼γ (x −y)2
where Γ(P1, P2) denotes the collection of all joint distributions γ(x, y) having P1 and P2 as marginal. Intuitively, if
P1 and P2 are viewed as unit amount of dirt piled on their
domain respectively, WD indicates the minimum mass that
needs to be transported in order to transform one distribution
into another. WD possesses many advantageous properties
over KL divergence, for instance, WD is insensitive to small
oscillations, making the measure more robust to noise [Ni
et al., 2009]. When P1 and P2 are 1D probability distributions, a closed-form solution exists for WD and its gradient.
However, for higher dimensional (e.g. 2D in our case) distributions, the computation of WD and its gradient is demanding. To speedup computation, we follow [Julien et al., 2011]
where an efﬁcient Sliced Wasserstein distance (SWD) is considered to approximate WD. For d-dimensional distributions:
SWD(P1, P2) =
where Ωis the unit sphere in Rd; P θ
2 are the projected distributions along the direction θ. Equation 18 means
that we can approximate WD by summing up a series of 1D
Wasserstein distance, which has closed-form solution.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)
Figure 4: Examples of irregular text recognition. Attention at each time-step are also shown. GT represents groundtruth labels.
Synthetic Dataset
Jaderberg et al. [2014a] proposed a synthetic data generator to produce regular scene text for training. Following a
similar method, we generate a large-scale synthetic dataset
containing perspectively distorted and curved text. Different
from [Jaderberg et al., 2014a], we also record the characterlevel bounding boxes to provide guidance for attention. Such
dataset will be made public to support future research for irregular text reading.
Implementation Details
The architecture of our convolutional feature extractor f is
similar to the convolutional part of the VGG16 model. It consists of a sequence of convolutional layers with a kernel size
of 3 × 3, each followed by a Batch Normalization (BN) layer
and a Rectify Linear Unit (ReLU) layer. Down-sampling is
done by three max-pooling layers each with a pooling size
of 2 × 2. For an input image x of size W × H, f(x) becomes a feature map of size Ch × W/8 × H/8 where Ch is
the number of channels. The FCN g consists of a series of
fully-convolutional layers with a kernel size of 3 × 3, each
followed by a BN layer and a ReLU layer. Up-sampling is
done by unpooling layers. The hyper parameters λ1 and λ2 in
our training objective L are set to 10 at the beginning and decrease throughout training. To approximate WD, we project
the 2D attention weights along 4 directions: 0◦(horizontal),
90◦(vertical), 45◦and -45◦. Beam Search with a window
size of 3 is used for decoding in r. The proposed model is
trained in an end-to-end manner using stochastic gradient decent. We adopt AdaDelta [Zeiler, 2012] to automatically adjust the learning rate.
Experiments
We ﬁrst conduct ablation experiments to carefully investigate the effectiveness of the model components. After that,
we evaluate our model on a number of standard benchmark
datasets for scene text recognition, and report word prediction
accuracy. Two of these datasets contain images with irregular
text, while the rest datasets mostly contain regular text.
This section describes the datasets used in our experiments.
Following [Wang et al., 2011], each image may be associated
with a lexicon containing a number of candidate words for
the purpose of reﬁning the prediction.
SVT-Perspective [Quy Phan et al., 2013] contains 639
cropped images for testing. Images are picked from sideview angle snapshots in Google Street View, therefore one
may observe severe perspective distortions.
CUTE80 [Risnumawan et al., 2014] is speciﬁcally collected for evaluating the performance of curved text recognition. It contains 288 cropped natural images for testing.
ICDAR03 [Lucas et al., 2003] contains 860 cropped images for testing.
For fair comparison, images with nonalphanumeric characters or have less than three characters are
discarded, following [Wang et al., 2011].
SVT [Wang et al., 2011] contains 647 cropped images collected from Google Street View. Many images in SVT suffer
from low resolution and challenging lighting conditions.
III5K [Mishra et al., 2012] contains 3000 cropped images
for testing. Images are collected from the Internet.
Ablation Experiments on Model Components
Figure 5 (Left) shows the decoding loss Ldec when using different approaches to obtain the feature extractor f. If we use
the weight of a pretrained VGG16 model to initialize f and
keep it ﬁxed, the loss curve will not decrease after reaching a
plateau. This justiﬁes our hypothesis that models trained on
ImageNet-like data can not capture enough visual cues that
are characterize text. Similar results can be observed when
using a pretrained Maxout model [Jaderberg et al., 2014b]
which is originally proposed for isolated character recognition. Although this time the model reaches a smaller loss, it
still gets stuck at a later stage. If we train the model from
scratch, the loss will decrease. Such phenomenon suggests
that the irregular text reading task requires visual representations that are very different from those learned through isolated character recognition. Finally, incorporating a dense
character detection task using FCN in scratch training leads
to a notable speedup and a lower decoding loss.
Figure 5 (Right) shows the decoding loss Ldec when different kinds of attention alignment loss Latt is applied. As
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)
Figure 5: Decoding loss Ldec on training (solid lines) and validation (dashed lines) set. Left: Loss curves when using different approaches to obtain the feature extractor f (Pretrained VGG16, Pretrained Maxout, Scratch and Scratch+FCN”). Right: Loss curves
when using different attention alignment loss (None, L1, L2, KL
divergence or SWD).
SVT-Perspective
[Wang et al., 2011]
[Mishra et al., 2012]
[Wang et al., 2012]
[Quy Phan et al., 2013]
[Shi et al., 2016a]
[Jaderberg et al., 2016]
[Shi et al., 2016b]
Table 1: Recognition accuracies on two irregular text datasets: SVT-
Perspective and CUTE80.
“50” and “Full” represent the size of
lexicons (“Full” means that we use all words in the dataset), while
“None” represents recognition without using a lexicon.
we can see, adding Latt results in a lower decoding loss. We
argue that introducing supervision directly on attention leads
to a more effective attention model, which is of vital importance for reading irregular text. We further compare the effects of using different types of Latt. As shown in Figure 5
(Right), SWD yields the lowest decoding loss on both training
and validation set. The physical implications of WD makes it
very suitable for the task of regressing the estimated attention
to the groundtruth attention. The difference among using L1,
L2 or KL loss is marginal.
The “Scratch+FCN+SWD” model in Figure 5 (Right) is
selected to report recognition results on benchmark datasets.
Results on Irregular Text
Table 1 summarized the recognition accuracies on two irregular text datasets: SVT-Perspective and CUTE80. On SVT-
Perspective dataset, the proposed model achieves the highest
accuracies. We observe that a large portion of test images in
SVT-Perspective dataset have a small amount of perspective
distortion, therefore models that are only trained on regular
text can also achieve competitive results. However, on CUTE80 dataset where many images contain curved text, the proposed model outperforms previous
methods with a large margin. The irregular character placement and the rotated characters pose a challenge to regulartext recognition methods.
In Figure 4, we show several examples illustrating the
abbyy [Wang et al., 2011]
[Wang et al., 2011]
[Yao et al., 2014]
[Wang et al., 2012]
[Jaderberg et al., 2014b]
[Jaderberg et al., 2014a]
[He et al., 2016]
[Shi et al., 2016a]
[Shi et al., 2016b]
Table 2: Recognition accuracies on several regular text datasets.
“50” and “1K” represent the size of lexicons.
movement of attention when recognizing irregular text. The
proposed model successfully focuses on the correct character at each time-step, even on some challenging images with
signiﬁcant perspective distortion (Figure 4(b)) or large curve
angle (Figure 4(d)). In these cases, the rectiﬁcation module
in [Shi et al., 2016b] fails to produce a satisfying correction.
Results on Regular Text
In Table 2, we compare the proposed model with other methods for regular text recognition. Our model achieves the best
results on III5K-50 and III5K-1K datasets. III5K contains
more test images, many of which suffer from perspective distortion and curving effects. Our model falls behind [Jaderberg et al., 2014a] slightly on IC03-50 dataset. However,
Jaderberg et al. [2014a] casts text recognition as an image
classiﬁcation problem where each word is deﬁned as a class
label. Consequently, their model can not recognize out-ofvocabulary words. Shi et al. [2016a] outperforms our model
on IC03-50 and SVT-50 datasets. However, they treat input
images as a 1D horizontal sequence of visual features, therefore irregular text with large rotation or curve angles can not
be successfully recognized. On the contrary, the proposed
model is capable of reading both regular and irregular text.
Conclusions
We present an end-to-end model which attentively reads both
regular and irregular text. Recognizing irregular text in natural scene is addressed by ﬁrst learning text-speciﬁc visual representations, then decoding the learned representations into a
character sequence via an attention-based RNN. To facilitate
training, we propose 1) a dense character detection task using
a FCN for representation learning and 2) an alignment loss to
provide guidance for attention. These two components prove
crucial for achieving fast model convergence and high performance. We also visualize the attention weights to better
analyze the model’s behavior. Future directions would be to
combine the proposed text recognition model with a text detection method for a full end-to-end system.
Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge partial support from NSF grant
CCF 1317560 and a hardware grant from NVIDIA.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)