Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics-System Demonstrations, pages 67–72
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c⃝2017 Association for Computational Linguistics
 
Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics-System Demonstrations, pages 67–72
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c⃝2017 Association for Computational Linguistics
 
OpenNMT: Open-Source Toolkit for Neural Machine Translation
Guillaume Klein†, Yoon Kim∗, Yuntian Deng∗, Jean Senellart†, Alexander M. Rush∗
SYSTRAN †, Harvard SEAS∗
We describe an open-source toolkit for
neural machine translation (NMT). The
toolkit prioritizes efﬁciency, modularity,
and extensibility with the goal of supporting NMT research into model architectures, feature representations, and source
modalities, while maintaining competitive
performance and reasonable training requirements. The toolkit consists of modeling and translation support, as well as
detailed pedagogical documentation about
the underlying techniques.
Introduction
Neural machine translation (NMT) is a new
methodology for machine translation that has led
to remarkable improvements, particularly in terms
of human evaluation, compared to rule-based and
statistical machine translation (SMT) systems . Originally developed using pure sequence-to-sequence models
 and improved upon using attention-based variants , NMT has
now become a widely-applied technique for machine translation, as well as an effective approach
for other related NLP tasks such as dialogue, parsing, and summarization.
As NMT approaches are standardized, it becomes more important for the machine translation and NLP community to develop open implementations for researchers to benchmark against,
learn from, and extend upon.
Just as the SMT
community beneﬁted greatly from toolkits like
Moses for phrase-based SMT
and CDec or travatar for syntax-based SMT, NMT toolkits
can provide a foundation to build upon. A toolkit
Figure 1: Schematic view of neural machine translation.
The red source words are ﬁrst mapped to word vectors and
then fed into a recurrent neural network (RNN). Upon seeing
the ⟨eos⟩symbol, the ﬁnal time step initializes a target blue
RNN. At each target time step, attention is applied over the
source RNN and combined with the current hidden state to
produce a prediction p(wt|w1:t−1, x) of the next word. This
prediction is then fed back into the target RNN.
should aim to provide a shared framework for
developing and comparing open-source systems,
while at the same time being efﬁcient and accurate
enough to be used in production contexts.
Currently there are several existing NMT implementations. Many systems such as those developed in industry by Google, Microsoft, and
Baidu, are closed source, and are unlikely to
be released with unrestricted licenses.
other systems such as GroundHog, Blocks, neuralmonkey, tensorﬂow-seq2seq, lamtram, and our
own seq2seq-attn, exist mostly as research code.
These libraries provide important functionality but
minimal support to production users.
most promising is University of Edinburgh’s Nematus system originally based on NYU’s NMT
system. Nematus provides high-accuracy translation, many options, clear documentation, and has
been used in several successful research projects.
In the development of this project, we aimed to
build upon the strengths of this system, while providing additional documentation and functionality
to provide a useful open-source NMT framework
for the NLP community in academia and industry.
With these goals in mind,
we introduce
OpenNMT ( an opensource framework for neural machine translation.
OpenNMT is a complete NMT implementation.
In addition to providing code for the core translation tasks, OpenNMT was designed with three
aims: (a) prioritize fast training and test efﬁciency,
(b) maintain model modularity and readability, (c)
support signiﬁcant research extensibility.
This engineering report describes how the system targets these criteria. We begin by brieﬂy surveying the background for NMT, describing the
high-level implementation details, and then describing speciﬁc case studies for the three criteria.
We end by showing benchmarks of the system in
terms of accuracy, speed, and memory usage for
several translation and translation-like tasks.
Background
extensively
in many excellent tutorials (see for instance
 
acl16nmt/home). We give only a condensed
NMT takes a conditional language modeling
view of translation by modeling the probability
of a target sentence w1:T given a source sentence
x1:S as p(w1:T |x) = QT
1 p(wt|w1:t−1, x; θ). This
distribution is estimated using an attention-based
encoder-decoder architecture . A source encoder recurrent neural network
(RNN) maps each source word to a word vector,
and processes these to a sequence of hidden vectors h1, . . . , hS. The target decoder combines an
RNN hidden representation of previously generated words (w1, ...wt−1) with source hidden vectors to predict scores for each possible next word.
A softmax layer is then used to produce a nextword distribution p(wt|w1:t−1, x; θ). The source
hidden vectors inﬂuence the distribution through
an attention pooling layer that weights each source
word relative to its expected contribution to the
target prediction. The complete model is trained
end-to-end to maximize the likelihood of the training data. An unfolded network diagram is shown
in Figure 1.
In practice, there are also many other important aspects that improve the effectiveness of the
base model.
Here we brieﬂy mention four areas:
(a) It is important to use a gated RNN
Live demo of the OpenNMT system across
dozens of language pairs.
such as an LSTM or GRU which help the
model learn long-distance features within a text.
(b) Translation requires relatively large, stacked
RNNs, which consist of several vertical layers (2-
16) of RNNs at each time step . (c) Input feeding, where the previous attention vector is fed back into the input as well as the
predicted word, has been shown to be quite helpful
for machine translation . (d)
Test-time decoding is done through beam search
where multiple hypothesis target predictions are
considered at each time step. Implementing these
correctly can be difﬁcult, which motivates their inclusion in an NMT framework.
Implementation
OpenNMT is a complete library for training and
deploying neural machine translation models. The
system is successor to seq2seq-attn developed at
Harvard, and has been completely rewritten for
ease of efﬁciency, readability, and generalizability.
It includes vanilla NMT models along with support for attention, gating, stacking, input feeding,
regularization, beam search and all other options
necessary for state-of-the-art performance.
The main system is implemented in the
Lua/Torch mathematical framework, and can be
easily be extended using Torch’s internal standard neural network components. It has also been
extended by Adam Lerer of Facebook Research
to support Python/PyTorch framework, with the
The system has been developed completely in
the open on GitHub at ( 
opennmt/opennmt) and is MIT licensed. The
ﬁrst version has primarily (intercontinental) contributions from SYSTRAN Paris and the Harvard
NLP group. Since ofﬁcial beta release, the project
has been starred by over 1000 users, and there
have been active development by those outside of
these two organizations. The project has an active
forum for community feedback with over ﬁve hundred posts in the last two months. There is also a
live demonstration available of the system in use
(Figure 3).
One nice aspect of NMT as a model is its relative compactness. When excluding Torch framework code, the Lua OpenNMT system including
preprocessing is roughly 4K lines of code, and
the Python version is less than 1K lines (although
slightly less feature complete). For comparison
the Moses SMT framework including language
modeling is over 100K lines. This makes the system easy to completely understand for newcomers. The project is fully self-contained depending
on minimal number of external Lua libraries and
including also a simple language independent reversible tokenization and detokenization tools.
Design Goals
As the low-level details of NMT have been covered previously ),
we focus this report on the design goals of Open-
NMT: system efﬁciency, code modularity, and
model extensibility.
System Efﬁciency
As NMT systems can take from days to weeks to
train, training efﬁciency is a paramount concern.
Slightly faster training can make be the difference
between plausible and impossible experiments.
Memory Sharing
When training GPU-based
NMT models, memory size restrictions are the
most common limiter of batch size, and thus directly impact training time. Neural network toolkits, such as Torch, are often designed to trade-off
extra memory allocations for speed and declarative simplicity.
For OpenNMT, we wanted to
have it both ways, and so we implemented an external memory sharing system that exploits the
known time-series control ﬂow of NMT systems
and aggressively shares the internal buffers between clones. The potential shared buffers are dynamically calculated by exploration of the network
graph before starting training. In practical use, aggressive memory reuse in OpenNMT provides a
saving of 70% of GPU memory with the default
model size.
additionally
multi-GPU training using data parallelism. Each
GPU has a replica of the master parameters
and process independent batches during training
Two modes are available: synchronous
and asynchronous training. In synchronous training, batches on parallel GPU are run simultaneously and gradients aggregated to update master
parameters before resynchronization on each GPU
for the following batch. In asynchronous training,
batches are run independent on each GPU, and
independent gradients accumulated to the master
copy of the parameters.
Asynchronous SGD is
known to provide faster convergence (Dean et al.,
Experiments with 8 GPUs show a 6×
speed up in per epoch, but a slight loss in training
efﬁciency. When training to similar loss, it gives a
3.5× total speed-up to training.
C/Mobile/GPU
Translation
systems requires some code complexity to facilitate fast back-propagation-through-time.
deployment, the system is much less complex,
and only requires (i) forwarding values through
the network and (ii) running a beam search that
is much simpliﬁed compared to SMT. OpenNMT
includes several different translation deployments
specialized for different run-time environments:
a batched CPU/GPU implementation for very
quickly translating a large set of sentences, a
simple single-instance implementation for use
on mobile devices, and a specialized C implementation.
The ﬁrst implementation is suited
for research use, for instance allowing the user
to easily include constraints on the feasible set
of sentences and ideas such as pointer networks
and copy mechanisms. The last implementation
is particularly suited for industrial use as it can
run on CPU in standard production environments;
it reads the structure of the network and then
uses the Eigen package to implement the basic
linear algebra necessary for decoding. Table 4.1
compares the performance of the different implementations based on batch size, beam size,
showing signiﬁcant speed ups due to batching on
GPU and when using the CPU/C implementation.
Modularity for Research
A secondary goal was a desire for code readability
for non-experts. We targeted this goal by explicitly separating out many optimizations from the
core model, and by including tutorial documenta-
Translation speed in source tokens per second
for the Torch CPU/GPU implementations and for the multithreaded CPU C implementation. , instead of generating a
word at each time step, the model generates both
word and associated features. For instance, the
system might include words and separate case features. This extension requires modifying both the
inputs and the output of the decoder to generate
multiple symbols. In OpenNMT both of these aspects are abstracted from the core translation code,
and therefore factored translation simply modiﬁes
the input network to instead process the featurebased representation, and the output generator network to instead produce multiple conditionally independent predictions.
Case Study: Attention Networks
The use of
attention over the encoder at each step of translation is crucial for the model to perform well. The
default method is to utilize the global attention
mechanism. However there are many other types
of attention that have recently proposed including
local attention , sparse-max attention , hierarchical attention among others. As
this is simply a module in OpenNMT it can easily
be substituted. Recently the Harvard group developed a structured attention approach, that utilizes
graphical model inference to compute this attention. The method is quite computationally complex; however as it is modularized by the Torch
interface, it can be used in OpenNMT to substitute
for standard attention.
Extensibility
Deep learning is a quickly evolving ﬁeld. Recently
work such as variational seq2seq auto-encoders
 or memory networks , propose interesting extensions
Figure 3: 3D Visualization of OpenNMT source embedding from the TensorBoard visualization system.
to basic seq2seq models. We next discuss a case
study to demonstrate that OpenNMT is extensible
to future variants.
Multiple Modalities
Recent work has shown
that NMT-like systems are effective for imageto-text generation tasks .
task is quite different from standard machine
translation as the source sentence is now an
the future of translation
may require this style of (multi-)modal inputs
 
multimodal-task.html).
As a case study, we adapted two systems with
non-textual inputs to run in OpenNMT. The ﬁrst
is an image-to-text system developed for mathematical OCR . This model replaces the source RNN with a deep convolution
over the source input. Excepting preprocessing,
the entire adaptation requires less than 500 lines
of additional code and is also open-sourced as
github.com/opennmt/im2text. The second is a speech-to-text recognition system based
on the work of Chan et al. .
This system has been implemented directly in OpenNMT
by replacing the source encoder with a Pyrimidal
source model.
Additional Tools
Finally we brieﬂy summarize some of the additional tools that extend OpenNMT to make it more
beneﬁcial to the research community.
Tokenization
We aimed for OpenNMT to be
a standalone project and not depend on commonly used tools.
For instance the Moses tokenizer has language speciﬁc heuristics not necessary in NMT. We therefore include a simple reversible tokenizer that (a) includes markers seen
by the model that allow simple deterministic deto-
32.7 (+5.4)
28.0 (+4.6)
34.4 (+6.1)
28.7 (+6.4)
32.9 (+3.3)
26.3 (+4.3)
30.9 (+5.2)
26.0 (+6.6)
31.6 (+5.3)
31.0 (+5.8)
28.0 (+5.0)
24.3 (+5.9)
35.3 (+10.4)
34.1 (+4.7)
28.1 (+5.6)
28.7 (+5.0)
35.0 (+5.4)
31.9 (+9.0)
26.4 (+6.3)
31.6 (+7.3)
Table 2: 20 language pair single translation model. Table shows BLEU(∆) where ∆compares to only
using the pair for training.
Speed tok/sec
Performance Results for EN→DE on WMT15
tested on newstest2014. Both system 2x500 RNN, embedding size 300, 13 epochs, batch size 64, beam size 5. We
compare on a 50k vocabulary and a 32k BPE setting. Open-
NMT shows improvements in speed and accuracy compared
to Nematus.
kenization, (b) has extremely simple, languageindependent tokenization rules. The tokenizer can
also perform Byte Pair Encoding (BPE) which has
become a popular method for sub-word tokenization in NMT systems .
Word Embeddings
OpenNMT includes tools
for simplifying the process of using pretrained
word embeddings, even allowing automatic download of embeddings for many languages. This allows training in languages or domain with relatively little aligned data. Additionally OpenNMT
can export the word embeddings from trained
models to standard formats, allowing analysis in
external tools such as TensorBoard (Figure 3).
Benchmarks
We now document some runs of the model. We
expect performance and memory usage to improve with further development.
Public benchmarks are available at 
net/Models/, which also includes publicly
available pre-trained models for all of these tasks
and tutorial instructions for all of these tasks. The
benchmarks are run on a Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-
5930K CPU @ 3.50GHz, 256GB Mem, trained on
1 GPU GeForce GTX 1080 (Pascal) with CUDA
v. 8.0 (driver 375.20) and cuDNN (v. 5005).
The comparison, shown in Table 3, is on
English-to-German (EN→DE) using the WMT
20151 dataset. Here we compare, BLEU score,
as well as training and test speed to the publicly
available Nematus system. 2
We additionally trained a multilingual translation model following Johnson .
model translates from and to French, Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, and Romanian. Training data is
4M sentences and was selected from the open parallel corpus3, speciﬁcally from Europarl, GlobalVoices and Ted. Corpus was selected to be multisource, multi-target: each sentence has its translation in the 4 other languages. Corpus was tokenized using shared Byte Pair Encoding of 32k.
Comparative results between multi-way translation and each of the 20 independent training are
presented in Table 2. The systematically large improvement shows that language pair beneﬁts from
training jointly with the other language pairs.
Additionally we have found interest from the
community in using OpenNMT for non-standard
MT tasks like sentence document summarization
dialogue response generation (chatbots), among
others. Using OpenNMT, we were able to replicate the sentence summarization results of Chopra
et al. , reaching a ROUGE-1 score of 33.13
on the Gigaword data.
We have also trained a
model on 14 million sentences of the OpenSubtitles data set based on the work Vinyals and Le
 , achieving comparable perplexity.
Conclusion
We introduce OpenNMT, a research toolkit for
NMT that prioritizes efﬁciency and modularity.
We hope to further develop OpenNMT to maintain
strong MT results at the research frontier, providing a stable and framework for production use.
1 
2 
Comparison
OpenNMT/Nematus
907824/75c6ab1.
3