Statistical Validation of Image Segmentation Quality Based on a
Spatial Overlap Index1:
Scientific Reports
Kelly H. Zou, PhD, Simon K. Warfield, PhD, Aditya Bharatha, MD, Clare M.C. Tempany, MD,
Michael R. Kaus, PhD, Steven J. Haker, PhD, William M. Wells III, PhD, Ferenc A. Jolesz,
MD, and Ron Kikinis, MD
Rationale and Objectives—To examine a statistical validation method based on the spatial
overlap between two sets of segmentations of the same anatomy.
Materials and Methods—The Dice similarity coefficient (DSC) was used as a statistical
validation metric to evaluate the performance of both the reproducibility of manual segmentations
and the spatial overlap accuracy of automated probabilistic fractional segmentation of MR images,
illustrated on two clinical examples. Example 1: 10 consecutive cases of prostate brachytherapy
patients underwent both preoperative 1.5T and intraoperative 0.5T MR imaging. For each case, 5
repeated manual segmentations of the prostate peripheral zone were performed separately on
preoperative and on intraoperative images. Example 2: A semi-automated probabilistic fractional
segmentation algorithm was applied to MR imaging of 9 cases with 3 types of brain tumors. DSC
values were computed and logit-transformed values were compared in the mean with the analysis of
variance (ANOVA).
Results—Example 1: The mean DSCs of 0.883 (range, 0.876–0.893) with 1.5T preoperative MRI
and 0.838 (range, 0.819–0.852) with 0.5T intraoperative MRI (P < .001) were within and at the
margin of the range of good reproducibility, respectively. Example 2: Wide ranges of DSC were
observed in brain tumor segmentations: Meningiomas (0.519–0.893), astrocytomas (0.487–0.972),
and other mixed gliomas (0.490–0.899).
Conclusion—The DSC value is a simple and useful summary measure of spatial overlap, which
can be applied to studies of reproducibility and accuracy in image segmentation. We observed
generally satisfactory but variable validation results in two clinical applications. This metric may be
adapted for similar validation tasks.
Prostate peripheral zone segmentation; brain segmentation; magnetic resonance imaging (MRI);
spatial overlap; Dice similarity coefficient
1From the Department of Radiology and Surgical Planning Laboratory, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 75
Francis St (Floor L–1), Boston, MA 02115; the Department of Health Care Policy, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA; the Department
of Medical Imaging, University of Toronto Medical School, Toronto, Canada; Philips Research Laboratories, Sector Technical Systems,
Hamburg, Germany; and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Address correspondence to K.H.Z..
Supported by National Institutes of Health grant nos. R01LM7861, P41RR13218, P01CA67165, R01RR11747, R01CA86879,
R21CA89449-01, R01AG19513-01, R03HS13234-01, a research grant from the Whitaker Foundation, and a University of Toronto
Burroughs Wellcome Fund Student Research Award from the Medical Research Council of Canada.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Acad Radiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 March 28.
 
Acad Radiol. 2004 February ; 11(2): 178–189.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) provides indispensable information about anatomy and
pathology, enabling quantitative pathologic and clinical evaluations. Segmentation is an
important image-processing step by which regions of an image are classified according to the
presence of relevant anatomic features. For example, segmentation of MRI of the brain assigns
a unique label (eg, white matter, gray matter, lesions, cerebrospinal fluid, to each voxel in an
input gray-scale image) (1). Segmentation methods typically yield binary or categoric
classification results. However, continuous classification schemes (eg, volume size, distance
between the volume surfaces, percentage of overlap voxels, percentage of highly discrepant
voxels, and probability-based fractional segmentation) are increasingly becoming
commonplace (2,3). The performance of segmentation methods has a direct impact on the
detection and target definition, as well as monitoring of disease progression. Thus, the main
clinical goal of surgical planning and quantitative monitoring of disease progression requires
segmentation methods with high reproducibility because of the limited number of images
available per patient.
Several recent articles have addressed the importance of developing new automated
segmentation methods in addition to binary classification, using overlap mixture intensity
distributions of abnormal and normal tissues (4–6), as well as a probabilistic fractional
segmentation methods on a continuous probability scale per voxel (2,3). These methods used
geometric and probabilistic models to allow improved tissue volume estimates and contrast
among tissue types (7–10). An overview and comparison of several existing algorithms for
brain segmentation (eg, finite normal mixture histograms, genetic algorithms, and hidden
Markov random field methods using percent correct identified voxels against digital phantoms)
are found in the literature (7).
However, it is a challenging task to evaluate the accuracy and reproducibility of MRI
segmentations. To conduct a validation analysis of the quality of image segmentation, it is
typically necessary to know a voxel-wise gold standard. Under a simple binary truth (here
labeled, T), this gold standard is defined as an indicator of true tissue class per voxel, ie, the
target class (C1) such as malignant tumor, and the background class (C0) such as the remaining
healthy tissues. Unfortunately, it is often impractical to know T only based on clinical data.
Various alternative methods have been sought to carry out statistical validations. A useful
method is to construct phantoms, either physically or digitally, with known T, specified before
building such a phantom. Because it is difficult to construct a physical phantom that can mimic
the tissue properties of the human body, great efforts have been devoted to building digital
phantoms that are both realistic and assessable by the radiologic community. Simulated MR
digital brain phantom images of a normal subject or one with multiple sclerosis may be
downloaded online from the Montreal BrainWeb ( 
(11,12). Nevertheless, even sophisticated phantoms may not yield clinical images with full
range of characteristics frequently observed in practice, such as partial volume artifacts,
intensity heterogeneity, noise, and normal and pathologic anatomic variability.
Without a known gold standard obtained by non-imaging methods such as histology, the
validation task becomes an assessment of reliability or reproducibility of segmentation. A
simple spatial overlap index is the Dice similarity coefficient (DSC), first proposed by Dice
(13). Dice similarity coefficient is a spatial overlap index and a reproducibility validation
metric. It was also called the proportion of specific agreement by Fleiss (14). The value of a
DSC ranges from 0, indicating no spatial overlap between two sets of binary segmentation
results, to 1, indicating complete overlap. Dice similarity coefficient has been adopted to
validate the segmentation of white matter lesions in MRIs (15) and the peripheral zone (PZ)
of the prostate gland in prostate brachytherapy (16). Other validation metrics considered for
statistical validation included Jaccard similarity coefficient (17), odds ratio (18), receiver
Zou et al.
Acad Radiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 March 28.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
operating characteristic analysis (19–22), mutual information (3,22), and distance-based
statistics (23,24).
In the present work, we applied and extended the DSC metric on two clinical examples analyzed
previously. We aimed to validate (A) repeated binary segmentation of preoperative 1.5T and
intraoperative 0.5T MRIs of the prostate’s PZ collected before and during brachytherapy for
prostate cancer (16); and (B) semi-automated probabilistic fractional segmentation of MRIs of
three different types of brain tumors, against a composite voxel-wise gold standard derived
from repeated expert manual segmentations of the images (25). For both the prostate and brain
datasets, segmentations were performed and reported previously (16,25). Here we have
extended our methodology and shown a statistical validation analysis using these existing
databases.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Example 1: Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Prostate Peripheral Zone
Imaging protocol—A total of 10 sequential MR-guided brachytherapy cases were identified
retrospectively from clinical practice. We excluded the cases who had received any
brachytreatment or previous external beam radiation therapy, which could confound shape and
MR signal intensity changes in the gland (16). Both preoperative and intraoperative imaging
was performed as follows:
Preoperative Imaging: All patients underwent preoperative 1.5T MR imaging using
an endorectal coil (MedRad, Indianola, PA) with an integrated pelvic-phased
multicoil array (Signa LX; GE Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI). The endorectal
coil is a receive-only coil mounted inside a latex balloon, and assumed a diameter of
4–6 cm, once inflated in the patient’s rectum. The patient was placed in a supine
position in the closed-bore magnet for the imaging examination. The axial T2weighted images were fast spin echo images (4,050/135; field of view, 12 cm; section
thickness, 3 mm; section gap, 0 mm; matrix, 256 × 256; 3 signal averages). Typical
acquisition times were 5–6 minutes.
Intraoperative Imaging: Imaging was performed in the open-configuration 0.5T MR
scanner (Signa SP; General Electric Medical Systems). Each patient was placed in
the lithotomy position to facilitate prostate brachytherapy via a perineal template. The
perineal template was fixed in place by a rectal obturator (2 cm in diameter). T2weighted fast spin echo images (axial and coronal, 6,400/100; field of view, 24 cm;
section thickness, 5 mm; section gap, 0 mm; matrix, 256 × 256; 2 signal averages)
were acquired in the MR scanner using a flexible external pelvic wraparound coil,
with typical acquisition times of 6 minutes.
Repeated manual segmentations—The three-dimensional Slicer ( 
(26) was used as a surgical simulation and navigation tool and to facilitate manual
segmentation. Manual contouring of two areas of the prostate, the PZ, and the central gland,
was performed by two segmenters using the T2-weighted images from the 1.5T and 0.5T
studies. Each segmenter independently and blindly outlined the PZ in five of these randomly
selected 10 cases. The manual segmentations of the same preoperative 1.5T and intraoperative
0.5T image were repeated five times. When segmenting the intraoperative 0.5T images, the
segmenters were allowed to examine preoperative 1.5T images, as is done in clinical practice.
Example 2: Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Brain Tumors
Imaging protocol—A total of nine patients were selected randomly for the purpose of
validation from a neurosurgical database of 260 brain tumor patients, of which three cases had
Zou et al.
Acad Radiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 March 28.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
meningiomas, three cases had astrocytomas, and three remaining cases had other mixed lowgrade gliomas (G) (25). The imaging protocol consisted of the following parameters: patient
heads were imaged in the sagittal planes with a 1.5T MR imaging system (Signa, GE Medical
Systems), with a postcontrast 3-dimensional sagittal spoiled gradient recalled acquisition with
contiguous slices (flip angle, 45°); repetition time of 35 ms; echo time of 7 ms; field of view
of 240 mm; slice-thickness of 1.5 mm; 256 × 256 × 124 matrix.
Manual segmentation—Using a randomly selected single 2-dimensional slice containing
the tumor from MR imaging, an interactive segmentation tool (MRX; GE Medical Systems,
Schenectady, NY) was used. Three segmenters, blinded to the semi-automated probabilistic
fractional segmentation results, independently outlined the target tumors. They extracted the
tumor boundary as perceived on spoiled gradient recalled acquisition. An anatomic object was
defined by a closed contour, and the computer program labeled every voxel of the enclosed
Probabilistic fractional segmentation—An automated probabilistic fractional
segmentation algorithm was applied (2,3), which yielded voxel-wise continuous probabilistic
measures in the range of , indicative of the likelihood of the brain tumor class. To derive
such probabilities, the relative signal intensity was modeled as a normal mixture of the two
classes based on an initial semiautomated binary segmentation.
Dice Similarity Coefficient and Logit Transformation
The main validation metric of spatial overlap index was DSC (13). The DSC measures the
spatial overlap between two segmentations, A and B target regions, and is defined as DSC
(A,B)= 2(A∩B)/(A+B) where ∩ is the intersection (Fig 1). In binary manual segmentation,
this coefficient may be derived from a two-by-two contingency table of segmentation
classification probabilities (Table 1). Conceptually that DSC is also a special case of the kappa
statistic commonly used in reliability analysis, when there is a much larger number of
background voxels than that of the target voxels, as shown previously by Zijdenbos et al
Furthermore, because DSC has a restricted range of and is often close to the value of 1,
we have found it useful to adopt a logit transformation for the purpose of statistical inferences,
where logit(DSC)=ln{DSC/(1−DSC)}. This monotone transformation maps the domain of
 to the unbounded range (−∞,∞), and logit(0.5) = 0. Agresti (18) showed that for large
sample size (in our case, the number of voxels), the distribution of the logit transformed
proportions and rates followed a normal distribution, asymptotically with a large number of
voxels. A statistical test of normality may be conducted by a z-test under a voxel-wise
independence assumption (27). As recommended by Zijdenbos et al (15) in the literature of
image validation an good overlap occurs when DSC >0.700, or equivalently, logit(DSC)
>0.847. Based on the analysis of the kappa statistic, an excellent agreement occurs when k
>0.75, as recommended by Fleiss (14). In the present work, we applied this important
transformation to all DSC values before conducting any statistical comparisons and hypothesis
Statistical Methods for Example 1: Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Prostate Peripheral
Summary statistics of DSC—In our clinical practice, the PZ of the prostate is the clinical
target volume for brachytherapy. Therefore, in our secondary analysis, the main focus was
placed on analyzing the reproducibility of PZ segmentations. Previously, we showed that
preoperative 1.5T MRI provided better spatial resolution and contrast, compared with
intraoperative 0.5T MRI (16). We thus developed a novel deformable registration method, used
Zou et al.
Acad Radiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 March 28.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
to align pretreatment 1.5T images with 0.5T intraoperative images to improve the information
content of the latter.
In the current analysis, we compared the corresponding reproducibility results based on
preoperative versus intraoperative images using all pair-wise spatial overlaps of five repeated
segmentations of the PZs of the 10 brachytherapy cases pooled over the two image segmenters
because we did not find significant differences between these segmenters. Moreover, we tested
whether there existed a learning-curve effect over time.
We labeled a segmentation pair as Sk and Sk’ from all 10 parings of the five repeated
segmentations, where (k,k’) = {(1,2); (2,3); (3, 4); (4, 5); (1,3); (2,4); (3,5); (1,4); (2,5); (1,5)}.
(Note: The index of k indicated a natural sequence in time, ie, S2 took place after S1, S3 took
place after S2, and so on.) Thus, when (k,k’) = {(1,2); (2,3); (3,4); (4,5)}, there was no session
in between the segmentation pair. Similarly, we labeled (k,k’) = {(1,3); (2,4); (3,5)} with one
session, (k,k’) = {(1,4); (2,5); (3,5)} with two sessions, (k,k’) = {(1,4); (2,5)} with three
sessions, and finally (k,k’) = {(1,5)} with four sessions in between their corresponding
segmentation pairs, respectively.
For each segmentation pair, summary statistics including the means and the standard deviations
of DSC and logit(DSC) were computed over all 10 cases, separately for 1.5T and 0.5 images.
In addition, boxplots of DSCs were created.
Analysis of variance—There were several clinical questions to be addressed using an
analysis of variance (ANOVA) approach: (1) Was the reproducibility of the manual
segmentations of PZ before and during brachytherapy satisfactory? (This was published
elsewhere (16) and is essential knowledge for interventional planning and treatment.) (2) Was
there a difference in reproducibility in segmenting preoperative 1.5T and intraoperative 0.5T
images? (Note: The advantages of the reproducibility using preoperative 1.5T over
intraoperative 0.5 images would justify the need for registering the 1.5T images onto 0.5 images
using the deformable model developed earlier) (16). (3) Was there a learning curve affecting
the segmenters over time? (4) Was there a case-to-case variation in segmentation quality of
To answer the above questions, we constructed the following ANOVA model: Denote the
variance components as M = preoperative 1.5T or intraoperative 0.5T MR, C = case, S =
segmentation pair, and two possible interactions, S × M and S × C. Correspondingly, there
were two imaging × 10 cases × 10 segmentation pairs =200 DSC values based on all pair-wise
overlaps of the repeated segmentations. In our ANOVA model, the outcome variable was logit
(DSC) with a normal error assumption. Thus, the model specification, written as the following
regression equation, for logit-transformed DSC became:
logit(DSC) = ln{DSC / (1 −DSC)}
= μ + M + C + S + S × M + S × C + e,
where normality was assumed for each component in the model; μ was the intercept and e is
the residual error term. The F-test statistic and P value of each variance component were
computed. Because here the reproducibility of segmentations was of main interest, the reduced
ANOVA model in equation 1 did not include all other possible additional interaction terms,
although the saturated model may also be considered.
In addition, we repeated a similar ANOVA to test the effect of segmentation by restricting the
segmentation pairs only to those taking place sequentially and consecutively, ie, with Sk and
Sk’ where (k,k’) = {(1,2); (2,3); (3,4); (4,5)}.
Zou et al.
Acad Radiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 March 28.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Statistical Methods for Example 2: Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Brain Tumors
Estimation of a voxel-wise gold standard—The main purpose here was to evaluate the
spatial overlap between the automated probabilistic fractional segmentation results against a
composite voxel-wise gold standard, with the latter estimated based on three segmenters’
independent manual segmentation results. Our motivation here was that reasonably satisfactory
and yet imperfect manual segmentations were observed from these three expert segmenters.
Thus, the first step in our validation procedure was to estimate a binary gold standard by
combining these multiple manual segmentations.
We applied our recently developed Simultaneous Truth and Performance Level Estimation
(STAPLE) program (21,22,28), which is an automated expectation-maximization algorithm
(29) for estimating the gold standard, along with the performance level of each segmentation
repetition. For each voxel, a maximum likelihood estimate of the composite gold standard of
tumor or background class was optimally determined over all image readers’ results (30). The
details of this algorithm may be found in relevant work (21,22,28) and are omitted here.
Bi-beta modeling of mixture distributions—The manual segmentations were binary
taking values of either 0 or 1, while the automated probabilistic fractional segmentation yielded
a probabilistic interpretation, a continuous value in , of the brain tumor class in each voxel.
A convenient model for such probabilistic data was a mixture of two beta distributions, here
called the bi-beta model (31). This model assumed that the distribution of the probabilistic
fractional segmentation in the background class was F(x) ~ Beta(α0β0), while the distribution
of the probabilistic fractional segmentation in the target brain tumor class was G(y) ~ Beta
(α1β1), with different shape parameters of the two classes.
The estimates of the four beta shape parameters are obtained by matching the mean and
variances of the beta distributions with what are found in each sample, separately for the
background and the target voxels, as follows: from the sample data in gold standard class C0,
let the mean of the probabilistic data in the background class be x¯ and the standard deviation
be sx; similarly, from the sample data in gold standard class C1, let the mean and standard
deviations be y¯ and the standard deviation be sy, respectively, then the estimates of the
parameters in the bi-beta model are: α^ 0 = x¯{x¯(1 −x¯)sx
2 −1}, β^0 = (1 −x¯){x¯(1 −x¯)sx
similarly, α^ 1 = y¯{y¯(1 −y¯)sy
2 −1}, and β^1 = (1 −y¯){y¯(1 −y¯)sy
2 −1}. Maximum likelihoods
of the parameters may also be obtained instead of using the moment approach. However, the
solutions are not explicit. Because a large number of voxels are available, the efficiency of the
method of moments is reasonable.
The beta mixture model is flexible in parametric modeling probabilistic data and fractions
(31). The parameters in this bi-beta model were estimated by matching the first two moments,
ie, the mean and the standard deviation, of the distributions.
Dice similarity coefficient based on a probabilistic fractional segmentation—
Because the probabilistic fractional segmentation yielded a continuous outcome in , at
each arbitrary decision threshold, γ, the segmentation result was first discretized into a
dichotomy. For simplicity, assume spatial independence for all individual voxels in classes
C0 and C1. Label the measurements of C0 as Xi (I = 1,…,m individuals or voxels), and the
measurements of C1 as Yj (j = 1,…,n individuals or voxels). The corresponding gold standard
variable is labeled as T for all of the (m + n) voxels in an image or a region of interest.
Without a loss of generality, further assume that a large threshold, γ, indicates an increased
likelihood of a target class in each voxel. At each possible threshold γ, the underlying
cumulative distributional function (c.d.f.) under class C0 is F(γ). At the same threshold γ, the
Zou et al.
Acad Radiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 March 28.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
underlying c.d.f. under class C1 is G(γ). Given γ, the true negative fraction (specificity, θγ0)
and the true positive fraction (sensitivity, θγ1) respectively:
θγ0 = P(Dγ = 0 | T = 0) = P(X ≤γ | T = 0) = F(γ),
θγ1 = P(Dγ = 1 | T = 1) = P(Y > γ | T = 1)
= 1 −G(γ).
As demonstrated below, the spatial overlap measured by DSCγ between the dichotomized
segmentation result and the binary gold standard is a simple function of sensitivity (truepositive rate), specificity (true-negative rate), and the true fraction of the target voxels of the
entire image. Assume that the target occupies the fraction of the entire image voxels with π =
P(T). At any given decision threshold, γ, the probabilistic fractional segmentation data may be
made binary. The DSC at the binarizing decision threshold against a binary gold standard may
be expressed as a simple function of the sensitivity (θγ1), specificity (θγ0), and true target
fraction (π) parameters. By Bayes’ theorem, it is given by:
2P{(Dγ = 1) ∩(T = 1)}
P(Dγ = 1) + P(T = 1)
2P(Dγ = 1 | T = 1)P(T = 1)
{P(Dγ = 1 | T = 0)P(T = 0)
+P(Dγ = 1 | T = 1)P(T = 1)} + P(T = 1)
(1 −θγ0)(1 −π) + (1 + θγ1)π
1 −θγ0 + (θγ0 + θγ1)π .
Let γ have a uniform, Unif(0,1), prior distribution in . The expected DSC over all range
of γ∈ is DSC = ∫0
1DSCγdγ, approximated via numerical integration.
As a possible future extension, a prior distribution h(γ) of the decision threshold γ may be
assumed, and an expected DSC is given by DSC = ∫0
1DSCγh (γ)dγ. The threshold was assumed
to have a uniform distribution because of possible case-to-case variations. The justification for
the integral over the threshold is an analog with receiver operating characteristic (ROC).
However, more informative knowledge may be used to impose sharper prior distributions of
this threshold. For example, if the threshold is known to be centered around 0.5, then a
symmetric beta prior distribution with equal values of its two shape parameters may be assumed
for γ. The expectation of DSC was calculated by a numerical integration over the range of all
possible thresholds, γ∈ . The effect of the variability of the threshold may be evaluated,
and an optimal operating threshold may be obtained by maximizing the corresponding DSC
Numerical Simulation of Dice Similarity Coefficients Under Bi-Beta Models
We used numerical integration to explore the relationship between several pre-specified bibeta shape parameters and the corresponding DSC values. We considered several hypothetical
scenarios for the mixture distributions with equal variances in the target and background
classes. As the mean of a two-parameter Beta(α,β) distribution is α/(α+β) and the variance is
Zou et al.
Acad Radiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 March 28.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
αβ/{(α+β)2(α+β+1)} we set one of the two shape parameters of the distribution to 1 for
simplicity. By varying the value of the other shape parameter, we achieved different underlying
The beta shape parameters specified in each of the Monte-Carlo simulations with 500 random
samples were: (α0,β0,α1,β1) = {(1,1,1,1,); (1,1.5,1.5,1);(1,3,3,1);(1,9,9,1)} in the bi-beta model.
The total number of voxels was fixed to be 10,000, with π={10%; 15%} as the fraction of the
target. The effects of the parameter and the target fraction on the resulting DSC were examined.
Example 1: Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Prostate Peripheral Zone
Summary statistics of DSC—The preoperative and intraoperative images and
intraoperative 0.5T T2-weighted MRIs of a case are shown in Figure 2. One of the five repeated
manual segmentations results of the PZ on these images is given in the same figure. The
boxplots of DSCs from preoperative 1.5T images and intraoperative 0.5T images by
segmentation pair are presented in Figures 3 and 4, respectively.
The means and standard deviations of the DSCs and logit(DSC) values of all segmentation
pairs based on both preoperative 1.5T and intraoperative 0.5 images are given in Table 2. The
preoperative and intraoperative imaging resulted in significantly higher reproducibility by
mean logit (DSC) preoperatively than intraoperatively. The mean DSCs of the 10 cases were
0.883 (range, 0.876–0.893) preoperatively and 0.838 (range, 0.819–0.852) intraoperatively,
with a statistical significant difference (P <.001).
The normality assumptions were statistically verified by z-test after the logit transformation.
Pair-wise logit-transformed of the 10 repeated segmentations of each of the 10 cases yielded
nonsignificant normality test results, with all P values above .05 (range, .27–0.81 on 1.5T; .
07–.80 on 0.5T). Comparing the mean logit(DSC) values, they were 2.070 (range, 2.011–2.159)
on 1.5T versus 1.659 (range, 1.525–1.742) on 0.5T, thus, the segmentation reproducibility
appeared higher based on preoperative images, and the P value was provided in the ANOVA
Analysis of variance—Tables 3 and 4 provide the two ANOVA results based on the
variance component model for logit(DSC) values, as given in equation 1. According to all pairwise DSCs over segmentation pairs (Table 3) and the DSCs of only sequentially consecutive
segmentation pairs (Table 4), there was a statistically significant improvement in the
reproducibility results using 1.5T over 0.5T images (P <.001). A case-to-case variation was
also significant (P <.001).
We did not observe a significant effect of segmentations among all pairs (P = .12; Table 3),
nor was there a learning curve phenomenon (P = .97; Table 4). The two interaction terms
included in equation 1 were not statistically significant either (Tables 3 and 4).
Example 2: Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Brain Tumors
Estimation of a voxel-wise gold standard—The manual segmentations and the resulting
estimated composite gold standard from our STAPLE software were presented in our previous
article (21).
Bi-beta modeling of mixture distributions—Table 5 presents the estimated fraction of
the target brain tumor (π), along with the four bi-beta parameters for each the nine cases.
Zou et al.
Acad Radiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 March 28.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Dice similarity coefficient based on a probabilistic fractional segmentation—The
corresponding DSC and logit(DSC) values for all cases are given in Table 5. High variability
of spatial overlap (agreement) was observed between the probabilistic fractional segmentation
and the corresponding estimated gold standard.
Specifically, the ranges of DSCs were: meningiomas (0.519–0.893), astrocytomas (0.487–
0.972), and mixed gliomas (0.490–0.899). The ranges of logit(DSC) values were: meningiomas
(0.076–2.122), astrocytoma (−0.052–3.547), and mixed gliomas (−0.040–2.186), particularly
for small tumors with low fraction of voxels in small values of π (2.6%–8.5%) of the entire
Numerical Simulation of Dice Similarity Coefficients Under Bi-Beta Models
Table 6 presents the mean DSC values via 500 Monte-Carlo simulations under each specified
set of bi-beta model parameters. Our computer simulation results suggested that DSCs were
generally low even for highly skewed beta distributions. Furthermore, this validation metric
was sensitive to the relative size of the target in a fix-sized region of interest.
DISCUSSION
The topic of image segmentation is of high interest in serial treatment monitoring of “disease
burden,” particularly in oncologic imaging, where stereotactic XRT and image guided surgical
approaches are rapidly gaining popularity. Assessing image segmentation methods in the
absence of good ground truth is difficult. If we represent the error as error = bias + variance,
the problem can be stated as being the lack of a good way to measure bias (truth − mean[result
of algorithm]). Variance (reproducibility) can be measured in the absence of ground truth.
Variance can in turn be decomposed into intraobserver variability (measured by reproducibility
of a single observer’s results) and interobserver variability (multiple observers’ differences
from each other). When the results of multiple observers are available, and there is no better
ground truth available, looking at interobserver variability is crucial.
We illustrated the use of DSC as a simple validation metric of reproducibility and spatial
overlap accuracy to evaluate the performances of either manual or automated segmentations.
The novel ideas in this article were: (A) logit-transformed the DSC metric to examine for
significant differences between segmentations with standard ANOVA; (B) confirmed that
ANOVA assumptions were reasonably met; and (C) demonstrated with simulation the
dependence of DSC with lesion size.
Ideas (A) and (B) were analogous to testing for significant differences between kappa values.
The sample size and statistical power based on the kappa statistic was investigated (32), and
thus were not part of our analyses. The kappa statistic contains a contribution that is essentially
a correction for guessing. The ROC curve corresponded to a model of perception that includes
a correction for guessing and that such an ROC curve has a shape that is not observed in
experiment (33). Observers respond to stimuli according to the classic models of signal
detection theory, where guessing is not part of the paradigm. The use of ROC as a validation
metric was the focus of our related work and was not investigated here (21,22). Idea (C) showed
that the kappa statistic and DSC are prevalence (ie, the probability of the target class)
dependent, whereas the sensitivity and specificity in ROC analysis are standardized so that
they are prevalence independent.
We have expanded statistical validation analysis based on DSC and logit(DSC) in two clinical
examples, one in repeated segmentations of preoperative and intraoperative images before and
during MR guided prostate brachytherapy, and the other in automated probabilistic fractional
Zou et al.
Acad Radiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 March 28.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
segmentations of MRIs of three different types of brain tumor against a composite gold standard
derived from multiple manual segmentations.
In the first clinical example, we showed that the reproducibility was significantly higher based
on 1.5T preoperative images than on 0.5T intraoperative images in brachytherapy. This
motivated us in a prior investigation to develop a deformable matching method to register these
images and achieve improved visualization in brachytherapy (16). In the second example, we
estimated a voxel-wise gold standard by an expectation-maximization algorithm. We also
found that the automated segmentation results were variable in all types of brain tumors,
particularly for small brain tumors. Therefore, an improved automated segmentation algorithm
was called for (25). There was no significant difference in mean logit(DSC) between
segmentation pairs, suggesting that the pair-wise comparison of repeated segmentations
fundamental to DSC did not introduce significant bias. The case effect was significant for the
prostate segmentation and the brain tumor segmentation. Certain cases were harder than others,
possibly because of the shape, size, and tumor type.
Conceptually, DSC is a special case of the kappa statistic, which is a popular and useful
reliability and agreement index frequently used in observer performance studies. From this
work, we have developed several new statistical methodologic extensions based on DSC. In
the prostate PZ segmentation example, the effects of preoperative and intraoperative
segmentation on logit(DSC) were analyzed and compared by ANOVA. These effects were
further tested using an F-test, with corresponding P values reported, which showed that both
the image acquisition and patient case effects were significant. In the brain tumor segmentation
example, to define the DSC derived from an automatic probabilistic fractional segmentation
algorithm, the distributions were assumed to have a bi-beta mixture model. The unknown gold
standard was estimated statistically using a recently developed expectation-maximization
algorithm (21,22,28).
We emphasize the importance of the logit transformation in the inferences using DSC. The
advantage of the logit transformation was that the outcome data are now in an unrestricted
range, which enabled us to assume the variance component model with normally distributed
errors. In addition, the normality assumption was tested via the z-test (27).
There are several limitations in our investigation. First, DSC as a reproducibility metric is not
robust in terms of the size of the target, as shown in our statistical Monte-Carlo simulations
and in our brain tumor segmentation example. Several alternative statistical validation metrics
of classification accuracy may be considered (3), particularly when spatial information is of
importance. These metrics include ROC analysis, odds ratio, mutual information, and distance
measures. The important clinical question of which metric should be used to evaluate a specific
clinical goal needs to be carefully examined in future investigations. In addition, for the prostate
data, it would have been more instructive if the observers had each segmented the same five
images instead of different images, or perhaps even all 10 images three tines each.
Unfortunately, because of such labor-intensive tasks, we only had each of the two segmenters
performing repeated manual segmentations on five different cases, and therefore inter-observer
variability was not assessed. In the same example, because the preoperative images were
available at the time of intraoperative segmentation, as per clinical practice, the observations
are not independent, and spatial homogeneity is typically present. The logit(DSC) is assumed
to be normally distributed by assuming one of repeated Bernoulli trials (one for each voxel)
under the voxel-independence assumption. Such assumption needs to be investigated when
there is spatial homogeneity. Thus, in practice, we assumed that the data at each voxel as if it
were one-dimensional, which might be an over simplification. In reality, however, the voxels
in the same image are typically correlated spatially. One may evaluate in a future validation
experiment whether the output of an algorithm differs as much from individual observers as
Zou et al.
Acad Radiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2006 March 28.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
the observers differ from each other. If an algorithm passes this test, it can be fairly stated that
the algorithm is about as good as human observers. More complicated ROC analyses using a
generalization to random-effects models may be conducted, as we have investigated and
summarized previously (20).
In summary, we have illustrated a statistical validation analysis of spatial overlap and
reproducibility using two existing datasets in both repeated manual segmentations and
automated probabilistic fractional segmentations. The metric used here is quite simple to
interpret and may be adapted to similar validation tasks to evaluate the performances of image
segmentations used in many radiologic studies.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the experts who performed manual segmentations.