Discovery of low thermal conductivity compounds with ﬁrst-principles anharmonic
lattice dynamics calculations and Bayesian optimization
Atsuto Seko,1, 2, ∗Atsushi Togo,2, ∗Hiroyuki Hayashi,1 Koji Tsuda,3 Laurent Chaput,4 and Isao Tanaka1, 2, 5, †
1Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan
2Center for Elements Strategy Initiative for Structure Materials (ESISM), Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan
3Department of Computational Biology, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences,
The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa 277-8561, Japan
4Institut Jean Lamour, UMR CNRS 7198, Universite de Lorraine,
Boulevard des Aiguillettes, BP 70239, 54506 Vandoeuvre Les Nancy Cedex, France
5Nanostructures Research Laboratory, Japan Fine Ceramics Center, Nagoya 456-8587, Japan
 
Compounds of low lattice thermal conductivity (LTC) are essential for seeking thermoelectric
materials with high conversion eﬃciency. Some strategies have been used to decrease LTC. However,
such trials have yielded successes only within a limited exploration space. Here we report the virtual
screening of a library containing 54,779 compounds. Our strategy is to search the library through
Bayesian optimization using for the initial data the LTC obtained from ﬁrst-principles anharmonic
lattice dynamics calculations for a set of 101 compounds. We discovered 221 materials with very
low LTC. Two of them have even an electronic band gap < 1 eV, what makes them exceptional
candidates for thermoelectric applications. In addition to those newly discovered thermoelectric
materials, the present strategy is believed to be powerful for many other applications in which
chemistry of materials are required to be optimized.
Thermoelectric generators are essential for utilizing
otherwise waste heat. Because of the technological importance, researchers have been seeking materials with
high conversion eﬃciency for decades . Compounds
of low lattice thermal conductivity (LTC) are essential
for this purpose.
Diﬀerent strategies have been used
to decrease LTC. Recently, high throughput screening
(HTS) of materials using materials database constructed
by ﬁrst principles calculations has been recognized as
an eﬃcient tool for accelerated materials discovery .
Thanks to the recent progress of computational power
and techniques, a large set of ﬁrst principles calculations
can be performed with the accuracy comparable to experiments. This is a straightforward strategy when both
of the following conditions are satisﬁed: 1) the target
physical property can be accurately computed by ﬁrst
principles methods. 2) The exploration space is well de-
ﬁned and not too large to compute the target physical
property exhaustively in the space.
In order to evaluate LTC with the accuracy comparable to experimental data, however, we need to develop
a method that is far beyond the ordinary density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Since we need to treat
multiple interactions among phonons, or anharmonic lattice dynamics, the computational cost is many orders of
magnitudes higher than the ordinary DFT calculations.
Such expensive calculations are practically possible only
for a small number of simple compounds. HTS of a large
DFT database of LTC is not a realistic approach unless the exploration space is narrowly conﬁned. In the
year 2014, Carrete and coworkers concentrated their efforts to search low LTC materials within half-Heusler
compounds . They made HTS of wide variety of half-
Heusler compounds by examination of thermodynamical
stability via DFT results. Then LTC was estimated either by full ﬁrst principles calculations or by a machinelearning algorithm for a selected small number of compounds. HTS of low LTC using a quasiharmonic Debye
model was also reported in 2014 . Eﬃcient prediction
of LTC through compressive sensing of lattice dynamics was recently demonstrated . Development of such
new methods would bring accelerated discovery of new
materials in the future.
In the present study, we do not want to restrict the
exploration space by empirical knowledge, for example,
by crystal structure.
We ﬁrstly evaluated LTC of 101
compounds with three prototype structures, i.e., rocksalt, zincblende and wurtzite-type structures, by ﬁrstprinciples anharmonic lattice dynamics calculations and
solving Boltzmann transport equation with the singlemode relaxation-time approximation . Then the
results are used to construct a model for making “virtual
screening” of many compounds in a library with a diversity of structures and chemical compositions employing
Bayesian optimization procedure. For the Bayesian optimization, predictors are determined by kriging method to
ﬁnd the lowest LTC compound among the 101 ﬁrst principles data. The highly ranked compounds are supplied
to ﬁrst principles LTC calculations to verify the result of
the screening.
Computational procedure of LTC is described in detail elsewhere .
LTCs were calculated from phonon
lifetimes, group velocities, and mode-heat capacities solving the phonon Boltzmann transport equation within the
relaxation time approximation. The phonon properties
were calculated from the force constants. We employed
 
ﬁrst-principles calculation to obtain second-order force
constants (FC2) and third-order force constants (FC3)
with the supercell and ﬁnite displacement approaches.
Phonopy code was used for these phonon calculations .
Finite displacements of 0.03 ˚A were systematically introduced to perfect supercells to ﬁll up all elements of
force constant tensor elements among atoms in the supercells. The Brillouin zone integration for the phonon
lifetime calculation was performed by the linear tetrahedron method.
For the ﬁrst principles calculations, we employed
the plane-wave basis projector augmented wave (PAW)
method in the framework of DFT and the generalized
gradient approximation of the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof
(PBE) form as implemented in the VASP code . Much more attention for the convergence of DFT
calculations should be paid in the phonon calculations
as compared to the ordinary ﬁrst principles calculations
with respect to the k-point mesh, plane wave energy cutoﬀand tolerances of energy, residual force and stress.
The size of the supercell was chosen by observing the
convergence of phonon properties by changing the supercell size. Low LTC crystals are generally more anharmonic and the atomic interaction range is considered
relatively large. LTC calculations of the highly ranked
compounds required larger supercells than those for ordinary crystals with smaller anharmonicity. The plane
wave energy cutoﬀwas chosen to be at least 20% higher
than the recommended values in the PAW dataset. Total energies were minimized until the energy convergences
became less than 10−8 eV.
Results of ﬁrst principles LTC of 101 compounds are
shown with crystalline volume per atom, V , and density, ρ, in Figs.
1 (a) and (b).
Among 101 compounds, PbSe with the rocksalt structure show the lowest
LTC, 0.9 W/mK (@300 K). It is in the similar trend as
the recent report showing low LTC for lead- and tinchalcogenides .
The computed results are compared with available experimental data in Fig.
Satisfactory agreements between experimental and computed results are evident in Fig. 1 (c), demonstrating
the usefulness of the ﬁrst principles LTC data for further
studies. A phenomenological relationship has been proposed that log κL is proportional to log V . Although
qualitative correlation can be seen between our LTC and
V , it is diﬃcult to predict LTC quantitatively, hence to
discover new compounds with low LTC, only from the
phenomenological relationship. It can be noted that the
dependence on V is remarkably diﬀerent between rocksalt
type and zincblende or wurtzite type compounds, while
zincblende and wurtzite type compounds show similar
LTC when the chemical compositions are the same.
The 101 ﬁrst principles LTC data are then used to
make a model for the prediction of LTC of compounds
within a library on the basis of the Bayesian optimization.
For the purpose of the prediction, it is preferable to select
“good” predictors. Our rule of thumb is as follows: 1)
whenever experts’ knowledge is available as a physical or
phenomenological rule, it should be examined as the ﬁrst
step. 2) Predictors may be better included in a library or
those easily made by combining the physical quantities
in a library. Alternatively, the predictors may be easily
computed by DFT calculations. 3) High eﬃciency for the
Bayesian optimization procedure needs to be examined.
On the basis of these ideas, we ﬁrstly determine predictors for the Bayesian optimization procedure to ﬁnd
the lowest LTC compound among the 101 ﬁrst principles LTC data. We adopt kriging method based on the
Gaussian process regression (GPR) of LTC simply using two physical quantities, V and ρ, as predictors. These quantities are available in most of the experimental or computational crystal structure database, such
as ICSD , Atomwork , Materials Project Database
(MPD) , and aﬂowlib . Although a phenomenological relationship has been proposed between log κL and
V , the correlation between them is not so high. The
correlation between log κL and ρ is even worse.
We start from an observed data set of 5 compounds
that is randomly chosen from 101 compounds.
kriging, a compound with maximum probability of improvement among the remaining data is searched, namely
a compound with the highest Z-score derived from GPR.
The compound is included into the observed data set
and then another compound with maximum probability
of improvement is searched. Both the kriging and random searches are repeated ﬁfty times and the average
number of observed compounds required for ﬁnding the
compound with the lowest LTC is examined.
When −log κL is expressed as f, Z-score for a compound with predictors x∗is deﬁned as
Z(x∗) = [f(x∗) −fbest] /
where f(x∗) and v(x∗) denote the predicted value of
−log κL and its prediction variance at a point expressed
by predictors x∗, respectively.
v(x∗) is expected to
be small for compounds near the observed data, while
it can be large for compounds far from the observed
fbest denotes the lowest LTC value among “observed” compounds, which is updated at each kriging
step. Z-score that is evaluated by dividing [f(x∗) −fbest]
by the square root of the prediction variance,
tends to select candidates with maximum probability of
improvement . Here the prediction and its variance
are described using the Gaussian kernel function. Therefore, our GPR has two free parameters, i.e. variances of
Gaussian kernel and prior distribution. Here, they are
given as 20 and 0.1, respectively.
Figure 2 (a) shows the result of the kriging search in
comparison to the random search of the lowest LTC compounds within the 101 compounds. The average numbers of compounds required for the optimization using
the kriging and random searches, Nave, are 11 and 55,
LTC calculation (W/m∙K)
LTC experiment (W/m∙K)
Rocksalt-type
Zincblende-type
Wurtzite-type
LTC calculation (W/m∙K)
Volume (Å3/atom)
Rocksalt-type
Zincblende-type
Wurtzite-type
LTC calculation (W/m∙K)
Density (g/cm3)
LTC calculated from ﬁrst principles for 101 compounds along with (a) volume, V , and (b) density, ρ. (c) Experimental
LTC data are shown for comparison when experimental LTCs are available.
Number of observations
Kriging with 2 descriptors
(Nave = 11)
Kriging with 2 descriptors
+ 34 elemental descriptors
(Nave = 19)
(Nave = 55)
Number of observations
Kriging with 2 descriptors
(Nave = 65)
(Nave = 50)
Minimum of LTC (W/m∙K)
Kriging with 2 descriptors
+ 34 elemental descriptors
(Nave = 19)
Lowest LTC values at each iteration in kriging search
for ﬁnding (a) PbSe and (b) LiI. Those by random searches are
also shown for comparison. When performing a kriging search
for ﬁnding LiI, PbSe and PbTe are intentionally omitted and
the rest of 99 compounds are used.
respectively. The compound with the lowest LTC among
the 101 compounds, i.e., rocksalt PbSe, can be found
much more eﬃciently using the kriging technique and
only with two variables, V and ρ. However, we realize
that the kriging only with these two variables is not a
robust way for ﬁnding the lowest LTC. As an example,
Fig. 2 (b) shows the result of the kriging search using the
dataset after intentionally removing 1st and 2nd lowest
LTC compounds, i.e., rocksalt PbSe and PbTe, from the
101 compounds. Then rocksalt LiI should be the right
answer of the optimization. However, Nave is 65 for ﬁnding LiI using the kriging only with V and ρ, which is
larger than that of the random search, Nave = 50. The
delay of the optimization should originate from the fact
that LiI is an outlier when LTC is modeled only with V
and ρ. Such outlier compounds with low LTC are diﬃcult
to ﬁnd only with V and ρ.
In order to overcome the outlier problem, we add predictors about constituent chemical elements. There are
many choices for such variables: They are, for example, electronegativity, atomic radius, ionization energy,
etc . Here, we newly introduced “elemental descriptors”, which is a set of binary digits representing the
presence of chemical elements. Since the 101 LTC data
is composed of 34 kinds of elements, we use 34 elemental
descriptors. Results of the kriging are shown in Figs. 2
(a) and (b) with 34 elemental descriptors on top of V
and ρ. In both cases, the compound of the lowest LTC is
found with Nave = 19. The use of the elemental descriptors is found to improve the robustness of the eﬃcient
As described in the Supplemental Material (SM), better correlations with LTC can be found for parameters
that are obtained from phonon density of states. However, we do not use such phonon parameters as predictors
in the present study, because there is no data library
available for such phonon parameters for a wide range
of compounds. Hereafter, we show results only with the
predictor set composed of 34 elemental descriptors on top
of V and ρ.
Screening for low LTC compounds over compounds in a
large library is carried out using a GPR prediction model.
Such a screening based on a prediction model is called
“virtual screening” in biomedical communities . For
the virtual screening, we adopt all 54,779 compounds in
MPD library , which is composed of most of crystal
structure data available in ICSD . On the basis of the
GPR prediction model made by V , ρ and 34 elemental
descriptors for the 101 LTC data, a ranking for low LTC
compounds is made according to the Z-score of the 54,779
compounds.
Figure 3 shows the distribution of Z-scores for the
54,779 compounds along with V and ρ.
The magni-
Z-score of LTC
Dependence of Z-score on constituent elements for
compounds in the MPD library. The magnitude of Z-score
is shown by colors along with volume, V , and density, ρ, for
each element.
tude of Z-score is plotted in panels corresponding to constituent elements. (Transition metal and other elements
are shown in SM.) The Z-score is relative to rocksalt
PbSe showing the lowest LTC among 101 compounds.
Among 54,779 compounds, 221 compounds show positive Z-score, which are expected to have lower LTC than
that of rocksalt PbSe, i.e., < 0.9 W/mK (@300 K). They
are highlighted by red dots. They are widely distributed
in V −ρ space; which means it is diﬃcult to pick them up
without performing the Bayesian optimization with elemental descriptors. The Z-score is widely distributed for
light elements such as Li, N, O and F. This implies that
the presence of such light elements by itself have little
eﬀects on lowering the LTC. When such light elements
form a compound with heavy elements, the compound
tends to show high Z-score. It is also noteworthy that
many compounds composed of some light elements such
as Be and B tend to show high LTC.
Special features are recognized for Pb, Cs, I, Br and
Many compounds composed of these elements exhibit high Z-score. (The number of compounds with positive Z-score is shown in SM.) Most of compounds showing positive Z-score have any of atomic combinations of
these ﬁve elements. On the other hand, elements in the
Periodic table neighboring to these ﬁve elements do not
show analogous trends. For example, compounds with
high Z-scores are rarely found for Tl and Bi, which are
neighboring to Pb. This may sound odd since Bi2Te3 is a
famous thermoelectric compound. This may be ascribed
to our selection of the training dataset composed only
of AB compounds with 34 elements and three kinds of
simple crystal structures. In other words, the training
dataset is somehow “biased”. This is unavoidable at the
moment since the ﬁrst-principles LTC calculations are
still too expensive to obtain suﬃciently unbiased training dataset with a large enough number of data to cover
the diversity of chemical composition and crystal struc-
Cs2[PdCl4]I2
Crystal structures of K2CdPb and Cs2[PdCl4]I2
predicted to show low LTC of < 0.5 W/mK (@300 K) and
narrow band gap of < 1 eV.
tures. Nevertheless, the “biased” training dataset will be
veriﬁed to be useful for ﬁnding low LTC materials. Because of the use of the “biased” training dataset, we may
not be able to discover all of the low LTC materials in
the library. However, we can discover at least a part of
Veriﬁcation process for the candidates of low LTC compounds after the virtual screening is one of the most important steps to “discover” low LTC compounds. First
principles LTCs are evaluated for the top 8 compounds
after the virtual screening. All of them are considered
to form ordered structures. LTC calculation was unsuccessful for Pb2RbBr5 due to the presence of imaginary
phonon modes within the supercell used in the present
study. Z-scores and ﬁrst principles LTC of the rest of the
compounds are listed in Table 1. All of top 5 compounds
show LTC of < 0.2 W/mK (@300 K), which are much
lower than that of the rocksalt PbSe, i.e., 0.9 W/mK
(@300 K). This conﬁrms the powerfulness of the present
GPR prediction model for eﬃciently discovering low LTC
compounds.
Crystal structures of highly ranked compounds, PbRbI3, PbIBr, PbRb4Br6 and PbI2 (P63mc)
are shown in SM. PbICl and PbClBr have the same crystal structures as PbIBr. PbI2 (R3m) and PbI2 (P63mc)
are diﬀerent only in their stacking sequences. All of these
compounds contain either six-fold or eight-fold coordinated Pb by halogen ions, and are of stoichiometric chemical composition when Pb is divalent.
When such LTC materials are considered for thermoelectric applications, properties related to electronic
structures, namely electronic contribution of the thermal
conductivity, electrical conductivity and Seebeck coeﬃcient should also be optimized. Although they can be
tuned by elemental doping, the band gap, Eg, should be
a simple measure of the electronic structure and allows to
discriminate in a simple way between materials that can
be good thermoelectrics or not. All of 221 compounds
showing positive Z-score are listed in SM together with
Eg (DFT-PBE) given in the MPD library. Among them
only 19 compounds satisfy 0.1 < Eg < 1.0 eV. First principles LTCs are evaluated for them. Crystal structures
First principles LTCs and Z-scores for highly
ranked compounds by the virtual screening. Band gaps by
DFT-PBE are taken from MPD library .
Ranking Z-score
(W/mK) gap (eV)
Cs2[PdCl4]I2 I4/mmm
and LTC for two of them are shown in Fig. 4 and Table I. Both of K2CdPb and Cs2[PdCl4]I2 are predicted to
exhibit LTC of less than 0.5 W/mK (@300 K) together
with band gap of smaller than 1 eV. The discovery of
such compounds may open a gate toward designing new
thermoelectric materials with exceptionally high ﬁgure of
In this study, we ﬁrst report the theoretical LTC of 101
compounds by ﬁrst-principles anharmonic lattice dynamics calculations. Using these data, the virtual screening
of a library containing 54,779 compounds is performed
by Bayesian optimization using kriging method based on
the Gaussian process regressions. 221 materials with very
low LTC are found from this screening. A ﬁnal ﬁltering
of those low LTC compounds is made using the electronic
band gap, which is a measure to discriminate in a simple
way between materials that can be good thermoelectrics
or not. Two compounds with low LTC of < 0.5 W/mK
(@300K) and narrow band gap of < 1 eV are thus discovered, which may open a gate toward designing new
thermoelectric materials with exceptionally high ﬁgure of
merit. The present method should be useful for searching
materials for many diﬀerent applications in which chemistry of materials are required to be optimized.
This work was supported by Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research (A) and Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research on Innovative Areas “Nano Informatics” (Grant
No. 25106005) from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS).
∗These authors contributed equally to this work.
† 
 M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Chen, M. Y. Tang, R. Yang, H. Lee,
D. Wang, Z. Ren, J.-P. Fleurial,
and P. Gogna, Adv.
Mater. 19, 1043 .
 G. J. Snyder and E. S. Toberer, Nat. Mater. 7, 105
Norimatsu,
M. Kusunoki, and K. Koumoto, Sci. Tech. Adv. Mater.
11, 044306 .
 D. J. Singh and I. Terasaki, Nat. Mater. 7, 616 .
 G. Ceder, MRS bull. 35, 693 .
 S. Curtarolo, G. L. Hart, M. B. Nardelli, N. Mingo,
S. Sanvito, and O. Levy, Nat. Mater. 12, 191 .
 K. Fujimura,
Y. Koyama,
A. Kuwabara,
I. Kishida, K. Shitara, C. A. J. Fisher, H. Moriwake,
and I. Tanaka, Adv. Energy Mater. 3, 980 .
 M. Nishijima,
T. Ootani,
Y. Kamimura,
S. Esaki, S. Murai, K. Fujita, K. Tanaka, K. Ohira,
Y. Koyama, et al., Nat. Commun. 5 .
 L. Yu, R. S. Kokenyesi, D. A. Keszler, and A. Zunger,
Adv. Energy Mater. 3, 43 .
 J. Carrete, W. Li, N. Mingo, S. Wang, and S. Curtarolo,
Phys. Rev. X 4, 011019 .
 C. Toher, J. J. Plata, O. Levy, M. de Jong, M. Asta,
M. B. Nardelli,
and S. Curtarolo, Phys. Rev. B 90,
174107 .
 F. Zhou, W. Nielson, Y. Xia, V. Ozoli¸nˇs, et al., Phys.
Rev. Lett. 113, 185501 .
 A. Togo, L. Chaput,
and I. Tanaka, Phys. Rev. B 91,
094306 .
 A. Togo, F. Oba, and I. Tanaka, Phys. Rev. B 78, 134106
 P. E. Bl¨ochl, Phys. Rev. B 50, 17953 .
 J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 77, 3865 .
 G. Kresse and J. Hafner, Phys. Rev. B 47, 558 .
 G. Kresse and J. Furthm¨uller, Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169
 G. Kresse and D. Joubert, Phys. Rev. B 59, 1758 .
 S. Lee, K. Esfarjani, T. Luo, J. Zhou, Z. Tian,
G. Chen, Nat. Commun. 5 .
 D. Parker, X. Chen, and D. J. Singh, Phys. Rev. Lett.
110, 146601 .
 L.-D. Zhao, S.-H. Lo, Y. Zhang, H. Sun, G. Tan, C. Uher,
C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid, and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature 508, 373 .
 J. M. Skelton, S. C. Parker, A. Togo, I. Tanaka,
A. Walsh, Phys. Rev. B 89, 205203 .
 G. A. Slack, in Solid State Physics, Vol. 34 pp. 1–71.
 C. E. Rasmussen and C. K. I. Williams, Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning .
 A. Seko, T. Maekawa, K. Tsuda, and I. Tanaka, Phys.
Rev. B 89, 054303 .
 G. Bergerhoﬀand I. D. Brown, in Crystallographic
databases, edited by F. H. Allen et al. .
 Y. Xu, M. Yamazaki, and P. Villars, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys.
50, 11RH02 .
 A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards,
S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, G. Ceder,
et al., APL Mater. 1, 011002 .
 S. Curtarolo, W. Setyawan, S. Wang, J. Xue, K. Yang,
R. H. Taylor, L. J. Nelson, G. L. Hart, S. Sanvito,
M. Buongiorno-Nardelli, et al., Comput. Mater. Sci..
 D. Jones, J. Global Optim. 21, 345 .
 D. B. Kitchen, H. Decornez, J. R. Furr, and J. Bajorath,
Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 3, 935 .
 S. P. Ong,
W. D. Richards,
G. Hautier,
M. Kocher, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, V. L. Chevrier, K. A.
and G. Ceder, Comput. Mater. Sci. 68, 314