Growing Scale-Free Networks with Tunable Clustering
Petter Holme∗and Beom Jun Kim†
Department of Theoretical Physics, Ume˚a University, 901 87 Ume˚a, Sweden
We extend the standard scale-free network model to include a “triad formation step”. We analyze
the geometric properties of networks generated by this algorithm both analytically and by numerical
calculations, and ﬁnd that our model possesses the same characteristics as the standard scale-free
networks like the power-law degree distribution and the small average geodesic length, but with
the high-clustering at the same time. In our model, the clustering coeﬃcient is also shown to be
tunable simply by changing a control parameter—the average number of triad formation trials per
time step.
PACS numbers: 89.75.-k, 89.75.Fb, 89.75.Hc, 89.65.-s
A great number of systems in many branches of science can be modeled as large sparse graphs, sharing
many geometrical properties .
For example: social
networks, computer networks, and metabolic networks
of certain organisms all have a logarithmically growing
average geodesic (shortest path) length ℓand an approximately algebraically decaying distribution of vertex degree. In addition to this, social networks typically show
a high clustering, or local transitivity: If person A knows
B and C, then B and C are likely to know each other.
Works on the geometry of social networks, which is the
main focus of the present paper, have originated from
Rapoport’s studies of disease spreading , and have
been further developed in Refs. . General mathematical models for random graphs with a structural bias
are called the Markov graphs and were studied in Ref. .
In the physics literature, networks with high clustering are commonly modeled by the small-world network
model of Watts and Strogatz (WS) , while networks
with the power-law degree distribution by the scale-free
network model of Barab´asi and Albert (BA) .
Although both models have a logarithmically increasing ℓ
with the network size, each model lacks the property of
the other model: the WS model shows a high clustering but without the power-law degree distribution, while
the BA model with the scale-free nature does not possess
the high clustering. In this work, we propose a network
model which has both the perfect power-law degree distribution and the high clustering. Furthermore, in our
model, the degree of the clustering, measured by the clustering coeﬃcient (see below), is shown to be tunable and
thus controllable by adjusting a parameter of the model.
We start from the deﬁnition of a network as a graph
G = (V, E), where V is the set of vertices and E is the
set of edges . An edge connects pairs of vertices in V
and not more than one edge may connect a speciﬁc pair
of vertices. To quantify the clustering, Watts and Strogatz introduced the clustering coeﬃcient γ ≡⟨γv⟩with
the average ⟨· · · ⟩for all vertices in V. The local clus-
∗Electronic address: 
†Electronic address: 
tering coeﬃcient γv for the vertex v is deﬁned as follows:
Suppose that the vertex v has kv neighbors (kv is called
the degree of the vertex v, a neighbor is a vertex separated by exactly one edge). For those kv neighbors, there
can exist at most
= kv(kv −1)/2 edges connecting
two of kv vertices. If one deﬁnes |E(Γv)| as the number
of actual edges existing in the network connecting those
neighbors, the local clustering coeﬃcient is written as 
γv ≡|E(Γv)|
¿From the above deﬁnition, it is clear that γ is a measure of the relative number of triads (fully connected subgraphs of three vertices). Note also that γ is strictly in
the interval with the upper limit attained only for a
fully connected graph. In a social acquaintance network,
for example, γ = 1 if everyone in the network knows
each other. It should be noted that even though the BA
model successfully explains the scale-free nature of many
networks, it has γ ≈0 and thus fails to describe correctly networks with the high clustering, such as social
We below review brieﬂy the BA model of the scale-free
network and present our model for the scale-free network
with the high clustering. The BA model is deﬁned as
• Initial condition: To start with, the network consists of m0 vertices and no edges.
• Growth: One vertex v with m edges is added at
every time step. Time t is identiﬁed as the number
of time steps.
• Preferential attachment (PA): Each edge of v is
then attached to an existing vertex with the probability proportional to its degree, i.e. the probability
for a vertex w to be attached to v is 
FIG. 1: Preferential attachment and triad formation. In the
preferential attachment step (a) the new vertex v chooses a
vertex u to attach to with a probability proportional to its
In the triad formation step (b) the new vertex v
chooses a vertex w in the neighborhood of the one linked to
in the previous preferential attachment step. × symbolizes
“not-allowed to attach to” (either since no triad would be
formed, or that an edge already exists).
In the BA model, the growth step is then iterated N =
|V| times, and for each growth step the PA step is iterated
m times for m edges of the newly added vertex v.
In order to incorporate the high clustering we modify
the above BA algorithm by adding an additional step:
• Triad formation (TF): If an edge between v and w
was added in the previous PA step, then add one
more edge from v to a randomly chosen neighbor
of w. If there remains no pair to connect, i.e., if all
neighbors of w were already connected to v, do a
PA step instead.
When a vertex v with m edges is added to the existing
network, we ﬁrst perform one PA step, and then perform
a TF step with the probability Pt or a PA step with the
probability 1 −Pt. The average number mt of the TF
trials per added vertex is then given by mt = (m −1)Pt,
which we take as the control parameter in our model (see
Fig. 1). It should be noted that our model reduces to the
original BA model when mt = 0.
The standard scale free network model not only generates networks with certain geometrical properties, it
suggests a mechanism for the emergence of power-law
degree distributions in evolving networks: New actors
(vertices) in a social context prefers to attach to more
connected (“well known”) actors. The sociological interpretation for the triad formation step is that after being
acquainted with (linked to) w an actor v is likely to be
acquainted to w’s acquaintances as well.
This mechanism of the emergence of clustering is well-known, and
was discussed under the name “sibling bias” already in
Ref. . Recently, Ref. provided empirical evidence
for both the mechanisms of triad formation and preferential attachment used in our construction algorithm.
The clustered scale-free network algorithm deﬁned
above gives the same degree distribution as the standard
scale free network, at least if every TF step follows a
PA step. To see this, ﬁrst observe that in a PA step an
arbitrary vertex v increases its degree with the rate
for a PA step,
FIG. 2: Degree distribution for the scale-free network model
with tunable clustering with parameter values m = m0 = 3,
N = 105 at various values of mt: At any value of mt, which
determines the average number of triad formations, P(k) exhibits a power-law behavior like the BA model corresponding
to mt = 0.
where the normalization factor A for one edge is determined to be unity following Ref. . For a TF step the
average increase of kv is proportional to the probability
that a vertex in the neighborhood w is linked in the PA
step before, times the inverse of that vertex’s degree (the
probability that v is linked from w):
w∈Γv kw(1/kw)
for a TF step,
where we have used the same normalization as in Eq. (3)
and Γv is the neighborhood of v (we use that the number
of vertices in Γv is kv). From Eqs. (3) and (4) the total
rate for one time step, composed of mt TF steps and
m −mt PA steps, is expressed as
which has the same form as the original BA model and
thus results in
Consequently, the degree of an arbitrary vertex increases
as the square root of the time, which then yield the
power-law degree distribution: P(k) ∼k−3 .
In the above discussion we have assumed that a TF
step always follows a PA step. If a TF step would be
proceeded by another TF step the factor kw(1/kw) in
Eq. (4) would be replaced by kw(1/(kw −1)) which is a
small correction when kw is large (which it is likely to be
by the deﬁnition of the PA step). And thus the resulting
degree distribution would not diﬀer much from a powerlaw. In Fig. 2, the degree distributions P(k) at various
(a) Clustering coeﬃcient γ versus the network size N
at various values of the average number mt of triads per time
step. Straight lines show asymptotic values of γ at each mt.
For mt ̸= 0, γ approaches a nonzero value as N is increased.
(b) γ(N →∞) versus mt: The clustering coeﬃcient can be
varied systematically by changing mt.
values of mt are displayed and we ﬁnd that at any value
of mt, the distribution is well described by the power law
with the exponent a ≈3 in P(k) ∼k−a, as is expected
from the above analytic consideration.
The parameter mt in our model introduces the clustering eﬀect into the system by allowing the formation of
triads. We only focus on the case of m = 3 with expectation that other values of m should give qualitatively the
same behavior. One expects then that for any m0 a ﬁnite
mt gives a ﬁnite clustering coeﬃcient γ in the thermodynamic limit of N →∞, whereas for mt = 0 (the BA
scale-free network model) γ goes to zero as N becomes
larger. In Fig. 3(a), γ at various values of mt is shown as
a function of system size N. As expected, we ﬁnd that γ
approaches to a ﬁnite nonzero value as N is increased at
nonzero mt, whereas the BA model, which corresponds
to the limiting case of mt = 0 in our model, is conﬁrmed
to to have γ = 0. Furthermore, we also observe that the
relation between mt and γ is almost linear, as depicted
in Fig. 3(b).
¿From the above observations, we conclude that our
model exhibits both the scale-free nature and the highclustering at the same time, while the WS model (the
BA model) lacks the former (the latter) property. We
note that in many real networks, both properties usually
coexist, and thus believe that our model is more realistic.
The triad formation step in our model, which inevitably
gives a high clustering coeﬃcient, is expected to make
FIG. 4: The characteristic path length for the arbitrary clustered scale-free network model with the parameters m =
m0 = 3 and at various values of mt. Although ℓbecomes
larger with mt, ℓis found to behave logarithmically as a function of N.
the average geodesic length smaller than the BA network,
since the edge for the triad could have been used to connect two vertices separated by a large distance if only
the preferential attachment step was allowed. However,
the characteristic path length, deﬁned as the average of
the geodesic length, ℓ, is found to behave logarithmically
with the size N, the same behavior as the WS model and
the BA model. In Fig. 4, we present ℓversus N at various values of mt. It is shown that ℓbecomes larger as
mt is increased, as expected. Furthermore Fig. 4 shows
that the increase of ℓis logarithmic for all mt.
By mimicking principles in network formation, a generation algorithm can construct graphs with certain topological statistics, such as a degree distribution, clustering
coeﬃcient, and so on. However, it should be emphasized
that these kinds of algorithms cannot claim to uniformly
sample the ensemble of networks with speciﬁc statistical
properties. This drawback exists even in more general
classes of random graphs where structural biases, such
as clustering, are imposed. 
Recently, Klemm and Equ´ıluz have proposed a network model based on a ﬁnite memory of vertices, i.e.,
vertices become inactive and do not get new edges after
a ﬁnite number of time steps, and have shown that their
growth and deactivation model exhibits both the high
clustering and the scale-free nature. Our model provides
an alternative possibility to achieve the same feature, the
clustered scale-free nature, based on our frequent everyday experience on how we are acquainted by newcomers:
B becomes A’s new friend since B is introduced by one
of A’s friends.
Even in the network of scientiﬁc citations, it is likely that authors of paper A refer paper B
since they have found B when they read a famous review paper C . This then has close resemblance to
our model, the TF step accompanied by the PA step. In
Ref. , a model with both the high clustering and the
scale-free distribution has also been suggested. However,
the power-law degree distribution was assigned to the
network to start with, and the next following steps were
devised not to change the degree at each vertex. In other
words, the power-law distribution in Ref. was not an
emerging property in the model, which is diﬀerent from
the BA model as well as our model in this work. Very
recently, we have learned about the work by Davidsen et
al. , which is based on the same observation of triad
formation as ours and has been shown to possess similar
network properties, i.e. the high clustering, small average
geodesic length, and a scale-free distribution. We believe,
however, that our model has some advantage in describing networks which grow in time, whereas the network
model in Ref. has ﬁxed network size.
In conclusion, we have proposed an algorithm for generation of growing networks with power-law degree distribution, a logarithmic increase of the average geodesic
length, and a ﬁnite clustering. The last two properties
make the generated graphs qualify as a small-world network in the Watts and Strogatz sense, in addition to
their scale-freeness. The simple relation between the coeﬃcient mt and γ further increases the usefulness of the
suggested algorithm, making it possible to tune the clustering coeﬃcient in a systematic way.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the Swedish Natural Research Council through Contracts Nos. F 5102-
659/2001 and E 5106-1643/1999.
 For reviews, see e.g., a special issue on complex systems
in Science 284, 79-109 ; D. J. Watts, Small Worlds
 ; M. E. J.
Newman, J. Stat. Phys. 101, 819 ; S. H. Strogatz,
Nature 410, 268 .
 A. Rapoport, Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 15,
523 ; 535 .
 A. Rapoport, Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 19,
257 ; T. J. Fararo and M. Sunshine, A Study
of a Biased Friendship Net ; J. A. Davis, Human Relations 20, 181
 ; I. Pool and M. Kochen, Social Networks 1, 1
 ; J. Skvoretz, Social Networks 7, 225 .
 C. C. Foster, A. Rapoport, and C. J. Orwant, Behavioral
Science 8, 56 .
 O. Frank and D. Strauss, J. Amer. Stat. Assoc. 81, 832
 D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz, Nature 393, 440 .
 A.-L. Barab´asi and R. Albert, Science 286, 509 ;
A.-L. Barab´asi, R. Albert, and H. Jeong, Physica A 272,
173 ; R. Albert, H. Jeong, and A.-L. Barab´asi,
Nature 401, 130 .
 For an introduction to graph theory, see for example:
R. J. Wilson, Introduction to Graph Theory, ; G. Chartrand and L. Lesniak,
Graphs and Digraphs, .
 M. E. J. Newman, Phys. Rev. E 64, 025102 .
 D. Strauss, SIAM Review 28, 513 .
 K. Klemm and V. M. Equ´ıluz, cond-mat/0107606; condmat/0107607.
 See the following recent studies, and references therein:
S. Redner, Eur. Phys. J. B 4, 131 ; S. Bilke and
C. Peterson, Phys. Rev. E 64, 036106 ; Y. Fang
and R. Rosseau, Scientometrics 50, 273 .
 A. R. Puniyani, R. M. Lukose, and B. A. Huberman,
cond-mat/0107212.
Bornholdt,
condmat/0108302.
 In practice one may use Pw = (kw + 1)/ P
v∈V(kv + 1),
to make it possible for disconnected vertices to be connected. This does not change the resultant network geometry signiﬁcantly.