raditional recommender systems, such as those based on
content-based and collaborative filtering, tend to use fairly simple user models. For example, user-based collaborative filtering generally models the user as a vector of item ratings. As additional observations are made about users’
preferences, the user models are extended, and the full collection of user preferences is used to generate recommendations or
make predictions. This approach, therefore, ignores the notion
of “situated actions” , the fact that users interact with the system within a particular “context” and that preferences for items within one context may be different from
those in another context.
In many application domains, a context-independent representation may lose predictive power because potentially useful
information from multiple contexts is aggregated. For example,
when a user is buying books, the preferences the user expresses
in one context, such as “books for my children,” may be of no
predictive value when the user seeks recommendations in a different context, such as “work-related books.” The ideal contextaware recommendation system would, therefore, be able reliably to label each user action with an appropriate context and
effectively tailor the system output to the user in that given context.
The concept of “context” has been studied extensively in several areas of computing and other disciplines. For example,
Bazire and Brezillon examine and compare some 150 different definitions of context from a number of different fields
and conclude that the multifaceted nature of the concept makes
it difficult to find a unifying definition: “Is context a frame for
a given object? Is it the set of elements that have any influence
on the object? Is it possible to define context a priori or just state
FALL 2011 67
Copyright © 2011, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence. All rights reserved. ISSN 0738-4602
Context-Aware
Recommender Systems
Gediminas Adomavicius, Bamshad Mobasher,
Francesco Ricci, and Alex Tuzhilin
n Context-aware
recommender
(CARS) generate more relevant recommendations by adapting them to the specific contextual situation of the user. This article explores
how contextual information can be used to create intelligent and useful recommender systems.
It provides an overview of the multifaceted
notion of context, discusses several approaches
for incorporating contextual information in the
recommendation process, and illustrates the
usage of such approaches in several application
areas where different types of contexts are
exploited. The article concludes by discussing
the challenges and future research directions for
context-aware recommender systems.
the effects a posteriori? Is it something static or
dynamic? Some approaches emerge now in artificial intelligence. In psychology, we generally study
a person doing a task in a given situation. Which
context is relevant for our study? The context of
the person? The context of the task? The context of
the interaction? The context of the situation?
When does a context begin and where does it stop?
What are the real relationships between context
and cognition?” Although Bazire and Brezillon
 do not settle on a specific definition, the
questions they raise do permeate virtually all
domains in which context awareness is necessary
or desired, including recommender systems.
Observing the various uses of context, Dourish
 has distinguished between two different
views of context: the representational view and the
interactional view. The representational view makes
four key assumptions: context is a form of information, it is delineable, it is stable, and it is independent from the underlying activity. In this view,
context can be described using a set of observable
attributes that are known a priori. Furthermore,
the structure of these contextual attributes does
not change over time. The interactional view of
context, according to Dourish, takes a different
stance on the key assumptions made by the representational view. In the interactional view, the
scope of contextual features is defined dynamically, and it is occasioned rather than static. Rather
than assuming that context acts as a set of conditions under which an activity occurs, this view
assumes a cyclical relationship between context
and activity, where the activity gives rise to context and the context influences activity.
Our goal in this article is not the exploration of
the notion of context in general, but rather the
examination of how context can be defined and
used in recommender systems in order to create
more intelligent and useful recommendations. We
begin by presenting our own approach to defining
context in recommender systems and discuss different paradigms of incorporating it into the recommendation process. We also highlight several
applications where context-aware recommender
systems have been used effectively, from travel
guides to information search and music recommendation. Finally, we identify several areas where
challenges in integrating context into recommender systems remain and point to some future
research directions.
Context in Recommender Systems
In our classification of context in recommender
systems, we follow many previous approaches by
assuming the existence of certain contextual factors,
such as time, location, and the purchasing purpose, that identify the context in which recommendations are provided. We assume that each of
these contextual factors can have a structure; the
Time factor, for example, can be defined in terms
of seconds, minutes, hours, days, months, and
years. The classification of context that we propose
in this article is based on the following two aspects
of contextual factors: what a recommender system
may know about these contextual factors, and how
contextual factors change over time. We will
explain each of these two dimensions in greater
detail later in this article.
What a Recommender System Knows
About Contextual Factors
A recommender system can have different types of
knowledge, which may include the exact list of all
the relevant factors, their structure, and their values, about the contextual factors. Depending on
what exactly the system knows (that is, what is
being observed), we can classify the knowledge of
a recommender system about the contextual factors into three categories: fully observable, partially observable, and unobservable.
Fully observable: The contextual factors relevant
to the application, as well as their structure and
their values at the time when recommendations
are made, are known explicitly. For example, in case
of recommending a purchase of a certain product,
such as a shirt, the recommender system may
know that only the Time, PurchasingPurpose, and
ShoppingCompanion factors matter in this application. Further, the recommender system may
know the structure of all these three contextual
factors, such as having categories of weekday,
weekend, and holiday for Time. Further, the recommender system may also know the values of the
contextual factors at the recommendation time
(for example, when this purchase is made, with
whom, and for whom).
Partially observable: Only some of the information about the contextual factors, as described
above, is known explicitly. For example, the recommender system may know all the contextual
factors, such as Time, PurchasingPurpose, and
ShoppingCompanion, but not their structure.
Note that there can possibly be different levels of
“partial observability.” In this article we do not differentiate between them and group various cases
of partially observable knowledge into this general
Unobservable: No information about contextual
factors is explicitly available to the recommender
system, and it makes recommendations by utilizing only the latent knowledge of context in an
implicit manner. For example, the recommender
system may build a latent predictive model, such
as hierarchical linear or hidden Markov models, to
estimate unknown ratings, where unobservable
context is modeled using latent variables.
AI MAGAZINE
How Contextual Factors
Change over Time
Depending on whether contextual factors change
over time or not, we have the following two categories: static and dynamic.
Static: The relevant contextual factors and their
structure remains the same (stable) over time. For
example, in case of recommending a purchase of a
certain product, such as a shirt, we can include the
contextual factors of Time, PurchasingPurpose,
ShoppingCompanion and only them during the
entire lifespan of the purchasing recommendation
application.
Dynamic: This is the case when the contextual
factors change in some way. For example, the recommender system (or the system designer) may
realize over time that the ShoppingCompanion
factor is no longer relevant for purchasing recommendations and may decide to drop it. Furthermore, the structure of some of the contextual factors can change over time (for example, new
categories can be added to the PurchasingPurpose
contextual factor over time).
These two dimensions give rise to the 3 x 2 diagram presented in figure 1. The two extremes in
figure 1 are the cases of the static, fully observable
contextual factors and the dynamic, unobservable
contextual factors. The former case pertains to the
situation when all the contextual factors are
known and do not change over time in any way.
This means that the system knows everything about
the context. This corresponds to the case called by
Dourish the representational view. The other
extreme is the case of the dynamic unobservable
contextual factors when nothing is known about
the context. Between these two extremes lie four
intermediate cases, such as dynamic fully or partially observable contextual factors and static
unobservable or partially observable factors.
One of these cases is defined by the static unobservable contextual information, when the structure of one or several unobserved latent contextual factors does not change over time. Since this
latent structure is stable, it can be modeled with
latent variables, and the unobserved contextual
information can be learned using some of the
machine-learning methods, such as matrix factorization , probabilistic latent semantic
analysis (PLSA), or hierarchical linear models
(HLMs). Regarding the dynamic observable or partially observable cases in figure 1, they are related
to the interactional view of the context. As an
example of the dynamic observable case, Mahmood, Ricci, and Venturini present a recommender system that adapts the dialogue to the
interaction context. This is modeled by a set of
dynamic contextual factors representing, for
instance, whether the user provided certain information or acted on the recommendations (for
example, put an item into the shopping cart). In a
dynamic way, step by step, the system adapts the
interaction considering a selection of these factors
depending on the state of the interaction. An
example of the static partially observable contextual case is presented in Palmisano, Tuzhilin, and
Gorgoglione , where the contextual information is defined using a Bayesian Network (BN).
In this BN, the observed context corresponds to
the external layers of the network and the unobserved latent one to the middle layers of the BN.
FALL 2011 69
Knowledge of the RS about the Contextual Factors
Partially Observable
Unobservable
Fully Observable
Everything Known
about Context
Partial and Static
Context Knowledge
Latent Knowledge
of Context
Context Relevance
Is Dynamic
Partial and Dynamic
Context Knowledge
Nothing Is Known
about Context
Contextual
Factors Change
Figure 1. Contextual Information Dimensions.
Further, some of the unobserved parameters of the
BN were learned from the data using standard
machine-learning methods .
Dynamic context may change based on passive
observations or explicit user feedback. For example,
the latter is the case in conversational recommender systems. In standard conversational systems, user feedback is used to iteratively refine the
user profile (or the initial user query) resulting in
more appropriate recommendations. In a contextaware conversational system (for example, Baltrunas et al. ), the user feedback may also be
used to iteratively modify contextual factors and
not just user profiles. For example, in the course of
conversation with a user, a restaurant recommender may determine that the user is on a romantic date. This observation, in turn, may result in filtering out restaurants that tend to be noisy or
without an adequate wine selection. Conversational recommender systems have been an active area
of research. The iterative refinement of context in
such systems will introduce a new set of research
questions that will require further investigation.
Most of the prior work on CARS follows the static, fully observable (or representational) view of
context . Some notable exceptions, in addition to
those already mentioned above, include work by
Jin, Zhou, and Mobasher and Anand and
Mobasher , which examined approaches to
modeling context based on the interactional view,
primarily in the realm of web personalization. In
much of the subsequent discussion we will focus
on the representational view of context-aware recommendation.
One of the main challenges of the representational view of context is the well-known domain
engineering problem typically associated with
knowledge-based systems. By their nature, representational context-aware systems are domain specific, and the set of contextual variables that are
relevant for the computational task (for example,
generating recommendations) must be specified as
part of the design of the system. It is often difficult
to determine a priori what all relevant contextual
factors are. For example, in a restaurant recommendation domain, it may be difficult to determine whether the user’s attire would be relevant to
his or her choice of restaurant. Another challenge
of representational systems is that the information
related to relevant contextual factors must be
determined as part of the data collection, and such
historical contextual information is often not
available when designing the system. For example,
in movie recommendation domains, it is rarely the
case that the users would have the capability (or
desire) to rate the same item multiple times under
different contexts.
The approaches that assume unobservable or
dynamic context also have their own challenges.
These challenges are primarily related to determining the efficacy of models (such as latent factors) that may characterize different contexts. In
addition, in such context-aware systems, contextual information must be extracted from users’
ongoing activities, and changes in contexts must
be recorded. Without an explicit model or representation of context, it is often difficult or impractical to determine what characterizes a specific
context in a user’s activity. In many applications,
the characterization of contextual cues may have
to be accomplished based on domain-specific
heuristics. This is even a bigger challenge if the
context is assumed to be dynamic. In that case, the
system must be able to determine when to
“switch” to a different underlying context model.
Next we describe how context can be incorporated into the recommendation process, focusing
mainly on the static, fully observable view of context, as it constitutes a predominant paradigm in
CARS so far, as mentioned earlier.
Representing and Modeling Context
Traditionally, the recommendation problem has
been viewed as a prediction problem in which, given a user profile and a target item, the recommender system’s task is to predict that user’s rating
for that item, reflecting the degree of user’s preference for that item. Specifically, a recommender system tries to estimate a rating function:
R : Users x Items Ratings
that maps user-item pairs to an ordered set of rating values. Note that R can be viewed as a general-purpose utility (or preference) measure for useritem pairs; however, due to the popularity of
rating-based utility models in recommender systems research, we use rating-based examples in
this article. The view of recommendation as a prediction problem comes from the fact that R is a
partial function: the ratings for all user-item pairs
are not known and, therefore, must be inferred.
For the subset of user-item pairs for which the rating values are known, those rating values are
obtained explicitly from users (for example,
movie ratings) or implicitly (for example, based
on observations of user behavior, such as purchase transactions). Once an initial set of ratings
have been specified, a recommender system tries
to estimate the rating values for user-item pairs
that have not yet been rated by the users. We call
such traditional recommender systems two-dimensional (2D) since they consider only the Users and
Items dimensions as input in the recommendation process. Note that the representation of users
and items in recommender systems is not limited
by their IDs (as done by many collaborative filtering algorithms) but can take into account com-
AI MAGAZINE
prehensive user profiles and item content features.
In contrast to the traditional model, contextaware recommender systems try to incorporate or
utilize additional evidence (beyond information
about users and items) to estimate user preferences
on unseen items. When such contextual evidence
can be incorporated as part of the input to the recommender system, the rating function can be
viewed as “multidimensional”:
R : Users x Items x Contexts Ratings
where Contexts represents a set of factors that further delineate the conditions under which the
user-item pair is assigned a particular rating. The
underlying assumption of this extended model is
that user preferences for items are not only a function of items themselves, but also a function of the
context in which items are being considered. It
should be noted that the above mapping is not
unique to the static, fully observable view of context, but, for instance — even in the unobservable
case — the ratings may depend on a set of latent
factors derived from observations of user activity
and used implicitly as part of the estimation of user
preferences (as mentioned previously).
In the static, fully observable view, however,
which is the primary focus of this article, Contexts
represents a set of explicit variables that model
contextual factors in the underlying domain (for
example, time, location, surroundings, device,
occasion, and so on). Regardless of the context representation, context-aware recommenders must be
able to obtain contextual information that corresponds to user’s activity (for example, making a
purchase or rating an item). On the one hand, this
contextual information is potentially needed as
part of the learning and modeling process (such as
discovering rules, segmenting users, or building
regression models). On the other hand, for a given
target user and a target item, the system must be
able to identify the values of specific contextual
variables as part of the user’s ongoing interaction
with the system.
The contextual information can be obtained in
many different ways. It can be obtained explicitly
or implicitly. Explicit contextual information may
be obtained from users themselves or from sensors
designed to measure specific physical or environmental information. For instance, the application
may ask an individual looking for a restaurant recommendation to specify whether he or she is on a
romantic date or out with coworkers for a business
dinner. If the restaurant recommender is on a
mobile device, additional contextual information
can be obtained through GPS or other sensors
about the location, time, and weather conditions.
In some cases, however, contextual information
must be derived or inferred from other observed
data. For example, an e-commerce system may
attempt, using previously learned models of user
behavior, to distinguish between the context in
which a user is buying a gift for a spouse and the
context of purchasing a work-related book.
Approaches to implicitly infer contextual information typically require building predictive models
from historical data .
Paradigms for Using
Contextual Information
Traditional recommender systems are built based
on the partial knowledge of user preferences, that
is, user preferences for some (often limited) set of
items, and the input data for traditional recommender systems is typically based on the records of
the form <user, item, rating>. In contrast, contextaware recommender systems are built based on the
knowledge of partial contextual user preferences
and typically deal with data records of the form
<user, item, context, rating>, where each specific
record includes not only how much a given user
liked a specific item, but also the contextual information in which the item was consumed by this
user (for example, context = Saturday). Furthermore, unlike the traditional recommendation
process that does not take context into account,
the information about the current context c can be
used in various stages of the recommendation
process, leading to several different approaches to
context-aware recommender systems.
In particular, from the algorithmic perspective,
while all the context-aware recommendation
approaches would work with the data of the form
U x I x C x R, where C is an additional contextual
dimension, and produce a list of contextual recommendations i1, i2, i3 ... for each user u, the context-aware recommendation process can take one
of the following three forms, based on how the
contextual information is used, as shown in figure
2 : contextual
prefiltering, contextual postfiltering, or contextual
Contextual prefiltering (or contextualization of
recommendation input). In this paradigm information about the current context c is used for
selecting only the relevant set of data, and ratings
are predicted using any traditional 2D recommender system on the selected data.
Contextual postfiltering (or contextualization of
recommendation output). In this paradigm contextual information is initially ignored, and the
ratings are predicted using any traditional 2D recommender system on the entire data. Then, the
resulting set of recommendations is adjusted (contextualized) for each user using the contextual
information.
Contextual modeling . In this paradigm contextual information is used directly in the modeling
technique as part of the rating estimation.
We note that adapting a recommendation to
context is complementary to the adaptation to the
user preferences (personalization). Personalization
can be implemented with the same general
approaches mentioned above. Note that, in principle, a recommender system can be context aware
without being personalized and vice versa,
although most CARS perform both kind of adaptations.
Contextual Prefiltering
As shown in figure 2a, the contextual prefiltering
approach uses contextual information to select the
most relevant 2D (Users x Items) data for generating
recommendations. One major advantage of this
approach is that it allows deployment of any of the
numerous traditional recommendation techniques
previously proposed in the literature . In particular, when using this
approach, context c essentially serves as a query (or
a filter) for selecting relevant rating data. An example of a contextual data filter for a movie recommender system would be: if a person wants to see
a movie on Saturday, only the Saturday rating data
is used to recommend movies. Note that this
example represents an exact prefilter because the
data was filtered using exactly the specified context.
However, the exact context sometimes can be
too narrow. Consider, for example, the context of
watching a movie with a girlfriend in a movie theater on Saturday or, more formally, c = (Girlfriend,
Theater, Saturday). Using this exact context as a
data-filtering query may be problematic, because
certain aspects of the overly specific context may
not be significant, and the exact context may not
have enough data for accurate rating prediction. To
address this issue, Adomavicius et al. introduced generalized prefiltering that generalizes data
filtering context c = (c1, ..., ck) with less specific context c= (c1, ..., ck) such that ci ci for every i = 1,
..., k in the corresponding context hierarchy (for
example, Saturday Weekend). Then, cis used
AI MAGAZINE
(a) Contextual Preﬁltering
(b) Contextual Postﬁltering
(c) Contextual Modeling
U x I x C x R
U x I x C x R
Recommendations
i1, i2, i3...
Contextual
Recommendations
i1, i2, i3...
Contextual
Recommendations
i1, i2, i3...
Contextual
Recommendations
i1, i2, i3...
U x I x C x R
Contextualized Data
2D Recomender
2D Recomender
MD Recomender
U x I x C → R
Figure 2. Paradigms for Incorporating Context in Recommender Systems.
instead of c to obtain contextualized ratings data.
Note that the prefiltering approach is related to the
task of building local models in machine learning
and data mining . Rather than
building the global rating estimation model utilizing all the available ratings, the prefiltering
approach builds a local rating estimation model
that uses only the ratings pertaining to the userspecified criteria in which a recommendation is
made (for example, Saturday).
It is important to know if a local model generated by the prefiltering approach outperforms the
global model of the traditional 2D technique,
where all the information associated with the contextual dimensions is simply ignored. For example,
it is possible that it is better to use the contextual
prefiltering to recommend movies to see in the
movie theaters on weekends, but use the traditional 2D technique for movies to see at home on
VCRs. The trade-off of having more relevant data
for calculating an unknown rating based only on
the ratings with the same or similar context versus
having fewer such data points used in this calculation belonging to a particular segment (that is, the
sparsity effect) explains why the prefiltering recommendation method can outperform traditional
2D recommendation techniques in some contexts
and underperform on others. Which of these two
trends dominates for a particular context may
depend on the application domain and on the
specifics of the available data. Based on this observation, Adomavicius et al. propose to combine a number of contextual prefilters with the traditional 2D technique (that is, as a default filter,
where no filtering is done).
Baltrunas and Ricci take a somewhat different approach to contextual prefiltering in proposing and evaluating the benefits of the itemsplitting technique, where each item is split into
several fictitious items based on the different contexts in which these items can be consumed. Similarly to the item-splitting idea, Baltrunas and
Amatriain introduce the idea of microprofiling, which splits the user profile into several
(possibly overlapping) subprofiles, each representing the given user in a particular context. The predictions are done using these contextual microprofiles instead of a single user model.
Contextual Postfiltering
As shown in figure 2b, the contextual postfiltering
approach ignores context information in the input
data when generating recommendations, that is,
when generating the ranked list of all candidate
items from which any number of top-N recommendations can be made. Instead, the contextual
postfiltering approach uses contextual information
to adjust the obtained recommendation list for
each user. The recommendation list adjustments
can be made by: (1) filtering out recommendations
that are irrelevant in a given context, or (2) adjusting the ranking of recommendations in the list. For
example, in a movie recommendation application,
if a person wants to see a movie on a weekend, and
on weekends he or she only watches comedies, the
system can filter out all noncomedies from the recommended list.
As with many recommendation techniques, the
contextual postfiltering approaches can be classified into heuristic and model-based techniques.
Heuristic postfiltering approaches focus on finding
common item characteristics (attributes) for a given user in a given context (for example, preferred
actors to watch in a given context) and then use
these attributes to adjust the recommendations. In
contrast, model-based postfiltering approaches can
build predictive models that calculate the probability with which the user chooses a certain type of
item in a given context (for example, likelihood of
choosing movies of a certain genre in a given context) and then use this probability to adjust the
recommendations.
Panniello et al. provide an experimental
comparison of the exact (that is, nongeneralized)
prefiltering method versus two different postfiltering methods, called Weight and Filter, using several real-world e-commerce data sets. The Weight
postfiltering method reorders the recommended
items by weighting the predicted rating with the
probability of relevance in that specific context,
and the Filter postfiltering method filters out recommended items that have small probability of
relevance in the specific context. Interestingly, the
empirical results show that the Weight postfiltering method dominates the exact prefiltering,
which in turn dominates the Filter method, thus,
indicating that the best approach to use (pre- or
postfiltering) really depends on a given application.
As was the case with contextual prefiltering, a
major advantage of the contextual postfiltering
approach is that it allows using any traditional recommendation technique previously proposed in
the literature .
Also, similarly to the contextual prefiltering
approaches, incorporating context-generalization
techniques into postfiltering methods constitutes
an interesting issue for future research.
Contextual Modeling
As shown in figure 2c, the contextual modeling
approach uses contextual information directly in
the recommendation function as an explicit predictor of a user’s rating for an item and, thus, gives
rise to truly multidimensional recommendation
functions representing either predictive models
(such as decision trees, regressions, and so on) or
heuristic calculations that incorporate contextual
FALL 2011 73
information in addition to the user and item data.
A number of recommendation algorithms based
on a variety of heuristics as well as predictive modeling techniques have been developed over the last
10 to 15 years ,
and some of these techniques can be extended
from the 2D to the multidimensional recommendation settings.
One example of recent developments in 2D recommendation algorithms is the rise of matrix factorization approaches, made popular by the recent
Netflix Prize competition . Karatzoglou et al. follow a similar approach for
context-aware recommender systems by introducing a tensor factorization method that models the
Users x Items x Contexts space as an n-dimensional
tensor, the factorization of which provides a compact model for computing context-aware recommendations.
Some other 2D recommendation methods that
can be directly extended to the multidimensional
case include the technique proposed by Ansari,
Essegaier, and Kohli , which combines the
information about users and items into a single
hierarchical regression-based Bayesian preference
model that uses Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) techniques to estimate its parameters.
This approach can be directly extended to include
the contextual information in a natural way by
adding contextual variables and their interaction
effects directly into the hierarchical model, as
described in Adomavicius and Tuzhilin .
In addition to possible extensions of existing 2D
recommendation techniques to multiple dimensions, there have also been some new techniques
developed specifically for context-aware recommender systems based on the contextual modeling
paradigm. For example, Oku et al. propose
to incorporate additional contextual dimensions
directly into recommendation space and use
machine-learning techniques to provide recommendations in a restaurant recommender system.
In particular, they use the support vector machine
(SVM) classification method, which views the set
of liked items and the set of disliked items of a user
in various contexts as two sets of vectors in an ndimensional space and constructs a separating
hyperplane in this space, which maximizes the
separation between the two data sets. The resulting hyperplane represents a classifier for future recommendation decisions. Furthermore, Oku et al.
 empirically show that context-aware SVM
significantly outperforms noncontextual SVMbased recommendation algorithm in terms of predictive accuracy and user’s satisfaction with recommendations.
Key CARS Applications
In this section we will survey some representative
CARS applications. This list obviously cannot be
complete; new applications are continuously proposed, as CARS is becoming an increasingly popular topic in recommender systems research. We will
mostly discuss mobile applications, especially in
the travel and tourism domains, since a number of
CARS applications are dealing with this scenario
 . As mentioned earlier, context is a
broad concept; therefore, in addition to referring
to the aforementioned paradigms for generating
context-aware recommendations (prefiltering,
postfiltering, and modeling), for better positioning
of the applications we will classify them according
to the exploited contextual information. We consider four broad types of context that are used by
the reviewed applications (extended from Fling
 ): physical context, social context, interaction media context, and modal context.
Physical context: representing the time, position,
and activity of the user, but also the weather, light,
and temperature when the recommendation is
supposed to be used.
Social context: representing the presence and role
of other people (either using or not using the application) around the user, and whether the user is
alone or in a group when using the application.
Interaction media context: describing the device
used to access the system (for example, a mobile
phone or a kiosk) as well as the type of media that
are browsed and personalized. The latter can be
ordinary text, music, images, movies, or queries
made to the recommender system.
Modal context: representing the current state of
mind of the user, the user’s goals, mood, experience, and cognitive capabilities.
In the rest of this section we will describe several groups of applications, focusing on particular
functionalities (information search, travel guides),
or recommendation methodologies (proactive, distributed, and conversational), or item types
Information Search
Church et al. propose a novel interface to
multidimensional,
context-sensitive
mobile information search. The system integrates
the user’s physical context (temporal and location
data) with preference information derived from
the queries of mobile searchers with similar interests (social), and presents graphically, with icons on
a map display, a view of the evolving search activities of this community of users (media). This system adopts a postfiltering model to support users in
browsing through community search experiences,
manipulating the searches of others, learning from
these searches, and initiating their own. The main
idea is that, instead of recommending information
AI MAGAZINE
explicitly requested by the user, the system
becomes proactive by presenting information, in
this case, by presenting searches performed by other users in similar contexts. The ultimate objective
is to support a more exploratory, context-driven
approach to information search.
A similar postfiltering approach is taken by Lee
and Park ; however, it is emphasizing the
importance of the current user search context
(modal), rather then the history of previous similar
search sessions. Their justification is that, on the
mobile web, news services must focus on the distribution of current news content rather than on
past or related news articles. It is therefore important, when personalizing news, to consider the
recency and importance of news articles, which
can only be assessed by relating them to the user
Travel Guides
Several applications of CARS deal with suggesting
places of interests. Cena et al. present a
tourist guide that uses context for intelligent content adaptation. Their system (UbiquiTO) is a
tourist guide integrating different forms of context-related adaptation: to the media device type,
to the user characteristics and preferences, to the
physical context of the interaction (location and
time). UbiquiTO uses a modeling approach (rulebased) to adapt the content of the provided recommendation, such as the amount / type of information / features associated with each recom -
mendation. Also, the system developed by Park,
Hong, and Cho is aimed at personalizing
the selection of restaurants and uses the modeling
approach (Bayesian network) for expressing the
probabilistic influences of the user’s contextual
state and preferences on the restaurant attribute
values. The user’s physical contextual situation is
automatically detected, including the season (for
example, spring), the time of the day (for example,
breakfast), the position, the weather (for example,
sunny), and the temperature (for example, warm).
A restaurant’s recommendation score is computed
as the weighted sum of the conditional probabilities of the restaurant’s attribute values. More
recently, Baltrunas, Ricci, and Ludwig and
Baltrunas et al. have also explored a modeling approach (based on mutual information) to
assess and estimate the relevance of various contextual information (physical, social, and modal)
for place-of-interest (POI) recommendations by
relying on subjective users’ evaluations of the
impact of contextual conditions on the likelihood
to select a POI. The recommendation algorithm is
based on a factor model, extended with parameters
explicitly modeling the impact of the selected contextual conditions on the predicted rating. A snapshot from the user interface of the mobile system
implementing these techniques is shown in figure
3. The user also can decide what contextual factors
the system must take into account. Moreover,
some recommendations are marked with a special
icon to indicate that for these the context played a
major role in promoting them to the top-rank
positions. An explanation, based on the contextual factor, for example, “this castle is recommended
because it is not crowded today,” is also provided.
Proactive and Distributed Approaches
Recent developments in wireless communication
technologies are transforming many kinds of
appliances (for example, electric household appliances)
computerized
machines. If the surrounding environment can use
sensors to recognize us and our activities, then
novel proactive and distributed services will be
possible (“ubiquitous computing”).
In this line of research, Sae-Ueng et al. 
focus on personalized shopping assistance by using
personal behavior log analysis on ubiquitous shop
space. The authors classify the possible user behaviors (physical context) in five classes: “standing,”
“viewing,” “touching,” “carrying,” and “fitting,”
where the last behavior refers to a consumer using
a mirror to match a certain object with his appearance. RFID sensors and a digital camera are used to
detect these behaviors. The system presents recommendations using three channels: a display
next to the product, a robot interacting with the
user, and with music and sounds illustrating products (modal context). The system offers an augmented reality environment. The proposed recommendation approach is prefiltering; it first checks
the position of the user, then it accumulates data
on the consumer’s actions, discovers commonalities among the items that were interesting for the
user, and finally recommends personalized item
information to the user, based on his behavior and
current situation.
Also, the MoMa-system 
offers proactive recommendations using a postfiltering approach for matching order specifications
with offers. When creating an order, the client
application will automatically fill in the appropriate physical context and profile parameters, for
example, “location” and “weather,” so that, for
example, the facility should not be too far away
from the current location of the user and beer gardens should not be recommended if it is raining.
On the other side, advertisers’ suppliers put offers
into the MoMa-system. These offers are also formulated according to the catalogue. When the system detects a pair of context matching order and
offer, the end user is notified, in the preferred manner (for example, SMS, email). At this point, the
user can decide whether to contact the advertiser
to accept the offer.
FALL 2011 75
Finally, Schifanella et al. develop Mob-
Hinter, a context-dependent distributed model,
where a user device can directly connect to other
mobile devices that are in physical proximity
through ad hoc connections, hence relying on a
very limited portion of the users’ community and
just on a subset of all available data (prefiltering).
The relationships between users are modeled with
a similarity graph. MobHinter allows a mobile
device to identify the affinity network neighbors
from random ad hoc communications. The collected information is then used to incrementally
refine locally calculated predictions, with no need
of interacting with a remote server or accessing the
Internet. Recommendations are then computed
using the information (such as ratings) available
from the discovered neighbors.
Conversational/Adaptive Approaches
In conversational applications, the recommender
is using the interaction state and the data collected by observing the human/computer interactions, in order to personalize the interaction workflow, for example, recommending alternative web
pages or actions (interaction media context). The
goal is to support more effective interactions, that
is, increasing the probability to end up in relevant
pages or products.
In this line of research, Smyth and Cotter 
proposed a solution for minimizing the time the
AI MAGAZINE
Figure 3. GUIs for Context Specification and Suggestions.
user spends in navigating to content of a mobile
portal, given his or her current navigational context. They developed a modeling solution reducing
the click-distance of the content items, which a
given user is likely to be interested in, by “promoting” these items to higher positions within the
portal menu structure. They used a probabilistic
model of user navigation to predict the likelihood
that some menu option will be selected, given that
the user is currently in a particular menu, based on
his or her past navigation history. Hence, when a
user arrives at a menu page, instead of displaying
the default options, the system computes the
options that are most likely to be accessed by the
user from that position (context).
Another example of adaptation of the interaction
media context is offered by Mahmood, Ricci, and
Venturini . The authors describe the effects
and advantages of a novel recommendation
methodology based on Markov decision processes
and reinforcement learning that allows conversational systems to autonomously improve an initial
interaction strategy in order to learn a more effective and efficient one. They applied and tested
their approach within an online travel recommender system. They showed that the learned
interaction strategy adapts its actions to the served
users and, more importantly, that it is able to assist
online users in acquiring their goals more efficiently than the initial strategy. This approach can
be used by a system designer to understand the
limitations of an existing interaction design and
guide the designer in the adoption of a new one
that is capable to improve customer relationships,
web site usage, and conversion rate.
Music Recommender Systems
The majority of available music recommender systems are based on collaborative filtering and do
not take into consideration contextual conditions
that may influence the user’s information or entertainment needs. Recently there has been an emerging interest in contextual, or situational, music recommendation. These are examples of media
context adaptation.
One example of contextual music recommenders
is offered by Lifetrak . It is
a system that generates a playlist from the user’s
music library considering the current user’s physical
context. Lifetrak considers: location, time of day,
day of week, noise or traffic level, temperature, and
weather. The context is obtained using sensors on
the user mobile device and RSS feeds (for weather
and traffic conditions). The songs in the user’s
library are supposed to be tagged by the user with
tags representing the values of possible contextual
conditions that suit the song. Given the library of
tagged songs, the system determines the current
context of the user and, using a postfiltering
approach, ranks all the songs in the library based
on their match with the current context.
Another notable example is illustrated in Park,
Yoo, and Cho . The context model used in
this work is again physical, and includes temperature, humidity, noise, illuminance, current weather, weather forecast, season, and time of day. Interestingly, here the authors use a modeling approach
to link two types of context, physical and modal.
A Bayesian network is used to infer the emotional
state of the user (depressed, content, exuberant, or
anxious/frantic), that is, the modal context. Then,
in order to compute the recommendations and to
relate music to the emotional state classes, the
users must explicitly express their preferences for
each music attribute (for example, genre) in all
possible context dimensions. Given this information and the values of current context parameters,
the system can infer the current emotional state of
the user and, using a simple postfiltering approach,
select the relevant tracks.
In Jones et al. , the authors, instead of
adapting the music to the context, use the music to
influence the physical context, that is, exploit the
practice of listening to music while being mobile
to provide navigation cues. Their system adapts
volume and spatial balance of played music to lead
users to destinations. The authors describe a pocket PC prototype used in a small field study with 10
users. Eighty-six percent of the users successfully
completed the navigation task. This work shows
another potential use of music in context-aware
The user’s mood is a contextual factor that has
been frequently used in music recommendations,
that is, how the user feels in the active/passive and
sad/happy dimensions. The emotional context is
also appealing because it can be used to establish a
bridge between music items and items from other
different domains, and perform cross-media recommendations .
One example concerns text and is a system recommending music while the user is reading web documents . In order to match music
with the content of a web page, both items are represented as text documents, where a music track is
described by its lyrics and online reviews. Then
music and web pages are mapped to a common
scale of emotions using a generative model, assuming that the frequencies of certain terms depend on
the emotions associated to the text. Hence, after
having computed the emotion distributions from
the term frequencies of two resources (with respect
to 40 selected emotions), the similarity of a web
page and a music page is computed by comparing
their distributions (postfiltering).
Another example deals with the physical context
specified by a place of interest (POI), it uses a postfiltering approach, and the recommender selects
FALL 2011 77
music that fits a POI context . The motivation for such functionality is to
implement more engaging tourist guide applications with adapted soundtracks as well as for recommending music to users on the move, depending on their location. The authors have used a set
of emotional tags attached by a user population to
both music and POIs. Moreover, they considered a
set of similarity measures for tagged resources to
establish a match between music tracks and POIs.
The outcome of a live experiment, where the users
were asked to assess the music selected by the system for a set of POIs, showed that there is a strong
overlap between the users’ selections and the best
matching music that is recommended by the system for a POI.
Challenges and Future
Research Directions
CARS is a relatively new research area having many
underexplored topics and open research problems,
some of them having been discussed in this article.
For example, the very topic of “what is context in
recommender systems” is still pretty much open to
further studies. We discussed this multifaceted topic in this article and proposed a classification of
contextual information in figure 1. We also pointed out that most of the work on CARS has focused
on the representational view of the context and
the alternative (nonrepresentational) methods
have been underexplored. Therefore, it is important for the CARS community to go beyond the
representational approach and study various alternatives corresponding to the remaining five cells
of figure 1.
Further, the proposed classification constitutes
only an initial and general high-level framework
for characterizing the multifaceted topic of contextual information in recommender systems.
Therefore, the CARS community needs to explore
possible refinements or alternative approaches to
classifying contextual information in order to
deepen our understanding of various ways of
incorporating context into recommender systems.
Although the representational view of context
has been studied for some time now, there are still
many unresolved issues and research challenges
pertaining to this view, some of which were
described in Adomavicius and Tuzhilin . In
the remainder of this section, we will focus on
three topics that we think are of critical importance to achieve further advances in CARS. The
first topic deals with a better understanding and
further exploration of the prefiltering, postfiltering, and contextual modeling paradigms that were
either not addressed or partially explored in the
current literature. In particular, although some initial examples of prefiltering, postfiltering, and contextual modeling methods were mentioned in the
paper, it is important to identify and study various
alternative methods for all the three paradigms in a
comprehensive manner.
Another important research direction is the
comparison of the three CARS paradigms in order
to identify strengths and weaknesses of each paradigm and to determine which one is better than
the others and in which circumstances. An initial
work on comparing these paradigms is presented
in Panniello et al. , where a few specific prefiltering and postfiltering algorithms were selected
and compared with each other across various
experimental conditions. Again, this constitutes
only the initial work in this direction, and much
more work is required to gain strong insights into
comparing the three CARS paradigms.
Finally, one does not have to use the prefiltering,
postfiltering, and contextual modeling paradigms
in isolation and can combine the three approaches in different ways. For example, one can combine
several algorithms of the same paradigm, such as
combining information from several different contextual prefilters, as was done in Adomavicius et al.
 . The rationale for having a number of different prefilters is based on the fact that, as mentioned earlier, typically there can be multiple different (and potentially relevant) generalizations of
the same specific context. For example, context c =
(Girlfriend, Theater, Saturday) can be generalized to
c1 = (Friend, AnyPlace, Saturday), c2 = (NotAlone, Theater, AnyTime), and a number of other contexts.
Following this idea, Adomavicius et al. use
prefilters based on the number of possible contexts
for each rating and then combine recommendations resulting from each contextual prefilter by
choosing the best-performing prefilter, using an
“ensemble” of prefilters, or deploying various other combination techniques. Another interesting
possibility stems from an observation that complex contextual information can be split into several components, and the utility of each piece of
contextual information may be different depending on whether it is used in the prefiltering, postfiltering, or modeling stage. For example, time
information (weekday versus weekend) may be
most useful to prefilter relevant data, but weather
information (sunny versus rainy) may be the most
appropriate to use as a postfilter. Determining the
utility of different contextual information with
respect to different paradigms of context-aware
recommender systems constitutes yet another
promising direction for future research.
This is a partial list of some of the challenges and
future research directions that were used only for
illustrative purposes in this section. However, it is
indicative of a wealth of open research problems
that make CARS an interesting and productive area
of future research.
AI MAGAZINE
Acknowledgments
The research of G. Adomavicius was supported in
part by the National Science Foundation grant IIS-