Boosted Local Structured HOG-LBP for Object Localization
Junge Zhang, Kaiqi Huang, Yinan Yu and Tieniu Tan
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{jgzhang,kqhuang,ynyu,tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Object localization is a challenging problem due to variations in object’s structure and illumination. Although existing part based models have achieved impressive progress
in the past several years, their improvement is still limited
by low-level feature representation. Therefore, this paper
mainly studies the description of object structure from both
feature level and topology level. Following the bottom-up
paradigm, we propose a boosted Local Structured HOG-
LBP based object detector. Firstly, at feature level, we propose Local Structured Descriptor to capture the object’s
local structure, and develop the descriptors from shape
and texture information, respectively. Secondly, at topology level, we present a boosted feature selection and fusion
scheme for part based object detector. All experiments are
conducted on the challenging PASCAL VOC2007 datasets.
Experimental results show that our method achieves the
state-of-the-art performance.
1. Introduction
Object localization is an essential task in computer vision. Impressive performance improvement in object localization has been achieved via the progress in: 1) learning object structure and detector model,
and 2) learning low-level feature based appearance model
 .
Detector models mainly include part based models and rigid template models . In part based
models, they try to describe the object’s structure using several parts and their relationships. Part based models can
be considered as top-down structure to tackle the problem
of partial occlusion and appearance variations. Part based
models have been shown success on many difﬁcult datasets . For these good properties of robustness
to deformation, part based model is regarded as a promising method for localizing objects in images. This motivates
us to focus on part based model. Rigid template models
Figure 1. Detection results of different methods. (a) is the original
image. (b) is the result of SVM+HOG. (c) is the result from 
and (d) is the result by the proposed method.
can not describe the object’s structure variations with ﬁxed
template. Therefore, they perform well on ideally conditioned database but suffer from those difﬁcult data with deformations. The progress in low-level feature advances the
progress of object localization greatly as well. One representative feature is Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG)
 . The others include Pairs of Adjacent Segments (PAS)
 and Local Binary Pattern (LBP) , etc.
One important problem in object localization is how to
describe object’s structure robustly. Part based model as
a top-down structure shows its good property of modeling
object structure in topology level . But robust low-level
feature representation challenges the part based model to
obtain better performance. In the ﬁeld of signal processing, signal is considered structured when the local intensity
varies along some preferred orientations . Local structure
can be corners, edges or crossings, etc. The research in signal processing indicates that there is relation between local
energy and local structure. These studies state that using the
local energy can represent the local structure well. From
this aspect, previous popular feature HOG and LBP are histogram features. Thus, they can not effectively describe an
object’s local structure information which is important for
object localization.
Motivated by these challenges of robust low-level feature
representation for part based model, we address the problem
via Local Structured Descriptors based part model. Firstly,
we propose Local Structured HOG(LSHOG) in which the
Local Structured Descriptor is computed from local energy of shape information, Secondly, similar to LSHOG,
we present Local Structured LBP(LSLBP) in which the Local Structured Descriptor is based on texture information.
In addition, to tackle the non-linear illumination changes,
we clip the large feature value caused by non-linear illumination changes with a truncation item. To reduce the effect
of small deformation, we apply spatial weighting which is
proved to be robust to aliasing and bin interpolation which
can accurately describe histograms in LSLBP. Thirdly, we
present a boosted Local Structured HOG-LBP based object
detector, and the proposed method achieves the state-of-theart performance on the challenging PASCAL VOC datasets
 . Figure 1 gives an example of person detection.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section
2 gives a brief overview of related work. Section 3 introduces the framework of our approach. Section 4 shows and
analyzes the experimental results and Section 5 draws conclusions.
2. Related work
This paper focuses on two basic problems: how to accurately describe object structure at feature level and how
to fuse multiple Local Structured Descriptors for part based
model at topology level.
2.1. Features for object localization
Various visual features such as HOG, LBP, etc. have
been proposed for object localization. HOG was ﬁrst proposed for human detection .
Ever since then HOG
has been proved one of the most successful features in
general object localization .
During the past few
years, many variants of HOG have been presented, such as
Co-occurrence Histograms of Oriented Gradients(CoHOG)
 in which the co-occurrence with various positional offsets is adopted to express complex shapes of object. In ,
contrast-sensitive and contrast-insensitive features are used
to formulate more informative gradient feature. LBP was
ﬁrst presented by Ojala et al. , for the purpose of texture
classiﬁcation. Uniform LBP then was developed to reduce
the negative effect caused by noises. In , Mu et al. stated
that the traditional LBP did not perform well in human detection, so they proposed two variants of LBP named by Se-
Boostedfeature
Learningfeature
Trainingsamples
Gradientimage
Featurepool
Initializeroot
Initializeparts
Updatesparts
Trainingpartbaseddetector
Figure 2. The framework of Local Structured HOG-LBP based
part based object detector. This paper mainly focuses on feature
construction and multiple features learning for part based model.
We perform feature selection in root level. In the training phase,
parts models are initialized and updated using the feature learnt
from the root. We adopt latent SVM from .
mantic LBP(S-LBP) and Fourier LBP(F-LBP).Wang et al.
also proposed a cell-structured LBP dividing the scanning window into non-overlapping cells for human detection.These features(HOG,LBP,CoHOG,S-LBP,etc.) are all
histogram features which have limitation in describing the
object’s local structure. In addition, PAS showed attractive performance compared with HOG in recent years.
PAS uses the line segments to capture the object’s global
shape and its structure which is different from HOG and
LBP’s description schemes. But the boundary detection in
PAS is very time consuming which limits its wide applications.
2.2. Part based models
Part based models are robust to partial occlusion and
small deformation due to their expressive description of object’s structure considering the relationships between parts.
During the past decade, the most representative part models are the constellation model proposed by Fergus et al.
 and the star-structured part model presented by Felzenszwalb et al. .
In , the parts’ locations are determined by the interest points.
While in , parts’ locations are searched through dense feature HOG. Especially,
the star-structured part model is discriminatively (For convenience, we refer the method in as DPBM for short)
trained and demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in
the past several years. In DPBM, an object is represented
by a root model and several parts models. The parts’ locations are considered as latent information and a latent SVM
is proposed to efﬁciently optimize the model’s parameters.
DPBM provides a very strong benchmark in the ﬁeld of object localization. But the performance of DPBM is still limited by the robust low-level feature representation.
Structured
LocalStructured
Descriptor
Figure 3. The ﬂowchart of the computation of Local Structured
3. Boosted Local Structured HOG-LBP for
part based model
We show our framework of training Local Structured
HOG-LBP based part model in Figure 2. The system consists of two parts: learning feature and training deformable
part based detector. The ﬁrst stage is learning feature, including extraction of Local Structured Descriptors based
on shape and texture information, and feature selection of
LSLBP in a supervised manner. In the stage of training object detector, we ﬁrstly train the root model using the learnt
feature from the ﬁrst stage, then initialize parts models from
the root model. We use latent SVM to iteratively
train the part based detector.
3.1. Local Structured HOG
In this subsection, the details of Local Structured Descriptor based on shape information will be introduced.
As shown in Figure 3, the procedures of LSHOG computation include gradient computation, orientation binning,
normalization and formulating Local Structured Descriptor.
The LSHOG includes both the histogram feature and Local
Structured Descriptor. Thus, LSHOG not only describe the
shape information through histogram feature, but also capture the relative local structure information through structured descriptor. The former steps are similar to HOG in
 . Especially, we don’t perform gamma/color normalization and Gaussian weighting because we ﬁnd they have little
affect on performance.
The gradient features used in LSHOG include both unsigned gradient and signed gradient . Their orientation
range is 0◦−180◦and 0◦−360◦, respectively. To obtain a
cell-structured feature descriptor, the cell size is set to 8×8.
Local Structured Description. As discussed in above
section, the original HOG and its variants are still histogram
features and can not describe the local structure effectively.
Empirically, the boundary of any object(e.g., person)
tends to be continuous and the spatial adjacent regions must
have certain structure relation. As mentioned in above section, PAS is used to capture the spatial structure of ob-
Figure 4. The details of the computation of LSHOG. The left image illustrates the histogram of gradient in each cell. The right image gives the gradient energy via the sum of squares of histogram
of gradient in each cell.
jects where the length of adjacent segments and their relative angles are encoded in the ﬁnal descriptor. However, the
Berkeley probability boundary detector used in PAS is very
time consuming which limits PAS’s large scale applications.
In the ﬁeld of signal processing, local energy based structure representation is widely used for its robustness to noise
and aliasing . Inspired by these progresses, we adopt the
local gradient energy to capture local structure. We believe
the relative local structure between adjacent blocks is more
informative. Therefore, we use the relative gradient energy
within object’s adjacent blocks to capture the local structure.
The computation of LSHOG is illustrated in Figure 4.
Let Fi,j(i=1,2,...,h;j=1,2,...,w) be the feature map where h, w
are the height and width of the feature map, respectively.
Let Hi,j specify the sum of histogram of gradients at
F(i, j), and let LRi(i=1,2,3,4) be the squared block consisting of four adjacent cells around cell (i+1, j +1). To avoid
a large local structure value, for an example, we deﬁne LR1
Ei,j + Ei,j+1 + Ei+1,j + Ei+1,j+1
where Ei,j(i=1,2,...,h;j=1,2,...,w) is used to denote the gradient energy obtained from the sum of squares of gradient
histogram at each cell (i, j) from F. The computation of
LR2, LR3 and LR4 is similar to LR1. Then we can de-
ﬁne the Local Structured Descriptor as follows. The Local
Horizontal Structure(LHS) is deﬁned as:
LHS1 = λ | LR1 −LR2 |
LHS2 = λ | LR3 −LR4 |
The Local Vertical Structure(LVS) is deﬁned as:
LV S1 = λ | LR1 −LR3 |
LV S2 = λ | LR2 −LR4 |
interpolation
Figure 5. Overview of the computation of LSLBP.
The Local Diagonal Structure(LDS) is deﬁned as:
LDS1 = λ | LR1 −LR4 |
LDS2 = λ | LR2 −LR3 |
And the Local Overall Structure(LOS) is deﬁned by
′ | LR1 + LR2 + LR3 + LR4 |
The control parameter λ can be taken as a normalization
factor for LHS,LVS and LDS. We set
where σ is the maximum possible value for gradient feature.
The purpose of Eq.6 is to make Local Structured
Descriptor’s value be the same order of quantity with histogram feature’s value. In LSHOG, we use the truncation
value σ = 0.2, so λ = 0.4743. For LOS, we ﬁnd the setting λ
′ = 0.1 is enough which has the same purpose as
λ. As illustrated above, this coding scheme has several advantages:1) Simple to compute. 2) Robust to small deformation. Because the descriptor is related with the local regions’ energy, small deformation would change little in the
energy of the corresponding region. 3) Easy to be applied
in other pixel based histogram features.
3.2. Local Structured LBP
In this subsection, we will give the details of Local Structured Descriptor based on texture information. As shown in
Figure 5, ﬁrstly, we compute the uniform binary pattern at
each pixel, then the initial cell-structured LBP descriptor is
formulated by trilinear interpolation. The ﬁnal LSLBP consists of both binary patterns histogram and Local Structured
Descriptor. The local structure coding scheme is similar
with LSHOG.
The LSLBP is computed with the cell size 8 × 8 to be
compatible with LSHOG. Many previous work on LBP did
not use the trilinear interpolation which is in fact, very helpful for accurate description of histogram based feature .
Similar to LSHOG, we capture the local structure
through texture information via LHS, LVS, LDS and LOS.
In LSLBP, each cell’s energy is computed from the sum of
squares of binary patterns histogram. That is,
where hp is the histogram of binary patterns, and p denotes
the pth feature in h. In this way, the LSLBP can capture the
local structure from the aspect of texture, which is mutual
complementary with LSHOG.
According to the coding scheme of LBP, it is invariant
to linear illumination changes. In the non-linear case, some
LBP values tend to become too large while others’ not. In
order to reduce the possible negative effect caused by these
non-linear changes, we clip the entry of uniform pattern
with 0.2. Especially, the entry of non-uniform pattern is often much larger than uniform patterns, so we limit its maximum value to 0.3 empirically. The normalization factors λ
′ are set by the same scheme with LSHOG.
3.3. Learning feature and training detector
In this subsection, we address the problem of combining LSHOG and LSLBP and training part based model with
learnt LSHOG-LSLBP. This work is different from , in
which a rigid template model is trained for human detection
using concatenated basic HOG-LBP.
To begin with the details of learning feature, we give the
formulation of multiple features combination generally.
Fusion problem. Let’s denote the training samples as
{(xi, yi)i=1,...,N} where xi ∈X is the training image and
yi ∈{+1, −1} is the corresponding class label. We can
extract different types of features such as LSHOG, LSLBP,
etc. which are denoted by f l
i(i=1,...,N,l=1,...,M) ∈F where
i denotes the lth feature extracted from sample xi,N is the
number of training samples and M is the total number of
feature types. Therefore, the feature combination could be
formulated as a learning problem:
g : α1T1(f 1)+...αlTl(f l)+...αMTM(f M) −→(−1, +1)
where Tl is the transformation function of the lth feature
and αl is the corresponding weight. g is the optimization
Many popular methods have been proposed to tackle
the feature combination problem. They are Multiple Kernel Learning , Boosting and subspace learning
 , etc. These methods can be roughly divided into two
categories: basic feature level and feature subspace. In this
paper, we mainly investigate some methods at feature level,
including na¨ıve combination, MKL and Boosting methods.
For the above three combination schemes, we take a uni-
ﬁed way to learn feature and train the part based object de-
tector using the learnt feature. The whole framework includes two stages: 1)Feature learning stage; 2) Part based
model training stage.
Feature learning stage. The goal in this paper is to train
a LSHOG-LSLBP based part based detector. Hence, the
key problem is how to learn feature for part models. In
this work, we use the star-structured part based model 
and the inference of a detection window for the part based
model can be summarized as,
scoresubwindow = sr +
where sr is the root score(The rigid template model is analogous to the root model here), spi means the score from the
ith part ﬁlter, dci is the deformation cost from the ith part
ﬁlter and N is the number of parts. In the star-structured
part based model, the parts models are initialized from the
root model. Therefore, we could perform feature selection
on root feature only. In the training part based object detector stage, we use the learnt feature to initialize both root
model and parts models. This approach has an important
advantage that is the learning procedure does not need to
know the parts models’ sizes.
Because the part based model is based on dense cellstructured feature(LSHOG,LSLBP,etc.), learning feature
from root still has two strategies: one is learning from features at each cell; The other is from features within the
whole detection window. Because our objective is to optimize and classify features from the whole detection window but not from each cell. Therefore, we adopt the latter
strategy, e.g. learning feature from the detection window. In
addition, learning feature procedure is performed for each
component to train a part model with multiple components
 according to aspect ratio.
Part based model training stage. Firstly, we use the
learnt feature to initialize the root model. Parts models are
then initialized from the root model. Latent SVM is used to train the part models iteratively. The whole
algorithm can be found in Algorithm 1.
4. Experiments
We evaluate the proposed method on the challenging
PASCAL VOC datasets which are widely acknowledged as difﬁcult benchmark datasets for object localization.
In PASCAL VOC datasets, there are 20 object classes consisting of person, vehicles(e.g.,car, bus),
household(e.g.,chair, sofa) and animals(e.g.,cat,horse) .
The criterion adopted in VOC challenge is Average Precision(AP). Our method achieves the state-of-the-art results
on PASCAL VOC datasets over other related methods.
Experiments are conducted in three groups:1) Single
1 Learnt feature LFi := Ø;
2 for component i := 1 to N do
PF : Extract positive features from ith root;
NF : Random sampling from negative samples;
Learning feature(MKL,Boosting,etc.) from
Add learnt feature to LFi;
8 Training part based object detector
9 for component i := 1 to N do
Initialize ith root from LFi;
for part j := 1 to Npart do
Initialize:jth part from ith root;
for Iter k := 1 to Kiter do
Update models and retrain;
Algorithm 1: Learning feature and training object detector.
LSHOG ’s experiments designed to validate the effectiveness of Local Structured Descriptor;2) Single LSLBP’s experiments developed to validate the effectiveness of trilinear interpolation, truncation and Local Structured Descriptor; 3) Comparison experiments with different combination schemes; 4) The full results of proposed boosted Local Structured HOG-LBP based object detector on PASCAL
Several versions of latent SVM were released at Felzenszwalb’s homepage. To avoid confusion, we mention vocrelease3.1 as V3 and voc-release4 as V4 shortly. The
latent SVM from V4 is only adopted in the full experiments
on PASCAL VOC datasets and latent SVM from V3 is used
in other experiments. The purpose of using like this is to
verify the stability of the proposed method.
4.1. Localization results with LSHOG
To validate the proposed LSHOG, we train a person detector using LSHOG on PASCAL VOC2007 datasets using latent SVM from V3. We achieve 37.4% AP score on
person with 1.2% improvement compared with 36.2% from
V3. We also do the comparison experiments on aeroplane
and dog categories randomly chosen from 20 classes. The
results are presented in Figure 6, from which we can see
that the improvement is promising.
These results validate that the local structured descriptor
can effectively capture more structured information and improve the detection performance. It should be highlighted
that the simple coding scheme could be easily extended to
other pixel based histogram features.
On aeroplane category
LSHOG: 30.7
On dog category
LSHOG: 11.0
Figure 6. Precision-Recall curve for the categories of aeroplane
4.2. Localization results with LSLBP
Firstly, we perform the person detection on PASCAL
VOC2007 based on traditional LBP without trilinear interpolation, traditional LBP with trilinear interpolation and
LSLBP. LSLBP achieves 32.4% best AP score, with an improvement by 1.4% and 2.2% over LBP with trilinear interpolation and traditional LBP, respectively. This result indicates that Local Structured Descriptor and trilinear interpolation are effective.
We also conduct several experiments on person category on VOC2007 to discuss different truncation’s strategies. The AP score is 29.2 for LBP without any truncation,
29.4 for LBP with truncation value 0.2 for both uniform pattern and non-uniform pattern and 30.2 for LBP with truncation value 0.2 for uniform pattern and 0.3 for non-uniform
pattern. Thus, treating uniform pattern and non-uniform
pattern differently and truncating them with 0.2 and 0.3 performs better than others. In addition, the truncation value is
set empirically.
The result that the LBP with truncation value 0.2 for uniform pattern and 0.3 for non-uniform pattern performs best
indicates that:1) Truncation is helpful for robustness to nonlinear illumination changes; 2)Different truncation for uniform patterns and non-uniform patterns is reasonable.
4.3. Comparisons with different fusion schemes
We compare na¨ıve combination, MKL and Boosting
method to ﬁnd which performs best in combining LSHOG
and LSLBP for part based model and also give the analysis.
Na¨ıve combination. Na¨ıve combination directly concatenates different features into a single feature vector,
which is the simplest method for feature combination.
Multiple Kernel Learning. MKL has great advantage
to handle multiple, heterogeneous data sources and has been
widely applied in the problem of feature selection and combination .
In this paper, we adopt Generalized
MKL(GMKL) for its good generalization property over
Improvement
Table 1. Detection results of na¨ıve combination on person and
chair category.
On person category
Naive: 37.2
Boosting: 40.2
On chair category
Naive: 15.2
Boosting: 17.9
Figure 7. The detection results achieved by the MKL and Boosting
based detection results.
kernels combination. And we use linear kernel as base kernel and sum kernel formulation for efﬁciency.
Boosting. Boosting is one of the most popular methods
for feature combination. In our approach, we choose GentleBoost mainly because GentleBoost uses Newton
stepping rather than exact optimization at each step, thus
it outperforms other boosting methods especially when the
training data is noisy and has outliers .
Results. In Table 1, we have shown the results of person
and chair using na¨ıve combination. To compare with V3
fairly, the HOG from and traditional LBP are adopted
in this experiment. As shown in Table 1, the performance
is improved by 1% for person, while decreased by 1.3% for
chair class. So we ﬁnd that na¨ıve combination is not always
effective for all classes.
Through the experiments discussed in LSHOG and
LSLBP subsections, the single LBP based part object detector’s performance is worse than that of single HOG. Therefore, it’s reasonable to infer that some subsets in LBP features are effective for localization while others not. Inspired
by these observations, we could select certain effective subsets in LBP. Thus, we use MKL and boosting to select features. Still the experiments are conducted on person category on PASCAL VOC2007 datasets and a bi-component
model using the learnt feature from MKL and GentleBoost
is trained, respectively.
In the experiment based on MKL, the penalty C is set
to 10 and the maximum iteration is set to 40. The maximum iteration is set to 200 for GentbleBoost.To fairly compare with na¨ıve combination, traditional LBP is adopted in
the experiments in which a bi-component model is trained.
MKL selects 1850 dimensions out of 3713 in component 1
and 1675 out of 2596 in component 2. While GentleBoost
Figure 8. Evaluation of the proposed approach over 9 categories.
Note:For a fair comparison, the feature used here is HOG from 
and traditional LBP.
selects 119 dimensions in component 1 and 131 in component 2.
As shown in Figure 7, for the person category, the Boosting based method achieves the best results, by improving
4% over baseline V3, 3% over na¨ıve combination and 2.4%
over MKL based method. Specially, it shows that the improvement for chair class is 1.4% while in na¨ıve combination is -1.3%. The result further validates only certain
subsets of LBP feature effective for localization. Improvement has been obtained from MKL as well, but inferior to
boosting method. MKL selects more features than boosting method, indicating there are still many noisy features
not effective for classiﬁcation.
Another disadvantage of
MKL is its huge computation cost. Furthermore, we evaluated the approach over other 8 classes randomly chosen
from VOC2007 datasets including person, vehicles, households and animals four categories using latent SVM from
V3 . The purpose of this experiment is to validate the effectiveness of presented boosted feature fusion scheme. As
shown in Figure 8, for the categories with rich texture such
as person,horse,dog, the average improvement is about by
4% while for chair, bottle with less texture, the improvement is only by 1% - 2%. Several conclusions can be drawn
from these results: 1) Texture complements shape feature
for robust feature representation on most categories. 2)Subsets of LBP are effective or better for localization than full
LBP. 3) Boosted multiple features fusion scheme for part
based model stably improves the localization performance
and performs best among these methods. These results also
answer the question why we use GentleBoost in this work.
4.4. Full results on PASCAL VOC datasets
Motivated by the above results, and at the same time we
intend to validate the stability of the proposed method, we
train the boosted Local Structured HOG-LBP based part object detector using the latest latent SVM from V4 . The
models in the following experiments are trained with six
On person category
Boosting: 44.6
Figure 9. Detection results with the Boosted LSHOG-LSLBP
based part object detector using latent SVM from .
components.
Firstly, the proposed boosted LSHOG-LSLBP based part
detector is compared with V4 on person category. As is
shown in Figure 9, an improvement is achieved by 2.7%.
The improvement is less than the proposed detector using
latent SVM from V3. There possibly exists over-ﬁtting in
the training procedure, because the feature dimension in six
component model is higher than two component model in
previous experiments.
The full results on PASCAL VOC2007 are given in Table 2. These results are all without any context based postprocessing.
As shown in Table 2, the proposed method stably outperforms the state-of-the-art part based object detector on
all the 20 categories. We outperforms other methods except
Oxford-MKL method(Oxford-MKL method adopted four
types of multi-level features and achieved very competitive
results on VOC2007 datasets) in 16 out of 20 categories. If
comparing with Oxford-MKL’s method, we obtain the best
score in 9 out of 20 and the second best in 8. These methods
are all the related representative methods in the past several
years. In addition, the mean AP of the proposed method is
34.3% which is the highest among these methods, exceeding Oxford-MKL’s method by 2.2%.
5. Conclusions
In this paper, we have presented a boosted Local Structured HOG-LBP based object detector.
Firstly, we have
proposed two types of local structured features, i.e., Local Structured HOG (LSHOG) and Local Structured LBP
(LSLBP). Experimental results have proven the proposed
features can describe the object’s local structure effectively
and improve the detection performance. Then, we have presented a boosted multiple features fusion scheme to tackle
plane bicycle bird boat bottle bus
cat chair cow table dog horse mbike person plant sheep sofa train
V4 28.9
10.0 15.2 25.5 49.6 57.9 19.3 22.4 25.2 23.3 11.1 56.8
17.8 33.6 45.1 41.6
best2007 26.2
21.4 39.3 43.2 24.0 12.8 14.0
17.5 14.7 33.4 28.9
UCI 28.8
3.2 14.2 29.4 38.7 48.7 12.4 16.0 17.7 24.0 11.7 45.0
16.1 20.1 34.2 35.4
LEO 29.4
9.4 14.3 28.6 44.0 51.3 21.3 20.0 19.3 25.2 12.5 50.4
19.7 25.1 36.8 39.3
Oxford-MKL 37.6
15.3 15.3 21.9 50.7 50.6 30.0 17.3 33.0 22.5 21.5 51.2
23.9 28.5 45.3 48.5
Proposed 36.7
11.8 17.5 26.3 49.8 58.2 24.0 22.9 27.0 24.3 15.2 58.2
21.4 34.9 47.5 42.3
Table 2. Full results on PASCAL VOC 2007 challenge datasets. best2007 was the best results submitted to the VOC2007 challenge .
The V4 is from without context based post-processing. The UCI method adopts multi-object layout to do object detection. The
LEO method used a latent hierarchical model to represent an object. Oxford-MKL method used four types of multi-level feature
and achieved very competitive results on VOC2007. Our method has no context rescoring.
the problem of multiple features combination for part based
model. And the proposed method achieves very competitive
results on PASCAL VOC datasets.
6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No.60875021,60723005),
NLPR 2008NLPRZY-2, National Hi-Tech Research and
Development Program of China (2009AA01Z318), Key
Project of Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information
Science and Technology.