Interactive, GPU-Based Level Sets for 3D Segmentation
Aaron E. Lefohn, Joshua E. Cates, and Ross T. Whitaker
Scientiﬁc Computing and Imaging Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112
{lefohn,cates,whitaker}@sci.utah.edu
Abstract. While level sets have demonstrated a great potential for 3D medical
image segmentation, their usefulness has been limited by two problems. First,
3D level sets are relatively slow to compute. Second, their formulation usually
entails several free parameters which can be very difﬁcult to correctly tune for
speciﬁc applications. This paper presents a tool for 3D segmentation that relies
on level-set surface models computed at interactive rates on commodity graphics
cards (GPUs). The interactive rates for solving the level-set PDE give the user immediate feedback on the parameter settings, and thus users can tune three separate
parameters and control the shape of the model in real time. We have found that this
interactivity enables users to produce good, reliable segmentation, as supported
by qualitative and quantitative results.
Introduction
This paper describes a new, general-purpose segmentation tool that relies on interactive
deformable models implemented as level sets. While level sets have demonstrated a
great potential for 3D medical image segmentation, their usefulness has been limited
by slow computation times combined with intensive parameter tuning. The proposed
tool updates a level-set surface model at interactive rates on commodity graphics cards
(GPUs), such as those that are commonly found on consumer-level personal computers.
Wedemonstratetheeffectivenessofthistoolbyaquantitativecomparisontoaspecialized
tool and the associated gold standard for a speciﬁc problem: brain tumor segmentation . This paper make the following contributions:
– A 3D segmentation tool that uses a new level-set deformation solver to achieve
interactive rates (approximately 15 times faster than previous solutions).
– A mapping of the sparse, level-set computation to a GPU, a new numerical scheme
for retaining a thin band structure in the solution, and a novel technique for dynamic
memory management between the CPU and GPU.
– Quantitative and qualitative evidence that interactive level-set models are effective
for brain tumor segmentation.
Background and Related Work
Level Sets
This paper relies on an implicit representation of deformable surface models called the
method of level sets. The use of level sets has been widely documented in the medical
R.E. Ellis and T.M. Peters (Eds.): MICCAI 2003, LNCS 2878, pp. 564–572, 2003.
c⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003
Interactive, GPU-Based Level Sets for 3D Segmentation
imaging literature, and several works give more comprehensive reviews of the method
and the associated numerical techniques . Here we merely review the notation and
describe the particular formulation that is relevant to this paper.
An implicit model is a surface representation in which the surface consists of all
points S = {¯x|φ(¯x) = 0}, where φ : ℜ3 →ℜ. Level-set methods relate the motion of
that surface to a PDE on the volume, i.e. ∂φ/∂t = −∇φ · ¯v(t), where ¯v(t) describes
the point-wise velocity of the surface. Within this framework one can implement a wide
range of deformations by deﬁning an appropriate ¯v. For segmentation, the velocity often
consists of a combination of two terms 
αD(¯x) + (1 −α)∇· ∇φ
where D is a data term that forces the model toward desirable features in the input data,
the term ∇· (∇φ/|∇φ|) is the mean curvature of the surface, which forces the surface
to have less area (and remain smooth), and α ∈ is a free parameter that controls
the degree of smoothness in the solution.
The behavior of the model is mostly characterized by the data term and how it relates
to the image. Invariably, the data term introduces free parameters, and the proper tuning
of those parameters, along with α, is critical to making the model behave in a desirable
Fortheworkinthispaperwehavechosenaverysimplespeedfunctiontodemonstrate
the effectiveness of interactivity in level-set solvers. The speed function at any one point
is based solely on the input intensity I at that point:
D(I) = ϵ −|I −T|,
where T controls the brightness of the region to be segmented and ϵ controls the range
of greyscale values around T that could be considered inside the object. Thus when
the model lies on a voxel with a greyscale level between T −ϵ and T + ϵ, the model
expands and otherwise it contracts. The speed term is gradual, and thus the effects of
D diminish as the model approaches the boundaries of regions whose greyscale levels
lie within the T ± ϵ range. Even with this simple scheme a user would have to specify
three different parameters, T, ϵ, and α, as well as an initialization. This speed term is a
simple approximation to a one-dimensional statistical classiﬁer, which assumes a single
density (with noise) for the regions of interest.
If a user were to initialize a model in a volume and use the speed term in eq (2)
without the curvature term the results would be virtually the same as a simple ﬂood ﬁll
over the region bounded by the upper and lower thresholds. However, the inclusion of
the curvature term alleviates the critical leaking problem that arises when using ﬂood
ﬁlling as a segmentation technique.
The purpose of this paper is not to advocate for any one level-set formulation or
speed function, but rather to address an issue that is relevant to virtually all level-set
segmentation strategies; that is, a good segmentation depends on a proper speciﬁcation
of free parameters and the initialization.
Solving level-set PDEs on a volume requires proper numerical schemes and
entails a signiﬁcant computational burden. Stability requires that the surface can progress
at most a distance of one voxel at each iteration, and thus a large number of iterations
A.E. Lefohn, J.E. Cates, and R.T. Whitaker
Fig. 1. (a)A speed function based on image intensity causes the model to expand over regions with
greyscale values within the speciﬁed range and contract otherwise. (b) Efﬁcient implementations
of level sets entail computing the solution only near the moving wavefront.
are required to compute signiﬁcant deformations. Efﬁcient algorithms for solving the
general level-set equations rely on the observation that at any one time step the only parts
of the solution that are important are those adjacent to the moving surface (near points
where φ = 0). In light of this several authors have proposed numerical schemes
that compute solutions for only those voxels that lie in a small number of layers adjacent
to the surface as shown in Figure 1b. However, even with a narrow band of computation,
updates rates with these algorithms using conventional processors on typical medical
data sets (e.g. 2563 voxels) are not interactive.
Graphics Processing Units
GPUs have been developed primarily for the computer gaming industry, but over the last
several years researchers have come to recognize them as low cost, high performance
computing platforms.Two important trends in GPU development, increased programmability and higher precision arithmetic processing, have helped to foster new non-gaming
applications.
Graphics processors outperform central processing units (CPUs)—often by more
than an order of magnitude—because of their streaming architecture and dedicated
high-speed memory. In the streaming model of computation, arrays of input data are
processed identically by the same computation kernel to produce output data streams.
The GPU takes advantage of the data-level parallelism inherent in this model by having
many identical processors execute the computation in parallel.
This paper presents a GPU computational model that supports dynamic, sparse grid
problems. These problems are difﬁcult to solve efﬁciently with GPUs for two reasons.
The ﬁrst is that in order to take advantage of the GPU’s parallelism, the streams being
processed must be large, contiguous blocks of data, and thus grid points near the level-set
surface model must be packed into a small number of textures. The second difﬁculty is
that the level set moves with each time step, and thus the packed representation must
readily adapt to the changing position of the model. Section 3 describes how our design
addresses these challenges.
Interactive, GPU-Based Level Sets for 3D Segmentation
Fig. 2. (a) The modern graphics processor computation pipeline. (b) The proposed method relies
on packing active tiles into 2D texture—a compressed format.
System Design and Implementation
Interface and Usage
Our system consists of a graphical user interface (GUI) that presents the user with two
volume slices and a control panel. The ﬁrst slice window displays the current segmentation as a yellow line overlaid on top of the MRI data. The second slice viewing window
displays a visualization of the speed function that clearly delineates the positive and
negative regions. The GUI has controls for setting the three free speed parameters, a
start/stop button to control the solver, and controls to save the 3D segmentation to ﬁle.
The user can query greyscale values in the MRI slice viewer and create spherical surface
models. A screen shot of our interface is shown in Fig. 3.
GPU Level Set Solver Implementation
This section gives a high-level description of our GPU level-set solver.A comprehensive
description is available in Lefohn et al. .
The efﬁcient solution of the level-set PDEs relies on updating only voxels that are
on or near the isosurface. The narrow band and sparse ﬁeld methods achieve this by
operating on sequences of heterogeneous operations. Like the narrow band and sparse
ﬁeld CPU-based solvers, our sparse GPU level-set solver computes only those voxels
near the isosurface. To run efﬁciently on GPUs, however, our solution must also have
the following characteristics: efﬁciently updated texture-based data structures, no scatter
Fig. 3. The user interface of our segmentation application. The center window shows a slice of the
MRI volume overlaid with the current segmentation. The right window displays the sign of the
speed function.
A.E. Lefohn, J.E. Cates, and R.T. Whitaker
write operations, and be highly data-parallel. We achieve these goals by decomposing
the volume into a set of small 2D tiles (e.g. 16 × 16 pixels each). Only those tiles with
non-zero derivatives are stored on the GPU (Fig. 2b). These active tiles are packed, in an
arbitrary order, into a large 2D texture on the GPU. The 3D level-set PDE is computed
directly on this compressed format.
For each PDE time step update, the 3D neighborhoods of all pixels in the active tiles
must be sampled from the compressed 2D compressed format. For each active tile, the
CPU sends texture coordinates, i.e. memory addresses, to the GPU for each of the tiles
that share a side or an edge in the 3D volume. Using these texture coordinates, the GPU
performs neighborhood lookups to produce the complete set of partial derivatives (ﬁnite
differences) used for the gradient and curvature calculations, which are in turn used to
update values of φ.
After the level-set embedding is updated, the GPU’s automatic mipmapping capabilities to create a bit vector image that summarizes the status of each tile. Each pixel
in this coarse texture contains a bit code that identiﬁes if that tile, as well as any of its
six cardinal neighbors, need to be active for the next time step. This small image (< 64
kB) is read back by the CPU and used to update the data structures that track the active
volume regions. The CPU then sends the texture coordinates and vertices for the new
set of active tiles to the GPU, and the next PDE iteration is computed.
This GPU-based level-set solver achieves a speedup of ten to ﬁfteen times over a
highly-optimized, sparse-ﬁeld, CPU-based solver. All benchmarks were run on an Intel
Xeon 1.7 GHz processor with 1 GB of RAM and an ATI Radeon 9700 Pro GPU. For the
tumor segmentations performed in the user study, the GPU-based solver ran at 60-70
time steps per second while the CPU version ran at 7-8 steps per second. The ﬁnal steps
of the cerebral cortex segmentation shown in ﬁgure 5 ran at 4 steps per second on the
GPU and 0.25 steps per second on the CPU.
User Study
The purpose of this study was to determine if our algorithm can produce volumetric
delineations of brain tumor boundaries comparable to those done by experts (e.g. radiologists or neurosurgeons) using traditional hand-contouring. We applied our method to
the problem of brain tumor segmentation using data from the Brain Tumor Segmentation
Database, which is made available by the Harvard Medical School at the Brigham and
Women’s Hospital (HBW) . The HBW database consists of ten 3D 1.5T MRI brain
tumor patient datasets selected by a neurosurgeon as a representative sampling of a larger
clinical database. For each of the ten cases, there are also four independent expert hand
segmentations of one randomly selected 2D slice in the region of the tumor.
We chose nine cases for our study: three meningioma (cases 1-3) and 6 low grade
glioma (4-6, 8-10). One case, number 7, was omitted because a quick inspection showed
it that its intensity structure was too complicated to be segmented by the proposed tool—
such a problem remains as future work, as we will discuss in Section 5. We performed
no preprocessing on the data, and there are no hidden parameters in this study—all
parameters in our system were set by the users in real time, as they interacted with the
data and the models.
Interactive, GPU-Based Level Sets for 3D Segmentation
Five users were selected from among the staff and students in our group and trained
brieﬂy to use our software. We asked each user to delineate the full, 3D boundaries of the
tumor in each of the nine selected cases. We set no time limit on the users and recorded
their time to complete each tumor. None of our users were experts in reading radiological
data. It was not our intention to test for tumor recognition (tissue classiﬁcation), but rather
to test whether parameters could be selected for our algorithm to produce a segmentation
which mimics those done by the experts. To control for tumor recognition, we allowed
each user to refer to a single slice from an expert segmentation. Users were told to treat
this hand segmentation slice as a guide for understanding the difference between tumor
and non-tumor tissue. Our assumption is that an expert would not need such an example.
We consider three factors in evaluating our segmentation method : validity of the
results (accuracy), reproducibility of the results (precision), and efﬁciency of the method
(time). To quantify accuracy we established a ground truth from the expert segmented
slices using the STAPLE method . This method is essentially a sophisticated averaging scheme that accounts for systematic biases in the behavior of experts in order to
generate a fuzzy ground truth (W) as well as sensitivity and speciﬁcity paramaters (p
and q respectively) for each expert and each case. The ground truth segmentation values
for each case are represented as an image of values between zero and one that indicates
the probability of each pixel being in the tumor. Each subject generates a binary segmentation which, compared against the ground truth, gives values to obtain p and q for
that subject. For our analysis we also considered a third metric, total correct fraction
which is the total number of correctly classiﬁed pixels (weighted by W) as a percentage
of the total size of the image.
To assess interoperator precision in segmentations, we used the metric proposed
by , which consists of pairwise comparisons of the cardinality of the intersection
of the positive classiﬁcations divided by the cardinality of the union of positive classiﬁcations. To analyze efﬁciency, we calculated the average total time (user time plus
processing time) taken for a segmentation.
For a typical segmentation of a tumor using our tool a user scrolls through slices until
they ﬁnd the location of the tumor. With a mouse, the user queries intensity values in
the tumor and sets initial values for the parameters T and ϵ based on those intensity
values. They initialize a sphere near or within the tumor and initiate deformation of
that spherical model. As the model deforms the user scrolls through slices, observing
its behavior and modifying parameters. Using the immediate feedback they get on the
behavior of the model, they continue modifying parameters until the model boundaries
appear to align with those of the tumor. In a typical 5 minute session, a user will modify
the model parameters between 10 and 30 times.
Figure 4 shows graphs of average p, q, and c values for the experts and the users in
our study. Error bars represent the standard deviations of the associated values for the
experts and the users in our study.
A.E. Lefohn, J.E. Cates, and R.T. Whitaker
Sensitivity
Specificity
Total Correct
Case Number
Fig. 4. Results from the user study in compare with expert hand contouring reveal an overall
comparable performance with a tendency to underestimate the region of tumor.
The performance of the experts and our users varies case by case, but in almost all
cases the performance of our users was within the range of performances of the experts.
The average correct fraction of our users was better than the experts in 4 out of 9 cases.A
general trend is that our users tended to underestimate the tumor relative to the experts,
as indicated by lower values of p. This is consistent with our experiences with hand
segmentations and level set models— with hand contouring users tend to overestimate
structures, and with level sets the curvature term tends to reduce the size of convex
structures.
The segmentations in our study show a substantially higher degree of precision
than the expert hand segmentations. Mean precision across all users and cases was
94.04% ± 0.04% while the mean precision across all experts and cases was 82.65% ±
0.07%. Regarding efﬁciency, the average time to complete a segmentation (all users,
all cases) was 6 ± 3minutes. Only 5% −10% of this time is spent processing the
level-set surface. This compares favorably with the 3-5 hours required for a typical 3D
segmentation done by hand.
The accuracy and precision of subjects using our tool compares well with the automated brain tumor segmentation results of Kaus, et al. , who use a superset of the same
datausedinourstudy.Theyreportanaveragecorrectvolumefractionof99.68%±0.29%,
while the average correct volume fraction of our users was 99.78% ± 0.13%. Their
method required similar average operator times (5-10 minutes), but unlike the proposed
method their classiﬁcation approach required subsequent processing times of approxi-
Fig. 5. (a) An expert hand segmentation of a tumor from the HBW database shows signiﬁcant
inter-slice artifacts. (b) A 3D segmentation of the same tumor from one of the subjects in our
study. (c) A segmentation of the cerebral cortex from a 256 x 256 x 175 MRI volume using the
same tool took 6 minutes.
Interactive, GPU-Based Level Sets for 3D Segmentation
mately 75 minutes. That method, like many other segmentation methods discussed in the
literature, includes a number of hidden parameters, which were not part of their analysis
of timing or performance.
The metrics requiring ground truth were computed on only a single 2D slice, which
was extracted from the 3D segmentations, because of the scarcity of expert data. Our
experience is that computer-aided segmentation tools perform relatively better for 3D
segmentations because the hand contours typically show signs of inter-slice inconsistencies and fatigue. Figures 5a–b show a segmentation by an expert with hand contouring
compared with a segmentation done by one of our subjects. Screen-captured movies of
a user interacting with our system are available online at .
Summary and Conclusions
A careful implementation of a sparse level-set solver on a GPU provides a new tool for
interactive 3D segmentation. Users can manipulate several paramaters simultaneously
in order to ﬁnd a set of values that are appropriate for a particular segmentation task.
The quantitative results of using this tool for brain tumor segmentation suggest that it is
compares well with hand contouring and state-of-the-art automated methods. However,
the tool as built and tested is quite general, and it has no hidden parameters. Thus, the
same tool can be used to segment other anatomy (e.g. Figure 5c).
The current limitations are mostly in the speed function and the interface. The speed
function used in this paper is quite simple and easily extended, within the current framework, to include image edges, more complicated greyscale proﬁles, and vector-valued
Acknowledgments. Thanks to the participants of our user study. We also thank Evan
Hart, Mark Segal, Jeff Royal and Jason Mitchell at ATI for donating technical advice
and hardware to this project. Simon Warﬁeld, Michael Kaus, Ron Kikinis, Peter Black
and Ferenc Jolesz provided the tumor database. This work was supported by NSF grants
ACI0089915 and CCR0092065 and NIH/NLM N01LM03503.