What to Do Next: Modeling User Behaviors by Time-LSTM
Yu Zhu†, Hao Li†, Yikang Liao†, Beidou Wang♯‡, Ziyu Guan⋆, Haifeng Liu♯, Deng Cai†∗
†State Key Lab of CAD&CG, College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, China
⋆College of Information and Technology, Northwest University of China
♯College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, China
‡ School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, Canada
{zhuyu cad, haolics, ykliao, haifengliu, dcai}@zju.edu.cn, , 
Recently, Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) solutions for recommender systems (RS) are becoming
increasingly popular. The insight is that, there exist some intrinsic patterns in the sequence of users’
actions, and RNN has been proved to perform excellently when modeling sequential data. In traditional tasks such as language modeling, RNN solutions usually only consider the sequential order
of objects without the notion of interval. However,
in RS, time intervals between users’ actions are of
signiﬁcant importance in capturing the relations of
users’ actions and the traditional RNN architectures
are not good at modeling them. In this paper, we
propose a new LSTM variant, i.e.
Time-LSTM,
to model users’ sequential actions.
equips LSTM with time gates to model time intervals. These time gates are speciﬁcally designed,
so that compared to the traditional RNN solutions,
Time-LSTM better captures both of users’ shortterm and long-term interests, so as to improve the
recommendation performance.
Experimental results on two real-world datasets show the superiority of the recommendation method using Time-
LSTM over the traditional methods.
Introduction
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) solutions have become
state-of-the-art methods on modeling sequential data. They
are applied to a variety of domains, ranging from language
modeling to machine translation to image captioning. With
remarkable success achieved when RNN is applied to aforementioned domains, there is an increasing number of works
trying to ﬁnd RNN solutions in the area of recommender systems (RS). [Hidasi et al., 2016a; Tan et al., 2016; Hidasi et al.,
2016b] focus on RNN solutions in one certain type of recommendation task, i.e. session-based recommendations, where
no user id exists and recommendations are based on previous
consumed items within the same session. [Yu et al., 2016]
points out that RNN is able to capture users’ general interest and sequential actions in RS and designs a RNN method
∗corresponding author
w1 w2 w3 w4
(a) Language Modeling
(b) Recommender Systems
Figure 1: wm in (a) represents the m-th word. In (b), im represents
the m-th consumed item and △tm is the time interval between the
time when im and im+1 are consumed.
for the next-basket recommendations. The insight that RNN
works well in the above recommendation tasks is that, there
exist some intrinsic patterns in the sequence of users’ actions,
e.g. once a man buys a badminton racket, he tends to buy
some badmintons later, and RNN has been proved to perform
excellently when modeling this type of patterns.
However, none of the above RNN solutions in RS considers the time interval between users’ neighbour actions, while
these time intervals are important to capture the relations of
users’ actions, e.g. two actions within a short time tend to be
related and actions with a large time interval may aim at different goals. Therefore, it is important to exploit the time information when modeling users’ behaviors, so as to improve
the recommendation performance. We use Figure 1 to show
what the time interval is and how it makes RS different from
the traditional domains such as language modeling. Speciﬁcally, there is no notion of interval between neighbour words
(e.g. no interval between w1 and w2) in language modeling,
while there are time intervals between neighbor actions (e.g.
△t1 between i1 and i2) in RS. Traditional RNN architectures
are good at modeling the order information of sequential data
as in Figure 1 (a), but they cannot well model time intervals
in Figure 1 (b). Therefore, new models need to be proposed
to address this problem.
A recently proposed model, i.e. Phased LSTM [Neil et al.,
2016], tries to model the time information by adding one time
gate to LSTM [Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997], where
LSTM is an important ingredient of RNN architectures. In
this model, the timestamp is the input of the time gate which
controls the update of the cell state, the hidden state and
thus the ﬁnal output. Meanwhile, only samples lying in the
model’s active state are utilized, resulting in sparse updates
during training. Thus, Phased LSTM can obtain a rather fast
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)
learning convergence in the training phase. However, there
exist several challenges preventing Phased LSTM from becoming the best ﬁt for recommendation tasks.
First of all, Phased LSTM models the timestamp, which is
the characteristic of one single action, rather than the time interval between two actions. Hence, Phased LSTM may fail
to properly model actions’ relations. Secondly, users’ action
data is usually very sparse in most RS and Phased LSTM
would ignore users’ actions in its inactive state, which cannot make full use of behaviors’ information for recommendations. Thirdly, previous studies [Jannach et al., 2015] have
pointed out that both of users’ short-term and long-term interests are of great importance for recommendations, but traditional RNN architectures (including Phased LSTM) are not
designed to distinguish and exploit these two types of interests simultaneously. Here, the short-term interest means that,
the recommended items should depend on recently consumed
items. For example, if a user just buys a Nikon camera, he is
very likely to pick-up a memory card, lenses and protection
cases in the near future. The long-term interest means that
the recommended items should also be inﬂuenced by users’
past actions, which reﬂect users’ general interest.
To cope with the above challenges, we propose Time-
LSTM, with three versions, to model users’ sequential actions
in RS. Actions’ time intervals are modeled by time gates in
Time-LSTM to capture actions’ relations. The ﬁrst version
has only one time gate, which exploits time intervals to simultaneously capture the short-term and long-term interests.
There are two time gates in our second version. One is designed to exploit time intervals to capture the short-term interest for current item recommendations and the other is to
save time intervals to model the long-term interest for later
recommendations. In the third version, we use coupled input and forget gates [Greff et al., 2016] to reduce the number of parameters, making our model more concise. Time-
LSTM with these time gates well captures users’ short-term
and long-term interests at the same time, so as to improve the
recommendation performance. In addition, Time-LSTM has
no inactive state to ignore actions, so that compared to Phased
LSTM, it can make better use of behaviors’ information. Our
experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of Time-
LSTM. The contributions of this paper are as follows:
• Our proposed model, Time-LSTM, equips LSTM with
carefully designed time gates, so that it is not only good
at modeling the order information in sequential data,
but can also well capture the interval information between objects. This is a general idea (not limited to RS)
and other variants of Time-LSTM could be developed to
model the event-based sequential data [Neil et al., 2016]
in other tasks. Note that different from Phased LSTM,
which considers the timestamp and may implicitly capture the interval information, we explicitly model time
intervals. In addition, compared to Phased LSTM, Time-
LSTM exploits the information of more samples.
• We propose three versions of Time-LSTM. Compared to
existing RNN solutions, these Time-LSTM versions can
better capture users’ short-term and long-term interests
at the same time, so as to improve the recommendation
performance.
• Our proposed models are evaluated on two real-world
datasets, and the experimental results show the superiority of the recommendation method using Time-LSTM
over traditional methods.
Ralated Work
LSTM and Its Variants
LSTM: The commonly-used update equations [Graves, 2013]
of LSTM are as follows:
im = σi(xmWxi + hm−1Whi + wci ⊙cm−1 + bi),
fm = σf(xmWxf + hm−1Whf + wcf ⊙cm−1 + bf), (2)
cm = fm ⊙cm−1
+ im ⊙σc(xmWxc + hm−1Whc + bc),
om = σo(xmWxo + hm−1Who + wco ⊙cm + bo),
hm = om ⊙σh(cm),
where im, fm, om represent the input, forget and output
gates of the m-th object respectively. cm is the cell activation
vector. xm and hm represent the input feature vector and the
hidden output vector respectively. Typically, σi, σf, σo are
sigmoidal nonlinearities and σc, σh are tanh nonlinearities.
Weight parameters Whi, Whf, Who, Wxi, Wxf and Wxo connect different inputs and gates with memory cells and outputs.
bi, bf and bo are corresponding biases. The update equation
of cm has two parts, one is a fraction of the previous cell state
cm−1 that is controlled by fm, and the other is a new input
state created from the element-wise (Hadamard) product, denoted by ⊙, of im and the output of the nonlinearity σc. The
operation of input, forget and output gates can be further in-
ﬂuenced by optional peephole [Gers and Schmidhuber, 2000]
connection weights wci, wcf, wco.
Coupled input and forget gates: One variant of LSTM is to
use coupled input and forget gates [Greff et al., 2016] instead
of separately deciding what to forget and what new information to add. It drops Eq. (2) and modiﬁes Eq. (3) to:
cm = (1 −im) ⊙cm−1
+ im ⊙σc(xmWxc + hm−1Whc + bc).
Phased LSTM: Phased LSTM [Neil et al., 2016] is a state-ofthe-art RNN architecture for modeling event-based sequential
data. It extends LSTM by adding the time gate km. km is controlled by three parameters: τ, ron and s, where τ represents
the total period of the model, s represents the phase shift and
ron is the ratio of the open period to the total period. τ, ron
and s are learned by training. km is formally deﬁned as:
φm = (tm −s) mod τ
2ron < φm < ron,
otherwise,
where tm is the timestamp and φm is an auxiliary variable.
The gate km has three phases: km rises from 0 to 1 in the ﬁrst
phase and drops from 1 to 0 in the second phase (active state).
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)
During the third phase, the model is in the inactive state. The
leak rate α (close to 0 in training and equal to 0 in testing) is
to propagate gradient information [He et al., 2015]. Updates
to cm and hm are permitted only in the active state. It rewrites
Eq. (3) and Eq. (5) in LSTM to:
cm = fm ⊙cm−1
+ im ⊙σc(xmWxc + hm−1Whc + bc),
cm = km ⊙˜
cm + (1 −km) ⊙cm−1,
hm = om ⊙σh( ˜
hm = km ⊙˜
hm + (1 −km) ⊙hm−1.
Due to the setting of inactive state, Phased LSTM cannot
make full use of users’ actions when applied to RS.
RNN Solutions in RS
[Hidasi et al., 2016a; Tan et al., 2016; Hidasi et al., 2016b]
focus on RNN solutions in session-based recommendations.
[Hidasi et al., 2016a] trains RNN with a ranking loss on onehot representations of item-IDs in old sessions. The RNN is
then used to provide recommendations on new user sessions.
[Tan et al., 2016] is an extension to [Hidasi et al., 2016a],
where it proposes two techniques, i.e. data augmentation and
a method to account for shifts in the input data distribution, to
improve the model performance. [Hidasi et al., 2016b] considers a slightly different setting, where items’ rich features
exist. It introduces parallel RNN architectures to model clicks
and items’ features. [Yu et al., 2016] designs a RNN method
for the next-basket recommendations.
In this paper, we explore RNN solutions with a more common setting in the RS community, where we know the user id,
but no session information is known. [Yu et al., 2016] directly
applies RNN to RS, without considering time intervals, while
we add time gates to LSTM, which can exploit time intervals
to improve the recommendation performance.
The Short-term and Long-term Interests
Most existing algorithms in RS, e.g. BPR (Bayesian Personalized Ranking) [Rendle et al., 2009], matrix factorization
[Koren et al., 2009], tensor models [Zhao et al., 2015], focus
on modeling users’ long-term interest, while the short-term
interest seems to play a minor role in RS research. [Liu et al.,
2010] adapts a collaborative ﬁltering approach to the user’s
current interest mined by content-based methods. Some approaches, e.g. [Aghabozorgi and Wah, 2009], [AlMurtadha
et al., 2010], apply collaborative ﬁltering and association
rules to match users’ recent actions. [Jannach et al., 2015]
proposes that both of users’ short-term and long-term interests are important in online shopping scenarios and quantiﬁes
several combining strategies. Semi-Markov Process (SMP)
and Markov Renewal Process (MRP) [Janssen and Limnios,
2013] also aim at modeling sequential processes with time
intervals. However, SMP and MRP cannot capture the longterm interest in our task, due to their Markov property.
Task Deﬁnition and Models’ Adaptations
Task Deﬁnition
Let U = {u1, u2, · · · } be a set of users and I = {i1, i2, · · · }
be a set of items. For each user u, his consuming history Hu
is given by Hu := [(iu
2), · · · , (iu
nu)], where
m) means that u consumes his m-th item iu
m at time tu
Our task is to provide a list of recommended items Il ⊆I
given a certain user up at a certain time tq.
Adaptations of LSTM and Phased LSTM
We adapt LSTM to our task in two ways. The ﬁrst way is that,
we simply record the sequence of items, regardless of the time
information. Thus xm in Eq. (1) is equivalent to iu
task. The second way considers the time information. We ﬁrst
transform Hu to [(iu
2), · · · , (iu
nu)]. Then xm is equivalent to (iu
m) in our task.
For adaptations of LSTM and all its variants, the model’s output is a probability distribution over all items calculated by
hm. The loss is based on the output and iu
m+1. We use onehot representations for iu
m and one entry for tu
For Phased LSTM’s adaptation, xm in Eq. (1) is equivalent
m in our task. tm in Eq. (7) is equivalent to tu
When applying LSTM and its variants to RS, xm in Eq. (3)
contains the information of the last item that a user consumed.
Since this is the user’s most recent action, we can exploit
xm to learn his/her current short-term interest. On the other
hand, cm−1 contains the information of this user’s previous
actions, thus cm−1 reﬂects his/her long-term interest. However, to what extent xm reﬂects current short-term interest
varies in different situations, e.g. if xm is consumed long
time ago, it can hardly reﬂect current consuming goal. In
Time-LSTM, we use time gates to control the inﬂuence of
the last consumed item (xm) on current recommendations.
In addition, these time gates help to store time intervals in
cm, cm+1 · · · , which reﬂect users’ long-term interest in later
recommendations. Therefore, not only previously consumed
items, but also corresponding time intervals are considered
when modeling users’ long-term interest. Three versions of
Time-LSTM are designed as follows.
Time-LSTM 1
This version adds one time gate Tm to LSTM, which is shown
in Fig. 2 (a). Based on the update equations (Eq. (1)∼(5)) of
LSTM, we add one update equation for Tm as:
Tm = σt(xmWxt + σ△t(△tmWtt) + bt).
We then modify Eq. (3) and Eq. (4) to:
cm = fm ⊙cm−1
+ im ⊙Tm ⊙σc(xmWxc + hm−1Whc + bc),
om = σo(xmWxo
+ △tmWto + hm−1Who + wco ⊙cm + bo).
△tm is the time interval and σ△t is a sigmoid function. Tm
is helpful in two ways. As shown in Eq. (13), on one hand,
σc(xmWxc +hm−1Whc +bc) is ﬁltered by not only the input
gate im, but also the time gate Tm. So Tm can control the
inﬂuence of xm on current recommendations. On the other
hand, △tm is ﬁrstly stored in Tm, then transferred to cm, and
would be transferred to cm+1, cm+2 · · · . Thus Tm helps to
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)
Output Gate
Forget Gate
(a) Time-LSTM 1
Time Gate 2
Forget Gate
Time Gate 1
xm hm-1cm-1
xm hm-1 cm-1
(b) Time-LSTM 2
Time Gate 2
Time Gate 1
xm hm-1 cm-1
(c) Time-LSTM 3
Figure 2: Model architectures of (a) Time-LSTM 1, (b) Time-LSTM 2 and (c) Time-LSTM 3. Time-LSTM 1 has one time gate Tm, which
is mainly controlled by the time interval △tm instead of the timestamp tm. Time-LSTM 2 has two time gates, i.e. T1m and T2m, where
T1m is designed to exploit time intervals for current item recommendations and T2m is to store time intervals for later recommendations.
Time-LSTM 3 uses coupled input and forget gates.
store △tm to model users’ long-term interest (cm, cm+1 · · · )
for later recommendations. Note that, in a similar way, we
are able to generalize Tm to other RNN architectures, such as
GRU [Cho et al., 2014].
Tm is fully learned from data. However, as a priori knowledge, we know that given a certain last consumed item, if it is
more recently consumed, it should have a larger inﬂuence on
current recommendations. We want to incorporate this priori
knowledge into the design of the time gate.
Time-LSTM 2
Two time gates, i.e. T1m and T2m, are designed in this version. T1m is to control the inﬂuence of the last consumed
item on current item recommendations, and T2m is to store
time intervals to model users’ long-term interest for later recommendations.
The architecture is shown in Fig.
Based on the update equations of LSTM, we ﬁrst add two
update equations for T1m and T2m as:
T1m = σ1(xmWx1 + σ△t(△tmWt1) + b1),
s.t. Wt1 ≤0,
T2m = σ2(xmWx2 + σ△t(△tmWt2) + b2).
We then modify Eq. (3)∼(5) to:
cm = fm ⊙cm−1
+ im ⊙T1m ⊙σc(xmWxc + hm−1Whc + bc), (17)
cm = fm ⊙cm−1
+ im ⊙T2m ⊙σc(xmWxc + hm−1Whc + bc), (18)
om = σo(xmWxo
+ △tmWto + hm−1Who + wco ⊙f
hm = om ⊙σh(f
Just as the input gate im in Eq. (17), T1m can be regarded
as another ﬁlter, so that σc(xmWxc + hm−1Whc + bc) is ﬁltered by not only im but also T1m. We use a new cell state
cm to store the result, which is then transferred to the output gate om, the hidden state hm and ﬁnally inﬂuences current item recommendations. T2m ﬁrstly stores △tm, then
transfers it to cm, and would transfer it to cm+1, cm+2 · · ·
to model users’ long-term interest for later recommendations.
Thus in Eq.
(18), T2m acts more as the role of
σc(xmWxc + hm−1Whc + bc).
Through the constraint Wt1 ≤0 in Eq. (15), T1m can
exploit the priori knowledge described in section 4.1 to control the inﬂuence of xm on current item recommendations.
Speciﬁcally, if △tm is smaller, according to Eq. (15), T1m
would be larger. Then according to Eq. (17), xm would have
a larger inﬂuence on current item recommendations (i.e. xm
better reﬂects the short-term interest, thus we increase its in-
ﬂuence). On the other hand, if △tm is larger, with a similar
analysis, xm would have a smaller inﬂuence and correspondingly cm−1 would more signiﬁcantly affect current recommendations (i.e. we are more uncertain about the short-term
interest, thus we increase the inﬂuence of the long-term interest). For T2m, however, it doesn’t make sense to impose such
constraint on Wt2 in Eq. (16) in terms of modeling users’
long-term interest for later recommendations. This also explains why we design two time gates in this version, i.e. to
distinguish and customize the role for current recommendations and the role for later recommendations.
Time-LSTM 3
Inspired by [Greff et al., 2016], this version (Fig. 2 (c)) uses
coupled input and forget gates. Speciﬁcally, based on Time-
LSTM 2, we remove the forget gate, and modify Eq. (17) and
Eq. (18) to:
cm = (1 −im ⊙T1m) ⊙cm−1
+ im ⊙T1m ⊙σc(xmWxc + hm−1Whc + bc), (21)
cm = (1 −im) ⊙cm−1
+ im ⊙T2m ⊙σc(xmWxc + hm−1Whc + bc). (22)
Since T1m is regarded as a ﬁlter (similar to im), thus we replace the forget gate with (1−im ⊙T1m) in Eq. (21). T2m is
to store time intervals (similar to σc(xmWxc + hm−1Whc +
bc)), thus we use (1−im) in Eq. (22). The difference between
Time-LSTM 3 and [Greff et al., 2016] lies in that (1) time
gates exist in Time-LSTM 3 but not in [Greff et al., 2016]
and, (2) Time-LSTM 3 has one additional coupled gate and
one additional cell state.
The way we adapt Time-LSTM to our task is similar to
the second way of LSTM’s adaptations. Firstly, we transform
Hu to [(iu
2), · · · , (iu
nu, tq −tu
nu)]. Then
xm in Time-LSTM is equivalent to iu
m in our task. △tm is
equivalent to tu
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)
The parameters in Time-LSTM models are optimized by
AdaGrad [Duchi et al., 2011], a variant of Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). For the constraint Wt1 ≤0 in Eq. (15),
we use the projection operator described in [Rakhlin et al.,
2012] to handle it, i.e. if we have Wt1 > 0 during training
iterations, we reset Wt1 = 0.
In real-world applications, users’ new consuming actions
are continually generated.
Other users’ consuming histories help to provide “collaborative information” for the target user’s recommendations. Meanwhile, this user’s previous
consuming history can provide “personalized information”
for his later recommendations. Thus we want to make use of
all available consuming histories (including newly generated
actions) for recommendations, i.e. an online learning setting
[Zhao et al., 2016]. To achieve this, we adapt the dynamic updated model in [Mikolov et al., 2010] to our task as follows.
Step one, our model is trained on users’ existing consuming
histories until convergence. Step two, we repeat following
procedure: After n (increase n for efﬁciency) new actions
being generated, we update previous parameters once by applying AdaGrad to users’ updated consuming histories. We
may repeat above two steps periodically. The period can be
tuned considering both of the recommendation performance
and computational cost.
Experiments
Datasets and Experiment Settings
Our proposed algorithm is evaluated on two datasets,
LastFM1 and CiteULike2. For the LastFM dataset, we extract tuples <user id, song id, timestamp>, where each represents the action that user user id listens to song song id at
time timestamp. For the CiteULike dataset, one user annotating one research paper at a certain time may have several
records, in order to distinguish different tags. We merge them
as one record and extract tuples <user id, paper id, timestamp>. Note that different from works such as [Zhu et al.,
2016], tags are not exploited for recommendations in this paper. Users and items with few interactions are ﬁltered. These
tuples are organized by user id and ordered by timestamp.
Table 1 shows their statistics.
For each dataset, 80% users are randomly selected as training users and their tuples are used for training. The remaining
users are test users. For each test user u, its ordered tuples
T u := [(u, iu
1), (u, iu
2), · · · , (u, iu
u)] would generate n′
u −1 test cases, where the k-th test case is to perform
recommendations at time tu
k+1 given u’s consuming history
2), · · · , (iu
k)] with the ground truth iu
Compared Methods
We compare Time-LSTM to the following methods.
method in [Yu et al., 2016] is not compared, because its setting is different from ours and some techniques, e.g. pooling
operations, cannot be applied to our task.
1 
/lastfm-1K.html
2 
Table 1: Statistics of Two Datasets
Number of Users
Number of Items
Number of Actions
CoOccur+BPR: This is a combining strategy proposed in
[Jannach et al., 2015], where CoOccur is to capture the shortterm interest and BPR is to capture the long-term interest.
Speciﬁcally, CoOccur ranks items by the conditional probability of item co-occurring in users’ sessions (association
rules). Other items are appended to the recommendation list
(if it is not ﬁlled up yet) ranked by BPR. We do not use FeatureMatching and RecentlyViewed in [Jannach et al., 2015].
The reason is that, FeatureMatching requires items’ attribute
information, which is not available in our task.
RecentlyViewed simply recommends recently viewed items. However, in most cases, we want the RS to provide us with favorable items that we ignore, since even without the help of RS,
we can still ﬁnd items that we are familiar with (e.g. items
that we recently viewed or comsumed). This method needs
the session information. We use a commonly used approach,
timeout [Huang et al., 2004], to identify sessions in users’
consuming histories.
Session-RNN: This method [Hidasi et al., 2016a] uses RNN
to capture the short-term interest based on items within a session in session-based recommendations. The long-term interest is not considered. The session information is extracted
as described in CoOccur+BPR. We use the publicly available
python implementation3 of Session-RNN.
LSTM: The ﬁrst way of LSTM’s adaptation in section 3.2.
LSTM+time: The second way of LSTM’s adaptation in section 3.2.
Phased LSTM: Phased LSTM’s adaptation in section 3.2.
The dynamic updated model described in section 4.4 is applied to LSTM and its variants, where the tuples of training
users are used to train the model for step one. A similar updating strategy is applied to CoOccur+BPR and Session-RNN to
ensure fair comparisons. The number of units is set to 512
for LSTM and its variants. The other hyperparameters in all
methods are tuned via cross-validation or set as in the original
paper. Our code is publicly available4.
Evaluations
Recall@10: Each target item ig (ground truth) is combined
with 100 other random items.
These 101 items are then
ranked by the method and the top 10 items form the recommendation list. Recall@10 is deﬁned as:
Recall@10 =
nhit is the number of test cases where ig is in the recommendation list and ntestcase is the number of all test cases.
MRR@10 (Mean Reciprocal Rank): This is the average of
reciprocal ranks of ig in the recommendation list. The reciprocal rank is set to 0 if the rank is above 10. MRR@10 takes
into account the rank of the item.
3 
4 lstm
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)
Each metric is evaluated 10 times and averaged. These two
metrics are also used in [Jannach et al., 2015].
Results and Discussions
Method Comparison: As shown in Table 2, Time-LSTM
models generally outperform other baselines. Time-LSTM 2
and Time-LSTM 3 have better performance than Time-LSTM
1, which demonstrates the effectiveness of using two time
gates instead of one time gate. T1m = 1 and T2m = 1 are the
results when we rewrite Eq. (15) to T1m = 1 and Eq. (16) to
T2m = 1, respectively. They perform worse than the original
version, which indicates that using our designed T1m to ﬁlter
the input and T2m to store time intervals can both improve
the performance. LSTM+time performs slightly worse than
LSTM in CiteULike, which may be due to the usually large
time intervals in CiteULike (after normalization, its performance improves, but is still worse than Time-LSTM models).
Performance on Cold and Warm Users: We regard users
as cold if they have consumed few items and warm if the opposite. Due to space limitation, we only show the results of
Recall@10 in LastFM. As shown in Figure 3, the index k
in the x-axis represents the k-th test cases, where we predict
test users’ (k + 1)-th actions given all the actions of training
users and the ﬁrst k actions of test users. (a) demonstrates that
Time-LSTM performs better for warm users (larger indexes
indicate that users have consumed more items). The reason
is that with more actions contained in cm−1, Time-LSTM can
better model the long-term interest for recommendations. For
cold users, the performance of Time-LSTM is comparable to
that of Session-RNN. This is because that although with few
consuming actions, Time-LSTM can still well perform recommendations by capturing the short-term interest. The performance in (b) is better than that in (a), which proves the effectiveness of the dynamic updated model. The performance
improvement from (a) to (b) is more remarkable for warm
users, because the model is updated more times when users
are warm than when they are cold.
Number of Units and Efﬁciency: We vary the number of
units (nu) to see how the performance and training time
change. The training time is evaluated on a GeForce GTX
Titan Black GPU. Due to space limitation, we only show the
results of Recall@10 and the training time in LastFM. As
shown in Figure 4 (a), increasing nu can improve Recall@10,
but the improvement slows down or it even deteriorates when
nu is larger than 128. On the other hand, as shown in Figure 4 (b), the training time is continually increasing when nu
varies, and it is expensive to move from 512 units to 1024.
Thus it is appropriate to assign to nu. Time-LSTM
3 always has a less training time than Time-LSTM 2 when nu
varies. The reason is that the coupled input and forget gates
in Time-LSTM 3 reduce the number of parameters and speed
up the training process.
Conclusions
We propose Time-LSTM to model users’ sequential actions
in RS, where time intervals between neighbour actions are
modeled by time gates in Time-LSTM. We design three versions of Time-LSTM, which well capture users’ short-term
Table 2: Method Comparison
CoOccur+BPR
Session-RNN
Phased LSTM
Time-LSTM 1
Time-LSTM 2
Time-LSTM 3
Index of users’ test cases
Time−LSTM 1
Time−LSTM 2
Time−LSTM 3
Session−RNN
(a) Without Dynamic Update
Index of users’ test cases
Time−LSTM 1
Time−LSTM 2
Time−LSTM 3
Session−RNN
(b) With Dynamic Update
Figure 3: Recall@10 evaluated on different indexes of users’ test
cases in LastFM. The dynamic updated model is applied in (b), but
not in (a).
Number of units
Time−LSTM 1
Time−LSTM 2
Time−LSTM 3
128 256 512 1024
Number of units
Training time (seconds/epoch)
Time−LSTM 1
Time−LSTM 2
Time−LSTM 3
Figure 4: (a) and (b) show how Recall@10 and the training time
change when we vary the number of units in LastFM.
and long-term interests at the same time, so as to improve
the recommendation performance. Experimental results on
two real-world datasets also show the effectiveness of Time-
LSTM. In future work, we would design new versions of
Time-LSTM to simultaneously model different types of behaviors in other application scenarios, e.g. click/collect/addto-cart/pay-for in e-commerce platforms.
In addition, our
method cannot generate recommendations for users who have
no actions. Inspired by [Wang et al., 2016a; 2016b], we will
explore the active learning solutions to this issue.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program) under Grant 2013CB336500
and National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant 61672409, 61379071, 61522206, 61373118.
thanks to Prof. Xifeng Yan and his students in UCSB.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)