Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 214–224,
Austin, Texas, November 1-5, 2016. c⃝2016 Association for Computational Linguistics
Aspect Level Sentiment Classiﬁcation with Deep Memory Network
Duyu Tang, Bing Qin∗, Ting Liu
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
{dytang, qinb, tliu}@ir.hit.edu.cn
We introduce a deep memory network for
aspect level sentiment classiﬁcation.
Unlike feature-based SVM and sequential neural
models such as LSTM, this approach explicitly captures the importance of each context
word when inferring the sentiment polarity of
an aspect. Such importance degree and text representation are calculated with multiple
computational layers, each of which is a neural attention model over an external memory.
Experiments on laptop and restaurant datasets
demonstrate that our approach performs comparable to state-of-art feature based SVM system, and substantially better than LSTM and
attention-based LSTM architectures. On both
datasets we show that multiple computational
layers could improve the performance. Moreover, our approach is also fast. The deep memory network with 9 layers is 15 times faster
than LSTM with a CPU implementation.
Introduction
Aspect level sentiment classiﬁcation is a fundamental task in the ﬁeld of sentiment analysis . Given
a sentence and an aspect occurring in the sentence,
this task aims at inferring the sentiment polarity (e.g.
positive, negative, neutral) of the aspect. For example, in sentence “great food but the service was
dreadful!”, the sentiment polarity of aspect “food”
is positive while the polarity of aspect “service” is
∗Corresponding author.
negative. Researchers typically use machine learning algorithms and build sentiment classiﬁer in a supervised manner. Representative approaches in literature include feature based Support Vector Machine
 and
neural network models . Neural models are
of growing interest for their capacity to learn text
representation from data without careful engineering of features, and to capture semantic relations between aspect and context words in a more scalable
way than feature based SVM.
Despite these advantages, conventional neural
models like long short-term memory (LSTM) capture context information in an implicit way, and are incapable of explicitly exhibiting
important context clues of an aspect. We believe that
only some subset of context words are needed to infer the sentiment towards an aspect. For example,
in sentence “great food but the service was dreadful!”, “dreadful” is an important clue for the aspect
“service” but “great” is not needed. Standard LST-
M works in a sequential way and manipulates each
context word with the same operation, so that it cannot explicitly reveal the importance of each context
word. A desirable solution should be capable of explicitly capturing the importance of context words
and using that information to build up features for
the sentence after given an aspect word. Furthermore, a human asked to do this task will selectively
focus on parts of the contexts, and acquire information where it is needed to build up an internal representation towards an aspect in his/her mind.
In pursuit of this goal, we develop deep memory network for aspect level sentiment classiﬁcation,
which is inspired by the recent success of computational models with attention mechanism and explicit memory .
Our approach is
data-driven, computationally efﬁcient and does not
rely on syntactic parser or sentiment lexicon. The
approach consists of multiple computational layers
with shared parameters. Each layer is a content- and
location- based attention model, which ﬁrst learns the importance/weight of each context word and
then utilizes this information to calculate continuous text representation. The text representation in
the last layer is regarded as the feature for sentiment
classiﬁcation. As every component is differentiable,
the entire model could be efﬁciently trained end-toend with gradient descent, where the loss function is
the cross-entropy error of sentiment classiﬁcation.
We apply the proposed approach to laptop and
restaurant datasets from SemEval 2014 . Experimental results show that our approach performs comparable to a top system using
feature-based SVM . On
both datasets, our approach outperforms both LST-
M and attention-based LSTM models in terms of classiﬁcation accuracy and running speed.
Lastly, we show that using multiple
computational layers over external memory could
achieve improved performance.
Background: Memory Network
Our approach is inspired by the recent success of
memory network in question answering . We describe the
background on memory network in this part.
Memory network is a general machine learning
framework introduced by Weston et al. . Its central idea is inference with a long-term memory component, which could be read, written to, and
jointly learned with the goal of using it for prediction.
Formally, a memory network consists of a
memory m and four components I, G, O and R,
where m is an array of objects such as an array of
vectors. Among these four components, I converts input to internal feature representation, G updates
old memories with new input, O generates an output representation given a new input and the current
memory state, R outputs a response based on the
output representation.
Let us take question answering as an example to
explain the work ﬂow of memory network. Given
a list of sentences and a question, the task aims to
ﬁnd evidences from these sentences and generate an
answer, e.g. a word. During inference, I component
reads one sentence si at a time and encodes it into a
vector representation. Then G component updates a
piece of memory mi based on current sentence representation. After all sentences are processed, we
get a memory matrix m which stores the semantics
of these sentences, each row representing a sentence.
Given a question q, memory network encodes it into
vector representation eq, and then O component uses
eq to select question related evidences from memory m and generates an output vector o. Finally, R
component takes o as the input and outputs the ﬁnal
response. It is worth noting that O component could
consist of one or more computational layers (hops). The intuition of utilizing multiple hops is that
more abstractive evidences could be found based on
previously extracted evidences.
Sukhbaatar et al.
 demonstrate that multiple hops could uncover more abstractive evidences than single hop, and
could yield improved results on question answering
and language modeling.
Deep Memory Network for Aspect Level
Sentiment Classiﬁcation
In this section, we describe the deep memory network approach for aspect level sentiment classiﬁcation. We ﬁrst give the task deﬁnition. Afterwards,
we describe an overview of the approach before presenting the content- and location- based attention
models in each computational layer. Lastly, we describe the use of this approach for aspect level sentiment classiﬁcation.
Task Deﬁnition and Notation
Given a sentence s = {w1, w2, ..., wi, ...wn} consisting of n words and an aspect word wi 1 occurring in sentence s, aspect level sentiment classiﬁcation aims at determining the sentiment polarity of
1In practice, an aspect might be a multi word expression
such as “battery life”. For simplicity we still consider aspect
as a single word in this deﬁnition.
sentence s towards the aspect wi. For example, the
sentiment polarity of sentence “great food but the
service was dreadful!” towards aspect “food” is positive, while the polarity towards aspect “service” is
negative. When dealing with a text corpus, we map
each word into a low dimensional, continuous and
real-valued vector, also known as word embedding
 . All
the word vectors are stacked in a word embedding
matrix L ∈Rd×|V |, where d is the dimension of
word vector and |V | is vocabulary size. The word
embedding of wi is notated as ei ∈Rd×1, which is a
column in the embedding matrix L.
An Overview of the Approach
We present an overview of the deep memory network for aspect level sentiment classiﬁcation.
Given a sentence s = {w1, w2, ..., wi, ...wn} and
the aspect word wi, we map each word into its embedding vector. These word vectors are separated
into two parts, aspect representation and context representation. If aspect is a single word like “food” or
“service”, aspect representation is the embedding of
aspect word. For the case where aspect is multi word
expression like “battery life”, aspect representation
is an average of its constituting word vectors . To simplify the interpretation, we consider aspect as a single word wi. Context word vectors
{e1, e2 ... ei−1, ei+1 ... en} are stacked and regarded
as the external memory m ∈Rd×(n−1), where n is
the sentence length.
An illustration of our approach is given in Figure
1, which is inspired by the use of memory network
in question answering . Our
approach consists of multiple computational layers
(hops), each of which contains an attention layer and
a linear layer. In the ﬁrst computational layer (hop
1), we regard aspect vector as the input to adaptively
select important evidences from memory m through
attention layer. The output of attention layer and the
linear transformation of aspect vector2 are summed
and the result is considered as the input of next layer
(hop 2). In a similar way, we stack multiple hops and run these steps multiple times, so that more
abstractive evidences could be selected from the ex-
2In preliminary experiments, we tried directly using aspect
vector without a linear transformation, and found that adding a
linear layer works slightly better.
aspect word
𝑤1 , 𝑤2 … 𝑤𝑖−1 , 𝑤𝑖, 𝑤𝑖+1 … 𝑤𝑛−1 , 𝑤𝑛
context words
context words
word embedding
Figure 1: An illustration of our deep memory network with
three computational layers (hops) for aspect level sentiment classiﬁcation.
ternal memory m. The output vector in last hop is
considered as the representation of sentence with regard to the aspect, and is further used as the feature
for aspect level sentiment classiﬁcation.
It is helpful to note that the parameters of attention
and linear layers are shared in different hops. Therefore, the model with one layer and the model with
nine layers have the same number of parameters.
Content Attention
We describe our attention model in this part. The
basic idea of attention mechanism is that it assigns a weight/importance to each lower position when
computing an upper level representation . In this work, we use attention model
to compute the representation of a sentence with regard to an aspect. The intuition is that context words
do not contribute equally to the semantic meaning of
a sentence. Furthermore, the importance of a word
should be different if we focus on different aspect.
Let us again take the example of “great food but the
service was dreadful!”. The context word “great”
is more important than “dreadful” for aspect “food”.
On the contrary, “dreadful” is more important than
“great” for aspect “service”.
Taking an external memory m ∈Rd×k and an
aspect vector vaspect ∈Rd×1 as input, the attention
model outputs a continuous vector vec ∈Rd×1. The
output vector is computed as a weighted sum of each
piece of memory in m, namely
where k is the memory size, αi ∈ is the weight
of mi and P
We implement a neural
network based attention model. For each piece of
memory mi, we use a feed forward neural network
to compute its semantic relatedness with the aspect.
The scoring function is calculated as follows, where
Watt ∈R1×2d and batt ∈R1×1.
gi = tanh(Watt[mi; vaspect] + batt)
After obtaining {g1, g2, ... gk}, we feed them to a
softmax function to calculate the ﬁnal importance
scores {α1, α2, ... αk}.
j=1 exp(gj)
We believe that such an attention model has two
advantages. One advantage is that this model could
adaptively assign an importance score to each piece
of memory mi according to its semantic relatedness
with the aspect. Another advantage is that this attention model is differentiable, so that it could be
easily trained together with other components in an
end-to-end fashion.
Location Attention
We have described our neural attention framework
and a content-based model in previous subsection.
However, the model mentioned above ignores the location information between context word and aspect. Such location information is helpful for an attention model because intuitively a context word closer
to the aspect should be more important than a farther
one. In this work, we deﬁne the location of a context
word as its absolute distance with the aspect in the
original sentence sequence3. On this basis, we study
four strategies to encode the location information in
the attention model. The details are described below.
3The location of a context word could also be measured by
its distance to the aspect along a syntactic path. We leave this
as a future work as we prefer to developing a purely data-driven
approach without using external parsing results.
• Model 1. Following Sukhbaatar et al. ,
we calculate the memory vector mi with
mi = ei ⊙vi
where ⊙means element-wise multiplication and
vi ∈Rd×1 is a location vector for word wi. Every
element in vi is calculated as follows,
i = (1 −li/n) −(k/d)(1 −2 × li/n)
where n is sentence length, k is the hop number and
li is the location of wi.
• Model 2. This is a simpliﬁed version of Model
1, using the same location vector vi for wi in different hops. Location vector vi is calculated as follows.
vi = 1 −li/n
• Model 3. We regard location vector vi as a parameter and compute a piece of memory with vector
addition, namely
mi = ei + vi
All the position vectors are stacked in a position
embedding matrix, which is jointly learned with gradient descent.
• Model 4. Location vectors are also regarded as
parameters. Different from Model 3, location representations are regarded as neural gates to control
how many percent of word semantics is written into
the memory. We feed location vector vi to a sigmoid
function σ, and calculate mi with element-wise multiplication:
mi = ei ⊙σ(vi)
The Need for Multiple Hops
It is widely accepted that computational models that
are composed of multiple processing layers have the
ability to learn representations of data with multiple
levels of abstraction . In this
work, the attention layer in one layer is essentially
a weighted average compositional function, which
is not powerful enough to handle the sophisticated
computationality like negation, intensiﬁcation and
contrary in language. Multiple computational layers allow the deep memory network to learn representations of text with multiple levels of abstraction.
Each layer/hop retrieves important context words,
and transforms the representation at previous level
into a representation at a higher, slightly more abstract level. With the composition of enough such
transformations, very complex functions of sentence
representation towards an aspect can be learned.
Aspect Level Sentiment Classiﬁcation
We regard the output vector in last hop as the feature, and feed it to a softmax layer for aspect level
sentiment classiﬁcation. The model is trained in a
supervised manner by minimizing the cross entropy
error of sentiment classiﬁcation, whose loss function is given below, where T means all training instances, C is the collection of sentiment categories,
(s, a) means a sentence-aspect pair.
c (s, a) · log(Pc(s, a))
Pc(s, a) is the probability of predicting (s, a) as category c produced by our system. P g
c (s, a) is 1 or
0, indicating whether the correct answer is c. We
use back propagation to calculate the gradients of
all the parameters, and update them with stochastic
gradient descent. We clamp the word embeddings
with 300-dimensional Glove vectors , which is trained from web data and the
vocabulary size is 1.9M4. We randomize other parameters with uniform distribution U(−0.01, 0.01),
and set the learning rate as 0.01.
Experiment
We describe experimental settings and report empirical results in this section.
Experimental Setting
We conduct experiments on two datasets from SemEval 2014 , one from laptop
domain and another from restaurant domain. Statistics of the datasets are given in Table 1. It is worth
noting that the original dataset contains the fourth
category - conﬂict, which means that a sentence expresses both positive and negative opinion towards
an aspect. We remove conﬂict category as the number of instances is very tiny, incorporating which
4Available at: 
will make the dataset extremely unbalanced. Evaluation metric is classiﬁcation accuracy.
Laptop-Train
Laptop-Test
Restaurant-Train
Restaurant-Test
Table 1: Statistics of the datasets.
Comparison to Other Methods
We compare with the following baseline methods on
both datasets.
(1) Majority is a basic baseline method, which
assigns the majority sentiment label in training set
to each instance in the test set.
(2) Feature-based SVM performs state-of-the-art
on aspect level sentiment classiﬁcation. We compare
with a top system using ngram features, parse features and lexicon features .
(3) We compare with three LSTM models ). In LSTM, a LSTM based recurrent
model is applied from the start to the end of a sentence, and the last hidden vector is used as the sentence representation. TDLSTM extends LSTM by
taking into account of the aspect, and uses two LST-
M networks, a forward one and a backward one, towards the aspect. TDLSTM+ATT extends TDLST-
M by incorporating an attention mechanism over the hidden vectors. We use
the same Glove word vectors for fair comparison.
(4) We also implement ContextAVG, a simplistic
version of our approach. Context word vectors are
averaged and the result is added to the aspect vector.
The output is fed to a softmax function.
Experimental results are given in Table 2. Our
approach using only content attention is abbreviated to MemNet (k), where k is the number of hops.
We can ﬁnd that feature-based SVM is an extremely
strong performer and substantially outperforms other baseline methods, which demonstrates the importance of a powerful feature representation for aspect
level sentiment classiﬁcation. Among three recurrent models, TDLSTM performs better than LSTM,
which indicates that taking into account of the aspect information is helpful. This is reasonable as the
sentiment polarity of a sentence towards different as-
Restaurant
Feature+SVM
TDLSTM+ATT
ContextAVG
MemNet (1)
MemNet (2)
MemNet (3)
MemNet (4)
MemNet (5)
MemNet (6)
MemNet (7)
MemNet (8)
MemNet (9)
Table 2: Classiﬁcation accuracy of different methods on laptop
and restaurant datasets. Best scores in each group are in bold.
pects (e.g. “food” and “service”) might be different.
It is somewhat disappointing that incorporating attention model over TDLSTM does not bring any improvement. We consider that each hidden vector of
TDLSTM encodes the semantics of word sequence
until the current position. Therefore, the model of
TDLSTM+ATT actually selects such mixed semantics of word sequence, which is weird and not an intuitive way to selectively focus on parts of contexts.
Different from TDLSTM+ATT, the proposed memory network approach removes the recurrent calculator over word sequence and directly apply attention
mechanism on context word representations.
We can also ﬁnd that the performance of ContextAVG is very poor, which means that assigning the
same weight/importance to all the context words is
not an effective way. Among all our models from
single hop to nine hops, we can observe that using
more computational layers could generally lead to
better performance, especially when the number of
hops is less than six.
The best performances are
achieved when the model contains seven and nine
hops, respectively. On both datasets, the proposed
approach could obtain comparable accuracy compared to the state-of-art feature-based SVM system.
Runtime Analysis
We study the runtime of recurrent neural models and
the proposed deep memory network approach with
different hops. We implement all these approaches
based on the same neural network infrastructure, use
the same 300-dimensional Glove word vectors, and
run them on the same CPU server.
TDLSTM + ATT
MemNet (1)
MemNet (2)
MemNet (3)
MemNet (4)
MemNet (5)
MemNet (6)
MemNet (7)
MemNet (8)
MemNet (9)
Table 3: Runtime (seconds) of each training epoch on the
restaurant dataset.
The training time of each iteration on the restaurant dataset is given in Table 3. We can ﬁnd that
LSTM based recurrent models are indeed computationally expensive, which is caused by the complex operations in each LSTM unit along the word
sequence. Instead, the memory network approach
is simpler and evidently faster because it does not
need recurrent calculators of sequence length. Our
approach with nine hops is almost 15 times faster
than the basic LSTM model.
Effects of Location Attention
As described in Section 3.4, we explore four strategies to integrate location information into the attention model. We incorporate each of them separately into the basic content-based attention model. It
is helpful to restate that the difference between four
location-based attention models lies in the usage of
location vectors for context words. In Model 1 and
Model 2, the values of location vectors are ﬁxed and
calculated in a heuristic way. In Model 3 and Model
4, location vectors are also regarded as the parameters and jointly learned along with other parameters
in the deep memory network.
(a) Aspect: service, Answer: -1, Prediction: -1
(b) Aspect: food, Answer: +1, Prediction: -1
Table 4: Examples of attention weights in different hops for aspect level sentiment classiﬁcation. The model only uses content
attention. The hop columns show the weights of context words in each hop, indicated by values and gray color. This example shows
the results of sentence “great food but the service was dreadful!” with “food” and “service” as the aspects.
(a) Aspect: service, Answer: -1, Prediction: -1
(b) Aspect: food, Answer: +1, Prediction: +1
Table 5: Examples of attention weights in different hops for aspect level sentiment classiﬁcation. The model also takes into account
of the location information (Model 2). This example is as same as the one we use in Table 4.
Number of hops
+ Location 1
+ Location 2
+ Location 3
+ Location 4
Figure 2: Classiﬁcation accuracy of different attention models
on the restaurant dataset.
Figure 2 shows the classiﬁcation accuracy of each
attention model on the restaurant dataset. We can
ﬁnd that using multiple computational layers could
consistently improve the classiﬁcation accuracy in
all these models. All these models perform comparably when the number of hops is larger than ﬁve.
Among these four location-based models, we prefer Model 2 as it is intuitive and has less computation cost without loss of accuracy. We also ﬁnd
that Model 4 is very sensitive to the choice of neural
gate. Its classiﬁcation accuracy decreases by almost
5 percentage when the sigmoid operation over location vector is removed.
Visualize Attention Models
We visualize the attention weight of each context
word to get a better understanding of the deep memory network approach. The results of context-based
model and location-based model (Model 2) are given in Table 4 and Table 5, respectively.
From Table 4(a), we can ﬁnd that in the ﬁrst hop
the context words “great”, “but” and “dreadful” contribute equally to the aspect “service”. While after
the second hop, the weight of “dreadful” increases
and ﬁnally the model correctly predict the polarity
towards “service” as negative. This case shows the
effects of multiple hops. However, in Table 4(b),
the content-based model also gives a larger weight
to “dreadful” when the target we focus on is “food”.
As a result, the model incorrectly predicts the polarity towards “food” as negative. This phenomenon
might be caused by the neglect of location information. From Table 5(b), we can ﬁnd that the weight
of “great” is increased when the location of context
word is considered. Accordingly, Model 2 predict-
s the correct sentiment label towards “food”. We
believe that location-enhanced model captures both
content and location information. For instance, in
Table 5(a) the closest context words of the aspect
“service” are “the” and “was”, while “dreadful” has
the largest weight.
Error Analysis
We carry out an error analysis of our location enhanced model (Model 2) on the restaurant dataset,
and ﬁnd that most of the errors could be summarized as follows.
The ﬁrst factor is noncompositional sentiment expression.
This model
regards single context word as the basic computational unit and cannot handle this situation.
example is “dessert was also to die for!”, where
the aspect is underlined.
The sentiment expression is “die for”, whose meaning could not be
composed from its constituents “die” and “for”.
The second factor is complex aspect expression
consisting of many words, such as “ask for the
round corner table next to the large window.” This
model represents an aspect expression by averaging its constituting word vectors, which could not
well handle this situation. The third factor is sentimental relation between context words such as negation, comparison and condition. An example is “but
dinner here is never disappointing, even if the prices
are a bit over the top”. We believe that this is caused
by the weakness of weighted average compositional function in each hop. There are also cases when
comparative opinions are expressed such as “i ’ve
had better japanese food at a mall food court”.
Related Work
This work is connected to three research areas in natural language processing. We brieﬂy describe related studies in each area.
Aspect Level Sentiment Classiﬁcation
Aspect level sentiment classiﬁcation is a ﬁnegrained classiﬁcation task in sentiment analysis,
which aims at identifying the sentiment polarity of
a sentence expressed towards an aspect . Most existing works use machine learning algorithms, and build sentiment classiﬁer from
sentences with manually annotated polarity labels. One of the most successful approaches in literature is feature based SVM. Experts could design
effective feature templates and make use of external
resources like parser and sentiment lexicons . In recent years, neural network approaches are of growing attention for
their capacity to learn powerful text representation
from data. However, these neural models (e.g. L-
STM) are computationally expensive, and could not
explicitly reveal the importance of context evidences
with regard to an aspect. Instead, we develop simple
and fast approach that explicitly encodes the context importance towards a given aspect. It is worth
noting that the task we focus on differs from ﬁnegrained opinion extraction, which assigns each word
a tag (e.g. B,I,O) to indicate whether it is an aspect/sentiment word . The aspect word in
this work is given as a part of the input.
Compositionality in Vector Space
In NLP community, compositionality means that
the meaning of a composed expression (e.g.
phrase/sentence/document) comes from the meanings of its constituents (Frege, 1892). Mitchell and
Lapata exploits a variety of addition and
multiplication functions to calculate phrase vector.
Yessenalina and Cardie use matrix multiplication as compositional function to compute vectors for longer phrases. To compute sentence representation, researchers develop denoising autoencoder , convolutional neural network , sequence based recurrent neural models and tree-structured neural networks . Several recent studies calculate continuous
representation for documents with neural networks
 .
Attention and Memory Networks
Recently, there is a resurgence in computational
models with attention mechanism and explicit memory to learn representations of texts .
In this line of research,
memory is encoded as a continuous representation
and operations on memory (e.g. reading and writing) are typically implemented with neural networks. Attention mechanism could be viewed as a compositional function, where lower level representations are regarded as the memory, and the function is to choose “where to look” by assigning
a weight/importance to each lower position when
computing an upper level representation. Such attention based approaches have achieved promising
performances on a variety of NLP tasks .
Conclusion
We develop deep memory networks that capture importances of context words for aspect level sentiment classiﬁcation. Compared with recurrent neural models like LSTM, this approach is simpler
and faster. Empirical results on two datasets verify that the proposed approach performs comparable
to state-of-the-art feature based SVM system, and
substantively better than LSTM architectures. We
implement different attention strategies and show
that leveraging both content and location information could learn better context weight and text representation. We also demonstrate that using multiple computational layers in memory network could
obtain improved performance. Our potential future
plans are incorporating sentence structure like parsing results into the deep memory network.
Acknowledgments
We would especially want to thank Xiaodan Zhu for
running their system on our setup. We greatly thank
Yaming Sun for tremendously helpful discussions.
We also thank the anonymous reviewers for their
valuable comments. This work was supported by the
National High Technology Development 863 Program of China (No. 2015AA015407), National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61632011
and No.61273321).