Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Representation Learning for NLP, pages 252–256,
Vancouver, Canada, August 3, 2017. c⃝2017 Association for Computational Linguistics
Deep Active Learning for Named Entity Recognition
Yanyao Shen
Austin, TX 78712
 
Hyokun Yun
Amazon Web Services
Seattle, WA 98101
 
Zachary C. Lipton
Amazon Web Services
Seattle, WA 98101
 
Yakov Kronrod
Amazon Web Services
Seattle, WA 98101
 
Animashree Anandkumar
Amazon Web Services
Seattle, WA 98101
 
Deep neural networks have advanced the
state of the art in named entity recognition. However, under typical training procedures, advantages over classical methods emerge only with large datasets. As
a result, deep learning is employed only
when large public datasets or a large budget for manually labeling data is available.
In this work, we show that by combining
deep learning with active learning, we can
outperform classical methods even with
a signiﬁcantly smaller amount of training
Introduction
Over the past several years, a series of papers have
used deep neural networks (DNNs) to advance the
state of the art in named entity recognition (NER)
 . Historically, the advantages of deep
learning have been less pronounced when working with small datasets. For instance, on the popular CoNLL-2003 English dataset, the best DNN
model outperforms the best shallow model by only
0.4%, as measured by F1 score, and this is a small
dataset containing only 203,621 words. On the
other hand, on the OntoNotes-5.0 English dataset,
which contains 1,088,503 words, a DNN model
outperforms the best shallow model by 2.24%
 .
In this work, we investigate whether we can
train DNNs using fewer samples under the active learning framework.
Active learning is the
paradigm where we actively select samples to be
used during training. Intuitively, if we are able to
select the most informative samples for training,
we can vastly reduce the number of samples required. In practice, we can employ Mechanical
Turk or other crowdsourcing platforms to label the
samples actively selected by the algorithm. Reducing sample requirements for training can lower
the labeling costs on these platforms.
We present positive preliminary results demonstrating the effectiveness of deep active learning. We perform incremental training of DNNs
while actively selecting samples.
On the standard OntoNotes-5.0 English dataset, our approach
matches 99% of the F1 score achieved by the
best deep models trained in a standard, supervised
fashion despite using only a quarter
NER Model Description
We use CNN-CNN-LSTM model from Yun
 as a representative DNN model for NER.
The model uses two convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) to encode characters and words respectively, and a long shortterm memory (LSTM) recurrent neural network
 as a decoder.
This model achieves the best F1 scores on the
OntoNotes-5.0 English and Chinese dataset, and
its use of CNNs in encoders enables faster training
as compared to previous work relying on LSTM
encoders . We brieﬂy describe the model:
Data Representation
We represent each input
sentence as follows.
First, special [BOS] and
[EOS] tokens are added at the beginning and the
end of the sentence, respectively. In order to batch
the computation of multiple sentences, sentences
with similar length are grouped together into buckets, and [PAD] tokens are added at the end of sentences to make their lengths uniform inside of the
Formatted Sentence
Table 1: Example formatted sentence. To avoid clutter, [BOW] and [EOW] symbols are not shown.
bucket. We follow an analogous procedure to represent the characters in each word. For example,
the sentence ‘Kate lives on Mars’ is formatted as
shown in Table 1. The formatted sentence is denoted as {xij}, where xij is the one-hot encoding
of the j-th character in the i-th word.
Character-Level Encoder
For each word i, we
use CNNs to extract character-level features wchar
(Figure 1). We apply ReLU nonlinearities and dropout between CNN layers, and include a residual
connection between input and output of each layer
 . So that our representation of the
word is of ﬁxed length, we apply max-pooling on
the outputs of the topmost layer of the characterlevel encoder .
max pooling
Figure 1: Example CNN architecture for Character-level Encoder with two layers.
Word-Level Encoder
To complete our representation of each word, we concatenate its
character-level features with wemb
, a latent word
embedding corresponding to that word:
In order to generalize to words unseen in the training data, we replace each word with a special
[UNK] (unknown) token with 50% probability
during training, an approach that resembles the
word-drop method due to Lample et al. .
Given the sequence of word-level input features
2 , . . . , wfull
n , we extract word-level representations hEnc
2 , . . . , hEnc
for each word position in the sentence using a CNN. In Figure 2,
we depict an instance of our architecture with two
convolutional layers and kernels of width 3. We
concatenate the representation at the l-th convolutional layer h(l)
i , with the input features wfull
Figure 2: Example CNN architecture for Word-level Encoder
with two layers.
Tag Decoder
The tag decoder induces a probability distribution over sequences of tags, conditioned on the word-level encoder features:
y2, y3, . . . , yn−1 |
1. We use an LSTM
RNN for the tag decoder, as depicted in Figure 3.
At the ﬁrst time step, the [GO]-symbol is provided as y1 to the decoder LSTM. At each time
step i, the LSTM decoder computes hDec
i+1, the hidden state for decoding word i + 1, using the last
tag yi, the current decoder hidden state hDec
the learned representation of next word hEnc
i+1. Using a softmax loss function, yi+1 is decoded; this
is further fed as an input to the next time step.
While it is computationally intractable to ﬁnd
the best sequence of tags with an LSTM decoder,
Yun reports that greedily decoding tags
from left to right often yields performance superior to chain CRF decoder ,
for which exact inference is tractable.
1y1 and yn are ignored because they correspond to auxiliary words [BOS] and [EOS]. If [PAD] words are introduced, they are ignored as well.
Figure 3: LSTM architecture for Tag Decoder.
Active Learning
As with most tasks, labeling data for NER usually
requires manual annotations by human experts,
which are costly to acquire at scale. Active learning seeks to ameliorate this problem by strategically choosing which examples to annotate, in the
hope of getting greater performance with fewer
annotations. To this end, we consider the following setup for interactively acquiring annotations.
The learning process consists of multiple rounds:
At the beginning of each round, the active learning algorithm chooses sentences to be annotated
up to the predeﬁned budget. After receiving annotations, we update the model parameters by training on the augmented dataset, and proceeds to the
next round. We assume that the cost of annotating
a sentence is proportional to the number of words
in the sentence, and that every word in the selected
sentence needs to be annotated; the algorithm cannot ask workers to partially annotate the sentence.
While various existing active learning strategies
suit this setup , we explore the uncertainty sampling strategy, which ranks unlabeled
examples in terms of current model’s uncertainty
on them, due to its simplicity and popularity. We
consider three ranking methods, each of which can
be easily implemented in the CNN-CNN-LSTM
model as well as most common models for NER.
Least Conﬁdence (LC): This method sorts examples in descending order by the probability of
not predicting the most conﬁdent sequence from
the current model :
y1,...,yn P [y1, . . . , yn | {xij}] .
Since exactly computing (1) is not feasible with
the LSTM decoder, we approximate it with the
probability of a greedily decoded sequence.
Normalized
Log-Probability
(MNLP): Our preliminary analysis revealed that
the LC method disproportionately selects longer
sentences. Note that sorting unlabeled examples
in descending order by (1) is equivalent to sorting
in ascending order by the following scores:
y1,...,yn P [y1, . . . , yn | {xij}]
P [yi | y1, . . . , yn−1, {xij}]
log P [yi |y1, . . . , yn−1, {xij}] . (2)
Since (2) contains summation over words, LC
method naturally favors longer sentences.
Because longer sentences require more labor for annotation, however, we ﬁnd this undesirable, and
propose to normalize (2) as follows, which we call
Maximum Normalized Log-Probability method:
log P [yi | y1, . . . , yn−1, {xij}] .
Bayesian Active Learning by Disagreement
(BALD): We also consider the Bayesian metric proposed by Gal et al. .
P1, P2, . . . PM as models sampled from the posterior. Then, one measure of our uncertainty on
the ith word is fi, the fraction of models which
disagreed with the most popular choice:
fi = 1−maxy
m : argmaxy′ Pm [yi = y′] = y
where |·| denotes cardinality of a set. We normalize this by the number of words as 1
j=1 fj, and
sort sentences in decreasing order by this score.
Following Gal et al. , we used Monte Carlo
dropout to sample
from the posterior, and set M as 100.
Experiments
We use OntoNotes-5.0 English and Chinese data
 for our experiments. The
training datasets contain 1,088,503 words and
756,063 words respectively. State-of-the-art models trained the full training sets achieve F1 scores
of 86.86 and 75.63 on the test sets .
Percent of words annotated
Test F1 score
Best Deep Model
Best Shallow Model
(a) OntoNotes-5.0 English
Percent of words annotated
Test F1 score
Best Deep Model
Best Shallow Model
(b) OntoNotes-5.0 Chinese
Figure 4: F1 score on the test dataset, in terms of the number of words labeled.
half_data, F1=85.10
no_nw_data, F1=81.49
nw_only_data, F1=82.08
Figure 5: Genre distribution of top 1,000 sentences chosen
by an active learning algorithm
Comparisons of selection algorithms
We empirically compare selection algorithms proposed
in Section 3, as well as uniformly random baseline (RAND). All algorithms start with an identical 1% of original training data and a randomly
initialized model. In each round, every algorithm
chooses sentences from the rest of the training data
until 20,000 words have been selected, adding this
data to its training set. Then, the algorithm updates its model parameters by stochastic gradient
descent on its augmented training dataset for 50
passes. We evaluate the performance of each algorithm by its F1 score on the test dataset.
Figure 4 shows results. All active learning algorithms perform signiﬁcantly better than the random baseline.
Among active learners, MNLP
slightly outperformed others in early rounds. Impressively, active learning algorithms achieve 99%
performance of the best deep model trained on
full data using only 24.9% of the training data on
the English dataset and 30.1% on Chinese. Also,
12.0% and 16.9% of training data were enough
for deep active learning algorithms to surpass the
performance of the shallow models from Pradhan
et al. trained on the full training data.
Detection of under-explored genres
understand how active learning algorithms choose
informative examples, we designed the following
experiment.
The OntoNotes datasets consist of
six genres: broadcast conversation (bc), braodcast news (bn), magazine genre (mz), newswire
(nw), telephone conversation (tc), weblogs (wb).
We created three training datasets:
half-data,
which contains random 50% of the original training data, nw-data, which contains sentences only
from newswire (51.5% of words in the original
data), and no-nw-data, which is the complement
of nw-data. Then, we trained CNN-CNN-LSTM
model on each dataset.
The model trained on
half-data achieved 85.10 F1, signiﬁcantly outperforming others trained on biased datasets (no-nwdata: 81.49, nw-only-data: 82.08). This showed
the importance of good genre coverage in training
data. Then, we analyzed the genre distribution of
1,000 sentences MNLP chose for each model (see
Figure 5). For no-nw-data, the algorithm chose
many more newswire (nw) sentences than it did
for unbiased half-data (367 vs. 217). On the other
hand, it undersampled newswire sentences for nwonly-data and increased the proportion of broadcast news and telephone conversation, which are
genres distant from newswire. Impressively, although we did not provide the genre of sentences
to the algorithm, it was able to automatically detect underexplored genres.
Conclusion
We proposed deep active learning algorithms
for NER and empirically demonstrated that they
achieve state-of-the-art performance with much
less data than models trained in the standard supervised fashion.