A Genetic Cascade-Correlation Learning
Algorithm∗
Mitchell A. Potter
Computer Science Department
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030 USA
e-mail: 
Gradient descent techniques such as back propagation have been used eﬀectively to
train neural network connection weights; however, in some applications gradient information may not be available. Biologically inspired genetic algorithms provide an
alternative. Unfortunately, early attempts to use genetic algorithms to train connection weights demonstrated that exchanging genetic material between two parents with
the crossover operator often leads to low performance children. This occurs because
the genetic material is removed from the context in which it was useful due to incompatible feature-detector mappings onto hidden units. This paper explores an approach
in which a traditional genetic algorithm using standard two-point crossover and mutation is applied within the Cascade-Correlation learning architecture to train neural
network connection weights. In the Cascade-Correlation architecture the hidden unit
feature detector mapping is static; therefore, the possibility of the crossover operator
shifting genetic material out of its useful context is reduced.
Problem Statement
Although gradient descent techniques such as back propagation have been used eﬀectively
to train feedforward neural network connection weights, researchers have experimented with
evolving an optimal set of connection weights with biologically inspired genetic algorithms.
Genetic algorithms are adaptive search algorithms in which a population of individuals representing alternative solutions to a problem are allowed to propagate based on a measure
of their ﬁtness . As the population evolves, the ﬁtness of the individuals
increases through the application of genetic recombination operators. Genetic algorithms
have several advantages over the back propagation algorithm. First, because genetic algorithms work on a population of solutions in parallel there is less chance of converging to
∗Published in Proceedings of COGANN-92 International Workshop on Combinations of Genetic Algorithms and Neural Networks, pp. 123-133, IEEE Computer Society Press, 1992
a suboptimal local minimum solution. Second, the node transfer functions in a network
trained with back propagation must be diﬀerentiable . This is not a
restriction in the genetic algorithm approach because the derivative of the transfer function
is not needed in the computation of a gradient. Third, back propagation is generally used
with feedforward networks containing no loops. Modiﬁcations to the algorithm are required
to support recurrent networks . Genetic algorithms place no restrictions on
network topology because they require no backward propagation of an error signal.
The eﬀorts to train neural networks with genetic algorithms have achieved mixed success. Montana and Davis have trained a neural network using a genetic algorithm to do line
characterization in the domain of sonar data analysis . They have
reported encouraging results in which their genetic algorithm outperformed back propagation. In addition, Whitley and Hanson have used genetic algorithms to train neural networks
to solve some of the classic feedforward network test cases; such as the exclusive-or problem,
424-encoder, and two-bit adder . However, the Whitley group
found that when traditional genetic algorithms were applied to larger networks they often
failed to ﬁnd acceptable connection weight solutions .
The approach these researchers have taken is to create a population of individuals whose
chromosomes represent alternative connection weight assignments for the network. The connection weights may be encoded in the chromosomes simply as a string of ﬂoating point
numbers or with a more traditional binary encoding in which each real-valued connection
weight is mapped to a segment of a string of bits. The population is initialized with individuals consisting of random connection weight values.
The genetic algorithm is then
substituted for back propagation to adjust the connection weights by recombining individuals in the population until a member evolves to an acceptable level of ﬁtness. The ﬁtness
of an individual is determined by computing the sum squared error as training patterns are
fed forward through the network; therefore, the genetic algorithm acts as a minimization
Traditionally genetic algorithms have relied heavily on crossover, a genetic recombination operator in which genetic material from the chromosomes of two parents is exchanged to
create oﬀspring. However, crossover has been of limited use in evolving connection weights
in large networks. The Whitley group has hypothesized that this is because parent networks
may contain incompatible feature-detector mappings onto hidden units. Therefore, exchanging genetic material between two parents often leads to low performance children because the
genetic material is removed from the context in which it was useful. They achieved better
neural network connection weight optimization results by emphasizing mutation, a genetic
operator in which alleles are randomly modiﬁed. In a neural network training environment
this consists of mutating one or more connection weight values to create a child.
Montana and Davis took an alternative approach in achieving their successful results on
the sonar array problem by creating a new set of genetic operators speciﬁcally tailored to
the domain of feedforward neural network connection weight optimization. By designing
domain speciﬁc operators they were able to achieve an eﬀective blend of exploration through
mutation and exploitation through recombination while avoiding the problems associated
with the crossover operator.
This paper explores a third approach in which a traditional genetic algorithm using standard two-point crossover and mutation is applied within the Cascade-Correlation learning
architecture developed by Fahlman to learn neural network connection weights . In the Cascade-Correlation architecture both neural network topology and connection weights are evolved simultaneously. Furthermore, the network is evolved one hidden
unit at a time. Once a hidden unit is added, its input weights do not change for the remainder of the training; i.e., the unit becomes a permanent feature-detector. This reduces the
possibility of the crossover operator shifting genetic material out of its useful context.
Technical Approach
Cascade-Correlation
In the Cascade-Correlation algorithm the network begins as a two-layer feedforward architecture in which each input unit has a weighted connection to each output unit. This two-layer
network is trained until learning approaches an asymptote. Hidden units are then added one
at a time through the application of two separate learning cycles. The Quickprop algorithm,
a heuristic second-order gradient descent technique, is used for both of these cycles (Fahlman
The ﬁrst cycle begins by creating a single new hidden unit and giving it a weighted
connection from each input unit. The input weights for the new hidden unit are then trained
by adjusting them to maximize the equation
Covariance =
(Vp −V )(Ep,o −Eo)
where o is a network output unit index, p is a training pattern index, V is the output of
the hidden unit, and E is the network sum squared error; i.e., the covariance is maximized
between the output of the hidden unit and the error from the network. Training patterns
will be fed forward through the network until the covariance approaches an asymptote.
In the second learning cycle the output of the new hidden unit is given a weighted
connection to each output unit. The entire set of connections to the output units (from all
hidden and input units) will then be trained by minimizing the sum squared error equation
(Dp,o −Yp,o)2
where o is a network output unit index, p is a training pattern index, D is the desired
output, and Y is the actual output. This cycle also continues until learning approaches an
asymptote.
If the error does not drop below a threshold value another hidden unit is created and the
learning cycles repeat. As new hidden units are added the input connection weights of the
previously installed hidden units remain ﬁxed; that is, the units become permanent feature
detectors. Later hidden units have input connections from all previously installed hidden
units along with connections from all input units. Figure 1 shows a Cascade-Correlation
network consisting of two inputs, a ﬁxed bias signal, and two outputs, after the addition of
three hidden units. The black connection boxes represent hidden unit input weights that will
remain ﬁxed throughout the rest of the training process while the white connection boxes
represent output unit weights that will continue to be adjusted.
Figure 1: Cascade-Correlation Network After the Addition of Three Hidden Units
Genetic Algorithm
In the Genetic Cascade-Correlation algorithm, Quickprop is replaced with a genetic algorithm in both learning cycles. The advantages of using a genetic algorithm over the Quickprop algorithm are similar to those mentioned earlier with respect to back propagation.
Speciﬁcally, they consist of reducing the possibility of convergence to suboptimal local minimum solutions and support for applications in which gradient information is not available.
Although Fahlman addresses the potential problem of gradient descent convergence to suboptimal local minimum solutions in the correlation phase of Cascade-Correlation by training
a population of “candidate units” in parallel and choosing the most highly correlated one
as the hidden unit to be added, he uses a small population of four to eight individuals and
does not allow them to interact with one another. Genetic algorithms typically maintain
much larger populations and exploit the interaction of individuals through the crossover
recombination operator.
The genetic algorithm used within the two learning cycles is based on the generational
model in which a single generation consists of:
Selecting a set of individuals from the population to be reproduced using a proportional non-deterministic selection strategy
Recombining the individuals using two-point crossover and mutation
Evaluating the new individuals and inserting them back into the population with
random replacement.
Each learning cycle continues to evolve its population until 100 generations have elapsed or
until learning approaches an asymptote.
A separate population of ﬁfty individuals is maintained for each of the two learning
cycles. An individual chromosome consists of ﬂoating point alleles representing real-valued
connection weights. Each individual in the population of the hidden unit input connection
cycle consists of connection weights from each input unit, from the ﬁxed bias, and from each
previously installed hidden unit. Output connection cycle individuals each consist of the
entire set of output connection weights. Because the number of connection weights in both
cycles increases as hidden units are added to the network, the genetic algorithm supports a
variable chromosome length.
At the beginning of each hidden unit input connection cycle, individuals are initialized
with random connection weights in the range (−1.0, 1.0). The ﬁrst output unit cycle also initializes its population with individuals consisting of random connection weights in the range
(−1.0, 1.0). However, all output connection weights continue to be adjusted throughout the
training process; therefore, information acquired during early cycles needs to be transferred
to later cycles. The initialization approach taken for later output unit cycles that achieves
this transfer yet maintains suﬃcient population diversity is to add to copies of the ﬁve best
individuals from the previous output unit cycle new connection weights in the range (0, −C),
where C is the covariance achieved in training the hidden unit input connections. This range
was chosen as a result of the heuristic that a unit whose output is positively correlated with
an error from another unit can best reduce that error with a negatively weighted connection.
Similarly, if the correlation is negative a positive connection weight will best reduce the error.
Selection consists of stochastic sampling with replacement. Sampling probabilities are
proportional to scaled ﬁtness.
When new individuals are added to the population, old
individuals are randomly selected for replacement. The best individual from each generation
is preserved into the next generation.
The hidden unit input connection cycle uses the
correlation of the hidden unit output with the sum squared network error as a measure of
ﬁtness. The output unit cycle uses the sum squared network error as a measure of ﬁtness.
The genetic recombination operators are entirely generic and consist of standard twopoint crossover with a 0.6 probability of application to each chromosome and an adjustably
disruptive mutation with a 0.2 probability of application to each ﬂoating point allele. The
crossover operator cuts chromosomes on connection weight boundaries. The mutation operator includes a “temperature” parameter τ and consists of the addition of a random delta
distributed uniformly in the range −τ to +τ to a connection weight. A larger value of τ results in more disruptive mutations. A ﬁxed τ value of 0.5 was used in the output connection
weight cycle. The τ value for the hidden unit input connection cycle is more application
dependent and ﬁxed values in the range 1.0 to 4.0 were used. Appropriate values of τ were
determined empirically.
Although the genetic algorithm was implemented speciﬁcally for this project, partially
due to the requirement that it be embedded within the Cascade-Correlation architecture,
the algorithm itself is not restricted to the domain of training neural network connection
Empirical Results
An implementation of the Genetic Cascade-Correlation algorithm is evaluated by comparing its performance to a Quickprop Cascade-Correlation program written by Fahlman. The
programs diﬀer only in the method used for training the connection weights. The two bench-
marks used for this comparison are the two-spiral problem and the N-bit parity problem;
both used by Fahlman in a comparison of Quickprop Cascade-Correlation to back propagation .
The primary metric used to compare the programs is the number of epochs required to
train the network. This is illustrated in the left graph of each pair below by plotting the
sum squared network error as a function of the number of training epochs. In interpreting
these graphs, note that a Genetic Cascade-Correlation epoch consists of a single forward-pass
of all training patterns through the network and a population evolution of one generation.
A Quickprop Cascade-Correlation epoch consists of a single forward-pass of all training
patterns through the network, the computation of gradient information, and the use of this
gradient information to adjust the connection weights. The number of epochs was chosen as
a metric over computation time to reduce the signiﬁcance of implementation details. In the
current implementation a Quickprop epoch requires approximately one order of magnitude
less computation than a genetic epoch.
A secondary metric is the number of hidden units required. This is illustrated below by
the right graph of each pair showing the maximum covariance achieved as hidden units are
added to the network.
All comparisons were run ten times and the results averaged to produce the graphs shown
below. Every experiment converged to a solution. The Genetic Cascade-Correlation experiments produced normal distributions while the Quickprop experiments produced extremely
heavy tailed distributions. None of the distributions were signiﬁcantly skewed. Welch’s twotailed t-test was used to check the comparisons for statistical signiﬁcance. .
Two-spiral Problem
The two-spiral problem has two inputs representing an (x, y) coordinate and one output
that is +0.5 for half of the training set and −0.5 for the other half. The coordinates for
the +0.5 and −0.5 outputs form two interlocking spirals. The problem is to classify each
input coordinate as a +0.5 coordinate or a −0.5 coordinate; that is, to determine in which of
the two spirals the coordinate belongs. The training set consists of 194 input/output pairs
forming interlocking spirals that loop around the origin three times. This problem is very
diﬃcult for back propagation networks to solve.
The graphs shown in Figure 2 compare the genetic and Quickprop performance on the
two-spiral problem. The results were generated using sigmoid transfer functions for hidden
units and output units. The Quickprop implementation maintained a population of eight
candidate units. As described earlier the genetic implementation maintained two populations
of ﬁfty individuals (one for each of the two learning cycles), and used a crossover rate of 0.6,
a mutation rate of 0.2, a hidden unit input connection cycle mutation temperature of 4.0,
and an output unit cycle mutation temperature of 0.5. The genetic algorithm solved the
two-spiral problem in an average of 1395 epochs and required an average of 33 hidden units
while the Quickprop algorithm solved the two-spiral problem in an average of 1815 epochs
and required an average of 17 hidden units. Welch’s t-test produced a statistically signiﬁcant
P value of less than 0.001 for both the primary and secondary metric comparisons. The ten
genetic experiments had a standard deviation of 154.9 epochs and 4.2 hidden units while the
Quickprop experiments had a standard deviation of 142.0 epochs and 1.6 hidden units. The
hidden unit
covariance
Figure 2: Comparison of Genetic and Quickprop Implementation of Two-spiral Problem
fastest convergence of the genetic algorithm was in 1141 epochs and the slowest convergence
was in 1630 epochs. The fastest convergence of the Quickprop algorithm was in 1639 epochs
and the slowest convergence was in 1981 epochs. The smallest genetically evolved network
contained 28 hidden units and the largest contained 42 hidden units. The smallest network
trained by Quickprop contained 15 hidden units and the largest contained 20 hidden units.
By increasing the number of generations each hidden unit is evolved by adjusting the
parameters controlling the detection of asymptotic convergence; a solution containing only
13 hidden units was found with the genetic algorithm. However, over 4000 epochs were
In addition, the two-spiral problem was used to determine the eﬀectiveness of the genetic
crossover operator. Figure 3 compares the performance of the genetic implementation with
and without this operator. All other parameters have the same values as previously described.
When the crossover operator is deactivated, the average number of epochs required to solve
the problem increased to 1533 and the average number of hidden units increased to 36. The
experiments had a standard deviation of 227.5 epochs and 5.8 hidden units. The fastest
convergence was in 1212 epochs and the slowest convergence was in 1904 epochs.
smallest network contained 28 hidden units and the largest contained 47 hidden units. The
results indicate that the crossover operator may be making a positive contribution to the
solution of the problem. When the operator is active, solutions are found in fewer epochs
with a smaller number of hidden units. However, Welch’s t-test produced a statistically
insigniﬁcant P value of 0.13 for the primary metric comparison and 0.18 for the secondary
metric comparison.
hidden unit
covariance
Figure 3: Comparison of Genetic Implementation of Two-spiral Problem With and Without
the Crossover Operator
N-bit Parity Problem
The N-bit parity problem has N inputs (an N value of two is equivalent to the XOR problem)
and a single output unit representing whether there is an even or odd number of one-bits in
the input. An output of +0.5 represents odd parity and an output of −0.5 represents even
parity. The training set for this problem consists of all 2N possible training pairs.
The graphs shown in Figure 4 compare the genetic and Quickprop performance for the
eight-input case. The results were generated using Gaussian transfer functions for hidden
units and sigmoid transfer functions for output units. All other parameters had the same
values as described earlier with the exception of the mutation temperature used in the genetic
hidden unit input connection cycle.
The best results were achieved with this mutation
temperature set to a value of 1.0. The genetic algorithm solved the parity problem in an
average of 629 epochs and required an average of 17 hidden units while the Quickprop
algorithm solved the parity problem in an average of 569 epochs and required an average of
6 hidden units. Welch’s t-test produced a statistically insigniﬁcant P value of 0.16 for the
primary metric comparison and a statistically signiﬁcant P value of less than 0.001 for the
secondary metric comparison. The ten genetic experiments had a standard deviation of 85.2
epochs and 3.3 hidden units while the Quickprop experiments had a standard deviation of
96.9 epochs and 0.9 hidden units. The fastest convergence of the genetic algorithm was in
535 epochs and the slowest convergence was in 787 epochs. The fastest convergence of the
Quickprop algorithm was in 446 epochs and the slowest convergence was in 702 epochs. The
smallest genetically evolved network contained 12 hidden units and the largest contained 22
hidden units. The smallest network trained by Quickprop contained 4 hidden units and the
largest contained 7 hidden units.
hidden unit
covariance
Figure 4: Comparison of Genetic and Quickprop Implementation of 8-bit Parity Problem
Conclusions
In conclusion, a genetic algorithm has been applied within the Cascade-Correlation architecture to train connection weights. The performance of the Genetic Cascade-Correlation
program when applied to the two-spiral and eight-bit parity problems compares favorably
with the original Cascade-Correlation program that used the Quickprop algorithm to train
connection weights.
Although Quickprop solved both problems with fewer hidden units,
the genetic algorithm required fewer epochs in the case of the two-spiral problem and only
slightly more epochs than Quickprop in the case of the eight-bit parity problem. If the creation of compact networks is desirable, the genetic algorithm can be adjusted to ﬁnd solutions
with fewer hidden units at the expense of additional training epochs. The performance of
the genetic algorithm is encouraging considering it uses no gradient information (thus does
not require diﬀerentiable transfer functions) and depends entirely on generic recombination
operators. The advantage of the Quickprop algorithm is that it is signiﬁcantly more eﬃcient
than the genetic algorithm when gradient information is available. However, in applications
such as non-linear neural control where an error gradient is sometimes not computable, genetic algorithms may provide a reasonable alternative. Future work will consist of applying
the Genetic Cascade-Correlation algorithm to such an application.
A comparison of the genetic algorithm performance with and without the crossover operator did not demonstrate a statistically signiﬁcant increase in performance when standard
two-point crossover was applied. However, earlier attempts to use genetic algorithms to train
neural networks demonstrated the crossover operator signiﬁcantly decreased the performance
due to incompatible feature-detector mappings onto hidden units. The empirical results of
this paper indicate that the application of crossover within the Cascade-Correlation architecture does not suﬀer from this defect. Future work may lead to alternate genetic representations within the Cascade-Correlation architecture that will enable the crossover operator
to demonstrate a signiﬁcant performance contribution.
The results are inconclusive as to whether the genetic algorithm reduces the possibility
of convergence to suboptimal local minimum solutions. Both Genetic Cascade-Correlation
and Quickprop Cascade-Correlation consistently found acceptable solutions to the two-spiral
and eight-bit parity problems.
Acknowledgements
The author thanks Scott Fahlman and Carnegie Mellon University for making available the
source code of the Quickprop Cascade-Correlation simulator.