Anatomically-Aided PET Reconstruction Using the Kernel
Will Hutchcroft1, Guobao Wang1, Kevin T. Chen2, Ciprian Catana2, and Jinyi Qi1
Jinyi Qi: 
1Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of California-Davis, Davis, CA, USA
2Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA, USA
This paper extends the kernel method that was proposed previously for dynamic PET
reconstruction, to incorporate anatomical side information into the PET reconstruction model. In
contrast to existing methods that incorporate anatomical information using a penalized likelihood
framework, the proposed method incorporates this information in the simpler maximum likelihood
(ML) formulation and is amenable to ordered subsets. The new method also does not require any
segmentation of the anatomical image to obtain edge information. We compare the kernel method
with the Bowsher method for anatomically-aided PET image reconstruction through a simulated
data set. Computer simulations demonstrate that the kernel method offers advantages over the
Bowsher method in region of interest (ROI) quantification. Additionally the kernel method is
applied to a 3D patient data set. The kernel method results in reduced noise at a matched contrast
level compared with the conventional ML expectation maximization (EM) algorithm.
1. Introduction
Positron emission tomography (PET) is a primary tool in the detection and characterization
of cancer, neurological disorders and cardiovascular disease . By imaging
the coincident annihilation photons from an injected radiotracer, PET allows for the
acquisition of functional information for a wide range of biochemical and physiological
processes. However, PET suffers from low spatial resolution due to detector blurring effects,
positron range and photon non-colinearity. The limited photon count in PET data also
requires spatial smoothing to reduce noise.
In contrast, anatomic imaging modalities such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic
resonance tomography (MRI) offer higher spatial resolution and accurate boundary
information. As of 2006, more than 95% of PET systems sold were dual modality PET/CT
systems implying that the overwhelming majority of PET systems
currently in use are as such. The benefit of PET/CT systems has been primarily through
attenuation correction for PET and image coregistration; how best to further utilize
anatomical information within PET reconstruction remains an open question. Moreover, a
large body of recent work has been devoted to developing PET/MRI systems offering
simultaneous data acquisition : 6668–6683. doi:10.1088/0031-9155/61/18/6668.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
2012, Pichler et al 2010, Catana et al 2008, Catana et al 2012). Simultaneous data
acquisition offers hardware-based image coregistration, reducing artifacts due to patient
motion as well as enabling temporally correlated cross-modal data sets
 .
Methods for incorporating anatomical information into PET image reconstruction have
existed for some time now, e.g., . The fact that MRI and CT are
able to generate images with high resolution and SNR, two areas where PET images may be
comparatively lacking, combined with the high correlation between PET tracer distributions
and anatomically delineated regions, makes the pursuit a natural one. Most of the existing
methods incorporate anatomical information through the penalized likelihood framework.
One particularly successful example is the Bowsher method which
computes the neighborhood of each pixel in an anatomically informed penalty function and
does not require any segmentation. A recent work compared three
algorithms for incorporating anatomical side information into PET reconstruction. The
modified Bowsher method , was shown to offer
superior quantitative accuracy when compared to post-smoothed maximum likelihood
expectation maximization (ML EM) reconstruction, MAP reconstruction with a relative
difference prior, and MAP reconstruction using an anatomy-specific joint entropy prior. The
Bowsher method is used for comparison in the work presented here.
Wang and Qi proposed an alternative framework for incorporating side information into PET
reconstruction based upon kernel methods from machine learning . The
kernel method has the advantage of simplicity in its implementation by using the popular
ML EM algorithm. The original development of the kernel method was primarily focused on
dynamic PET reconstruction where side information was obtained from temporal data. Here
we extend the kernel method to anatomically-aided PET image reconstruction. Rather than
using temporal features as in dynamic PET reconstruction, we employ patch-based MR
image features to form the kernel matrix. We evaluated the kernel method using both
computer simulation data and real patient data acquired on a brain PET/MR scanner.
2.1. Kernel Based Anatomically-Aided Reconstruction
PET data are commonly modeled as independent Poisson random variables with log
likelihood,
Hutchcroft et al.
Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
where the data vector y has expectation ȳ. The expectation is a function of the image vector
x through the following affine transform,
where P ∈ ℝM × N is the system matrix with pij denoting the probability of detecting an
event originating in voxel j in detector pair i, and r a vector encompassing random and
scattered events. M and N represent the number of detector bins and voxels, respectively.
Many existing works on anatomically-aided PET image reconstruction have focused on
incorporating anatomical information through the use of a penalty or prior function that
encourages smoothness within anatomical regions while allowing sharp transition between
anatomical regions . Here we present a different approach that encodes
anatomical information in the image representation by using the kernel trick. The basic idea
is to represent the PET image x by a linear function of transformed anatomical features in a
high-dimensional space. This can be accomplished by defining a kernel function on every
pair of anatomical pixels j and k. The PET image at pixel j can then be written as (Wang and
where fj and fk are anatomical feature vectors for pixels j and k, respectively. In this work,
each feature vector consists of pixel intensity values in a patch extracted from the highresolution MR image. The vector α is referred to as the coefficient image. There are a
variety of choices of the kernel function κ. A common choice in many applications is the
radial Gaussian kernel,
where the parameter σ controls the edge sensitivity. Figure 1 depicts the kernel feature
extraction process.
The above kernel representation can be written in a matrix-vector form as
where the (j, k)th element of the kernel matrix K is equal to κ(fj, fk). The column vectors of
the kernel matrix K can also be viewed as a set of basis functions for the image
representation. For computational efficiency, a k-nearest-neighbor (kNN) search is carried
out for each pixel based on the Euclidean distance between fk and fj. A search neighborhood,
nb, as well as number of neighbors, k, are specified beforehand. Only those pixels as
Hutchcroft et al.
Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
determined by the kNN search are allowed to contribute, resulting in the following
definition,
This ensures that the kernel matrix K is sparse. For the purpose of reconstructing an image,
we found that a large value of σ yielded more accurate results quantitatively, as determined
by bias-variance analysis. Consequently, κ(fj, fk) was set to 1 in this study. In order to ensure
that the kernel transformation preserves counts, K is row normalized.
By substituting (5) into (2), the kernelized forward projection model is obtained
The optimization problem for image reconstruction then becomes
and may be solved by the well-known expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm. The
update equation is
where the vector multiplication and division are performed element by element. The update
equation share the same form as that was used in PET image reconstruction with
supervoxels by replacing the kernel matrix with the proper basis functions.
Once the coefficient image estimate α̂ is obtained, the final image estimate x̂ is given by
Comparison with inter-iteration nonlocal mean filtering—Equation (10) can be
viewed as an anatomical based nonlocal mean (NLM) post-filtering operation. Naturally one
may consider performing the NLM filtering inside the standard ML EM iteration, which
would result in the following update equation:
Hutchcroft et al.
Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
In comparison, the kernel method in (9) guarantees convergence to an ML solution, but the
inter-iteration NLM filtering algorithm in (11) does not.
2.2. The Bowsher Method
For comparison, we implemented the Bowsher method, which incorporates anatomical
information through a prior function. The Bowsher method was found to perform very well
in a previous study . With regard to feature extraction, the modified
Bowsher method treats the anatomical image in a manner similar to the kernel method. The
difference lies in how the information is further incorporated into image reconstruction. In
the Bowsher method, the k-nearest neighbors of pixel j form the set
j and a penalty
function is defined as
By specifying the penalty function this way, the inter-pixel smoothing is restricted to those
pixels that are anatomically similar.
The PET image is estimated using the penalized likelihood framework
where β is the parameter that controls the strength of the regularization. We used De Pierro’s
algorithm , which guarantees convergence to a global optimum, to find the
penalized likelihood estimate.
3. Computer Simulations
3.1. Simulation Data
Computer simulation was performed to assess the performance of the proposed kernel
method. A MRI data set was obtained from the BrainWeb project with
256×256 voxels in the axial plane and 1-mm isotropic voxel size. A suitable axial slice
displaying regions of grey and white matter was chosen. The skull and cerebral spinal fluid
were then removed using a region growing algorithm. To generate a simulated PET image,
the remaining interior tissue was segmented into grey matter and white matter and resized to
128×128, with 2-mm pixels. Intensity values of 4 and 1 were assigned, respectively. A
circular lesion with diameter of 5 pixels and intensity of 8 was then added to the grey matter
in the PET image. In addition to the original MR image, another anatomical prior image was
generated by adding a hypointense lesion with 1:2 contrast with regard to the surrounding
tissue at the same location as that of the PET data. The lesion was smoothed using a
Gaussian filter to avoid an artificially sharp boundary. Both MR prior images were then
resized to 384×384 pixels so that each PET pixel corresponded to a 3×3 patch in the MR
images. The prior image containing the lesion will be referred to as the lesion prior and the
Hutchcroft et al.
Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
unmodified MR prior as the lesion-less prior. Figure 2 shows the simulated PET image along
with the two prior images.
For the simulation reconstructions, we modeled a GE Discovery ST PET/CT scanner in twodimensional mode . Each detector ring of the scanner consists of 420
crystals. Each crystal face is 6.3 mm wide. The 2D sinogram contains 249 radial bins and
210 angular projections. The PET phantom image was forward projected using the system
matrix to generate the noise-free projection data. A uniform sinogram with value equal to
20% of the mean of the noise-free sinogram was added to simulate background events
(randoms and scatters). Finally, a set of 100 noisy realizations was generated by introducing
poisson noise to the sinogram with the expected total number of events set to 500k.
3.2. Parameter Optimization
Images were reconstructed using the ML EM algorithm and the two anatomically-aided
methods with a broad parameter range. In both methods, kNN search was performed in a
local window for each pixel in the PET image. Four search window sizes were studied, with
a variant number of included neighbors for each. The search window size, along with the
corresponding number of neighbors, were: 3 × 3 window with 2 to 9 neighbors, 5 × 5
window with 4 to 24 neighbors, 7 × 7 window with 4 to 48 neighbors, 9 × 9 window with 5
to 80 neighbors.
3.3. Region of Interest Quantification
3.3.1. Bias-Variance Analysis—The lesion in the grey matter shown in Figure 2(a) was
chosen as the region of interest (ROI). Standard deviation percentage vs. bias percentage
curves were generated for each reconstruction. The mean ROI intensity of the ith realization,
, was first calculated and the mean ROI intensity was averaged over all noisy
realizations as,
The bias percentage was calculated by,
is the true ROI mean. The standard deviation percentage was calculated by,
Hutchcroft et al.
Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
For the ML EM and kernel methods, the standard deviation percentage vs. bias percentage
curves were plotted by varying iteration number from 30 to 300. For the Bowsher method,
the curves were generated by varying the penalty parameter β and with a fixed iteration
number of 300.
3.3.2. Lesion Contrast Recovery Coefficient—Lesion quantification was studied
through the contrast recovery coefficient (CRC). For the ith realization, the CRC was
calculated by
is the mean intensity of the background and
is the true background
intensity. The CRC was averaged over realizations and plotted against its standard deviation
to obtain a CRC vs. SD curve. As in ROI quantification, the ML EM and kernel method
were controlled by iteration number, while the Bowsher method was regularized by β. For
the Bowsher method, 300 iterations were used to ensure convergence. The background
region was chosen in the white matter as shown in Figure 3.
3.4. Image Signal-to-Noise Ratio
In addition to the above methods in ROI quantification, overall image quality was assessed
by the image signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) defined as,
where ‖‖ denotes the Euclidean norm and xrecon and xtrue are the reconstructed image and
ground truth, respectively.
4. Simulation Results
4.1. Lesion Prior
4.1.1. Reconstructed Images—Figure 4 contains reconstructed images for all
algorithms. For the Bowsher and kernel methods, four different search window sizes were
investigated. The reconstruction parameters (iteration number for ML EM, iteration number
and number of neighbors for the kernel method, and number of neighbors and β for the
Bowsher method) were chosen to maximize the average image SNR. In all cases, β = 1 was
found to give the best result with regard to SNR. Both anatomically aided methods show
superior overall image quality and SNR to that of the ML EM algorithm. The Bowsher
method was shown to yield slightly higher image SNR than the kernel method for a given
search window size.
Hutchcroft et al.
Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
4.1.2. Bias-Variance Analysis—Bias percentage and standard deviation percentage were
calculated as described in section IV D. Figure 5 shows performance plots for all
neighborhood sizes. In each case, the number of neighbors were selected to achieve the best
performance. Both anatomically aided methods give better bias-variance performance than
the ML EM algorithm. In comparison, the kernel method achieved lower variance at a given
bias level than the Bowsher method for all neighborhood sizes. The curved, oscillatory shape
seen in the curves for the kernel method is representative of pixel coupling within the
reconstruction. By tracking the intensity values of individual pixels through many iterations,
it was seen that pixels within and just outside of the lesion display dampened oscillations
that are of a similar frequency but out of phase with one another as the intensity values
converge to a final value.
4.1.3. Contrast Recovery—Figure 6 displays the CRC vs. standard deviation curves for
all three methods. As was done for the ROI quantification, the curves displayed for each
window size correspond to the number of neighbors that yields the best performance for
each. All methods yield similar performance in terms of CRC value, as expected. Both the
kernel and Bowsher methods demonstrate improved performance over the ML EM
algorithm.
4.2. Lesion-less Prior
In this section, anatomically aided images were reconstructed using the lesion-less prior
image. It is expected that ROI quantification performance may suffer when no information
on the ROI is included in the prior image. This case presents an interesting and realistic
challenge. For all but the smallest search window size (3 × 3), this task proves too difficult
for both the kernel and Bowsher methods. Larger window sizes yield poor performance
when compared to the ML EM algorithm for both ROI quantification metrics. This result is
expected as there is no information in the prior image to distinguish the lesion from its
surrounding tissue and a large search window results in more erroneous coupling between
pixels outside and inside the lesion. In this case, a smaller neighborhood size decreases the
rate of such occurrence. In practice, a user would need to tailor the neighborhood size and
number of chosen neighbors to select the desired level of anatomical influence. If a high
level of confidence in correspondence between anatomical and functional information exists,
then a larger neighborhood and number of neighbors will yield better performance. Figure 7
displays the best quantification performance for each algorithm. For the hot-lesion ROI
quantification, the kernel method is able to achieve a reduction in noise compared to the EM
algorithm. In the case of CRC vs. SD, the kernel method shows performance that closely
mirrors that of the ML EM algorithm, while the Bowsher method shows slightly higher
noise for CRC values between 0.7 and 0.9. For both methods of quantification, the use of all
neighbors in the Bowsher method yields the best performance. For this level of inclusivity,
the method gives no anatomically specific smoothing and is reduced to the standard
penalized likelihood reconstruction with a quadratic penalty.
Figure 8 shows sampled reconstructed images at a matched bias level of the lesion ROI. The
reconstructed hot lesions appear similar in all three images. The fact that the grey and white
matter in the Bowsher reconstruction appears noisier than the EM reconstruction is because
Hutchcroft et al.
Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
noise is more uniform spatially in penalized maximum likelihood reconstruction , whereas it is more proportional to the image intensity in EM-based methods
 . If we were to compare images at a matched bias level of a cold region, a
Bowsher reconstruction would appear less noisy than a EM reconstruction.
5. Clinical Patient Data
To further validate the kernel method, the algorithm was applied to a clinical patient data set
acquired on a Siemens BrainPET insert operating inside the Siemens MAGNETOM 3-T
MRI scanner. The PET insert consists of 32 detector cassettes, each consisting of 6 detector
blocks. Each individual detector block is composed of a 12×12 array of lutetium
oxyorthosilicate crystals (2.5×2.5×20 mm). Magnetic field insensitive avalanche
photodiodes are used for readout purposes. For data processing, raw PET data was rebinned
into the sinogram space using span 9 compression and a maximum ring difference of 67,
resulting in a total of 1,399 sinograms. The sinogram dimensions are 192 angular projections
and 256 radial bins. The tracer used was 18F-FDG.
The clinical patient data was reconstructed using both the kernel method and ML EM, with
300 iterations for each. Correction factors for randoms, scatters, attenuation and detector
normalization were estimated using the standard software provided by the manufacturer and
included in the forward model in both reconstructions . Figures 9 and 10 show coronal and axial images, respectively,
for the two methods at iteration 50.
For quantitative comparison, we used the volume segmentations derived by FreeSurfer to
define 3D ROI’s. The white matter region in the left hemisphere was eroded to serve as the
background region. Two regions of clinical interest, the hippocampus and the caudate, were
used as targets of interest. These regions are displayed in Figure 11. Only one transaxial
slice is shown for each region, but all the regions were defined in 3D.
The background noise was computed as the standard deviation of the white matter region,
normalized by its mean activity. Similarly, mean contrast was computed within the target
regions and normalized by the background mean. Quantification curves were generated by
plotting these metrics over iteration and are shown in Figure 12. In comparison, the kernel
method results in a 53% and 26% reduction in noise at a matched contrast level (95% of the
maximum contrast achieved by ML EM) compared to the ML EM algorithm, in the caudate
and hippocampus, respectively.
6. Conclusion
We proposed a kernel method to incorporate anatomical information in PET reconstruction.
The computer simulation study showed that the kernel method can achieve better ROI
quantification performance when compared to the ML EM algorithm, as well as the
Bowsher method that utilizes the same anatomical information. The kernel method was also
applied to real patient data acquired on a brain PET/MR scanner. The results showed that the
kernel method achieves a significant reduction in noise at matched contrast, when compared
to the ML EM algorithm.
Hutchcroft et al.
Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
While our work considers the case of features present in the PET data yet missing from the
anatomical prior, other types of signal mismatch will likely exist in certain imaging
scenarios. As an example, non-concurrent PET/MRI acquisition presents an increased
likelihood of boundary mismatch between the two datasets. Under these conditions, care
must be taken to maximize alignment between PET and MRI boundaries before applying an
anatomically informed reconstruction. This will be addressed in the future work.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments and suggestions. This work
is supported by the National Institutes of Health under grant number R01EB014894 and R01EB000194. KT Chen
is supported by Department of Defense (DoD) through the National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate
Fellowship (NDSEG) Program.