OBITUARY Wylie Vale
and an elusive stress
hormone p.542
HISTORY OF SCIENCE Descartes’
lost letter tracked using
Google p.540
EARTH SYSTEMS Past climates
give valuable clues to future
warming p.537
AVIAN INFLUENZA Shift expertise
to track mutations where
they emerge p.534
Raise standards for
preclinical cancer research
C. Glenn Begley and Lee M. Ellis propose how methods, publications and
incentives must change if patients are to benefit.
fforts over the past decade to
characterize the genetic alterations
in human cancers have led to a better
understanding of molecular drivers of this
complex set of diseases. Although we in the
cancer field hoped that this would lead to
more effective drugs, historically, our ability
to translate cancer research to clinical suc­
cess has been remarkably low1. Sadly, clinical
trials in oncology have the highest failure
rate compared with other therapeutic areas.
Given the high unmet need in oncology, it
is understandable that barriers to clinical
development may be lower than for other
disease areas, and a larger number of drugs
with suboptimal preclinical validation will
enter oncology trials. However, this low suc­
cess rate is not sustainable or acceptable, and
investigators must reassess their approach to
translating discovery research into greater
clinical success and impact.
Many factors are responsible for the high
failure rate, notwithstanding the inher­
ently difficult nature of this disease. Cer­
tainly, the limitations of preclinical tools
such as inadequate cancer-cell-line and
mouse models2 make it difficult for even
Many landmark findings in preclinical oncology research are not reproducible, in part because of inadequate cell lines and animal models.
S. GSCHMEISSNER/SPL
2 9 M A R C H 2 0 1 2 | V O L 4 8 3 | N A T U R E | 5 3 1
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
the best scientists working in optimal
conditions to make a discovery that will ulti­
mately have an impact in the clinic. Issues
related to clinical-trial design — such as
uncontrolled phase II studies, a reliance
on standard criteria for evaluating tumour
response and the challenges of selecting
patients prospectively — also play a signifi­
cant part in the dismal success rate3.
Unquestionably, a significant contribu­
tor to failure in oncology trials is the qual­
ity of published preclinical data. Drug
development relies heavily on the literature,
especially with regards to new targets and
biology. Moreover, clinical endpoints in can­
cer are defined mainly in terms of patient
survival, rather than by the intermediate
endpoints seen in other disciplines (for
example, cholesterol levels for statins). Thus,
it takes many years before the clinical appli­
cability of initial preclinical observations
is known. The results of preclinical studies
must therefore be very robust to withstand
the rigours and challenges of clinical trials,
stemming from the heterogeneity of both
tumours and patients.
CONFIRMING RESEARCH FINDINGS
The scientific community assumes that the
claims in a preclinical study can be taken at
face value — that although there might be
some errors in detail, the main message of the
paper can be relied on and the data will, for
the most part, stand the test of time. Unfor­
tunately, this is not always the case. Although
the issue of irreproducible data has been
discussed between scientists for decades, it
has recently received greater attention (see
go.nature.com/q7i2up) as the costs of drug
development have increased along with the
number of late-stage clinical-trial failures and
the demand for more effective therapies.
Over the past decade, before pursu­
ing a particular line of research, scientists
(including C.G.B.) in the haematology and
oncology department at the biotechnology
firm Amgen in Thousand Oaks, Califor­
nia, tried to confirm published findings
related to that work. Fifty-three papers were
deemed ‘landmark’ studies (see ‘Repro­
ducibility of research findings’). It was
acknowledged from the outset that some of
the data might not hold up, because papers
were deliberately selected that described
something completely new, such as fresh
approaches to targeting cancers or alterna­
tive clinical uses for existing therapeutics.
Nevertheless, scientific findings were con­
firmed in only 6 (11%) cases. Even knowing
the limitations of preclinical research, this
was a shocking result.
Of course, the validation attempts may
have failed because of technical differences
or difficulties, despite efforts to ensure that
this was not the case. Additional models
were also used in the validation, because
to drive a drug-development programme
it is essential that findings are sufficiently
robust and applicable beyond the one nar­
row experimental model that may have
been enough for publication. To address
these concerns, when findings could not be
reproduced, an attempt was made to contact
the original authors,
discuss the discrep­
ant findings, exchange
reagents and repeat
experiments under
the authors’ direction,
occasionally even in
the laboratory of the
original investigator.
These investigators
were all competent, well-meaning scientists
who truly wanted to make advances in can­
cer research.
In studies for which findings could be
reproduced, authors had paid close attention
to controls, reagents, investigator bias and
describing the complete data set. For results
that could not be reproduced, however, data
were not routinely analysed by investigators
blinded to the experimental versus control
groups. Investigators frequently presented
the results of one experiment, such as a sin­
gle Western-blot analysis. They sometimes
said they presented specific experiments that
supported their underlying hypothesis, but
that were not reflective of the entire data set.
There are no guidelines that require all data
sets to be reported in a paper; often, original
data are removed during the peer review and
publication process.
Unfortunately, Amgen’s findings are con­
sistent with those of others in industry. A
team at Bayer HealthCare in Germany last
year reported4 that only about 25% of pub­
lished preclinical studies could be validated
to the point at which projects could con­
tinue. Notably, published cancer research
represented 70% of the studies analysed in
that report, some of which might overlap
with the 53 papers examined at Amgen.
Some non-reproducible preclinical papers
had spawned an entire field, with hundreds
of secondary publications that expanded on
elements of the original observation, but
did not actually seek to confirm or falsify its
fundamental basis. More troubling, some of
the research has triggered a series of clinical
studies — suggesting that many patients had
subjected themselves to a trial of a regimen
or agent that probably wouldn’t work.
These results, although disturbing, do not
mean that the entire system is flawed. There
are many examples of outstanding research
that has been rapidly and reliably translated
into clinical benefit. In 2011, several new
cancer drugs were approved, built on robust
preclinical data. However, the inability of
industry and clinical trials to validate results
from the majority of publications on poten­
tial therapeutic targets suggests a general,
systemic problem. On speaking with many
investigators in academia and industry, we
found widespread recognition of this issue.
IMPROVING THE PRECLINICAL ENVIRONMENT
How can the robustness of published pre­
clinical cancer research be increased? Clearly
there are fundamental problems in both aca­
demia and industry in the way such research
is conducted and reported. Addressing these
systemic issues will require tremendous
commitment and a desire to change the
prevalent culture. Perhaps the most crucial
element for change is to acknowledge that
the bar for reproducibility in performing and
presenting preclinical studies must be raised.
An enduring challenge in cancer-drug
development lies in the erroneous use and
misinterpretation of preclinical data from
cell lines and animal models. The limita­
tions of preclinical cancer models have been
widely reviewed and are largely acknowl­
edged by the field. They include the use
of small numbers of poorly characterized
tumour cell lines that inadequately recapitu­
late human disease, an inability to capture
the human tumour environment, a poor
appreciation of pharmacokinetics and phar­
macodynamics, and the use of problematic
endpoints and testing strategies. In addition,
preclinical testing rarely includes predictive
biomarkers that, when advanced to clinical
trials, will help to distinguish those patients
who are likely to benefit from a drug.
Wide recognition of the limitations in
preclinical cancer studies means that busi­
ness as usual is no longer an option. Can­
cer researchers must be more rigorous in
their approach to preclinical studies. Given
the inherent difficulties of mimicking the
human micro-environment in preclini­
cal research, reviewers and editors should
demand greater thoroughness.
REPRODUCIBILITY OF RESEARCH FINDINGS
Preclinical research generates many secondary publications, even when results cannot be reproduced.
impact factor
Mean number of citations of
non-reproduced articles*
Mean number of citations of
reproduced articles
248 (range 3–800)
231 (range 82–519)
169 (range 6–1,909)
13 (range 3–24)
Results from ten-year retrospective analysis of experiments performed prospectively. The term ‘non-reproduced’ was
assigned on the basis of findings not being sufficiently robust to drive a drug-development programme.
*Source of citations: Google Scholar, May 2011.
“The scientific
the highest
standards of
quality, ethics
and rigour.”
5 3 2 | N A T U R E | V O L 4 8 3 | 2 9 M A R C H 2 0 1 2
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
As with clinical studies, preclinical inves­
tigators should be blinded to the control
and treatment arms, and use only rigor­
ously validated reagents. All experiments
should include and show appropriate posi­
tive and negative controls. Critical experi­
ments should be repeated, preferably by
different investigators in the same lab, and
the entire data set must be represented in
the final publication. For example, showing
data from tumour models in which a drug
is inactive, and may not completely fit an
original hypothesis, is just as important as
showing models in which the hypothesis was
confirmed.
Studies should not be published using a
single cell line or model, but should include
a number of well-characterized cancer cell
lines that are representative of the intended
patient population. Cancer researchers
must commit to making the difficult, timeconsuming and costly transition towards
new research tools, as well as adopting
more robust, predictive tumour models and
improved validation strategies. Similarly,
efforts to identify patient-selection bio­
markers should be mandatory at the outset
of drug development.
Ultimately, however, the responsibility
for design, analysis and presentation of
data rests with investigators, the laboratory
and the host institution. All are account­
able for poor experimental design, a lack
of robust supportive data or selective
data presentation. The scientific process
demands the highest standards of quality,
ethics and rigour.
BUILDING A STRONGER SYSTEM
What reasons underlie the publication of
erroneous, selective or irreproducible data?
The academic system and peer-review pro­
cess tolerates and perhaps even inadvertently
encourages such conduct5. To obtain fund­
ing, a job, promotion or tenure, research­
ers need a strong publication record, often
including a first-authored high-impact
publication. Journal editors, reviewers and
grant-review committees often look for a
scientific finding that is simple, clear and
complete — a ‘perfect’ story. It is therefore
tempting for investigators to submit selected
data sets for publication, or even to massage
data to fit the underlying hypothesis.
But there are no perfect stories in biology.
In fact, gaps in stories can provide opportu­
nities for further research — for example, a
treatment that may work in only some cell
lines may allow elucidation of markers of
sensitivity or resistance. Journals and grant
reviewers must allow for the presentation of
imperfect stories, and recognize and reward
reproducible results, so that scientists feel
less pressure to tell an impossibly perfect
story to advance their careers.
Although reviewers, editors and grantcommittee members share some responsi­
bility for flaws in the system, investigators
must be accountable for the data they gener­
ate, analyse and submit. We in the field must
remain focused on the purpose of cancer
research: to improve the lives of patients.
Success in our own careers should be a con­
sequence of outstanding research that has an
impact on patients.
The lack of rigour that currently exists
around generation and analysis of preclinical
data is reminiscent of the situation in clini­
cal research about 50 years ago. The changes
that have taken place in clinical-trials pro­
cesses over that time indicate that changes
in prevailing attitudes and philosophies can
occur (see ‘Improving the reliability of pre­
clinical cancer studies’).
Improving preclinical cancer research
to the point at which it is reproducible and
translatable to clinical-trial success will
be an extraordinarily difficult challenge.
However, it is important to remember that
patients are at the centre of all these efforts.
If we in the field forget this, it is easy to
lose our sense of focus, transparency and
urgency. Cancer researchers are funded
by community taxes and by the hard work
and philanthropic donations of advocates.
More importantly, patients rely on us to
embrace innovation, make advances and
deliver new therapies that will improve their
lives. Although hundreds of thousands of
research papers are published annually, too
few clinical successes have been produced
given the public investment of significant
financial resources. We need a system that
will facilitate a transparent discovery pro­
cess that frequently and consistently leads to
significant patient benefit. ■ SEE EDITORIAL P.509
C. Glenn Begley is a consultant and
former vice-president and global head of
Hematology and Oncology Research at
Amgen, Thousand Oaks, California 91359,
USA. Lee M. Ellis is at the University of
Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
e-mail: 
1. Hutchinson, L. & Kirk, R. Nature Rev. Clin. Oncol.
8, 189–190 .
2. Francia, G. & Kerbel, R. S. Nature Biotechnol. 28,
561–562 .
3. Rubin, E. H. & Gilliland, D. G. Nature Rev.
Clin. Oncol. 
nrclinonc.2012.22 .
4. Prinz, F., Schlange, T. & Asadullah, K. Nature Rev.
Drug Discov. 10, 712 .
5. Fanelli, D. PLoS ONE 5, e10271 .
We recommend the following steps to
change the culture of oncology research
and improve the relevance of translational
●There must be more opportunities to
present negative data. It should be the
expectation that negative preclinical data
will be presented at conferences and in
publications. Preclinical investigators
should be required to report all findings,
regardless of the outcome. To facilitate this,
funding agencies, reviewers and journal
editors must agree that negative data can
be just as informative as positive data.
●Journal editors must play an active part
in initiating a cultural change. There must
be mechanisms to report negative data that
are accessible through PubMed or other
search engines. There should be links to
journal articles in which investigators have
reported alternative findings to those in an
initial (sometimes considered landmark)
publication. One suggestion is to include
‘tags’ that report whether the key findings
of a seminal paper were confirmed.
●There should be transparent
opportunities for trainees, technicians and
colleagues to discuss and report troubling
or unethical behaviours without fearing
adverse consequences.
●Greater dialogue should be encouraged
between physicians, scientists, patient
advocates and patients. Scientists benefit
from learning about clinical reality.
Physicians need better knowledge of the
challenges and limitations of preclinical
studies. Both groups benefit from improved
understanding of patients’ concerns.
●Institutions and committees should give
more credit for teaching and mentoring:
relying solely on publications in top-tier
journals as the benchmark for promotion
or grant funding can be misleading,
and does not recognize the valuable
contributions of great mentors, educators
and administrators.
●Funding organizations must recognize
and embrace the need for new cancerresearch tools and assist in their
development, and in providing greater
community access to those tools. Examples
include support for establishing large
cancer cell-line collections with easy
investigator access (a simple, universal
material-transfer agreement); capabilities
for genetic characterization of newly
derived tumour cell lines and xenografts;
identification of patient selection
biomarkers; and generation of more robust,
predictive tumour models. C.G.B. and L.M.E.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Improving the reliability of preclinical cancer studies
2 9 M A R C H 2 0 1 2 | V O L 4 8 3 | N A T U R E | 5 3 3
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved