Basic Problems in Interaction Assessment
Sander Greenland
Department of Epidemiology, UCLA School of Public Health, Los Angeles, CA 90024-1772
This paper reviews problems with the definition and estimation of interactions in epidemiologic studies.
Methods for modeling interactions and
dose-response also are reviewed, and references to more detailed literature are provided. Concepts are illustrated in the context of evaluating the
joint effects of household radon exposure and environmental tobacco smoke. - Environ Health Perspect 101 (Suppl 4):59-66 .
Key Words: Epidemiologic methods, interaction, relative risk, risk assessment
Introduction
In any study of the health effects of exposure mixtures, it is natural to ask whether
or not observed effects are due to interactions of the mixtures' components; for
example, one may inquire whether or not
the effect of one component is modified by
the effect of another (effect modification).
Four major problems in addressing such a
question are:
a) The term "interaction"
has no single definition but requires precise definition in order to be studied; b)
even when it is precisely defined, there is
often little study power to detect interaction; c) interactions are inevitably confounded with dose-response and latency
relationships; and d) measurement errors,
even if independent and nondifferential
(random), may severely distort interaction
assessment. This paper reviews these four
problems and provides references to detailed
literature on the problems.
Definitions of
the central concepts are reviewed first in
order to provide a basis for precise problem statements.
Next, the problems are
described and illustrated in the context of
evaluating effects of household radon
exposure and environmental tobacco
smoke (passive smoking).
Finally, methods for dealing with the problems are
Issues concerning mechanisms of
interaction are not addressed here.
recently discussed by Thompson (1), epidemiologic data are limited inherently in
their ability to discriminate among such
mechanisms, because different mechanisms may predict identical patterns of
disease. This problem is a logical one and
persists even if the problems discussed
here are eliminated.
This manuscipt was prepared as part of the Environmental Epidemiogy Planning Project of the Health Effects
Institute, September 1990- September 1992.
would like to thank W. Douglas Thompson and
Irva Hertz-Picciotto for their helpful comments on this
Definitions
Main EfHec
and Causal Effects
A source of ambiguity in the study of interactions (and indeed in the study of any
effects) is the existence of multiple definitions of the term effect. Two major definitions exist.
Ironically, both seem to have
developed from the pioneering work on
experimental design conducted by Fisher,
Neyman, and others during the period
between the first and second world wars.
The first definition, the parametric definition, is by far the most common today:
An effect is a coefficient of a study exposure
in a generalized linear model for the outcome of interest.
[A generalized linear
model is simply a linear model for some
transformation of the expected outcome
(2).] As an example, consider a log-linear
(multiplicative) model for the rate R (in
cases per person-year) of lung cancer in a
cohort of married nonsmokers, given a certain exposure to spousal tobacco smoke x
and radon level z, within a stratum k
defined by some combination of age, sex,
and (possibly) other determinants of lung
logeRk= =ak + Px +yz
or, equivalently,
Rk, = exp(ak + Px+Yz).
Here, k = 1, 2, 3,... simply indexes the various strata created by subdividing the
cohort into subcohorts homogeneous on
age, sex, etc., and ak represents the log rate
among stratum-k subjects who have no
smoke or radon exposure (x = 0 and z = 0).
The coefficients
and y of x and z traditionally are called the main effects of smoke
and radon. This term suggests that
represent some sort of causal action ofsmoke
and radon on lung cancer rates.
interpretation could, however, be misleading. For example, the magnitude of
Environmental Health Perspectives Supplements
Volume 101, Supplement 4, December 1993
would be affected by a failure to stratify on
some cause of lung cancer that is distributed
differentially across levels of radon and
smoke exposure.
For example, if asbestos
exposure were associated with radon and
smoke exposure in this cohort but the stratification did not indude asbestos, one would
say that the causal effect of smoke and radon
was confounded with the asbestos effect, or
that there was confounding by asbestos in
the above model and in effect estimates
derived from the model.
The parametric definition arose in the
context of randomized experiments in agricultural research. Given randomization, the
definition is not very misleading. Ifsubjects
had been randomized to the various smoke
and radon levels, one would not expect smoke
or radon to be associated with any potential
confounder such as asbestos. Unfortunately,
a causal interpretation of P and y requires
(among other things) absence of confounding; given the difficulty ofassuring the latter
condition, references to P andy as main effects
should be regarded as traditional rather than
careful usage.
The difficulty with the parametric definition stems from the fact that model 1 describes
many different subcohorts ofthe same cohort
(one subcohort for every level of smoke and
radon in the total cohort). That is, model 1
is a descriptive model with no causal or biological content. It only describes how the rate
varies across subcohorts exposed to different
levels of smoke and radon; it does not
describe how any of the subcohorts would
respond if smoke or radon levels were altered
(unless, fortuitously, there is no confounding
within the analysis strata).
If, say, x is measured in "pack-decades smoked by spouse," a
coefficient of , = 0.182 only says that the rate
in subcohorts (strata) with one pack-decade
of spousal smoking is on average exp(0.182)
= 1.2 times higher than in subcohorts with
no spousal smoking; it does not say that this
elevated rate is caused by the environmental
tobacco smoke.
S. GREENLAND
The second major definition of effect,
the counterfactual definition, attempts to
deal explicitly with the preceding problem. A
causal effect is defined as a contrast ofthe outcome of a single subject under two different
exposure conditions. Consider a married man
in our cohort of nonsmokers. Suppose this
man would have contracted lung cancer at
age 85 ifhe had no smoke or radon exposure.
However, since his marriage at age 20, he has
been living with his wife who smokes a pack
a day in a house that produces 1 WLM/year
of radon-progeny exposure; these exposures
result in his developing lung cancer at age 55.
Thus, the causal effect ofhis acaual smoke-radon
exposure (relative to no exposure) on his incidence time is -30 years; that is, he contracted
lung cancer (became an incident case oflung
cancer) 30 years sooner than he would have in
the absence ofboth exposures. Note that the
condition ofno exposure is counterfactual: It
refers to what would have happened if, contrary to fact, the man had not been exposed to
either smoke or radon.
Counterfactual models for causal effects
extend at least as far back as the 1920s but
have only seen extensive development over
the last few decades (3). Modern development began in philosophy literature (4)
and in educational statistics (5); another
line of development was introduced into
epidemiology by Rothman (6).
ensuing decade, epidemiologists have
employed counterfactual models to define
biological interactions (7-9), confounding
(10), and intermediate effects (11,12).
The present discussion ignores the
problem of competing risks, that is, outcome events that remove a subject from
risk of the outcome of interest.
cancer, all such competing risks are deaths
from other causes, such as a car crash.
Proper conceptualization of competing
risks in a causal framework is somewhat
controversial (13,14). To avoid complexities in presentation, the remaining discussion assumes that within levels of radon,
smoking, age, sex, and other controlled
covariates, competing risks occur independently of lung cancer.
This assumption
allows one to interpret all lung cancer incidence times as expected times, given no
competing risks occur.
Nevertheless, in
any application, the assumption would
need to be evaluated critically against any
available background knowledge.
Statistical Interaction
In the theory surrounding generalized linear modeling, one commonly sees interactions defined as the coefficients of exposure
products in the model.
("Product" here
refers to multiplication, not the result of a
reaction.)
Continuing our
smoke-radon example, consider the model
Rk= exp(ak+
x+ Yz+ Bxz).
In the context of this model, the interaction
of smoke and radon usually refers to the
coefficient 8 of the product xz of smoke and
radon level; often, the entire product term
Sxz is called an interaction term. If model 1
is correct, it is said that no exposure interactions or nonlinearities are present on the
log-linear or multiplicative scale.
Such usage ofthe term interaction has been
criticized on several grounds (15-17). One
criticism is that such usage is algebraic, divorced
from any consideration of what constitutes
interaction or synergy on the biological level.
Another criticism is that such usage renders the
presence or absence of interaction entirely
dependent on the form ofthe statistical model
one chooses; for the same data, interaction may
appear to be present when using one model but
absent when using another.
To illustrate the last point, suppose the
lung cancer rates in our cohort follow the
no-interaction log-linear model with 0 =
0.182 per pack-decade spousal use and y =
0.693 per 100 working-level months (WLM)
radon-progeny exposure. Then the expected
rates in stratum k will be R1,0 = exp(ak)
among subjects with no exposure,
RkIo = exp(ack+ 0.182) = 1.2exP(cXk)
among subjects with one pack-decade of
spousal-smoke exposure but no radonprogeny exposure,
Rkol = exp(ak + 0.693) = 2.Oexp(ak)
among subjects with no spousal-smoke
exposure but 100 WLM radon-progeny
exposure, and
RkIl = exp(ak+ 0.182 + 0.693)
= 2.4exp(cXk)
among subjects with one pack-decade of
spousal-smoke exposure and 100 WLM
radon-progeny exposure. When expressing
these four rates in the format of a linear
excess-rate-ratio model
= (1 + P*x+ y*z+ 8*xz)exp(ak),
one finds that
Rklo= 1.2exp(ak) = (1 + P*)exp(ak),
Rkol = 2.Oexp(ak) = (1 + Y)exp(ak),
Rkll = 2.4exp((ak)
= (1 + ,B* + y* +
*)exp(ak).
The rate among the unexposed, exp(ak), cancels out of these three equations; this results in
three simple linear equations with solutions [*
= 0.2, Y* = 1.0, and &* = 1.2. In other words,
although no interaction is present when the
rates are expressed in a log-linear model (i.e., 8
= 0), interaction is present when the rate ratios
are expressed in a linear model (i.e., &*. 0).
Causal Interactions
A different concept of interaction arises
under the counterfactual model of effects.
Consider again the man who developed
lung cancer at age 55 after living 35 years
with a wife who smoked a pack a day, in a
house that produced 1 WLM/year of radonprogeny exposure.
It was assumed that this
man would have survived to develop lung
cancer at age 85 only if all smoke partides
and radon progeny in his household air had
been removed (e.g., filtered) from the air he
Now ask whether or not the lung tumor
he developed (at age 55) would have
occurred later (if at all) if all the smoke particles but none of the radon progeny had
been removed from the air. If the answer is
yes, one says that spousal smoke advanced
the incidence time of the subject's lung cancer.
Also ask whether or not the tumor
would have occurred later (if at all) if none
of the smoke particles but all the radon
progeny had been removed. If the answer to
this question is yes, one may say that the
radon advanced the incidence time.
answer to both questions is yes, so that both
exposures contributed to the advance in
incidence time, one may say that the factors
exhibited cooperative interaction (causal
coaction, or synergism) in advancing the
subject's incidence time.
To extend the example, suppose the subject would have developed lung cancer at age
70 if only the smoke particles had been
removed and at age 65 if only the radon
progeny had been removed. The advance in
incidence time from 65 in the presence of
smoke alone to age 55 in the presence ofboth
exposures represents a portion of the total
advance (of 30 years) that required the presence of both exposures to occur. Thus, the
portion of the advance from 65 to 55 may be
called the interaction effect or coaction of the
two exposures.
Coaction is a special case of a more
general concept of causal interaction or
interdependence of causal effects, which
Environmental Health Perspectives Supplements
Volume 101, Supplement 4, December 1993
BASIC PROBLEMS IN INTERACTIONASSESSMENT
formalizes (in the counterfactual framework)
concepts such as synergy, antagonism, and
competitive action. Greenland and Poole (9)
review this counterfactual theory and derive
its connection to the sufficient-component
causal theory of Rothman. Under the counterfactual theory, an instance of synergism
between two factors is defined as an instance
of disease in an individual that would not
have occurred (by a specified time) if either
or both factors had been absent. The connection to the above example is that lung
cancer would not have occurred by age 55 if
either or both factors (35 pack-years of
spousal smoke exposure and 35 WLM of
radon exposure) had been absent.
Note that the preceding counterfactual
concept ofsynergism does not correspond to
mechanism-based concepts of interaction [for
example, see (1)]. Certain mechanisms do,
however, predict response patterns consistent
with this concept when interaction is present.
Connections among Definitions
ofEffects and Interaction
The definition of coaction just given bears
no resemblance to the statistical definition of
interaction; in particular, the concept of
coaction is connected only indirectly to the
statistical model for the rates.
In terms of
incidence time, the definition of coaction
conflicts with the common definition of synergy as a total effect greater than the sum of
the separate effects:
In the example, the
advance of lung-cancer time when both
exposures are present (30 years) is less than
the sum of the advance when only radon is
present (85 - 70 = 15 years) and the advance
when only smoke is present (85 - 65 = 20
Nevertheless, there is a connection
among these concepts when the problem is
reformulated in terms ofincidence proportions
(i.e., average risks ofdisease).
As an illustration of this connection,
consider the subcohort of male nonsmokers
whose exposure histories (up to the time
they contract lung cancer) are, say, x = 1
pack/day spousal cigarette use and z = 1
WLM/year radon-progeny exposure, starting at age 20. Let Rxz(t) be the actual proportion of this subcohort contracting lung
cancer by age t. Define the three counterfactual proportions R,o(t) = proportion of
the subcohort contracting lung cancer by
age t if only the radon progeny had been
removed from the environment; Roz(t) =
proportion of the subcohort contracting
lung cancer by age t if only the tobacco
smoke had been removed; and Roo(t) = proportion of the subcohort contracting lung
cancer by age t if both the radon progeny
and the smoke had been removed.
the four proportions just defined, one can
compute two average-risk differences as
measures of the effects radon and smoke
would have had in the absence of the other,
RDxo(t) = Rxo(t) - Roo(t) (radon)
RDoz(t) = Roz(t) - R&o(t) (smoke)
which are entirely counterfactual, and a difference that measures their actual combined effect,
RDxz(t) = Rxz(t) - R0o(t).
It can be shown that superadditivity of the
differences,
RDXZ(t) > RDxo(t) + RDoz(t)
can occur only if, in some subjects, radon
and smoke causally interact in some of the
cohort members; that is, only if coaction
has occurred in some members (8,9).
Note, however, that the converse is not
Coaction may take place without
superadditivity occurring (8,9).
It follows that an upper one-sided test
of the additivity condition
RDxz(t) = RDxo(t) + RDoz(t)
may be regarded as a test for the occurrence
of coaction.
Various forms of this conclusion, and tests of additivity (model 14) as a
test for synergism, can be found in the pharmacology literature as far back as the 1920s
(18). The idea did not seem to attract notice
in the epidemiologic literature until the
1970s; see Rothman (15), Koopman (7),
and Miettinen (8) for some early formulations.
Inequality 13 conforms to the common notion of synergy as a combined effect
exceeding the sum of separate effects; note,
however, that the effect referred to here is the
effect of the exposures on an entire, homogeneously exposed subcohort. In contrast, the
effect referred to in the definition of coaction
refers to a single subject.
Inequality 13 also conforms to the definition of statistical interaction if one
adopts an additive model for the average
risks. To see this, define
a(t) = Roo(t),
= RDxO(t),y(zt) = RDoz(t),
6(x;z,t) = [RD,.(t) - RD,o(t) - RD0z(t)].
Then, with a little algebra, we see that
inequality 13 implies
Rx,(t) = a(t) + P(x,t) + y(z,t) + 3(x,Z;t)
6(x,z,t)>0.
Thus, as before, superadditivity of
effects (in particular, an additive-risk model
with two causal exposures and a positive
product term) implies the presence of
interaction.
Although the counterfactual
and statistical definitions do not otherwise
coincide, the superadditive case is, fortunately, the one of primary concern in the
study of environmental and occupational
hazards, for it is this case that is usually of
most public-health concern (16,17).
The counterfactual proportions R,o(t),
Ro_(t), and Roo(t) used for empirical testing
of additivity would ordinarily be estimated
from comparison groups that are subject to
the various combinations of exposure.
example, Roo(t) would be estimated from a
subcohort with no (or negligible) smoke and
radon exposure.
This estimate must be
adjusted for possible confounding.
In observational epidemiology, adequate
adjustment may be difficult or impossible to
achieve. There are usually too few subjects
to allow simultaneous stratification on all
important adjustment variables (confounders)
and detailed comparison of exposure groups
(although this problem generally is dealt
with by using statistical models to estimate
the average risks). More intractably, some
important confounders may be impractical
to measure accurately or to measure at all,
and thus may remain uncontrolled.
Problems arising from confounder mismeasurement are well recognized in the epidemiologic literature, however (19-21),
and will not be a point of focus here.
Instead, later sections will discuss the implications of exposure measurement problems
for the assessment of interaction.
Some Problems in Interaction
Assessment
Ile Power and Precision Problem
In epidemiologic settings, the power to detect
statistical interactions is typically an order of
magnitude less than the power to detect main
effects; see Greenland (22) and Breslow and
Day (23) for examples.
Similarly, the variance of the interaction estimate will be an
order of magnitude greater than the variance
of the main-effects estimate under a no-interaction model.
Environmental Health Perspectives Supplements
Volume 101, Supplement 4, December 1993
S. GREENLAND
An intuition for these results may be
obtained by comparing variance formulas for
estimates of main effect and interaction when
both exposures x and z are dichotomous with
levels 1 (exposed) and 0 (unexposed). Here
we consider the basic linear-risk model
Rk=ak +Px +'yx +Sxz
which may be viewed as a special case of
If there is only one stratum and
( is assumed to be zero (no interaction), the
usual estimates of ,B will have a variance
approximately equal to VI V0/(Vl + V0)
where VI and V0 are the variances of the
estimates of Rkll - Rkol and Rklo - Rkoo.
In contrast, the usual estimates of 8 will
have a variance equal to VI + V0. The ratio
of the latter variance to the first is (V1 +
VO)2/ V1 V0, which equals 4 if V1 = V0 and
will be larger if V1 . V0. Thus, in this simple case, the precision of the interaction estimate will be no more than a quarter that of
the usual main-effect estimate. An identical result is obtained if one considers a loglinear rate model such as model 1 (23).
Situations involving continuous exposure measurements are considerably more
complex, but nevertheless reveal that considerably larger study sizes are needed to
study interactions than are required to
detect effects (24). We will return to this
issue in the discussion of designs for the
study of interactions.
Confounding ofIntaction
and Dose-Response
In common epidemiologic usage, dose-response
refers to the changes in risk produced by
changes in a single exposure, whereas interaction refers to changes in risk produced by two
or more exposures. Thomas (25) has pointed
out that a major problem in the assessment of
both dose-response and interaction is their
tendency to confound one another, as well as
their tendency to confound and be confounded with latency estimates. For example,
consider the full quadratic generalization of
model 18 to continuous exposures,
Rk= ak+ Px+ P2x2 +7y,z+y2z2 + Sxz.
In practice, x and z may be centered (that is,
have their sample means subtracted off their
observed values) to minimize correlation
among the coefficient estimates. Even if this
dose-response terms x2 and z2 will usually be
highly correlated with the interaction (product) term xz; consequently, if P2 and 72 are
nonzero, x2 and Z2 will act as confounders for
xr, so that a biased estimate of 6 will result if
x2or z2 is omitted from the model.
symmetric fashion, omission of xz will bias
the P2 and 2 estimates if8 is nonzero.
More generally, failure to adequately
model dose-response and latency can lead to
bias in interaction estimates and vice-versa.
Perhaps a more illuminating way to view this
problem is to recognize that dose-response,
latency, and interaction assessment are actually facets ofa single task, namely assessment
of the shape of the joint time-dependent
dose-response surface relating incidence to
both exposures.
For example, model 19
specifies that this surface is quadratic; without specific prior knowledge about combined smoke and radon effects, there would
be no basis for omitting any term from the
model (unless the data clearly indicated a
term was negligible).
Of course, model 19 is fairly restrictive as
is its log-linear analogue (obtained by replacing R., with log,Rxz), and does not encompass the possibility oftransforming xand zto
improve model accuracy and to model latency. Some alternative modeling approaches
will be discussed below. The present point is
that dose-response and interaction should be
viewed in a unified fashion if one wishes to
avoid higher-order confounding.
Measurement Errors
In ordinary language, a measurement error
is simply the act of recording an incorrect
value for some variable on some subject.
Statistical theory is concerned with the distribution of these errors in the study population and the relationship between true
and measured values.
For example, one
may ask a number of questions involving
the measured and true values for environmental tobacco smoke, such as: a) What is
the distribution of true values x among
subjects with measured values xm?
What is the distribution of measured values
Xm among subjects with true values x?
Do the errors in the measured values xm
vary systematically across levels of the true
values x of smoke?
(If not, the smoke
errors are said to be additively homogeneous.) d) Do the errors in the measured
values xm vary systematically across levels of
other variables? (If so, the errors are said to
be differential; if not, the errors are said to
be nondifferential.)
e) Are the errors in the
measured values xm of smoke associated with
the errors in the measured values xm of
radon? (Ifnot, the errors in the two variables
are said to be independent ofeach other.)
An analogous list can be made for the
errors in measuring lung cancer incidence
Traditionally, however, disease outcomes have been treated as dichotomies
(diseased/not diseased), and errors in disease
measurement have been treated as diagnostic errors, which are evaluated in terms of
sensitivity (probability of true positive
among cases) and specificity (probability of
true negative among noncases).
The above listing does not exhaust the
possibilities, and hence it may be clear that
the topic of measurement error, and all its
possible effects, can become exceedingly
It should not be surprising then
that most studies on the topic are limited
in scope and usually make several simplifying assumptions.
Most commonly, errors
are assumed to be independent and nondifferential, so that the answers to questions d
and e and the analogous questions for disease are negative.
One rationale for such
an assumption in methodologic studies is
that if some bias arises from well-behaved
(independent nondifferential) errors, the
same sort of bias or worse should be
expected if the errors are not well behaved.
Although this rationale is not valid universally (26), investigators often attempt to
ensure that these errors will be independent
and nondifferential, and so such errors are
worth studying in detail.
Nevertheless, it should be recognized
that optimistic conclusions based on assuming independent nondifferential errors cannot be extended to dependent or differential
errors, and that the errors actually occurring
in a study can become differential under
ordinary circumstances.
Consider, for
example, exposure measurements over time.
Such measurements often are based on historical records or, worse, subject memory.
In such situations, exposure measurements
for the more distant past may be less accurate than measurements for more recent
exposure; if so, accuracy of cumulative
exposure measurement will vary with any
variable correlated with calendar time, such
as another exposure.
Even if the intrinsic
accuracy of the exposure measurements do
not vary over time, the degree of bias produced by measurement errors may still vary
over time (27). Similar problems will arise
if accuracy of outcome measurement (e.g.,
disease diagnosis) varies over time.
The Impact ofMeasurement Errors
The impact of measurement errors on
main-effect estimates has been studied
extensively, especially for situations involving independent nondifferential error.
One well-known result is that independent
nondifferential errors in the classification of
a dichotomous exposure and covariate cannot produce bias away from the null value
Environmental Health Perspectives Supplements
Volume 101, Supplement 4, December 1993
BASIC PROBLEMS IN INTERACTiON ASSESSMENT
of the exposure effect; for example, any bias
produced by such error in the estimate of j
in model 1 will be towards zero.
result, while useful, is often stated without
mention of the assumptions of independent
errors and dichotomous exposure.
Unfortunately, violations of either
assumption can result in bias away from the
null; Dosemeci et al. (28) show that independent nondifferential classification error
can produce bias away from the null if the
exposure has as few as three levels.
clear, however, how often such bias occurs
in practice, and there are a number of special error models under which the estimated
coefficients in linear or log-linear models
can only be biased towards the null.
example, this is so under the classical model,
in which the measured value xm is given by
xm = x + ex, where x is the true value, £x is
the x error, and x and £x are normally distributed with £,x independent of all other
variables (including x)-that is, the error is
independent, additively homogeneous, nondifferential, and normal. Although these
conditions are restrictive, the result extends
to various cases involving nonnormal exposures and errors. Extension to multiplicative
errors, with xm = x * £x and x and £x stricty
positive, follows by using log(x.) = log(x,) +
log(ex) in place of xm as the regressor variable.
These and other results for special
models are reviewed by Armstrong (29).
Lubin et al. (25) specifically consider models for radon measurement to evaluate the
impact of measurement errors in studies of
tobacco smoke, radon, and lung cancer.
The impact of measurement errors on
interaction estimates has been studied less
thoroughly.
Independent nondifferential
classification errors can produce spurious
appearances of interaction and can mask
true interactions, depending on other features of situation (19). More generally, the
interaction coefficient 6 in models 17 and
18 may be biased towards or away from the
null by independent nondifferential errors
in the study covariates (regressors); errors in
disease classification may further aggravate
such biases, thus distorting the entire shape
of the dose-response surface. These results
easily extend to situations involving arbitrary
polytomous or continuous exposures
(Appendix).
Nevertheless, there are a number of special cases in which nondifferential
independent error will not affect the validity
of tests for interaction, and may rarely or
never produce bias away from the null; for
example, if the true values were distributed
joindy and normally and if the errors were
independent, additively homogeneous, nondifferential, and normal (that is, if xm = x +
£x and Zm = z + ez, where x, z are bivariate
normal and the errors £, ez are normal and
independent of x, z, and each other), or if
the errors were independent, nondifferential, and x and z were not associated with
each other (Appendix).
The distortion ofdose-response and interaction estimates produced by measurement
error depends heavily on the particulars of
the study distribution ofexposures and errors.
Thus, rather than rely on any general (and
possibly misleading) conclusions, it may be
best to evaluate the effects of measurement
error on a study-specific basis, using methods of the sort discussed in the next section.
In the particular case ofenvironmental tobacco
smoke and radon, measurement errors may
render the study ofinteractions infeasible due
to attenuated power (24); a similar conclusion may apply to most other epidemiologic
studies of environmental exposures.
Coping with the Problems
Designs for Assessing Intracons
and Dose-Response
In studies involving primary subject selection,
power for detection of interactions can be
increased by using special sampling plans.
Unfortunately, a major obstade in employing
such designs is that they require a priori specification of a number of parameters that may
be only vaguely known, if at all. For cohort
studies, one must be able to specifyj likely values for the intercept and main-effect parameters (e.g., a, P, y in model 18) in the model
of interest, as well as a value for the interaction parameter (6) for which one wishes to
maximize power or precLsion. For case-control studies, the intercept need not be specified, but one must have some idea of the
exposure distributions in the population
serving as the source ofcases and controls.
A considerable amount of literature exists
for choosing optimal designs, at least in the
cohort framework; Seber and Wlld (30) provide references to the linear-model literature
and also review design methods for nonlinear
models. Although this literature is highly
technical, a few general condusions can be
drawn, especially in the special case of studying departures from risk or rate additivity.
The optimal design for detecting departures from additivity will not correspond to
the optimal design for detecting departures
from linearity of the dose-response curve
for each exposure. Nor will either of these
designs correspond to the optimal design
for detecting main effects; however, the
presence of main effects will hopefully have
been established before embarking on a
specialized study of interactions.
Because one will have to simultaneously
consider interaction and dose-response, as
explained earlier, it may be best to select
subjects to maximize precision of the estimated dose-response surface.
approach, interaction represents but one of
several potentially important departures
from linearity of the joint dose-response
surface relating smoke (x) and radon (z) to
For example, consider the quadraticrisk model given in model 19. A good
design for studying such a model would
select subjects to enhance the precision of
estimates for 02 and y2 as well as 6.
More generally, one would want to
allow for response surfaces other than quadratic, including perhaps unanticipated
shapes. One simple cohort design to help
achieve this end would try and insure that
subjects are distributed evenly across the
joint range of smoke and radon levels (that
is, across the combinations ofx and z).
The case-control situation is not addressed
as easily, for it is the case-control ratio rather
than the joint exposure distribution that is
controlled by the investigator.
Nevertheless,
if one is willing to sacrifice the ability to estimate the main effect ofone of the exposures,
one also may manipulate the marginal distribution of that exposure by, for example,
case-control matching; see Smith and Day
(31) and Thomas and Greenland (32) for
some elementary studies of the impact of
matching on interaction assessment in the
context of log-linear interactions. For interaction assessment, one can expect that certain highly variable matching ratios will
offer more precision than fixed ratios:
Relatively few controls per case would be
needed in strata with many cases, but relatively many controls per case would be
needed in strata with few cases.
If one already knows the joint distribution
ofdisease and one ofthe exposures in the source
population, it may be most efficient to employ a
two-stage design rather than a conventional
matched design; see Cain and Breslow (33) for
further discLssion ofthis point.
Moeng Interations
and Dose-Response
The confounding of interactions and
dose-response can be overcome if one has
accurate information on the values of the
variables (here, smoke and radon) over a
reasonably broad range of combinations of
the variables.
Even with accurate and
broad-ranging measurements, however,
one must take care to employ a model form
flexible enough to accurately approximate
the true dose-response surface.
the shape of the true surface usually is
Environmental Health Perspectives Supplements
Volume 101, Supplement 4, December 1993
S. GREENLAND
unknown (and is in fact what is under
study), a safe strategy would be to employ
as flexible a model form as practical.
The most flexible approaches available
are nonparametric regression methods,
such as bivariate smoothers; for examples,
see Hastie and Tibsiirani (34). Unfortunately,
these methods are not yet implemented
widely in software, are impractical for handling more than a few regressors, and can
require fairly large samples for reasonable
performance. An easier approach, with
somewhat less flexibilty, is generalized
additive modeling (34).
As an example,
the generalized-additive analogue of model
1 would be
log1(R,.) = ak + (x) + Y(z),
where 5(x) and y(x) are now unspecified
functions of x and z that will be estimated
from the data. Unlike model 1, which constrains dose-response to be log linear, model
20 allows the dose-response for smoke and
radon to be any shape at all. Both models 1
and 20 do, however, imply that the shape for
the smoke dose-response does not change
across levels of radon or covariates, and the
shape for the radon dose-response does not
change across levels ofsmoke or covariates;
this set of constraints is called the no-additive-interaction or parallelism condition.
Model 20 is easily fit using the GAIM software package (35). To generalize model 20
to allow for departures from additivity, one
may add a product-term function to obtain
log,(Rxz) = ak
3(x) + Y(z) + 6(xz).
This is one ofseveral possible generalized-additive analogues of model 1. Unlike model 20,
it does not constrain the dose-response surface
to contain parallel dose-response curves.
All the models given so far imply that
the shape of the dose-response surface does
not change across the covariate strata (i.e.,
there is no additive interaction with covariates). To get around this restriction, one
could model the covariate effects in detail
and add interaction terms between the
covariates and exposures to the model.
Among the drawbacks of this strategy is that
the resulting model may have too many
terms for the fitting procedure to work.
Even if the model can be fit, the individual
terms may be estimated with little accuracy.
The individual terms also may be difficult to
interpret, although this need not be a problem if one focuses on graphs of the response
surfaces instead ofon model terms.
Further extensions of the above models
may be obtained by considering other
transformations of the outcome measure, as
in the additive logit model in which
logitRk,z = ak + (x) + Y(z),
where logit R = log,[RI(1-R)]. One also
may employ incidence times or rates in place
of risks as the outcome measure in the above
models. The latter models often fit better
and may even obviate the need for product
terms in the model. They also allow for
straightforward incorporation of time-dependent exposures in the model, an obvious
advantage in longitudinal studies ofexposures
such as smoke and radon. Nevertheless, tests
of the no-coaction hypothesis stil correspond
to testing the fit of an additive-risk model
(such as model 17 or 18) (36).
Unfortunately, additive-risk models cannot be fit to case-control data unless one has
sufficient external information to reconstruct
the population risks from the data.
unmatched studies, all one needs is an estimate of the crude disease rate in the source
population of cases and controls or knowledge of the case and control sample fractions.
For matched studies, one must have the
crude rates or sampling fractions within levels
of the matching factors. Given this information, however, one may fit the same variety of
model forms as used for cohort data (37).
For further discussions of modeling
issues and techniques see Breslow and Day
(23), McCullagh and Nelder (2), and
Hastie and Tibshirani (34). Less technical
overviews of modeling are given by
Greenland (38) and Checkoway et al. (39).
Evaluating and Correting for
Measurement Error
The best means ofcoping with measurement
error is, of course, not to have it. Because
this ideal is not attainable in typical environmental and occupational studies, evaluation
of measurement error and its effects is an
essential component of any informative
study. Most evaluations are limited to narrative review offactors influencing errors and
the implications for bias; most commonly,
these evaluations comprise arguments that
exposure-measurement errors were independent and nondifferential and hence produced only bias towards the null. As shown
earlier, however, such arguments are of little
use in interaction assessment, because independent, nondifferential misclassification
may bias interaction terms in any direction.
Much more can be done if data are
available about the accuracy of the exposure and covariate measurements in the
In the best situation a validation
substudy is conducted in which exposure is
remeasured in a subsample of subjects
using criterion methods, that is, methods
more accurate than the general methods
applied to all subjects. The association of
the criterion and general measurements, as
estimated from the validation substudy,
may then be used to correct coefficient estimates obtained from the full study cohort.
Correction methods also may be applied if
the criterion-general measurement association is estimated from data external to the
study (although, in the latter case, one
must assume that this association is the
same in both the study and the external
data). There is now an extraordinary variety of validation-based correction methods
available (for example 40-42).
If a criterion measurement is unavailable, it still may be possible to obtain a
more limited correction of coefficient estimates using a reliability substudy in which
replications of the general measurement are
obtained on a subsample of subjects.
Again, there is a variety of reliability-based
correction methods (e.g., ref. 43).
If neither validation data nor reliability
data are available, but some educated
guesses can be made about the distributions of exposure and covariate errors, one
may conduct a sensitivity analysis of the
study results.
In such an analysis, various
hypothesized error distributions are used to
correct the study results; one thus sees how
sensitive estimates are to assumptions
about the error distribution.
This analysis
is conducted easily under various simplifying assumptions (29).
If the study variables are discrete, matrix formulas for correcting contingency-table results can be
applied (40, Appendix), and these are programmed easily in matrix languages such as
GAUSS, SC, S-PLUS, and SAS IML.
Conclusions
Given the difficulties inherent in attempting
to study interactions with epidemiologic data,
design and analysis is best focused on accurate estimation of the entire dose-response
surface relating incidence to covariates, rather
than on isolated aspects of this surface, such
as statistical interaction. One may, ofcourse,
test the departure of the data from surfaces
predicted by various causal models, such as
the no-coaction model (7,9) or the simple
independent-action model (44), but the power
and validity ofthese tests will be nearly optimal under the same conditions that insure
accuracy of dose-response estimation, such
as well-balanced exposure distributions and
accurate exposure measurement.
Flexible modeling and, where possible,
quantitative evaluation of measurement error
Environmental Health Perspectives Supplements
Volume 101, Supplement 4, December 1993
BASIC PROBLEMS IN INTERACTION ASSESSMENT
will help achieve the most accurate assessment of interaction possible with available
data. Nevertheless, because of limitations of
power and because of distortions produced
by measurement error, one should be cautious about the potential of environmental
epidemiology for interaction assessment.
For simplicity, suppose we have just one stratum, and let P(x,y xm,zm) be the probability that a subject with measured smoke and
radon exposures xm and Zm has true levels x
and z; note that
4,,P(x,y x.,z.) = 1 (here,
X,. indicates the sum over all possible values
ofx and z). Let
.i(Xm,Zm.))-X
xP(x,y Xm,Zm,)
z (Xm,Zm)-X
zP(x,y xmz,m) 
be the means ofthe true smoke and radon levels
among subjects with measured levels xm and zm;
let R.,z be the average risk among subjects with
true levels xand z; and suppose Rxz follows the
no-interaction linear-risk model (model 18 with
6 = 0). Then the average risk among subjects
with measured levels xm and zm will be
R (Xm,Zm ) = Xz P (x,Z I Xm,Zm)R.
= ,z P(X,ZI Xm,Z.) (a + Px + 'yz)
= a* 1 + Px,=xP(x,zI Xm,Zm)
zP (x,z Xm,Zm.)
- a + PR(Xm,Zm) + YZ(XmZm )-
Now let RD(xm,zm) = R(Xm,Zm) - R(O,O)
be the risk difference between subjects with
measured levels xm,zm and subjects measured
as having no exposure. Then
RD (xm,Zm)
- a + PR(Xm,Zm) + 7Y(Xm,Zm)
- [a + PR(O,O) + y2(O,O)]
- t[4(Xm,Zm) - R(o,o)]
+ 7[Y(xm,Zm)] - z(O,O)];
in contrast, for subjects measured as
exposed to only one of the two exposures,
RD (xm,O) + RD (O,Zm)
= 1[R(Xm,O) - R(o,o)]
+ YL[(Xm,O) -i(O,O)]
+ 3[L(O,zm) - R(o,o)]
+ Y[I(O,Zm) - 2(0,0)]
= P[3(Xm,O) + x(O,zm) - 2R(0,0)]
+ Y[L(Xm,O) + 2(0,Zm) - 22(0,0)].
Thus, except in certain special cases,
RD(xm,zm) . RD(X.,O) + RD(O,Zm).
that is, the risks based on the measured
exposures need not be additive, and this is
so even if the measurement error is independent and nondifferential and the risks
based on the true exposures are additive.
Additivity will be preserved (i.e., 25
will equal 26 under model 18 with 6 = 0) if
the mean true levels x and z depend on the
measured levels xm and Zm in an additive
fashion, for then
R(Xm,Zm) - R(0,0)
= x(Xm,O) + R(O,zm) - 2R(0,0)
- Z(Xm,O) + Z(0,Zm) - 22(0,0)
This would occur, for example, if the
errors were independent nondifferential and
x and z were unassociated, or if x and z were
bivariate normal and their respective errors
were independent normal with homogeneous variance.
Additivity also will be preserved under "Berkson error" [see Armstrong
(29) for discussion of Berkson error in the
context ofmain-effect estimates].