Temporal reasoning with medical data - A review with emphasis
on medical natural language processing
Li Zhou, BMed, MS, George Hripcsak, MD, MS
Department of Biomedical Informatics, Columbia University, New York, NY
Temporal information is crucial in electronic medical records and biomedical information systems.
Processing temporal information in medical narrative data is a very challenging area. It lies at the
intersection of temporal representation and reasoning (TRR) in artificial intelligence and medical
natural language processing (MLP). Some fundamental concepts and important issues in relation
to TRR have previously been discussed, mainly in the context of processing structured data in
biomedical informatics; however, it is important that these concepts be reexamined in the context
of processing narrative data using MLP. Theoretical and methodological TRR studies in
biomedical informatics can be classified into three main categories: category 1 applies theories and
models from temporal reasoning in AI; category 2 defines frameworks that meet needs from
clinical applications; category 3 resolves issues such as temporal granularity and uncertainty.
Currently, most MLP systems are not designed with a formal representation of time, and their
ability to reason about temporal relations among medical events is limited. Previous work in
processing time with clinical narrative data includes processing time in clinical reports, modeling
textual temporal expressions in clinical databases, processing time in clinical guidelines, and
building time standards for data exchange and integration.
In addition to common problems in MLP, there are challenges specific to TRR in medical text,
which occur at each level of linguistic structure and analysis. Despite advances in temporal
reasoning in biomedical informatics, processing time in medical text deserves more attention.
Besides the need for more research in temporal granularity, fuzzy time, temporal contradiction,
intermittent events and uncertainty, broad areas for future research include enhancing functions of
current MLP systems on processing temporal information, incorporating medical knowledge into
temporal reasoning systems, resolving coreference, integrating narrative data with structured data
and evaluating these systems.
temporal representation; temporal reasoning; natural language processing; medical narrative data
Correspondence: Li Zhou, BMed, MS, Department of Biomedical Informatics, Columbia University, 622 West 168th Street, VC5,
New York, NY 10032, Voice: 212-305-9801, Fax: 212-342-1647, .
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
 
J Biomed Inform. 2007 April ; 40(2): 183–202. doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2006.12.009.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
1. Introduction
Temporal information is crucial in electronic medical records (EMR) and biomedical
information systems . Healthcare providers normally record the progress of a disease or
a hospital course chronologically in text, and procedures and laboratory tests are stored in
databases with time-stamps. The EMR is only significant in a certain temporal context.
Retrieval of information often relates to time; e.g. “what happened after that operation?” As
a fundamental entity, time is intrinsically connected with many medical reasoning tasks.
Automatically reasoning about temporal information can help us understand the dynamics of
medical phenomena and may potentially improve the quality of patient care.
Temporal information processing in medicine is a task that draws from many fields,
including philosophy, artificial intelligence (AI), database management, computational
linguistics, and biomedical informatics. During the last two decades, researchers with
different backgrounds, perspectives and objectives have attempted to bring together the
fundamental methodologies and techniques from these disciplines to conduct research in this
challenging area. Several review articles present detailed summarization and analysis of this
area . However, research efforts in temporal reasoning in biomedical informatics are
predominantly in processing structured data , which is the focus of most of these
previous review articles. Recently, Augusto argued that in the medical domain, “Natural
Language turns into a very fertile area of research where temporal issues are very
important.”
Nowadays, the most significant impact of computer technologies in medicine is in
processing structured data . In general, structured data is information presented in a
standard, predictable form (e.g. defined data types and operations) that is easily processable
by a machine. By contrast, unstructured data is information that does not have a data
structure. Examples include free text, audio and video. The term “natural language” is used
to distinguish languages for human general-purpose communication from computer
languages (e.g. a programming language or a formal representation). In the medical domain,
natural language commonly appears in patient charts, scientific literature, technical and
administrative reports, emails, surveys, presentations, etc . Natural language processing
refers to any system that manipulates text or speech . In this paper we focus on medical
text processing along with associated applications, such as information extraction and
retrieval, and we also limit our scope to the English language.
Processing time in medical text is a very challenging area, which lies at the intersection of
temporal representation and reasoning (TRR) in AI and medical natural language processing
(MLP). In addition to the general difficulties in TRR and MLP, there are many other critical
issues that need to be deeply studied in order to handle such information. In natural
language, times related to an event are not always stated explicitly. Interpreting this implicit
information require complex linguistic analysis and domain knowledge. In addition,
temporal expressions are diverse and often vague (e.g. “during that time”, “recently”) .
Another challenge is to determine whether two expressions refer to the same concept. For
example, in the statement “The patient was in her usual state of good health one day prior to
admission when she developed running nose, fever, cough and respiratory distress. Her
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
symptoms worsened on the day of admission”, “Her symptoms” refers to a set of
manifestations underlined in the first sentence.
Although many fundamental concepts in relation to temporal reasoning have been
extensively discussed in previous publications , they are inadequately addressed
in the context of processing medical narrative data. Thus, this article first examines some of
these concepts, specifically focusing on basic time-related notions, theories and models in
AI, with emphasis on medical narrative data.
Then, we present a methodological overview of temporal reasoning in medical domain. One
motivation is that we consider that these theoretical and methodological studies will in
general contribute to processing time in medical text, either in the development of systems
which make use of these methods, or in a future direction that integrates processed narrative
data with structured data for higher level temporal reasoning tasks.
In the remaining sections, we emphasize NLP and processing temporal information in
medical narrative data. We start with an overview of previous work on processing time in
NLP in general. Then, we introduce several important studies on processing temporal
information in medical text in the field of medical informatics. We provide a discussion of
significant issues and challenges on handling temporal information. Finally, we conclude
this article by pointing out several key areas for future research.
2. Revisiting Basic Concepts in Temporal Representation and Reasoning
Researchers have been puzzled by fundamental questions about the nature of time. Is time
bounded or unbounded? Is it discrete or continuous? There are widely divergent answers for
such questions, and thus it is quite difficult to give a clear definition of time. In the discipline
of philosophy , there is a longstanding argument about whether time is a substance
or an abstract concept. Modern philosophers in the past century debated the existence of
past, presence and future. In physics , time is regarded as one of the fundamental
quantities (or dimensions) just like mass and length.
Even though time is hard to define or explain, human beings have no difficulty manipulating
it in the real world. Psychologists and cognitive scientists have found that time
perception changes as the perceiver’s environment or age changes. For example, time flies
during enjoyable moments while time moves slowly during suffering. In addition, time
appears to pass more quickly as the perceiver gets older. Therefore, the measure of time is
often fuzzy since different people may judge identical lengths of time quite differently.
For computers, manipulating temporal data is not as easy as it is for humans. Enhancing
their capability to process temporal information has been an active area of research. AI
forms a vital branch of computer science, and temporal representation and reasoning (TRR)
has been a subject of study in AI since 1970’s. As a discipline that provides automated
solutions to real life problems, studies in AI look for ways to represent and reason about
time in an intelligent manner .
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
There are two commonly recognized divisions in TRR: reasoning about actions and
changes, and reasoning about temporal constraints. The first category studies the changes of
the world due to the occurrence of actions and/or events, and is concerned with predicting
the future effects of events that occur (forward temporal projection) as well as with inferring
explanations of a given situation in terms of possible causes (backward temporal projection).
Situation Calculus , Event Calculus and Fluent Calculus are perhaps the
most influential formalisms in this category. The second category, reasoning about temporal
constraints, is concerned with the handling of relations among temporal entities (e.g. points
and intervals) for the purpose of performing tasks such as scheduling, planning and natural
language processing. The various ways of representing time in this category can be further
classified into three subcategories : representation based on dating schemes, qualitative
constraint representation, and duration-based representation.
Much of the work in temporal reasoning in medical informatics has used points anchored in
absolute time . The available data in such work consists of coded events with
known times, such as visit information and laboratory test results. Qualitative constraints are
usually based upon Allen’s interval relationships . In 1983, Allen introduced a set of 13
mutually exclusive binary relations between intervals, including before, meets, overlaps,
starts, during, finishes, equals, and the inverses of these relations. He developed a constraint
propagation algorithm that can represent any disjunction of these relations. Medical
informatics researchers have applied intervals to the abstraction and query process . The best known formalisms in AI that address metric relations, which specify durations
between pairs of time points, include Detcher, Meiri and Pearl’s distance algebra and
Dean and McDermott’s time map manager . Some of these methods have been applied
to the field of medical informatics , e.g. for the verification of temporal scheduling
constraints within clinical guidelines. Each of these methods, however, varies in its
expressive power as well as computational tractability. Expressibility and tractability of
temporal formalisms tend to be inversely related. A method that achieves a suitable tradeoff
will be useful for medical informatics applications.
In the following, we examine some basic concepts and important issues in the field of TRR.
We also relate these issues closely to the fields of medical narrative data and natural
language processing, which are the focus of this investigation.
2.1. The Categories of Time - How Should Diverse Temporal Expressions be Processed?
Each social culture and each scientific field has its own view on classifying time. A useful
distinction was mentioned in , where time was classified into three categories: 1)
natural time is based on natural phenomena, such as the alternation of day and night, and the
shift of the four seasons; 2) conventional time is based on the social conventions, usually
represented by a set of general time-units such as seconds, minutes, hours, days and years, or
by a set of special time-units such as epoch and fiscal year; 3) Logical time refers to the
logical or mathematical structure of time and operations on time. In natural language, mixed
use of these variant time-expression styles makes automatic processing of temporal
information a difficult task. For example, in the statement “he had a surgery on Christmas
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Eve, 2000”, according to cultural convention, could span any period from the morning of
December 24 through early morning of December 25, 2000.
2.2. The Structure of Time – Which Structure is Suitable for a System?
Intuitively, time is usually conceived as a line where events are aligned chronologically.
Branching time is adopted when the future is uncertain: that is, when the future has several
possibilities. In order to describe repetitive processes, circular time is often the choice.
Parallel time is considered when handling time among different agents simultaneously. To
process a medical narrative report, a system may consider a mixture of these structures to
address different situations. For example, to represent the history of illness, we may prefer to
use a linear structure, while to represent the future treatment plans, a branching structure
may be applied to specify alternative ways of treatments. For repetitive symptoms or
medications, like “Procardia XL 60 mg. po bid (two times per day),” circular time is a better
choice. If the report also records the effect of a new medication by an automatic monitoring
system and with the patients recording their symptoms and feelings, a parallel time may be
2.3. Instant vs. Interval – Which is the Primitive Unit to Model Time?
Whether the temporal primitive unit should be an instant (also called a point) or interval
(also called a period) has been a debated topic among researchers. Early representations of
time make use of instant as a primitive unit, such as in McDermott’s temporal logic .
In this point of view, time points are the foundation of temporal reasoning and time intervals
can be constructed out of the points. Allen argued that the interval should be the only
temporal primitive since an instant can be represented as a very short interval, and the
interval more intuitively addresses issues such as temporal imprecision (e.g. much temporal
information is relative but not absolute) and temporal uncertainty (e.g. incomplete
knowledge about the relationship between two times). Later on, researchers 
proposed using both instants and intervals with the same level of importance. Medical data
include both of these two types. For example, some lab tests are carried out on a particular
day and stored in a coded clinical database with timestamps, such as “01/31/2005”. In
contrast, medical problems and findings that are frequently recorded in textual data may
have an associated duration, as in “fever lasted for three hours”. Both instants and intervals
have been considered in representing temporal information for medical information systems.
In general, a point-based representation is desirable if every event is assigned a date.
Unfortunately, in real applications, many events cannot be assigned a precise date. In natural
language, time references are rather relative and vague. In such cases, time intervals are
convenient.
2.4. Absolute Time vs. Relative Time – Can Temporal References Always be Anchored in
the Time Axis?
Temporal references that can be allocated in the temporal axis are
called anchored, while those that cannot are called unanchored (e.g. “the rash began before
admission”). Some literature refers to these as absolute and relative temporal references,
respectively. An interval is often defined by modeling its endpoints. For example, an interval
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
is an ordered pair of points where the second point is never before the first. In the medical
domain, there are many cases where either the beginning or the ending is not directly known.
For example, in “the medication is started on the day of discharge”, the exact time when the
patient stops this medication is unknown. This phenomenon is also called the semi-interval
problem in the literature .
2.5. Events, States, Actions and Processes
Time-related technical terms that frequently appear in the literature of this field are events,
actions, states and processes . These kinds of concepts are used in the computing
field to describe things that take place and to embody changes in the world.
In the literature, changes in the world are usually represented using states and events. An
object or a set of objects and their properties (such as size and temperature) define a state of
the world. A given state of the world is changed by the occurrence of events. Actions are
identified with the agents’ capabilities of interacting with the world. They are considered
event-producers; however, events could be the by-product of other events. Allen and
Ferguson state that a temporal event “must involve at least one object over some stretch
of time or involve at least one change of state.’ Process denotes a sequence of
events, that produces some outcomes. Most processes found in nature are recurrent or
periodic: for example, “the patient has taken hydralazine for several weeks.” However,
whether processes are as primitive as events and states for temporal reasoning is still in
Sowa’s ontology rests on different assumptions . He states that processes can be
described by their starting and stopping points and by the kinds of changes that take place in
between. The changes are either continuous or discrete. In a continuous process, which is the
normal kind of physical process, incremental changes take place smoothly. In a discrete
process, which is typical of computer programs or idealized approximations to physical
processes, changes occur in discrete steps called events, which are interleaved with periods
of inactivity called states (see Figure 1).
TimeML is a markup language for events and temporal expressions in natural language.
In TimeML, all time-oriented information is tagged as “events”. The authors consider
“events” an umbrella term for situations that happen or occur. Events can be punctual or can
last for a period of time. Furthermore, the authors argue that linguistic analysis can be used
to classify events.
Questions may arise on how time-oriented medical records should be modeled. Combi and
Shahar distinguished two approaches in modeling temporal entities in medical
applications. One is the addition of a temporal dimension to existing objects, particularly for
the task of managing temporal clinical databases. One example is to add the temporal
dimension at the level of a database tuple to facilitate clinical queries that have a temporal
component . Another approach is the creation of task-specific entities to meet the need
of temporal reasoning tasks. For example, in the HyperLipid Advisory system , the
temporal representation consists of two lower level objects: point events (e.g. visits) and
interval events (e.g. therapies), and higher level abstract objects called phases based on these two lower level objects. Consults were made by combining a
rule base with a temporal representation of these objects. Similarly, for Shahar and Musen
 the temporal abstraction task was defined in terms of inputs and outputs: the inputs
include a set of time-stamped parameters (e.g. blood glucose value), events (e.g. insulin
injection) and abstraction goals (e.g. therapy of patients who have insulin-dependent
diabetes). The outputs include a set of interval-based, context-specific parameters and their
values at a summarization level (e.g. a period of 5 weeks of grade III toxicity of the bone
marrow in the context of therapy with AZT.).
To model temporal-oriented information in clinical reports, Hripcsak and colleagues 
adopted a broad definition of medical events to include processes with a start and finish time
(e.g. an operation), states over various periods (e.g. the presence of a rash), and
instantaneous changes (e.g. death). All of these medical events were represented as intervals,
and temporal assertions about events were represented as constraints. For example, in the
statement “the rash began before admission,” the start of rash is constrained by “before
admission.”
Intuitively, “her weight is 150 pounds” may be modeled as a state, “she had liver surgery” as
an event, and “she took ampicillin 250mgs q.i.d. for five days” as a periodic event. However,
weight fluctuates, there are many sub-events and states of the surgery event itself, and the
repeat patterns of medication taking might not be easy to track (e.g. missing doses). Just as
in defining “time,” it is hard to give a clear definition for these time-related concepts or to
differentiate them. While these concepts are widely discussed and agreement is reached to
some extent, modeling temporally related knowledge is sometimes subject to different
designs and various needs encountered in the building of a variety of medical systems. For
processing time in medical text data, the first step may be to recognize and annotate time
and medical situations mentioned in the original text, maybe along with identification and
classification of these medical concepts. Afterwards, higher level temporal reasoning tasks
such as temporal abstraction (or summarization) can be accomplished by combining medical
domain knowledge and computing temporal models. Finally, synthetic knowledge can be
used for real time clinical decision making.
3. Overview of Temporal Reasoning with Medical Data
During the last two decades, the literature on temporal reasoning in medical informatics has
evolved from a few scattered, unrelated, application-specific accounts, to many articles
addressing various topics, to several special journal issues dedicated to the topic , to
a major track in medical informatics conferences and workshops, and to a number of
doctoral research theses in biomedical informatics. Many studies demonstrate the
interdisciplinary nature of this area by connecting technical methodologies with medical
applications.
The field of temporal representation and temporal reasoning in medical informatics is
thoroughly reviewed and various research directions have been well summarized and
analyzed in a few review articles . Combi and Shahar suggested that timeoriented systems in medicine can be classified into two groups: one focuses on applications
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
including different generic tasks (e.g. diagnosis) and clinical areas (e.g. cardiology), another
focuses on theories and methodologies. They further reviewed the latter category and
divided it into two classes: 1) temporal reasoning, which supports various inference tasks
involving time-oriented data, such as planning and execution, and traditionally has been
linked with the AI community, and 2) temporal data maintenance, which deals with storage
and retrieval of data that may have heterogeneous temporal dimensions, and typically is
associated with the temporal database community. In Augusto’s review , he discussed
issues about representing and retrieving time-oriented data and time granularity, and then
provided a survey on time-based decision support for some of the fundamental stages related
to patient care, namely, diagnosis, prognosis and treatment.
From another point of view, in the field of developing Medical Decision Support Systems
(MDSSs), some researchers have suggested that temporal reasoning in
MDSSs can be classified into two types: implicit time modeling and explicit time modeling.
In implicit time modeling , temporal concepts are treated by the MDSS inference
mechanism in exactly the same manner as atemporal ones. For example, “significant weight
loss during last year” is an example of an implicit temporal statement. By contrast, explicit
time modeling has a model of time (e.g. a patient’s life time is represented
as a series of 1-month intervals) in which various factors are associated to the model of time
(e.g. body weight in each 1-month interval). It also has a mechanism to use the association
of entities to the time model to draw inferences (e.g. the significant weight loss during last
year can be determined by examining the time series of body weight measurements).
A wide range of topics in the area of temporal reasoning in medicine have been recognized
including: adoption of advanced data models, management of time-oriented clinical
databases, temporal-pattern matching and temporal queries, abstraction and summarization
of time-oriented medical data, management of temporal-reasoning knowledge (including
knowledge acquisition, maintenance, sharing, and reuse), handling temporal granularity,
handling fuzzy and uncertain temporal references, visualization interfaces and
implementation of time-oriented medical information systems.
We review theoretical and methodological studies in biomedical informatics by classifying
them into three main categories (see Table 1). These theories and methods, which have been
predominately applied to structured medical data, can be applied to medical text.
Furthermore, they will serve in a crucial role for the future of integrating processed narrative
data with structured data. As shown in table 1, category 1 applies theories and models from
the temporal reasoning in the AI field. Category 2 defines frameworks that satisfy needs
from different clinical applications. Category 3 deals with universal issues such as temporal
granularity and temporal uncertainty which should be addressed in Category 1 and 2.
Temporal reasoning is involved in a number of major medical reasoning tasks. Applications
of temporal reasoning that support time-oriented decision making can be grouped into each
one of these fundamental stages of patient care : 1) Prevention, which predicts risk
factors using methods such as time series analysis ; 2) Diagnosis, which discovers
patterns of temporal evolution of diagnostic evidence ; 3)
Treatment, which administers a therapeutic protocol (e.g. chemotherapy) over several
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
predetermined periods ; and 4) Prognosis, which forecasts the effects of health
care on the problems of the patient over a period of time . Researchers have
also summarized the field according to particular medical specialties to which time-related
techniques have been applied: cardiology , oncology , psychiatry ,
intensive care , infectious disease , pediatrics , and diabetes
 .
4. Processing Temporal Information in Clinical Narrative Data
Up to this point, our review has discussed the nature of time, basic issues on modeling time,
and methods for time inference. Now, we focus upon the linguist’s viewpoint. Representing
and reasoning about temporal information in text has drawn increasing attention in the area
of computational linguistics. The text corpus used by research groups in this area was
usually outside of medicine (e.g. everyday English and news articles), so the adaptability of
these systems to process temporal information in medical data has not been assessed.
Nevertheless, the progress that has been made in this field is very valuable and worth
delivering to MLP researchers. We organize this section as follows: First, we give a brief
overview of previous work on processing temporal information in natural language in
general, with a central focus on the field of computational linguistics. Second, we introduce
and classify some important studies on processing time in medical text in the field of
medical informatics. Third, we discuss critical concerns and challenges in the area. Our
analysis associates the related work closely with the different levels of linguistic knowledge
and their corresponding linguistic analyses.
4.1. Processing Time in Natural Language
4.1.1. Linguistic Knowledge and Linguistic Analysis—Linguists and computer
scientists agree that in order to build a system that intelligently understands and thus is able
to process human language, linguistic analysis must be broken into several levels. Figure 2
shows the different layers of linguistic knowledge and corresponding analyses that have
been applied to NLP systems . As a result, most current NLP systems are
designed with separate modules, with each module handling a different level of linguistic
structures. The third column in Figure 2 discusses major challenges encountered in each
layer in processing time in medical text. These challenges will be introduced in section 4.3.
Morphology and lexical analysis relates to morphemes (roots, prefixes and suffixes) of a
language and are used to determine the sequences of morphemes into words. Syntax relates
to combing multiple words and is used to determine the structure of phrases and sentences.
Semantics relates to the meaning or interpretation of the words, and how they combine to
form the meaning of phrases and sentences. One word can have multiple meanings. For
example, consider the word “discharge” in “he was discharged from hospital” and in “a
discharge of pus.” Pragmatics studies the language as it is used in a social context and is
concerned with how sentences combine to form discourse and how this context affects the
interpretation of the sentences. In other words, pragmatics tries to fill the gap between the
interpretation of the sentence and the speaker’s actual meaning . An NLP system
acquires and represents the aforementioned knowledge as well as applies computational
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
techniques including symbolic formalisms (e.g. finite state machines and context-free
grammars) and statistical formalisms (e.g. Markov models) . We do not attempt to
enumerate all the methods and techniques in detail here, since they have been introduced
elsewhere in many text books .
4.1.2. Analyzing and Handling Time in Natural Language—In the past half
century, different methods have been proposed to handle effects of lexical knowledge,
syntax, rhetorical relations, discourse structure, domain knowledge, pragmatic conventions
and other aspects for determining the temporal relationships of events in text. A
comprehensive edited collection of papers on the topic can be found in Mani et al .
Though a timeline may not be efficient enough to describe all the endeavors, to some extent
a gathering of research efforts with a particular focus can be identified within a period of
time. We list interesting research foci that are related to this review article in Figure 3. Note
that these areas have been continuously studied for several decades, and researchers are
searching for a comprehensive method.
The analysis of verb tense and aspect in natural language, such as past, present, or future, as
well as the continuance or completion of the action or state, has been a principle concern of
most researchers in linguistics since the 1960s . According to Reichenbach ,
the tenses of verbs determine relations between three times: a speech time (S) which is the
time point of the act of speech, an event time (E) which is the time point at which the
described event took place, and a reference time (R) which is time from which the speaker is
viewing the event on a time line. In the early 1970s, Bruce built a computer question
answering program, called Chronos, which accepts information in the form of tensed
sentences and answers questions about the time of events. The analyzed NL features in the
model include tense, time relations, and other references to time in language. He also
proposed seven time-segment relations.
In the mid 1970s, Kahn and Gorry developed a time specialist program which encodes
time specifications of events, handling time-expressions including date, relative time and
fuzzy time. The time specialist organizes events in three different ways: with a date line, by
special reference events and by before/after chains. It checks temporal consistency of the
facts and answers time-related questions. It was assessed in understanding disease scenarios
used in medical diagnosis. The intelligent question-answering system developed by Findler
and Chen deals with durational and time-point information as well as causal
relationships which satisfy different time restrictions. Causal, coexistensive, and relative
time relations for a pair of events can be answered by the program.
Some studies in the1980s have shown that both linguistic and world knowledge should be
used to make inferences about the temporal structure of discourse. Discourse relations, such
as, “elaboration,” “explanation” and “narrative,” which can be derived from this knowledge,
help in defining the narrative reference time and constraining the temporal relations between
events . The shifts of tense, verb aspects, and pragmatics can assist anaphora resolution
 and discourse ordering . Readers can refer to several studies for
more information on the temporal structure of narrative.
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Tense logic was introduce around 1960 by Prior . His work aroused the subsequent
efforts to formulate a temporal logic for natural language. Many logical approaches to
temporal reasoning have been previously reviewed . Shoham showed that
Allen’s interval calculus and McDermott’s temporal logic do not have completely
clear meaning for sentences, and proposed a reified temporal logic having formal semantics.
Moens argued that any temporal formalism for natural language should have an
ontology for a semantics of linguistic categories like tense, aspect and temporal adverbials as
well as for a theory of their use in defining temporal relations of events. Recently, based on
Allen’s interval temporal logic , Hobbs led an effort on developing a
DAML (DARPA Agent Markup Language) ontology of time that characterizes temporal
concepts and properties, with the aim to cover the basic topological temporal relations on
instants, intervals and events, measures of duration, and dates and times. It is expressed in
first-order predicate calculus. Its relation to TimeML in natural language has been
discussed in .
The best known attempts at representing temporal expressions in the last decade are
probably the MUC Named Entity Time Task , which recognized and classified
time-referring expressions, the formalisms proposed by the TIDES group , which
developed a standard for the annotation of temporal expressions, the TimeML group , which developed a language for markup of events and their temporal anchoring in
documents, and their applications in event ordering .
In general, the analysis units in the field have evolved from the word (lexical) level, phrase
and sentence (syntactic) levels, to the discourse (semantic and pragmatic) levels, and the
computational methods that have been applied in the field have evolves from traditional
logic-based approaches, to other reasoning mechanisms , and to ontology-based
approaches.
4.2. Related Work in Processing Temporal Information with Clinical Narrative Data
4.2.1. Processing Time in Clinical Text—Though there is considerable research and
discussion in processing time in computational linguistics, time has not yet gained adequate
attention in medical natural language processing. However, it is well recognized that natural
language processing is a difficult but important task in biomedical informatics. As some
researchers have pointed out , structured clinical data in the EMR is often poorly
recorded, and information may be missing about key outcomes and processes. In fact,
important clinical outcomes, such as disease state and its evolution, are often stored only as
unstructured data (such as in dictated medical notes). Discussions of NLP applications in
biomedicine can be found elsewhere . Tasks include encoding findings with
medical terminologies, facilitating assessment and diagnosis, and integrating with other
clinical applications for decision support purposes. To date, a number of MLP systems have
been developed for extracting, structuring and encoding clinical information from text
reports, making clinical data available for use by subsequent automatic agents . In the following, we review a few MLP systems’ methods for modeling temporal
information. We present the current state-of-the-art in the field and then discuss the
challenges at each level of linguistic analysis in section 4.3.
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
4.2.1.1 In the 1980s: In the early 1980s, a few studies were conducted on processing
temporal information in medical text in NLP . Hirschman and Story 
identified words and structures that carry time information in narrative and emphasized that
the identification should embrace both explicit and implicit sources of temporal information.
Explicit sources include verb tense, adverbial expressions of time, and connectives joining
two sentences. Implicit sources include multiple references to the same event in a text, and
narrative time progression. “The time program” was developed and embedded in
the NLP system of the Linguistic String Project (LSP). The LSP was developed at New York
University as one of the first comprehensive NLP systems for general English and was then
adapted to medical text . The time program takes the output of the NLP system,
recognizes and analyzes time information, and formalizes the variant time expressions in a
representation which consists of five fields: relation, reference point, direction, quantity and
time-unit. Furthermore, the time program obtains a representation of time for each narrated
event. Figure 4 taken from shows examples of the time representation for medical text.
A directed graph representation was then described in . The vertices of such a graph
correspond to points in time, and the directed edges to the intervals of time between the
points. The output of the time program can be used to answer time-related queries.
Obermeier developed an NLP system, called GROK (Grammatical Representation of
Objective Knowledge), for analyzing temporal information in medical text. It was illustrated
using text that related to case histories of liver disease. An important notion in this study is
“key events.” A key event is defined as a domain-specific concept which is used to order and
group events around this key event. In other words, key events build up the temporal
structure of a text. One output of GROK is a knowledge representation of a text, consisting
of a series of events extracted from the text and chronologically ordered by the NLP system.
An event consists of a domain-specific concept, a key event, a relation to key event, and a
duration (see Figure 5). The NLP analysis serves as the input to a medical expert system.
4.2.1.2 In the 1990s: MedLEE , a Medical Language Extraction and Encoding
System, was developed by Friedman and has been used at New York Presbyterian Hospital
since 1995. The system has been applied to many types of medical text, including discharge
summaries, radiology reports, pathology reports, visit notes, and residents’ sign out notes.
MedLEE can automatically encode clinical information in text reports into ICD, SNOMED
and UMLS codes . The system relies on a grammar and a lexicon, as well as other
knowledge-based components. It has a preprocessor that performs lexical lookup to
recognize and categorize words and phrases, and a parser that uses the grammar to identify
the structure of the sentence and generate the output structure, which consists of primary
findings and modifiers.
MedLEE currently captures straightforward references to dates (“was admitted on
June 30”), some statuses (“in the past”), and changes (“increase,” “decrease”). However,
relative assertions (“developed a fever after surgery”) lose the relation (i.e. after) between
the events (i.e. fever and surgery), and less common temporal assertions are not handled.
Figure 6 shows a simplified XML output of MedLEE.
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
The Special Purpose Radiology Understanding System (SPRUS) was developed at
University of Utah. It is primarily semantically driven and has been used to processes
radiology reports. It functions as a module within a clinical information system, the HELP
system . Its later version, Symbolic Text Processor (SymText) , has been
applied to encode admission diagnoses and extract pneumonia-related concepts from
chest x-ray reports . MPLUS is the latest successor of SymText. Both of the later
systems apply a semantic model based on Bayesian Networks. These tools are not designed
to capture explicit temporal information. However, they identify a change of state with
possible values including unchanged, improved, recurrence, worsened, and so on. The
absence or presence of a condition can be inferred by using the state value and other
contextual information . For example, a condition is absent in the patient if it is stated
in the Family History Section, and a condition is inferred to be present if the condition
“worsens” or even if there is “no change”.
4.2.1.3 In the 2000s: Hahn argued that most current MLP systems suffer from
neglecting text structure phenomena, such as referential relations between discourse units.
He and his colleagues have developed MedSyndikate , a NLP system for
extracting medical information from findings reports. It transfers a text to formal conceptual
representation structures and deals with anaphoric reference relations spanning sentences. It
mainly focuses on pronominal and nominal anaphora, textual ellipsis and metonymy. The
system analyzes the tense and the modality of a verb to assist the conceptual representation.
Recently, Hripcsak et al have modeled the temporal information contained in clinical
discharge summaries as a Simple Temporal Constraint Satisfaction Problem (STP) . This
study was conducted through a consensus process, which resulted in a set of encoding
procedures and a list of issues related to encoding (including medical events, explicit and
implicit temporal assertions, context, linking events, intermittent events, periodic events,
temporal granularity, temporal vagueness, uncertainty, contradiction, and discontinuous
disjunction). Based upon this work, Zhou et al further proposed a systematic
methodology and system architecture for representing, extracting and reasoning about
temporal information in clinical narrative reports. The proposed system includes several
major components. First is a Temporal Constraint Structure (TCS) which is a formal
structure that consists of a set of fields to encode various temporal expressions (see Figure
7), and the TCS tagger which implements the TCS. Second is an NLP system (MedLEE) for
encoding and extracting medical events and formalized temporal data. Third is a postprocessor for handling implicit and uncertain temporal information. Fourth is a system to
automatically implement the STP modeling.
4.2.2. Other related work—This section, we introduce other related studies on
processing textual temporal information that is stored in clinical databases or stated in
clinical guidelines. Their modeling methods are reviewed. In addition, we introduce
standards on modeling temporal components in the EMR, particularly a semantic modeling.
Though in this paper we have limited the scope to English, researchers in biomedical
informatics have addressed temporal processing in other languages .
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
4.2.2.1 Modeling Textual Temporal Expressions in Clinical Databases: Many studies,
as we list in section 3, must deal with textual temporal expressions stored in databases, such
as “December 1998 for five weeks,” “from March to October” and “for several years.” In
addition to building models (as described in section 2 and 3) and standards (which will be
introduced in section 4.2.2.3) to formalize this information, important issues such as
temporal granularity, temporal uncertainty and temporal heterogeneity must be handled.
Though many of the relevant studies have been already mentioned in section 3, we here
introduce a few studies that focus on natural language expressions. Dolin described a
study on the development of a conceptual data model for the temporal aspect of symptom
data. Compared with atemporal models which usually treat time as any other modifier, this
study applied object-oriented modeling approaches, which enable the temporal objects
defined in the model to be inherited by other medical objects, such as problems. He
proposed to use an attribute “granularity_qualifier” to represent the uncertainty of absolute
date/time and duration. Combi and Pozzi proposed a temporal model named HMAP
and focused on modeling and querying information related to natural language sentences. In
HMAP, intervals are represented by start, end and duration. They introduced a three-valued
logic for managing uncertainty in temporal relationships. In , an approach was
proposed for handling granularity for both anchored and unanchored temporal data. The
study shows the representation of unanchored temporal data, procedures for converting the
data to a given granularity, and operations between the data elements.
4.2.2.2 Processing Time in Clinical Guidelines: In the Asgaard project, Shahar et al
 developed a framework for recognizing care providers’ intentions from their actions,
and critiquing care providers’ actions using the guideline as well as the patients’ clinical
data. They presented the Asbru language to represent and to annotate guidelines. The Asbru
time annotation schema represents the uncertainty of starting time, ending time, and duration
of a time interval. It also includes a reference and is written as ([the earliest starting shift, the
latest starting shift], [the earliest finishing shift, the latest finishing shift], [the minimal
duration, the maximal duration], reference). It uses specific symbols to represent cyclical
time points and other time references, e.g. MORNINGS representing a set of mornings and
*NOW* for current time. The RESUME temporal abstraction module and Chronus
temporal query module were applied to this project. Other work in temporal modeling
that was done as part of the Asgaard project and the Asbru guideline language can be found
elsewhere .
Terenziani introduced the treatment of temporal constraints in clinical guideline
in GLARE. Their temporal formalism represents minimum and maximum duration of each
action, and minimum and/or maximum distance between any pair of endpoints of the actions
involved. The STP framework has been applied to check temporal consistency in
guidelines acquisition and execution. They proposed to use a tree of STP frameworks to
represent the constraints regarding repeated actions, where each action was represented as a
node in a separated STP.
4.2.2.3 Building Time Standards for Data Exchange and Integration: Efforts have
been made in modeling temporal components in the EMR in order to build a standard for
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
data exchange amongst healthcare information systems or for data integration in large scale
systems. For example, organizations CEN , HL7 and openEHR have
defined basic temporal data types (e.g. point in time and interval of point in time), temporal
structures (e.g. structures for modeling time series) and temporal variables in classes (e.g.
variable effectiveTime in a class Act). Different from various medical information systems,
which usually develop specialized methods to address unique requirements of clinical
applications, these efforts focus on building uniform models, which aim to encode the
temporal information explicitly and unambiguously to be understandable and interoperable
among systems. However, semantic specifications for modeling clinical concepts are still
lacking . An early project called Time Standards for Healthcare Specific Problems
(TSMI) provided a semantic data model for descriptions of time related information.
Figure 8 shows an example encoded by TSMI. It allows combinations of situations (e.g.
event and episode), temporal links (e.g. has-occurrence and has-duration) and temporal
expressions (e.g. time point expression and duration expression) which are defined in TSMI.
4.3. Challenges in Processing time in Clinical Narrative Data
Based on section 4.1 and 4.2, we can find that the progress that has been made in MLP in
processing temporal information coincides with the evolution in general NLP. Therefore,
experience gained from the general NLP field can be applied to MLP.
We list challenges in processing temporal information in medical text, as shown in the third
column of Figure 2. These challenges are listed corresponding to the different layers of
linguistic structures and analysis. However, the difficulties are not limited to these aspects.
The list does not include other major problems in computational NLP in general, e.g.
anaphora, ellipsis and conjunction, and major challenges in processing medical text, e.g.
heterogeneous formats, occurrence of typographic and spelling errors, and intraoperability
and interoperability of NLP systems, as listed in .
1) Diverse temporal expressions—In natural language, time can be represented in a
natural way (e.g. “before tonight,” “right now,” and “during that period”), in a conventional
way , or in a professional language with
unique formats and styles (e.g. “q.i.d.” and “postop # 6” which means the sixth day after an
operation). The same time can be written in many ways. For example, 01/03/02, 010302,
01032002 and Jan 3, 02, all represent the same date. Zhou et al revealed a wide diversity
of temporal expressions in discharge summaries and classified them into a set of natural
categories. However, a more comprehensive study is needed to cover medical text from
different sources.
2) Medical grammar—Medical language, especially clinical notes, often ignores many
restrictions that are required in the general English grammar ; for example, the fact that
each sentence must have a subject. Clinical text is typically more compact: for example,
“chief complaints: cough, fever” and “potassium 4.1, glucose of 115, albumin 2.7.” Medical
events are largely expressed by nouns or noun phrases, whereas in general linguistics, events
are often expressed by tensed and untensed verbs and nominalizations . In addition,
there are some misleading expressions specific to the medical domain. For example, the
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
phrase “the patient presented with” does not necessarily mean that the event occurred in the
past . Therefore, the role of tense and aspect in temporal reasoning using medical text
requires further investigation.
3) Ubiquitous ambiguities—Interpretation of an expression can be uncertain. For
example, “010202” can be a number, a date, a symbol, or anything else. “Last year” can
mean 2002 when uttered in year 2003, or 1995 when uttered in year 1996. “A patient had a
fourteen to sixteen week size fibroid uterus” does not indicate a time but a size, because the
time expression here refers to the size of the progression of pregnancy, which is used as a
reference standard for the mass size. “In day two” can be in the second day of a hospital stay
or in the second day of a treatment. Sophisticated semantic analysis and world knowledge
are required to answer questions such as what senses are to be associated with a temporal
expression and how the meaning of this temporal expression contributes to the meaning of a
sentence or discourse that make up by this term.
4) Complex temporal relations in medical domains—Medical events are linked
directly or indirectly in the text. In addition, there are many possible temporal relationships
between two events; e.g. event 1 is either before or after event 2, but not during it .
Another example of temporally complex situations is a case in which a rash was treated with
a medicine, which caused a new rash. The reasoning system must figure out that these two
occurrences of rash are not the same, probably by drawing upon domain specific knowledge.
One philosophical concern as described by Anscombe is that there is a distinction
between lexical and sentential meanings. For example, before and after are not converses, as
“the patient was alive after he had the surgery” does not imply “the patient had the surgery
before he was alive.” Extra assumptions should be made while uniformly treating temporal
references. Anscombe also discussed the difference between instantaneous events and events
that occupy a period of time. The paradoxical example given above causes no problem when
it refers to two instantaneous (point-based) events, such as the death of the patient and the
operation. If the events are not instantaneous, then before and after need to be interpreted
with respect to the start and finish of the interval.
5) Implicit information—Many medical reports are compact and omit information that
can be assumed by experts. “The patient had spiked to 101.4” means that the patient had a
fever and his temperature was as high as 101.4 °F. Temporal information in natural language
is not always stated explicitly, but requires interpretation or inferences using world
knowledge and assumptions. For the sentence “he had heart failure previously,” a system
must determine whether “previously” refers to a week ago or a year ago. In a manual
reviews of discharge summaries, Hripcsak et al reported that 64% of temporal
assertions about events are implicit.
6) Pragmatics—Hahn and Romacker pointed out that most current medical
text processing systems are actually sentence processors or even more restricted phrase
processors which treat their sentences and phrases in isolation only. In fact, medical texts,
like any other sort of text, exhibit textual structures, and ignorance of these structural
relations will cause underdetermined or invalid content representations. Jurafsky and Martin
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 argued that complete analysis of a text requires analysis of relationships between
sentences and larger units of discourse such as paragraphs and sections.
The intended value of a time expression may require a prior time expression elsewhere in the
sentence (local context dependence) or in the surrounding discourse (global context
dependence). Anaphoric approaches are needed to resolve temporal adverbial information:
e.g. “at that time”, “then” and “later.” For the statement “the patient had a fever on March
2,” the value of “March 2” may be linked a specific year based on the context.
7) Granularity of the information—Temporal information may be specified at
different granularities. It is unclear what unit of measure should be adopted to represent
different granularities. For example, “three months ago” may refer to a specific month or a
specific day. It is also unclear how the system should switch from one temporal domain to a
coarser or finer one. Projection from finer to coarser granularity or the reverse involves
complex semantic issues. That is, one must assign a proper meaning to the association of
facts at different temporal layers .
8) Temporal fuzziness and uncertainty—Temporal information in medical text is
often imprecise or uncertain because exact or complete data and knowledge are not
available. For example, “several days ago” is fuzzy as to what is the exact value for
“several”; the statement “the patient had a previous episode last month that lasted 2 or 3
days” does not specify a precise date or a precise duration; and “the pain started by mid-
July” presents a set of possible dates. Researchers in medical informatics have used a time
range to represent uncertainty information. However, most of the ranges are defined based
on the human experience. Some studies proposed to handle imprecise and
uncertain information in temporal reasoning in the framework of fuzzy sets and possibility
9) Semi-interval problem—One difficulty is the semi-interval problem as discussed
earlier in this paper in section 2.4; i.e., we may only know the temporal beginning or ending
of an event but not both. For example, only the starting time of appendectomy was recorded
in the electronic medical record, but not the ending time; or it was mentioned that a central
venous catheter (CVC) was placed before the operation, but there is no real information
about if CVC was removed before or after the operation. Clinical domain knowledge may
play an important role for solving this problem. For example, the time of an appendectomy
procedure can be measured in minutes to hours and should definitely before discharge.
Related studies in AI can be found in .
10) Inconsistency—Temporal information for an event can be inconsistent when data
are unreliable or obtained from several sources. For example, in a clinical report, if it is
stated that an event started before admission and that the exact same event started after
admission, then there is a contradiction. Inconsistency may be more common when
integrating data from different sources. Discovering the source of the inconsistency is a
difficult task in temporal reasoning . Deciding which temporal constraints to eliminate
to solve the inconsistency may require more information beyond constraints themselves; for
example, certainty information might be helpful for deciding which statement is true.
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
5. Key Areas for Future Research
Limitations and challenges in previous studies can point the way to future work in the field.
Temporal reasoning with structured data is more advanced, and future directions for
structured data have been summarized elsewhere . Reasoning about time in natural
language is one of the most challenging areas. Others have pointed out the need for more
research in temporal granularity, fuzzy time, temporal contradiction, intermittent events,
periodic events, and uncertainty . In addition, we present several broad
research directions.
1) Enhancing functions of current MLP systems in processing temporal information
In order to augment the performance of these systems, improved temporal representations
and temporal reasoning with NLP data must be achieved. Processing time should be
involved in each phase of natural language processing. That is, temporal information must
be handled in each level of linguistic units, from morphology and lexicography to syntax and
semantics, and finally to pragmatics. Different sources of knowledge and computational
techniques should be applied to this field. Although many useful methods, techniques and
other resources can be taken directly from general NLP, research in MLP is still required to
address medicine-specific scenarios.
The first thing to start with might be to study how temporal information is conveyed in
medical narrative. Different types of medical documents should be collected and then a
formal structure should be developed to formalize diverse temporal references for further
automated processing. Verb tense (past, present and future), aspect (progressive, perfective)
and modality (will, would, may, might) have been analyzed for determining the state of
medical conditions; however, their role in temporal reasoning has not yet been widely
studied. Beside tense, analyzing the temporal structure of a sentence should concern the
functions of temporal subordinating conjunctions (e.g. while, whenever, before and as soon
as) and temporal adverbials (e.g., then, soon and recent). Resolving temporal granularity and
uncertainty has been constantly a challenge not only for medical informatics but also for
general NLP. One of the most difficult tasks that MLP researchers face today is probably at
the pragmatics analysis level, since most current MLP systems mainly stay at the sentence
level. Temporal reasoning is an important mechanism for connecting the events in a
discourse. Understanding the temporal property of a text and discovering complex temporal
relations will assist in complete analysis of the text.
Besides linguistic analysis of the text, computational models for temporal reasoning as
introduced in section 3 must be considered as well. Balancing the tradeoff between
expressive power and computational tractability to look for a suitable formalism for
discovering more implicit temporal information in the text may be one of the most important
concerns in this step.
2) Incorporating medical knowledge into temporal reasoning systems
Some linguists argue that medical text, such as medical summaries, “have a
stereotypic structure. They can be viewed as a sequence of episodes, which correspond to
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
phrases, sentences, or groups of sentences dealing with a single topic.” Thus, medical
domain knowledge is important to understand the structure and context of a medical text to
improve temporal reasoning. One interesting research area would be to incorporate different
medical knowledge (e.g. medical terminologies and specialized medical domain knowledge)
into temporal reasoning systems. For example, the hierarchical structure of a terminology
can help identify whether two different statements refer to the same event (e.g. references to
ampicillin and to a course of antibiotics). In addition, well defined semantic relations (such
as causal relationship) can help order events. Medical knowledge in specialized fields is also
important, for example, in defining reference events in a liver transplant domain.
3) Resolving coreference
A challenging topic in NLP is coreference resolution . Coreference is the
phenomenon where two expressions in an utterance both refer to the same thing. An
example might be a report containing two references to the same ankle surgery. Coreference
resolution is critical for temporal reasoning, but conversely, discovered temporal information
can be used to assist in deciding if two statements refer to the same thing. For example, if
the temporal assertions about these two “ankle surgery” events are close enough to each
other, they might refer to the same operation.
4) Evaluation of the systems
Evaluating MLP systems in practice is critical to progress. However, it is difficult to evaluate
an MLP system due to the difficulty of obtaining a gold standard and of sharing the data
across institutions . Raters may have different opinions on annotating temporal
expressions or ordering events in a text, which lead to a lower inter-rater and intra-rater
agreement. In addition, obtaining a gold standard is very costly, since it involves much
manual processing.
Evaluating a temporal system at every linguistic level might be tedious but necessary.
Questions that should be answered include: How accurately does the system identify
temporal references? Are the grammar rules helpful for analyzing the temporal structure of a
phrase or sentence? Does the proposed semantic analysis help in disambiguating the
different senses of a temporal expression? How well does a system infer the temporal
structure of a discourse? Is a temporal formalism suitable for reasoning about time in such a
medical text?
On the application level, the aims of evaluation may vary according to the problems that
need to be solved. In general, research will answer the following questions: What type of
temporal information is needed to solve this problem? Does the system accurately extract
the required temporal information from the text? How accurately and efficiently does the
system answer temporal questions?
5) Integrating narrative data with structured data
As soon as systems can successfully represent and reason with temporal information
contained in narrative data, one promising future direction is to integrate narrative
information with structured database information. Such integration could help carry out
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
higher level reasoning tasks (e.g. temporal abstraction), or implement applications such as
information retrieval or information visualization. While temporal abstraction for structured
data is usually built from temporal primitives, original narrative data contains different levels
of abstraction (see Figure 9). Integrating these two data types would require complicated
conversion, mapping and merging.
6. Conclusion
Temporal representation and reasoning have been studied in depth in recent decades. In
computer science, especially in artificial intelligence and database management, time has
been studied extensively, resulting in many publications and meetings. In addition,
researchers in medical informatics have made great contributions to this field, with the goal
of supporting medical decision making and improving the quality of health care. Despite
advances, many areas still deserve attention. Processing text data, in general, is a hard
problem in computing. Given the recent progress and success of medical language
processing and of its uses in medical informatics applications, processing temporal
information in medical textual data promises to be a very fruitful area of research.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Jessica Ancker, Peter Hung and two anonymous reviewers for their valuable
comments on this paper.
7. References
 . Augusto JC. Temporal reasoning for decision support in medicine. Artificial Intelligence in
Medicine 2005;33(1):1–24. [PubMed: 15617978]
 . Combi C, Shahar Y. Temporal reasoning and temporal data maintenance in medicine: Issues and
challenges. Computers in Biology and Medicine 1997;27(5):353–368. [PubMed: 9397339]
 . Combi C, Shahar Y, editors. Time-oriented systems in medicine. Special Issue from Computers in
Biology and Medicine 1997;27(5):349–351.
 . Shahar Y, Combi C. Timing is everything. Time-oriented clinical information systems. West J Med
1998;168(2):105–13. [PubMed: 9499744]
 . Shahar Y, Combi C, editors. Intelligent temporal information systems in medicine. Special Issue
from Journal of Intelligent Information Systems 1999;13(1–2):5–8.
 . Keravnou E, Editor. Medical temporal reasoning. Special Issue from Artificial Intelligence in
Medicine 1991;3(6):289–290.
 . Keravnou ET. Temporal reasoning in medicine. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 1996;8(3):187–
191. [PubMed: 8830921]
 . Zhou L, Melton GB, Parsons S, Hripcsak G. A temporal constraint structure for extracting
temporal information from clinical narrative. J Biomed Inform 2006;39(4):424–39. [PubMed:
 . Friedman C, Johnson S. Natural Language and Text Processing in Biomedicine In: Shortliffe EH
(ed.), Cimino JJ (assoc. ed.) Biomedical Informatics: Computer Applications in Health Care and
Biomedicine (3rd edition). New York: Springer-Verlag, 2006 [in press] 2006.
 . Johnson S Natural language processing in biomedicine In: Bronzino JD. The Handbook of
Biomedical Engineering. Boca Raton (FL): CRC Press, 2000:188-1-6. 2000.
 . Jurafsky D, Martin JH. Speech and Language Processing: An Introduction to Natural Language
Processing, Computational Linguistics and Speech Recognition Prentice Hall 2000.
 . Chittaro L, Montanari A. Temporal Representation and Reasoning in Artificial Intelligence:
Issues and Approaches. Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence 2000;28:47–106.
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 . Pani AK, Bhattacharjee GP. Temporal representation and reasoning in artificial intelligence: A
review. Mathematical and Computer Modeling 2001;34(1–2):55–80.
 . Whitrow JG. Time in History: The Evolution of Our General Awareness of Time and Temporal
Perspective. Oxford University Press 1998.
 . Novikov ID. The river of time. Cambridge: New York Cambridge University Press 1998.
 . Turetzky P Time: Problems of Philosophy. London; New York Routledge 2002.
 . Allen JF. Time and time again: the many ways to represent time. International Journal of
Intelligent Systems 1991;6(4):341–355.
 . Pani AK, Bhattacharjee GP. Temporal representation and reasoning in artificial intelligence: A
review. Mathematical and Computer Modelling 2001;34(1–2):55–80.
 . Augusto JC. The logical Approach to Temporal Reasoning. Artificial Intelligence Review
2001;16:301–333.
 . McCarthy J, Hayes P. Some philosophical problems from the standpoint of artificial intelligence.
Machine Intelligence 1969;4:463–502.
 . Reiter R The frame problem in the situation calculus: a simple solution (sometimes) and a
completeness result for goal regression In Vladimir Lifshitz, editor, Artificial intelligence and
mathematical theory of computation: papers in honour of John McCarthy, pages 359–380, San
Diego, CA, USA Academic Press Professional, Inc. 1991.
 . Kowalski R, Sergot M. A logic-based calculus of events. New Generation Computing 1986;4:67–
 . Thielscher M Introduction to the fluent calculus. Electronic Transactions on Artificial
Intelligence 1998;2(3–4):179–192.
 . Kahn MG, Tu S, Fagan LM. TQuery: a context-sensitive temporal query language. Comput
Biomed Res 1991;24(5):401–19. [PubMed: 1743002]
 . Das A, Musen M. A foundational model of time for heterogeneous clinical databases. Proc
AMIA Annu Fall Symp. 1997.
 . Campbell KE, Das AK, Musen MA. A logical foundation for representation of clinical data. J
Am Med Inform Assoc 1994;1(3):218–232. [PubMed: 7719805]
 . Nigrin DJ, Kohane IS. Temporal Expressiveness in Querying a Time-stamp-- based Clinical
Database. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2000;7(2):152–163. [PubMed: 10730599]
 . O’Connor MJ, Tu SW, Musen MA. The Chronus II temporal database mediator. Proc AMIA
Symp 2002:567–71. [PubMed: 12474882]
 . Allen JF. Maintaining Knowledge about Temporal Intervals. Communications of the ACM
1983;26(11):832–843.
 . Shahar Y A framework for knowledge-based temporal abstraction. Artificial Intelligence
1997;90(1–2):79–133.
 . Combi C, Pozzi G. HMAP – A temporal data model managing intervals with different
granularities and indeterminacy from natural language sentences. J Very Large Databases
2001;9(4):294–311.
 . Das AK, Musen MA. A temporal query system for protocol-directed decision support. Meth.
Inform. Med 1994;33:358–370. [PubMed: 7799812]
 . Kahn MG, Fagan LM, Tu S. Extensions to the time-oriented database model to support temporal
reasoning in medical expert systems. Methods Inf Med 1991;30(1):4–14. [PubMed: 2005832]
 . Dechter R, Meiri I, Pearl J. Temporal constraint networks. Artif. Intell 1991;49(1–3):61–95.
 . Dean T, McDermott D. Temporal data base management. Artif. Intell 1987;32(1–55).
 . Dojat M, Ramaux N, Fontaine D. Scenario recognition for temporal reasoning in medical
domains. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 1998;14(1–2):139–155. [PubMed: 9779887]
 . Duftschmid G, Miksch S, Gall W. Verification of temporal scheduling constraints in clinical
practice guidelines. Artif Intell Med 2002;25(2):93–121. [PubMed: 12031602]
 . Oddi A, Cesta A. Toward interactive scheduling systems for managing medical resources. Artif
Intell Med 2000;20(2):113–38. [PubMed: 10936749]
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 . Terenziani P, Montani S, Torchio M, Molino G, Anselma L. Temporal consistency checking in
clinical guidelines acquisition and execution: the GLARE’s approach. AMIA Annu Symp Proc
2003:659–63. [PubMed: 14728255]
 . Johnson S Temporal information in medical narrative In: Sager N, Friedman C, Lyman MS.
Medical Language Processing: Computer Management of Narrative Data. Reading, Mass:
Addison-Wesley Pub. Co 1987:175–94.
 . Richards EG. Mapping time: the calendar and its history. Oxford University Press 2000.
 . McDermont D A temporal logic for reasoning about process and plan. Cognitive Science
1982;6:101–155.
 . Dean T, McDermott D. Temporal data base management. Artif. Intell 1987(32):1–55.
 . Allen J Maintaining knowledge about temporal interval. Communication of the ACM
1983;26(11):832–843.
 . Vila L An analysis of the main approaches to temporal reasoning in AI. IIIA technical report
 . Vila L IP: A Theory of Time based on Instants and Periods. ECAI’94 Workshop on Spatiotemporal Reasoning.
 . Bochman A Concerted Instant-Interval Temporal Semantics I: Temporal Ontologies. Notre Dame
Journal of Formal Logic 1990;31 (3):403–414.
 . Freksa C Temporal reasoning based on semi-intervals. Artif intell 1992;54(1–2):199–227.
 . Allen J, Ferguson G. Actions and events in interval temporal logic. Journal of Logic and
Computation 1994;4:205–45.
 . Allen J Towards a general theory of action and time. Artif intell 1984;23(2):123–54.
 . Galton A A critical examination of Allen’s theory of action and time. Artif intell 1990;42(2–
3):159–88.
 . Shoham Y Temporal logics in artificial intelligence: semantical and ontological considerations.
Artif intell 1987;33(1):89–104.
 . Sowa JD. Knowledge Representation: Logical, Philosophical, and Computational Foundations.
Brooks Cole Publishing Co., Pacific Grove, CA, ©2000.
 . Sauri R, Littman J, Knippen B, Gaizauskas R, Setzer A, Pustejovsky J. TimeML annotation
guidelines. 2004.
 . Rucker D, Maron D, Shortliffe E. Temporal representation of clinical algorithms using expertsystem and database tools. Comput Biomed Res. 1990;6;23(3):222–39. [PubMed: 2350959]
 . Shahar Y, Musen MA. Knowledge-based temporal abstraction in clinical domains. Artificial
Intelligence in Medicine 1996;8(3):267–298. [PubMed: 8830925]
 . Hripcsak G, Zhou L, Parsons S, Das AK, Johnson SB. Modeling electronic discharge summaries
as a simple temporal constraint satisfaction problem. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2005;12(1):55–63.
[PubMed: 15492038]
 . Kahn MG. Model-Based Interpretation of Time-Ordered Medical Data. PhD Dissertation,
University of California, San Francisco, CA 1988.
 . Shahar Y A knowlege-based method for temporal abstraction of clinical data. Doctoral
Dissertation, Standford University 1994.
 . Aliferis CF. A Temporal Representation and Reasoning Model for Medical Decision-Support
Systems. Doctoral Dissertation, University of Pittsburgh 1998.
 . Das AK. Temporal mediation of relational databases for clinical decision support. Doctoral
Dissertation, Standford University 2002.
 . Shahar Y, Combi C. Timing is everything. Time-oriented clincial information systems. West J
Med. 1998;2:168(2):105–13. [PubMed: 9499744]
 . Miller RA, Pople HE, Myers JD. Internist-I, An Experimental Computer-Based Diagnostic
Consultant for General Internal Medicine. New England Journal of Medicine 1982;307:468–76.
[PubMed: 7048091]
 . Aliferis C, Cooper G, Pollack M, Buchanan B, Wagner M. Representing and developing
temporally abstracted knowledge as a means towards facilitating time modeling in medical
decision-support systems. Comput. Biol. Med 1997;27(5):411. [PubMed: 9397342]
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 . Aliferis C, Cooper G, Miller R, Buchanan B, Bankowitz R, Giuse N. A temporal analysis of
QMR. J Am Med Inform Assoc 1996;Jan-Feb;3(1):79–91. [PubMed: 8750392]
 . Castillo E, Gutiérrez JM, Hadi AS. Expert Systems and Probabilistic Network Models. New
York: Springer-Verlag 1997.
 . Schwartz SM, Baron J, Clarke JR. A causal Bayesian model for the diagnosis of appendicitis in
Uncertainty Artificial Intell. (Kanal LN and Lemmer JF, Eds.). Amsterdam: Elsevier, North-
Holland, 1988, pp. 423–434.
 . Aliferis C, Cooper G, Pollack M, Buchanan B, Wagner M. Representing and developing
temporally abstracted knowledge as a means towards facilitating time modeling in medical
decision-support systems. Comput. Biol. Med 1997;27(5):411–34. [PubMed: 9397342]
 . Rutledge G, Thomsen G, Farr B, Tovar M, Sheiner L LF. VentPlan: a ventilator-management
advisor. Proc Annu Symp Comput Appl Med Care, 1991 1991:869–71.
 . Long W Temporal reasoning for diagnosis in a causal probabilistic knowledge base. Artif Intell
Med 1996;7;8(3):193–215. [PubMed: 8830922]
 . Dagum P, Galper A. Time series prediction using belief network models. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies 1995;42(6):617–32.
 . Chittaro L, Del Rosso M, Dojat M. Modeling medical reasoning with the event calculus: an
application to the management of mechanical ventilation In: Barahona P, Stefanelli M, Wyatt J,
(eds) Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, LNAI 934, Berlin Heidelberg, Springer, 1995:79–90.
 . Combi C, Chittaro L. Abstraction on clinical data sequences: an object-oriented data model and a
query language based on the event calculus. Artif Intell Med 1999;17(3):271–301. [PubMed:
 . Dean T, Wellmann M. Planning and Control. Morgan Kaufmann San Mateo, CA 1991.
 . Magni P A new approach to optimal dynamic therapy planning. Proc AMIA Symp 1998:936–40.
[PubMed: 9929356]
 . Larizza C, Moglia A, Stefanelli M. M-HTP: A system for monitoring heart transplant patients.
Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 1992;4(2):111–126.
 . Terenziani P, Molino G, Torchio M. A modular approach for representing and executing clinical
guidelines. Artif Intell Med 2001;23(3):249–76. [PubMed: 11704440]
 . Terenziani P, Montani S, Bottrighi A, Torchio M, Molino G, Correndo G. A context-adaptable
approach to clinical guidelines. Medinfo 2004;11(Pt 1):169–73.
 . Terenziani P, Montani S, Bottrighi A, Torchio M, Molino G, Correndo G. The GLARE approach
to clinical guidelines: main features. Stud Health Technol Inform 2004;101:162–6. [PubMed:
 . Terenziani P, Carlini C, Montani S. Towards a Comprehensive Treatment of Temporal Constraints
in Clinical Guidelines. Ninth International Symposium on Temporal Representation and
Reasoning (TIME’02). 2002:20–7.
 . Aamodt A, Plaza E. Case-Based Reasoning: Foundational Issues, Methodological Variations, and
System Approaches. Artificial Intelligence Communications 1994;7(1):39–52.
 . Hartge F, Wetter T, Haefeli WE. A similarity measure for case based reasoning modeling with
temporal abstraction based on cross-correlation. Comput Methods Programs Biomed
2006;81(1):41–8. [PubMed: 16359749]
 . Schmidt R, Gierl L. A prognostic model for temporal courses that combines temporal abstraction
and case-based reasoning. Int J Med Inform 2005;74(2–4):307–15. [PubMed: 15694637]
 . Tansel A, Clifford J, Gadia S, Jajodia S, Segev A, Snodgrass R. Temporal data bases (Theory,
design and implementation), The Benjamin Cummings Pub. Co., California .
 . Etzioni O, Jajodia S, Sripada S, Editors. Temporal databases: research and practice, Springer-
Verlag .
 . Wiederhold G, Fries J, Weyl S. Structured organization of clinical data bases. In Proceedings of
AFIPS NCC, AFIPS 1975:479–85.
 . Das AK, Musen MA. A formal method to resolve temporal mismatches in clinical databases.
Proc AMIA Symp 2001:130–4. [PubMed: 11825168]
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 . Das AK, Musen MA. A foundational model of time for heterogeneous clinical databases. Proc
AMIA Annu Fall Symp 1997:106–10. [PubMed: 9357598]
 . Das AK, Musen MA. SYNCHRONUS: a reusable software module for temporal integration.
Proc AMIA Symp 2002:195–9. [PubMed: 12463814]
 . Tansel AU. A generalized relational framework for modeling temporal data Temporal
databases:Theory, Design, and Implementation. Redwood City, CA, Benjamin/Cummings 1993.
 . Snodgrass RT. The TSQL2 Temporal Query Langage. Boston, MA, Kluwer Academic Publishers
 . Elmasri R, Wuu GTJ, Kouramajian V. A temporal model and query language for EER databases
Temporal databases:Theory, Design, and Implementation. Redwood City, CA, Benjamin/
Cummings 1993.
 . Gregersen H, Jensen CS. Temporal entity-relationship models: A survey. IEEE transactions on
Knowledge and Data Engineering 1999;11:464–97.
 . Wuu GTJ, Dayal U. A uniform model for temporal and versioned object-oriented databases
Temporal databases:Theory, Design, and Implementation. Redwood City, CA, Benjamin/
Cummings 1993.
 . Gorawalla LA, Oszu MT, Szafron D. Framework for temporal data models: Exploiting objectoriented technology. In Proceedings of 1997 Conference on Technology of Object-oriented
Languages and Systems, TOOLS23, Santa Barbara, CA, IEEE 1997:16–30.
 . Pinciroli F, Combi C, Pozzi G. Object-oriented DBMS techniques for time-oriented medical
record. Med. Inform 1992;17:231–41.
 . Kahn M Modeling time in medical decision-support programs. Med Decis Making. 1991;Oct-
Dec;11(4):249–64. [PubMed: 1766328]
 . Shahar Y, Musen MA. RESUME: a temporal-abstraction system for patient monitoring. Comput
Biomed Res 1993;26(3):255–73. [PubMed: 8325005]
 . Kahn MG, Marrs KA. Creating temporal abstractions in three clinical information systems. Proc
Annu Symp Comput Appl Med Care 1995:392–6. [PubMed: 8563309]
 . Boaz D, Shahar Y. A framework for distributed mediation of temporal-abstraction queries to
clinical databases. Artif Intell Med 2005;34(1):3–24. [PubMed: 15885563]
 . Seyfang A, Miksch S. Advanced temporal data abstraction for guideline execution. Stud Health
Technol Inform 2004;101:88–102. [PubMed: 15537208]
 . Spokoiny A, Shahar Y. A knowledge-based time-oriented active database approach for
intelligent abstraction, querying and continuous monitoring of clinical data. Medinfo 2004;11 :508–12.
 . Stein A, Musen MA, Shahar Y. Knowledge acquisition for temporal abstraction. Proc AMIA
Annu Fall Symp 1996:204–8. [PubMed: 8947657]
 . Shahar Y, Das AK, Tu SW, Kraemer FB, Basso LV, Musen MA. Knowledge-based temporal
abstraction in diabetes therapy. Medinfo 1995;8 Pt 1:852–6. [PubMed: 8591345]
 . Shahar Y, Das AK, Tu SW, Kraemer FB, Musen MA. Knowledge-based temporal abstraction
for diabetic monitoring. Proc Annu Symp Comput Appl Med Care 1994:697–701. [PubMed:
 . Kuilboer MM, Shahar Y, Wilson DM, Musen MA. Knowledge reuse: temporal-abstraction
mechanisms for the assessment of children’s growth. Proc Annu Symp Comput Appl Med Care
1993:449–53. [PubMed: 8130514]
 . Cousins S, Kahn M. The visual display of temporal information. Artif Intell Med 1991;3:341–
 . Spenke M Visualization and interactive analysis of blood parameters with InfoZoom. Artif Intell
Med 2001;22(2):159–72. [PubMed: 11348845]
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 . Plaisant C, Mushlin R, Snyder A, Li J, Heller D, Shneiderman B. LifeLines: using visualization
to enhance navigation and analysis of patient records. Proc AMIA Symp 1998:76–80. [PubMed:
 . Shahar Y, Goren-Bar D, Boaz D, Tahan G. Distributed, intelligent, interactive visualization and
exploration of time-oriented clinical data and their abstractions. Artif Intell Med 2006;38(2):115–
35. [PubMed: 16343873]
 . Shahar Y Dimensions of time in illness: an objective view. Ann Intern Med 2000;132(1):45–53.
[PubMed: 10627251]
 . Shahar Y, Cheng C. Intelligent visualization and exploration of time-oriented clinical data. Top
Health Inf Manage 1999;20(2):15–31. [PubMed: 10662090]
 . Shahar Y, Cheng C. Knowledge-based visualization of time-oriented clinical data. Proc AMIA
Symp 1998:155–9. [PubMed: 9929201]
 . Shahar Y, Cheng C. Model-based visualization of temporal abstractions. Compat Intell
2000;16(2):279–306.
 . Chittaro L, Combi C. Visual definition of temporal clinical abstractions: A user interface based
on novel metaphors. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, Proceedings 2001;2101:227–230.
 . Chittaro L, Combi C. Visualizing queries on databases of temporal histories: new metaphors and
their evaluation. Data & Knowledge Engineering 2003;44(2):239–264.
 . Chittaro L, Combi C, Trapasso G. Data mining on temporal data: a visual approach and its
clinical application to hemodialysis. Journal of Visual Languages and Computing
2003;14(6):591–620.
 . Combi C, Pinciroli F, Cavallaro M, Cucchi G. Querying temporal clinical databases with
different time granularities: the GCH-OSQL language. Proc Annu Symp Comput Appl Med Care
1995:326–30. [PubMed: 8563295]
 . Combi C, Pinciroli F, Musazzi G, Ponti C. Managing and displaying different time granularities
of clinical information. Proc Annu Symp Comput Appl Med Care 1994:954–8. [PubMed:
 . Combi C, Pinciroli F, Pozzi G. Managing different time granularities of clinical information by
an interval-based temporal data model. Methods Inf Med 1995;34(5):458–74. [PubMed:
 . Combi C, Franceschet M, Peron A. Representing and Reasoning about Temporal Granularities.
J Logic Computation 2004;14(1):51–77.
 . Combi C, Pinciroli F, Pozzi G. Managing time granularity of narrative clinical information: the
temporal data model TIME-NESIS. 3rd Workshop on Temporal Representation and Reasoning
(TIME’96) 1996:88–93.
 . Keravnou ET. A Multidimensional and Multigranular Model of Time for Medical Knowledge-
Based Systems. Journal of Intelligent Information Systems 1999;13(12):73–120.
 . Goralwalla IA, Yuri L, Özsu MT, Szafron D, Combi C. Temporal Granularity: Completing the
Puzzle. Journal of Intelligent Information Systems 2001;16(1):41–63.
 . Dubois D, HadjAli A, Prade H. Fuzziness and uncertainty in temporal reasoning. Journal of
Universal Computer Science 2003;9(9):1168–1194.
 . Santos E, Young JD. Probabilistic temporal networks: A unified framework for reasoning with
time and uncertainty. International Journal of Approximate Reasoning 1999;20(3):263–291.
 . Wainer J, Sandri S. Fuzzy Temporal/Categorical Information in Diagnosis. Journal of Intelligent
Information Systems 1999;13(1 – 2):9–26.
 . Dolin RH. Modeling the temporal complexities of symptoms. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association 1995;2(5):323–331. [PubMed: 7496882]
 . Anderson FA Jr., Hirsh J, White K, Fitzgerald RH Jr. Temporal trends in prevention of venous
thromboembolism following primary total hip or knee arthroplasty 1996–2001: findings from the
Hip and Knee Registry. Chest 2003;124(6 Suppl):349S–356S. [PubMed: 14668417]
 . Baumert J, Ladwig KH, Doring A, Lowel H, Wichmann HE. Temporal changes and
determinants of smoking habits with respect to prevention. Gesundheitswesen 2005;67 Suppl
1:S46–50. [PubMed: 16032517]
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 . Innocent PR, John RI. Computer aided fuzzy medical diagnosis. Information Sciences
2004;162(2):81–104.
 . Long W Temporal reasoning for diagnosis in a causal probabilistic knowledge base. Artificial
Intelligence in Medicine 1996;8(3):193–215. [PubMed: 8830922]
 . Haimowitz IJ, Kohane IS. Managing temporal worlds for medical trend diagnosis. Artificial
Intelligence in Medicine 1996;8(3):299–321. [PubMed: 8830926]
 . Guarnero A, Marzuoli M, Molino G, Terenziani P, Torchio M, Vanni K. Contextual and
temporal clinical guidelines. Proc AMIA Symp 1998:683–7. [PubMed: 9929306]
 . Musen MA, Tu SW, Das AK, Shahar Y. EON: a component-based approach to automation of
protocol-directed therapy. J Am Med Inform Assoc 1996;3(6):367–88. [PubMed: 8930854]
 . Tu SW, Musen MA. The EON model of intervention protocols and guidelines. Proc AMIA
Annu Fall Symp 1996:587–91. [PubMed: 8947734]
 . Schmidt R, Gierl L. A prognostic model for temporal courses that combines temporal
abstraction and case-based reasoning. Stud Health Technol Inform 2003;95:571–6. [PubMed:
 . Schmidt R, Pollwein B, Gierl L. Prognoses of multiparametric medical time courses applied to
kidney function assessments. Medinfo 1998;9 Pt 1:554–8.
 . Zupan B, Demsar J, Smrke D, Bozikov K, Stankovski V, Bratko I, et al. Predicting patient’s
long-term clinical status after hip arthroplasty using hierarchical decision modelling and data
mining. Methods Inf Med 2001;40(1):25–31. [PubMed: 11310156]
 . Babaev A, Frederick PD, Pasta DJ, Every N, Sichrovsky T, Hochman JS. Trends in management
and outcomes of patients with acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock.
Jama 2005;294(4):448–54. [PubMed: 16046651]
 . Combi C, Oliboni B, Rossato R. Merging multimedia presentations and semistructured temporal
data: a graph-based model and its application to clinical information. Artif Intell Med
2005;34(2):89–112. [PubMed: 15894175]
 . Senni M, De Maria R, Gregori D, Gonzini L, Gorini M, Cacciatore G, et al. Temporal trends in
survival and hospitalizations in outpatients with chronic systolic heart failure in 1995 and 1999. J
Card Fail 2005;11(4):270–8. [PubMed: 15880335]
 . Pires LA, Ganji JR, Jarandila R, Steele R. Diagnostic patterns and temporal trends in the
evaluation of adult patients hospitalized with syncope. Arch Intern Med 2001;161(15):1889–95.
[PubMed: 11493131]
 . Peek NB. Explicit temporal models for decision-theoretic planning of clinical management.
Artif Intell Med 1999;15(2):135–54. [PubMed: 10082178]
 . Siregar P, Sinteff JP, Julen N, Lebeux P. Spatio-temporal reasoning for multi-scale modeling in
cardiology. Artif Intell Med 1997;10(1):41–57. [PubMed: 9177815]
 . Tong DA, Widman LE. Model-based interpretation of the ECG: a methodology for temporal and
spatial reasoning. Comput Biomed Res 1993;26(3):206–19. [PubMed: 8325001]
 . Long WJ, Naimi S, Criscitiello MG. Development of a knowledge base for diagnostic reasoning
in cardiology. Comput Biomed Res 1992;25(3):292–311. [PubMed: 1611893]
 . Tong DA, Widman LE. Model-based interpretation of the ECG: a methodology for temporal and
spatial reasoning. Proc Annu Symp Comput Appl Med Care 1992:133–9. [PubMed: 1482855]
 . Galan SF, Aguado F, Diez FJ, Mira J. NasoNet, modeling the spread of nasopharyngeal cancer
with networks of probabilistic events in discrete time. Artif Intell Med 2002;25(3):247–64.
[PubMed: 12069762]
 . Kahn MG, Fagan LM, Sheiner LB. Combining physiologic models and symbolic methods to
interpret time-varying patient data. Methods Inf Med 1991;30(3):167–78. [PubMed: 1943788]
 . Rao BR, Sandilya S, Niculescu R, Germond C, Goel A. Mining time-dependent patient
outcomes from hospital patient records. Proc AMIA Symp 2002:632–6. [PubMed: 12463900]
 . Cohen T, Kaufman D, White T, Segal G, Staub AB, Patel V, et al. Cognitive evaluation of an
innovative psychiatric clinical knowledge enhancement system. Medinfo 2004;11(Pt 2):1295–9.
 . Schmidt R, Pollwein B, Gierl L. Medical multiparametric time course prognoses applied to
kidney function assessments. Int J Med Inform 1999;53(2–3):253–63. [PubMed: 10193893]
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 . Dalal M, Feiner S, McKeown K, Jordan D, Allen B, alSafadi Y. MAGIC: an experimental
system for generating multimedia briefings about post-bypass patient status. Proc AMIA Annu
Fall Symp 1996:684–8. [PubMed: 8947752]
 . Russ TA. Use of data abstraction methods to simplify monitoring. Artif Intell Med
1995;7(6):497–514. [PubMed: 8963373]
 . Spooner SA. Incorporating temporal and clinical reasoning in a new measure of continuity of
care. Proc Annu Symp Comput Appl Med Care 1994:716–21. [PubMed: 7950019]
 . Bellazzi R, Magni P, Larizza C, De Nicolao G, Riva A, Stefanelli M. Mining biomedical time
series by combining structural analysis and temporal abstractions. Proc AMIA Symp 1998:160–
4. [PubMed: 9929202]
 . Shahar Y, Musen MA. Knowledge-based temporal abstraction in clinical domains. Artif Intell
Med 1996;8(3):267–98. [PubMed: 8830925]
 . Friedman C, Hripcsak G. Natural Language Processing and its future in medicine. Academic
Medicine 1999;74:890–5. [PubMed: 10495728]
 . Winograd T Language as a Cognitive Process: Volume 1-Syntax. Reading. MA: Addison-
Wesley 1983.
 . Carston R Thoughts and Utterances: The Pragmatics of Explicit Communication. Oxford:
Blackwell 2002.
 . Yule G Pragmatics (Oxford Introduction to Language Study Series). Oxford University Press
 . Thomas J Meaning in Interaction: An Introduction to Pragmatics. Longman. 1995.
 . Allen J Natural Language Understanding (2nd ed.). Redwood City, CA: Benjamin Cummings
 . Charniak E Statistical Language Learning. Cambridge: MIT Press 1993.
 . Manning CD, Schütze H. Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing. The MIT
Press 1999.
 . Mani I, Pustejovsky J, Gaizauskas R. The language of time: a reader. Oxford University Press
 . Bull W Time, tense, and the verb. University of California Publications in Linguistics 1960;19.
 . McCawley J Tense and time reference in English in Studies in Linguistic Semantics, ed.
Langendoen T, Holt Renhardt & Winston 1971.
 . Dowty D Studies in the logic of verb aspect and time reference in English Dept. of Linguistics,
University of Texas at Austin 1972.
 . Steedman M Verb, time and modality. Cogn Sci 1977;1(2):216–234.
 . Passonneau R A computational model of the semantics of tense and aspect. Computational
Linguistics 1988;14(2):44–60.
 . Webber B Tense as discourse anaphor. Computational Linguistics 1988;14(2):61–71.
 . Bruce BC. A model for temporal references and its application in a question answering
program. Artif intell 1972;3:1–25.
 . Vendler Z Verbs and times. In Linguistics in Philosophy. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY
1967:97–121.
 . Nakhimovsky A Aspect, aspectual class, and the temporal structure of narrative. Computational
Linguistics 1988;14(2):29–43.
 . Reichenbach H Elements of Symbolic Logic. The Macmillan Company 1947.
 . Kahn K, Gorry GA. Mechanizing temporal knowledge. Artificial Intelligence 1977;9(1):87–
 . Findler NV, Chen D. On the problems of time retrieval of temporal relations causality, and
coexistence. International Journal of Parallel Programming 1973;2(3):161–185.
 . Lascarides A, Asher NP. Discourse relations and defeasible knowledge. in 29th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics 1991:55–62.
 . Dowty D The effects of aspectual class on the temporal structure of discourse: semantics or
pragmatics? Linguistics and Philosophy 1986;9(1):37–61.
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 . Mann W, Thompson S. Rhetorical structure theory: A theory of text organisation. Technical
report ISI/RS-87–190, USC Information Sciences Institute and Linguistics Dept UC santa
Barbara 1987.
 . Schilder F, Tenbrink T. Before and after: sentence-internal and -external discourse relations
Workshop booklet of Workshop From Sentence Processing to Discourse Interpretation: Crossing
the Borders. Utrecht (The Netherlands), 2–3 7 2001.
 . Prior A Past, Present and Future. Oxford: Clarendon Press 1967.
 . Galton A Temporal Logics and their Applications. London: Academic Press 1987.
 . Gabbay D, Hodkinson I, Reynolds M. Temporal Logic: Mathematical Foundations and
Computational Aspects. Oxford: Clarendon Press 1994.
 . Augusto JC. The logical approach to temporal reasoning. Artifical intelligence Review
2001;16:301–333.
 . Moens M, Thompson N. Temporal ontology and temporal reference. Computational Linguistics
1988;14(2):15–28.
 . Hobbs J, Ferguson G, Allen J, Fikes R, Hayes P, McDermott D, et al. A DAML Ontology of
Time. 2002.
 . Pustejovsky J, Sauri R, Setzer A, Gaizauskas R, Ingria B. TimeML annotation guidelines. http://
www.cs.brandeis.edu/~jamesp/arda/time/documentation/AnnotationGuidelinev0.4.0.pdf 2002.
 . Sauri R, Littman J, Knippen B, Gaizauskas R, Setzer A, Pustejovsky J. TimeML annotation
guidelines. Sep, 2004.
 . Hobbs J, Pustejovsky J. Annotating and Reasoning about Time and Events. In Proceedings of
AAAI Spring Symposium on Logical Formalization of Commonsense Reasoning, Stanford,
California 2003.
 . MUC6. Proceedings of the Sixth Message Understanding Conference (MUC-6), Columbia,
Maryland 1995.
 . MUC7. Proceedings of the 7th Conference on Message Understanding (MUC-7), NIST,
Washington, DC 1998.
 . Ferro L, Mani I, Sundheim B, Wilson G. TIDES-2003 standard for the annotation of temporal
expressions. In Processings of the MITRE 2003.
 . Ferro L, Mani I, Sundheim B, Wilson G. TIDES Temporal Annotation Guidelines. Version
1.0.2. 2001.
 . Setzer A Temporal information in newswire articles: an annotation scheme and corpus study.
Ph.D. dissertation, University of Sheffield 2001.
 . Mani I, Schiffman B. Temporally Anchoring and Ordering Events in News Pustejovsky James
and Gaizauskas Robert Event Recognition in Natural Language. John Benjamins.
 . Han B, Lavie A. A Framework for Resolution of Time in Natural Language. TALIP Special
Issue on Spatial and Temporal Information Processing 3 2004;3(1).
 . Friedman C, Shagina L, Lussier Y, Hripcsak G. Automated encoding of clinical documents
based on natural language processing. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2004;11(5):392–402. [PubMed:
 . Friedman C, Hripcsak G. Natural language processing and its future in medicine. Acad Med
1999;74(8):890–5. [PubMed: 10495728]
 . Spyns P Natural language processing in medicine: an overview. Methods Inf Med 1996;35(4–
5):285–301. [PubMed: 9019092]
 . Hirschman L Retrieving Time Information from Natural Language Texts Information Retrieval
Research (Oddy RN, Robertson SE, Van Rijsbergen CJ and Williams P, eds.), Butterworths,
London 1981:154–171.
 . Hirschman L, Story G. Representation Implicit and Explicit Time Relations in Narrative In
Proc. of the 7th IJCAI, Vancouver, Canada 1981:289–295.
 . Obermeier K. Temporal inference in medical texts. Proceedings of 23 Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics; Chicago. 1985.
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 . Jonsson P, Drakengren T, Backstrom C. Temporal information in medical narrative In: Sager N,
Friedman C, Lyman MS. Medical Language Processing: Computer Management of Narrative
Data. Reading, Mass: Addison-Wesley Pub. Co 1987:175–94.
 . Haug PJ, Ranum DL, Frederick PR. Computerized extraction of coded findings from free-text
radiologic reports. Work in progress. Radiology 1990;174(2):543–548. [PubMed: 2404321]
 . Sager N, Lyman M, Nhan N, Tick L. Medical language processing: applications to patient data
representation and automatic encoding. Methods Inf Med 1995;34(1–2):140–6. [PubMed:
 . Friedman C A broad-coverage natural language processing system. Proc AMIA Symp
2000:270–4. [PubMed: 11079887]
 . Friedman C, Alderson PO, Austin JH, Cimino JJ, Johnson SB. A general natural-language text
processor for clinical radiology. J Am Med Inform Assoc 1994;1(2):161–174. [PubMed:
 . Friedman C, Liu H, Shagina L, Johnson S, Hripcsak G. Evaluating the UMLS as a source of
lexical knowledge for medical language processing. Proc AMIA Symp 2001:189–93. [PubMed:
 . Lussier YA, Shagina L, Friedman C. Automating SNOMED coding using medical language
understanding: a feasibility study. Proc AMIA Symp 2001:418–22. [PubMed: 11825222]
 . Pryor TA. The HELP medical record system. MD Comput 1988;5(5):22–33.
 . Pryor TA, Gardner RM, Clayton PD, Warner HR. The HELP system. J Med Syst 1983;7(2):87–
102. [PubMed: 6688267]
 . Haug P, Koehler S, Lau L, Wang P, Rocha R, Huff S. Experience with a mixed semantic/
syntactic parser. Proc Annu Symp Comput Appl Med Care 1995:284–8. [PubMed: 8563286]
 . Gundersen ML, Haug PJ, Pryor TA, van Bree R, Koehler S, Bauer K, et al. Development and
evaluation of a computerized admission diagnoses encoding system. Comput Biomed Res
1996;29(5):351–72. [PubMed: 8902364]
 . Fiszman M, Chapman WW, Aronsky D, Evans RS, Haug PJ. Automatic detection of acute
bacterial pneumonia from chest X-ray reports. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2000;7(6):593–604.
[PubMed: 11062233]
 . Christensen LM, Haug PJ, Fiszman M. MPLUS: a probabilistic medical language understanding
system. Proceedings of a Workshop on Natural Language Processing in the Biomedical Domain
2002:29–36.
 . Meystre S, Haug P. Automation of a problem list using natural language processing. BMC
Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2005;5(1):30. [PubMed: 16135244]
 . Hahn U, Romacker M, Schulz S. Discourse structures in medical reports--watch out! The
generation of referentially coherent and valid text knowledge bases in the MEDSYNDIKATE
system. Int J Med Inform 1999;53(1):1–28. [PubMed: 10075128]
 . Hahn U, Romacker M, Schulz S. MEDSYNDIKATE--a natural language system for the
extraction of medical information from findings reports. Int J Med Inform 2002;67(1–3):63–74.
[PubMed: 12460632]
 . Zhou L, Friedman C, Parsons S, Hripcsak G. System architecture for temporal information
extraction, representation and reasong in clinical narrative reports. Proc AMIA Symp. 2005; 869–
873. [PubMed: 16779164]
 . Imai T, Onogi Y. Extracting numeric measurements and temporal coordinates from Japanese
radiological reports Medical Imaging 2004: PACS and Imaging Informatics. Edited by Ratib
Osman M.; Huang HK Proceedings of the SPIE, Volume 5371, pp. 268–276 . 2004.
 . Ohe K, Miyo K, Onogi Y, Ueda K, Takada M, Chihara T. Implications of a General data model
for implementing OODB/CORBA-based computerized patient record system In: Patel V et al.
eds., Proceedings of MEDINFO2001, Amsterdam: IOS press, 2001; pp.789.
 . Shahar Y, Miksch S, Johnson P. The Asgaard project: a task-specific framework for the
application and critiquing of time-oriented clinical guidelines. Artif Intell Med 1998;14(1–2):29–
51. [PubMed: 9779882]
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 . Kaiser K, Miksch S. Treating Temporal Information in Plan and Process Modeling. Vienna
University of Technology, Institute of Software Technology and Interactive Systems, Vienna,
Technical Report, Asgaard-TR-2004–1, 2004.
 . Miksch S, Shahar Y, Johnson P. Asbru: A task-specific, intention-based, and time-oriented
language for representing skeletal plans. Proceedings of the Seventh Workshop on Knowledge
Engineering Methods and Languages (KEML-97), Milton Keynes, UK.
 . CEN/TC 251 - European Standardization of Health Informatics. 
 . Health Level Seven. 
 . openEHR Community. 
 . Gall W, Duftschmid G, Dorda W. Temporal Components in Architectures of Electronic Health
Records. Tagungsband der 49. Jahrestagung der Deutschen Gesellschaft für Medizinische
Informatik, Biometrie und Epidemiologie ; Innsbruck, Österreich (Verlag videel
OHG), pp. 99–102. 2004.
 . Ceusters W, Buekens F, DeMoor G, Bernauer J, DeKeyser L, Surján G. TSMI: a CEN/TC251
standard for time specific problems in healthcare informatics and telematics. International
Journal of Medical Informatics 1997;46(2):87. [PubMed: 9315498]
 . Anscombe GEM. Before and after. The Philosophical Review 1964(74):3–24.
 . Hahn U, Romacker M, Schulz S. Why discourse structures in medical reports matter for the
validity of automatically generated text knowledge bases. Medinfo 1998;9 Pt 1:633–8.
 . Hahn U, Romacker M. Text structures in medical text processing: empirical evidence and a text
understanding prototype. Proc AMIA Annu Fall Symp 1997:819–23. [PubMed: 9357739]
 . Iqbal A Goralwalla YL, Ozsu M. Tamer, Duane Szafron, Carlo Combi. Temporal Granularity:
Completing the Puzzle Journal of Intelligent Information Systems. Boston Jan-Feb 2001;Vol.
16(Iss. 1):p. 41.
 . Vila L, Godo L. On Fuzzy Temporal Constraint Networks. Mathware and Soft Computing
1994;3:315–334.
 . Dubois D, Prade H. Processing fuzzy temporal knowledge. Man and Cybernetics, IEEE
Transactions on Systems 1989;19(4):729–744.
 . Badaloni S, Giacomin M. The algebra IA(fuz): a framework for qualitative fuzzy temporal
reasoning. Artificial Intelligence 2006;170(10):872–908.
 . Badaloni S, Falda M, Giacomin M. Integrating quantitative and qualitative fuzzy temporal
constraints. Ai Communications 2004;17(4):187–200.
 . Bonnet A Schema-shift strategies to understanding structured texts in natural language. Stanford
Heuristic programming Project, Memo HPP-79–25. Department of Computer Science Report No.
STAN-CS-79–759. 1979.
 . Hobbs J Coherence and Coreference. Cogn Sci 1979;3(1):67–90.
 . Mitkov R Anaphora Resolution. Lindon; New York: Longman 2002.
 . Friedman C, Hripcsak G. Evaluating natural language processors in the clinical domain. In
Chute CG, ed. Proceedings of the Conference on Natural Language and Medical Concept
Representation (IMIA WG6), Jacksonville, Florida 1997:41–52.
 . Hripcsak G, Wilcox A. Reference standards, judges, comparison subjects: roles for experts in
evaluating system performance. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2002;9:1–15. [PubMed: 11751799]
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Types of Processes (adapted from )
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Levels of linguistic structure and analysis (see details in section 4.1), and related challenges
in processing time in medical text (see details in section 4.3)
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
A simple timeline and selected work of processing temporal information in natural language
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Time representation for medical text in “the time program” (adapted from )
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Time representation for medical text in GROK system (adapted from )
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
A simplified XML output of MedLEE. In this case temporal information is tagged using
semantic types “date”, “reltime” and “status.” The output also contains other contextual
information.
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
(Adapted from ) Example temporal expression “his cough started at least two weeks
before admission” modeled on a time line, depicting the event “cough” anchored by
“admission.” The bars represent the vagueness of the temporal information, which widen the
limits of the constraints.
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
A statement encoded using TSMI standard (adapted from )
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Input to temporal abstraction tasks from structured data and narrative data
Zhou and Hripcsak
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Zhou and Hripcsak
Theoretical and methodological studies in processing temporal information in medicine
Theories and
methodologies
Related work
Category 1: applying theories and models in temporal reasoning in AI
Probabilistic approaches
Associated with the tasks of interpreting or forecasting with time- stamped clinical data whose values are affected
by different sources of uncertainty. Many studies in time have applied Bayesian probabilistic
Event calculus 
Applied to assess the evolution of a patient’s status . It also has been adopted as the temporal ontology in a
temporal abstraction approach for clinical time-oriented databases .
Markov decision process
Applied to solve decision problems in which the optimal choice has to be revised periodically in accordance to the
evolution of the patient’s conditions .
Allen’s interval 
Applied to the tasks of temporal abstraction and query process to determine qualitative temporal relationships
between medical events .
Temporal constraint
network 
Used to facilitate patient-monitoring and problem-detection , manage medical resources , and treat
temporal constraints in clinical guidelines . It has also been applied to model temporal information
in clinical discharge summaries .
Case-based reasoning 
Used to determine similarities in patient treatments mainly with respect to their pattern of time and dosage .
Schmidt proposed a method for prognosis of temporal courses, which combines temporal abstractions with
case-based reasoning.
Category 2: developing frameworks that meet needs from clinical applications
Temporal Database
Management
Involves tasks of storing, processing and retrieving time-oriented information . Various modeling
approaches have been studied. Wiederhold proposed a Time Oriented Databank (TOD) which created a cubic
view of time-stamped clinical data. Kahn et al described a query language called TQuery. Das 
proposed a method for temporal integration called temporal mediation which addresses the problem of temporal
model heterogeneity. Other approaches involve relational models , entity-relationship models or
object-oriented models .
Temporal Abstraction
Relates to the task of creating interval-based concepts (abstractions) from time-stamped raw data . Many
studies have been conducted , specifically focusing on clinical domains such as
chronic diseases, growth and development problems, and intensive neonatal or adult care unit settings, where
clinical data are either cumulative or arrive rapidly. Shahar developed the RESUME system, which
utilizes specific explicit domain ontologies and contains several mechanisms that deal with five temporalabstraction subtasks.
Temporal Data
Visualization
Involves tasks of collecting, navigating and visualizing time-oriented information. Some early work used raw
clinical data. For example, Cousins developed a system called a time line with a set of operators and a user
interface that allows time lines to be manipulated. Later on, systems appeared with a more flexible zoom in and
zoom out interface . Shahar et al developed methods and systems for visualization of
domain specific temporal abstractions. Other methods in this field include 2D and 3D visualization,
and various statistical and graphical methodologies.
Category 3: resolving issues such as temporal granularity and uncertainty
Temporal Granularity
Involves tasks of representing and storing time points and time spans with different and mixed granularities,
converting a temporal primitive from one granular level to another, and handling granularity mismatches between
two sets of data .
Temporal Uncertainty
Relates to tasks of handling vague and uncertain temporal information which is due to imprecise or unreliable
data and knowledge , e.g. fuzzy sets theory was used to model imprecise temporal
information within a diagnostic framework .
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 July 13.