Volume 6, Issue 2
The International Journal of
Biostatistics
CAUSAL INFERENCE
An Introduction to Causal Inference
Judea Pearl, University of California, Los Angeles
Recommended Citation:
Pearl, Judea "An Introduction to Causal Inference," The International Journal of
Biostatistics: Vol. 6: Iss. 2, Article 7.
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
An Introduction to Causal Inference
Judea Pearl
This paper summarizes recent advances in causal inference and underscores the paradigmatic
shifts that must be undertaken in moving from traditional statistical analysis to causal analysis of
multivariate data. Special emphasis is placed on the assumptions that underlie all causal
inferences, the languages used in formulating those assumptions, the conditional nature of all
causal and counterfactual claims, and the methods that have been developed for the assessment of
such claims. These advances are illustrated using a general theory of causation based on the
Structural Causal Model (SCM) described in Pearl , which subsumes and unifies other
approaches to causation, and provides a coherent mathematical foundation for the analysis of
causes and counterfactuals. In particular, the paper surveys the development of mathematical tools
for inferring (from a combination of data and assumptions) answers to three types of causal
queries: those about (1) the effects of potential interventions, (2) probabilities of counterfactuals,
and (3) direct and indirect effects (also known as "mediation"). Finally, the paper defines the
formal and conceptual relationships between the structural and potential-outcome frameworks and
presents tools for a symbiotic analysis that uses the strong features of both. The tools are
demonstrated in the analyses of mediation, causes of effects, and probabilities of causation.
KEYWORDS: structural equation models, confounding, graphical methods, counterfactuals,
causal effects, potential-outcome, mediation, policy evaluation, causes of effects
Author Notes: Portions of this paper are adapted from Pearl ; I am indebted to
Elja Arjas, Sander Greenland, David MacKinnon, Patrick Shrout, and many readers of the UCLA
Causality Blog ( for reading and commenting on various
segments of this manuscript, and especially to Erica Moodie and David Stephens for their
thorough editorial input. This research was supported in parts by NIH grant #1R01 LM009961-01,
NSF grant #IIS-0914211, and ONR grant #N000-14-09-1-0665.
One condition for the identiﬁability of DEx,x′(Y) is that Zx⊥⊥Yx′,z|W holds
for some set W of measured covariates. This technical condition in itself, like the
ignorability condition of (35), is close to meaningless for most investigators, as it
is not phrased in terms of realized variables. The surgical interpretation of counterfactuals (29) can be invoked at this point to unveil the graphical interpretation
of this condition. It states that W should be admissible (i.e., satisfy the back-door
condition) relative the path(s) from Z to Y. This condition, satisﬁed by W2 in Fig.
6(b), is readily comprehended by empirical researchers, and the task of selecting
such measurements, W, can then be guided by the available scientiﬁc knowledge.
Additional graphical and counterfactual conditions for identiﬁcation are derived in
Pearl Petersen et al. and Imai, Keele, and Yamamoto .
In particular, it can be shown that the natural direct effect
is identiﬁable in Markovian models (i.e., no unobserved confounders) where each
“do-expression” can be reduced using Eq. (24) or (25) and then estimated by regression.
For example, for the model in Fig. 6(b) we have:
DEx,x′(Y) = ∑
P(w2)[E(Y|x′,z,w2)−E(Y|x,z,w2)]∑
P(z|x,w1,w2)P(w1)
while for the confounding-free model of Fig. 6(a) we have:
DEx,x′(Y) = ∑
[E(Y|x′,z)−E(Y|x,z)]P(z|x).
Both (44) and (45) can easily be estimated by a two-step regression.
Page 41: The first 3 paragraphs from the top of the page through the end of section
6.1.3 (including erroneous equation (44)) should appear as follows:
Introduction
Most studies in the health, social and behavioral sciences aim to answer causal
rather than associative – questions. Such questions require some knowledge of the
data-generating process, and cannot be computed from the data alone, nor from the
distributions that govern the data. Remarkably, although much of the conceptual
framework and algorithmic tools needed for tackling such problems are now well
established, they are not known to many of the researchers who could put them
into practical use. Solving causal problems systematically requires certain extensions in the standard mathematical language of statistics, and these extensions are
not typically emphasized in the mainstream literature. As a result, many statistical
researchers have not yet beneﬁted from causal inference results in (i) counterfactual analysis, (ii) nonparametric structural equations, (iii) graphical models, and (iv)
the symbiosis between counterfactual and graphical methods. This survey aims at
making these contemporary advances more accessible by providing a gentle introduction to causal inference for a more in-depth treatment and its methodological
principles ).
In Section 2, we discuss coping with untested assumptions and new mathematical notation which is required to move from associational to causal statistics.
Section 3.1 introduces the fundamentals of the structural theory of causation and
uses these modeling fundamentals to represent interventions and develop mathematical tools for estimating causal effects (Section 3.3) and counterfactual quantities (Section 3.4). Section 4 outlines a general methodology to guide problems of
causal inference: Deﬁne, Assume, Identify and Estimate, with each step beneﬁting
from the tools developed in Section 3.
Section 5 relates these tools to those used in the potential-outcome framework, and offers a formal mapping between the two frameworks and a symbiosis
(Section 5.3) that exploits the best features of both. Finally, the beneﬁt of this
symbiosis is demonstrated in Section 6, in which the structure-based logic of counterfactuals is harnessed to estimate causal quantities that cannot be deﬁned within
the paradigm of controlled randomized experiments. These include direct and indirect effects, the effect of treatment on the treated, and questions of attribution, i.e.,
whether one event can be deemed “responsible” for another.
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
From Association to Causation
Understanding the distinction and its implications
The aim of standard statistical analysis is to assess parameters of a distribution from
samples drawn of that distribution. With the help of such parameters, associations
among variables can be inferred, which permits the researcher to estimate probabilities of past and future events and update those probabilities in light of new
information. These tasks are managed well by standard statistical analysis so long
as experimental conditions remain the same. Causal analysis goes one step further;
its aim is to infer probabilities under conditions that are changing, for example,
changes induced by treatments or external interventions.
This distinction implies that causal and associational concepts do not mix;
there is nothing in a distribution function to tell us how that distribution would differ if external conditions were to change—say from observational to experimental
setup—because the laws of probability theory do not dictate how one property of a
distribution ought to change when another property is modiﬁed. This information
must be provided by causal assumptions which identify relationships that remain
invariant when external conditions change.
A useful demarcation line between associational and causal concepts crisp
and easy to apply, can be formulated as follows. An associational concept is any
relationship that can be deﬁned in terms of a joint distribution of observed variables, and a causal concept is any relationship that cannot be deﬁned from the
distribution alone. Examples of associational concepts are: correlation, regression, dependence, conditional independence, likelihood, collapsibility, propensity
score, risk ratio, odds ratio, marginalization, conditionalization, “controlling for,”
and many more. Examples of causal concepts are: randomization, inﬂuence, effect,
confounding, “holding constant,” disturbance, error terms, structural coefﬁcients,
spurious correlation, faithfulness/stability, instrumental variables, intervention, explanation, and attribution. The former can, while the latter cannot be deﬁned in
term of distribution functions.
This demarcation line is extremely useful in tracing the assumptions that are
needed for substantiating various types of scientiﬁc claims. Every claim invoking
causal concepts must rely on some premises that invoke such concepts; it cannot be
inferred from, or even deﬁned in terms statistical associations alone.
This distinction further implies that causal relations cannot be expressed in
the language of probability and, hence, that any mathematical approach to causal
analysis must acquire new notation – probability calculus is insufﬁcient. To illustrate, the syntax of probability calculus does not permit us to express the simple fact
that “symptoms do not cause diseases,” let alone draw mathematical conclusions
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
from such facts. All we can say is that two events are dependent—meaning that if
we ﬁnd one, we can expect to encounter the other, but we cannot distinguish statistical dependence, quantiﬁed by the conditional probability P(disease|symptom)
from causal dependence, for which we have no expression in standard probability
Untested assumptions and new notation
The preceding two requirements: (1) to commence causal analysis with untested,1
theoretically or judgmentally based assumptions, and (2) to extend the syntax of
probability calculus, constitute the two primary barriers to the acceptance of causal
analysis among professionals with traditional training in statistics.
Associational assumptions, even untested, are testable in principle, given
sufﬁciently large sample and sufﬁciently ﬁne measurements. Causal assumptions,
in contrast, cannot be veriﬁed even in principle, unless one resorts to experimental
control. This difference stands out in Bayesian analysis. Though the priors that
Bayesians commonly assign to statistical parameters are untested quantities, the
sensitivity to these priors tends to diminish with increasing sample size. In contrast,
sensitivity to prior causal assumptions, say that treatment does not change gender,
remains substantial regardless of sample size.
This makes it doubly important that the notation we use for expressing
causal assumptions be cognitively meaningful and unambiguous so that one can
clearly judge the plausibility or inevitability of the assumptions articulated. Statisticians can no longer ignore the mental representation in which scientists store experiential knowledge, since it is this representation, and the language used to access it
that determine the reliability of the judgments upon which the analysis so crucially
Those versed in the potential-outcome notation , can recognize causal expressions through the subscripts that are attached to counterfactual events and variables, e.g. Yx(u) or Zxy. (Some authors use
parenthetical expressions, e.g. Y(0), Y(1), Y(x,u) or Z(x,y).) The expression Yx(u),
for example, stands for the value that outcome Y would take in individual u, had
treatment X been at level x. If u is chosen at random, Yx is a random variable, and
one can talk about the probability that Yx would attain a value y in the population,
written P(Yx = y) (see Section 5 for semantics). Alternatively, Pearl used
expressions of the form P(Y = y|set(X = x)) or P(Y = y|do(X = x)) to denote the
probability (or frequency) that event (Y = y) would occur if treatment condition
1By “untested” I mean untested using frequency data in nonexperimental studies.
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
X = x were enforced uniformly over the population.2 Still a third notation that distinguishes causal expressions is provided by graphical models, where the arrows
convey causal directionality.
However, few have taken seriously the textbook requirement that any introduction of new notation must entail a systematic deﬁnition of the syntax and
semantics that governs the notation. Moreover, in the bulk of the statistical literature before 2000, causal claims rarely appear in the mathematics. They surface only
in the verbal interpretation that investigators occasionally attach to certain associations, and in the verbal description with which investigators justify assumptions.
For example, the assumption that a covariate not be affected by a treatment, a necessary assumption for the control of confounding , is expressed
in plain English, not in a mathematical expression.
The next section provides a conceptualization that overcomes these mental
barriers by offering a friendly mathematical machinery for cause-effect analysis and
a formal foundation for counterfactual analysis.
Structural Models, Diagrams, Causal Effects, and
Counterfactuals
Any conception of causation worthy of the title “theory” must be able to (1) represent causal questions in some mathematical language, (2) provide a precise language for communicating assumptions under which the questions need to be answered, (3) provide a systematic way of answering at least some of these questions
and labeling others “unanswerable,” and (4) provide a method of determining what
assumptions or new measurements would be needed to answer the “unanswerable”
questions.
A “general theory” should do more. In addition to embracing all questions
judged to have causal character, a general theory must also subsume any other theory or method that scientists have found useful in exploring the various aspects of
causation. In other words, any alternative theory needs to evolve as a special case
of the “general theory” when restrictions are imposed on either the model, the type
of assumptions admitted, or the language in which those assumptions are cast.
The structural theory that we use in this survey satisﬁes the criteria above. It
is based on the Structural Causal Model (SCM) developed in 
2Clearly, P(Y = y|do(X = x)) is equivalent to P(Yx = y). This is what we normally assess in a
controlled experiment, with X randomized, in which the distribution of Y is estimated for each level
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
which combines features of the structural equation models (SEM) used in economics and social science , the potential-outcome
framework of Neyman and Rubin , and the graphical models developed for probabilistic reasoning and causal analysis .
Although the basic elements of SCM were introduced in the mid 1990’s
 , and have been adapted widely by epidemiologists , statisticians , and social scientists , its potentials as a comprehensive theory of causation are yet to be fully utilized. Its
ramiﬁcations thus far include:
1. The uniﬁcation of the graphical, potential outcome, structural equations, decision analytical , interventional , sufﬁcient
component and probabilistic approaches to
causation; with each approach viewed as a restricted version of the SCM.
2. The deﬁnition, axiomatization and algorithmization of counterfactuals and
joint probabilities of counterfactuals
3. Reducing the evaluation of “effects of causes,” “mediated effects,” and “causes
of effects” to an algorithmic level of analysis.
4. Solidifying the mathematical foundations of the potential-outcome model,
and formulating the counterfactual foundations of structural equation models.
5. Demystifying enigmatic notions such as “confounding,” “mediation,” “ignorability,” “comparability,” “exchangeability (of populations),” “superexogeneity” and others within a single and familiar conceptual framework.
6. Weeding
misconceptions
traditions
 .
This section provides a gentle introduction to the structural framework and
uses it to present the main advances in causal inference that have emerged in the
past two decades.
A brief introduction to structural equation models
How can one express mathematically the common understanding that symptoms do
not cause diseases? The earliest attempt to formulate such relationship mathematically was made in the 1920’s by the geneticist Sewall Wright . Wright used
a combination of equations and graphs to communicate causal relationships. For
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
example, if X stands for a disease variable and Y stands for a certain symptom of
the disease, Wright would write a linear equation:3
where x stands for the level (or severity) of the disease, y stands for the level (or
severity) of the symptom, and uY stands for all factors, other than the disease in
question, that could possibly affect Y when X is held constant. In interpreting this
equation one should think of a physical process whereby Nature examines the values
of x and u and, accordingly, assigns variable Y the value y = βx+uY. Similarly, to
“explain” the occurrence of disease X, one could write x = uX, where UX stands for
all factors affecting X.
Equation (1) still does not properly express the causal relationship implied
by this assignment process, because algebraic equations are symmetrical objects; if
we re-write (1) as
x = (y−uY)/β
it might be misinterpreted to mean that the symptom inﬂuences the disease. To express the directionality of the underlying process, Wright augmented the equation
with a diagram, later called “path diagram,” in which arrows are drawn from (perceived) causes to their (perceived) effects, and more importantly, the absence of an
arrow makes the empirical claim that Nature assigns values to one variable irrespective of another. In Fig. 1, for example, the absence of arrow from Y to X represents
the claim that symptom Y is not among the factors UX which affect disease X. Thus,
in our example, the complete model of a symptom and a disease would be written
as in Fig. 1: The diagram encodes the possible existence of (direct) causal inﬂuence
of X on Y, and the absence of causal inﬂuence of Y on X, while the equations encode the quantitative relationships among the variables involved, to be determined
from the data. The parameter β in the equation is called a “path coefﬁcient” and it
quantiﬁes the (direct) causal effect of X on Y; given the numerical values of β and
UY, the equation claims that, a unit increase for X would result in β units increase
of Y regardless of the values taken by other variables in the model, and regardless
of whether the increase in X originates from external or internal inﬂuences.
The variables UX and UY are called “exogenous;” they represent observed or
unobserved background factors that the modeler decides to keep unexplained, that
is, factors that inﬂuence but are not inﬂuenced by the other variables (called “endogenous”) in the model. Unobserved exogenous variables are sometimes called
“disturbances” or “errors”, they represent factors omitted from the model but judged
3Linear relations are used here for illustration purposes only; they do not represent typical
disease-symptom relations but illustrate the historical development of path analysis. Additionally,
we will use standardized variables, that is, zero mean and unit variance.
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
to be relevant for explaining the behavior of variables in the model. Variable UX, for
example, represents factors that contribute to the disease X, which may or may not
be correlated with UY (the factors that inﬂuence the symptom Y). Thus, background
factors in structural equations differ fundamentally from residual terms in regression equations. The latters are artifacts of analysis which, by deﬁnition, are uncorrelated with the regressors. The formers are part of physical reality (e.g., genetic
factors, socio-economic conditions) which are responsible for variations observed
in the data; they are treated as any other variable, though we often cannot measure
their values precisely and must resign to merely acknowledging their existence and
assessing qualitatively how they relate to other variables in the system.
If correlation is presumed possible, it is customary to connect the two variables, UY and UX, by a dashed double arrow, as shown in Fig. 1(b).
Figure 1: A simple structural equation model, and its associated diagrams. Unobserved exogenous variables are connected by dashed arrows.
In reading path diagrams, it is common to use kinship relations such as
parent, child, ancestor, and descendent, the interpretation of which is usually self
evident. For example, an arrow X →Y designates X as a parent of Y and Y as a
child of X. A “path” is any consecutive sequence of edges, solid or dashed. For
example, there are two paths between X and Y in Fig. 1(b), one consisting of the
direct arrow X →Y while the other tracing the nodes X,UX,UY and Y.
Wright’s major contribution to causal analysis, aside from introducing the
language of path diagrams, has been the development of graphical rules for writing
down the covariance of any pair of observed variables in terms of path coefﬁcients
and of covariances among the error terms. In our simple example, one can immediately write the relations
Cov(X,Y) = β
for Fig. 1(a), and
Cov(X,Y) = β +Cov(UY,UX)
for Fig. 1(b) (These can be derived of course from the equations, but, for large
models, algebraic methods tend to obscure the origin of the derived quantities).
Under certain conditions, (e.g. if Cov(UY,UX) = 0), such relationships may allow
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
one to solve for the path coefﬁcients in term of observed covariance terms only, and
this amounts to inferring the magnitude of (direct) causal effects from observed,
nonexperimental associations, assuming of course that one is prepared to defend
the causal assumptions encoded in the diagram.
It is important to note that, in path diagrams, causal assumptions are encoded not in the links but, rather, in the missing links. An arrow merely indicates
the possibility of causal connection, the strength of which remains to be determined
(from data); a missing arrow represents a claim of zero inﬂuence, while a missing
double arrow represents a claim of zero covariance. In Fig. 1(a), for example, the
assumptions that permits us to identify the direct effect β are encoded by the missing double arrow between UX and UY, indicating Cov(UY,UX)=0, together with the
missing arrow from Y to X. Had any of these two links been added to the diagram, we would not have been able to identify the direct effect β. Such additions
would amount to relaxing the assumption Cov(UY,UX) = 0, or the assumption that
Y does not effect X, respectively. Note also that both assumptions are causal, not
associational, since none can be determined from the joint density of the observed
variables, X and Y; the association between the unobserved terms, UY and UX, can
only be uncovered in an experimental setting; or (in more intricate models, as in
Fig. 5) from other causal assumptions.
Although each causal assumption in isolation cannot be tested, the sum total of all causal assumptions in a model often has testable implications. The chain
model of Fig. 2(a), for example, encodes seven causal assumptions, each corresponding to a missing arrow or a missing double-arrow between a pair of variables.
None of those assumptions is testable in isolation, yet the totality of all those assumptions implies that Z is unassociated with Y in every stratum of X. Such testable
implications can be read off the diagrams using a graphical criterion known as dseparation .
Deﬁnition 1 (d-separation) A set S of nodes is said to block a path p if either (i) p
contains at least one arrow-emitting node that is in S, or (ii) p contains at least one
collision node that is outside S and has no descendant in S. If S blocks all paths
from X to Y, it is said to “d-separate X and Y,” and then, X and Y are independent
given S, written X⊥⊥Y|S.
To illustrate, the path UZ →Z →X →Y is blocked by S = {Z} and by
S = {X}, since each emits an arrow along that path. Consequently we can infer
that the conditional independencies UZ⊥⊥Y|Z and UZ⊥⊥Y|X will be satisﬁed in any
probability function that this model can generate, regardless of how we parametrize
the arrows. Likewise, the path UZ →Z →X ←UX is blocked by the null set {/0}
but is not blocked by S = {Y}, since Y is a descendant of the collision node X.
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
Consequently, the marginal independence UZ⊥⊥UX will hold in the distribution,
but UZ⊥⊥UX|Y may or may not hold. This special handling of collision nodes (or
colliders, e.g., Z →X ←UX) reﬂects a general phenomenon known as Berkson’s
paradox , whereby observations on a common consequence of two
independent causes render those causes dependent. For example, the outcomes of
two independent coins are rendered dependent by the testimony that at least one of
them is a tail.
The conditional independencies entailed by d-separation constitute the main
opening through which the assumptions embodied in structural equation models can
confront the scrutiny of nonexperimental data. In other words, almost all statistical
tests capable of invalidating the model are entailed by those implications.4
Figure 2: (a) The diagram associated with the structural model of Eq. (5). (b) The
diagram associated with the modiﬁed model of Eq. (6), representing the intervention do(X = x0).
From linear to nonparametric models and graphs
Structural equation modeling (SEM) has been the main vehicle for effect analysis
in economics and the behavioral and social sciences . However, the bulk of SEM methodology was developed for
linear analysis and, until recently, no comparable methodology has been devised
to extend its capabilities to models involving dichotomous variables or nonlinear
dependencies. A central requirement for any such extension is to detach the notion
of “effect” from its algebraic representation as a coefﬁcient in an equation, and redeﬁne “effect” as a general capacity to transmit changes among variables. Such an
extension, based on simulating hypothetical interventions in the model, was proposed in and has led to new ways of deﬁning and
estimating causal effects in nonlinear and nonparametric models (that is, models in
which the functional form of the equations is unknown).
4Additional implications called “dormant independence” may be deduced from some graphs with correlated errors .
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
The central idea is to exploit the invariant characteristics of structural equations without committing to a speciﬁc functional form. For example, the nonparametric interpretation of the diagram of Fig. 2(a) corresponds to a set of three
functions, each corresponding to one of the observed variables:
where in this particular example UZ,UX and UY are assumed to be jointly independent but, otherwise, arbitrarily distributed. Each of these functions represents a
causal process (or mechanism) that determines the value of the left variable (output)
from those on the right variables (inputs). The absence of a variable from the right
hand side of an equation encodes the assumption that Nature ignores that variable
in the process of determining the value of the output variable. For example, the
absence of variable Z from the arguments of fY conveys the empirical claim that
variations in Z will leave Y unchanged, as long as variables UY, and X remain constant. A system of such functions are said to be structural if they are assumed to
be autonomous, that is, each function is invariant to possible changes in the form of
the other functions .
Representing interventions
This feature of invariance permits us to use structural equations as a basis for modeling causal effects and counterfactuals. This is done through a mathematical operator called do(x) which simulates physical interventions by deleting certain functions from the model, replacing them by a constant X = x, while keeping the rest of
the model unchanged. For example, to emulate an intervention do(x0) that holds X
constant (at X = x0) in model M of Fig. 2(a), we replace the equation for x in Eq.
(5) with x = x0, and obtain a new model, Mx0,
the graphical description of which is shown in Fig. 2(b).
The joint distribution associated with the modiﬁed model, denoted
P(z,y|do(x0)) describes the post-intervention distribution of variables Y and Z (also
called “controlled” or “experimental” distribution), to be distinguished from the
pre-intervention distribution, P(x,y,z), associated with the original model of Eq.
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
(5). For example, if X represents a treatment variable, Y a response variable, and Z
some covariate that affects the amount of treatment received, then the distribution
P(z,y|do(x0)) gives the proportion of individuals that would attain response level
Y = y and covariate level Z = z under the hypothetical situation in which treatment
X = x0 is administered uniformly to the population.
In general, we can formally deﬁne the post-intervention distribution by the
PM(y|do(x)) ∆= PMx(y)
In words: In the framework of model M, the post-intervention distribution of outcome Y is deﬁned as the probability that model Mx assigns to each outcome level
From this distribution, one is able to assess treatment efﬁcacy by comparing
aspects of this distribution at different levels of x0. A common measure of treatment
efﬁcacy is the average difference
0))−E(Y|do(x0))
0 and x0 are two levels (or types) of treatment selected for comparison.
Another measure is the experimental Risk Ratio
0))/E(Y|do(x0)).
The variance Var(Y|do(x0)), or any other distributional parameter, may also enter
the comparison; all these measures can be obtained from the controlled distribution function P(Y = y|do(x)) = ∑z P(z,y|do(x)) which was called “causal effect” in
Pearl (see footnote 2). The central question in the analysis of causal
effects is the question of identiﬁcation: Can the controlled (post-intervention) distribution, P(Y = y|do(x)), be estimated from data governed by the pre-intervention
distribution, P(z,x,y)?
The problem of identiﬁcation has received considerable attention in econometrics and social science
 , usually in linear parametric settings, where it reduces to asking whether some model parameter, β, has a unique solution in terms
of the parameters of P (the distribution of the observed variables). In the nonparametric formulation, identiﬁcation is more involved, since the notion of “has a unique
solution” does not directly apply to causal quantities such as Q(M) = P(y|do(x))
which have no distinct parametric signature, and are deﬁned procedurally by simulating an intervention in a causal model M (as in (6)). The following deﬁnition
overcomes these difﬁculties:
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
Deﬁnition 2 ) A quantity Q(M) is identiﬁable,
given a set of assumptions A, if for any two models M1 and M2 that satisfy A, we
P(M1) = P(M2) ⇒Q(M1) = Q(M2)
In words, the details of M1 and M2 do not matter; what matters is that the
assumptions in A (e.g., those encoded in the diagram) would constrain the variability of those details in such a way that equality of P’s would entail equality of Q’s.
When this happens, Q depends on P only, and should therefore be expressible in
terms of the parameters of P. The next subsections exemplify and operationalize
this notion.
Estimating the effect of interventions
To understand how hypothetical quantities such as P(y|do(x)) or E(Y|do(x0)) can
be estimated from actual data and a partially speciﬁed model let us begin with a
simple demonstration on the model of Fig. 2(a). We will see that, despite our ignorance of fX, fY, fZ and P(u), E(Y|do(x0)) is nevertheless identiﬁable and is given
by the conditional expectation E(Y|X = x0). We do this by deriving and comparing
the expressions for these two quantities, as deﬁned by (5) and (6), respectively. The
mutilated model in Eq. (6) dictates:
E(Y|do(x0)) = E(fY (x0,uY)),
whereas the pre-intervention model of Eq. (5) gives
E(Y|X = x0))
E(fY (X,uY)|X = x0)
E(fY (x0,uY)|X = x0)
E(fY (x0,uY))
which is identical to (11). Therefore,
E(Y|do(x0)) = E(Y|X = x0))
Using a similar derivation, though somewhat more involved, we can show that
P(y|do(x)) is identiﬁable and given by the conditional probability P(y|x).
We see that the derivation of (13) was enabled by two assumptions; ﬁrst, Y
is a function of X and UY only, and, second, UY is independent of {UZ,UX}, hence
of X. The latter assumption parallels the celebrated “orthogonality” condition in
linear models, Cov(X,UY) = 0, which has been used routinely, often thoughtlessly,
to justify the estimation of structural coefﬁcients by regression techniques.
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
Naturally, if we were to apply this derivation to the linear models of Fig.
1(a) or 1(b), we would get the expected dependence between Y and the intervention
E(Y|do(x0))
E(fY (x0,uY))
E(βx0 +uY)
This equality endows β with its causal meaning as “effect coefﬁcient.” It is extremely important to keep in mind that in structural (as opposed to regressional)
models, β is not “interpreted” as an effect coefﬁcient but is “proven” to be one by
the derivation above. β will retain this causal interpretation regardless of how X is
actually selected (through the function fX, Fig. 2(a)) and regardless of whether UX
and UY are correlated (as in Fig. 1(b)) or uncorrelated (as in Fig. 1(a)). Correlations
may only impede our ability to estimate β from nonexperimental data, but will not
change its deﬁnition as given in (14). Accordingly, and contrary to endless confusions in the literature (see footnote 12) structural equations say absolutely nothing
about the conditional expectation E(Y|X = x). Such connection may exist under
special circumstances, e.g., if cov(X,UY) = 0, as in Eq. (13), but is otherwise irrelevant to the deﬁnition or interpretation of β as effect coefﬁcient, or to the empirical
claims of Eq. (1).
The next subsection will circumvent these derivations altogether by reducing the identiﬁcation problem to a graphical procedure. Indeed, since graphs encode
all the information that non-parametric structural equations represent, they should
permit us to solve the identiﬁcation problem without resorting to algebraic analysis.
Causal effects from data and graphs
Causal analysis in graphical models begins with the realization that all causal effects are identiﬁable whenever the model is Markovian, that is, the graph is acyclic
(i.e., containing no directed cycles) and all the error terms are jointly independent.
Non-Markovian models, such as those involving correlated errors (resulting from
unmeasured confounders), permit identiﬁcation only under certain conditions, and
these conditions too can be determined from the graph structure (Section 3.3). The
key to these results rests with the following basic theorem.
Theorem 1 (The Causal Markov Condition) Any distribution generated by a Markovian model M can be factorized as:
P(v1,v2,...,vn) = ∏
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
where V1,V2,...,Vn are the endogenous variables in M, and pai are (values of) the
endogenous “parents” of Vi in the causal diagram associated with M.
For example, the distribution associated with the model in Fig. 2(a) can be
factorized as
P(z,y,x) = P(z)P(x|z)P(y|x)
since X is the (endogenous) parent of Y,Z is the parent of X, and Z has no parents.
Corollary 1 (Truncated factorization) For any Markovian model, the distribution
generated by an intervention do(X = x0) on a set X of endogenous variables is
given by the truncated factorization
P(v1,v2,...,vk|do(x0)) = ∏
P(vi|pai)|x=x0
where P(vi|pai) are the pre-intervention conditional probabilities.5
Corollary 1 instructs us to remove from the product of Eq. (15) those factors that quantify how the intervened variables (members of set X) are inﬂuenced
by their pre-intervention parents. This removal follows from the fact that the postintervention model is Markovian as well, hence, following Theorem 1, it must
generate a distribution that is factorized according to the modiﬁed graph, yielding
the truncated product of Corollary 1. In our example of Fig. 2(b), the distribution
P(z,y|do(x0)) associated with the modiﬁed model is given by
P(z,y|do(x0)) = P(z)P(y|x0)
where P(z) and P(y|x0) are identical to those associated with the pre-intervention
distribution of Eq. (16). As expected, the distribution of Z is not affected by the
intervention, since
P(z|do(x0)) = ∑
P(z,y|do(x0)) = ∑
P(z)P(y|x0) = P(z)
while that of Y is sensitive to x0, and is given by
P(y|do(x0)) =∑
P(z,y|do(x0)) = ∑
P(z)P(y|x0) = P(y|x0)
This example demonstrates how the (causal) assumptions embedded in the model
M permit us to predict the post-intervention distribution from the pre-intervention
5A simple proof of the Causal Markov Theorem is given in Pearl . This theorem
was ﬁrst presented in Pearl and Verma , but it is implicit in the works of Kiiveri, Speed, and
Carlin and others. Corollary 1 was named “Manipulation Theorem” in Spirtes et al. ,
and is also implicit in Robins’ G-computation formula. See Lauritzen .
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
distribution, which further permits us to estimate the causal effect of X on Y from
nonexperimental data, since P(y|x0) is estimable from such data. Note that we have
made no assumption whatsoever on the form of the equations or the distribution of
the error terms; it is the structure of the graph alone (speciﬁcally, the identity of X’s
parents) that permits the derivation to go through.
The truncated factorization formula enables us to derive causal quantities
directly, without dealing with equations or equation modiﬁcation as in Eqs. (11)–
(13). Consider, for example, the model shown in Fig. 3, in which the error variables
Figure 3: Markovian model illustrating the derivation of the causal effect of X on
Y, Eq. (20). Error terms are not shown explicitly.
are kept implicit. Instead of writing down the corresponding ﬁve nonparametric
equations, we can write the joint distribution directly as
P(x,z1,z2,z3,y) = P(z1)P(z2)P(z3|z1,z2)P(x|z1,z3)P(y|z2,z3,x)
where each marginal or conditional probability on the right hand side is directly
estimable from the data. Now suppose we intervene and set variable X to x0. The
post-intervention distribution can readily be written (using the truncated factorization formula (17)) as
P(z1,z2,z3,y|do(x0)) = P(z1)P(z2)P(z3|z1,z2)P(y|z2,z3,x0)
and the causal effect of X on Y can be obtained immediately by marginalizing over
the Z variables, giving
P(y|do(x0)) = ∑
P(z1)P(z2)P(z3|z1,z2)P(y|z2,z3,x0)
Note that this formula corresponds precisely to what is commonly called “adjusting
for Z1,Z2 and Z3” and, moreover, we can write down this formula by inspection,
without thinking on whether Z1,Z2 and Z3 are confounders, whether they lie on
the causal pathways, and so on. Though such questions can be answered explicitly
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
from the topology of the graph, they are dealt with automatically when we write
down the truncated factorization formula and marginalize.
Note also that the truncated factorization formula is not restricted to interventions on a single variable; it is applicable to simultaneous or sequential interventions such as those invoked in the analysis of time varying treatment with time
varying confounders . For example, if X
and Z2 are both treatment variables, and Z1 and Z3 are measured covariates, then
the post-intervention distribution would be
P(z1,z3,y|do(x),do(z2)) = P(z1)P(z3|z1,z2)P(y|z2,z3,x)
and the causal effect of the treatment sequence do(X = x),do(Z2 = z2)6 would be
P(y|do(x),do(z2)) = ∑
P(z1)P(z3|z1,z2)P(y|z2,z3,x)
This expression coincides with Robins’ G-computation formula,
which was derived from a more complicated set of (counterfactual) assumptions.
As noted by Robins, the formula dictates an adjustment for covariates (e.g., Z3) that
might be affected by previous treatments (e.g., Z2).
Coping with unmeasured confounders
Things are more complicated when we face unmeasured confounders. For example,
it is not immediately clear whether the formula in Eq. (20) can be estimated if any of
Z1,Z2 and Z3 is not measured. A few but challenging algebraic steps would reveal
that one can perform the summation over Z2 to obtain
P(y|do(x0)) = ∑
P(z1)P(z3|z1)P(y|z1,z3,x0)
which means that we need only adjust for Z1 and Z3 without ever measuring Z2. In
general, it can be shown that, whenever the graph is Markovian
the post-interventional distribution P(Y = y|do(X = x)) is given by the following
expression:
P(Y = y|do(X = x)) = ∑
P(y|t,x)P(t)
where T is the set of direct causes of X (also called “parents”) in the graph. This
allows us to write (23) directly from the graph, thus skipping the algebra that led to
(23). It further implies that, no matter how complicated the model, the parents of X
are the only variables that need to be measured to estimate the causal effects of X.
6For clarity, we drop the (superﬂuous) subscript 0 from x0 and z20.
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
It is not immediately clear however whether other sets of variables beside
X’s parents sufﬁce for estimating the effect of X, whether some algebraic manipulation can further reduce Eq. (23), or that measurement of Z3 (unlike Z1, or Z2) is
necessary in any estimation of P(y|do(x0)). Such considerations become transparent from a graphical criterion to be discussed next.
Covariate selection – the back-door criterion
Consider an observational study where we wish to ﬁnd the effect of X on Y, for
example, treatment on response, and assume that the factors deemed relevant to
the problem are structured as in Fig. 4; some are affecting the response, some are
Figure 4: Markovian model illustrating the back-door criterion. Error terms are not
shown explicitly.
affecting the treatment and some are affecting both treatment and response. Some
of these factors may be unmeasurable, such as genetic trait or life style, others
are measurable, such as gender, age, and salary level. Our problem is to select a
subset of these factors for measurement and adjustment, namely, that if we compare
treated vs. untreated subjects having the same values of the selected factors, we
get the correct treatment effect in that subpopulation of subjects. Such a set of
factors is called a “sufﬁcient set” or “admissible set” for adjustment. The problem
of deﬁning an admissible set, let alone ﬁnding one, has bafﬂed epidemiologists and
social scientists for decades for review).
The following criterion, named “back-door” in , settles this
problem by providing a graphical method of selecting admissible sets of factors for
adjustment.
Deﬁnition 3 (Admissible sets – the back-door criterion) A set S is admissible (or
“sufﬁcient”) for adjustment if two conditions hold:
1. No element of S is a descendant of X
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
2. The elements of S “block” all “back-door” paths from X to Y, namely all
paths that end with an arrow pointing to X.
In this criterion, “blocking” is interpreted as in Deﬁnition 1. For example, the set
S = {Z3} blocks the path X ←W1 ←Z1 →Z3 →Y, because the arrow-emitting
node Z3 is in S. However, the set S = {Z3} does not block the path X ←W1
Z1 →Z3 ←Z2 →W2 →Y, because none of the arrow-emitting nodes, Z1 and Z2, is
in S, and the collision node Z3 is not outside S.
Based on this criterion we see, for example, that the sets {Z 1,Z 2,Z 3},{Z 1,Z 3},
{W1,Z3}, and {W2,Z3}, each is sufﬁcient for adjustment, because each blocks all
back-door paths between X and Y. The set {Z3}, however, is not sufﬁcient for adjustment because, as explained above, it does not block the path X ←W1 ←Z1 →
Z3 ←Z2 →W2 →Y.
The intuition behind the back-door criterion is as follows. The back-door
paths in the diagram carry spurious associations from X to Y, while the paths directed along the arrows from X to Y carry causative associations. Blocking the
former paths (by conditioning on S) ensures that the measured association between
X and Y is purely causative, namely, it correctly represents the target quantity: the
causal effect of X on Y. The reason for excluding descendants of X (e.g., W3 or any
of its descendants) is given in .
Formally, the implication of ﬁnding an admissible set S is that, stratifying
on S is guaranteed to remove all confounding bias relative the causal effect of X on
Y. In other words, the risk difference in each stratum of S gives the correct causal
effect in that stratum. In the binary case, for example, the risk difference in stratum
s of S is given by
P(Y = 1|X = 1,S = s)−P(Y = 1|X = 0,S = s)
while the causal effect (of X on Y) at that stratum is given by
P(Y = 1|do(X = 1),S = s)−P(Y = 1|do(X = 0),S = s).
These two expressions are guaranteed to be equal whenever S is a sufﬁcient set, such
as {Z1,Z3} or {Z2,Z3} in Fig. 4. Likewise, the average stratiﬁed risk difference,
taken over all strata,
[P(Y = 1|X = 1,S = s)−P(Y = 1|X = 0,S = s)]P(S = s),
gives the correct causal effect of X on Y in the entire population
P(Y = 1|do(X = 1))−P(Y = 1|do(X = 0)).
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
In general, for multi-valued variables X and Y, ﬁnding a sufﬁcient set S
permits us to write
P(Y = y|do(X = x),S = s) = P(Y = y|X = x,S = s)
P(Y = y|do(X = x)) = ∑
P(Y = y|X = x,S = s)P(S = s)
Since all factors on the right hand side of the equation are estimable (e.g., by regression) from the pre-interventional data, the causal effect can likewise be estimated
from such data without bias.
An equivalent expression for the causal effect (25) can be obtained by multiplying and dividing by the conditional probability P(X = x|S = s), giving
P(Y = y|do(X = x)) = ∑
P(Y = y,X = x,S = s)
P(X = x|S = s)
from which the name “Inverse Probability Weighting” has evolved .
Interestingly, it can be shown that any irreducible sufﬁcient set, S, taken as
a unit, satisﬁes the associational criterion that epidemiologists have been using to
deﬁne “confounders”. In other words, S must be associated with X and, simultaneously, associated with Y, given X. This need not hold for any speciﬁc members of
S. For example, the variable Z3 in Fig. 4, though it is a member of every sufﬁcient
set and hence a confounder, can be unassociated with both Y and X . Conversely, a pre-treatment variable Z that is associated with both Y and X
may need to be excluded from entering a sufﬁcient set.
The back-door criterion allows us to write Eq. (25) directly, by selecting a
sufﬁcient set S directly from the diagram, without manipulating the truncated factorization formula. The selection criterion can be applied systematically to diagrams
of any size and shape, thus freeing analysts from judging whether “X is conditionally ignorable given S,” a formidable mental task required in the potential-response
framework . The criterion also enables the analyst to
search for an optimal set of covariate—namely, a set S that minimizes measurement
cost or sampling variability .
All in all, one can safely state that, armed with the back-door criterion,
causality has removed “confounding” from its store of enigmatic and controversial
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
Confounding equivalence – a graphical test
Another problem that has been given graphical solution recently is that of determining whether adjustment for two sets of covariates would result in the same confounding bias . The reasons for posing this question are several. First, an investigator may wish to assess, prior to taking any measurement,
whether two candidate sets of covariates, differing substantially in dimensionality,
measurement error, cost, or sample variability are equally valuable in their biasreduction potential. Second, assuming that the structure of the underlying DAG is
only partially known, one may wish to test, using adjustment, which of two hypothesized structures is compatible with the data. Structures that predict equal response
to adjustment for two sets of variables must be rejected if, after adjustment, such
equality is not found in the data.
Deﬁnition 4 ((c-equivalence)) Deﬁne two sets,
of covariates as
c-equivalent, (c connotes “confounding”) if the following equality holds:
P(y|x,t)P(t) = ∑
P(y|x,z)P(z)
Deﬁnition 5 ((Markov boundary)) For any set of variables S in a DAG G, the
Markov boundary Sm of S is the minimal subset of S that d-separates X from all
other members of S.
In Fig. 4, for example, the Markov boundary of S = {W1,Z1,Z2,Z3} is Sm =
Theorem 2 
Let Z and T be two sets of variables in G, containing no descendant of X. A
necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for Z and T to be c-equivalent is that at least
one of the following conditions holds:
1. Zm = Tm, (i.e., the Markov boundary of Z coincides with that of T)
2. Z and T are admissible (i.e., satisfy the back-door condition)
For example, the sets T = {W1,Z3} and Z = {Z3,W2} in Fig. 4 are
c-equivalent, because each blocks all back-door paths from X to Y. Similarly,
the non-admissible sets T = {Z2} and Z = {W2,Z2} are c-equivalent, since their
Markov boundaries are the same (Tm = Zm = {Z2}). In contrast, the sets {W1} and
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
{Z1}, although they block the same set of paths in the graph, are not c-equivalent;
they fail both conditions of Theorem 2.
Tests for c-equivalence (27) are fairly easy to perform, and they can also
be assisted by propensity scores methods. The information that such tests provide
can be as powerful as conditional independence tests. The statistical ramiﬁcation
of such tests are explicated in .
General control of confounding
Adjusting for covariates is only one of many methods that permits us to estimate
causal effects in nonexperimental studies. Pearl has presented examples in
which there exists no set of variables that is sufﬁcient for adjustment and where the
causal effect can nevertheless be estimated consistently. The estimation, in such
cases, employs multi-stage adjustments. For example, if W3 is the only observed
covariate in the model of Fig. 4, then there exists no sufﬁcient set for adjustment
(because no set of observed covariates can block the paths from X to Y through
Z3), yet P(y|do(x)) can be estimated in two steps; ﬁrst we estimate P(w3|do(x)) =
P(w3|x) (by virtue of the fact that there exists no unblocked back-door path from X
to W3), second we estimate P(y|do(w3)) (since X constitutes a sufﬁcient set for the
effect of W3 on Y) and, ﬁnally, we combine the two effects together and obtain
P(y|do(x)) = ∑
P(w3|do(x))P(y|do(w3))
In this example, the variable W3 acts as a “mediating instrumental variable” .
The analysis used in the derivation and validation of such results invokes
mathematical rules of transforming causal quantities, represented by expressions
such as P(Y = y|do(x)), into do-free expressions derivable from P(z,x,y), since
only do-free expressions are estimable from non-experimental data. When such a
transformation is feasible, we are ensured that the causal quantity is identiﬁable.
Applications of this calculus to problems involving multiple interventions
(e.g., time varying treatments), conditional policies, and surrogate experiments
were developed in Pearl and Robins , Kuroki and Miyakawa , and
Pearl .
A more recent analysis shows that the key to identiﬁability lies not in blocking paths between X and Y but, rather, in blocking paths
between X and its immediate successors on the pathways to Y. All existing criteria
for identiﬁcation are special cases of the one deﬁned in the following theorem:
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
Theorem 3 A sufﬁcient condition for identifying the causal
effect P(y|do(x)) is that every path between X and any of its children traces at least
one arrow emanating from a measured variable.7
For example, if W3 is the only observed covariate in the model of Fig. 4, P(y|do(x))
can be estimated since every path from X to W3 (the only child of X) traces either
the arrow X →W3, or the arrow W3 →Y, both emanating from a measured variable
Shpitser and Pearl have further extended this theorem by (1) presenting a necessary and sufﬁcient condition for identiﬁcation, and (2) extending the
condition from causal effects to any counterfactual expression. The corresponding unbiased estimands for these causal quantities are readable directly from the
Graph-based methods for effect identiﬁcation under measurement errors are
discussed in .
From identiﬁcation to estimation
The mathematical derivation of causal effect estimands, like Eqs. (25) and (28) is
merely a ﬁrst step toward computing quantitative estimates of those effects from
ﬁnite samples, using the rich traditions of statistical estimation and machine learning Bayesian as well as non-Bayesian. Although the estimands derived in (25)
and (28) are non-parametric, this does not mean that one should refrain from using parametric forms in the estimation phase of the study. Parameterization is
in fact necessary when the dimensionality of a problem is high. For example, if
the assumptions of Gaussian, zero-mean disturbances and additive interactions are
deemed reasonable, then the estimand given in (28) can be converted to the product E(Y|do(x)) = rW3XrYW3·Xx, where rYZ·X is the (standardized) coefﬁcient of Z in
the regression of Y on Z and X. More sophisticated estimation techniques are the
“marginal structural models” of , and the “propensity score” method
of which were found to be particularly useful when
dimensionality is high and data are sparse ).
It should be emphasized, however, that contrary to conventional wisdom
 ), propensity score methods are merely efﬁcient estimators of the right hand side of (25); they entail the same asymptotic bias, and cannot
be expected to reduce bias in case the set S does not satisfy the back-door criterion . Consequently, the prevailing practice of conditioning
7Before applying this criterion, one may delete from the causal graph all nodes that are not
ancestors of Y.
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
on as many pre-treatment measurements as possible should be approached with
great caution; some covariates (e.g., Z3 in Fig. 3) may actually increase bias if included in the analysis (see footnote 16). Using simulation and parametric analysis,
Heckman and Navarro-Lozano and Wooldridge indeed conﬁrmed the
bias-raising potential of certain covariates in propensity-score methods. The graphical tools presented in this section unveil the character of these covariates and show
precisely what covariates should, and should not be included in the conditioning set
for propensity-score matching ).
Counterfactual analysis in structural models
Not all questions of causal character can be encoded in P(y|do(x)) type expressions,
thus implying that not all causal questions can be answered from experimental studies. For example, questions of attribution (e.g., what fraction of death cases are due
to speciﬁc exposure?) or of susceptibility (what fraction of the healthy unexposed
population would have gotten the disease had they been exposed?) cannot be answered from experimental studies, and naturally, this kind of questions cannot be
expressed in P(y|do(x)) notation.8 To answer such questions, a probabilistic analysis of counterfactuals is required, one dedicated to the relation “Y would be y had
X been x in situation U = u,” denoted Yx(u) = y. Remarkably, unknown to most
economists and philosophers, structural equation models provide the formal interpretation and symbolic machinery for analyzing such counterfactual relationships.9
The key idea is to interpret the phrase “had X been x” as an instruction to
make a minimal modiﬁcation in the current model, which may have assigned X a
different value, say X = x′, so as to ensure the speciﬁed condition X = x. Such a
minimal modiﬁcation amounts to replacing the equation for X by a constant x, as
we have done in Eq. (6). This replacement permits the constant x to differ from
the actual value of X (namely fX(z,uX)) without rendering the system of equations
inconsistent, thus yielding a formal interpretation of counterfactuals in multi-stage
8The reason for this fundamental limitation is that no death case can be tested twice, with and
without treatment. For example, if we measure equal proportions of deaths in the treatment and
control groups, we cannot tell how many death cases are actually attributable to the treatment itself;
it is quite possible that many of those who died under treatment would be alive if untreated and,
simultaneously, many of those who survived with treatment would have died if not treated.
9Connections between structural equations and a restricted class of counterfactuals were ﬁrst recognized by Simon and Rescher . These were later generalized by Balke and Pearl , using surgeries (Eq. (29)), thus permittingendogenous variables to serve as counterfactual antecedents.
The term “surgery deﬁnition” was used in Pearl and criticized by Cartwright
 and Heckman , ).
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
models, where the dependent variable in one equation may be an independent variable in another.
Deﬁnition 6 )
Let M be a structural model and Mx a modiﬁed version of M, with the equation(s)
of X replaced by X = x. Denote the solution for Y in the equations of Mx by the
symbol YMx(u). The counterfactual Yx(u) (Read: “The value of Y in unit u, had X
been x”) is given by:
Yx(u) ∆= YMx(u).
In words: The counterfactual Yx(u) in model M is deﬁned as the solution for Y in
the “surgically modiﬁed” submodel Mx.
We see that the unit-level counterfactual Yx(u), which in the Neyman-Rubin
approach is treated as a primitive, undeﬁned quantity, is actually a derived quantity
in the structural framework. The fact that we equate the experimental unit u with
a vector of background conditions, U = u, in M, reﬂects the understanding that the
name of a unit or its identity do not matter; it is only the vector U = u of attributes
characterizing a unit which determines its behavior or response. As we go from one
unit to another, the laws of nature, as they are reﬂected in the functions fX, fY, etc.
remain invariant; only the attributes U = u vary from individual to individual.10
To illustrate, consider the solution of Y in the modiﬁed model Mx0 of Eq.
(6), which Deﬁnition 6 endows with the symbol Yx0(uX,uY,uZ). This entity has
a clear counterfactual interpretation, for it stands for the way an individual with
characteristics (uX,uY,uZ) would respond, had the treatment been x0, rather than
the treatment x = fX(z,uX) actually received by that individual. In our example,
since Y does not depend on uX and uZ, we can write:
Yx0(u) = Yx0(uY,uX,uZ) = fY (x0,uY).
In a similar fashion, we can derive
Yz0(u) = fY(fX(z0,uX),uY),
10The distinction between general, or population-level causes (e.g., “Drinking hemlock causes
death”) and singular or unit-level causes (e.g., “Socrates’ drinking hemlock caused his death”),
which many philosophers have regarded as irreconcilable , introduces no tension at all
in the structural theory. The two types of sentences differ merely in the level of situation-speciﬁc
information that is brought to bear on a problem, that is, in the speciﬁcity of the evidence e that
enters the quantity P(Yx = y|e). When e includes all factors u, we have a deterministic, unit-level
causation on our hand; when e contains only a few known attributes (e.g., age, income, occupation
etc.) while others are assigned probabilities, a population-level analysis ensues.
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
Xz0,y0(u) = fX(z0,uX),
and so on. These examples reveal the counterfactual reading of each individual
structural equation in the model of Eq. (5). The equation x = fX(z,uX), for example,
advertises the empirical claim that, regardless of the values taken by other variables
in the system, had Z been z0, X would take on no other value but x = fX(z0,uX).
Clearly, the distribution P(uY,uX,uZ) induces a well deﬁned probability on
the counterfactual event Yx0 = y, as well as on joint counterfactual events, such as
‘Yx0 = y AND Yx1 = y′,’ which are, in principle, unobservable if x0 ̸= x1. Thus, to
answer attributional questions, such as whether Y would be y1 if X were x1, given
that in fact Y is y0 and X is x0, we need to compute the conditional probability
P(Yx1 = y1|Y = y0,X = x0) which is well deﬁned once we know the forms of the
structural equations and the distribution of the exogenous variables in the model.
For example, assuming linear equations (as in Fig. 1),
y = βx+uX,
the conditioning events Y = y0 and X = x0 yield UX = x0 and UY = y0 −βx0, and
we can conclude that, with probability one, Yx1 must take on the value: Yx1 = βx1 +
UY = β(x1 −x0)+y0. In other words, if X were x1 instead of x0, Y would increase
by β times the difference (x1 −x0). In nonlinear systems, the result would also
depend on the distribution of {UX,UY} and, for that reason, attributional queries
are generally not identiﬁable in nonparametric models .
In general, if x and x′ are incompatible then Yx and Yx′ cannot be measured
simultaneously, and it may seem meaningless to attribute probability to the joint
statement “Y would be y if X = x and Y would be y′ if X = x′.”11 Such concerns
have been a source of objections to treating counterfactuals as jointly distributed
random variables . The deﬁnition ofYx andYx′ in terms of two distinct
submodels neutralizes these objections , since the contradictory joint
statement is mapped into an ordinary event, one where the background variables
satisfy both statements simultaneously, each in its own distinct submodel; such
events have well deﬁned probabilities.
The surgical deﬁnition of counterfactuals given by (29), provides the conceptual and formal basis for the Neyman-Rubin potential-outcome framework, an
approach to causation that takes a controlled randomized trial (CRT) as its ruling paradigm, assuming that nothing is known to the experimenter about the science behind the data. This “black-box” approach, which has thus far been denied
the beneﬁts of graphical or structural analyses, was developed by statisticians who
11For example, “The probability is 80% that Joe belongs to the class of patients who will be cured
if they take the drug and die otherwise.”
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
found it difﬁcult to cross the two mental barriers discussed in Section 2.2. Section
5 establishes the precise relationship between the structural and potential-outcome
paradigms, and outlines how the latter can beneﬁt from the richer representational
power of the former.
Methodological Principles of Causal Inference
The structural theory described in the previous sections dictates a principled methodology that eliminates much of the confusion concerning the interpretations of study
results as well as the ethical dilemmas that this confusion tends to spawn. The
methodology dictates that every investigation involving causal relationships (and
this entails the vast majority of empirical studies in the health, social, and behavioral sciences) should be structured along the following four-step process:
1. Deﬁne: Express the target quantity Q as a function Q(M) that can be computed from any model M.
2. Assume: Formulate causal assumptions using ordinary scientiﬁc language
and represent their structural part in graphical form.
3. Identify: Determine if the target quantity is identiﬁable (i.e., expressible in
terms of estimable parameters).
4. Estimate: Estimate the target quantity if it is identiﬁable, or approximate it,
if it is not. Test the statistical implications of the model, if any, and modify
the model when failure occurs.
Deﬁning the target quantity
The deﬁnitional phase is the most neglected step in current practice of quantitative
analysis. The structural modeling approach insists on deﬁning the target quantity,
be it “causal effect,” “mediated effect,” “effect on the treated,” or “probability of
causation” before specifying any aspect of the model, without making functional or
distributional assumptions and prior to choosing a method of estimation.
The investigator should view this deﬁnition as an algorithm that receives a
model M as an input and delivers the desired quantity Q(M) as the output. Surely,
such algorithm should not be tailored to any aspect of the input M; it should be general, and ready to accommodate any conceivable model M whatsoever. Moreover,
the investigator should imagine that the input M is a completely speciﬁed model,
with all the functions fX, fY,... and all the U variables (or their associated probabilities) given precisely. This is the hardest step for statistically trained investigators
to make; knowing in advance that such model details will never be estimable from
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
the data, the deﬁnition of Q(M) appears like a futile exercise in fantasy land – it is
For example, the formal deﬁnition of the causal effect P(y|do(x)), as given
in Eq. (7), is universally applicable to all models, parametric as well as nonparametric, through the formation of a submodel Mx. By deﬁning causal effect procedurally, thus divorcing it from its traditional parametric representation, the structural
theory avoids the many pitfalls and confusions that have plagued the interpretation
of structural and regressional parameters for the past half century.12
Explicating causal assumptions
This is the second most neglected step in causal analysis. In the past, the difﬁculty has been the lack of a language suitable for articulating causal assumptions
which, aside from impeding investigators from explicating assumptions, also inhibited them from giving causal interpretations to their ﬁndings.
Structural equation models, in their counterfactual reading, have removed
this lingering difﬁculty by providing the needed language for causal analysis. Figures 3 and 4 illustrate the graphical component of this language, where assumptions are conveyed through the missing arrows in the diagram. If numerical or
functional knowledge is available, for example, linearity or monotonicity of the
functions fX, fY,..., those are stated separately, and applied in the identiﬁcation
and estimation phases of the study. Today we understand that the longevity and
natural appeal of structural equations stem from the fact that they permit investigators to communicate causal assumptions formally and in the very same vocabulary
in which scientiﬁc knowledge is stored.
Unfortunately, however, this understanding is not shared by all causal analysts; some analysts vehemently oppose the re-emergence of structure-based causation and insist, instead, on articulating causal assumptions exclusively in the unnatural (though formally equivalent) language of “potential outcomes,” “ignorability,”
“missing data,” “treatment assignment,” and other metaphors borrowed from clinical trials. This modern assault on structural models is perhaps more dangerous than
the regressional invasion that distorted the causal readings of these models in the
12Note that β in Eq. (1), the incremental causal effect of X on Y, is deﬁned procedurally by
β ∆= E(Y|do(x0 +1))−E(Y|do(x0)) = ∂
∂xE(Y|do(x)) = ∂
Naturally, all attempts to give β statistical interpretation have ended in frustrations , some persisting well into the 21st century .
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
late 1970s . While sanctioning causal inference in one idiosyncratic
style of analysis, the modern assault denies validity to any other style, including
structural equations, thus discouraging investigators from subjecting models to the
scrutiny of scientiﬁc knowledge.
This exclusivist attitude is manifested in passages such as: “The crucial
idea is to set up the causal inference problem as one of missing data” or “If a problem of causal inference cannot be formulated in this manner (as the comparison of
potential outcomes under different treatment assignments), it is not a problem of
inference for causal effects, and the use of “causal” should be avoided,” or, even
more bluntly, “the underlying assumptions needed to justify any causal conclusions
should be carefully and explicitly argued, not in terms of technical properties like
“uncorrelated error terms,” but in terms of real world properties, such as how the
units received the different treatments” .
The methodology expounded in this paper testiﬁes against such restrictions. It demonstrates the viability and scientiﬁc soundness of the traditional structural equations paradigm, which stands diametrically opposed to the “missing data”
paradigm. It renders the vocabulary of “treatment assignment” stiﬂing and irrelevant (e.g., there is no “treatment assignment” in sex discrimination cases). Most
importantly, it strongly prefers the use of “uncorrelated error terms,” (or “omitted
factors”) over its “strong ignorability” alternative, as the proper way of articulating
causal assumptions. Even the most devout advocates of the “strong ignorability”
language use “omitted factors” when the need arises to defend assumptions )
Identiﬁcation, estimation, and approximation
Having unburden itself from parametric representations, the identiﬁcation process
in the structural framework proceeds either in the space of assumptions (i.e., the
diagram) or in the space of mathematical expressions, after translating the graphical assumptions into a counterfactual language, as demonstrated in Section 5.3.
Graphical criteria such as those of Deﬁnition 3 and Theorem 3 permit the identiﬁcation of causal effects to be decided entirely within the graphical domain, where it
can beneﬁt from the guidance of scientiﬁc understanding. Identiﬁcation of counterfactual queries, on the other hand, often require a symbiosis of both algebraic and
graphical techniques. The nonparametric nature of the identiﬁcation task (Deﬁnition 1) makes it clear that contrary to traditional folklore in linear analysis, it is not
the model that need be identiﬁed but the query Q – the target of investigation. It
also provides a simple way of proving non-identiﬁability: the construction of two
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
parameterization of M, agreeing in P and disagreeing in Q, is sufﬁcient to rule out
identiﬁability.
When Q is identiﬁable, the structural framework also delivers an algebraic
expression for the estimand EST(Q) of the target quantity Q, examples of which
are given in Eqs. (24) and (25), and estimation techniques are then unleashed as
discussed in Section 3.3.4. An integral part of this estimation phase is a test for
the testable implications, if any, of those assumptions in M that render Q identiﬁable – there is no point in estimating EST(Q) if the data proves those assumptions
false and EST(Q) turns out to be a misrepresentation of Q. Investigators should
be reminded, however, that only a fraction, called “kernel,” of the assumptions embodied in M are needed for identifying Q , the rest may be violated
in the data with no effect on Q. In Fig. 2, for example, the assumption {UZ⊥⊥UX}
is not necessary for identifying Q = P(y|do(x)); the kernel {UY⊥⊥UZ,UY⊥⊥UX}
(together with the missing arrows) is sufﬁcient. Therefore, the testable implication
of this kernel, Z⊥⊥Y|X, is all we need to test when our target quantity is Q; the
assumption {UZ⊥⊥UX} need not concern us.
More importantly, investigators must keep in mind that only a tiny fraction
of any kernel lends itself to statistical tests, the bulk of it must remain untestable,
at the mercy of scientiﬁc judgment. In Fig. 2, for example, the assumption set
{UX⊥⊥UZ,UY⊥⊥UX} constitutes a sufﬁcient kernel for Q = P(y|do(x)) (see Eq.
(28)) yet it has no testable implications whatsoever. The prevailing practice of
submitting an entire structural equation model to a “goodness of ﬁt” test in support of causal claims is at odd with the logic of SCM ). Alternative causal models usually exist that make contradictory
claims and, yet, possess identical statistical implications. Statistical test can be
used for rejecting certain kernels, in the rare cases where such kernels have testable
implications, but the lion’s share of supporting causal claims falls on the shoulders
of untested causal assumptions.
When conditions for identiﬁcation are not met, the best one can do is derive
bounds for the quantities of interest—namely, a range of possible values of Q that
represents our ignorance about the details of the data-generating process M and that
cannot be improved with increasing sample size. A classical example of non identiﬁable model that has been approximated by bounds, is the problem of estimating
causal effect in experimental studies marred by non compliance, the structure of
which is given in Fig. 5.
Our task in this example is to ﬁnd the highest and lowest values of Q
Q ∆= P(Y = y|do(x)) = ∑
P(Y = y|X = x,UX = uX)P(UX = uX)
subject to the equality constraints imposed by the observed probabilities P(x,y,|z),
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
Figure 5: Causal diagram representing the assignment (Z), treatment (X), and outcome (Y) in a clinical trial with imperfect compliance.
where the maximization ranges over all possible functions P(uY,uX), P(y|x,uX)
and P(x|z,uY ) that satisfy those constraints.
Realizing that units in this example fall into 16 equivalence classes, each
representing a binary function X = f(z) paired with a binary function y = g(x),
Balke and Pearl were able to derive closed-form solutions for these bounds.13
They showed that, in certain cases, the derived bounds can yield signiﬁcant information on the treatment efﬁcacy. Chickering and Pearl further used Bayesian
techniques (with Gibbs sampling) to investigate the sharpness of these bounds as
a function of sample size. Kaufman, Kaufman, and MacLenose used this
technique to bound direct and indirect effects (see Section 6.1).
The Potential Outcome Framework
This section compares the structural theory presented in Sections 1–3 to the potentialoutcome framework, usually associated with the names of Neyman and Rubin , which takes the randomized experiment as its ruling paradigm and has
appealed therefore to researchers who do not ﬁnd that paradigm overly constraining. This framework is not a contender for a comprehensive theory of causation
for it is subsumed by the structural theory and excludes ordinary cause-effect relationships from its assumption vocabulary. We here explicate the logical foundation
of the Neyman-Rubin framework, its formal subsumption by the structural causal
model, and how it can beneﬁt from the insights provided by the broader perspective
of the structural theory.
The primitive object of analysis in the potential-outcome framework is the
unit-based response variable, denoted Yx(u), read: “the value that outcome Y would
obtain in experimental unit u, had treatment X been x.” Here, unit may stand for an
individual patient, an experimental subject, or an agricultural plot. In Section 3.4
13These equivalence classes were later called “principal stratiﬁcation” by Frangakis and Rubin
 . Looser bounds were derived earlier by Robins and Manski .
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
(Eq. (29) we saw that this counterfactual entity has a natural interpretation in the
SCM; it is the solution for Y in a modiﬁed system of equations, where unit is interpreted a vector u of background factors that characterize an experimental unit.
Each structural equation model thus carries a collection of assumptions about the
behavior of hypothetical units, and these assumptions permit us to derive the counterfactual quantities of interest. In the potential-outcome framework, however, no
equations are available for guidance and Yx(u) is taken as primitive, that is, an unde-
ﬁned quantity in terms of which other quantities are deﬁned; not a quantity that can
be derived from the model. In this sense the structural interpretation of Yx(u) given
in (29) provides the formal basis for the potential-outcome approach; the formation
of the submodel Mx explicates mathematically how the hypothetical condition “had
X been x” is realized, and what the logical consequences are of such a condition.
The “black-box” missing-data paradigm
The distinct characteristic of the potential-outcome approach is that, although investigators must think and communicate in terms of undeﬁned, hypothetical quantities
such as Yx(u), the analysis itself is conducted almost entirely within the axiomatic
framework of probability theory. This is accomplished, by postulating a “super”
probability function on both hypothetical and real events. If U is treated as a random variable then the value of the counterfactual Yx(u) becomes a random variable
as well, denoted as Yx. The potential-outcome analysis proceeds by treating the observed distribution P(x1,...,xn) as the marginal distribution of an augmented probability function P∗deﬁned over both observed and counterfactual variables. Queries
about causal effects (written P(y|do(x)) in the structural analysis) are phrased as
queries about the marginal distribution of the counterfactual variable of interest,
written P∗(Yx = y). The new hypothetical entities Yx are treated as ordinary random
variables; for example, they are assumed to obey the axioms of probability calculus,
the laws of conditioning, and the axioms of conditional independence.
Naturally, these hypothetical entities are not entirely whimsy. They are assumed to be connected to observed variables via consistency constraints such as
X = x =⇒Yx = Y,
which states that, for every u, if the actual value of X turns out to be x, then the value
that Y would take on if ‘X were x’ is equal to the actual value of Y. For example,
a person who chose treatment x and recovered, would also have recovered if given
treatment x by design. When X is binary, it is sometimes more convenient to write
Y = xY1 +(1−x)Y0
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
Whether additional constraints should tie the observables to the unobservables is not
a question that can be answered in the potential-outcome framework; for it lacks an
underlying model to deﬁne its axioms.
The main conceptual difference between the two approaches is that, whereas
the structural approach views the intervention do(x) as an operation that changes a
distribution but keeps the variables the same, the potential-outcome approach views
the variable Y under do(x) to be a different variable, Yx, loosely connected to Y
through relations such as (32), but remaining unobserved whenever X ̸= x. The
problem of inferring probabilistic properties of Yx, then becomes one of “missingdata” for which estimation techniques have been developed in the statistical literature.
Pearl shows, using the structural interpretation of Yx(u),
that it is indeed legitimate to treat counterfactuals as jointly distributed random
variables in all respects, that consistency constraints like (32) are automatically
satisﬁed in the structural interpretation and, moreover, that investigators need not
be concerned about any additional constraints except the following two
for all y, subsets Z, and values z for Z
Xz = x ⇒Yxz = Yz
for all x, subsets Z, and values z for Z
Equation (33) ensures that the interventions do(Y = y) results in the condition Y =
y, regardless of concurrent interventions, say do(Z = z), that may be applied to
variables other than Y. Equation (34) generalizes (32) to cases where Z is held
ﬁxed, at z. for proof of completeness.)
Problem formulation and the demystiﬁcation of “ignorability”
The main drawback of this black-box approach surfaces in problem formulation,
namely, the phase where a researcher begins to articulate the “science” or “causal
assumptions” behind the problem of interest. Such knowledge, as we have seen
in Section 1, must be articulated at the onset of every problem in causal analysis
– causal conclusions are only as valid as the causal assumptions upon which they
To communicate scientiﬁc knowledge, the potential-outcome analyst must
express assumptions as constraints on P∗, usually in the form of conditional independence assertions involving counterfactual variables. For instance, in our example of Fig. 5, to communicate the understanding that Z is randomized (hence
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
independent of UX and UY), the potential-outcome analyst would use the independence constraint Z⊥⊥{Yz1,Yz2,...,Yzk}.14 To further formulate the understanding
that Z does not affect Y directly, except through X, the analyst would write a, so
called, “exclusion restriction”: Yxz = Yx.
A collection of constraints of this type might sometimes be sufﬁcient to
permit a unique solution to the query of interest. For example, if one can plausibly
assume that, in Fig. 4, a set Z of covariates satisﬁes the conditional independence
 ,)
then the causal effect P(y|do(x)) = P∗(Yx = y) can readily be evaluated to yield
P∗(Yx = y)
P∗(Yx = y|z)P(z)
P∗(Yx = y|x,z)P(z) (using (35))
P∗(Y = y|x,z)P(z) (using (32))
P(y|x,z)P(z).
The last expression contains no counterfactual quantities (thus permitting us to drop
the asterisk from P∗) and coincides precisely with the standard covariate-adjustment
formula of Eq. (25).
We see that the assumption of conditional ignorability (35) qualiﬁes Z as an
admissible covariate for adjustment; it mirrors therefore the “back-door” criterion
of Deﬁnition 3, which bases the admissibility of Z on an explicit causal structure
encoded in the diagram.
The derivation above may explain why the potential-outcome approach appeals to mathematical statisticians; instead of constructing new vocabulary (e.g.,
arrows), new operators (do(x)) and new logic for causal analysis, almost all mathematical operations in this framework are conducted within the safe conﬁnes of
probability calculus. Save for an occasional application of rule (34) or (32)), the
analyst may forget that Yx stands for a counterfactual quantity—it is treated as any
other random variable, and the entire derivation follows the course of routine probability exercises.
This orthodoxy exacts a high cost: Instead of bringing the theory to the
problem, the problem must be reformulated to ﬁt the theory; all background knowledge pertaining to a given problem must ﬁrst be translated into the language of
14The notation Y⊥⊥X|Z stands for the conditional independence relationship P(Y = y,X = x|Z =
z) = P(Y = y|Z = z)P(X = x|Z = z) .
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
counterfactuals (e.g., ignorability conditions) before analysis can commence. This
translation may in fact be the hardest part of the problem. The reader may appreciate this aspect by attempting to judge whether the assumption of conditional
ignorability (35), the key to the derivation of (36), holds in any familiar situation,
say in the experimental setup of Fig. 2(a). This assumption reads: “the value that Y
would obtain had X been x, is independent of X, given Z”. Even the most experienced potential-outcome expert would be unable to discern whether any subset Z of
covariates in Fig. 4 would satisfy this conditional independence condition.15 Likewise, to derive Eq. (35) in the language of potential-outcome ), one would need to convey the structure of the chain X →W3 →Y using the
cryptic expression: W3x⊥⊥{Yw3,X}, read: “the value that W3 would obtain had X
been x is independent of the value that Y would obtain had W3 been w3 jointly with
the value of X.” Such assumptions are cast in a language so far removed from ordinary understanding of scientiﬁc theories that, for all practical purposes, they cannot
be comprehended or ascertained by ordinary mortals. As a result, researchers in
the graph-less potential-outcome camp rarely use “conditional ignorability” (35) to
guide the choice of covariates; they view this condition as a hoped-for miracle of
nature rather than a target to be achieved by reasoned design.16
Replacing “ignorability” with a conceptually meaningful condition (i.e.,
back-door) in a graphical model permits researchers to understand what conditions
covariates must fulﬁll before they eliminate bias, what to watch for and what to
think about when covariates are selected, and what experiments we can do to test,
at least partially, if we have the knowledge needed for covariate selection.
Aside from offering no guidance in covariate selection, formulating a problem in the potential-outcome language encounters three additional hurdles. When
counterfactual variables are not viewed as byproducts of a deeper, process-based
model, it is hard to ascertain whether all relevant judgments have been articulated,
whether the judgments articulated are redundant, or whether those judgments are
self-consistent. The need to express, defend, and manage formidable counterfactual relationships of this type explain the slow acceptance of causal analysis among
health scientists and statisticians, and why most economists and social scientists
15Inquisitive readers are invited to guess whether Xz⊥⊥Z|Y holds in Fig. 2(a), then reﬂect on why
causality is so slow in penetrating statistical education.
16The opaqueness of counterfactual independencies explains why many researchers within the
potential-outcome camp are unaware of the fact that adding a covariate to the analysis . Rubin goes as
far as stating that refraining from conditioning on an available measurement is “nonscientiﬁc ad
hockery” for it goes against the tenets of Bayesian philosophy for a discussion of this fallacy).
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
continue to use structural equation models instead of the potential-outcome alternatives advocated in
Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin , Holland , Sobel .
On the other hand, the algebraic machinery offered by the counterfactual
notation, Yx(u), once a problem is properly formalized, can be extremely powerful
in reﬁning assumptions , deriving consistent estimands , bounding probabilities of necessary and
sufﬁcient causation , and combining data from experimental
and nonexperimental studies . The next subsection (5.3) presents a
way of combining the best features of the two approaches. It is based on encoding
causal assumptions in the language of diagrams, translating these assumptions into
counterfactual notation, performing the mathematics in the algebraic language of
counterfactuals (using (32), (33), and (34)) and, ﬁnally, interpreting the result in
graphical terms or plain causal language. The mediation problem of Section 6.1 illustrates how such symbiosis clariﬁes the deﬁnition and identiﬁcation of direct and
indirect effects,17 and how it overcomes difﬁculties that were deemed insurmountable in the exclusivist potential-outcome framework .
Combining graphs and potential outcomes
The formulation of causal assumptions using graphs was discussed in Section 3.
In this subsection we will systematize the translation of these assumptions from
graphs to counterfactual notation.
Structural equation models embody causal information in both the equations
and the probability function P(u) assigned to the exogenous variables; the former
is encoded as missing arrows in the diagrams the latter as missing (double arrows)
dashed arcs. Each parent-child family (PAi,Xi) in a causal diagram G corresponds
to an equation in the model M. Hence, missing arrows encode exclusion assumptions, that is, claims that manipulating variables that are excluded from an equation
will not change the outcome of the hypothetical experiment described by that equation. Missing dashed arcs encode independencies among error terms in two or more
equations. For example, the absence of dashed arcs between a node Y and a set of
nodes {Z1,...,Zk} implies that the corresponding background variables, UY and
{UZ1,...,UZk}, are independent in P(u).
17Such symbiosis is now standard in epidemiology research yet still lacking in econometrics .
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
These assumptions can be translated into the potential-outcome notation using two simple rules ; the ﬁrst interprets the missing arrows
in the graph, the second, the missing dashed arcs.
1. Exclusion restrictions: For every variable Y having parents PAY and for every
set of endogenous variables S disjoint of PAY , we have
YpaY = YpaY,s.
2. Independence restrictions: If Z1,...,Zk is any set of nodes not connected to
Y via dashed arcs, and PA1,...,PAk their respective sets of parents, we have
YpaY ⊥⊥{Z1 pa1,...,Zk pak}.
The exclusion restrictions expresses the fact that each parent set includes
all direct causes of the child variable, hence, ﬁxing the parents of Y, determines
the value of Y uniquely, and intervention on any other set S of (endogenous) variables can no longer affect Y. The independence restriction translates the independence between UY and {UZ1,...,UZk} into independence between the corresponding potential-outcome variables. This follows from the observation that, once we
set their parents, the variables in {Y,Z1,...,Zk} stand in functional relationships to
the U terms in their corresponding equations.
As an example, consider the model shown in Fig. 5, which serves as the
canonical representation for the analysis of instrumental variables . This model displays the following parent sets:
PAZ = {/0}, PAX = {Z}, PAY = {X}.
Consequently, the exclusion restrictions translate into:
Zxy = Zx = Z
the absence of any dashed arc between Z and {Y,X} translates into the independence restriction
Z⊥⊥{Yx,Xz}.
This is precisely the condition of randomization; Z is independent of all its nondescendants, namely independent of UX and UY which are the exogenous parents
of Y and X, respectively. (Recall that the exogenous parents of any variable, say Y,
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
may be replaced by the counterfactual variable YpaY , because holding PAY constant
renders Y a deterministic function of its exogenous parent UY.)
The role of graphs is not ended with the formulation of causal assumptions.
Throughout an algebraic derivation, like the one shown in Eq. (36), the analyst
may need to employ additional assumptions that are entailed by the original exclusion and independence assumptions, yet are not shown explicitly in their respective
algebraic expressions. For example, it is hardly straightforward to show that the assumptions of Eqs. (40)–(41) imply the conditional independence (Yx⊥⊥Z|{Xz,X})
but do not imply the conditional independence (Yx⊥⊥Z|X). These are not easily derived by algebraic means alone. Such implications can, however, easily be tested in
the graph of Fig. 5 using the graphical reading for conditional independence (Definition 1). .) Thus, when the need arises
to employ independencies in the course of a derivation, the graph may assist the
procedure by vividly displaying the independencies that logically follow from our
assumptions.
Counterfactuals at Work
Mediation: Direct and indirect effects
Direct versus total effects
The causal effect we have analyzed so far, P(y|do(x)), measures the total effect of
a variable (or a set of variables) X on a response variable Y. In many cases, this
quantity does not adequately represent the target of investigation and attention is
focused instead on the direct effect of X on Y. The term “direct effect” is meant
to quantify an effect that is not mediated by other variables in the model or, more
accurately, the sensitivity of Y to changes in X while all other factors in the analysis
are held ﬁxed. Naturally, holding those factors ﬁxed would sever all causal paths
from X to Y with the exception of the direct link X →Y, which is not intercepted
by any intermediaries.
A classical example of the ubiquity of direct effects involves legal disputes
over race or sex discrimination in hiring. Here, neither the effect of sex or race
on applicants’ qualiﬁcation nor the effect of qualiﬁcation on hiring are targets of
litigation. Rather, defendants must prove that sex and race do not directly inﬂuence
hiring decisions, whatever indirect effects they might have on hiring by way of
applicant qualiﬁcation.
From a policy making viewpoint, an investigator may be interested in decomposing effects to quantify the extent to which racial salary disparity is due to
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
educational disparity, or, taking a health-care example, the extent to which sensitivity to a given exposure can be reduced by eliminating sensitivity to an intermediate
factor, standing between exposure and outcome. Another example concerns the
identiﬁcation of neural pathways in the brain or the structural features of proteinsignaling networks in molecular biology . Here, the decomposition of effects into their direct and indirect components carries theoretical scientiﬁc importance, for it tells us “how nature works” and, therefore, enables us to
predict behavior under a rich variety of conditions.
Yet despite its ubiquity, the analysis of mediation has long been a thorny issue in the social and behavioral sciences primarily because structural equation modeling in those
sciences were deeply entrenched in linear analysis, where the distinction between
causal parameters and their regressional interpretations can easily be conﬂated.18
As demands grew to tackle problems involving binary and categorical variables,
researchers could no longer deﬁne direct and indirect effects in terms of structural
or regressional coefﬁcients, and all attempts to extend the linear paradigms of effect decomposition to non-linear systems produced distorted results . These difﬁculties have accentuated the need to redeﬁne and derive causal effects from ﬁrst principles, uncommitted to distributional assumptions or a particular parametric form of the equations.
The structural methodology presented in this paper adheres to this philosophy and
it has produced indeed a principled solution to the mediation problem, based on
the counterfactual reading of structural equations (29). The following subsections
summarize the method and its solution.
Controlled direct-effects
A major impediment to progress in mediation analysis has been the lack of notational facility for expressing the key notion of “holding the mediating variables
ﬁxed” in the deﬁnition of direct effect. Clearly, this notion must be interpreted as
(hypothetically) setting the intermediate variables to constants by physical intervention, not by analytical means such as selection, regression, conditioning, matching
or adjustment. For example, consider the simple mediation models of Fig. 6, where
the error terms (not shown explicitly) are assumed to be independent. It will not be
sufﬁcient to measure the association between gender (X) and hiring (Y) for a given
18All articles cited above deﬁne the direct and indirect effects through their regressional interpretations; I am not aware of any article in this tradition that formally adapts a causal interpretation,
free of estimation-speciﬁc parameterization.
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
Figure 6: (a) A generic model depicting mediation through Z with no confounders,
and (b) with two confounders, W1 and W2.
level of qualiﬁcation (Z), (see Fig. 6(b)) because, by conditioning on the mediator
Z, we create spurious associations between X and Y through W2, even when there
is no direct effect of X on Y .
Using the do(x) notation, enables us to correctly express the notion of “holding Z ﬁxed” and obtain a simple deﬁnition of the controlled direct effect of the
transition from X = x to X = x′:
CDE ∆= E(Y|do(x),do(z))−E(Y|do(x′),do(z))
or, equivalently, using counterfactual notation:
CDE ∆= E(Yxz)−E(Yx′z)
where Z is the set of all mediating variables. The readers can easily verify that, in
linear systems, the controlled direct effect reduces to the path coefﬁcient of the link
X →Y (see footnote 12) regardless of whether confounders are present (as in Fig.
6(b)) and regardless of whether the error terms are correlated or not.
This separates the task of deﬁnition from that of identiﬁcation, as demanded
by Section 4.1. The identiﬁcation of CDE would depend, of course, on whether
confounders are present and whether they can be neutralized by adjustment, but
these do not alter its deﬁnition. Nor should trepidation about infeasibility of the
action do(gender = male) enter the deﬁnitional phase of the study, Deﬁnitions apply to symbolic models, not to human biology. Graphical identiﬁcation conditions
for expressions of the type E(Y|do(x),do(z1),do(z2),...,do(zk)) in the presence
of unmeasured confounders were derived by Pearl and Robins and invoke sequential application of the back-door conditions
discussed in Section 3.2.
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
Natural direct effects
In linear systems, the direct effect is fully speciﬁed by the path coefﬁcient attached
to the link from X to Y; therefore, the direct effect is independent of the values at
which we hold Z. In nonlinear systems, those values would, in general, modify the
effect of X on Y and thus should be chosen carefully to represent the target policy
under analysis. For example, it is not uncommon to ﬁnd employers who prefer
males for the high-paying jobs (i.e., high z) and females for low-paying jobs (low
When the direct effect is sensitive to the levels at which we hold Z, it is often
more meaningful to deﬁne the direct effect relative to some “natural” base-line level
that may vary from individual to individual, and represents the level of Z just before
the change in X. Conceptually, we can deﬁne the natural direct effect DEx,x′(Y)
as the expected change in Y induced by changing X from x to x′ while keeping all
mediating factors constant at whatever value they would have obtained under do(x).
This hypothetical change, which Robins and Greenland conceived and called
“pure” and Pearl formalized and analyzed under the rubric “natural,” mirrors
what lawmakers instruct us to consider in race or sex discrimination cases: “The
central question in any employment-discrimination case is whether the employer
would have taken the same action had the employee been of a different race (age,
sex, religion, national origin etc.) and everything else had been the same.” ).
Extending the subscript notation to express nested counterfactuals, Pearl
 gave a formal deﬁnition for the “natural direct effect”:
DEx,x′(Y) = E(Yx′,Zx)−E(Yx).
Here, Yx′,Zx represents the value that Y would attain under the operation of setting X
to x′ and, simultaneously, setting Z to whatever value it would have obtained under
the setting X = x. We see that DEx,x′(Y), the natural direct effect of the transition
from x to x′, involves probabilities of nested counterfactuals and cannot be written
in terms of the do(x) operator. Therefore, the natural direct effect cannot in general
be identiﬁed, even with the help of ideal, controlled experiments (see footnote 8 for
intuitive explanation). However, aided by the surgical deﬁnition of Eq. (29) and the
notational power of nested counterfactuals, Pearl was nevertheless able to
show that, if certain assumptions of “no confounding” are deemed valid, the natural
direct effect can be reduced to
DEx,x′(Y) = ∑
[E(Y|do(x′,z))−E(Y|do(x,z))]P(z|do(x)).
The intuition is simple; the natural direct effect is the weighted average of the controlled direct effect, using the causal effect P(z|do(x)) as a weighing function.
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
One condition for the validity of (43) is that Zx⊥⊥Yx′,z|W holds for some set
W of measured covariates. This technical condition in itself, like the ignorability
condition of (35), is close to meaningless for most investigators, as it is not phrased
in terms of realized variables. The surgical interpretation of counterfactuals (29)
can be invoked at this point to unveil the graphical interpretation of this condition.
It states that W should be admissible (i.e., satisfy the back-door condition) relative
the path(s) from Z to Y. This condition, satisﬁed by W2 in Fig. 6(b), is readily comprehended by empirical researchers, and the task of selecting such measurements,
W, can then be guided by the available scientiﬁc knowledge. Additional graphical
and counterfactual conditions for identiﬁcation are derived in Pearl Petersen
et al. and Imai, Keele, and Yamamoto .
In particular, it can be shown that expression (43) is both valid
and identiﬁable in Markovian models (i.e., no unobserved confounders) where each
term on the right can be reduced to a “do-free” expression using Eq. (24) or (25)
and then estimated by regression.
For example, for the model in Fig. 6(b), Eq. (43) reads:
DEx,x′(Y) =∑
P(w1)[E(Y|x′,z,w1))−E(Y|x,z,w1))]∑
P(z|x,w2)P(w2). (44)
while for the confounding-free model of Fig. 6(a) we have:
DEx,x′(Y) = ∑
[E(Y|x′,z)−E(Y|x,z)]P(z|x).
Both (44) and (45) can easily be estimated by a two-step regression.
Natural indirect effects
Remarkably, the deﬁnition of the natural direct effect (42) can be turned around
and provide an operational deﬁnition for the indirect effect – a concept shrouded
in mystery and controversy, because it is impossible, using the do(x) operator, to
disable the direct link from X to Y so as to let X inﬂuence Y solely via indirect
The natural indirect effect, IE, of the transition from x to x′ is deﬁned as the
expected change in Y affected by holding X constant, at X = x, and changing Z to
whatever value it would have attained had X been set to X = x′. Formally, this reads
 :
IEx,x′(Y) ∆= E[(Yx,Zx′)−E(Yx)],
which is almost identical to the direct effect (Eq. (42)) save for exchanging x and x′
in the ﬁrst term.
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
Indeed, it can be shown that, in general, the total effect TE of a transition
is equal to the difference between the direct effect of that transition and the indirect
effect of the reverse transition. Formally,
TEx,x′(Y) ∆= E(Yx′ −Yx) = DEx,x′(Y)−IEx′,x(Y).
In linear systems, where reversal of transitions amounts to negating the signs of
their effects, we have the standard additive formula
TEx,x′(Y) = DEx,x′(Y)+IEx,x′(Y).
Since each term above is based on an independent operational deﬁnition, this equality constitutes a formal justiﬁcation for the additive formula used routinely in linear
Note that, although it cannot be expressed in do-notation, the indirect effect
has clear policy-making implications. For example: in the hiring discrimination
context, a policy maker may be interested in predicting the gender mix in the work
force if gender bias is eliminated and all applicants are treated equally—say, the
same way that males are currently treated. This quantity will be given by the indirect
effect of gender on hiring, mediated by factors such as education and aptitude,
which may be gender-dependent.
More generally, a policy maker may be interested in the effect of issuing
a directive to a select set of subordinate employees, or in carefully controlling the
routing of messages in a network of interacting agents. Such applications motivate
the analysis of path-speciﬁc effects, that is, the effect of X on Y through a selected
set of paths .
In all these cases, the policy intervention invokes the selection of signals to
be sensed, rather than variables to be ﬁxed. Pearl has suggested therefore
that signal sensing is more fundamental to the notion of causation than manipulation; the latter being but a crude way of stimulating the former in experimental
setup. The mantra “No causation without manipulation” must be rejected. .)
It is remarkable that counterfactual quantities like DE and IE that could
not be expressed in terms of do(x) operators, and appear therefore void of empirical content, can, under certain conditions be estimated from empirical studies, and
serve to guide policies. Awareness of this potential should embolden researchers to
go through the deﬁnitional step of the study and freely articulate the target quantity Q(M) in the language of science, i.e., counterfactuals, despite the seemingly
speculative nature of each assumption in the model .
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
The Mediation Formula: a simple solution to a thorny problem
This subsection demonstrates how the solution provided in equations (45) and (48)
can be applied to practical problems of assessing mediation effects in non-linear
models. We will use the simple mediation model of Fig. 6(a), where all error terms
(not shown explicitly) are assumed to be mutually independent, with the understanding that adjustment for appropriate sets of covariates W may be necessary to
achieve this independence and that integrals should replace summations when dealing with continuous variables .
Combining (45) and (48), the expression for the indirect effect, IE, becomes:
IEx,x′(Y) = ∑
E(Y|x,z)[P(z|x′)−P(z|x)]
which provides a general formula for mediation effects, applicable to any nonlinear
system, any distribution (of U), and any type of variables. Moreover, the formula is
readily estimable by regression. Owed to its generality and ubiquity, I will refer to
this expression as the “Mediation Formula.”
The Mediation Formula represents the average increase in the outcome Y
that the transition from X = x to X = x′ is expected to produce absent any direct
effect of X on Y. Though based on solid causal principles, it embodies no causal
assumption other than the generic mediation structure of Fig. 6(a). When the outcome Y is binary (e.g., recovery, or hiring) the ratio (1 −IE/TE) represents the
fraction of responding individuals who owe their response to direct paths, while
(1−DE/TE) represents the fraction who owe their response to Z-mediated paths.
The Mediation Formula tells us that IE depends only on the expectation
of the counterfactual Yxz, not on its functional form fY(x,z,uY) or its distribution
P(Yxz = y). It calls therefore for a two-step regression which, in principle, can be
performed non-parametrically. In the ﬁrst step we regress Y on X and Z, and obtain
the estimate
g(x,z) = E(Y|x,z)
for every (x,z) cell. In the second step we estimate the expectation of g(x,z) conditional on X = x′ and X = x, respectively, and take the difference:
IEx,x′(Y) = Ez(g(x,z)|x′)−Ez(g(x,z)|x)
Nonparametric estimation is not always practical. When Z consists of a
vector of several mediators, the dimensionality of the problem would prohibit the
estimation of E(Y|x,z) for every (x,z) cell, and the need arises to use parametric
approximation. We can then choose any convenient parametric form for E(Y|x,z)
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
(e.g., linear, logit, probit), estimate the parameters separately (e.g., by regression
or maximum likelihood methods), insert the parametric approximation into (49)
and estimate its two conditional expectations (over z) to get the mediated effect
 .
Let us examine what the Mediation Formula yields when applied to both
linear and non-linear versions of model 6(a). In the linear case, the structural model
z = bxx+uZ
y = cxx+czz+uY
Computing the conditional expectation in (49) gives
E(Y|x,z) = E(cxx+czz+uY) = cxx+czz
and yields
IEx,x′(Y) = ∑cxx+czz)[P(z|x′)−P(z|x)].
= cz[E(Z|x′)−E(Z|x)]
= (x′ −x)(czbx)
= (x′ −x)(b−cx)
where b is the total effect coefﬁcient, b = (E(Y|x′)−E(Y|x))/(x′ −x) = cx +czbx.
We thus obtained the standard expressions for indirect effects in linear systems, which can be estimated either as a difference in two regression coefﬁcients
(Eq. 53) or a product of two regression coefﬁcients (Eq. 52), with Y regressed on
both X and Z. ). These two strategies do not generalize to non-linear system as we shall see next.
Suppose we apply (49) to a non-linear process (Fig. 7) in which X,Y, and Z
are binary variables, and Y and Z are given by the Boolean formula
Y = AND (x,ex)∨AND (z,ez)
x,z,ex,ez = 0,1
z = AND (x,exz)
z,exz = 0,1
Such disjunctive interaction would describe, for example, a disease Y that would
be triggered either by X directly, if enabled by ex, or by Z, if enabled by ez. Let
us further assume that ex,ez and exz are three independent Bernoulli variables with
probabilities px, pz, and pxz, respectively.
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
Figure 7: Stochastic non-linear model of mediation. All variables are binary.
As investigators, we are not aware, of course, of these underlying mechanisms; all we know is that X,Y, and Z are binary, that Z is hypothesized to be a
mediator, and that the assumption of nonconfoundedness permits us to use the Mediation Formula (49) for estimating the Z-mediated effect of X on Y. Assume that
our plan is to conduct a nonparametric estimation of the terms in (49) over a very
large sample drawn from P(x,y.z); it is interesting to ask what the asymptotic value
of the Mediation Formula would be, as a function of the model parameters: px, pz,
From knowledge of the underlying mechanism, we have:
P(Z = 1|x)
P(Y = 1|x,z)
= pxx+ pzz−pxpzxz
Therefore,
= xpx +zpz −xzpxpz
= ∑z E(Y|x,z)P(z|x)
= xpx +(pz −xpxpz)E(Z|x)
= x(px + pxzpz −xpxpzpxz)
Taking x = 0,x′ = 1 and substituting these expressions in (45), (48), and
(49) yields
IE(Y) = pzpxz
DE(Y) = px
TE(Y) = pzpxz+ px + pxpzpxz
Two observations are worth noting. First, we see that, despite the non-linear
interaction between the two causal paths, the parameters of one do not inﬂuence on
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
the causal effect mediated by the other. Second, the total effect is not the sum of the
direct and indirect effects. Instead, we have:
TE = DE +IE −DE ·IE
which means that a fraction DE ·IE/TE of outcome cases triggered by the transition
from X = 0 to X = 1 are triggered simultaneously, through both causal paths, and
would have been triggered even if one of the paths was disabled.
Now assume that we choose to approximate E(Y|x,z) by the linear expression
g(x,z) = a0 +a1x+a2z.
After ﬁtting the a’s parameters to the data (e.g., by OLS) and substituting in (49)
one would obtain
= ∑z(a0 +a1x+a2z)[P(z|x′)−P(z|x)]
= a2[E(Z|x′)−E(Z|x)]
which holds whenever we use the approximation in (57), regardless of the underlying mechanism.
If the correct data-generating process was the linear model of (50), we
would obtain the expected estimates a2 = cz,E(z|x′)−E(z|x′) = bx(x′ −x) and
IEx,x′(Y) = bxcz(x′ −x).
If however we were to apply the approximation in (57) to data generated by
the nonlinear model of Fig. 7, a distorted solution would ensue; a2 would evaluate
= ∑x[E(Y|x,z = 1)−E(Y|x,z = 0)]P(x)
= P(x = 1)[E(Y|x = 1,z = 1)−E(Y|x = 1,z = 0)]
= P(x = 1)[(px + pz −pxpz)−px]
= P(x = 1)pz(1−px),
E(z|x′)−E(z|x) would evaluate to pxz(x′ −x), and (58) would yield the approximation
= a2[E(Z|x′)−E(Z|x)]
= pxzP(x = 1)pz(1−px)
We see immediately that the result differs from the correct value pzpxz derived in (54). Whereas the approximate value depends on P(x = 1), the correct
value shows no such dependence, and rightly so; no causal effect should depend on
the probability of the causal variable.
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
Fortunately, the analysis permits us to examine under what condition the
distortion would be signiﬁcant. Comparing (59) and (54) reveals that the approximate method always underestimates the indirect effect and the distortion is minimal
for high values of P(x = 1) and (1−px).
Had we chosen to include an interaction term in the approximation of
E(Y|x,z), the correct result would obtain. To witness, writing
E(Y|x,z) = a0 +a1x+a2z+a3xz,
a2 would evaluate to pz, a3 to pxpz, and the correct result obtains through:
IEx,x′(Y) = ∑a0 +a1x+a2z+a3xz)[P(z|x′)−P(z|x)]
= (a2 +a3x)[E(Z|x′)−E(Z|x)]
= (a2 +a3x)pxz(x′ −x)
= (pz −pxpzx)pxz(x′ −x)
We see that, in addition to providing causally-sound estimates for mediation
effects, the Mediation Formula also enables researchers to evaluate analytically the
effectiveness of various parametric speciﬁcations relative to any assumed model.
This type of analytical “sensitivity analysis” has been used extensively in statistics
for parameter estimation, but could not be applied to mediation analysis, owed to the
absence of an objective target quantity that captures the notion of indirect effect in
both linear and non-linear systems, free of parametric assumptions. The Mediation
Formula of Eq. (49) explicates this target quantity formally, and casts it in terms of
estimable quantities.
The derivation of the Mediation Formula was facilitated by taking seriously
the four steps of the structural methodology (Section 4) together with the graphicalcounterfactual-structural symbiosis spawned by the surgical interpretation of counterfactuals (Eq. (29)).
In contrast, when the mediation problem is approached from an exclusivist
potential-outcome viewpoint, void of the structural guidance of Eq. (29), counterintuitive deﬁnitions ensue, carrying the label “principal stratiﬁcation” , which are at variance with common understanding of direct and indirect effects. For example, the direct effect is deﬁnable only in units absent of indirect
effects. This means that a grandfather would be deemed to have no direct effect
on his grandson’s behavior in families where he has had some effect on the father.
This precludes from the analysis all typical families, in which a father and a grandfather have simultaneous, complementary inﬂuences on children’s upbringing. In
linear systems, to take an even sharper example, the direct effect would be unde-
ﬁned whenever indirect paths exist from the cause to its effect. The emergence of
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
such paradoxical conclusions underscores the wisdom, if not necessity of a symbiotic analysis, in which the counterfactual notationYx(u) is governed by its structural
deﬁnition, Eq. (29).19
Causes of effects and probabilities of causation
The likelihood that one event was the cause of another guides much of what we
understand about the world (and how we act in it). For example, knowing whether
it was the aspirin that cured my headache or the TV program I was watching would
surely affect my future use of aspirin. Likewise, to take an example from common
judicial standard, judgment in favor of a plaintiff should be made if and only if it
is “more probable than not” that the damage would not have occurred but for the
defendant’s action .
These two examples fall under the category of “causes of effects” because
they concern situations in which we observe both the effect, Y = y, and the putative
cause X = x and we are asked to assess, counterfactually, whether the former would
have occurred absent the latter.
We have remarked earlier (footnote 8) that counterfactual probabilities conditioned on the outcome cannot in general be identiﬁed from observational or even
experimental studies. This does not mean however that such probabilities are useless or void of empirical content; the structural perspective may guide us in fact
toward discovering the conditions under which they can be assessed from data, thus
deﬁning the empirical content of these counterfactuals.
Following the 4-step process of structural methodology – deﬁne, assume,
identify, and estimate – our ﬁrst step is to express the target quantity in counterfactual notation and verify that it is well deﬁned, namely, that it can be computed
unambiguously from any fully-speciﬁed causal model.
In our case, this step is simple. Assuming binary events, with X = x and
Y = y representing treatment and outcome, respectively, and X = x′, Y = y′ their
negations, our target quantity can be formulated directly from the English sentence:
“Find the probability that Y would be y′ had X been x′, given that, in
reality, Y is actually y and X is x,”
PN(x,y) = P(Yx′ = y′|X = x,Y = y)
19Such symbiosis is now standard in epidemiology research and is making
its way slowly toward the social and behavioral sciences.
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
This counterfactual quantity, which Robins and Greenland named
“probability of causation” and Pearl named “probability of necessity” (PN), to be distinguished from two other nuances of “causation,” is certainly
computable from any fully speciﬁed structural model, i.e., one in which P(u) and all
functional relationships are given. This follows from the fact that every structural
model deﬁnes a joint distribution of counterfactuals, through Eq. (29).
Having written a formal expression for PN, Eq. (60), we can move on to
the formulation and identiﬁcation phases and ask what assumptions would permit
us to identify PN from empirical studies, be they observational, experimental or a
combination thereof.
This problem was analyzed in Pearl and yielded the
following results:
Theorem 4 If Y is monotonic relative to X, i.e., Y1(u) ≥Y0(u), then PN is identiﬁable whenever the causal effect P(y|do(x)) is identiﬁable and, moreover,
PN = P(y|x)−P(y|x′)
+ P(y|x′)−P(y|do(x′))
The ﬁrst term on the r.h.s. of (61) is the familiar excess risk ratio (ERR) that epidemiologists have been using as a surrogate for PN in court cases . The second term represents the correction needed
to account for confounding bias, that is, P(y|do(x′)) ̸= P(y|x′).
This suggests that monotonicity and unconfoundedness were tacitly assumed
by the many authors who proposed or derived ERR as a measure for the “fraction
of exposed cases that are attributable to the exposure” .
Equation (61) thus provides a more reﬁned measure of causation, which can
be used in situations where the causal effect P(y|do(x)) can be estimated from either
randomized trials or graph-assisted observational studies (e.g., through Theorem 3
or Eq. (25)). It can also be shown that the expression in
(61) provides a lower bound for PN in the general, nonmonotonic case. .) In particular, the tight upper and lower bounds on
PN are given by:
0, P(y)−P(y|do(x′))
1, P(y′|do(x′))−P(x′,y′)
It is worth noting that, in drug related litigation, it is not uncommon to obtain data from both experimental and observational studies. The former is usually
available at the manufacturer or the agency that approved the drug for distribution
(e.g., FDA), while the latter is easy to obtain by random surveys of the population.
Pearl: An Introduction to Causal Inference
In such cases, the standard lower bound used by epidemiologists to establish legal responsibility, the Excess Risk Ratio, can be improved substantially using the
corrective term of Eq. (61). Likewise, the upper bound of Eq. (62) can be used to
exonerate drug-makers from legal responsibility. Cai and Kuroki analyzed
the statistical properties of PN.
Pearl shows that combining data from experimental and
observational studies which, taken separately, may indicate no causal relations between X and Y, can nevertheless bring the lower bound of Eq. (62) to unity, thus
implying causation with probability one.
Such extreme results dispel all fears and trepidations concerning the empirical content of counterfactuals . They demonstrate that a
quantity PN which at ﬁrst glance appears to be hypothetical, ill-deﬁned, untestable
and, hence, unworthy of scientiﬁc analysis is nevertheless deﬁnable, testable and,
in certain cases, even identiﬁable. Moreover, the fact that, under certain combination of data, and making no assumptions whatsoever, an important legal claim such
as “the plaintiff would be alive had he not taken the drug” can be ascertained with
probability approaching one, is a remarkable tribute to formal analysis.
Another counterfactual quantity that has been fully characterized recently is
the Effect of Treatment on the Treated (ETT):
ETT = P(Yx = y|X = x′)
ETT has been used in econometrics to evaluate the effectiveness of social programs
on their participants and has long been the target of research
in epidemiology, where it came to be known as “the effect of exposure on the
exposed,” or “standardized morbidity” have derived a complete characterization of those
models in which ETT can be identiﬁed from either experimental or observational
studies. They have shown that, despite its blatant counterfactual character, (e.g.,
“I just took an aspirin, perhaps I shouldn’t have?”) ETT can be evaluated from
experimental studies in many, though not all cases. It can also be evaluated from
observational studies whenever a sufﬁcient set of covariates can be measured that
satisﬁes the back-door criterion and, more generally, in a wide class of graphs that
permit the identiﬁcation of conditional interventions.
These results further illuminate the empirical content of counterfactuals and
their essential role in causal analysis. They prove once again the triumph of logic
and analysis over traditions that a-priori exclude from the analysis quantities that are
not testable in isolation. Most of all, they demonstrate the effectiveness and viability
of the scientiﬁc approach to causation whereby the dominant paradigm is to model
the activities of Nature, rather than those of the experimenter. In contrast to the
The International Journal of Biostatistics, Vol. 6 , Iss. 2, Art. 7
DOI: 10.2202/1557-4679.1203
ruling paradigm of conservative statistics, we begin with relationships that we know
in advance will never be estimated, tested or falsiﬁed. Only after assembling a host
of such relationships and judging them to faithfully represent our theory about how
Nature operates, we ask whether the parameter of interest, crisply deﬁned in terms
of those theoretical relationships, can be estimated consistently from empirical data
and how. It often does, to the credit of progressive statistics.
Conclusions
Traditional statistics is strong in devising ways of describing data and inferring
distributional parameters from sample. Causal inference requires two additional
ingredients: a science-friendly language for articulating causal knowledge, and a
mathematical machinery for processing that knowledge, combining it with data
and drawing new causal conclusions about a phenomenon. This paper surveys recent advances in causal analysis from the unifying perspective of the structural theory of causation and shows how statistical methods can be supplemented with the
needed ingredients. The theory invokes non-parametric structural equations models as a formal and meaningful language for deﬁning causal quantities, formulating
causal assumptions, testing identiﬁability, and explicating many concepts used in
causal discourse. These include: randomization, intervention, direct and indirect
effects, confounding, counterfactuals, and attribution. The algebraic component
of the structural language coincides with the potential-outcome framework, and its
graphical component embraces Wright’s method of path diagrams. When uniﬁed
and synthesized, the two components offer statistical investigators a powerful and
comprehensive methodology for empirical research.