A System For Automatic Personalized Tracking of Scientiﬁc
Literature on the Web
Kurt D. Bollacker, Steve Lawrence, and C. Lee Giles
NEC Research Institute
Princeton, NJ 08540
fkurt,lawrence, 
We introduce a system as part of the CiteSeer digital library
project for automatic tracking of scientiﬁc literature that is
relevant to a user’s research interests. Unlike previous systems that use simple keyword matching, CiteSeer is able to
track and recommend topically relevant papers even when
keyword based query proﬁles fail.
This is made possible
through the use of a heterogenous proﬁle to represent user
interests. These proﬁles include several representations, including content based relatedness measures. The CiteSeer
tracking system is well integrated into the search and browsing facilities of CiteSeer, and provides the user with great
ﬂexibility in tuning a proﬁle to better match his or her interests. The software for this system is available, and a sample
database is online as a public service.
user proﬁle, citation index, knowledge representation, information ﬁltering.
INTRODUCTION
There has always been a need for humans to be kept current
on important matters, but the time and effort required to do
so can be enormous. Very early, this problem was handled
by the creation of periodicals1, and throughout history, the
quantity and diversity of such publications has increased. In
modern times, information scarcity has become information
overload. In particular, the rate of publication of scientiﬁc literature grows each year, making it increasingly harder for researchers to keep up with novel relevant published work. The
advent of digital libraries was a technological response to this
overload. However, even with easier methods of searching
through scientiﬁc documents, researchers must still expend
a great deal of time and effort looking for new publications
that may interest them.
1The ﬁrst periodic newspaper is considered to be the Roman “Acta Diurna”, which Julius Caesar began in about 59 B.C. .
Previously we have introduced CiteSeer, a system that performs Autonomous Citation Indexing (ACI) of scientiﬁc publications on the Web . CiteSeer helps users in ways
that many traditional digital libraries do not. It provides the
facilities to browse by citation links and allows ﬁnding both
citing and cited papers of an interesting work. It summarizes
citation contexts to make quick appraisal of papers easier,
and it gives citation statistics including the number of citations for each cited paper and identiﬁcation of self-citations.
However, after spending the time to make a literature search
and possibly downloading papers from the Web, the effort
that the user put into the search is often forgotten and lost.
Later, the user may wish to perform a search about the same
topic to ﬁnd new relevant papers that have appeared since the
last time a search was performed. This requires a repeat of
the manual labor in searching and browsing to ﬁnd the papers
just like the ﬁrst time.
We introduce a tracking system into CiteSeer that uses pro-
ﬁles to represent a user’s topical interests in scientiﬁc literature. CiteSeer can examine its database of publications to
determine whether any new papers are related to the user’s
interests. If so, then the user can be alerted by e-mail or
whenever they next use CiteSeer’s Web based interface. Cite-
Seer includes, but goes beyond, simple keyword matching to
determine whether a user will be interested in a new paper.
A heterogeneous relatedness measure is used to identify new
related documents. Also, citation links can be monitored to
discover new citations to existing papers. CiteSeer not only
tracks interesting papers for the user, but provides a conﬁguration facility by which the user can change the proﬁle to
more closely reﬂect his or her interests.
Representing User Interests
CiteSeer’s tracking system
acts as a proxy for user interests. It attempts to decide whether
a newly available paper would be interesting enough to the
user to be worth mentioning it to him or her. In order for
such a system to be effective, it must be able to accurately
represent a user’s opinion of what is interesting. CiteSeer
relies on a number of different representations of the user’s
notion of an interesting paper. A new paper is deemed relevant if it satisﬁes the requirements of any of the representations. Having a diversity of representations is important for
several reasons. First, not every person searches for literature
in the same manner. Each person has their own set of techniques that they use to ﬁnd useful papers. By representing a
user’s interests with a proﬁle consisting of a heterogeneous
set of features, a wider variety of users may be accommodated. Second, even for a single user, no one representation
may be adequate to capture what the user considers interesting. A user’s opinion may be complex enough that each type
of representation only partially covers the user’s notion of
what makes a paper interesting.
CiteSeer uses two general methods for determining paper relevance: (i) constraint matching and (ii) feature relatedness.
Constraint matching allows a user to describe an interesting
paper by specifying constraints. This include such methods
as keyword matching on the text of the paper, or metadata
constraints such as specifying a source URL. Feature relatedness allows a user to specify a set of papers that are interesting, and CiteSeer tries to ﬁnd papers that are related to the
speciﬁed set.
CONSTRAINT MATCHING
A very simple, yet highly effective method of determining
whether a paper is relevant is constraint matching. Many digital libraries allow search by features such as included keywords, age, manual classiﬁcation and many other features
that may be useful in determining a relevant document. Cite-
Seer includes several constraint matching methods that may
be included in a user’s proﬁle.
Keyword Matching
Although it is commonly used, keyword matching should be used with care if it is to be an effective means of detecting relevant papers. The context of
the keyword is of high importance, since it has an impact on
how related the keyword is to the central ideas of the paper.
CiteSeer allows keyword matching, for which the context is
restricted to speciﬁc parts of the document. Currently, these
parts include the (i) title, (ii) header, (iii) abstract, and (iv)
main body of text of the document. CiteSeer can with greater
than 90% reliability determine the title of papers that it parses
from Postscript (and 100% of those where the title is given,
e.g. the paper is downloaded from another database). The
header is everything from the beginning of the paper till the
beginning of the abstract, or the ﬁrst section if there is no abstract. The header often contains important information such
as the author names and afﬁliations, and references to where
the paper has been published. CiteSeer allows a user to specify keywords that will match in the header, but not in the
title. For example, this will allow discrimination of the word
“research” in the title versus the same word in an author’s
afﬁliation.
Keyword matching is a powerful method of identifying interesting new papers but requires the explicit determination
of good keywords, which can be difﬁcult. If poor keywords
are chosen, then undesirable papers may be incorrectly identiﬁed as interesting. If good keywords are not included, then
many valuable papers may be missed. Because of this, Cite-
Seer uses a variety of other forms of relevance in addition to
Citation Links
Citation of previous published research ties
a scientist’s work to results from earlier research upon which
it builds. To know which and how later publications cite a
particular paper gives an indication of the effect of the cited
work on the research community. One of the indices in a
CiteSeer database is for the references at the end of the paper. Users may search for citations by keyword, and then be
given links to all of the citing papers in the database, as well
as the context of the citations in the main text of those papers. By presenting these citation contexts together, CiteSeer
forms a summary of assessments of the cited work. If the
cited work is particularly important or interesting, new citing
papers may also be of interest. CiteSeer’s tracking system allows a user to specify interesting citations. When new citing
papers appear, the user can be informed as to their existence.
One example of why a user may want to use such a representation of their interests is in citations to their own publications. Citations to a researcher’s work may contain valuable
feedback. Particularly for very proliﬁc authors, keeping up
with citations to one’s work could be very time consuming.
Use of Metadata
Since metadata is a descriptive tag associated with a document, it may provide useful information
about the relevance of a scientiﬁc publication. Since Cite-
Seer takes most of its papers from the Web, it records the
URL from which each publication is linked. Users can specify a URL to track, and when new papers appear linked from
it, they are added to the list of papers to recommend. This
form of relevance is important when a user wishes to keep
up with publications from a particular research group or institution. The limitations of using URLs to track relevant literature mirror those of keyword matching. Extraneous URLs
result in uninteresting papers being recommended and missing URLs cause useful papers to be missed. Other forms of
metadata can be useful, and may be included in a future version of the CiteSeer tracking system.
RELATED PAPERS
When a user performs a literature survey on a topic of interest, he or she essentially ends up with a collection of relevant
literature. By specifying keyword or metadata constraints, a
user can specify an interest proﬁle. However, there may be
many other relevant publications that do not cite one of the
found papers or match some other constraint. The user would
like to simply say, “Tell me about new papers that are related
to this one.” CiteSeer is able to identify such papers through
the use of relatedness measures .
CiteSeer attempts to capture a user’s notion of relatedness
between papers. This task is composed of two major challenges: (i) identifying features of the documents that represent useful semantic information, and (ii) creating functions
of these features having a range space in which distances represent meaningful semantic distances. “Meaningful” in this
case is deﬁned as “adequately represents a user’s concept”.
We do not attempt to approach these challenges for general
documents, as some information retrieval systems do. Instead, we are interested in the special case of scientiﬁc publications, which are relatively well structured, making the
problem easier.
Consider a database of scientiﬁc documents created by Cite-
() be a set of features extractors applicable to
a scientiﬁc document, and let
d dimensional feature vector extracted from
some document
) be a relatedness measure
between documents
e. From the perspective of a user,
we would like
) to be small when
e are about
mostly unrelated topics and concepts, and large when
e talk about very related issues and ideas. In this framework,
challenge (i) simply amounts to choosing a good feature extractor
() and challenge (ii) is that of choosing a useful
relatedness measure
Like its use of heterogeneous constraints, CiteSeer also uses
a mixture of paper relatedness measures. Both text based
and citation based relatedness measures are used to determine whether a paper is relevant to the user.
Text Relatedness
Instead of considering a body of text to
be a long string of symbols, it is common to consider a document to be a collection of words. The frequency of each
unique word can be measured. A feature vector
d is extracted from a document
d where each component is one or
zero to indicate the presence of a unique word or (more commonly) the frequency of the word in the document.
One often used form of this measure is known as term frequency
 inverse document frequency (TFIDF) . In this
scheme the feature set
d is a vector of word frequencies2
weighted by their rarity over a collection of documents
W be the set of all words over
D. In a document
the frequency of each word stem
ds and let the number of documents in the database having stem
d let the highest term frequency be
max. In one
TFIDF scheme a word weight vector element
ds is calculated as:
j is the total number of documents. Thus for TFIDF,
j dimensional vector of
ds values. Once the
feature vectors have been extracted for two documents, the
distance between them may be calculated. Commonly, a dot
product or Euclidean distance measure is used. The TFIDF
relatedness between two documents
e is a dot product
2Actually, CiteSeer uses word stems generated by Porter’s algorithm
of the two word vectors
e given as:
CiteSeer uses the TFIDF distance between the abstracts and
between text bodies of papers to determine whether a newly
available paper is related to one of the papers speciﬁed by the
user. If the TFIDF relatedness is above a threshold for either
the abstract or full text, then it is considered relevant enough
to be recommended. Currently this threshold is tuned by us
by hand, but in the future could be adjusted by the user or
learned from user feedback.
The total number of unique word stems
j in the collection of documents
j can be quite large, presenting sparsity
problems for TFIDF. This has been approached in a variety
of ways such as chopping off the smallest terms (what
CiteSeer does now) or using a dimensionality reducing mapping such as Latent Semantic Indexing .
Citation Relatedness
Word based similarity measure can
be useful, but do not take advantage of speciﬁc features in
scientiﬁc publications. In addition to word based similarity
measures, CiteSeer uses common citations to make an estimate of document relatedness. Our premise is that if two scientiﬁc papers cite some of the same previous publications,
then these two papers may be related. If a cited work is very
obscure then this is a more powerful indicator than if a citation is to an extremely well known and often cited publication. The measure that captures this idea of relatedness is
called “Common Citation
 Inverse Document Frequency”
(CCIDF) and is partially analogous to the word vector
based TFIDF. Let
i be the frequency of a citation
i in a collection of documents
i be the inverse frequency, and let
D be the vector of these inverse frequencies. Let
di be a Boolean indicator of whether document
contains citation
d be the resulting Boolean vector.
The CCIDF relatedness between a newly downloaded document
e and a document of interest
d (speciﬁed by the user) is
deﬁned as:
() is the trace function and
 is the outer product.
Any document
e having a value
set threshold is considered relevant. In the future we intend
to explore reﬁnements to CCIDF to consider more information about each citation such as placement in the text body,
frequency, and context.
PROFILE CREATION
A CiteSeer proﬁle is a machine representation of a user’s notion of an interesting publication. The creation of a user pro-
ﬁle is integrated into the process of using CiteSeer’s searching and browsing functions to ﬁnd papers of interest. When
a user uses CiteSeer through its Web browser interface, a
cookie is used to assign that user a unique identifying number. This unique number allows CiteSeer to keep track of
Home Options Edit Profile Recommendations Help Add Documents Feedback Papers About
Searching for c l giles or c lee giles or c giles or l giles in Computer Science (161911 documents
2352873 citations total).
1186 citations found.
Click on the [Context] links to see the citing documents and the context of the citations. Track All
C.L. Giles, C.B. Miller, D. Chen, H.H. Chen, G.Z. Sun, and Y.C. Lee. Learning and
extracting finite state automata with second--order recurrent neural networks. Neural
Computation, 4(3):393--405, 1992. Context Bib Related Track Check
B. Hassibi and D. G. Stork. Second-order derivatives for network pruning: Optimal brain
surgeon. In S. J. Hanson, J. D. Cowan, and C. L. Giles, editors, Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 5, pages 164--171. Morgan Kauffman, San Mateo,
CA, 1993. Context Bib Related Track Check
Giles, C. L., Sun, G. Z., Chen, H. H., Lee, Y. C., and Chen, D. . Higher order
recurrent networks and grammatical inference. Neural Computation, 4(3):393--405.
Context Bib Related Track Check
P. Simard, Y. LeCun, and J. Denker. Efficient pattern recognition using a new
transformation distance. In S. J. Hanson, J. D. Cowan, and C. L. Giles, editors, Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 5, San Mateo, CA, 1993. Morgan Kaufmann.
Context Bib Related Track Check
P. Dayan and G. E. Hinton. Feudal reinforcement learning. In S. J. Hanson, J. D. Cowan,
and C. L. Giles., editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing 5, pages 271--278,
San Mateo, CA, 1993. Morgan Kaufmann. Context Bib Related Track Check
[... section deleted ...]
Self-citations are not included in the graph or the main number of citations.
c l giles or c lee giles or c giles or l giles
Search Citations
Search Indexed Articles
Figure 1: The results of a CiteSeer query for citations to “C. Lee Giles”. Different abbreviations in the query cover different
ways that “C. Lee Giles” is abbreviated in citations.
the proﬁle if the user wishes to remain anonymous. It also
greatly simpliﬁes the process of updating the proﬁle with
minimal user effort. The user may also provide an e-mail
address to which recommendations may be sent periodically.
In order to actually begin building a proﬁle, the user simply
needs to specify a citation for which new citing papers will be
tracked, a document for which related papers will be tracked,
or a keyword or URL to add to the proﬁle.
As a citation example, Figure 1 shows the results of a Cite-
Seer query for all citations to “C. Lee Giles”. In order to
get a list of already existing citations to the paper “Learning
and extracting ﬁnite state automata with second-order recurrent neural networks”, including contexts, the user simply
chooses the Context link. If this citation appears interesting
to the user, then the Track New Cites link can be chosen to
add this citation to their proﬁle. In the future, when new papers that make this citation are added to the database, they
Home Options Edit Profile Recommendations Help Add Documents Feedback Papers About
Searching for support vector machine in Computer Science (161911 documents 2352873 citations
total). Track New Documents Matching Query
Retrieving documents...
64 documents found. Ordering by the number of citations (authorities)
Details Context 21: Training Support Vector Machines: an Application to Face Detection Edgar
Osuna Robert Freund Federico Girosi Center for Biological and Computational Learning and Operations
Research Center Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge, MA, 02139, U.S.A.
...Support Vector Machines: an Application to Face Detection (To appear in the Proceedings of
CVPR'97,... /...Cambridge, MA, 02139, U.S.A. Abstract We investigate the application of Support
Vector Machines (SVMs) in computer vision. SVM is a learning technique developed by V. Vapnik ...
Details Context 7: Support Vector Machines: Training and Applications Massachusetts Institute Of
Technology Artificial Intelligence Laboratory Center For Biological And Computational Learning
Department Of Brain And Cognitive Sciences A.I. Memo No. 1602 March, 1997 C.B.C.L Paper No. 144
Edgar E. Osuna, Robert
...AND COGNITIVE SCIENCES A.I. Memo No. 1602 March, 1997 C.B.C.L Paper No. 144 Support
Vector Machines: Training and Applications Edgar E. Osuna, Robert Freund and Federico ... /...this
publication is: ai-publications/1500-1999/AIM-1602.ps.Z Abstract The Support Vector Machine (SVM)
is a new and very promising classification technique developed by...
Details Context 4: Generalization Performance of Support Vector Machines and Other Pattern
Classifiers Generic author design sample pages 1998/04/10 13:50 1 Peter Bartlett Australian National
University John Shawe-Taylor Royal Holloway, University of London
j.shawe-taylor@dcs
...author design sample pages 1998/04/10 13:50 1 Generalization Performance of Support Vector
Machines and Other Pattern Classifiers Peter Bartlett Australian National University ... /...have been
obtained for high confidence generalization error bounds for the Support Vector Machine (SVM) and
other pattern classifiers related to the SVM. As a by-product of...
Details Context 2: Feature Selection via Concave Minimization and Support Vector Machines P. S.
Bradley Computer Sciences Department University of Wisconsin Madison, WI 53706 
O. L. Mangasarian Computer Sciences Department University of Wisconsin Madison, WI 53706
 
...Selection via Concave Minimization and Support Vector Machines P. S. Bradley Computer Sciences
Department University of Wisconsin Madison,... /...of dimensions of the space used to determine the plane
is minimized. In the support vector machine approach , in addition to minimizing the
weighted sum...
support vector machine
Search Citations
Search Indexed Articles
Figure 2: The results of a CiteSeer query for documents containing the term “support vector machine”.
can be recommended to the user as potentially interesting.
As a document example, Figure 2 shows part of the results of
a query for full documents containing the term “support vector machine”. If the user is interested in the paper “Training
support vector machines: An application to face detection”,
he or she can choose the Details link to get more information,
as is shown in Figure 3.
The active bibliography section as shown in Figure 3 gives a
list of documents that are related in the sense of CCIDF similarity, along with the degree of similarity. If the user wishes
to track new papers that are related to this one, then the Track
Related Documents link can be chosen to add this document
to the user’s proﬁle. Additionally, the details of existing related documents can be retrieved, and new documents related
to these can be tracked as well.
In order to add keywords to the proﬁle, the user can choose
the Track New Documents Matching Query button from
the main CiteSeer search page, as shown in Figure 2. As new
documents that match a given query are found, they will be
recommended to the user.
Training Support Vector Machines: an Application to Face
Edgar Osuna
Robert Freund
Federico Girosi
Center for Biological and Computational Learning and
Operations Research Center
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA, 02139, U.S.A.
ftp://ftp.ai.mit.edu/pub/cbcl/cvpr97-face.ps.gz Context Source HTML Track Related Documents
Abstract: We investigate the application of Support Vector Machines (SVMs) in computer vision. SVM
is a learning technique developed by V. Vapnik and his team (AT&T Bell Labs.) that can be seen as a new
method for training polynomial, neural network, or Radial Basis Functions classifiers. The decision
surfaces are found by solving a linearly constrained quadratic programming problem. This optimization
problem is challenging because the quadratic form is completely dense and the memory requirements grow
with the square of the number of data points. We present a decomposition algorithm that guarantees global
optimality, and can be used to train SVM's over very large data sets. The main idea behind the
decomposition is the iterative solution of sub-problems and the evaluation of optimality conditions which
are used both to generate improved iterative values, and also establish the stopping criteria for the
algorithm. We present experimental results of our implementation of SVM, and demonstrate the ...
Active bibliography (related documents):
Details Context 0.85: Support Vector Machines: Training and Applications Massachusetts Institute
Of Technology Artificial Intelligence Laboratory Center For Biological And Computational Learning
Department Of Brain And Cognitive Sciences A.I. Memo No. 1602 March, 1997 C.B.C.L Paper No. 144
Edgar E. Osuna, Robert
Details Context 0.4: Rotation Invariant Neural Network-Based Face Detection Henry A. Rowley
Shumeet Baluja Takeo Kanade December 1997 CMU-CS-97-201 School of Computer Science Carnegie
Mellon University Pittsburgh, PA 15213 Justsystem Pittsburgh Research Center 4616 Henry Street
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Citations made in this document:
Context G. Burel and D. Carel. Detection and localization of faces on digital images. Pattern
Recognition Letters, 15:963--967, 1994.
Context C.J.C. Burges. Simplified support vector decision rules. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, pages 71--77. 1996.
Context C. Cortes and V. Vapnik. Support vector networks. Machine Learning, 20:1--25, 1995.
Context N. Kruger, M. Potzsch, and C. v.d. Malsburg. Determination of face position and pose with
learned representation based on labled graphs. Technical Report 96-03, Ruhr-Universitat, January 1996.
[... section deleted ...]
Figure 3: Document details on a user selected paper.
RECOMMENDATIONS
CiteSeer uses a combination of Web search engines, Web
crawling, and mailing list monitoring to continuously search
for new scientiﬁc publications. As they are found, the publications are downloaded, parsed, and placed into the appropriate CiteSeer databases. There are two methods by which
CiteSeer can check for new items that match the user’s proﬁle
and notify the user of new recommendations. First, whenever a user begins a new session of using CiteSeer through its
Web based interface, he or she can be alerted to the existence
of new recommendations on the main CiteSeer page. If the
user chooses to display the recommendations page, each new
recommended document is displayed along with the component of their proﬁle which was used to ﬁnd that document.
Figure 4 shows a demonstration of what a recommendation
page looks like. In this example, the new papers that match
the keywords “support vector machine” or are related to the
paper “Training support vector machines: An application to
face detection” are shown. If any of these recommended papers are important to the user, then they can be added to the
Home Options Edit Profile Recommendations Help Add Documents Feedback Papers About
New Document Recommendations
(for database Computer Science)
New documents found for the query: support vector machine
Details Track Related Reducing the run-time complexity of Support Vector Machines Edgar Osuna Federico Girosi Center for Biological and
Computational Learning Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge, MA 02139, USA e-mail:
feosuna, 
New documents related to: Edgar Osuna, Robert Freund, and Federico Girosi. Training support
vector machines: an application to face detection. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 130 -- 136, 1997.
Details Context Track Related 0.45: Face Detection with In-Plane Rotation: Early Concepts and
Preliminary Results Shumeet Baluja Justsystem Pittsburgh Research Center 4616 Henry Street
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 School of Computer Science Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburgh, PA 15213
 
Figure 4: New papers found by CiteSeer and recommended to the user as potentially interesting. One paper matches a
keyword, while the other new paper is sufﬁciently related to a paper previously speciﬁed by the user as interesting.
proﬁle. CiteSeer can also check all of the existing user pro-
ﬁles daily for new matches, and can e-mail those recommendations to the user if desired. If a user wishes this, then he
or she needs to provide a valid e-mail address on the Cite-
Seer Options page linked off of the main page. This e-mail
address can also be used to recover the user’s unique ID, if
their browser cookie is lost or unavailable.
PROFILE TUNING
It is easy to add new documents, citations, and keywords to
a proﬁle during the process of browsing and search in Cite-
Seer’s Web interface. The details of the proﬁle stay out of
the way of the user, keeping CiteSeer’s interface simple and
elegant. However, the user may want to evaluate his or her
proﬁle and delete some of its components. By choosing the
Proﬁle link from the CiteSeer main page, the user is presented with their proﬁle as in the example of Figure 5.
Shown here are the various keywords, citations, and documents that comprise the user’s proﬁle. The user can choose
one or more of these components for deletion, if desired. By
adding and deleting proﬁle components, the user can tune the
proﬁle to better reﬂect his or her interests.
PREVIOUS WORK
The functions that CiteSeer performs ﬁt under a lot of different research umbrellas. CiteSeer’s tracking system could be
thought of as an information retrieval system that performs
content based information ﬁltering. There has been a great
deal of information ﬁltering research concerning text based
documents (see for an overview). Important issues that
have concerned researchers include document representation
(e.g. ) and classiﬁcation techniques (see a comparison
in ). The use and learning of user proﬁles to improve
the quality of information ﬁlters has also been studied (e.g.
 ). The use of relatedness measures to ﬁnd
interesting publications has been cast as a routing problem,
a clustering problem, and even as data mining. Much of the
information ﬁltering research has focused on the problem of
general or loosely structured documents. In CiteSeer’s tracking system, we take advantage of the relatively rigid structure
of scientiﬁc publications to choose useful features to represent relatedness and relevance.
As far as Internet speciﬁc research, CiteSeer’s tracking system is similar to the capabilities provided by several Web
page tracking and location systems. Some of these systems
ﬁnd related Web pages using distance measures based on
word vector features , while others use page
links to ﬁnd related pages . There has also been work
in systems that alert users to changes in manually identiﬁed
interesting Web pages (e.g. ).
Beyond general information ﬁltering efforts, there are other
scientiﬁc publication tracking systems. CiteSeer’s tracking
capabilities are partially shared by commercial tools provided
by The Institute for Scientiﬁc Information (ISI) , who
provide large citation indexed databases, such as the Science Citation Index
. Like CiteSeer, browsing via citation links is also possible, but citation contexts are not supported. Tracking of papers by keyword is possible through
their Discover Agent service, but no sort of heterogenous pro-
ﬁle information is kept, and in particular, tracking by paper
Home Options Edit Profile Recommendations Help Add Documents Feedback Papers About
User Profile for 
(for database Computer Science)
Keywords Tracked:
support vector machine
URLs Tracked:
 
Documents Tracked:
Edgar Osuna, Robert Freund, and Federico Girosi. Training support vector machines: an
application to face detection. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 130 -- 136, 1997.
Citations Tracked:
Bollacker, K. D.; Lawrence, S.; and Giles, C. L. 1998. CiteSeer: An autonomous web agent
for automatic retrieval and identification of interesting publications. In Agents
'98, 116--123.
Make Changes
Make Changes
Figure 5: A sample CiteSeer proﬁle for a user. The user can add and delete components to have it reﬂect the user’s
interests more closely.
relatedness is not supported. The e-Print archive at http:
//xxx.lanl.gov/ also allows tracking of new submitted
scientiﬁc literature. However, this archive requires manual
classiﬁcation of all submitted papers, and can only track by
matching on those classiﬁcations.
CONCLUSIONS
The CiteSeer tracking system allows users to automatically
keep up to date with publications on the Web that are relevant
to their research interests. Users can easily deﬁne proﬁles
consisting of a heterogenous representation of their research
interests. This system ﬁnds potentially relevant papers based
on these proﬁles and recommends them to the user via email or CiteSeer’s Web interface. This system is unique in
its ability to ﬁnd papers based on a heterogeneous measure
of relatedness. The tracking interface is tightly integrated
into the CiteSeer system, to minimize the effort required by
users to create and tune their proﬁle.
The CiteSeer software is available at no cost for non-commercial use (contact
 for details), and a
demonstration computer science database is available as a
public service. The demonstration database can be found at
 and indexes over 150,000 computer science articles containing over 2 million citations.
FUTURE WORK
Although the CiteSeer tracking system is a powerful means
of automatically keeping up to date on research topics of
interest, there are several directions in which we intend to
provide enhancements. User proﬁles currently can only be
updated manually, although this process is made very easy.
We intend to explore the use of learning from implicit feedback based on use of the CiteSeer system. For example, if
the value of a particular tracked document could be assessed
by how many new interesting papers are found as being related to it, this information could be used to adjust sensitivity
parameters for relatedness. Also, there has been a great deal
of interest in collaborative ﬁltering of text documents .
We will investigate methods to use all of the users’ proﬁles as
a database to help enhance each individual proﬁle. Currently,
CiteSeer only recommends new documents of interest. In the
future we hope to expand this capability to the recommendation of new author names and keywords, which can then be
added back into the tracking proﬁle.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Shumeet Baluja, Eric Baum, Robert
Cameron, Eric Glover, Haym Hirsh, Steve Hitchcock, Bob
Krovetz, Andrea LaPaugh, Michael Lesk, Andrew McCallum, Michael Nelson, Craig Nevill-Manning, Brian Pinkerton, Ben Schafer, Warren Smith, and David Waltz for useful
comments and suggestions regarding CiteSeer.