Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 261–270
Brussels, Belgium, October 31 - November 4, 2018. c⃝2018 Association for Computational Linguistics
Unsupervised Multilingual Word Embeddings
Xilun Chen
Department of Computer Science
Cornell Unversity
Ithaca, NY, 14853, USA
 
Claire Cardie
Department of Computer Science
Cornell Unversity
Ithaca, NY, 14853, USA
 
Multilingual Word Embeddings (MWEs) represent words from multiple languages in a single distributional vector space. Unsupervised
MWE (UMWE) methods acquire multilingual embeddings without cross-lingual supervision, which is a signiﬁcant advantage over
traditional supervised approaches and opens
many new possibilities for low-resource languages. Prior art for learning UMWEs, however, merely relies on a number of independently trained Unsupervised Bilingual Word
Embeddings (UBWEs) to obtain multilingual
embeddings. These methods fail to leverage
the interdependencies that exist among many
languages. To address this shortcoming, we
propose a fully unsupervised framework for
learning MWEs1 that directly exploits the relations between all language pairs. Our model
substantially outperforms previous approaches
in the experiments on multilingual word translation and cross-lingual word similarity. In addition, our model even beats supervised approaches trained with cross-lingual resources.
Introduction
Continuous
distributional
representations have become a common
technique across a wide variety of NLP tasks.
Recent research, moreover, proposes cross-lingual
word representations that create a shared embedding space for words across two (Bilingual
Word Embeddings, BWE) or more languages
(Multilingual Word Embeddings, MWE). Words
from different languages with similar meanings
will be close to one another in this cross-lingual
embedding space. These embeddings have been
found beneﬁcial for a number of cross-lingual and
even monolingual NLP tasks .
1Code: 
The most common form of cross-lingual word
representations is the BWE, which connects the
lexical semantics of two languages. Traditionally
for training BWEs, cross-lingual supervision is required, either in the form of parallel corpora , or in the
form of bilingual lexica . This makes learning BWEs
for low-resource language pairs much more dif-
ﬁcult. Fortunately, there are attempts to reduce
the dependence on bilingual supervision by requiring a very small parallel lexicon such as identical character strings , or numerals .
Furthermore, recent work proposes approaches to obtain unsupervised BWEs without relying on any bilingual resources .
In contrast to BWEs that only focus on a pair
of languages, MWEs instead strive to leverage the
interdependencies among multiple languages to
learn a multilingual embedding space. MWEs are
desirable when dealing with multiple languages
simultaneously and have also been shown to improve the performance on some bilingual tasks
thanks to its ability to acquire knowledge from
other languages . Similar to training BWEs, cross-lingual supervision is typically needed for training MWEs,
and the prior art for obtaining fully unsupervised
MWEs simply maps all the languages independently to the embedding space of a chosen target language2 (usually English) . There are downsides, however, when using a single ﬁxed target language with no interaction between any of the two source languages. For
instance, French and Italian are very similar, and
the fact that each of them is individually converted
to a less similar language, English for example, in
2Henceforth, we refer to this method as BWE-Pivot as the
target language serves as a pivot to connect other languages.
order to produce a shared embedding space will
inevitably degrade the quality of the MWEs.
For certain multilingual tasks such as translating between any pair of N given languages, another option for obtaining UMWEs exists. One
can directly train UBWEs for each of such language pairs (referred to as BWE-Direct). This is
seldom used in practice, since it requires training
O(N2) BWE models as opposed to only O(N)
in BWE-Pivot, and is too expensive for most use
cases. Moreover, this method still does not fully
exploit the language interdependence. For example, when learning embeddings between French
and Italian, BWE-Direct only utilizes information
from the pair itself, but other Romance languages
such as Spanish may also provide valuable information that could improve performance.
In this work, we propose a novel unsupervised
algorithm to train MWEs using only monolingual
corpora (or equivalently, monolingual word embeddings). Our method exploits the interdependencies between any two languages and maps all
monolingual embeddings into a shared multilingual embedding space via a two-stage algorithm
consisting of (i) Multilingual Adversarial Training
(MAT) and (ii) Multilingual Pseudo-Supervised
Reﬁnement (MPSR). As shown by experimental
results on multilingual word translation and crosslingual word similarity, our model is as efﬁcient
as BWE-Pivot yet outperforms both BWE-Pivot
and BWE-Direct despite the latter being much
more expensive. In addition, our model achieves
a higher overall performance than state-of-the-art
supervised methods in these experiments.
Related Work
There is a plethora of literature on learning crosslingual word representations, focusing either on
a pair of languages, or multiple languages at the
same time .
One shortcoming of these methods is the dependence on crosslingual supervision such as parallel corpora or
bilingual lexica. Abundant research efforts have
been made to alleviate such dependence , but consider only the case of a single pair
of languages (BWEs). Furthermore, fully unsupervised methods exist for learning BWEs . For unsupervised MWEs, however, previous methods merely rely on a number of independent BWEs to separately map each language
into the embedding space of a chosen target language .
Adversarial Neural Networks have been successfully applied to various cross-lingual NLP
tasks where annotated data is not available, such as
cross-lingual text classiﬁcation ,
unsupervised BWE induction and unsupervised machine
translation . These works, however, only consider the
case of two languages, and our MAT method (§3.1)
is a generalization to multiple languages.
Mikolov et al. ﬁrst propose to learn
cross-lingual word representations by learning a
linear mapping between the monolingual embedding spaces of a pair of languages. It has then
been observed that enforcing the linear mapping
to be orthogonal could signiﬁcantly improve performance . These methods solve a linear
equation called the orthogonal Procrustes problem for the optimal orthogonal linear mapping between two languages, given a set of word pairs as
supervision. Artetxe et al. ﬁnd that when
using weak supervision (e.g. digits in both languages), applying this Procrustes process iteratively achieves higher performance. Lample et al.
 adopt the iterative Procrustes method with
pseudo-supervision in a fully unsupervised setting
and also obtain good results. In the MWE task,
however, the multilingual mappings no longer
have a closed-form solution, and we hence propose the MPSR algorithm (§3.2) for learning multilingual embeddings using gradient-based optimization methods.
In this work, our goal is to learn a single multilingual embedding space for N languages, without relying on any cross-lingual supervision. We
assume that we have access to monolingual embeddings for each of the N languages, which
can be obtained using unlabeled monolingual corpora . We now present our unsupervised MWE
(UMWE) model that jointly maps the monolingual embeddings of all N languages into a single
space by explicitly leveraging the interdependencies between arbitrary language pairs, but is computationally as efﬁcient as learning O(N) BWEs
(instead of O(N2)).
Denote the set of languages as L with |L | =
N. Suppose for each language l ∈L with vocabulary Vl, we have a set of d-dimensional monolingual word embeddings El of size |Vl| × d. Let
Sl denote the monolingual embedding space for
l, namely the distribution of the monolingual embeddings of l. If a set of embeddings E are in
an embedding space S, we write E ⊢S (e.g.
∀l : El ⊢Sl). Our models learns a set of encoders
Ml, one for each language l, and the corresponding decoders M−1
. The encoders map all El to a
single target space T : Ml(El) ⊢T . On the other
hand, a decoder M−1
maps an embedding in T
back to Sl.
Previous research shows
that there is a strong linear correlation between
the vector spaces of two languages, and that learning a complex non-linear neural mapping does not
yield better results. Xing et al. further show
that enforcing the linear mappings to be orthogonal matrices achieves higher performance. Therefore, we let our encoders Ml be orthogonal linear
matrices, and the corresponding decoders can be
obtained by simply taking the transpose: M−1
l . Thus, applying the encoder or decoder to an
embedding vector is accomplished by multiplying
the vector with the encoder/decoder matrix.
Another beneﬁt of using linear encoders and decoders (also referred to as mappings) is that we can
learn N −1 mappings instead of N by choosing
the target space T to be the embedding space of a
speciﬁc language (denoted as the target language)
without losing any expressiveness of the model.
Given a MWE with an arbitrary T , we can construct an equivalent one with only N −1 mappings
by multiplying the encoders of each language Ml
to the decoder of the chosen target language M⊤
t Ml)El ⊢St
where I is the identity matrix. The new MWE is
isomorphic to the original one.
We now present the two major components of
our approach, Multilingual Adversarial Training
(§3.1) and Multilingual Pseudo-Supervised Re-
ﬁnement (§3.2).
Embeddings from langi
langi Encoder
langj Decoder
Discriminator
Shared Embedding Space
Embeddings from langj
Forward and backward passes when training M
Forward and backward passes when training D
Multilingual Adversarial Training (Algorithm 1). langi and langj are two randomly selected
languages at each training step. JDj and JMi are the
objectives of Dj and Mi, respectively (Eqn. 1 and 2).
Multilingual Adversarial Training
In this section, we introduce an adversarial training approach for learning multilingual embeddings without cross-lingual supervision. Adversarial Training is a powerful technique for minimizing the divergence between complex distributions that are otherwise difﬁcult to directly
model .
In the crosslingual setting,
it has been successfully applied to unsupervised cross-lingual text classiﬁcation and unsupervised bilingual word embedding learning . However, these methods
only consider one pair of languages at a time, and
do not fully exploit the cross-lingual relations in
the multilingual setting.
Figure 1 shows our Multilingual Adversarial
Training (MAT) model and the training procedure
is described in Algorithm 1.
Note that as explained in §3, the encoders and decoders adopted
in practice are orthogonal linear mappings while
the shared embedding space is chosen to be the
same space as a selected target language.
Algorithm 1 Multilingual Adversarial Training
Require: Vocabulary Vi for each language langi ∈L . Hyperparameter k ∈N.
▷D iterations
for diter = 1 to k do
for all langj ∈L do
Select at random langi ∈L
Sample a batch of words xi ∼Vi
Sample a batch of words xj ∼Vj
ˆxt = Mi(xi)
▷encode to T
▷decode to Sj
yj = Dj(xj)
▷real vectors
ˆyj = Dj(ˆxj)
▷converted vectors
lossd += Ld(1, yj) + Ld(0, ˆyj)
Update all D parameters to minimize lossd
▷M iteration
for all langi ∈L do
Select at random langj ∈L
Sample a batch of words xi ∼Vi
ˆxt = Mi(xi)
▷encode to T
▷decode to Sj
ˆyj = Dj(ˆxj)
loss += Ld(1, ˆyj)
Update all M parameters to minimize loss
orthogonalize(M)
26: until convergence
In order to learn a multilingual embedding
space without supervision, we employ a series
of language discriminators Dl, one for each language l ∈L . Each Dl is a binary classiﬁer with
a sigmoid layer on top, and is trained to identify
how likely a given vector is from Sl, the embedding space of language l. On the other hand, to
train the mappings, we convert a vector from a random language langi to another random language
langj (via the target space T ﬁrst). The objective
of the mappings is to confuse Dj, the language discriminator for langj, so the mappings are updated
in a way that Dj cannot differentiate the converted
vectors from the real vectors in Sj. This multilingual objective enables us to explicitly exploit the
relations between all language pairs during training, leading to improved performance.
Formally, for any language langj, the objective
that Dj is minimizing is:
Ld (1, Dj(xj)) +
where Ld(y, ˆy) is the loss function of D, which
is chosen as the cross entropy loss in practice. y
is the language label with y = 1 indicates a real
embedding from that language.
Furthermore, the objective of Mi for langi is:
where Mi strives to make Dj believe that a converted vector to langj is instead real. This adversarial relation between M and D stimulates M
to learn a shared multilingual embedding space by
making the converted vectors look as authentic as
possible so that D cannot predict whether a vector
is a genuine embedding from a certain language or
converted from another language via M.
In addition, we allow langi and langj to be
the same language in (1) and (2). In this case,
we are encoding a language to T and back to
itself, essentially forming an adversarial autoencoder , which is reported
to improve the model performance . Finally, on Line 5 and 17 in Algorithm 1, a
for loop is used instead of random sampling. This
is to ensure that in each step, every discriminator (or mapping) is getting updated at least once,
so that we do not need to increase the number of
training iterations when adding more languages.
Computationally, when compared to the BWE-
Pivot and BWE-Direct baselines, one step of MAT
training costs similarly to N BWE training steps,
and in practice we train MAT for the same number of iterations as training the baselines. Therefore, MAT training scales linearly with the number of languages similar to BWE-Pivot (instead of
quadratically as in BWE-Direct).
Multilingual Pseudo-Supervised
Using MAT, we are able to obtain UMWEs with
reasonable quality, but they do not yet achieve
state-of-the-art performance.
Previous research
on learning unsupervised BWEs observes that the embeddings obtained
from adversarial training do a good job aligning
the frequent words between two languages, but
performance degrades when considering the full
vocabulary. They hence propose to use an iterative reﬁnement method to
repeatedly reﬁne the embeddings obtained from
the adversarial training. The idea is that we can
anchor on the more accurately predicted relations
between frequent words to improve the mappings
learned by adversarial training.
Algorithm 2 Multilingual Pseudo-Supervised Re-
Require: A set of (pseudo-)supervised lexica of word pairs
between each pair of languages Lex(langi, langj).
for all langi ∈L do
Select at random langj ∈L
Sample (xi, xj) ∼Lex(langi, langj)
ti = Mi(xi)
▷encode xi
tj = Mj(xj)
▷encode xj
loss += Lr(ti, tj)
▷reﬁnement loss
Update all M parameters to minimize loss
orthogonalize(M)
11: until convergence
When learning MWEs, however, it is desirable
to go beyond aligning each language with the target space individually, and instead utilize the relations between all languages as we did in MAT.
Therefore, we in this section propose a generalization of the existing reﬁnement methods to incorporate a multilingual objective.
In particular, MAT can produce an approximately aligned embedding space. As mentioned
earlier, however, the training signals from D for
rare words are noisier and may lead to worse
performance.
Thus, the idea of Multilingual
Pseudo-Supervised Reﬁnement (MPSR) is to induce a dictionary of highly conﬁdent word pairs
for every language pair, used as pseudo supervision to improve the embeddings learned by MAT.
For a speciﬁc language pair (langi, langj), the
pseudo-supervised lexicon Lex(langi, langj) is
constructed from mutual nearest neighbors between MiEi and MjEj, among the most frequent
15k words of both languages.
With the constructed lexica, the MPSR objective
(xi,xj)∼Lex(i,j) Lr(Mixi, Mjxj)
where Lr(x, ˆx) is the loss function for MPSR, for
which we use the mean square loss. The MPSR
training is depicted in Algorithm 2.
Cross-Lingual
Similarity
When constructing the pseudo-supervised lexica,
a distance metric between embeddings is needed
to compute nearest neighbors. Standard distance
metrics such as the Euclidean distance or cosine
similarity, however, can lead to the hubness
problem in high-dimensional spaces when used
 .
some words are very likely to be the nearest
neighbors of many others (hubs), while others
are not the nearest neighbor of any word. This
problem is addressed in the literature by designing
alternative distance metrics, such as the inverted
softmax or the CSLS . In this work, we adopt the CSLS
similarity as a drop-in replacement for cosine
similarity whenever a distance metric is needed.
The CSLS similarity (whose negation is a distance
metric) is calculated as follows:
CSLS(x, y) = 2 cos(x, y)
cos(x, y′)
cos(x′, y)
where NY (x) is the set of n nearest neighbors of
x in the vector space that y comes from: Y =
{y1, ..., y|Y |}, and vice versa for NX(y). In practice, we use n = 10.
Orthogonalization
As mentioned in §3, orthogonal linear mappings
are the preferred choice when learning transformations between the embedding spaces of different
languages .
Therefore, we perform an orthogonalization update after each training step to
ensure that our mappings M are (approximately)
orthogonal:
∀l : Ml = (1 + β)Ml −βMlM⊤
where β is set to 0.001.
Unsupervised Multilingual Validation
In order to do model selection in the unsupervised
setting, where no validation set can be used, a surrogate validation criterion is required that does not
depend on bilingual data. Previous work shows
promising results using such surrogate criteria for
model validation in the bilingual case , and we in this work adopt a variant adapted to our multilingual setting:
V (M, E) =
mean csls(M⊤
j MiEi, Ej)
pij · mean csls(M⊤
j MiEi, Ej)
where pij forms a probability simplex.
work, we let all pij =
N(N−1) so that V (M, E)
reduces to the macro average over all language
pairs. Using different pij values can place varying
weights on different language pairs, which might
be desirable in certain scenarios.
The mean csls function is an unsupervised
bilingual validation criterion proposed by Lample
et al. , which is the mean CSLS similarities between the most frequent 10k words and their
translations (nearest neighbors).
Experiments
In this section, we present experimental results to
demonstrate the effectiveness of our unsupervised
MWE method on two benchmark tasks, the multilingual word translation task, and the SemEval-
2017 cross-lingual word similarity task. We compare our MAT+MPSR method with state-of-theart unsupervised and supervised approaches, and
show that ours outperforms previous methods, supervised or not, on both tasks.
Pre-trained 300d fastText (monolingual) embeddings trained on the
Wikipedia corpus are used for all systems that require monolingual word embeddings for learning
cross-lingual embeddings.
Multilingual Word Translation
In this section, we consider the task of word translation between arbitrary pairs of a set of N languages. To this end, we use the recently released
multilingual word translation dataset on six languages: English, French, German, Italian, Portuguese and Spanish . For
any pair of the six languages, a ground-truth bilingual dictionary is provided with a train-test split
of 5000 and 1500 unique source words, respectively. The 5k training pairs are used in training
supervised baseline methods, while all unsupervised methods do not rely on any cross-lingual resources. All systems are tested on the 1500 test
word pairs for each pair of languages.
For comparison, we adopted a state-of-the-art
unsupervised BWE method 
and generalize it for the multilingual setting using the two aforementioned approaches, namely
BWE-Pivot and BWE-Direct, to produce unsupervised baseline MWE systems.
English is chosen as the pivot language in BWE-Pivot. We further incorporate the supervised BWE-Direct (Sup-
BWE-Direct) method as a baseline, where each
BWE is trained on the 5k gold-standard word pairs
via the orthogonal Procrustes process .
Table 1 presents the evaluation results, wherein
the numbers represent precision@1, namely how
many times one of the correct translations of a
source word is retrieved as the top candidate. All
systems retrieve word translations using the CSLS
similarity in the learned embedding space.
Table 1a shows the detailed results for all 30 language pairs, while Table 1b summarizes the results in a number of ways. We ﬁrst observe the
training cost of all systems summarized in Table 1b. #BWEs indicates the training cost of a certain method measured by how many BWE models it is equivalent to train.
BWE-Pivot needs
to train 2(N−1) BWEs since a separate BWE is
trained for each direction in a language pair for
increased performance. BWE-Direct on the other
hand, trains an individual BWE for all (again, directed) pairs, resulting a total of N(N−1) BWEs.
The supervised Sup-BWE-Direct method trains
the same number of BWEs as BWE-Direct but is
much faster in practice, for it does not require the
unsupervised adversarial training stage. Finally,
while our MAT+MPSR method does not train independent BWEs, as argued in §3.1, the training
cost is roughly equivalent to training N−1 BWEs,
which is corroborated by the real training time
shown in Table 1b.
We can see in Table 1a that our MAT+MPSR
method achieves the highest performance on all
but 3 language pairs, compared against both the
unsupervised and supervised approaches. When
looking at the overall performance across all language pairs, BWE-Direct achieves a +0.6% performance gain over BWE-Pivot at the cost of being much slower to train.
When supervision is
available, Sup-BWE-Direct further improves another 0.4% over BWE-Direct.
Our MAT+MPSR
method, however, attains an impressive 1.3% improvement against Sup-BWE-Direct, despite the
lack of cross-lingual supervision.
To provide a more in-depth examination of the
results, we ﬁrst consider the Romance language
pairs, such as fr-es, fr-it, fr-pt, es-it, it-pt and their
reverse directions. BWE-Pivot performs notably
worse than BWE-Direct on these pairs, which validates our hypothesis that going through a less similar language (English) when translating between
Supervised methods with cross-lingual supervision
Sup-BWE-Direct
Unsupervised methods without cross-lingual supervision
BWE-Direct
Supervised methods with cross-lingual supervision
Sup-BWE-Direct
Unsupervised methods without cross-lingual supervision
BWE-Direct
(a) Detailed Results
Training Cost
Single Source
Single Target
time en-xx de-xx fr-xx es-xx it-xx pt-xx xx-en xx-de xx-fr xx-es xx-it xx-pt Overall
Supervised methods with cross-lingual supervision
Sup-BWE-Direct N(N−1)
Unsupervised methods without cross-lingual supervision
BWE-Direct
N(N−1) 23h
(b) Summarized Results
Table 1: Multilingual Word Translation Results for English, German, French, Spanish, Italian and Portuguese. The
reported numbers are precision@1 in percentage. All systems use the nearest neighbor under the CSLS distance
for predicting the translation of a certain word.
similar languages will result in reduced accuracy.
Our MAT+MPSR method, however, overcomes this
disadvantage of BWE-Pivot and achieves the best
performance on all these pairs through an explicit
multilingual learning mechanism without increasing the computational cost.
Furthermore, our method also beats the BWE-
Direct approach, which supports our second hypothesis that utilizing knowledge from languages
beyond the pair itself could improve performance.
For instance, there are a few pairs where BWE-
Pivot outperforms BWE-Direct, such as de-it, itde and pt-de, even though it goes through a third
language (English) in BWE-Pivot.
This might
suggest that for some less similar language pairs,
leveraging a third language as a bridge could in
some cases work better than only relying on the
language pair itself.
German is involved in all
these language pairs where BWE-Pivot outperforms than BWE-Direct, which is potentially due
to the similarity between German and the pivot
language English. We speculate that if choosing
a different pivot language, there might be other
pairs that could beneﬁt. This observation serves
as a possible explanation of the superior performance of our multilingual method over BWE-
Direct, since our method utilizes knowledge from
all languages during training.
Cross-Lingual Word Similarity
In this section,
we evaluate the quality of
our MWEs on the cross-lingual word similarity
(CLWS) task, which assesses how well the similarity in the cross-lingual embedding space corresponds to a human-annotated semantic similarity score. The high-quality CLWS dataset from
SemEval-2017 is
Supervised methods with cross-lingual supervision
Unsupervised methods without cross-lingual supervision
BWE-Direct
Table 2: Results for the SemEval-2017 Cross-Lingual Word Similarity task. Spearman’s ρ is reported. Luminoso and NASARI are the two top-performing
systems for SemEval-2017 that reported results on all language pairs.
used for evaluation.
The dataset contains word
pairs from any two of the ﬁve languages: English,
German, Spanish, Italian, and Farsi (Persian), annotated with semantic similarity scores.
In addition to the BWE-Pivot and BWE-
Direct baseline methods, we also include the
two best-performing systems on SemEval-2017,
Luminoso and
NASARI for
comparison. Note that these two methods are supervised, and have access to the Europarl3 (for all
languages but Farsi) and the OpenSubtitles20164
parallel corpora.
Table 2 shows the results, where the performance of each model is measured by the Spearman correlation. When compared to the BWE-
Pivot and the BWE-Direct baselines, MAT+MPSR
continues to perform the best on all language pairs.
The qualitative ﬁndings stay the same as in the
word translation task, except the margin is less signiﬁcant. This might be because the CLWS task is
much more lenient compared to the word translation task, where in the latter one needs to correctly
identify the translation of a word out of hundreds
of thousands of words in the vocabulary. In CLWS
though, one can still achieve relatively high correlation in spite of minor inaccuracies.
On the other hand, an encouraging result is
that when compared to the state-of-the-art supervised results, our MAT+MPSR method outperforms
NASARI by a very large margin, and achieves
top-notch overall performance similar to the competition winner, Luminoso, without using any bitexts. A closer examination reveals that our unsupervised method lags a few points behind Lumi-
3 
4 
OpenSubtitles2016.php
noso on the European languages wherein the supervised methods have access to the large-scale
high-quality Europarl parallel corpora. It is the
low-resource language, Farsi, that makes our unsupervised method stand out. All of the unsupervised methods outperform the supervised systems
from SemEval-2017 on language pairs involving
Farsi, which is not covered by the Europarl bitexts.
This suggests the advantage of learning unsupervised embeddings for lower-resourced languages,
where the supervision might be noisy or absent.
Furthermore, within the unsupervised methods,
MAT+MPSR again performs the best, and attains
a higher margin over the baseline approaches on
the low-resource language pairs, vindicating our
claim of better multilingual performance.
Conclusion
In this work, we propose a fully unsupervised
model for learning multilingual word embeddings
Although methods exist for learning
high-quality unsupervised BWEs , little work has been done in the unsupervised multilingual setting. Previous work relies
solely on a number of unsupervised BWE models
to generate MWEs (e.g. BWE-Pivot and BWE-
Direct), which does not fully leverage the interdependencies among all the languages. Therefore,
we propose the MAT+MPSR method that explicitly
exploits the relations between all language pairs
without increasing the computational cost. In our
experiments on multilingual word translation and
cross-lingual word similarity , we
show that MAT+MPSR outperforms existing unsupervised and even supervised models, achieving
new state-of-the-art performance.
For future work, we plan to investigate how our
method can be extended to work with other BWE
frameworks, in order to overcome the instability
issue of Lample et al. . As pointed out by
recent work , the method by Lample et al. performs much worse on certain languages such as
Finnish, etc. More reliable multilingual embeddings might be obtained on these languages if we
adapt our multilingual training framework to work
with the more robust methods proposed recently.