GLYCAM06: A Generalizable Biomolecular Force Field.
Carbohydrates
KARL N. KIRSCHNER, AUSTIN B. YONGYE, SARAH M. TSCHAMPEL, JORGE GONZÁLEZ-
OUTEIRIÑO, CHARLISA R. DANIELS, B. LACHELE FOLEY, and ROBERT J. WOODS
Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, 315 Riverbend Road, Athens,
Georgia 30602
A new derivation of the GLYCAM06 force field, which removes its previous specificity for
carbohydrates, and its dependency on the AMBER force field and parameters, is presented. All
pertinent force field terms have been explicitly specified and so no default or generic parameters
are employed. The new GLYCAM is no longer limited to any particular class of biomolecules, but
is extendible to all molecular classes in the spirit of a small-molecule force field. The torsion terms
in the present work were all derived from quantum mechanical data from a collection of minimal
molecular fragments and related small molecules. For carbohydrates, there is now a single
parameter set applicable to both α- and β-anomers and to all monosaccharide ring sizes and
conformations. We demonstrate that deriving dihedral parameters by fitting to QM data for
internal rotational energy curves for representative small molecules generally leads to correct
rotamer populations in molecular dynamics simulations, and that this approach removes the need
for phase corrections in the dihedral terms. However, we note that there are cases where this
approach is inadequate. Reported here are the basic components of the new force field as well as
an illustration of its extension to carbohydrates. In addition to reproducing the gas-phase
properties of an array of small test molecules, condensed-phase simulations employing
GLYCAM06 are shown to reproduce rotamer populations for key small molecules and
representative biopolymer building blocks in explicit water, as well as crystalline lattice
properties, such as unit cell dimensions, and vibrational frequencies.
carbohydrate; force field; GLYCAM; AMBER; molecular dynamics; parameter development
© 2007 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Correspondence to: R. J. Woods; .
The first two authors contributed equally to this work
Current address for Karl N. Kirschner: Center for Molecular Design, Hamilton College, Clinton, New York 13323
Current address for Jorge González-Outeiriño: Information Technology and Services, Syracuse University, 250 Machinery Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244
This article contains supplementary material available via the Internet at 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
 
J Comput Chem. 2008 March ; 29(4): 622–655. doi:10.1002/jcc.20820.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Introduction
Carbohydrates are involved in numerous biological functions, such as recognition in axonal
growth or path-finding,1 blood anticoagulation,2 cell-cell recognition,3 antibody–antigen
inter-actions,4 structure factors in extra-cellular matrices,5 and post- or cotranslational
modifications of polypeptides.6 Correct glycosylation patterns are essential for normal cell
and organism function, and aberrant glycosylation is associated with numerous human
diseases.7,8 To provide a structural basis for the multitude of biological roles played by
carbohydrates, it is imperative that their spatial and dynamic properties be accurately
determined. Experimental structure determination methods such as X-ray
crystallography,9–11 NMR spectroscopy,12–15 and fluorescence energy-transfer
spectroscopy16 have been applied in studies of carbohydrate conformation, either free or
complexed with proteins. While NMR spectroscopy has been extensively used to
characterize the dynamics of glycans in solution,17 interglycosidic linkage conformations
are notoriously difficult to determine by NMR spectroscopy because of the paucity of
nuclear Overhauser effects (nOes),18 the uncertainties in the Karplus-type equations
employed to interpret scalar J-coupling constants19 and the potential for the linkage to
populate multiple rotamer states.20 Moreover, NMR techniques employed to determine the
structural properties of polysaccharides or protein–carbohydrate complexes are limited by
molecular weight constraints. Alternatively, X-ray crystallography can be a powerful source
of structural information. However, the presence of multiple glycoforms often prevents
crystallization of glycoproteins, and the inherent flexibility of oligosaccharides is the
presumed reason for the notable absence of X-ray structures for any but the smallest
Theoretical methods, such as Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, are
employed increasingly to augment the experimental approaches in determining the
conformational properties of carbohydrates, and biomolecules in general. The level of
interest in applying classical simulations to oligosaccharides arises from experimental
limitations and is demonstrated by the numerous force fields and parameter sets that have
been derived for carbohydrates (See ref. 17 for a review). The performance of several
parameter sets, which included the first version of GLYCAM (GLYCAM_9321), has been
quantitatively evaluated against data from quantum mechanical calculations22 as well as on
a relative basis, using a chemometric analysis from 20 second-generation carbohydrate force
fields.23 The conclusion from those comparisons was that no single parameter set or force
field consistently out-performed the others. In a study that focused on the abilities of three
prominent biomolecular force fields to reproduce experimental solution data for two related
disaccharides, the second version of GLYCAM (GLYCAM200024) with AMBER
performed well in terms of conformational predictions.25 Although the GLYCAM_9321 and
200024 parameter sets, augmented by terms from the AMBER parameters,26 have been
employed frequently in the study of oligosaccharides5,22–25,27–32 and oligosaccharide–
protein complexes,10,14,33–39 they have some serious limitations. Earlier GLYCAM versions
performed poorly at reproducing diffusion rates in explicit solvent MD simulations, and
differed substantially from other carbohydrate parameter sets in the prediction of putative
radial pair distribution functions (RPD) between hydroxyl groups and TIP3P40 water.25 For
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
example, the RPD for the O3-atom in methyl α-D-isomaltoside computed with
GLYCAM2000a resulted in a less structured secondary hydration shell, and a first hydration
shell at 3.0 Å, which was higher than the average distance between Ocarbohydrate…Owater
atoms found in carbohydrate crystals (2.77 Å).41 The first hydration shell of the O3…Owater
RPD had a peak density value of 1.0, which compared unfavorably with the experimental
value of about 3.0 for the RPD of Owater…Owater.25 The computed O3…Owater RPD
employing the present version of GLYCAM (GLYCAM06) resulted in a first hydration
shell at 2.75 Å with a peak density of 1.6 and a well-defined secondary hydration layer at
about 5.0–5.5 Å. This improvement in GLYCAM06 was due to the utilization of AMBERconsistent van der Waals parameters for the hydroxyl oxygen. In the case of self-diffusion
rates of α-D-isomaltose GLYCAM2000a gave a value that was about twice the experimental
value.25 The self-diffusion rate computed with GLYCAM06 was 3.6 × 10−26 cm2/s, which
is in agreement with the experimental value of 4.2 × 10−26 cm2/s.25
The previous versions of GLYCAM were designed with the intention that they would
introduce the minimal parameters necessary to add carbohydrate functionality to AMBER,
and otherwise to maintain consistency with the AMBER force field development
philosophy.21 Regarding transferability, GLYCAM development followed the general
approach employed in biomolecular force fields of defining a single dihedral angle term for
each molecular-class-specific linkage. Analogous to the treatment of peptide backbone
dihedral angles, the rotational properties associated with glycosidic linkages were
characterized by a single dihedral angle term specific to a unique atomic sequence, present
only in carbohydrates. All other potentially contributing terms associated with that linkage
were explicitly eliminated.21 That approach facilitated precise fitting to QM rotational data,
but was specific to six-membered ring forms (pyranosides) and to the anomeric
configuration. This limited the ability to readily introduce new chemical functionality into
GLYCAM, to study ring conformational interconversions, and to apply it to other ring sizes
(furanosides, in particular).42
The derivation of a highly consistent and transferable parameter set for modeling
carbohydrates and glycoconjugates (GLYCAM06) is the focus of the present work. In light
of accumulated applications of GLYCAM_93,10,22–25,27–31,43–48 several areas were targeted
for improvement. In particular, the parameter set should (1) be transferable to all
carbohydrate ring conformations and sizes, (2) be self-contained and therefore readily
transferable to many quadratic force fields, (3) not require specific atom types for α- and βanomers, (4) be readily extendible to carbohydrate derivatives and other biomolecules, (5)
be applicable to monosaccharides and complex oligosaccharides, (6) be rigorously assessed
in terms of the relative accuracy of its component terms, and (7) avoid the use of 1–4
electrostatic or non-bonded scaling factors.24 In a study of the ω-angle rotation (O5—C5—
C6—O6) in monosaccharides, we observed that O6 may interact with either O4 (in a 1–5
relationship) or O5 (in a 1–4 relationship) and the use of 1–4 scaling therefore unbalanced
these interactions leading to an inability to correctly predict rotamer populations.24
Parameterization of GLYCAM06 employed training and test sets of ~100 molecules from
the chemical families of hydrocarbons, alcohols, ethers, amides, esters, carboxylates,
molecules of mixed functional groups as well as simple ring systems related to cyclic
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
carbohydrates, as outlined in Table 1. If a molecule had the potential of forming an internal
hydrogen bond during a torsion rotation, two rotational energy curves were examined, one in
which a hydrogen bond was allowed, and a second in which the hydrogen bond was
disallowed.
To maintain consistency with the current AMBER protein parameters, the B3LYP/6-31+
+G(2d,2p)//HF/6-31G* level of theory was selected as the reference for all valence quantum
calculations.49 Energies at this level may be expected to display minimal basis set
superposition error (BSSE),50 which is not only important for determining accurate
interaction energies, but also for locating minima and establishing barrier heights along the
valence reaction coordinates. It has been shown that the B3LYP functional performs well in
carbohydrates and related molecules,50–52 and was therefore selected for our force field
development. Of particular importance for dynamics, this level of theory leads frequently to
a reduction of barrier heights for internal rotations relative to those obtained with the HF/
6-31G* method, resulting in increased conformational sampling for oligosaccharides.
Quantum Mechanical Calculations
Quantum mechanical calculations were performed using the Gaussian98 software
package.53 Geometries were optimized using the Gaussian98 default optimization criteria,
unless otherwise noted. The HF/6-31G* level of theory was employed for neutral fragments,
whereas for anionic molecules diffuse functions were added. Rotational energy curves were
generated by varying the relevant torsion angle from 0–360° in 30° increments while
optimizing all other variables. Single point energies were computed at the B3LYP/6-31+
+G(2d,2p) level of theory.
Molecular Mechanics Calculations
All molecular mechanics (MM) calculations were performed using either the AMBER754 or
AMBER855 software packages, with nonbonded and electrostatic scaling factors (SCEE,
SCNB) set to unity. The valence parameters were determined by minimizing the error
between the energies obtained from the ab initio and molecular mechanics calculations in
the traditional manner.
Molecular Dynamics
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were carried out with the explicit inclusion of
solvent (TIP3P)40 under isothermal–isobaric (nPT) conditions. Charged systems were
neutralized by adding the appropriate number of counter ions. In general, the initial solvent
configurations were optimized through 50 cycles of steepest descent and 950 cycles of
conjugate gradient energy minimization with the SANDER module, followed by
minimization of the entire system through the same protocol. The entire system was then
annealed by heating from 5 to 300 K in 50 ps, followed by cooling to 5 K in another 50 ps.
Initial velocities were assigned from a Boltzmann distribution at 5 K. Prior to the production
dynamics stage the entire system was thermally equilibrated by heating again from 5 to 300
K in 150 ps. A 2-fs time step was used to integrate the equations of motion, using the Verlet
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Algorithm.56 Long-range electrostatic interactions were treated using the particle mesh
Ewald summation. A dielectric constant of unity was employed in all MD and MM
calculations. Bonds containing hydrogen were constrained to their equilibrium lengths using
the SHAKE algorithm.57
Potential of Mean Force Calculations
The weighted histogram analysis method (WHAM)58 was used to calculate potentials of
mean force (PMF).59 To ensure maximum sampling along the reaction coordinate, harmonic
force constants of 10 and 5 kcal/mol were used for regions of high (maxima) and low (local
and global minima) potential energies, respectively. Prior to the PMF calculations, the
system was equilibrated following the protocol outlined in the MD section. Umbrella
sampling was performed for 140 ps under nPT conditions with a time-step of 2 fs.
Single Molecule and Ensemble-Averaged Charge Calculations
The atomic partial charges of all molecules employed in the gas phase for the development
of valence bond, angle, and torsional parameters were derived from the HF/cc-pVTZ//HF/
6-31G* molecular electrostatic potential (MEP), employing the restrained electrostatic
potential (RESP)60 charge fitting methodology, with a hyperbolic charge restraint weight of
0.0005, as indicated by Bayly et al.60 However, partial charge sets destined for condensedphase simulations were generated from the HF/6-31G*//HF/6-31G* MEP, appropriate for
TIP3P40 water simulations. For the condensed-phase charge sets, a RESP charge restraint
weight of 0.01 was employed, based on earlier MD simulations of experimental crystal
lattices of α-D-glucopyranose,31 wherein this value led to optimal reproduction of unit-cell
dimensions of the crystal.
In GLYCAM06, the issue of charge-conformation coupling was addressed by employing
ensemble-averaged (EA) charge sets.61 For any given monosaccharide, an MD simulation,
typically 50–100 ns was performed in TIP3P water, with 100–200 structures being selected
from the trajectory for individual charge calculations. For each of these snapshots partial
charges were calculated by fitting to the HF/6-31G* MEP. Prior to the charge calculations,
each structure was optimized at the HF/6-31G* level, with the rotatable exocyclic bonds
constrained to their MD conformations.61 The charges were then averaged for each
monosaccharide to afford a final EA charge set, as exemplified in Table 2. These sets of
charges were thus weighted by the actual occurrence of a particular solution conformation in
an MD simulation. For these terminal monosaccharides, the average RESP-derived charge
on the aglycon was −0.194 au, with the total charge on the glycoside equal to +0.194 au
(Qterm), for overall charge neutrality. To generate charges on nonterminal residues, the
charge on the linking hydroxyl proton is added to that of the linking oxygen atom to give a
new charge, Qol. Next, Qterm is subtracted from Qol to afford the final charge on the linking
oxygen atom. This results in an overall charge of zero for nonterminal residues.
Nonbonded van der Waals parameters were taken directly from the PARM94 parameter set,
which are also employed in the current distribution of AMBER parameter sets AMBER9.62
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vibrational Analysis
Vibrational frequencies were computed for α-D-glucopyranose using the NMODE facility
in AMBER9 with the GLYCAM parameter set. The calculation was performed on a
monomer and on a 64-unit crystal. In both calculations, the initial structure was adapted
from neutron scattering crystallographic data (PDB ID: GLUCSA10).63 The NMODE
calculations were performed with default settings except for the values of the 1–4
nonbonded and 1–4 electrostatic scale factors, which were each set equal to unit as
suggested by earlier work.31 Both monomer and crystal were minimized to ΔRMS = 1 ×
10−5. Since periodic boundary conditions are not implemented in NMODE, the 64-mer was
minimized as if it were a discrete nanoparticle. Frequency analyses were also performed on
the monomer at the HF/6-31G*//6-31G* and B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p)//6-31++ G(2d,2p)
levels of theory.
Because of the complexity of the molecular structures, particularly in the 64-mer, a program
(DMODES, for “describe modes”) was written to automatically detect and assign vibrational
modes. Although assignments for glucopyranose have often64–68 been made based on the
potential energy distribution (PED) within each vibrational mode, NMODE facilitates use of
the eigenvectors (collection of atomic motion vectors). Primarily for this reason, DMODES
bases its assignments on the motions and relative kinetic energies of the atoms. However,
there are other reasons to make assignments based on motion rather than PED’s. While PED
assignments are limited to bonded and near-neighbor nonbonded interactions, motion
analysis can easily consider concerted motions of atoms far removed from each other. For
example, motion analysis can assign ring expansions and deformations, assignments that are
far more difficult to make using PED analysis. In addition, motion analysis yields
assignments that are intuitive and that use language familiar to spectroscopists. The use of a
computer program in general is, of course, also preferred to visual inspection of the
eigenvector data because of increases in speed, objectivity, and reliability. At present,
DMODES is in the prototype stage and is of limited general usefulness, but a copy of the
code can be obtained by contacting the authors.
In brief, DMODES employs the relationships of individual atomic motions with respect to
each other and to the molecular geometry to determine an appropriate description of the
vibrational motion for a mode. For example, the dot product of a unit motion vector for atom
, with a corresponding unit bond vector,
, indicates the extent to which the motion is
a stretch along that bond. Since the dot product of two unit vectors yields the cosine of the
angle between them, the result of this calculation will be nearly ±1 if the motion is parallel
to the bond (stretching) and ~0 if the motion is perpendicular (bending or torsioning).
Similarly, bending and torsional motions of a system i—j—k can be determined using eq.
If this relationship is nearly zero, the motion lies within the plane formed by i, j, and k and is
therefore a bend (if also determined not to be a stretch). If the magnitude of the relationship
is nearly one, the motion is nearly perpendicular to the plane and is torsional. Intermediate
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
values, of course, correspond to mixtures of torsion and bending. DMODES employs a set
of cutoff values to distinguish between motions.
The significance of an individual atom’s motion was determined using the relative kinetic
energy of the atom. Each atom’s motion vector represents its relative velocity at its
vibrational potential energy minimum. The vector magnitudes can therefore be converted
into relative kinetic energies, which correspond to the significances of the individual atomic
motions within the vibrational mode. Although DMODES considered each atomic motion,
the primary vibrational modes, which are presented here, were assigned on the basis of the
most significant motion within each motion class. The implications of this choice are
discussed in more detail in the results and conclusions section.
Assignments for the 64-mer required additional considerations. Since NMODE does not
employ crystal-based symmetry arguments when calculating frequencies, 4608 normal
modes (3N, where N = 64 units × 24 atoms per unit) were generated. Also, since an accurate
frequency calculation requires a minimization, the positions of the atoms were necessarily
displaced somewhat from their perfect-crystal locations. Because of this, the assignments for
the 64 units, while generally similar, were each unique. To reduce the 294,912 different
motion assignments, the data were treated in the following manner. First, the motions of all
64 units were assigned as usual for each vibrational frequency. During the assignment, the
overall importance of each unit’s motion to each mode was scored by summing the
magnitudes of the motion vectors for each of the atoms in the unit. The motion vectors used
for this score had previously been altered to remove any overall translational component
(due to lattice-wide motions). The maximum magnitude sum for each frequency was then
determined. If, within any frequency, a unit’s magnitude was at least 50% of the largest
magnitude, the results of its motion analysis were included in the results presented here.
This procedure removes from our immediate attention those motions that occur with low
intensity, being primarily due to resonance with more energetic motions of nearby
neighbors. However, it does not discount resonances that result in motions that are more
energetic, if somewhat unexpected. An example of the latter appears in the data and is
discussed below.
Modern characterizations of the infrared and Raman spectra of carbohydrates typically
employ some form of calculation of the PED when making assignments,64–71 though they
occasionally use more traditional methods.69,71 Those that rely significantly71 or
exclusively72 on traditional methods, as well as the occasional computation,70 will often
employ more descriptive terminology in their assignments. While the assignment method
employed here was designed to translate more readily into standard spectroscopic
descriptions, it is important, also, to compare with the less-intuitive PED-based systems. To
present a balanced comparison with experimental data, we have chosen to compare with
four experimental studies.67,68,70,71 Since the various assignment naming methodologies do
not always translate in a one-to-one correspondence (for an illustration, see Fig. 20 in Wells
and Atalla71), we have chosen categories that are sufficiently broad that they facilitate
comparisons, but are also narrow enough that the comparisons remain useful.
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Of the four experimental studies considered here, two70,71 employed traditional assignment
nomenclature and two67,68 assigned based on PEDs. All four used one or more
computational method to make assignments, though one71 also used traditional methods,
e.g., isotopic substitution, to guide their assignments. Three67,68,70 compared their
calculations with spectra from earlier studies,64–66,69,72 but their results are being used here
instead of the earlier work because of the detailed assignments they provided. Since our
interest is comparison with experiment, only the experimentally observed frequencies from
these studies are considered here. Additionally, we have only considered those experimental
frequencies for which assignments were offered.
Since our assignments are based on the most energetic motion class within a given mode, we
compared with only the most significant (first on the list) potential energy contribution
within any PED assignment.67,68 With no hierarchy of significance apparent in the work of
Gregurick and Kafafi,70 each assignment within a frequency was counted. The ranges from
Wells and Atalla71 come mostly from their Figure 20, with occasional modifications based
on the accompanying text, the latter being necessary for proper correlation to the set of
motion classes being considered here.
Since IR and Raman intensities are not calculated natively by NMODE, and since the focus
of the present study is the extent to which the force field reproduces vibrational frequencies
we will not consider them here. In our comparisons with experimental data below, where
both IR and Raman frequencies are available, we have compared with only the former, since
the frequencies usually differ by only a few wavenumbers, which is not significant in this
work. For modes that are not IR active, we have compared with the Raman frequency.
Results and Discussion
Atomic Partial Charges
The accurate reproduction of the electrostatic properties of a molecule is essential in a
classical force field that seeks to quantitatively model intermolecular interactions of polar
molecules, such as carbohydrates, proteins, and nucleic acids in water. The complexity of
this requirement is reflected by the number of partial atomic charge derivation schemes
reported in the literature. These include empirical methods, in which charges are fit to
reproduce liquid densities and heats of vaporization,73 or a popular alternative, and that used
in AMBER, in which the charges are fit to reproduce quantum mechanical MEPs.26 It
should be noted that the concept of a partial charge is artificial but convenient, thus there is
no definitive approach to their assignment.
A common drawback of several empirical methods is that they rely on reproducing bulk
liquid properties and cannot be applied readily to solutes. In all MEP partial charge-based
models, there are limitations that arise from the omission of a mechanism for incorporating
the dependence of partial charge on molecular conformation.74,75 In addition, it is not
necessarily ideal to locate the partial charges at the nuclear positions,40,76 nor do all atoms
require partial charges.77 Close examination of ESP-charges computed for biomolecular
fragments74 revealed that aliphatic hydrogen atoms tend to have small magnitude charges,
as expected from the low bond polarity of most C—H bonds. Further, charges on all
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
hydrogen atoms showed wide fluctuations coupled to the central carbon atom. However, the
net charge of the methyl or methylene groups displayed minimal fluctuations. In
GLYCAM_93,21 the effects of basis set and ESP-fitting algorithm on partial charges in
carbohydrates were examined and again indicated the same behavior for aliphatic groups.
A second problematic area is that of charge partitioning. While MEP-fitting has the
advantage of reproducing intermolecular interaction energies, caution must be exercised in
the selection of atoms that will be included in the fitting procedure. Francl et al.77 performed
singular value decomposition analyses on the least-squares matrices used to assign partial
charges in a series of compounds, which frequently showed that an optimal fit to the ESP
was achievable with fewer charges than the total number of atoms, suggesting that
consistent reproduction of the MEP can be obtained by assigning zero net charges to some
atoms. Consequently, in GLYCAM06, restraints were employed in the ESP fitting to ensure
that the charges on all aliphatic hydrogen atoms were zero, leading to consistent charge sets
with minimal degradation in the accuracy of the fit. For example, the omission of partial
atomic charges on aliphatic hydrogens in methyl α-D-mannopyranoside had essentially no
effect on the molecular dipole moment (4.589 D) relative to the all atom charge model
(4.581 D), and resulted in only an approximate 2.5% increase in the relative error in the fit
to the potential.
In contrast to intermolecular interactions, which are well reproduced by MEP-derived partial
charges, intramolecular interactions or solution properties are often poorly reproduced,
unless conformationally averaged charges are employed. This issue becomes particularly
significant when considering the relative energies of conformational isomers. For example,
in the case of cyclohexanol, slightly different partial charge sets result from MEP fitting for
both the equatorial and axial forms. When separate charge sets are utilized, incorrect relative
energies of the ring conformations were obtained. However, accurate prediction of the
relative energies between the chair forms, 4C1↔ C4 (<1 kcal/mol)78 necessitated employing
a common charge set for both the equatorial and axial species.
Extension of this logic to monosaccharides is challenged by notable variations among partial
charge sets as a function of both anomeric and ring-carbon configuration. From the data in
Table 2, both changes in anomericity (α, β) and hydroxyl group configuration (methyl α,β-
D-glucopyranoside, α,β-D-GlcpOMe; methyl α,β-D-mannopyranoside, α,β-D-ManpOMe;
and methyl α,β-D-galacotopyranoside, α,β-D-GalpOMe) resulted in partial charge sets that
were statistically indistinguishable. Therefore, it is reasonable to generate a single charge set
that can be used for either anomer of a given monosaccharide. However, a limitation in
employing anomer-averaged charge sets is the loss of precision in the calculated
intermolecular properties. Nevertheless, with a single charge set for a given
monosaccharide, the relative intramolecular energies of ring conformations in which the
anomeric configuration becomes inverted (4C1↔1C4) can now be effectively computed. For
an example of the effect of charge protocol on internal energies, consider the relative
energies of the α- and β-anomers of GlcpOMe. At the HF/6-31G*//HF/6-31G* level of
theory the α-anomer is predicted to be 1.46 kcal/mol more stable than the β-anomer, while at
the B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p)//HF/6-31G* level, this value is 0.77 kcal/mol, which is in good
agreement with other recently reported theoretical results.79 Using GLYCAM06 and the α,β
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
EA (RESP<α,β>) charge set derived from Table 2, the α-anomer was predicted to be 1.15
kcal/mol more stable, a value between the HF/6-31G* and B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p) results.
When the same calculations were performed using the individual EA charge sets,
(RESP<α>) for α-D- and (RESP<β>) β-D-GlcpOMe, the relative energy was reversed, with
the β-anomer predicted to be the more stable by 4.19 kcal/mol. Illustrating further the
concept of a common charge set, the relative energies of 12 low-energy conformers of D-
GlcpOMe and D-GalpOMe, computed using GLYCAM06 were compared with their
respective HF/6-31G*//HF/6-31G* values, Table 3. In the case of D-GlcpOMe, when
anomer-specific charges were used, the predicted relative energies were once more reversed
relative to the QM-predicted values, with the most stable α-conformer being 4.45 kcal/mol
less stable than the most stable β-conformer. When <α,β> EA charge sets were employed,
the resulting relative energies were comparable once more with the QM values; the αanomer being preferred by 1.29 kcal/mol. It can be inferred that this energy difference has
an electrostatic origin, since a common parameter set was employed for both anomers.
Among the β-D-GlcpOMe conformers, the trend in the GLYCAM06 predicted relative
energies (β1 < β3 < β2) did not reproduce that determined by QM (β2 < β1 < β3). This
variance, however, is insignificant given that the higher energy conformers in both the QM
and MM calculations are all within 0.6 kcal/mol of the global minima. In the case of D-
GalpOMe, the GLYCAM06-computed relative energies employing anomer-specific charge
sets resulted in both large energy differences (11.71 kcal/mol) and incorrect anomer
preferences (β < α). Once more, the correct trends were predicted when the RESP<α,β>
charge set was used, with the most stable α-anomer being 1.58 kcal/mol more stable than the
lowest energy β-anomer, which compared favorably with the QM value of 1.88 kcal/mol.
This strategy of averaging anomer- specific charges could be extrapolated to obtain a
common set of charges for all the glycosides (RESP<overall>). Employing this charge set in
D-GlcpOMe and D-GalpOMe, the α-anomer was correctly predicted to be more stable by
1.12 and 1.79 kcal/mol, respectively.
Bond Lengths and Angles Parameters
The stereoelectronic effects that give rise to valence bond and angle variations at the
anomeric carbon atom in pyranoses are well known.80,81 These variations are not only
dependent on anomericity, but also influenced by the size of the aglycon.82 The
stereoelectronic effects may be incorporated into Type II classical force-fields through
stretch-bend and stretch-torsion cross terms.83 However, these cross terms do not exist in
well-established macromolecular force fields, such as AMBER,26 CHARMM,84 and
GROMOS.85 In GLYCAM_93, these geometrical variations were incorporated by defining
anomer-specific atom types, each with unique values for the bond (Kr) and angle force
constants (Kθ), and the equilibrium bond lengths (req) and angles (θeq). While the use of
unique atom types for the different anomeric carbon atoms facilitated the inclusion of these
stereoelectronic effects, it inhibited the ability of the force field to model processes
involving ring inversions, which are equivalent to anomer interconversions. In addition,
maintaining nongeneralizable anomer-dependent parameters prevented facile extension of
the force field to nonstandard glycosyl residues. In the present parameterization, a common
set of parameters has been derived for both α- and β-anomers employing a single sp3 atom
type (CG). For example, in the previous scheme, a 2-deoxymonosaccharide would require
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
new parameters to be derived, whereas in the current approach all such derivatives are
implicitly allowed.
In principle harmonic stretching and bending force constants may be derived from
spectroscopic data. However, such data are not available for all molecules of interest to this
work. In addition, to be consistent with the use of QM data in the derivation of rotational
barriers, we wished to employ only gas-phase force constants. Thus all force constants were
derived by fitting a classical harmonic function to a distortion energy curve, computed at the
B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p) level.
The accurate determination of the bending force constants for atomic sequences involved in
glycosidic angles ensures that the flexing and rotational dynamics of the molecule will be
correctly reproduced. Values of Kθ for the C—O—C and O—C—O angles were estimated
from distortion analyses of the applicable angles in methoxymethane and 1,1dimethoxyethane, respectively. Fitting to the QM energy curves, computed over the range
θeq ± 10°, gave Kθ values of 50 kcal/rad2 and 100 kcal/rad2 for the C—O—C and O—C—O
angles, respectively. The average relative errors in these curve fits were 0.73 and 0.16 kcal/
mol, respectively. These angle-bending constants are slightly softer than those employed in
GLYCAM_93 C—O—C (60.0 kcal/rad2) and O—C—O (110.0 kcal/rad2).21
It should be noted that the experimentally observed bond lengths and valence angles in
molecules such as carbohydrates and amino acids should not be employed as equilibrium
values. These complex molecules contain internal strain forces that perturb the bond lengths
and angles away from their theoretical equilibrium values. Equilibrium values, however,
may be estimated from small carefully selected molecular fragments. These equilibrium
values may differ significantly from the observed valence angles in larger molecules. In
addition, effects associated with intermolecular interactions can lead to considerable
differences between the QM values for bonds and angles, and those observed
experimentally. For example, in the case of peptide bonds, the average experimental C—N
bond length (1.33 Å) from a survey of crystal structures from the Cambridge
Crystallographic Data Bank differs markedly from both the gas-phase electron diffraction,
and MP2/6-31G* values of 1.386 and 1.365 Å, respectively, computed for Nmethylacetamide.86,87 Similarly, the θeq value for the C—O—C angle in GLYCAM06
(111.6°) is smaller than the average values observed in α-(2→8) trisialoside (117°),88 and
generally in saccharides (116.5°).89,90 Nonetheless, using tetrahydro-2-methoxy-5-
(tetrahydro-2H-pyran-2-yloxy)-2H-pyran, Figure 1, the GLYCAM06 minimized structure
gave a glycosidic valence angle of 116.8°, comparable with that found in experimental
structures of glycosides.90 When methyl α-D-Glcp(1→4)α-D-Glcp and methyl β-D-Glcp-
(1→4)β-D-Glcp, Figure 1, were employed the glycosidic angles were 117.3° and 116.9°,
respectively, which compared favorably with experimental observations.90
The bond and angle parameters developed in this work are presented in Table 4. Only six
out of 35 bond, and 20 out of 91 angle parameters were eventually transferred from the
existing GLYCAM_93 parameter set.
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Torsion Parameters
The GLYCAM_93 force field, as well as other current biomolecular force fields, such as the
PARM9991 parameterization in AMBER, frequently employ a single atomic sequence to
define the torsion properties for a given bond. For example, in GLYCAM_93, the rotation
associated with the φ-angle was defined by the terms for the O5—C1—OX—CX sequence
only; with a specific torsion term required for each α- and β-anomer. The related terms C2—
C1—OX—CX and H1—C1—OX—CX were explicitly set to zero. While this approach may
lead to accurate reproduction of the QM rotational energy curves, it suffers from a lack of
transferability. In view of making the parameters in GLYCAM06 fully transferable we
adopted a more general approach wherein all atomic sequences had an explicitly defined set
of torsion terms. Each term was derived by fitting to rotational energy curves for a
molecular training set composed of relevant small molecules. Because of the symmetry of
these small molecules, no phase angles were required. The omission of phase angles further
facilitates parameter transferability. However, as each rotational energy is now the result of
the sum of the contributions from the constituent atomic sequences, the overall accuracy is
limited by the sum of errors in each term. The benefits in terms of applying to novel
molecular classes is particularly important for carbohydrates as they frequently exist in
highly derivatized forms in vivo.
Together with the nonbonded terms, torsion terms are crucially important for force fields to
correctly model the conformational and particularly, the dynamic properties of
macromolecules. As opposed to bond and angle parameters, in which only small excursions
from equilibrium values are observed, torsional rotations may cover the entire range
between 0 and 360°, and frequently exhibit more than one energy minimum. To achieve
correct thermodynamic and kinetic behavior during MD simulations, it is important that both
the relative energies of the minima and the barrier heights between them be reproduced.
Thus, we not only sought to locate the minima and maxima, but also to reproduce all barrier
heights. To assess the extent to which this had been achieved for each molecular class, the
errors between the QM and MM rotational energies were computed over the entire range of
the curves, <Error>curve, and the minima, <Error>minima, are presented in Table 5.
Hydrocarbons
Hydrocarbons provide the foundation for any biomolecular force field. As can be seen from
the data in Table 5, the force field reproduced the gas-phase relative energies for these
simple molecules very well, with an average error in the energies over the entire rotational
energy curve of 0.15 kcal/mol and an error in the <Error>minima of 0.11 kcal/mol.
Rotating about the central Csp3—Csp3 (CG—CG) bond in butane allowed us to examine
how several torsion parameters performed collectively, namely those associated with the CG
—CG—CG—CG, CG—CG—CG—HC, and HC—CG—CG—HC sequences. GLYCAM06
predicted the stabilization of the trans conformation, relative to the gauche conformation, of
1.16 kcal/mol, in reasonable agreement with both the B3LYP/6-3111G(2d,2p) value
computed here of 0.95 kcal/mol and the experimental range of 0.74–0.90 kcal/mol.92–94 For
this molecule, the GLYCAM06 rotational barriers were determined to be 5.51 kcal/mol at 0°
and 3.15 kcal/mol at 120°, which may be compared with the B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p) values
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
of 5.80 and 3.33 kcal/mol, respectively, and with the experimental values92 of 4.56 and 3.62
kcal/mol, respectively.
The hydroxyl groups of alcohols make this class of compounds particularly relevant in the
development of force fields for nucleic acids and carbohydrates. The overall errors in the fits
for alcohols were <Error>curve 5 0.45 kcal/mol and <Error>minima = 0.28 kcal/mol. The
alcohols with a single hydroxyl group were easier to fit and resulted in <Error>curve = 0.20
kcal/mol, while the fit was slightly degraded for the diols with <Error>curve = 0.73 kcal/mol.
Mono-Alcohols
Mono-alcohols were used for the derivation of parameters that involved hydroxyl groups
without the inclusion of other electronegative groups. As relates to the rotational behavior of
the hydroxyl protons, the H1—CG—OH—HO rotational barrier in methanol was
determined at the B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p) level and with GLYCAM06 to be 1.03 and 1.08
kcal/mol, respectively, both in excellent agreement with the experimental value95 of 1.07
kcal/mol. For ethanol, GLYCAM06 determined the trans conformation about the CG—CG
—OH—HO torsion to be 0.34 kcal/mol more stable than the gauche conformation, which
may be compared with the experimental value95–97 of 0.40 kcal/mol, while the B3LYP/
6-31++G(2d,2p) level overestimated the stability of the gauche conformer by 0.30 kcal/mol.
The barrier to rotation between the gauche conformations was determined to be 1.11 kcal/
mol, which compared well with the B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p) value and experimental range98
of 1.01 kcal/mol and 0.8–1.2 kcal/mol, respectively. Similarly, for propan-2-ol,
GLYCAM06 determined the gauche (defined by H1—CG—OH—HO) conformer to be
more stable than the trans by 0.11 kcal/mol, which may be compared with the
experimental96,97 and QM values of 0.45 ± 0.21 and 0.24 kcal/mol, respectively. The
GLYCAM06 value for the HC—CG—CG—OH rotational barrier in ethanol was found to
be 3.09 kcal/mol, compared with the B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p) value of 3.07 kcal/mol, which
both slightly underestimated the experimental range95,99 of 3.32–3.55 kcal/mol.
Developing parameters for the CG—CG—CG—OH sequence was challenging due
primarily to the different conformational preferences of this torsion in open-chain and cyclic
systems. In open-chain systems, using n-propanol as an example, the gauche conformation
computed here at the MP2/6-31++G(2d,2p)//MP2/6-31G** level, was favored over the trans
by 0.21 kcal/mol. In contrast, the equatorial conformer of cyclohexanol100 in which the
sequence CG—CG—CG—OH is trans, is more stable than the axial conformation (CG—
CG—CG—OH is gauche) by 0.56 kcal/mol. The differences between the open-chain and
the cyclic preferences appear to reside in induction effects, which are difficult to account for
in a classical mechanical treatment lacking polarizability.101 Therefore, GLYCAM06 was
derived to slightly overestimate the trans conformation in n-propanol (0.77 kcal/mol) over
the gauche to optimize the performance of this parameter in glycan rings. As a result,
optimal agreement was achieved for the rotational energy profile of the equatorial
conformation of hydroxymethylcyclohexane Figure 2, as well as in highly substituted openchain alcohols, such as 2,2-dimethylpropanol and 1,1,2,2-tetramethylpropanol.
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Diols mimic the atomic sequence, O—C—C—O prevalent in the vicinal hydroxyl fragments
on the rings of common glycosyl residues. The torsional preferences for this linkage affect
ring conformations as well as the rotamer preferences of exocyclic side chains, such as in
sialic acid. This torsion term is most strongly influenced by the OH—CG—CG—OH
parameters as well as by internal hydrogen bonding. To establish the relative contributions
from each of these effects, rotational energy curves for the O—C—C—O linkage were
computed both allowing and prohibiting the formation of internal H-bonds.24 The ability of
GLYCAM06 to reproduce these relative energies and trends was illustrated by the average
error values <Error>curve and <Error>minima, in the rotational energy profiles. For example,
in 2,3-butanediol <Error>curve = 0.40 kcal/mol and <Error>minima = 0.35 kcal/mol when
internal H-bonding was allowed, while <Error>curve = 0.34 kcal/mol and <Error>minima =
0.21 kcal/mol when internal H-bonding was disallowed.
The presence of the OH—CG—CG—OH dihedral angle in the exocyclic glyceryl side
chains of sialic acids such as 5-N-acetyl-neuraminic acid (Neu5Ac) is significant in
determining the conformational properties of the side chain, Figure 3. The side chain
features two dihedral angles, which bear the OH—CG—CG—OH sequence: ω8
(O7C7C8O8) and ω9 (O8C8C9O9). The tendency for the OH—CG—CG—OH angle to adopt
the gauche conformation in simple diols has been referred to as the gauche effect.24
However, in Neu5Ac, while ω9 populates all three staggered rotamers, ω8 predominantly
exists in the trans conformation, as ascertained from both solution NMR88,102–104 and X-ray
crystallography105,106 studies. A pair of intramolecular hydrogen bonds, between H8O and
the oxygen atoms of the carboxylate group, and H7O and the carbonyl group of the amido
moiety, appears to stabilize this rotamer. However, the magnitude of this stabilization is
unclear, as the same trans preference for ω8 is also observed in the β-anomer,106 in which
the intramolecular H8O-carboxylate H-bond is not possible. Application of the initial
parameters for the OH—CG—CG—OH torsion term, generated by fitting to the QM
rotational energy curves for compounds in the initial training set of diols, in solvated MD
simulations, did not quantitatively reproduce the rotamer populations for the glyceryl side
chain in Neu5Ac. In contrast to experimental data, the initial parameters led to a strong
predilection for the gauche rotamer. Consequently a new approach was adopted in
developing torsional parameters for the OH—CG—CG—OH atomic sequence.
The initial values for the OH—CG—CG—OH torsion term were modified by systematically
adjusting the V1 coefficient until explicitly solvated MD simulations of Neu5Ac were able to
reproduce the solution populations for ω8. Because our goal was to increase the sampling of
the trans rotamer of ω8, and only the energy function of the V1 coefficient has a single
minimum at 180°, only this term was modified. Next, the effect of the different V1 values on
the stability of the ring conformations in selected monosaccharides was evaluated, because
the OH—CG—CG—OH atomic sequence is also present in ring systems. Because the entire
range of V1 values were consistent with predicting the ring conformational preferences, and
a series of MD simulations of Neu5Ac indicated that different V1 values resulted in a
predominant occurrence of the ω8 trans rotamer, the most consistent value was finally
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
determined by performing explicitly solvated MD simulations of 1,2-ethanediol, and
selecting the value that best reproduced its experimentally determined rotamer populations.
The rotamer sampling of ω8 in the glyceryl side chain, employing different V1 values are
presented in Table 6. Traversing these values from −1.0 to 1.0 kcal/mol resulted in an
overall increase in the occurrence of the trans rotamer, indicating that an adjustment of this
coefficient was necessary to reproduce the solution conformational properties of ω8.
As mentioned earlier, the OH—CG—CG—OH term is also present in monosaccharide
rings, most commonly existing in gauche relationships, Figure 4. Increasing the V1
coefficient could induce a preference for the trans relationships of OH—CG—CG—OH
dihedral angles present in ring systems, subsequently introducing artifactual ring flips during
MD simulations. To determine whether the different V1 coefficients had any influence on
the stabilities of pyranose chair conformations when the parameters were employed in MD
simulations, the MM generalized Born surface area (MMGBSA) implicit solvation model
was used to compute the average MM energies of α-D-Manp and α-D-idopyranose (α-D-
Idop) in both 4C1 and 1C4 conformations. In the experimental solution conformations, α-D-
Manp displays a single trans and two gauche O—C—C—O conformations in both the 4C1
and 1C4 chair forms. In contrast, α-D-Idop displays three trans and three gauche O—C—C
—O conformations in the 4C1 and 1C4 chair forms, respectively.
For each monosaccharide, 1-ns explicit solvent MD simulations were performed in which
the ring was either in the 4C1 or 1C4 conformation. Snapshots were selected from the last
500 ps at 1 ps intervals from each simulation, and water molecules were removed. Using
different V1 coefficients the average MM energies of the individual chair conformers of each
monosaccharide were determined by averaging the MMGBSA computed energies of the 500
selected snapshots. Over the entire range of V1 values, the calculations predicted a consistent
preference for the 4C1 over the 1C4 conformations in α-D-Manp, Figure 3. This insensitivity
of the α-D-Manp ring conformation relative to the V1 coefficient can be attributed to the
similar distribution of the trans and gauche O—C—C—O conformations in both chair
forms. The preference for the 4C1 over the 1C4 conformer is also expected due to the
unfavorable axial configuration of the hydroxymethy1 group at C5, in addition to the
energetically disallowed 1–3 interaction between the axial hydroxyl group at C3 and the C5
hydroxymethyl group. On the other hand, traversing the range of the V1 coefficients in the
α-D-Idop system, there was a preference for the 1C4 conformation at the negative extreme
(−2.0 kcal/mol) with a progressive increase in the stabilization of the 4C1 conformation
toward the positive extreme (2.0 kcal/mol). This trend is expected because for negative V1
coefficients, the V1 energy profile as a function of dihedral angle has a maximum barrier at
180°, the reverse being true for positive coefficients. Thus the exclusive presence of the O—
C—C—O trans conformations in the 4C1 structure leads to a destabilization for negative V1
values, but becomes a stabilizing factor for positive values of V1.
From MD simulations of methyl α-Neu5Ac, observation of the ω8 trans and gauche rotamer
populations as a function of V1, Table 6, indicated that the following values: −0.2, 0.0, 0.4,
0.6, 0.8, and 1.0 kcal/mol, would lead to rotamer preferences that were consistent with
experimental data. In addition, the MMGBSA calculations showed that these coefficients
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
would not cause spurious ring flips during MD simulations. Therefore, the most consistent
coefficient was determined by performing explicit solvent MD simulations of 1,2ethanediol, with V1 ranging from −0.5 to 0.5 kcal/mol, in increments of 0.1 kcal/mol. The
conformational properties of 1,2-ethanediol have been extensively investigated by both
experimental and theoretical studies,107,118 which predict a predominance of the gauche
conformation, albeit to different extents, ranging from gauche:trans 99:1116 to 67:33.115
Experimental NMR data117 indicate a mixture of 80:20% gauche:trans populations in
solvents with low dielectric constants. Chidichimo et al.110 reported the existence of only
the gauche conformation. However, their studies were done using nematic-lyotropic
crystalline solutions. A V1 value of −0.1 kcal/mol best reproduced the experimental
populations obtained in conditions most similar to those of the simulation, with a
gauche:trans ratio of 81:19%. Using this value of −0.1 kcal/mol a PMF-WHAM analysis of
methyl α-Neu5Ac with ω8 as the reaction coordinate was carried out. This analysis produced
an energy profile with the trans rotamer being more stable by ~1.0 kcal/mol relative to the +
gauche conformer, and 1.2 kcal/mol with respect to the −gauche conformer, Figure 5. The
rotational barriers to transition between +gauche and −gauche conformers were ~2.4 and
3.4 kcal/mol, respectively, indicating some transition to the +gauche rotamer. The MD
simulations correctly predicted the solution behavior of the glyceryl ω8 torsion, Figure 5. To
assess further the extent to which these new parameters were able reproduce the B3LYP/
6-31++G(2d,2p) rotational energies, the rotational energy curves for the O—C—C—O
torsions for 2,3-butanediol were determined for comparison, Figure 6. As expected, when
intramolecular hydrogen bonds are allowed, there is a stabilization of the gauche conformers
over the trans conformer. When intramolecular hydrogen bonds are excluded, by
constraining the hydroxyl proton to a trans orientation (HO—OH—CG—CG = 180°), or by
substituting the hydroxyl protons with methyl groups, electrostatic repulsions between the
oxygen atoms reverse the relative stabilities of the rotamers, resulting in the trans rotamer
being the most stable. The <Error>curve = 0.87 kcal/mol and <Error>minima = 0.35 kcal/mol
when internal H-bonding was allowed, and <Error>curve = 1.04 and <Error>minima = 0.61
kcal/mol when internal H-bonding was disallowed. Comparing these error values to those
determined using the initial OH—CG—CG—OH parameters, indicated that the present
parameters resulted in fits that were slightly less accurate. However, this slight degradation
was necessary for the correct prediction of the solution conformational properties of the
glyceryl side chain of sialic acid.
The parameters derived from ethers are important to the accurate description of
carbohydrate ring conformational properties as well as the rotational properties of glycosidic
linkages. The overall accuracy of the derived torsion terms is indicated in the <Error>curve
and <Error>minima of 0.56 and 0.35 kcal/mol, respectively. In methoxymethane,
GLYCAM06 yielded a rotational barrier for the H1—CG—OS—CG torsion of 2.31 kcal/
mol, in reasonable agreement with the B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p) and experimental values119
of 2.43 and 2.62 kcal/mol, respectively.
The OS—CG—CG—OS torsion term is particularly important for glycans having a 1→6
linkage. The simplest molecule exhibiting this torsion term is 1,2-dimethoxyethane (DME).
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
A single V2 coefficient of 0.82 kcal/mol for this term leds to good overall reproduction of
the gas-phase data for the entire set of diethers, with a value of <Error>curve = 0.30 kcal/mol
(Table 5) for the OS—CG—CG—OS and associated parameters. This term is also
significant in branched glycans, which may exhibit glycosidic linkages between vicinal
hydroxyl groups within the glycan ring. Incorrect parameters for this term may alter the
conformational stability of the glycan ring. To quantify the behavior of the parameters for
this linkage, we examined the rotational properties of the central Csp3—Csp3 (CG—CG)
bond in 2,3-dimethoxybutane. As can be seen from the data in Figure 6, the parameters well
reproduced the QM data for 2,3-dimethoxybutane.
To assess further the applicability of the parameters for the OS—CG—CG—OS sequence to
solution phase studies, the conformer populations of DME from a 20-ns explicit solvent MD
simulation were compared with those determined from solution phase experimental data.
The conformers were characterized by the rotational preferences of the dihedral angles
composed of the Csp3—Osp3 (CG—OS) bonds, and the central CG—CG bond; with T and G
denoting the trans and gauche conformations, respectively. Theoretical120–122 and
experimental123–125 techniques have been employed to elucidate these conformational
properties in aqueous solutions at different DME concentrations, and in the gas phase. There
was a general preference for the G rotamer around the CG—CG bond, and for the T rotamer
around the CG—OS bonds, with the major conformers identified as the TTT, TGT, TGG′,
TGG, and TTG.124 Notable, were the observations that the populations of the various
conformers differed in aqueous solutions relative to those present in neat liquid or in the gas
phase. The populations also displayed a dependence on temperature. In the gas phase, the
TTT, TGT, and TGG′ were the major rotamers, while in neat liquid and aqueous solutions,
the TGT and TGG were predominant,123,124 indicating that DME-DME and DME-H2O
interactions influenced rotamer populations. Thus, our 20-ns MD-derived conformer
populations were compared with those observed experimentally at low DME concentrations.
The populations determined from the MD simulations could be ranked as: TGT (56%), TGG
(13%), TTT (11%), TGG′ (10%), TTG (6%), and others (4%), which concurred qualitatively
with experimental observations that the TGT and TGG predominate.123,124
Anomeric Linkages
Anomeric linkages, represented by the C—O—C—O torsion angle common to all
carbohydrates, are often modeled in pyranosides by tetrahydro-2-methoxy-2H-pyran (axial)
and tetrahy-dro-2-methoxy-2H-pyran (equatorial), corresponding to α- and β-pyranosides,
respectively.21,126 In GLYCAM_93, reproduction of the C—O—C—O rotational energies
for the α- and β-link-ages was accomplished by using unique torsion parameters for each
anomer, which were distinguished by different atom types for the anomeric carbon atom.
Here, we use a single parameter for both anomeric configurations. Both GLYCAM06 and
GLYCAM_93 correctly reproduced the B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p) rotational energy profiles,
with <Error>curve values of 0.45 kcal/mol (GLYCAM06) and 0.3 kcal/mol (GLYCAM_93),
for the α-glycosides, while for the β-glycosides the <Error>curve values were 0.36 kcal/mol
(GLYCAM06) and 0.57 kcal/mol (GLYCAM_93). Therefore, employing a torsion term
common to both α- and β-glycosides did not lead to degradation in the fit to the relevant
rotational energy curves. As depicted in Figure 7, GLYCAM06 reproduced the rotational
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
topologies for both α- and β-anomers, showing good quantitative agreement with the
B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p) energies. The HF/6-31G* rotational energy curve for tetrahydro-2methoxy-2H-pyran (axial) displayed a global minimum at 60°, and a less stable local
minimum at 300°, while for tetrahydro-2-methoxy-2H-pyran (equatorial), the global
minimum was at 300° with a local minimum 5 kcal/mol higher at ~60°. Three of these
minima are consistent with the minima based on expectations due to the stabilizing exoanomeric effect,127 and the repulsive steric interactions. However, the minimum of
tetrahydro-2-methoxy-2H-pyran (axial) located at 300° has not been observed
experimentally, even though it displays a stabilizing exo-anomeric effect, presumably due to
large steric repulsions between the hydrogen atoms of the aglycon and that of C2. This
structure was subjected to a subsequent optimization at the MP2/6-311++G(2d,2p) level of
theory, during which it collapsed to the global minimum energy structure with the C—O—C
—O torsion of ~60°.
Amides and Esters
Amide and ester parameters are relevant to a carbohydrate force field since many
monosaccharides contain N- and O-acetyl moieties. In addition, N-linked glycans are
attached via an amide bond to asparagine side chains in glycoproteins.
The exact extent of deviation from planarity in the ground-state amido groups, and the origin
of the large barrier to rotations about the Nsp2—Csp2 (N—C) bond in amides have been the
subject of an extensive study.128 From their highest level calculation (CCSD(T)/PVTZ)
Fogarasi and Szalay found that the optimized structure of methanamide was exactly planar.
It is accepted that the large barrier to rotation is associated with the breaking of πdelocalization at 90°. Langley and Allinger.129 observed that the rotational barrier is
sensitive to which proton is rotated and the out-of-plane distortion of the proton not
constrained by the torsional rotation. When either H—N—C—O torsion angle for one
proton is driven above 90°, the unconstrained proton lags behind and follows an out-ofplane, rather than a purely torsional, energetic pathway.129 Consequently, in acetamide the
two different H—N—C—O dihedral angles were both varied counterclockwise from 0 to
90°, and from 180° to 90°, resulting in two transition states at the 90° angle having
rotational barriers of 13.96 and 10.87 kcal/mol, corresponding to the 0→90° and 180→90°
paths, respectively. In both transition states the nitrogen atom is pyramidal. In the lower
energy state the unconstrained proton is closer to the carbonyl oxygen (Hunconst—N—C—O
= 22°), while in the higher energy state this proton is farther from the oxygen atom
(Hunconst—N—C—O = −154°). The rotational energies in GLYCAM06 were in line with
the B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p) values, although GLYCAM06 underestimated the barrier
heights by ~2.0 kcal/mol in each case, Figure 8. In general, the amide parameters performed
well, giving <Error>curve = 0.64 kcal/mol and <Error>minima = 0.38 kcal/mol.
To determine the torsion terms relevant to substituted amides, the rotational energy curves
of N-methylacetamide and N,N-dimethylacetamide were utilized. The latter molecule
enabled the derivation of a rotational profile consisting solely of the two coupled torsion
terms (CG—N—C—O/CG—N—C—CG), while N-methylacetamide allowed us to examine
the transferability of the CG—N—C—O/CG—N—C—CG and the H—N—C—O/H—N—
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
C—CG coupled torsion pairs. As it is impossible to separate these terms, coupled through a
180° phase-shift, the energy contributions were derived by simultaneously fitting to the QMderived rotational energy curve, employing torsional angles of θ° (CG—N—C—O) and θ +
180° (CG—N—C—CG), in a nonlinear least-squares approach. For N,N-dimethylacetamide GLYCAM06 gave the rotational barrier about the Nsp2—Csp2 bond to be 14.6 kcal/
mol, which is lower than the B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p) value of 16.9 kcal/mol. However,
GLYCAM06 is in better agreement with the NMR determined130 effective barrier of 15.3
kcal/mol, Figure 8. The transferability of the GLYCAM06 parameters was illustrated by the
reproduction of the B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p) rotational energy curve for the Nsp2—Csp2
bond in N-methylacetamide, in which the trans rotamer was correctly predicted to be less
stable than the cis rotamer, Figure 8. N,N-dimethylacetamide was also used to parameterize
the CG—N—CG—H1/C—N—CG—H1 coupled torsion pair. The C—N—CG—H1 torsion
is present in N-acetylated carbohydrates, and its parameters are relevant to the C—N—CG
—H2 linkage present in N-linked sugars. GLYCAM06 gave a rotational barrier of 0.64
kcal/mol for the N—CG bond, which may be compared with the B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p)
value of 0.59 kcal/mol.
Esters were employed for generating parameters necessary for extending the force field to
model the properties of O-acetylated carbohydrates such as those common in certain
bacterial capsular polysaccharides, and in the sialic acid residues of higher animals.131 The
overall <Error>curve computed for the parameters of the following atomic sequences H1—
CG—OS—C, HC CG C—OS, CG—OS—C—O, CG—OS—C—CG and CG—CG—OS—
C were 0.03, 0.02, 0.18, 0.62, and 0.45 kcal/mol, respectively.
The GLYCAM06 rotational energy barrier for the O-methyl group (H1—CG—OS—C) in
methyl acetate was 0.91 kcal/mol which can be compared with the B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p)
and microwave132 values of 0.87 and 1.22 kcal/mol, respectively. The negligible rotational
energy barrier for the acetyl-methyl group (HC—CG—C—OS) of 0.25 kcal/mol was also in
good agreement with both B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p) (0.23 kcal/mol) and experimental (0.29
kcal/mol) values.132 In esters, the CG—OS—C—O and CG—OS—C—CG dihedral angles
are coupled through a 180° phase-shift. The parameters for these atomic sequences were
derived by following the same simultaneous fitting approach employed in developing the
coupled parameters (CG—N—C—O/CG—N—C—CG) in amides, with torsional angles of
θ° (CG—OS—C—O) and θ + 180° (CG—OS—C—CG). This simultaneous fit resulted in
V2 values of −3.20 and 3.0 kcal/mol for CG—OS—C—O and CG—OS—C—CG atomic
sequence, respectively. The GLYCAM06 rotational energy curve for the CG—OS—C—O
sequence resulted in a local minimum at 180°, which was 7.52 kcal/mol less stable than the
global minimum at 0°. This relative energy underestimated the IR spectroscopy133 value of
8.5 ± 1.0 kcal/mol, but was comparable to the B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p) value of 7.48 kcal/
Lastly, N-tert-butylacetamide and N-(tetrahydro-2H-pyran-3-yl) acetamide were utilized to
determine the coupled torsion parameters (CG—CG—N—H/CG—CG—N—C) and (H1—
CG— N—H/CG—CG—N—C), while ethyl acetate and tetrahydro-2H-pyran-3-yl acetate
were employed in deriving the C—OS— CG—CG parameters, Figure 9. The B3LYP/6-31+
+G(2d,2p) rotational energy curve for the CG—CG—N—C sequence in N-tert-
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
butylacetamide resulted in a threefold 120° periodic profile, which GLYCAM06 reproduced
with <Error>curve = 0.05 kcal/mol. For this rotation in tetrahydro-2H-pyran-3-yl acetate,
however, both GLYCAM06 and the B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p) energies resulted in
asymmetric profiles with a broad low energy global minimum at 90°, which was ~1.75
kcal/mol more stable than a local minimum at 300°. The minimum energy structure at 90° is
consistent with the conformational properties of the acetamido moiety in the solid-phase
structures of Neu5Ac methyl ester and its monohydrate,106,134 as well as the solution-phase
NMR structure of β-D-2-deoxy-2-N-acetylglucopyranoside,135 in which the carbonyl group
almost eclipses the ring C—H bond. This spatial orientation results in an approximate trans
dihedral angle between the amide proton and the ring aliphatic hydrogen atom in the H1—
CG—N—H sequence. It should be noted that at the global minimum of the CG—CG—N—
C sequence being driven, the H1—CG—N—H dihedral angle is approximately at the trans
conformation. The ability of these parameters to model their corresponding rotational energy
curves was reflected in the <Error>curve and <Error>minima values of 0.52 and 0.08 kcal/mol,
respectively, Figure 9. However, during a 10-ns MD simulation of N-acetyl 2-deoxy-Nacetyl-β-D-glucopyranoside employing the QM-derived parameters, rotation about the
Csp3—Nsp2 (CG—N) bond to the local minimum (τC-N-C2-H2 ≈ 180°) occurred after ~1 ns.
This rotamer remained stable throughout the remainder of the simulation. A very recent
experimental and QM-NMR study of the conformational properties of this group in GlcNAc
indicated that the H—Csp3—Nsp2—H atomic sequence exists only in the trans low energy
con-formation(τC–N–C2–H2 ≈ 0°), but displays broad librations around that minimum.136
Therefore, to increase the stability of the H1—CG—N—H trans rotamer, and ultimately
prevent this conformational transitions from occurring, V1 terms were introduced for the H1
—CG—N—H and H1—CG—N—C parameters to determine a reasonable value. The V1
coefficients were varied from 0.0 to 2.0 kcal/mol in increments of 0.5 kcal/mol, and PMF
calculations were performed for each value, employing N-(tetrahydro-2H-pyran-3-yl)
acetamide with the C1—C2—N—C dihedral angle as the reaction coordinate. Based on the
~2 kcal/mol increase in the relative energy of the local minimum, Figure 9, the pair of
values 1.0 and −1.0 kcal/mol was selected for the H1—CG—N—H and H1—CG—N—C
torsion parameters, respectively. Employing these values, a 50-ns MD simulation performed
with N-acetyl 2-deoxy-N-acetyl-β-D-glucopyranoside did not display any conformational
transitions of the acetamido moiety. The origin of the observed solution-phase transitions,
when employing the purely QM-derived torsion terms, remains undetermined.
In the case of ethyl acetate, rotating the about the Csp3—Osp3 bond in the atomic sequence
(CG—CG—OS—C) resulted in a symmetric B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p) energy curve, which
produced a large barrier (7.45 kcal/mol) at 0°, with minima at the trans configuration as well
as at 90° and 270°. A negligible QM-determined rotational energy barrier (0.83 kcal/mol)
separated the global trans minimum from the local minima at 90° and 270°. These results
were consistent with previous theoretical studies of ethyl acetate.137 GLYCAM06
reproduced the B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p) relative energies over the entire curve with
<Error>curve = 0.45 kcal/mol. As for the CG—CG—OS—C rotation in tetrahydro-2Hpyran-3-yl acetate, both B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p) and GLYCAM06 produced similar
asymmetric energy profiles, Figure 9. The <Error>curve for this atomic sequence was 0.54
kcal/mol. To assess the extent to which GLYCAM06 could model other O-acetylated
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
pyranosyl moieties, rotations were performed around the Csp3—Osp3 bond in both
tetrahydro-2-methoxy-2H-pyran-3-yl acetate and (tetra-hydro-2H-pyran-2-yl)methyl acetate,
Figure 10. Unlike the rotational energy profile of tetrahydro-2H-pyran-3-yl acetate, the
energy profile of tetrahydro-2-methoxy-2H-pyran-3-yl acetate resulted in a barrier to
rotation at ~30°, which could arise from Coulombic repulsions between the carbonyl oxygen
and the oxygen atom of the methoxy group. Compared to the QM-value, GLYCAM06
underestimated this repulsion by about 2.31 kcal/mol. Overall, there was a good
reproduction of the B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p) data (<Error>curve values of 0.89, and 0.50,
kcal/mol, respectively).
Carboxylates
Under physiological conditions, the extent to which carboxylate groups are ionized depends
on their pKa. In the case of the ionic state it should be noted that it will never exist in the
absence of a counter ion, such as sodium. It is generally presumed that uronic and ulosonic
acids exist in the ionized form, and parameters were derived accordingly, with exceptions
noted below. The B3LYP/6-3111G(2d,2p) rotational energy curve about the Csp2—Csp3 (C
—CG) bond in 2-methylpropanoate displayed minima at 120° and 300°. For this rotation,
GLYCAM06 was fit to the MP2/cc-pVDZ rotational energies, Figure 11, with <Error>curve
and <Error>minima values of 0.72 and 0.60 kcal/mol, respectively. The QM-determined
rotational energy barrier of the carboxyl group was 0.8 kcal/mol. This is a very low
rotational barrier, which is less than the room temperature equipartition energy of a
molecule (kT). Thus during an MD simulations, free rotations of the carboxylic group about
the C—CG bond are expected. To this extent, it was more important to ensure reasonable
barriers to rotation, than to identify the minima.
In addition to the O2—C—CG—CG torsion term, modeling uronic acids also required the
development of parameters for the OH—CG—CG—C and OS—CG—CG—C sequences.
The OH—CG—CG—C parameters were derived using 2-hydroxy-proponoate as the model
compound, by simultaneously fitting to two sets of curves: with and without the presence of
an internal hydrogen bond between the hydroxyl and carboxyl groups. For the OH—CG—
CG—C rotations, the <Error>curve was 0.79 kcal/mol and <Error>minima was 0.31 kcal/mol
(with the inclu sion of intramolecular H-bond), while <Error>curve and <Error>minima were
0.96 mol−1 and 0.16 kcal/mol, respectively (when the H-bond was disallowed). The
<Error>curve and <Error>minima for the OS—CG—CG—C rotations were 1.15 and 0.09
kcal/mol, respectively.
Mixed Functional Groups
Mixed functional groups that are present in carbohydrates include the alcohol–ethers,
alcohol–amides, and ether-amides. alcohol–ethers are required in the derivation of torsion
terms that model the torsion angles involving the ring oxygen and the C2 hydroxyl group as
well as the glycosidic ether oxygen and other ring hydroxyl groups. These molecules with
mixed functionalities can form intramolecular H-bonds, hence rotational energy curves were
derived in the presence and absence of internal H-bonds, as appropriate. The B3LYP/6-31+
+G(2d,2p) and GLYCAM06 OH—CG—CG—OS rotational energy curves for 2-
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
methoxybutan-3-ol are shown in Figure 12. Overall for ether-alcohols, the <Error>curve was
0.61 kcal/mol with a value of 0.59 kcal/mol for the <Error>minima.
The highly polar mixed functionality of ether–amides was challenging to parameterize (Fig.
S1, supplementary materials), as indicated in the overall values of <Error>curve = 1.12
kcal/mol and <Error>minima = 1.10 kcal/mol. In terms of carbohydrates, the OS—CG—N—
C parameter is relevant to the modeling carbohydrate–protein linkages. In this set of
parameters, the OS—CG—N—C parameter was the least accurate with <Error>curve = 1.93
kcal/mol. The other ether amide parameters performed better as can be seen in Table 5.
To determine the torsion parameters associated with the OH—CG—CG—N rotation,
molecules having both alcohol and amide functionality were employed. The overall values
for <Error>curve and <Error>minima were 0.49 and 0.41 kcal/mol, respectively. The
performance of these parameters is exemplified by N-ethanolacetamide as shown in Figure
Special Cases
Ulosonic Acids—For GLYCAM06 to correctly model the glycosidic conformational
properties of ulosonic acids such as 5-N-acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac), a class of sugars
frequently present at the termini of eukaryotic cell surface glycans, accurate
parameterization of the anomeric angle φ (CxCxOx−1Cx−1) is required, Figure 3. Unlike most
glycosyl residues, ulosonic acids contain a carboxyl functional group attached to the
anomeric carbon atom, which alters the rotational preferences for the φ-angle in this class of
compounds. In solution, the φ-angle predominantly exists in two conformations, −gauche
and trans, in an ~1:1 ratio.104,138 The torsion term (C—CY—OS—CG) associated with the
carboxylate group for Neu5Ac contributes significantly to the φ-angle conformation in these
carbohydrates. Generating parameters for this torsion term proved challenging; exhibiting
ether–carboxylate mixed functionality. Initial MD simulations of the glycoside of methyl α-
Neu5Ac employing parameters generated by fitting to gas-phase QM rotational energy
profiles of either ionized or protonated 2-methoxypropanoate resulted in the sampling of
only the −gauche rotamer about the φ-angle of methyl α-Neu5Ac. The inability of the initial
parameters to reproduce experimental φ populations may originate from the omission of
charge polarizabilities in the force field. Thus, we took the approach of empirically varying
the V1 coefficient of this term until we obtained the proper rotamer distribution for φ from
explicitly solvated simulations of methyl α-Neu5Ac. By changing the V1 value from 1.0 to
8.0 kcal/mol it was possible to shift the preference of the sampling from predominantly —
gauche to exclusively trans. An intermediate value of 3.5 kcal/mol reproduced the
experimental rotamer distribution, Figure 14. Employing this V1 term, a PMF analysis was
carried out to determine the energy profile of the φ-angle in methyl α-Neu5Ac in solution,
Figure 14. The PMF results indicated that the −gauche and trans conformers now displayed
similar relative energies in solution, with a stabilization energy of ~2.3 kcal/mol over the
+gauche. The rotational energy barrier between the −gauche and trans conformers was ~1.4
kcal/mol. The small barrier to rotation results in the frequent transitions between the two
rotamers, as observed in the MD simulation trajectory, Figure 14. To assess whether this
new torsional coefficient could model a mixed system of ionized and neutral carboxylic acid
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
groups, the GLYCAM06 rotational energy curve for the rotation around the exocyclic
Csp3—Osp3 (C1—O1) bond was compared with the B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p) curves for both
ionized and neutral (R)-tetrahydro-2-methoxy-2H-pyran-2-carboxylic acid, Figure 15.
Notably, the GLYCAM06 rotational behavior appeared to be a compromise between each of
the QM curves in ionized and neutral (R)-tetrahydro-2-methoxy-2H-pyran-2-carboxylic
Force Field Validation—In the course of developing torsion parameters for molecules in
the training set, most of the parameters were validated concurrently by determining how
well GLYCAM06 was able to reproduce the B3LYP/6-31++G(2d,2p) rotational energy
curves for test molecules, or by performing MD simulations and comparing MD-computed
rotamer populations to those observed experimentally. In this section, we extend the
validation by examining how the parameters collectively perform in selected glycans.
Unlike the earlier parameterization of GLYCAM,21 which was based on carbohydratespecific analogues, only small representative molecules of a broad diversity were employed
in the derivation of GLYCAM06. Therefore, validation of the force field by comparison
with carbohydrate molecules provides an independent assessment of the ability of this smallmolecule-based approach to model carbohydrate properties. Explicit solvent MD
simulations (50 ns) were performed for α-D-GlcpOMe, α-D-GalpOMe and α-D-ManpOMe,
and compared with NMR experimental data, such as rotamer populations and scalar 3Jcouplings. While scalar 3J-couplings can rarely provide a complete picture of the structural
properties of carbohydrates, when combined with nOe distances both datasets can provide
valuable insights about oligosaccharide conformational properties. Average ring puckering
parameters were also computed from the MD simulation data and compared with solid phase
neutron diffraction data. The comparison of ring puckering parameters between gas-phase
and crystallographic data is not ideal. However, Momany and Willet139 have shown that the
geometrical properties of pyranosyl rings from gas-phase B3LYP/6-31G* calculations were
remarkably close to those determined in the solid-phase, suggesting that the packing
environment may not have a significant effect on the geometry of the ring.
In solution, the rotamer preferences of the ω-angle (O5—C5—C6—O6) involving the
exocyclic hydroxymethyl group are greatly influenced by the stereochemistry at the C4
position and the polarity of the solvent.28 The three accessible staggered rotamers about the
C5—C6 bond are generally designated gauche–gauche (gg), gauche–trans (gt), and trans–
gauche (tg) with respect to the dihedral angles O5—C5—C6—O6 and C4—C5—C6—O6,
respectively. A significant test of a carbohydrate force field is its ability to reproduce the
rotamer populations about the C5—C6 exocyclic bonds because the populations are sensitive
to the energetic balance between the formation of intramolecular and solute–solvent
hydrogen bonds.140 The ability of GLYCAM06 to reproduce the NMR J-couplings for the
C5—C6 bond is reflective of the performance of its dihedral, nonbonded, and electrostatic
components.
Homonuclear scalar 3J-couplings between the H5—C5— C6—H6R/H6S hydrogen atoms
from a 50-ns explicit solvent MD simulation of α-D-GlcpOMe were computed, employing
an experimentally parameterized Karplus equation.141 Values computed over the entire
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
trajectory resulted in coupling constants of 5.4 ± 1.7 Hz and 2.9 ± 2.0 Hz for 3JH5H6R
and 3JH5H6S, respectively, which compared favorably with experimental values,142–144
Table 7. In the course of the MD simulation, rotations about the exocyclic C5—C6 bond
resulted in each of the rotational states of the ω-angle being populated. The MD gg:gt:tg
populations, 62:36:2, were in good agreement with the experimentally observed populations
of 57:38:5144 and 53:47:0.142
Similar J-calculations were performed for α-D-GalpOMe, the C-4 epimer of Glcp. From the
MD data, the 3JH5H6R and 3JH5H6s coupling constants were 7.9 ± 1.6 and 3.7 ± 1.8 Hz,
respectively. Several experimental values have been reported for the 3JH5H6R/S coupling
constants and the gg:gt:tg populations of α-D-GalpOMe, Table 7. The MD-computed values
for 3JH5H6R and 3JH5H6S fell within the experimental ranges of 7.8–8.6 Hz and 3.7–6.0 Hz,
respectively.142–144 With respect to the gg:gt:tg populations, the MD values of 6:76:18
showed good agreement with the more recent data.
In addition to bond rotational properties, pyranose ring puckering parameters, ring
interproton torsion angles and distances provide another means of assessing the accuracy of
the ring geometry. Analyses of the Cremer and Pople145 ring puckering parameters over the
50-ns MD simulations of α-D-GlcpOMe, α-D-GalpOMe and α-D-ManpOMe indicated
stable 4C1 ring chair forms, with (Q,θ) values of (0.55 ± 0.04, 6 ± 10), (0.57 ± 0.04, 24 ± 8)
and (0.55 ± 0.04, 1 ± 10), respectively, which were in good agreement with the values
determined from solid state neutron diffraction experiments of (0.57, 2.3),146 (0.57, 4.9),147
and (0.56, 0), respectively.146
Ring interproton distances and dihedral angles are a source of NMR-restraints employed in
determining the ring geometries of glycans. In addition, the distances provide internal
calibration references employed in the elucidation of glycan conformational properties from
nOe data. Thus, the feasibility of employing GLYCAM06 to predict glycan ring
conformational properties was determined by its ability to reproduce experimental
interproton distances and dihedral angles. A comparison of interproton distances and
dihedral angles computed using GLYCAM06, and those determined from neutron
diffraction data146,147 for α-D-GlcpOMe, α-D-GalpOMe and α-D-ManpOMe is presented
in Table 8. To make a direct comparison between experimental and theoretical data, the
coupling constants between vicinal ring-hydrogen atoms were computed from solvated MD
simulations of α/β-D-GlcpOMe, α/β-D-GalpOMe, and α/β-D-ManpOMe, and compared
with available solution-phase NMR experimental data, Table 9. The overall agreement
between the GLYCAM06-derived and experimental data are quite good. However,
theoretical and experimental values for the 3JH4H5 and 3JH1H2 constants in α/β-D-GalpOMe
and β-D-ManpOMe, respectively, were in weaker agreement. Superimpositions of the
crystal structures with energy-minimized and average ring geometries of these pyranosides,
computed from the MD simulations did not reveal any structural distortions (Fig. S2,
supplementary materials). This error may be arising from electronic hyperconjugative
effects between the lone pair of electrons on the ring oxygen atom and the antibonding
orbital of the C5—H5 or the C1—H1 bonds when the anomeric center is in the βconfiguration, which are not included in classical force fields. Using the B3LYP functional
with the cc-pV5ZT and 5s2p1d basis sets for hydrogen and heavy atoms, respectively, QM
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
NMR predictions from the B3LYP/aug-cc-pVTZ optimized neutron diffraction structures of
α- and β-D-GalpOMe resulted in 3JH4H5 values of 1.9 and 1.2Hz, respectively.
Another indication of the performance of a biomolecular force field is its ability to
reproduce experimentally determined unit cell geometries. In general, unit cell dimensions
are influenced by internal torsional rotations as well as by van der Waals and electrostatic
intermolecular interactions. However, it is recognized that in polar molecules such as
carbohydrates, the treatment of electrostatics is crucial in reproducing experimental crystal
geometries.31 The suitably of the present treatment of electrostatics in GLYCAM06 was
assessed by comparing the average difference between the unit cell geometries of a methyl
α-D-Glcp crystal computed from a 1-ns MD simulation to those determined
experimentally.63 The average difference computed with GLYCAM06 was 1.2 Å, which
showed better performance when compared with the average differences computed with
GLYCAM_93,21 CHARMM HGFB,148 and GROMOS (93)149 of 1.7, 1.8, and 1.6 Å,
respectively.
The results of the frequency calculations, assignments, and comparisons to the various
experimental results are summarized in Figure 16. The character of the assignments
generated by our program is illustrated in Table 10, where we have listed the primary
motion assigned by DMODES to each vibrational frequency for the monomer calculated by
NMODE. The notations are described in the caption. The assignments for the monomer
were also checked by visually inspecting corresponding plots of the atom positions with
energy-weighted motion vectors. For the comparisons with experiment, the DMODESgenerated assignments were grouped into the broader classes used in Figure 16, Figure 17
and Table 11.
In general, the agreement between the calculated frequencies and the experimental results is
good, with the only notable exceptions being the H—O stretches, which are about 5% blueshifted. This deviation is likely due to the use of the gas-phase H—O stretching frequency
for methanol in the initial derivation of the AMBER HO—OH stretching constant.150 Since
the gas-phase H—O stretching frequency of methanol is about 360 cm−1 higher than the
liquid phase value, it is reasonable to expect that a smaller force constant would produce
better results in the condensed phases.
We have chosen to use the standard AMBER values for the H—O stretches, and also the H
—C, for two reasons. First, we wish to minimize the introduction of new atom types, and
associated complications, into the AMBER force field. Second, fitting force constants to
quantum-derived separation energies for these bond stretches does not improve the function
of the force field. Instead, the quantum derived force constants increase the normal mode
frequency disagreement to 10–20%. However, although the current values work well, the
AMBER force field is used primarily for condensed-phase simulations, so it may be
valuable to reevaluate the use of the current HO—OH stretching constant.
Although the O—C stretches seem in Figure 16 to differ by ~50%, the issue is more
complex, and is partly one of assignment. As with the experimental work, we also see O—C
stretches in the region ~ 1000–1200 cm−1, as is illustrated for the 64-mer in Figure 17.
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
However, according to our molecular mechanics analysis of the monomer and the 64-mer, as
well as the quantum analyses of the monomer (Tables 10 and 11 for the monomer data), the
O—C stretches do not account for the major portion of the vibrational kinetic energy at
these frequencies. In Figure 17, we present all frequencies calculated for the crystal that
corresponded to a C—C or O—C stretch. The figure shows that the calculation yields many
C—C and O—C stretches in the range of “heavy atom stretches” given by Wells and
Atalla.71 The more intense stretches at the lower frequencies are all parts of larger, more
complex motions that would not typically be assigned as stretches, so frequencies in these
ranges are not expected to correspond to experiment. On the other hand, the presence of the
cluster of high-frequency C—C stretches, about 1400–1600, is puzzling. The cause of the
discrepancy is not known. Kuttel et al.,68 reported similar calculated frequencies, although
theirs also included O—C stretches. They attributed the high frequencies to the influence of
ring-atom bond and angle force constants that are not mitigated by the presence of cross
terms in the force field. Although our outlying frequencies might have a similar cause,
further investigation is needed to determine the precise cause of the discrepancy.
The agreement with experimental results for bending, distortion, and torsion modes, on the
other hand, is very good (Figure 16). Our calculated ranges significantly overlap
experimental ranges for these motion classes, though the experimental ranges do not always
agree with each other. For example, consider the data for the H—O—C torsions. These
show the least consensus among the other studies. This may in part be due to difficulties
translating between assignment conventions, but it may more likely represent a wide
variability in those torsional frequencies, as is found for the 64-unit calculation. Similar
arguments might be made for the “other C6 & O6” class. It should be noted that the
Gregurick and Kafafi70 study used a different assignment method than what was used in the
other studies to which we compare our results, which might account for the difference
between their results and those of the others within these classes.
Two features in Figure 16 that are specific to the results of this study require further
discussion. The first is the presence of the highest frequency —C6— distortion modes.
There were no assignments offered by the other studies that satisfactorily correlated with
this motion, which is essentially the movement of the C6 atom along a line between the C5
and O6 atoms. There is accompanying motion in C5 and in the two hydrogens attached to
C6, but the primary energy is in the motion of the C6. Note that this discussion only applies
to the —C6— distortion modes above 1500 cm−1 (the lower frequency modes are other
stretching motions of the C6 atom, for example, along the bond to one of the aliphatic
hydrogens). Considering the strong stretching character of the motion, it is likely that the
frequency reported here is only approximate. Normal mode analysis of the HF/6-31G* data
for the monomer revealed a similar mode at 1635 cm−1 (Table 11). The density functional
calculation generated a similar mode at 1458 cm−1. This mode is likely to be real, but may
be difficult to observe since the motion is highly symmetric. In all of the quantum
calculations in which the vibrational kinetic energy was primarily coupled to the motion of
C6 between C5 and O6, the IR intensity calculated for that mode was small.
The other feature of note is the small cluster of very high frequency H—O—C torsions
noted with (*) in Figure 10. Note that the relative energy associated with the motion is
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
small, but it was not small enough to be filtered out by the procedures described earlier. The
motions responsible for these anomalous assignments make physical sense, and are likely to
occur in nature, but may be too weak to be observed. The cluster of torsions arises due to an
accidental resonance. In the 64-unit crystal used for the calculation, the minimization
resulted in a configuration such that a stretch of the O2—HO2 of a single molecule would
necessarily excite torsion of the hydroxyl HO6 of another neighboring molecule. Since one
of the molecules was situated at one a face of the crystal, and since NMODE does not
employ periodic boundaries, the isolated behavior was not representative of the bulk
properties.
Conclusions
This work describes the derivation of a parameter set for classical quadratic force fields that
accurately models carbohydrates, but which can also be generalized to more diverse
molecules by virtue of the noncarbohydrate specific nature of the parameters. QM
calculations were employed to compute properties that are difficult or impossible to access
experimentally, such as, bond and valence angle deformation force constants, dihedral angle
rotational barriers, and electrostatic properties. The structures of the biomolecular building
blocks (monosaccharides in the present case) were taken from experimental neutron
diffraction data. Consistent with the AMBER force field, the PARM94 parameter set for van
der Waals terms was employed. Particular attention was given to those properties that most
impact the overall 3D structure and dynamics of biopolymers; namely, internal electrostatic
interactions, solute–solvent interactions, and internal rotational barriers. While we derived
partial atomic charges by fitting to the QM molecular electrostatic potentials (so called ESPfitting), we departed from the general practice of assigning partial atomic charges to every
atom in the molecule adopted in our earlier work (GLYCAM_93, GLYCAM2000) by not
fitting partial charges to aliphatic hydrogen atoms. In addition, the current parameterization
removes the need to treat 1–4 non-bonded interactions as a special case; that is, 1–4 scaling
has been removed.
Although the parameter set is complete for carbohydrates, the methodology and the force
field may be readily extended to lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids. The generality of the
parameters is exemplified by the utilization of a common set of terms for α-and βcarbohydrate anomers. When combined with appropriate charge sets, these common terms
provide a means of predicting the relative energies of interconverting ring forms. Not
surprisingly, for nonpolar molecules the parameters derived by fitting to gas-phase B3LYP/
6-31++G(2d,2p) data successfully reproduced the QM rotational energies. In addition, the
force field was able to reproduce solid state ring puckering parameters, ring inter-proton
torsion angles and distances, solution phase populations of the ω-angle, and scalar 3Jcoupling constants for the H5—C5—C6—H6R/S atoms in representative carbohydrates. In
highly polar molecules, however, the percentage errors in the torsional energies were
occasionally high, and in the case of carboxylate ions the gas-phase QM-derived parameters
failed to reproduce solution phase conformational properties. The expectation that
condensed phase simulations, employing dihedral terms fit to gas-phase QM data, can
reproduce solution rotamer populations is founded on the assumption that internal
electrostatic polarization is relatively independent of internal rotation, either in the gas or
KIRSCHNER et al.
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
condensed phases. This is frequently a reasonable assumption for relatively nonpolar
molecules, but we found that as molecular polarity increased the observed condensed phase
rotamer populations began to deviate from experimental expectations. This is clearly the
case for ionic systems, for which it was necessary, in the absence of an explicit treatment of
polarizability, to adjust the dihedral terms empirically to achieve accurate behavior in the
aqueous solution. However, the empirically-corrected rotational energy curves were shown
to differ only modestly from the gas-phase QM data. For such systems an iterative
procedure, which involved explicit solvent MD simulations, was adopted to generate the
torsion parameters. The inadequacy of the gas-phase QM-derived torsion terms when
applied to highly polar molecules may be attributed to the absence of charge polarizability in
the classical force field. The development of a polarizable version of GLYCAM is
Acknowledgments
RJW would like to thank Dr. Dusan Uhrin for insightful discussions.
Contract/grant sponsor: National Institutes of Health; contract/grant numbers: RR05357, GM55230
Contract/grant sponsor: Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory (EMSL) at Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory (PNNL); contract/grant numbers: 9607