A Survey on Demand Response Programs
in Smart Grids: Pricing Methods
and Optimization Algorithms
John S. Vardakas, Member, IEEE, Nizar Zorba, Member, IEEE, and Christos V. Verikoukis, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—The smart grid concept continues to evolve and
various methods have been developed in order to enhance
the energy efﬁciency of the electricity infrastructure. Demand
Response (DR) is considered as the most cost-effective and
reliable solution for the smoothing of the demand curve, when
the system is under stress. DR refers to a procedure that is
applied to motivate changes in the customers’ power consumption
habits, in response to incentives regarding the electricity prices.
In this paper, we provide a comprehensive review of various DR
schemes and programs, based on the motivations offered to the
consumers in order to participate in the program. We classify the
proposed DR schemes according to their control mechanism, to
the motivations offered to reduce the power consumption and to
the DR decision variable. We also present various optimization
models for the optimal control of the DR strategies that have
been proposed so far. These models are also categorized, based
on the target of the optimization procedure. The key aspects
that should be considered in the optimization problem are the
system’s constraints and the computational complexity of the
applied optimization algorithm.
Index Terms—Smart grid, demand response, pricing methods,
optimization algorithms.
I. INTRODUCTION
MART grid uses new technologies, such as intelligent
and autonomous controllers, advanced software for data
management, and two-way communications between power
utilities and consumers, in order to create an automated and
distributed advanced energy delivery network . In the next
generation power systems, these intelligent technologies are
incorporated across the entire system, from power generation,
transmission and distribution, to consumption at the electricity
customers’ premises, with the aim of improving the efﬁciency,
reliability, and safety of the system .
One of the key objectives in smart grid is the transition to an
energy-efﬁcient power grid . Energy efﬁciency is obtained
whenever volatile demands and renewable energy are managed, through the utilization of scalable information processing architectures. The concept of Demand Side Management
(DSM) includes all activities which target to the alteration of
the consumer’s demand proﬁle, in time and/or shape, to make
it match the supply, while aiming at the efﬁcient incorporation
of renewable energy resources . Furthermore, DSM can be
also can be employed to facilitate the integration of distributed
Barcelona,
( ).
N. Zorba is with QMIC, Al-Doha, Qatar, (e-mail: )
C. V. Verikoukis is with the Telecommunications Technological Centre of
Catalonia (CTTC), Barcelona, Spain, (e-mail: ).
generation that can yield signiﬁcant savings both in the energy
generation and transmission . Other advantages of DSM
include the blackouts elimination, the reduction of operational
costs and decreased CO2 emissions .
Currently, one of the main DSM activities is Demand
Response (DR), since DR is considered as a subset of the
broader category of DSM, together with energy-efﬁciency and
conservation programs , , . The US Department of
Energy deﬁned DR as “a tariff or program established to
motivate changes in electric use by end-use customers, in
response to changes in the price of electricity over time, or to
give incentive payments designed to induce lower electricity
use at times of high market prices or when grid reliability
is jeopardized” . Based on this deﬁnition, the idea is to
make DR attractive to consumers, in order to manage their
power usage preferences in a way that will beneﬁt not only
themselves, but also the power grid . This customerenabled power consumption management is the key smart-grid
feature that enables the adaptation of power demands to time
pricing or incentives, while improves the efﬁciency and the
reliability of the power grid , . It should be noted that
some researchers and practitioners consider that DSM and DR
are interchangeable , .
The design of efﬁcient DR programs is a crucial component
for the smart grid deployment . To this end, the study of
DR is an important issue and the various types of DR schemes
and actual programs should be identiﬁed, in order to extract
the advantages and limitations of these schemes. In this paper,
we present various DR schemes that have been proposed in
the literature. Speciﬁcally, we organize the DR schemes into
three basic categories, as shown in Fig. 1. In the ﬁrst category,
DR schemes are classiﬁed according to the control mechanism
into centralized and distributed . In the centralized mode,
consumers communicate directly to the power utility, without
interacting with each other; while in the distributed mode
interactions between users provide information to the utility
about the total consumption .
In the second category, DR schemes are classiﬁed according
to the motivations offered to consumers in order to reduce their
power consumption . In general, these motivations break
down into time-based DR and incentive-based DR. In the timebased DR (also known as price-based DR , ), consumers
are granted time-varying prices that are deﬁned based on the
electricity cost in different time periods. On the other hand,
customers in incentive-based DR schemes are offered ﬁxed or
time-varying payments, in order to motivate the reduction of
Fig. 1. Classiﬁcation of DR programs.
their electricity usage during periods of system stress , but
they are also under speciﬁc constraints or they are penalized
for not participating in the program.
Finally in the third category, DR schemes use the decision
variable to identify task-scheduling and energy-managementbased DR schemes (also known as energy or power scheduling
DR schemes) . In task scheduling DR, the key function is
the control on the activation time of the requested load, which
can be shifted in peak-demand periods . Different power
consumption in peak-demand hours is achieved by the energymanagement-based DR schemes through reducing the power
consumption of speciﬁc loads .
In recent years, there has been an extensive research effort
on the optimization and control of the smart grid. Fig. 2
presents the increased trend on the development of optimization models based on DR programs (indexed by Google
Scholar) within the last 15 years. These efforts are comprehensively reviewed in this paper, and their key characteristics
are presented, such as the objective function, the applied
optimization technique and the constraints that are used to
formulate the optimization problem. Furthermore, we organize
these optimization models into 5 groups according to the target
of the proposed optimization model. These categories are: a)
minimization of electricity cost, b) maximization of social
welfare, c) minimization of aggregated power consumption,
d) minimization of both electricity cost and aggregated power
consumption, and e) both the maximization of social welfare
and minimization of aggregated power consumption. We also
present game-theoretic methods that have been proposed for
the solution of the demand-response optimization problem.
Moreover, we highlight the optimization methods for two new
smart grid paradigms: Vehicle-to-Grid (V2G) systems and
microgrids . A V2G system is able to provide energy and
ancillary services from an electric vehicle to the grid. This
function is achieved through the utilization of bidirectional
power ﬂows that transfer the discharging energy back to the
grid, or through unidirectional power ﬂows by changing rate
modulation , , . On the other hand, microgrids are
entities that coordinate distributed energy resources, energy
storage devices and electric loads in a decentralized way
 . In a microgrid environment, the controller facilitates
supply side management, demand side management, as well
as voltage and frequency control . In a grid-connected
operational mode, these parameters follow the same policy
that is used in the main grid. However, in an islanded mode,
microgrids are independently controlled and therefore they
efﬁciently deal with events like faults and voltage sags .
Other surveys on DR can be found in the literature -
 . In , the authors study the state of DR technology
in electricity markets, and the magnitude of energy savings
under DR and other efﬁciency standards that have been used in
electricity markets. A description of existing DR architectures
is presented in with a report on their requirements, bene-
ﬁts and costs, and also a brief review of DR implementations
in USA, Europe and China. Furthermore, authors in 
perform a bibliographic survey on pricing signals in electricity
distribution systems, while brieﬂy reviewing some demandside programs. Recently, a survey on DR programs is presented
in , where authors present the enabling technologies and
systems, such as smart meters, energy controllers, and communication systems that are required for the application of DR
in smart grids. Our contribution complements these existing
surveys by presenting a) an overall look and classiﬁcation of
DR schemes and actual DR programs, and recent research
approaches that apply these schemes, b) optimization methods
for the minimization of electricity cost/power consumption as
well as the proﬁts maximization, and c) the application of
optimization methods in V2G systems and microgrids.
The rest of this work is organized as follows. Section II
provides the DR background by discussing the objectives of
DR schemes, management issues, types of consumers that
participate in DR programs and adversative conditions in
DR implementation. Section III presents different categories
of DR schemes that have been presented in the literature.
In Section IV we tackle an extensive survey of the major
optimization models that have been proposed for smart grid
environments. Finally, Section V provides concluding remarks
for this work, together with the lessons learned and future
VARDAKAS et al.: A SURVEY ON DEMAND RESPONSE PROGRAMS IN SMART GRIDS: PRICING METHODS AND OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHMS
Fig. 2. Increased trend of number of optimization models on DR programs.
directions. Furthermore, a list of abbreviations used in this
survey is provided in Appendix A.
II. BACKGROUND: DR CONCEPTS
A. Main objectives of DR
The main objectives of the application of a DR scheme are
summarized as follows:
• Reduction of the total power consumption, so that mutual
proﬁt for the power utility and the consumers is achieved.
This reduction should occur not only in the consumer’s
demand, but also in the losses of the transmission and
distribution systems .
• Reduction of the total needed power generation, which is
the main result of the aforementioned objective. Under
the successful implementation of a DR scheme, the
need of activating expensive-to-run power plants to meet
peak demands is eliminated, while it enables the energy
providers to meet their pollution obligations .
• Change of the demand in order to follow the available
supply, especially in regions with high penetration of
renewable energy sources, such as solar panels and wind
turbines, in order to maximize the overall power-system’s
reliability .
• Reduction or even elimination of overloads in the distribution system. This objective is met by the operation of
a Distribution Management System (DMS) that monitors
the operation of the distribution system, and takes near
real-time decisions that enhance the reliability of the
system .
A DR scheme should also consider security mechanisms,
for the protection of personally identiﬁable energy usage
information that is collected by smart meters for the DR
provision . Furthermore, DR schemes should target on
the reduction of loads in the distribution system to unload
transmission lines, in order to prevent emergency conditions
 . Moreover, a DR scheme should be designed in such a
way that attracts the interest of consumers to participate in the
program, through the provision of incentives to change their
power consumption habits, while at the same time minimizing
the consumers’ discomfort .
B. DR Management
The implementation of a DR method targets on the control
of the customer’s power consuming behavior, in order to meet
the aforementioned objectives that are presented in Section
II.A . The adjustment of the customers’ electric usage
is realized as a response to changes in electricity price over
time or when system reliability is threatened. This function
is executed through the cooperation of four main participants
 , as illustrated in Fig. 3: a) energy consumers that take part
in the DR program, b) a DR aggregator that is connected to
the customers and executes the DR program, c) a Distribution
System Operator (DSO) that controls the distribution grid
and d) an Independent System Operator (ISO) or Regional
Transmission Operator (RTO). In general, the process of a DR
program starts by the ISO/RTO that determines the preferred
demand volume and the time duration that it is offered. This
information is submitted to the DR aggregators, who then
select the participating customers based on their availability.
By considering the number of customers that agree with the
proposed DR, the aggregator calculates the total demand and
reports back to the ISO/RTO. In order to evade uncertainty
problems in the distribution system, the aggregators may
initially report the total DR to the DSO, who then informs
the most available substations about the total power demand
 . In this case, the DR calculations are performed at the DR
aggregators, and they are then used by the DSO for executing
optimization procedures or for discovering problems in the
distribution grid.
The aforementioned model of the four participants is general, and it may also involve a number of agents that interact
in competition or in cooperation. In these multi-agent systems, distributed decision making is implemented either in a
local domain or inside the entire system . The decision
making process is a result of negotiations and trading on
an electronic market and involves procedures like DR and
distributed generation . There are several examples of
multi-agent energy management systems that are proposed and
described in the literature. PowerMatcher is a hierarchical
market based algorithm, in which multiple agents that control
electronic devices can bid for energy, by considering their
own bidding strategy. A similar multi-agent system, known
as the Dezent project, is proposed in , where scalability is
improved by incorporating balancing group managers instead
of a central market place. A more scalable system is presented
in , where agents not only use price information but
also information about the environment and current status for
their bidding strategies. Due to the nature of the multi-agent
systems, they are well-ﬁt in microgrid environments , .
C. DR Applicability
A DR program could increase its effectiveness by taking
into consideration the types of consumers that are applied to.
Typically, consumers are divided into the following three main
categories, as illustrated in Fig. 4: residential, commercial and
industrial consumers .
1) Residential consumers: The design of an efﬁcient DR
program for residential users is far more complicated, com-
Fig. 3. Main participants in a DR program.
pared to industrial customers, mainly due to their near-random
consumption patterns that require vigilant modeling. This task
can be achieved by designing residential load management
programs that either reduce or shift power consumption .
The reduction of power consumption is realized through the
encouragement of energy-aware consumption patterns and the
construction of buildings with high energy efﬁciency .
However, by shifting consumption from peak demand to offpeak hours, a signiﬁcant reduction of the peak-to average ratio
can be achieved. Consequently, there are possibly abundant
opportunities for the DR application in domestic areas. Nevertheless, the applied DR program should not consider that
all customers have the same power consuming behavior. As
reported in , residential consumers can be grouped into
different categories: a) short range consumers, who are only
concerned about the power price at the current time instant,
b) real-world advancing customers, with consumer perception
in current and past periods only, c) real world-postponing
consumers, whose perception depends on current and future
prices only, d) real-world mixed consumers, who are a mixture
of postponing and advancing customers, and e) long range
consumers, who are able to shift their consumption over a
wide range of time.
In addition to the consumer’s response to the DR program,
other factors should be taken into account during the design
of DR programs for residential areas. The advent of Plugin Hybrid Electric Vehicles (PHEVs) is expected to place a
signiﬁcant load on the power grid . A smart scheduling of
PHEVs charging hours (e. g. during the night) can reduce their
impact on the grid. Another issue that should be addressed in
a DR program is the proliferation of locally generated power
at the residential level. This local generation provides the
customers with the opportunity to supply their excess electrical
power back to the grid.
2) Commercial consumers: Typically, commercial buildings are identical in terms of energy consumption patterns,
which are determined by weather conditions, design styles,
and operational behaviors. Furthermore, these types of consumers can be considered autonomous, regarding the way
they response to electricity prices . In such environments,
the main power consuming processes are Heating, Ventilation
and Air-Conditioning (HVAC), lighting systems and electronic
equipment. The reduction of the power consumption on these
heavy loads can be achieved by either the adoption of energyefﬁcient building technologies, and/or by the control of the
buildings’ energy consumption behavior through price elasticity of power demand. By applying a DR program in a commercial environment, building operators or their automated
control systems make modiﬁcations to building operations,
with the aim of reducing the building’s total electric load
during peak electric usage times. These modiﬁcations vary,
depending on the consuming process. HVAC systems usually
use automated operational DR functions that are based on
temperature and/or air distribution adjustments, in order to
achieve power consumption reductions . Lighting DR
strategies depend on the season of the year and the time of day.
For instance, on a summer day the demand reduction in over-lit
buildings can provide savings, which can be further increased
by cooling savings, since lighting produces heat . For the
results of the applicability of DR methods on various case
studies regarding commercial buildings, the interested reader
can refer to - .
3) Industrial consumers: Industrial plants are high energy
consumers, with typical peak loads of hundreds of MWs
at high voltage levels. In such cases, power and voltage
efﬁciency are extremely vital. Besides, many manufacturing
processes have critical temporal dependencies, which must
be scheduled with high timing precision. In contrast to the
residential consumers, where it is sufﬁcient to control loads
based on near-real time data, in many industrial environments millisecond-scale monitor and control is essential .
Furthermore, security issues are particularly important in the
industry. The access to information regarding the load proﬁles
or load shapes is highly conﬁdential and competition-sensitive,
since it may indicate the type of equipment that is active and
in what time periods. These requirements are vital for the
innocuous operation of the industry equipment. Hence, for
many years various industrial facilities participate in actions
that are very familiar to the smart grid applications, frequently
through the application of dynamic pricing models. A number
of examples of such activities are listed in . However,
intelligent DR methods may increase the reliability of the
industrial system and the economic efﬁciency of the electricity
infrastructure , . The application of these methods
may also beneﬁt the power utilities, through the collaboration
with the industrial partners, to analyze DR and determine
optimal solutions for the response at peak-demand hours, and
to provide downstream beneﬁts through end-use monitoring
 . The results of the application of DR in different sections
of industry can be found in (industrial refrigerated warehouses), (meat industry), (cement industry) and 
(food industry).
D. Adversative conditions in DR implementation
The execution of a DR program may have unpredicted
results when speciﬁc conditions are encountered. An important
drawback occurs when the end users consume more power
than their original level of reported consumption. This increase
in power consumption is usually caused by loads such as
water heaters, air conditions or electric stoves, and is called
VARDAKAS et al.: A SURVEY ON DEMAND RESPONSE PROGRAMS IN SMART GRIDS: PRICING METHODS AND OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHMS
Fig. 4. Share of electricity consumed in 2011.
Cold Load PickUp (CLPU) . On the other hand, voltage
violations may occur when Voltage/Var control is applied in
the distribution system. A possible solution to this deﬁciency
is the integration of Voltage/Var control applications and DR,
which may signiﬁcantly increase the productiveness of the
distribution management system . Furthermore, violations
associated to the DR activation may be the result of asymmetric DR balancing between phases. This may lead to the
increase of neutral wire current and three-phase bus voltage
imbalance .
The installation of smart meters in the consumers’ premises
allows the implementation of more dynamic pricing schemes,
for the triggering of the peak-demand reduction. However, the
application of such pricing schemes to a wide range of consumers may result in several important implications, regarding
the consumers’ reaction to these rates (especially low-income
consumers) and the possible volatility in electricity prices.
This is mainly due to low-income consumers, who have a
signiﬁcantly lower level of price-elasticity than higher-income
consumers. An interesting article that considers these issues
can be found in .
III. CLASSIFICATION OF DR MODELS
The design of DR programs in a smart grid environment has
drawn much research attention in recent years. Fig. 1 illustrates
the classiﬁcation of these research efforts; this classiﬁcation
is based on the control mechanism of the DR procedure,
on the motivations offered to customers to reduce or shift
their demands, or on the DR decision variable. The following
subsections present the main characteristics of each one of
these DR schemes.
A. DR methods based on the control mechanism
This class of DR schemes can be further classiﬁed into
centralized and distributed programs , according to where
the response decision is made. In centralized programs, response decisions for load activation or load scheduling are
only tackled by the power utility, through considering that a
number of users form a group . However, the operation
and control of the grid in a centralized manner is highly
difﬁcult in complex and large grids. As an alternative, in
large grids the communication between energy supplies and
consumers can be distributed . In such distributed schemes,
the power utility’s main contribution is the transmission of
price signals; users can coordinate directly with each other,
in order to achieve an aggregated load reduction. In the
following subsections we present more details on centralized
and distributed DR schemes. Based on the aforementioned description, in centralized schemes communication connections
are only necessary between the utility and the consumers (Fig.
5a), while distributed schemes require the additional consumer
interconnection (Fig. 5b).
1) Centralized schemes: In a centralized scheme, the DR
procedure is monitored and coordinated by a central controller,
who collects demand information from consumers, and DR
decisions are then made for the demand scheduling. For
example, in and an aggregator is used in order to
derive scheduling decisions. Centralized management of loads
is an effective solution for controlling buildings ( , )
and charging stations for PHEVs - . For instance, a
centralized method for PHEV charging is proposed in 
that schedules PHEV charging times based on weights, which
deﬁne critical and non-critical demand periods.
Central controllers are used in islanded microgrids that have
been introduced as a coordinated approach. They are used to
simplify the penetration of distributed generation units into
the utility network . In microgrids, different power microsources operate as a single system that provides energy to a
cluster of loads in a local area . The main function of the
microgrid is the conservation of power balance independently
of the main grid. The application of DR in microgrids has
been studied in several articles ( - ). For example, in
 , an active control load strategy is applied in a microgrid
environment, which is triggered by the voltage level in the
microgrid and it enables the full exploitation of the installed
renewable energy sources.
2) Distributed schemes: Distributed DR control programs
consider that demand information is not centrally collected
and consumers can directly access indicators of the grid’s
state . By using this information, consumers are able to
react, if the system’s state is critical. Many researchers have
been inspired by the distributive nature of the Internet, in
order to provide efﬁcient control mechanisms in smart grid
environments - . In , authors present a distributed
scheme that is based on congestion pricing in Internet trafﬁc
control. Consumers receive only pricing information from the
utility; this information is a function of the current aggregated
load, while it is used by the consumers to adapt their loads.
This is achieved by using a mechanism that is based on
decentralized congestion control mechanism for IP networks.
This scheme is also used in and it is applied to a
distributed charging system for PHEVs. In this scheme, the
user’s preference is modeled through a parameter for the
willingness to pay, which can be seen as an indicator of
differential quality of service. A similar study is presented
Distributed schemes are also used in cooperation with
other mechanisms that target on the control of crucial system
parameters. In , a distributed DR method is integrated
with a volt/var control scheme that provides improved voltage
Fig. 5. Centralized and distributed control mechanisms.
control and reduction of power consumption. Additionally,
in the problem of frequency control is discussed and
authors argue that frequency-sensitive demand-response could
be achieved in such power systems. Furthermore, the presence
of distributed energy resources is considered in ; authors
provide distributed algorithms for the coordination and control
of both DR resources and distributed energy resources.
The research articles from literature presented in this subsection are summarized in Table I, for both centralized and
distributed schemes. Section IV presents several other research
efforts that have been made on both these schemes that use
optimization methods.
B. DR methods based on offered motivations
Another way to distinguish DR schemes is by considering
the motivation method that is offered to customers for their
efforts to reduce or shift their power demands. There exist two
main classes within this group: time-based DR and incentivebased DR. The former group is usually more suited for residential customers, while incentive-based programs are more
suited for industrial consumers . For example, a study
that is based on real data from several industrial and largescale commercial customers proved that incentive-based DR
programs are more suitable, through the provision of explicit
bill credits or payments for pre-contracted or measured load
reductions . Furthermore, the application of a time-based
DR program and an incentive-based DR-program to a 24bus IEEE Reliability Test System showed that the offered
incentives have key impact on customer habit formation in
response to DR programs . The research articles from
literature that are presented in the following two subsections
are summarized in Table II and Table III, respectively.
1) Time-based DR: These programs offer customers timevarying prices that are deﬁned based on the cost of electricity
in different time periods . Customers receive this information and have a propensity for consuming less electrical
power in time periods when prices are high. There are various
pricing schemes that have been proposed for DSM, which
are either retail price structures or DR-based programs -
 . In the former case, either ﬁxed prices or consumptionbased electricity rates are offered to consumers in order to
reduce their electricity usage. However, customers do not
participate in the determination of the prices, while no economic incentives are offered to the consumers to respond to
hourly changes in electricity prices . On the other hand,
in DR-based programs the reduction of the electricity usage is
achieved with the contribution of customers, who respond to
motivation signals, being sent from the energy provider .
In the following paragraphs we present the different pricing
schemes, by ﬁrstly introducing the retail pricing schemes and
then the DR-based programs.
Flat pricing has been used in traditional energy systems
and has been ingrained in the users’ mind. Under this scheme,
customers know that the only way to reduce their electricity
bills is by simply using less electricity throughout the duration
of the day. In some cases, seasonal ﬂat pricing can be applied,
where prices are ﬁxed within a season but they can change
from one season to another .
Time-Of-Use (TOU) pricing is the application of ﬂat pricing
in different time periods. Under a TOU pricing scheme, prices
are retained ﬁxed within different pricing periods, which can
be different hours within a day or different days within a week
 . For example, in California, USA, TOU is used for large
commercial customers, who are charged different rates for
the energy they consume in three different periods: off-peak,
mid-peak and peak. During the off-peak period the customers
are charged $0.05/KWh, during the mid-peak $0.078/KWh
and during the peak $0.099/KWh . TOU tariffs are also
used as incentives in a household simulation model that
generates realistic load proﬁles in . Based on this model,
bill savings are estimated, when the household invest in the
smart appliance technology. However, the effectiveness of such
schemes to the reduction of the total power consumption is
limited, since customers do not receive any practical incentives
to reduce their demands. This customers’ response to TOU
schemes is also triggered by the fact that they receive attractive
off-peak prices, but relatively high prices in peak-demand
hours . A study in showed that TOU programs offer
the smallest reduction in the peak demand among all tested
Critical Peak Pricing (CPP) has similarities with TOU
pricing, regarding the ﬁxed prices in different time periods.
However, the price for at least one period can change, either
regularly or in most cases, due to occasions of system stress
 . The participant consumers receive notiﬁcation of the
VARDAKAS et al.: A SURVEY ON DEMAND RESPONSE PROGRAMS IN SMART GRIDS: PRICING METHODS AND OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHMS
CLASSIFICATION OF DR SCHEMES BASED ON CONTROL MECHANISM.
new energy price, usually a day ahead. As in the case of
TOU, CPP is not economically efﬁcient for the consumers,
due to the preset prices. Furthermore, the ratio of on-peak
to off-peak price is higher on CPP event days than in a
TOU program . On the other hand, from the energy
provider point of view, signiﬁcant load reductions during
critical periods can be achieved under this pricing scheme
 , but with high probability of negative net beneﬁts .
The implementation of a CPP program in California, USA,
demonstrated respectable responses to the state’s announced
critical events . A variation of CPP is the Extreme Day
CPP, in which a critical peak price is applied to critical peak
hours, but there is no variable tariff on other days .
In Peak Load Pricing (PLP) the day is divided into a number
of periods and different prices are determined for each period.
These prices are announced to the customers ahead of each
day . The price value for each time period is calculated
based on the average power consumption of the consumers
in each time period, in order to maximize the payoff of the
energy provider . Also, the price calculation targets on the
demand shift away from peak-demand periods, by expecting a
reaction from the customers’ side according to the high price.
A similar to the PLP pricing method is the adaptive pricing,
where prices are not announced to customers at the beginning
of day. Instead, based on the power consumptions on previous
time periods, the energy provider calculates prices in real-time
and announces them to customers at the beginning of each time
period .
Under the Peak Day Rebates (PDR) pricing scheme customers decide whether they respond to a critical event. Specifically, customers are under their standard tariff, but they have
the opportunity to receive a rebate payment for any load
reduction they can achieve below an estimated baseline load
threshold . The results of a pilot study conducted in
Connecticut, USA, showed that PDR is more advantageous
compared to TOU, in terms of power reduction and consumer’s
satisfaction . On the other hand, the same study showed
that CPP is more beneﬁcial that PDR. Furthermore, due to the
fact that the baseline load threshold must be calculated for each
customer and for every critical event, additional resources are
needed. Besides, it is possible that some customers will receive
rebate for the reduction of their power consumption that they
would have made, regardless of the critical event . An
experiment involving 123 residential consumers of the city
of Anaheim, CA, USA, showed that the rebate rewarded to
consumers is pre-determined to be very high, which does not
reveal the actual supply-demand balance at different operating
conditions .
Another pricing scheme that is based on voluntary participation of customers is the Vickrey-Clarke-Groves (VCG) scheme.
Customers are requested to provide their power demand information, which is then used by a centralized mechanism for
the price calculation, for each time period . Payments are
provided to the customers in a way that they have motivations
to provide their demand information truthfully. The VCG
pricing scheme has been used in order to reduce the total
power consumption , or to shift it to off-peak time periods
Real-Time Pricing (RTP) requires the maximum customer
participation. Under an RTP scheme, the energy provider
announces electricity prices on a rolling basis; these prices are
determined and announced before the start of each time period
(e.g., 15 minutes beforehand) . Therefore, the successful
implementation of an RTP scheme relies on the two-way
communication capabilities of the smart grid, which together
with an Energy Management Controller (EMC) installed at
the customer’s premises, signiﬁcantly increases the decision
taking velocity . EMCs support continuous ﬂow of data
and are based on the consumer’s preferences. The consumers
make smart decisions to modify the energy usage across the
building, which will guarantee higher reductions in the electricity bill. The energy provider also makes decisions to deﬁne
the prices for the upcoming time period. These decisions are
inﬂuenced by random events, the total power consumption and
the response of the consumers to the previous prices .
RTP mechanisms have already been applied to large industrial
and commercial customers . However, in the residential
domain, RTP schemes have small implementation success,
since most consumers are risk-averse and see the necessity
of taking systematic electricity decisions as an important
drawback , . In addition, in some cases the cost
savings resulting from the participation in an RTP program
will exceed the costs imposed on customers to follow the
program , .
One of the main challenges for the implementation of an
RTP scheme is that it requires continuous real-time communication between the energy provider and the customers, which
is not attractive from the user perspective. . Furthermore,
the mass ﬂow of data that is exchanged between the energy
provider and the EMCs, the lack of efﬁcient smart metering
and the high complexity could limit the effectiveness of such
a scheme. The Day-Ahead RTP (DA-RTP) is an alternative
RTP-based solution, wherein the next day’s predicted real time
prices are announced to the customers beforehand and they are
billed for their consumption based on the price of this dayahead , . A test system with 320 customers in Ontario, Canada showed that the DA-RTP scheme achieved ﬂatter
demand curve, lower losses, lower peak-to-peak distance and
higher load factor . Also, the integration of a DR program
based on DA-RTP and Volt/Var control is proposed in ,
where the effects of demand reduction on system voltage are
studied and results show signiﬁcant improvement in system
voltage under the proposed scheme.
The results of the application of the aforementioned timebased DR programs in various markets across the USA are
presented in . Several case studies are tackled, with a
wide range of consumer sizes, program durations and energy
management services. In addition, the authors in outline
the beneﬁts of the applied RTP programs by the American
Electric Power (AEP) in Columbus, Ohio. Similar studies are
presented in , and , where time-based schemes
in North America, in California and in the city of Chicago,
IL, are respectively presented and analyzed.
2) Incentive-based DR: They consist of programs that
offer ﬁxed or time-varying incentives (payments) to customers
that reduce their electricity usage during periods of system
stress . Customer enrollment and response are voluntary,
although some of these programs penalize customers that
fail the contractual response when events are declared. The
incentive-based DR programs can be further sub-categorized
into classical programs and market-based programs, while
they can be offered in both retail and wholesale markets
 . Consumers that participate in classical incentive-based
programs receive participation payments, usually as bill credits or discount rates. In market-based programs, participants
are rewarded with money for their performance, depending
on the amount reduction of electricity usage during critical
conditions.
The Direct Load Control (DLC) is a classical program,
and it enables the power utility to remotely cycle or turn off
consumers’ electrical equipment . These loads (typically
appliances such as air-conditions and water heaters) may be
directly dispatched by the power utility, based on the balance
between consumption and generation. The load control is
feasible through the installation of switches at the customer’s
premises that communicate with the power utility. In some
cases, the power entity can also send control signals to
the customer in order to inﬂuence the control action. DLC
programs are mainly offered to residential or small commercial customers and they can be normally deployed within a
relatively short notice . Consumers that participate in a
DLC program receive incentive payments in advance, in order
to reduce their consumption below predeﬁned thresholds. DLC
has been considered in various DR programs - . For
instance, a DLC program is considered in , which targets
on the reduction of the power consumption in an in-home
environment, where both real-time and scheduled appliances
are considered.
Interruptible/Curtailable (I/C) load, where upfront incentives are also
provided to participant consumers. An I/C program considers
curtailment options, e.g. curtail a speciﬁc part of electric
load or curtail the total consumption to a predeﬁned level.
Furthermore, they provide a rate discount or bill credit by
agreeing to reduce load during system emergencies .
Customers that do not respond to these options receive a
number of penalties that are deﬁned in the program’s terms and
conditions . These programs are traditionally offered to
larger customers with power consumption that range from 200
KW, for the baseline interruptible program, to 3 MW .
Emergency DR Programs (EDRPs) are a kind of Marketbased programs, but can be also considered as a combination of DLC and I/C programs, since they provide incentive
payments to consumers for reducing their power consump-
CLASSIFICATION OF TIME-BASED DR SCHEMES.
tion during reliability triggered events . Consumers can
choose not to curtail and therefore forgo the payments, which
are usually speciﬁed beforehand. EDRP has been included in
the programs offered by the New York ISO, which manages
New York’s electricity grid : participants that are able
to reduce consumption are subscribed to the EDRP and they
are called during emergency conditions. The EDRP pays for
energy during times of emergency, but does not pay for
capacity . In , the authors propose an event-driven
EDRP scheme that prevents a power system from experiencing
voltage collapse. The avoidance of a critical event is ensured
by triggering DR, based on a table of DR actions that contains
information regarding locations and the amount of electricity
that are needed in these locations. However, several real cases
of EDRP operation have pointed out that an excessive shedding
of the EDRP could lead to unpredicted power oscillations,
which complicate the sequential generation control .
Another Market-based program is the Capacity Market
Program (CMP) that is offered to consumers who are able
to provide predeﬁned load reductions to replace conventional
generation or delivery resources . For the reduction of
power consumption, customers that participate in a CMP
usually receive a day-ahead notiﬁcation and they are penalized
if they do not contribute to the load reduction . In 
an economic model of both CMP and I/C programs has been
developed and a simulation study has been conducted that
reveal the strong relationship of the incentive-based program
and the corresponding penalties, with the satisfaction level of
both consumers and electricity suppliers.
Demand Bidding (DB) is another market-based program
(also known as negawatt program) and it is usually applied
to large consumers, who offer curtailment capacity bids in the
electricity wholesale market . A bid is accepted if it is
less than the market price, where the consumer must curtail
his load by the amount speciﬁed in the bid, otherwise he faces
penalties . The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
(FERC) considers that demand bidding “will be less costly
than a program where an end user receives payments greater
than the market-clearing price to reduce its demand”, .
Authors in argue that it is a debate whether this idea is
acceptable, since the amount of the energy reduction is mainly
based on the consumption history of the bidder; due to this
fact, there are market designing problems that may arise. For
example, the Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT)
market has applied a balancing up load program, where
demand bidding is permitted through the submission of formal
bids from the consumers . However, the capacity payment
has not been sufﬁcient enough to encourage consumers into
VARDAKAS et al.: A SURVEY ON DEMAND RESPONSE PROGRAMS IN SMART GRIDS: PRICING METHODS AND OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHMS
CLASSIFICATION OF INCENTIVE-BASED DR PROGRAMS.
submitting formal offers. A possible solution to this problem
could be the DR-aided DB , which is a combination of
DR (by consumers) and demand biding that allows energy
retailers to request from consumers to curtail loads, in order
to reduce peak demands.
As in the case of demand bidding programs, the consumers
following the Ancillary Service Market (ASM) subfamily are
allowed to bid on load curtailments, but the bids refer to the
ancillary service market. If the bids are accepted, participating
consumers are paid for committing to be on standby. In case
the load curtailments are needed, the participants are notiﬁed
by the power operator and they are paid for the energy provision . For example, the Midwest ISO selected $3500 per
MWh as “the average cost to consumers of an interruption of
ﬁrm demand”and the highest price on its ancillary services demand curve . In addition, California ISO accepts bids for
ancillary services through a demand responsiveness program
and under speciﬁc terms and conditions . Furthermore,
New York ISO includes ancillary services through a demand
side ancillary services program and it provides three different
services: 10- Minute Spinning (Synchronous) Reserve, 10-
Minute Total (includes 10-Minute Synchronous and 10-Minute
Non- Synchronous Reserve), and 30-Minute Reserve Total
(Synchronous and Non-Synchronous) .
Apart from their classiﬁcation to classical and market-based
programs, the aforementioned incentive-based programs can
be also classiﬁed as voluntary, mandatory and market clearing
programs . Voluntary programs are DLC and EDRP and
therefore participants are not penalized for not contributing
to the program. Mandatory programs are I/C and CMP, where
participants that do not curtail loads receive penalties. Demand
bidding and ASM are market clearing programs, where usually
large customers inform the utility operator for the amount of
load that they are willing to curtail at posted prices.
Incentive-based programs not belonging to the aforementioned categories have been also proposed as parts of DR
programs in other research efforts. An incentive-based model
implemented at end-user’s premises to curtailing/shifting electric loads to the right time of the day has been presented in
 . This model targets on spreading out the demand proﬁle
and allowing the utilization of renewable energy sources. In
 , a coupon incentive-based DR program is presented
that exploits the capabilities of mobile communication and
smart grid technologies. This scheme preserves a simple
ﬂat retail rate structure, while it also provides a voluntary
incentive-based structure to trigger demand reduction, instead
of paying the high wholesale price. In , authors propose
an incentive-based DR scheme that covers the in-home load
management with the objective to control appliances, such
as air conditioning, water heaters, clothe-dryers and electric
vehicles. This method considers that appliances have different
priorities, depending on the degree of necessity of use. Finally,
the interested reader may refer to for an overview of
DR programs (both price- and incentive-based) that have been
implemented in competitive electricity markets.
C. DR methods based on the decision variable
DR methods can be also sub-classiﬁed according to the
decision variable into two main groups: the ﬁrst group refers to
DR programs that decide when to activate the requested loads,
while DR programs in the second group decide the amount of
energy can be allocated to each consumer (or appliance) during
each time period . The research articles from literature that
are presented in the following two subsections are summarized
in Table IV.
1) Task scheduling DR methods: The key function of these
DR programs is the control of the activation time of the
requested loads. Two types of loads are considered: mustrun (or non-schedulable) loads that cannot tolerate any activation (e.g. illumination or refrigerators) and schedulable loads
that can be stopped, adjusted, or shifted to other time slots
(e.g. water-heaters or PHEVs) . Other parameters that
are taken into account are related to the available energy,
predeﬁned deadlines and operating times of the loads .
The main target of these DR programs is to reduce the
power consumption in peak-demand hours by shifting loads
to off-peak hours. This is typically realized by using a target
power level that should not be reached at peak-demand hours.
Such a target power level is used in , as a method
based on communication protocols in order to achieve uniform
overall power consumption. Furthermore, the current power
consumption is used in order to decide the scheduling of power
requests in , where two power demand control policies are
proposed and corresponding analytical models are presented.
The ﬁrst policy assumes that a power controller activates
immediately or postpones power requests, based on the current
power consumption. In the second policy, a new request is
activated immediately if the total power consumption is lower
than a threshold, else it is queued.
The shifting of the activation time should be followed by
electricity bill reductions or incentive provisions. In a
direct load scheduling algorithm is proposed, that mediates
between the central control model of DLC and RTP. In this
scheme, costumers voluntarily release the control of their loads
to a central controller, so that their energy use is manipulated
to follow a desired demand proﬁle closely. A DR formulation
that takes into account both must-run and scheduled services
is presented in , by considering the DA-RTP pricing
scheme. The problem of optimally scheduling a set of appliances is mapped to the multiple knapsack method and uniformity in the home energy proﬁle is achieved. In addition, a TOU
pricing scheme is used in , which deﬁnes the energy price
in two different scenarios: the Power-Constrained, Minimum-
Cost Scheduling with Fixed Prices scenario considers that
boundaries for the total power consumption of the consumer,
while the Minimum-Cost Scheduling with Power-Dependent
Variable Prices scenario assumes that the electrical energy
price is also a function of the total power usage of the
In the literature, there is a large number of research articles
that target on the optimization of the task scheduling procedure
in order to minimize the total power consumption and/or to
maximize the social welfare. These methods are presented in
Section IV.
2) Energy-management-based DR methods: The main objective of energy-management-based DR programs is to reduce
the power consumption of speciﬁc loads, so that the total
power consumption in peak-demand hours is reduced .
This is realized by controlling the appliance’s operation to
consume less power during system stress. For example, in
a summer day an air condition could be adjusted to 25oC
instead of 22oC, thus less power is consumed and people
still feel comfortable. To motivate consumers to control the
power consumption of their appliances, bill reductions or other
incentives are provided by the power utility. The satisfaction
level to the results of energy management is the subject of the
study in , where a power-scheduling scheme is proposed.
This scheme is driven by the Quality of Experience (QoE)
factor that describes the consumer’s satisfaction degree on
the grid’s performance and deﬁnes the social welfare of the
The consideration of schedulable and non-schedulable loads
in an energy-management scheme is taken into account in
 , - . In these studies a task-scheduling scheme
is considered for appliances that consume power in adjustable
time-slots and an energy-management scheme for appliances
that have ﬂexible demands but are non-schedulable. Therefore,
these DR programs decide when to activate a speciﬁc set
of appliances, while they also decide how much energy to
allocate to appliances during each time-slot. In , a water-
ﬁlling based scheduling algorithm is proposed that allows
consumers to shift part of their loads to off-peak hours
in a probabilistic way. This algorithm has low complexity,
since it utilizes statistical information on power consumption,
which is available from the power utility. On the contrary,
a cooperative scheduling approach in requires detailed
and continuously updated information between the utility
company and the consumers. Apart from schedulable and nonschedulable loads, this scheme also considers loads that must
consume a certain amount of power (e.g. rechargeable batteries
and PHEVs). Finally in , a distributed incentive-based
algorithm for scheduling power consumption is presented. The
optimal energy consumption schedule for each consumer is
derived based on an optimization algorithm, while game theory
is used to derive a pricing model that offers a motivation for
consumers to reduce their loads. Optimization methods and
game theoretic analysis have been also used in a number of
DR programs. These programs are presented below, in Section
CLASSIFICATION DR PROGRAMS BASED ON THE DECISION VARIABLE.
IV. OPTIMIZATION: METHODS IN DR PROGRAMS
In this section we review the work on the optimization of
various DR programs and schemes. Given that optimization
is deﬁned as the process of ﬁnding the conditions that give
the maximum beneﬁt or minimum cost of a process ( ),
published studies on optimization of DR programs target
on minimization of the total power consumption and/or the
maximization of the social welfare. The latter term refers
to the utility’s proﬁt (total consumer willingness to pay)
minus the total cost experienced by all the generators and
wastage cost caused by transmission losses . Therefore, the
maximization of the social welfare is achieved by maximizing
the difference of the utility’s proﬁt by total electricity cost.
The target of an optimization problem is to ﬁnd a set of
variables that minimizes (or maximizes) a function (or a set
of functions) of this set of variables, while these variables
are subject to a set of constraints. The set of variables is
known as the design vector, while the function is termed as
the objective function . The design vector is deﬁned by
the variables of the speciﬁc DR problem. For example, in a
task-scheduling scheme the design vector can be determined
by the demand request start time, the operational time of the
load, the type of load (e.g. the type of an appliance in the
consumer’s residence) and the priority of the request. Also, in
an energy-management based scheme, the design vector can be
deﬁned by the load type, the amount of power that is reduced
and the load operational duration under the reduced load. The
objective function is deﬁned based on the desired characteristic
that is optimized, e.g. the total power consumption or the social
welfare. Finally, the constraints are determined based on the
conditions of the DR scheme under study. Typical parameters
that are constraints in an optimization problem refer to the
operation of the system, such as capacity constraints, energy
storage constraints and appliance constraints (e.g. the total
energy required for the operation of an appliance).
Optimization problems can be classiﬁed based on the nature
of the design vector, the objective function and the constraint
functions. For example, if at least one of the objective and
constraint functions is non-linear and if some or all the
variables of the design vector are integers, then the problem is an integer, non-linear programming problem .
Furthermore, based on the deterministic or the stochastic
nature of the variables involved, optimization problems can
be classiﬁed into deterministic and stochastic programming
problems; the latter case deﬁnes optimization problems that
deal with renewable energy sources, due to the stochastic
nature of these sources, or other uncertainties and correlations.
Based on the type of the optimization problem, a technique
is deﬁned for the derivation of the solution; therefore for
VARDAKAS et al.: A SURVEY ON DEMAND RESPONSE PROGRAMS IN SMART GRIDS: PRICING METHODS AND OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHMS
an integer linear programming problem, an integer linear
technique is applied for the optimal solution derivation. It
should be noted that optimization does not necessarily mean
that an optimum solution is reachable. There are optimization
problems (e.g. NP-hard problems), where a solution is not
feasible to ﬁnd , or the computational times are too high.
In such cases, classical optimization procedures, such as linear
programming (which have been widely deployed when large
problems are modeled), or quadratic programming cannot be
applied; therefore, if the complexity of a solution technique
is high, heuristic approaches can be used, since they provide
fast and near optimal solutions.
In this section we ﬁrstly categorize the optimization approaches in DR problems based on the target of the optimization procedure. These categories are: a) minimization of
electricity cost, b) maximization of social welfare, c) minimization of aggregated power consumption, d) joint minimization of electricity cost and aggregated power consumption,
and e) joint maximization of social welfare and minimization
of aggregated power consumption. Therefore, the ﬁrst three
categories deal with a single objective function, while the
target of the last two categories is the optimization of two
objective functions. Furthermore, we present game-theoretic
methods for the determination of the optimal solution, which
either refer to the minimization of electricity cost or the
maximization of the social welfare. Finally, we highlight the
optimization models for two important smart grid paradigms;
V2G systems and microgrids. We also categorize the optimization problems based on the solution method that is used
in order to derive the optimal solution. Table V presents the
DR optimization models for each one of the aforementioned
categories, together with the solution methods that have been
considered for each case. Furthermore, in Table VI we classify
these optimization models according to the control mechanism,
the decision variable and the pricing scheme. Finally, in
Table VII the presented optimization models are classiﬁed
according to the ability to include uncertainties, scalability,
responsiveness, communications requirements, and support of
multiple load types.
A. Minimization of electricity cost
The main objective of an optimization algorithm aims to
bring the ﬁnal load curve close to the objective load curve,
such that the desired objective of the DR strategy is achieved.
The objectives of a DR strategy could be to maximize the
use of renewable energy resources, to maximize the economic
beneﬁt for the power utility, to minimize the electricity or
generation cost, and/or to reduce the peak load demand. The
formulation of the cost minimization problem is based on the
derivation of an optimal load scheduling procedure and the
application of an appropriate pricing scheme. There are several
research articles that aim to the cost minimization objective
 - , - . These articles can be further subcategorized based on the applied optimization procedure and
the technique that is used for the derivation of the solution.
A number of cost minimization problems are solved by using complex, well-known optimization procedures. An Integer
Linear Programming (ILP) method is used in to derive
the minimum electricity cost for local (single house) or global
(multiple houses) applications. Furthermore, a Mixed Integer
Programming (MIP) method is used in to minimize the
total cost (operation, reserve and expected load-not-supplied
cost). The calculation of operation and reserve costs is based
on two utilization patterns of DR methods. The Peak Clipping
DR activates a task-scheduling procedure when the system is
at stress, while the Reserve Supplying DR is an I/C-based
DR method that is applied as a reserve and it is activated in
emergency conditions. A Mixed Integer Linear Programming
(MILP) method is used in for the minimization of
the household’s electricity payment by optimally scheduling
the operation and energy consumption for each appliance,
while considering the waiting time as a comfort setting for
the operation of each appliance, and an RTP scheme. In
addition, an appliance commitment algorithm is presented
in and solved with a multiple-looping algorithm and
enhanced by a linear sequential optimization process. This
algorithm schedules Thermostatically Controlled Appliances
(TCAs) based on price and consumption forecasts. Customer
comfort constraints are incorporated in the proposed approach,
by specifying time-varying temperature ranges for each TCA.
The optimization model of considers two types of
appliances: the ﬁrst type consists of task-scheduling appliances
(their consumption can be adjusted across time), while the
second type consists of energy-management appliances (their
consumption can be reduced but cannot be shifted to next
time-slots). Together with the electricity cost minimization,
the formulated problem deals with the minimization of the
consumers’ discomfort, due to the adjustments in the appliances’ operation. The resulting optimization problem is
non-convex. In general, non-convex optimization models are
difﬁcult to solve, since they are computationally intractable
and convex relaxation techniques should be applied, in order to
convert the problem to a convex optimization problem .
However, in under the consideration of a continuous
time horizon, the non-convex problem has a zero duality gap
(difference between the primal and the dual problem, which
is usually observed in convex optimization problems), and it
can be solved by using Lagrangian algorithms. Similarly, the
model in considers multiple appliance’s types; the dual
optimization problem of minimizing the electricity cost and
maximizing the consumer’s satisfaction is balanced into the
optimization problem of maximizing its payoff. This problem
is also non-convex and a simulated-annealing-based price
control algorithm is developed to provide the optimal solution.
The aforementioned optimization approaches that are based
on linear or convex programming provide efﬁcient solutions,
with polynomial time complexity, while the optimality of the
solution is deﬁnite . However, the main problem of these
approaches is their high complexity, especially when a large
number of consumers is considered. For such cases, heuristic
approaches can provide fast and near optimal solutions. For
example, a heuristic-based evolutionary algorithm is proposed
in , with primary objective to reduce the utility bills of
consumers in residential, commercial and industrial areas. This
is realized through a load shifting technique, for the support
CLASSIFICATION OF DR OPTIMIZATION PROBLEMS AND THE SOLUTION METHODS FOR EACH CASE.
of a large number of loads of various types. The Binary
Particle Swarm Optimization (BPSO) heuristic algorithm is
used in for the optimization of the demand management
and a Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) , for the
optimal resource management. A near optimal solution is also
provided in , which is based on a greedy search heuristic.
Furthermore, the proposed cost minimization problem in 
is transformed to a relaxed problem with lower complexity, which is solved by a modiﬁed Lyapunov optimization
technique. In this approach, various types of appliances are
considered by taking into account both inelastic (must-run) and
elastic (shift-able) power demands from various residential appliances, renewable energy sources and energy storage devices,
for the formulation of the optimization problem. In the same
way, the convex programming problem of cost minimization
is relaxed in , so that it can be applied to a large
number of consumers. This is realized by relaxing the binary
decision variables, associated with the consumer-appliances’
status, from integer to continues values, in order the use of a
complicated ILP scheme.
Several research efforts appear in the literature that deal with
the optimization problem in V2G systems. The formulation
of these problems should consider a number of challenges
in both unidirectional and bidirectional V2G solutions. In
the bidirectional power ﬂow option, additional hardware is
required in the vehicles to pump the energy back to the grid,
while the power utility must convince consumers to allow
discharging their batteries. On the other hand, the limitations in
unidirectional systems refer to the reduced participation times,
due to battery charging and the lower power levels. This is
mainly due to the inability to pump the energy stored in the
batteries back to the grid, and the lower overall performance
of the unidirectional option, compared to the bidirectional
solution , . Nevertheless, it is acknowledged that
VARDAKAS et al.: A SURVEY ON DEMAND RESPONSE PROGRAMS IN SMART GRIDS: PRICING METHODS AND OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHMS
both V2G systems have the potential to provide ﬁnancial
beneﬁts to utilities , CO2 emission reductions and
power consumption increase during off-peak hours .
It should be noted that the optimal resource scheduling
problem that leads to the minimization of the cost may have
signiﬁcant computational complexity, especially if the V2G
system supports a large number of vehicles. To overcome this
problem, artiﬁcial-intelligence-based techniques can be used
in order to reduce the execution time. PSO is a technique
that exploits simple analogues of social interaction, instead
of purely individual cognitive abilities. This technique is
used in and for the cost minimization, while
considering renewable energy sources, The effectiveness of
the PSO approach is veriﬁed through its comparison with a
reference methodology based on Mixed-Integer Non-Linear
Programming (MINLP) in . This comparison reveals that
the PSO approach achieves signiﬁcantly shorter execution
times, but slightly higher total cost (production cost plus
V2G discharge cost), compared to the MINLP solution. A
similar conclusion is presented in for the performance
of another technique that reduces the algorithm execution time.
This technique is called simulated annealing technique ,
and its application to a V2G system is based on several
constrains regarding the electric vehicles, such as battery
capacity, charging/discharging rates, starting travel times and
minimum travel distances. The evaluation of this technique
under a scenario that considers 1000 vehicles led to a faster
solution, compared to both mixed-integer nonlinear and linear
programming approaches, but its solution is slightly more
expensive, compared to the optimal solution of the linear
B. Maximization of social welfare
Various solutions have been proposed for the maximization
of the social welfare. These solutions vary depending on
the implemented optimization technique, the applied pricing
scheme and the constraints that are taken into consideration
in the problem formulation.
The maximization of the social welfare has been formulated
as a convex optimization problem in a number of research
approaches. The model in assumes that speciﬁc payment
rules should be applied to consumers that are unwilling to
reveal their real power demands. The proposed convex optimization model is solved based on the knowledge of the consumers’ demands. This solution determines the optimal power
allocation to each user and provides the maximum social
welfare. Convex optimization problems are also formulated
in , , that affect the energy procurement decisions
of the consumers for the amount of the purchased balancing
power needed to meet the aggregated demand. In this case, the
social welfare maximization is the result of a joint optimization
procedure. The ﬁrst part of the overall problem refers to
the power utility decisions for the day-ahead procurement
of electricity on the wholesale electricity markets, and the
second part refers to the real-time decisions of consumers
for the load schedule. In addition, the model captures the
uncertainty of the electricity supply from renewable energy
sources. Furthermore, the convex optimization problem that
is presented in is solved by a decentralized Lagrange-
Newton method. For the determination of the maximum social welfare, the model considers the energy demand and
the generation decisions that reduce transmission losses. The
interior point method is used for solving the convex problem
of maximization of the social welfare in . This approach
considers that users are independent decision makers and
schedule their loads so that predeﬁned power consumption
levels are met. The energy-based scheduling is motivated
by a VCG pricing method, which is proved to be a more
efﬁcient solution than a PLP method, by providing a numerical
evaluation.
A mixed discrete-continuous optimization nonlinear problem with a single integer variable is presented in , which
tackles the optimal integration of renewable energy systems.
A number of constraints, such as voltage level, active and
reactive power constraints for generators and consumers and
ﬂow constrains for lines and transformers are all included in
the proposed analysis. The presented results evidenced that
the combined operations of renewable energy systems and
price responsive demands alleviate network constraints, while
satisfying greater demand levels and reducing energy costs.
A Non-Linear Programming (NLP) problem is formulated
in for the maximization of the power utility’s proﬁt,
while considering other parameters, such as consumer’s beneﬁts and reactions to energy prices, minimum daily power
consumption and constraints in the distribution network. The
proposed scheme is based on a DA-RTP pricing method. The
optimization problem is solved by using commercial software,
while the Benders decomposition method is applied to make
the model applicable to a large number of consumers.
The target of the optimization model presented in is
the maximization of the utility’s proﬁt, together with low costs
to the consumers in a unidirectional V2G system. The same
authors study the equivalent problem, but for a bidirectional
V2G system in . In both cases, the problem is formulated
as a linear program. Furthermore, the proﬁt maximization
problem is also tackled in , where a real-time pricing
scheme is considered in order to deal with the price uncertainty
in V2G systems. The scheduling problem is formulated as a
Markov Decision Problem (MDC), where the decisions on the
prices are made by considering the future proﬁts. This problem
is then solved by using a Q-learning algorithm, which is an
iterative method that learns from experience and updates in
each step. The main limitation of this algorithm is that the
learning process is time consuming.
Heuristic approaches have been also proposed for the determination of the maximum social welfare. In , two
models are developed for the minimization of the consumer’s
electricity cost and the minimization of the generating cost
for the utility companies. The former problem is solved by a
greedy algorithm that is applied to each time period for the
optimal load scheduling, while the latter problem is solved by
using a ﬁlling method. PSO has been used in an optimization
model for V2G systems in for the maximization of the
utility’s proﬁt. Furthermore, variations of a Coevolutionary
PSO (CPSO) are used in , in order to incorporate the
CLASSIFICATION OF DR OPTIMIZATION METHODS BASED ON CONTROL
MECHANISM, DECISION VARIABLE AND PRICING SCHEME.
coordination of distributed energy resources to the social
welfare maximization.
C. Minimization of aggregated power consumption
The minimization of the power consumption is usually
achieved by ﬁnding the optimal scheduling solution that
consumers can use to schedule their loads to off-peak hours.
Various optimization techniques have been applied for the
determination of the optimal load scheduling. A MINLP is
proposed in , that involves resource scheduling with different anticipation times: day-ahead, hour-ahead and 5 minutes
ahead, while generators, storage units and intra-day market
are considered by the hour-ahead management. Additionally,
the proposed model considers the intensive penetration of
distributed generation and the load curtailment opportunities
that are enabled by the DR program. Commercial optimization
software is used to solve the presented problem, while the
obtained solutions are validated by using a power system
simulation.
Optimal daily load scheduling is also achieved in 
through an ILP technique, which is solved by using the Branch
and Bound method. The resulting solution is used to derive
the optimal power consumption, by taking into account loads
that can shift their operation in succeeding time periods and
loads that can adjust their power consumption in the current
period. The proposed mechanism can be applied either in the
residential environment, where a home energy management
unit makes optimal scheduling decisions for all appliances,
or in a local area, where scheduling decisions are made
by a central control unit. Similarly, a linear programming
model is also used in for the optimization of the peak
load reduction, through scheduling commercial, industrial and
residential loads.
The convex optimization model that is proposed in 
is easily scalable to large number of users. This is due to the
fact that the analysis is based on a task scheduling scheme
with heterogeneity in delay tolerances. This fact allows the
energy provider to estimate these delay tolerances based only
on the aggregated data and not on the parameters of each
consumer. Similarly, another convex optimization problem is
formulated in , that takes into account distributed power
generators and electricity prices that are analogous to the total
power consumption. This problem is solved by using a parallel
distributed optimization approach, which signiﬁcantly reduces
the time complexity and communication costs. Moreover, a
heuristic approach that is proposed in can be applied
to a large number of consumers. This methodology is called
Signaled PSO (SPSO) and it is used in order to address
the energy resources management problem. The comparison
of the SPSO method with other methodologies revealed the
superiority of the proposed scheme in terms of convergence,
cost and time execution and absolute error. The consideration
of a large number of thermostatic loads in converts
the optimization problem into a non-convex problem, with
a signiﬁcantly high complexity due to the on-off control
of such devices. To this end, the authors of propose
a distribution structure for the optimal solution derivation,
with a supervisor center (that broadcasts coordination signals)
and local controllers for the consumer’s appliances. Even
though the distributed approach of the problem requires the
communication between the thermostatic devices, the authors
claim that the communication requirements of their proposed
scheme are low.
Signiﬁcant work has been conducted for the development
of optimization models in microgrids - . One of
the main challenges in these models is the incorporation
of renewable energy sources and storage devices. A mixed
integer programming model that targets on the determination
of the optimal operation schedule of loads is presented in
 . The impact of renewable generators and power storage
devices on the optimal schedule of loads is studied and an
estimation of the storage capacity according to the size of the
microgrid is derived. The optimal scheduling of residential
power consumption is also studied in , by introducing
a mixed integer programming model. This model targets on
the minimization of the total one day-ahead expense of the
residential power consumption, which is achieved through the
determination of an optimal scheduling for both the operation
of the consumer’s appliances and for the distributed energy
generators. In the latter case, the derivation of the optimal
scheduling is based on renewable energy output forecast (e.g.
weather forecast is used for the case of wind generators).
The combination of DR and distributed generators is challenging, mainly due to the high computational complexity
of centralized optimization. To overcome this problem, a 3step optimization procedure is proposed in , for the
minimization of the total power consumption of a distributed
microgrid that services a residential community. The ﬁrst step
considers the dynamic DR based on day-ahead time-varying
pricing, for the reduction of the energy consumption cost of the
consumer, while the second step considers the reduction of the
electricity cost in the entire microgrid. The third step involves
the management of the storage of surplus wind energy and the
discharge of this energy in high-demand hours. The electricity
demands that are taken into account in this model are not only
schedulable tasks, but also tasks that can be dropped by the
agent to prevent system stress. The optimization problem for
VARDAKAS et al.: A SURVEY ON DEMAND RESPONSE PROGRAMS IN SMART GRIDS: PRICING METHODS AND OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHMS
the ﬁrst two steps is solved with a PSO algorithm, which is
considered as an advantageous method over other evolutionary
algorithms, while the optimal solution for the third step is
derived by applying a Q-learning algorithm.
D. Minimization of electricity cost and aggregated power
consumption
In this section we target on both the minimization of the
electricity cost and the total power consumption. Typically, optimization problems that consider multiple objective functions
are solved either by considering decomposing algorithms, or
utilizing Pareto-based optimization methods . The main
target of a decomposing algorithm is the disintegration of the
power system into subsystems with reduced complexity; these
subsystems are optimized separately by utilizing methods that
are compatible with the optimum of the entire system. In
Pareto-based methods, relations are created among solutions
based on a Pareto-dominance concept and the set of optimal
solutions is extracted based on these relationships. A third solution is the utilization of aggregated weight functions, where
the objective functions are combined into a single function,
while weights are considered to depict the importance of
each original objective . For example, the dual-objective
problem of minimizing the cost in a microgrid and at the same
time minimizing the amount of pollutants released into the air
by thermal units (which are functions of the power generation)
of is solved by generating the non-dominated set of
Pareto-optimal solutions.
The scheduling energy consumption problem is formulated
as a linear programming problem in , for a deterministic
approach of the scheduling problem. The proposed robust
optimization model explicitly addresses the problem of correlated price data, while the principal component analysis
and the minimum power decomposition methods are used for
the solution of the robust problem. The model considers that
correlation may exist among the uncertain electricity price data
of successive time periods over which consumption is to be
scheduled. For the evaluation of the proposed model, two case
studies are presented that use prices from the Brazilian market.
They tackle the determination of the appropriate consumption
scheduling algorithms that could be used in the speciﬁc market
and achieving the highest possible energy transfer from highto low-demand periods.
The dual minimization problem of both the operational cost
and the load power are solved by using a MILP model in
 , for the proposed home energy management system with
distributed energy resources. The presented case study refers
only to a single household, which cannot be an indicator for
the complexity level of the model. On the other hand, the case
study for the home energy management system proposed in
 considers a scenario with 60 residential users with three
controllable loads in each residence. The proposed analysis
targets on the minimization of the real-time market cost
and the total energy consumption. Customers are encouraged
to participate in the program by using the motivation that
they will not pay additional money compared to the cost
they optimized by participating in the program. The optimization problem is formulated as an approximate certainty
CLASSIFICATION OF DR OPTIMIZATION METHODS BASED ON VARIOUS
PERFORMANCE METRICS.
equivalent control dynamic programming problem, while its
computational complexity is highly affected by the number of
residential users and the number of controllable appliances. To
increase the model scalability to higher numbers of users and
appliances, a decentralized algorithm recomposes the problem
to parallel subproblems, where each residence computes its
scheduling solution locally. However, due to multiple iterations
required by the decentralized algorithm, the model requires
real-time exchange messages between the users, thus causing
possible overheads in the communication network.
E. Maximization of social welfare and minimization of aggregated power consumption
The dual optimization problem of social welfare maximization and optimal power consumption can be solved by using
various optimization schemes. Convex optimization models
have been used in , . In the latter case, the dual
problem can be solved under a cooperative multi-residence
scheduling approach, which assumes that each consumer has
two classes of adjustable loads. Loads that belong to the ﬁrst
class must consume a speciﬁed total amount of energy over
the scheduling horizon, but the consumption can be adjusted
across different time periods. Loads that belong to the second
type have adjustable power consumption patterns, without a
total energy requirement, but the load operation at reduced
power results in discomfort at the end-user side. The resulting
convex optimization problem is solved through a distributed
subgradient algorithm. Similar communication requirements,
as the ones in , are needed in the analysis presented in
 , but in the latter case a single type of adjustable load
is assumed. The proposed energy and welfare optimization
models are based on a real-time pricing scheme. This problem
can also be solved by using a convex programming technique,
such as the centrally-fashioned interior-point method.
Authors in argue that the social welfare maximization
and the optimal resource allocation introduce communication
network externalities, caused by the uncertainty in message
signaling due to transmission network constraints. Therefore,
the proposed framework jointly optimizes the data network
component of the smart grid, so that the uncertainty on the
communication (e.g. delay) is reduced. The optimal scheduling
procedure is derived by a distributed algorithm that considers
the fact that a consumer may be affected by the action of other
consumers.
The aforementioned optimization models consider a group
of consumers that are served by a single load-serving entity
or that each consumer has only two classes of appliances.
The key assumption of the analysis presented in is that
each residence is equipped with different appliances of diverse
power demands. In addition, a consumer is also equipped with
a battery that provides further ﬂexibility for optimization of
the residence’s power consumption across time. The optimal
power scheduling and maximization of social welfare problems are solved by a distributed algorithm, which considers
that the power utility and the consumers jointly compute
an equilibrium based on a gradient algorithm. In the latter
algorithm, the power utility sets the prices to be the marginal
costs of electricity and each consumer solves its own net
beneﬁt maximization problem in response.
F. Application of Game Theory to DR Programs
Game theory can be considered as a collection of analytical
tools that provides the understanding of phenomena that are
observed when decision-makers interact . Consequently,
game theory is suitable to address demand response management, where the players are the consumers, the actions
are the strategies that players follow to optimize a utility
function, while the solution (the outcome of the game) is
the optimal utility function . Based on the target of the
solution, game-theoretic methods can be classiﬁed by using
the categorization of the optimization procedures that are
presented in the previous subsections.
Game theory has been used for the formulation of the
appropriate energy consumption procedure that results in minimum electricity cost. The scheduling game that is proposed
in considers consumers as the players and the daily load
schedules as their strategies. The target of this approach is to
minimize the electricity cost, which is achieved at the Nash
equilibrium, and also to minimize the Peak-to-Average Ratio
(PAR). Users interact with each other via message exchange,
in order to coordinate their electricity usage, so that reduction
of the PAR is achieved. The resulting problems are solved by
using the interior point method.
A game theoretical method can also be used to capture
the conﬂicting economic interests of the retailer and their
consumers. Authors in propose optimization models for
the maximization of the expected market proﬁts for the retailer
and the minimization of the electricity cost for the consumer.
The proposed approach considers real-time prices for must-run
loads. Solutions to these two separated problems are provided
through the formulation of one bilevel problem as an MILP
model. The MILP solution is provided by using commercial
optimization software. However, the computational complexity
of the proposed approach is signiﬁcant and the authors provide
an example with only three consumers. In addition, auctioning
games have been used in to allocate load demands
among customers, while maximizing the social welfare. These
repeated Vickrey auctions use the optimal demand scheduling
problem, which is solved by applied a water ﬁlling heuristic
method. Furthermore, the utility cost minimization problem is
formulated as a convex optimization, with a solution that is
derived under the generation capacity constraint. The solutions
of the two problems are used to maximize customers’ social
A problem that can signiﬁcantly affect the performance of a
DR program is the unwillingness of consumers to reveal their
real power demands. This problem is the subject of the study
in , where a cheat-proof game theoretic DR method is
proposed. The participation in the program is motivated by
a simple RTP scheme, where consumers calculate their own
optimal demand and report it to the utility. A similar problem
motivated the game-theoretic approach in , where the
utility uses a TOU pricing scheme that is announced ahead
of time. In this way, consumers are not obliged to respond
to the complex procedure of a time-varying pricing process.
The designed utility function (proﬁt minus the cost of the
users) is optimized with linear constraints and solved for Nash
equilibrium.
Game theoretical models have been also employed for the
optimal solution to the dual minimization problem of the
electricity cost and the aggregated power consumption. In
 , a two-level optimization framework is presented, with
a game-theoretic framework at the upper level and a static
convex optimization problem at the lower level. On the upper
level, a nonzero-sum differential game is used to capture
the interaction among different players, who seek to ﬁnd an
VARDAKAS et al.: A SURVEY ON DEMAND RESPONSE PROGRAMS IN SMART GRIDS: PRICING METHODS AND OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHMS
optimal demand policy to maximize their long term payoff. At
the lower level, a static convex optimization problem leads to
an optimum solution, which is found for the scheduling of each
consumer, while considering different appliances per household. Similarly, a Stackelberg game model is used in 
for the optimal scheduling of loads. In this game, the utility
plays the leader level game by setting the real-time price and
the consumer plays the follower level game and schedules the
appliances’ operation. An RTP-based pricing scheme is used,
where prices are determined by the utility according to the
current load level, while optimal power consumption occurs
by shifting power consumption in forwarding time periods.
Furthermore, a non-cooperative game theoretical framework is
applied, to model the DR problem in a distributed smart grid
environment, which is equipped with energy storage devices,
connected in a decentralized fashion. Based on the game
theoretical approach, the distributed algorithm is determined
and minimization of both the aggregated power consumption
and the total energy cost is achieved.
Game theory may also be applied for power scheduling and
control, especially for the case of distributed microgrids. The
interested reader may refer to for an overview of game
theoretic models in distributed microgrids. Furthermore, game
theory has also been applied for the interaction of PHEVs and
the retailer, where players are the PHEVs who are involved in a
non-cooperative game, while their actions are the load demand
values. The solution of the game is obtained for the maximum
proﬁt from the retailer’s perspective, and the optimal tradeoff
between the beneﬁt from battery charging and the associated
cost, from the PHEV’s perspective. This target is achieved by
the generalized Stackelberg game presented in , where
PHEVs select their strategies in order to optimize their beneﬁt,
while the retailer consider these strategies to maximize its
proﬁt. Apart from the optimal proﬁt of either the retailer
or the PHEV owners, other characteristics of the PHEVretailer system can be optimized. The authors in present
a four-stage nested game, where players are not only the
PHEV owners, but also residential users. The objective of the
retailer is to maximize its proﬁt, but also to perform frequency
regulation through matching the power supply and demand.
The optimal performance of frequency regulation in a realtime pricing scenario is also the objective of the game-theoretic
model presented in . However, this model does not
incorporate the dynamics of the regulation signals, the energy
restrictions of the EVs’ batteries and the battery degradation
due to frequent charging/discharging. These characteristics of
the PHEV-aggregator system are considered in , where
a stochastic optimization problem is proposed, based on the
Lyapunov optimization technique. It should be noted that the
constraints in the aforementioned models refer to the aggregated demand of the PHEVs and to the charging/discharging
procedures (e.g. charging and discharging cannot be performed
simultaneously).
V. CONCLUSION: LESSONS LEARNED AND FUTURE
DIRECTIONS
In this paper we presented the background and key characteristics of DR programs that have been proposed for the
efﬁcient operation of the smart grid. We provided an extensive
review on DR methods and we classiﬁed them into categories
based on the control mechanism of the DR program, on
the motivations offered to customers to reduce or shift their
power demands, and on the DR decision variable. We also
reviewed a wide range of optimization algorithms that have
been proposed for the optimal operation of the smart grid,
with special attention given to V2G systems and microgrids.
From the study of the various DR schemes and programs a
number of useful lessons can be derived. Firstly, the successful
implementation of a DR program relies on the participation of
the consumers that contribute to reduce of the overall power
consumption in peak-demand hours. This involvement does
not imply that consumers have to pull the plug on major
appliances, or to compromise their lifestyle and intimidate
their comfort. It is up to them to decide the amount of
their participation in a DR program. The study of 70 tests
performed on dynamic pricing-based DR pilots carried out in
Europe, North America and Australia showed that in general,
consumers marginally respond to these programs, while others
do not respond at all . Furthermore, the result of a DR
program may not be beneﬁcial for all customers. For example,
the implementation of DR programs in Victoria, Australia
 and in Illinois, U.S.A. , resulted in higher electricity
bills for the low income earners, since they usually do not
use much energy and so, the amount of demand reduction is
limited. Based on these facts, a DR program should also offer
information tools to the consumers, regarding the participation
beneﬁts and the optimal use of their appliances, in order to
increase the consumer participation rate. In addition, ﬁnancial
incentives should be offered to retail customers to invest on
smart metering infrastructure that enables the switch from a
ﬁxed retail rate to a more dynamic pricing .
Secondly, the majority of DR programs are based on
customer baselines that are used to determine the demand
reduction, while they also deﬁne the price formation. The
setting of the customer baselines is a complex procedure,
since it is based on varying load patterns. Therefore, the
challenge for the DR provider is to establish an efﬁcient
baseline that avoids producing signiﬁcant problems in the
price formation in wholesale markets, while also urges the
consumers to realize the potentials and advantaged of demand
control . However, a successful DR program is not
only founded on the proper deﬁnition of customer baselines;
other uncertainties may have a penetrating inﬂuence on the
success of a DR program. Government policies, fuel prices,
technology breakthroughs, demand ﬂuctuations and capital
costs for the infrastructure renovations are highly related to
the price formation and are expected to play a signiﬁcant
role in the elaboration of efﬁcient DR programs . A
powerful process that enables the uncertainty resolution is
the implementation of pilot programs; in this way, valuable
information and credible results may improve the effectiveness
of a DR program .
Thirdly, useful information can be derived from the results
of already implemented pilots. A survey on various case
studies of several dynamic pricing programs is presented in
 . The general conclusion from these case studies is that
the greatest motivation for participation of the consumers is
the bill reduction. However, only a few consumers responded
to critical peak events, either by reducing or shifting theirs
loads, unless signiﬁcant incentives are offered. For example,
Pepco’s customers in Washington, DC, that utilize a CPP
program, reduced their peak summer usage by an additional
20%, compared to those who do not participate in the program.
Similar results are obtained from the case studies presented in
 . What is interesting is that in the case of the Hydro
One’s pilot in Ontario, Canada, an average 6.5% of power
consumption reduction is achieved without offering any price
incentives, but by simply providing the customer with realtime feedback, through the use of in-home displays. The
general conclusion of these studies, as well as of other case
studies in Europe and China (e.g. - ), is that the
successfulness of a DR program is not only based on the
offered incentives; DR providers should also consider the
provision of information tools for the efﬁcient participation,
as well as the supply of complimentary smart equipment to
the consumers.
Based on the above survey, we can focus on the challenges,
advantages and also limitations that arise from the implementation of these DR methods, which should be addressed in
order to make more efﬁcient and cost effective decisions for
the implementation of the future smart grid. The key factor that
aims at changing the demand in order to follow the available
supply is the efﬁcient and reliable utilization and control
of various energy sources. This effort will be even more
challenging in the future, mainly due to the high penetration
of renewable energy sources. The stochastic nature of these
sources and the large variations of the renewable energy are
triggering the need for efﬁcient, real-time power-generation,
and demand forecasting methods. Power predictions can be
used by the power utility to adjust its forthcoming operation
and properly schedule the consumers’ demands. A number
of efforts have been made in order to design an accurate
forecasting model , , - . These efforts include
algorithms that are based on fuzzy logic , neural networks
 , and game theory , . Also, attention has
been given on using machine learning for forecast decisions
in smart grid environments - . Nevertheless, the
research in the ﬁeld of demand forecasting is still at its infancy
and there are many fundamental issues that still need to be
addressed, in order to jointly consider the random distribution
of the various smart grid components and the stochastic behavior of the renewable energy sources. This can be realized by
applying the aforementioned artiﬁcial intelligence techniques,
or other techniques, such as sum of products, regression fusion
and meta-classiﬁcation, that can provide practical in advance
results on the deﬁnition of the margins for reliable operation of
the smart grid system. Finally, it is highly desirable to generate
simpler dynamic pricing schemes, based on the application
of these forecasting techniques, and more efﬁcient automated
procedures for the DR implementation.
APPENDIX A
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
American Electric Power
Ancillary Services Market
Binary Particle Swarm Optimization
Capacity Market Programs
Coevolutionary Particle Swarm Optimization
Cold Load PickUp
Critical Peak Pricing
Day-Ahead Real-Time Pricing
Demand Bidding
Demand Response
Demand Side Management
Direct Load Control
Distribution Management System
Distribution System Operator
Electric Reliability Council of Texas
Emergency Demand Response Programs
Energy Management Controller
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
Heating, Ventilation and Air-Conditioning
Independent System Operator
Interruptible/Curtailable
Integer Linear Programming
Markov Decision Problem
Mixed Integer Linear Programming
Mixed-Integer Non-Linear Programming
Mixed Integer Programming
Non-Linear Programming
Particle Swarm Optimization
Peak Day Rebates
Peak Load Pricing
Peak-to-Average Ratio
Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles
Quality of Experience
Real-Time Pricing
Regional Transmission Operator
Signaled Particle Swarm Optimization
Thermostatically Controlled Appliances
Time-Of-Use
Vickrey-Clarke-Groves
Vehicle-to-Grid