VU Research Portal
Modeling Relational Data with Graph Convolutional Networks
Schlichtkrull, Michael; Kipf, Thomas N.; Bloem, Peter; van den Berg, Rianne; Titov, Ivan;
Welling, Max
 
The Semantic Web
DOI (link to publisher)
10.1007/978-3-319-93417-4_38
document version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
document license
Article 25fa Dutch Copyright Act
Link to publication in VU Research Portal
citation for published version (APA)
Schlichtkrull, M., Kipf, T. N., Bloem, P., van den Berg, R., Titov, I., & Welling, M. . Modeling Relational
Data with Graph Convolutional Networks. In A. Gangemi, R. Navigli, M.-E. Vidal, P. Hitzler, R. Troncy, L. Hollink,
A. Tordai, & M. Alam (Eds.), The Semantic Web : 15th International Conference, ESWC 2018, Heraklion, Crete,
Greece, June 3–7, 2018, Proceedings (pp. 593-607). (Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics); Vol. 10843 LNCS). Springer/Verlag.
 
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
• Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
• You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
• You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
E-mail address:
 
Download date: 26. Mar. 2025
Modeling Relational Data with Graph
Convolutional Networks
Michael Schlichtkrull1
, Thomas N. Kipf1(B)
, Peter Bloem2,
Rianne van den Berg1
, Ivan Titov1,3, and Max Welling1,4
1 University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
{m.s.schlichtkrull,t.n.kipf,r.vandenberg,titov,m.welling}@uva.nl
2 Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
 
3 University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
4 Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Toronto, Canada
Abstract. Knowledge graphs enable a wide variety of applications,
including question answering and information retrieval. Despite the great
eﬀort invested in their creation and maintenance, even the largest (e.g.,
Yago, DBPedia or Wikidata) remain incomplete. We introduce Relational Graph Convolutional Networks (R-GCNs) and apply them to two
standard knowledge base completion tasks: Link prediction (recovery of
missing facts, i.e. subject-predicate-object triples) and entity classiﬁcation (recovery of missing entity attributes). R-GCNs are related to a
recent class of neural networks operating on graphs, and are developed
speciﬁcally to handle the highly multi-relational data characteristic of
realistic knowledge bases. We demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of R-GCNs
as a stand-alone model for entity classiﬁcation. We further show that factorization models for link prediction such as DistMult can be signiﬁcantly
improved through the use of an R-GCN encoder model to accumulate
evidence over multiple inference steps in the graph, demonstrating a large
improvement of 29.8% on FB15k-237 over a decoder-only baseline.
Introduction
Knowledge bases organize and store factual knowledge, enabling a multitude of
applications including question answering and information retrieval .
Even the largest knowledge bases (e.g. DBPedia, Wikidata or Yago), despite
enormous eﬀort invested in their maintenance, are incomplete, and the lack
of coverage harms downstream applications. Predicting missing information in
knowledge bases is the main focus of statistical relational learning (SRL).
We consider two fundamental SRL tasks: link prediction (recovery of missing
triples) and entity classiﬁcation (assigning types or categorical properties to
entities). In both cases, many missing pieces of information can be expected to
reside within the graph encoded through the neighborhood structure. Following
M. Schlichtkrull and T. N. Kipf—Equal contribution.
⃝Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018
A. Gangemi et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2018, LNCS 10843, pp. 593–607, 2018.
 
M. Schlichtkrull et al.
this intuition, we develop an encoder model for entities in the relational graph
and apply it to both tasks.
Our entity classiﬁcation model uses softmax classiﬁers at each node in the
graph. The classiﬁers take node representations supplied by a relational graph
convolutional network (R-GCN) and predict the labels. The model, including
R-GCN parameters, is learned by optimizing the cross-entropy loss.
Our link prediction model can be regarded as an autoencoder consisting of
(1) an encoder: an R-GCN producing latent feature representations of entities,
and (2) a decoder: a tensor factorization model exploiting these representations
to predict labeled edges. Though in principle the decoder can rely on any type of
factorization (or generally any scoring function), we use one of the simplest and
most eﬀective factorization methods: DistMult . We observe that our method
achieves signiﬁcant improvements on the challenging FB15k-237 dataset ,
as well as competitive performance on FB15k and WN18. Among other baselines, our model outperforms direct optimization of the factorization (i.e. vanilla
DistMult). This result demonstrates that explicit modeling of neighborhoods in
R-GCNs is beneﬁcial for recovering missing facts in knowledge bases.
Our main contributions are as follows: To the best of our knowledge, we are
the ﬁrst to show that the GCN framework can be applied to modeling relational
data, speciﬁcally to link prediction and entity classiﬁcation tasks. Secondly, we
introduce techniques for parameter sharing and to enforce sparsity constraints,
and use them to apply R-GCNs to multigraphs with large numbers of relations.
Lastly, we show that the performance of factorization models, at the example
of DistMult, can be signiﬁcantly improved by enriching them with an encoder
model that performs multiple steps of information propagation in the relational
Neural Relational Modeling
We introduce the following notation: we denote directed and labeled multi-graphs
as G = (V, E, R) with nodes (entities) vi ∈V and labeled edges (relations)
(vi, r, vj) ∈E, where r ∈R is a relation type.1
Relational Graph Convolutional Networks
Our model is primarily motivated as an extension of GCNs that operate on local
graph neighborhoods to large-scale relational data. These and related
methods such as graph neural networks can be understood as special cases
of a simple diﬀerentiable message-passing framework :
1 R contains relations both in canonical direction (e.g. born in) and in inverse direction
(e.g. born in inv).
Modeling Relational Data with Graph Convolutional Networks
where h(l)
∈Rd(l) is the hidden state of node vi in the l-th layer of the neural network, with d(l) being the dimensionality of this layer’s representations. Incoming
messages of the form gm(·, ·) are accumulated and passed through an elementwise activation function σ(·), such as the ReLU(·) = max(0, ·).2 Mi denotes the
set of incoming messages for node vi and is often chosen to be identical to the set
of incoming edges. gm(·, ·) is typically chosen to be a (message-speciﬁc) neural
network-like function or simply a linear transformation gm(hi, hj) = Whj with
a weight matrix W such as in . This type of transformation has been shown
to be very eﬀective at accumulating and encoding features from local, structured
neighborhoods, and has led to signiﬁcant improvements in areas such as graph
classiﬁcation and graph-based semi-supervised learning .
Motivated by these architectures, we deﬁne the following simple propagation
model for calculating the forward-pass update of an entity or node denoted by
vi in a relational (directed and labeled) multi-graph:
i denotes the set of neighbor indices of node i under relation r ∈R.
ci,r is a problem-speciﬁc normalization constant that can either be learned or
chosen in advance (such as ci,r = |N r
Intuitively, (2) accumulates transformed feature vectors of neighboring nodes
through a normalized sum. Choosing linear transformations of the form Whj
that only depend on the neighboring node has crucial computational beneﬁts:
(1) we do not need to store intermediate edge-based representations which could
require a signiﬁcant amount of memory, and (2) it allows us to implement Eq. 2 in
vectorized form using eﬃcient sparse-dense O(|E|) matrix multiplications, similar
to . Diﬀerent from regular GCNs, we introduce relation-speciﬁc transformations, i.e. depending on the type and direction of an edge. To ensure that the
representation of a node at layer l+1 can also be informed by the corresponding
representation at layer l, we add a single self-connection of a special relation
type to each node in the data.
A neural network layer update consists of evaluating (2) in parallel for every
node in the graph. Multiple layers can be stacked to allow for dependencies across
several relational steps. We refer to this graph encoder model as a relational
graph convolutional network (R-GCN). The computation graph for a single node
update in the R-GCN model is depicted in Fig. 1.
Regularization
A central issue with applying (2) to highly multi-relational data is the rapid
growth in number of parameters with the number of relations in the graph. In
practice this can easily lead to overﬁtting on rare relations and to models of very
2 Note that this represents a simpliﬁcation of the message passing neural network
proposed in that suﬃces to include the aforementioned models as special cases.
M. Schlichtkrull et al.
rel_1 (in)
rel_1 (out)
rel_N (in)
rel_N (out)
(a) Single R-GCN layer
(b) Entity classiﬁcation model
encoder decoder
(c) Link prediction model
Fig. 1. Diagram for computing the update of a single graph node/entity (red) in the R-
GCN model. Activations (d-dimensional vectors) from neighboring nodes (dark blue)
are gathered and then transformed for each relation type individually (for both inand outgoing edges). The resulting representation (green) is accumulated in a (normalized) sum and passed through an activation function (such as the ReLU). This
per-node update can be computed in parallel with shared parameters across the whole
graph. (b) Depiction of an R-GCN model for entity classiﬁcation with a per-node loss
function. (c) Link prediction model with an R-GCN encoder (interspersed with fullyconnected/dense layers) and a DistMult decoder. (Color ﬁgure online)
large size. Two intuitive strategies to address such issues is to share parameters
between weight matrices, and to enforce sparsity in weight matrices so as to limit
the total number of parameters.
Corresponding to these two strategies, we introduce two separate methods for regularizing the weights of R-GCN-layers: basis- and block-diagonaldecomposition. With the basis decomposition, each W (l)
is deﬁned as follows:
i.e. as a linear combination of basis transformations V (l)
∈Rd(l+1)×d(l) with
coeﬃcients a(l)
rb such that only the coeﬃcients depend on r.
In the block-diagonal decomposition, we let each W (l)
be deﬁned through
the direct sum over a set of low-dimensional matrices:
Modeling Relational Data with Graph Convolutional Networks
Thereby, W (l)
are block-diagonal matrices:
1r , . . . , Q(l)
br ∈R(d(l+1)/B)×(d(l)/B).
Note that for B = d, each Q has dimension 1 and Wr becomes a diagonal matrix.
The block-diagonal decomposition is as such a generalization of the diagonal
sparsity constraint used in the decoder in e.g. DistMult .
The basis function decomposition (3) can be seen as a form of eﬀective weight
sharing between diﬀerent relation types, while the block decomposition (4) can
be seen as a sparsity constraint on the weight matrices for each relation type. The
block decomposition structure encodes an intuition that latent features can be
grouped into sets of variables which are more tightly coupled within groups than
across groups. Both decompositions reduce the number of parameters needed to
learn for highly multi-relational data (such as realistic knowledge bases).
The overall R-GCN model then takes the following form: We stack L layers as
deﬁned in (2) – the output of the previous layer being the input to the next layer.
The input to the ﬁrst layer can be chosen as a unique one-hot vector for each
node in the graph if no other features are present. For the block representation,
we map this one-hot vector to a dense representation through a single linear
transformation. While in this work we only consider the featureless approach,
we note that GCN-type models can incorporate predeﬁned feature vectors .
Entity Classiﬁcation
For (semi-)supervised classiﬁcation of nodes (entities), we simply stack R-GCN
layers of the form (2), with a softmax(·) activation (per node) on the output of
the last layer. We minimize the following cross-entropy loss on all labeled nodes
(while ignoring unlabeled nodes):
tik ln h(L)
where Y is the set of node indices that have labels and h(L)
is the k-th entry of
the network output for the i-th labeled node. tik denotes its respective ground
truth label. In practice, we train the model using (full-batch) gradient descent
techniques. A schematic depiction of the model is given in Fig. 1b.
Link Prediction
Link prediction deals with prediction of new facts (i.e. triples (subject, relation,
object)). Formally, the knowledge base is represented by a directed, labeled graph
G = (V, E, R). Rather than the full set of edges E, we are given only an incomplete subset ˆE. The task is to assign scores f(s, r, o) to possible edges (s, r, o) in
order to determine how likely those edges are to belong to E.
M. Schlichtkrull et al.
In order to tackle this problem, we introduce a graph auto-encoder model
(see Fig. 1c), comprised of an entity encoder and a scoring function (decoder).
The encoder maps each entity vi ∈V to a real-valued vector ei ∈Rd. The
decoder reconstructs edges of the graph relying on the vertex representations;
in other words, it scores (subject, relation, object)-triples through a function
s : Rd × R × Rd →R. Most existing approaches to link prediction (for example,
tensor and neural factorization methods ) can be interpreted under this
framework. The crucial distinguishing characteristic of our work is the reliance
on an encoder. Whereas most previous approaches use a single, real-valued vector
ei for every vi ∈V optimized directly in training, we compute representations
through an R-GCN encoder with ei = h(L)
, similar to the graph auto-encoder
model introduced in for unlabeled undirected graphs.
In our experiments, we use the DistMult factorization as the scoring
function, which is known to perform well on standard link prediction benchmarks
when used on its own. In DistMult, every relation r is associated with a diagonal
matrix Rr ∈Rd×d and a triple (s, r, o) is scored as
f(s, r, o) = eT
As in previous work on factorization , we train the model with negative
sampling. For each observed example we sample ω negative ones. We sample by
randomly corrupting either the subject or the object of each positive example.
We optimize for cross-entropy loss to push the model to score observable triples
higher than the negative ones:
(1 + ω)| ˆE|
(s,r,o,y)∈T
f(s, r, o)
(1 −y) log
f(s, r, o)
where T is the total set of real and corrupted triples, l is the logistic sigmoid
function, and y is an indicator set to y = 1 for positive triples and y = 0 for
negative ones.
Empirical Evaluation
Entity Classiﬁcation Experiments
Here, we consider the task of classifying entities in a knowledge base. In order to
infer, for example, the type of an entity (e.g. person or company), a successful
model needs to reason about the relations with other entities that this entity is
involved in.
Datasets. We evaluate our model on four datasets3 in Resource Description
Framework (RDF) format : AIFB, MUTAG, BGS, and AM. Relations in
3 
Modeling Relational Data with Graph Convolutional Networks
these datasets need not necessarily encode directed subject-object relations, but
are also used to encode the presence, or absence, of a speciﬁc feature for a given
entity. In each dataset, the targets to be classiﬁed are properties of a group of
entities represented as nodes. The exact statistics of the datasets can be found
in Table 1. For a more detailed description of the datasets the reader is referred
to . We remove relations that were used to create entity labels: employs and
aﬃliation for AIFB, isMutagenic for MUTAG, hasLithogenesis for BGS, and
objectCategory and material for AM.
For the entity classiﬁcation benchmarks described in our paper, the evaluation process diﬀers subtly between publications. To eliminate these diﬀerences,
we repeated the baselines in a uniform manner, using the canonical test/train
split from . We performed hyperparameter optimization on only the training
set, running a single evaluation on the test set after hyperparameters were chosen
for each baseline. This explains why the numbers we report diﬀer slightly from
those in the original publications (where cross-validation accuracy was reported).
Table 1. Number of entities, relations, edges and classes along with the number of
labeled entities for each of the datasets. Labeled denotes the subset of entities that
have labels and that are to be classiﬁed.
23,644 333,845 1,666,764
74,227 916,199 5,988,321
Baselines.
As a baseline for our experiments, we compare against recent
state-of-the-art classiﬁcation results from RDF2Vec embeddings , Weisfeiler-
Lehman kernels (WL) , and hand-designed feature extractors (Feat) .
Feat assembles a feature vector from the in- and out-degree (per relation) of
every labeled entity. RDF2Vec extracts walks on labeled graphs which are then
processed using the Skipgram model to generate entity embeddings, used
for subsequent classiﬁcation. See for an in-depth description and discussion
of these baseline approaches. All entity classiﬁcation experiments were run on
CPU nodes with 64 GB of memory.
For WL, we use the tree variant of the Weisfeiler-Lehman subtree kernel
from the Mustard library.4 For RDF2Vec, we use an implementation provided
by the authors of which builds on Mustard. In both cases, we extract explicit
feature vectors for the instance nodes, which are classiﬁed by a linear SVM. For
4 
M. Schlichtkrull et al.
the MUTAG task, our preprocessing diﬀers from that used in where for
a given target relation (s, r, o) all triples connecting s to o are removed. Since o
is a boolean value in the MUTAG data, one can infer the label after processing
from other boolean relations that are still present. This issue is now mentioned
in the Mustard documentation. In our preprocessing, we remove only the speciﬁc
triples encoding the target relation.
Results. All results in Table 2 are reported on the train/test benchmark splits
from . We further set aside 20% of the training set as a validation set for
hyperparameter tuning. For R-GCN, we report performance of a 2-layer model
with 16 hidden units (10 for AM), basis function decomposition (Eq. 3), and
trained with Adam for 50 epochs using a learning rate of 0.01. The normalization constant is chosen as ci,r = |N r
Hyperparameters for baselines are chosen according to the best model performance in , i.e. WL: 2 (tree depth), 3 (number of iterations); RDF2Vec: 2
(WL tree depth), 4 (WL iterations), 500 (embedding size), 5 (window size), 10
(SkipGram iterations), 25 (number of negative samples). We optimize the SVM
regularization constant C ∈{0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1, 10, 100, 1000} based on performance on a 80/20 train/validation split (of the original training set).
For R-GCN, we choose an l2 penalty on ﬁrst layer weights Cl2 ∈{0, 5·10−4}
and the number of basis functions B ∈{0, 10, 20, 30, 40} based on validation set
performance, where B = 0 refers to no basis decomposition. Block decomposition
did not improve results. Otherwise, hyperparameters are chosen as follows: 50
(number of epochs), 16 (number of hidden units), and ci,r = |N r
i | (normalization
constant). We do not use dropout. For AM, we use a reduced number of 10
hidden units for R-GCN to reduce the memory footprint. All entity classiﬁcation
experiments were run on CPU nodes with 64 GB of memory.
Table 2. Entity classiﬁcation results in accuracy (average and standard error over 10
runs) for a feature-based baseline (see main text for details), WL , RDF2Vec
 , and R-GCN (this work). Test performance is reported on the train/test set splits
provided by .
55.55 ± 0.00
77.94 ± 0.00
72.41 ± 0.00
66.66 ± 0.00
80.55 ± 0.00
80.88 ± 0.00 86.20 ± 0.00
87.37 ± 0.00
88.88 ± 0.00
67.20 ± 1.24
87.24 ± 0.89 88.33 ± 0.61
R-GCN (Ours) 95.83 ± 0.62 73.23 ± 0.48
83.10 ± 0.80
89.29 ± 0.35
Our model achieves state-of-the-art results on AIFB and AM. To explain
the gap in performance on MUTAG and BGS it is important to understand the
nature of these datasets. MUTAG is a dataset of molecular graphs, which was
later converted to RDF format, where relations either indicate atomic bonds or
Modeling Relational Data with Graph Convolutional Networks
merely the presence of a certain feature. BGS is a dataset of rock types with
hierarchical feature descriptions which was similarly converted to RDF format,
where relations encode the presence of a certain feature or feature hierarchy.
Labeled entities in MUTAG and BGS are only connected via high-degree hub
nodes that encode a certain feature.
We conjecture that the ﬁxed choice of normalization constant for the aggregation of messages from neighboring nodes is partly to blame for this behavior,
which can be particularly problematic for nodes of high degree. A potentially
promising way to overcome this limitation in future work is to introduce an
attention mechanism, i.e. to replace the normalization constant 1/ci,r with datadependent attention weights aij,r, where
j,r aij,r = 1.
Link Prediction Experiments
As shown in the previous section, R-GCNs serve as an eﬀective encoder for
relational data. We now combine our encoder model with a scoring function
(which we refer to as a decoder, see Fig. 1c) to score candidate triples for link
prediction in knowledge bases.
Datasets. Link prediction algorithms are commonly evaluated on FB15k, a subset of the relational database Freebase, and WN18, a subset of WordNet. In ,
a serious ﬂaw was observed in both datasets: The presence of inverse triplet pairs
t = (e1, r, e2) and t′ = (e2, r−1, e1) with t in the training set and t′ in the test
set. This reduces a large part of the prediction task to memorization of aﬀected
triplet pairs, and a simple baseline LinkFeat employing a linear classiﬁer and features of observed training relations was shown to outperform existing systems
by a large margin. Toutanova and Chen proposed a reduced dataset FB15k-237
with all such inverse triplet pairs removed. We therefore choose FB15k-237 as
our primary evaluation dataset. Since FB15k and WN18 are still widely used, we
also include results on these datasets using the splits introduced in (Table 3).
Table 3. Number of entities and relation types along with the number of edges per
split for the three datasets.
Train edges 141,442 483,142
Val. edges
Test edges
M. Schlichtkrull et al.
Baselines. A common baseline for both experiments is direct optimization of
DistMult . This factorization strategy is known to perform well on standard
datasets, and furthermore corresponds to a version of our model with ﬁxed entity
embeddings in place of the R-GCN encoder as described in Sect. 4. As a second
baseline, we add the simple neighbor-based LinkFeat algorithm proposed in .
We further compare to ComplEx and HolE , two state-of-the-art
link prediction models for FB15k and WN18. ComplEx facilitates modeling of
asymmetric relations by generalizing DistMult to the complex domain, while
HolE replaces the vector-matrix product with circular correlation. Finally, we
include comparisons with two classic algorithms – CP and TransE .
Table 4. Results on FB15k-237, a reduced version of FB15k with problematic inverse
relation pairs removed. CP, TransE, and ComplEx were evaluated using the code published for , while HolE was evaluated using the code published for . R-GCN+
denotes an ensemble between R-GCN and DistMult.
Results. We provide results using two commonly used evaluation metrics: mean
reciprocal rank (MRR) and Hits at n (H@n). Following , both metrics can
be computed in a raw and a ﬁltered setting. We report ﬁltered and raw MRR,
and ﬁltered Hits at 1, 3, and 10.
We evaluate hyperparameter choices on the respective validation splits. We
found a normalization constant deﬁned as ci,r = ci =
i |, i.e. applied
across relation types, to work best. For FB15k and WN18, we report results
using basis decomposition (Eq. 3) with two basis functions, and a single encoding
layer with 200-dimensional embeddings. For FB15k-237, we found block decomposition (Eq. 4) to perform best, using two layers with block dimension 5 × 5
and 500-dimensional embeddings. We regularize the encoder via edge dropout
applied before normalization, with dropout rate 0.2 for self-loops and 0.4 for
other edges. We apply l2 regularization to the decoder with a penalty of 0.01.
We use the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.01. For the baseline
and the other factorizations, we found the parameters from – apart from
the dimensionality on FB15k-237 – to work best, though to make the systems
Modeling Relational Data with Graph Convolutional Networks
comparable we maintain the same number of negative samples (i.e. ω = 1). We
use full-batch optimization for both the baselines and our model.
On FB15k, local context in the form of inverse relations is expected to dominate the performance of the factorizations, contrasting with the design of the
R-GCN model. Preliminary experiments revealed that R-GCN still improved
performance on high-degree vertices, where contextual knowledge is abundant.
Since the two models for this dataset appear complementary, we attempt to
combine the strengths of both into a single model R-GCN+: f(s, r, t)R-GCN+ =
αf(s, r, t)R-GCN + (1−α)f(s, r, t)DistMult, with α = 0.4 selected on FB15k development data. To facilitate a fair comparison to R-GCN, we use half-size embeddings for each component of R-GCN+. On FB15k and WN18 where local and
long-distance information can both provide strong solutions, we expect R-GCN+
to outperform each individual model. On FB15k-237 where local information is
less salient, we do not expect the combination model to outperform a pure R-
GCN model signiﬁcantly.
In Table 4, we show results for FB15k-237 where (as previously discussed)
inverse relation pairs have been removed and the LinkFeat baseline fails to generalize5. Here, our R-GCN model outperforms the DistMult baseline by a large
margin of 29.8%, highlighting the importance of a separate encoder model. As
expected from our earlier analysis, R-GCN and R-GCN+ show similar performance on this dataset.
The R-GCN model further compares favorably against other factorization
methods, despite relying on a DistMult decoder which shows comparatively weak
performance when used without an encoder. The high variance between diﬀerent
decoder-only models suggests that performance could be improved by combining
R-GCN with a task-speciﬁc decoder selected through validation. As decoder
choice is orthogonal to the development of our encoder model, we leave this as
a promising avenue for future work.
In Table 5, we evaluate the R-GCN model and the combination model on
FB15k and WN18. On the FB15k and WN18 datasets, R-GCN and R-GCN+
both outperform the DistMult baseline, but like all other systems underperform
on these two datasets compared to the LinkFeat algorithm. The strong result
from this baseline highlights the contribution of inverse relation pairs to highperformance solutions on these datasets.
Related Work
Relational Modeling
Our encoder-decoder approach to link prediction relies on DistMult in the
decoder, a special and simpler case of the RESCAL factorization , more
5 Our numbers are not directly comparable to those reported in , as they use
pruning both for training and testing (see their Sects. 3.3.1 and 4.2). Since their
pruning schema is not fully speciﬁed (values of the relation-speciﬁc parameter t are
not given) and the code is not available, it is not possible to replicate their set-up.
M. Schlichtkrull et al.
Table 5. Results on the FB15k and WN18 datasets. Results marked (*) taken from
 . Results marks (**) taken from .
Filtered 1
Filtered 1
0.248 0.634
0.522 0.718 0.814 0.526 0.813
0.701 0.921 0.943
0.251 0.651
0.541 0.736 0.825 0.553 0.814
0.686 0.928 0.955
0.262 0.696
0.601 0.760 0.842 0.561 0.819
0.697 0.929 0.964
0.152 0.326
0.219 0.376 0.532 0.075 0.058
0.049 0.080 0.125
0.221 0.380
0.231 0.472 0.641 0.335 0.454
0.089 0.823 0.934
0.232 0.524
0.402 0.613 0.739 0.616 0.938
0.930 0.945 0.949
ComplEx* 0.242 0.692
0.599 0.759 0.840 0.587 0.941
0.936 0.945 0.947
eﬀective than the original RESCAL in the context of multi-relational knowledge
bases. Numerous alternative factorizations have been proposed and studied in
the context of SRL, including both (bi-)linear and nonlinear ones (e.g., ). Many of these approaches can be regarded as modiﬁcations or
special cases of classic tensor decomposition methods such as CP or Tucker; for
an overview of tensor decomposition literature we refer the reader to .
Incorporation of paths between entities in knowledge bases has recently
received considerable attention. We can roughly classify previous work into (1)
methods creating auxiliary triples, which are then added to the learning objective
of a factorization model ; (2) approaches using paths (or walks) as features
when predicting edges ; or (3) doing both at the same time . The ﬁrst
direction is largely orthogonal to ours, as we would also expect improvements
from adding similar terms to our loss (in other words, extending our decoder).
The second research line is more comparable; R-GCNs provide a computationally
cheaper alternative to these path-based models. Direct comparison is somewhat
complicated as path-based methods used diﬀerent datasets (e.g. sub-sampled
sets of walks from a knowledge base).
Neural Networks on Graphs
Our R-GCN encoder model is closely related to a number of works in the area of
neural networks on graphs. It is primarily motivated as an adaption of previous
work on GCNs for large-scale and highly multi-relational data,
characteristic of realistic knowledge bases.
Early work in this area includes the graph neural network (GNN) .
A number of extensions to the original GNN have been proposed, most notably
 , both of which use gating mechanisms to facilitate optimization.
Modeling Relational Data with Graph Convolutional Networks
R-GCNs can further be seen as a sub-class of message passing neural networks
 , which encompass a number of previous neural models for graphs, including
GCNs, under a diﬀerentiable message passing interpretation.
As mentioned in Sect. 5, we do not in this paper experiment with subsampling of neighborhoods, a choice which limits our training algorithm to full-batch
descent. Recent work including have experimented with various subsampling strategies for graph-based neural networks, demonstrating promising
Conclusions
We have introduced relational graph convolutional networks (R-GCNs) and
demonstrated their eﬀectiveness in the context of two standard statistical relation modeling problems: link prediction and entity classiﬁcation. For the entity
classiﬁcation problem, we have demonstrated that the R-GCN model can act
as a competitive, end-to-end trainable graph-based encoder. For link prediction,
the R-GCN model with DistMult factorization as decoder outperformed direct
optimization of the factorization model, and achieved competitive results on
standard link prediction benchmarks. Enriching the factorization model with
an R-GCN encoder proved especially valuable for the challenging FB15k-237
dataset, yielding a 29.8% improvement over the decoder-only baseline.
There are several ways in which our work could be extended. For example,
the graph autoencoder model could be considered in combination with other
factorization models, such as ConvE , which can be better suited for modeling
asymmetric relations. It is also straightforward to integrate entity features in R-
GCNs, which would be beneﬁcial both for link prediction and entity classiﬁcation
problems. To address the scalability of our method, it would be worthwhile to
explore subsampling techniques, such as in . Lastly, it would be promising to
replace the current form of summation over neighboring nodes and relation types
with a data-dependent attention mechanism. Beyond modeling knowledge bases,
R-GCNs can be generalized to other applications where relation factorization
models have been shown eﬀective (e.g. relation extraction).
Acknowledgements. We would like to thank Diego Marcheggiani, Ethan Fetaya,
and Christos Louizos for helpful discussions and comments. This project is supported
by the European Research Council (ERC StG BroadSem 678254), the SAP Innovation
Center Network and the Dutch National Science Foundation (NWO VIDI 639.022.518).