Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Residential implementation of critical-peak pricing of electricity
 
Herter, Karen
Publication Date
2006-06-29
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org
Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California
Residential implementation of critical-peak pricing of electricity
Karen Herter*
Energy and Resources Group, University of California at Berkeley, 310 Barrows Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, MS-3111, One Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, CA 94720
This paper investigates how critical-peak pricing (CPP) affects households with
different usage and income levels, with the goal of informing policy makers who are
considering the implementation of CPP tariffs in the residential sector. Using a subset of
data from the California Statewide Pricing Pilot of 2003-2004, average load change
during summer events, annual percent bill change, and post-experiment satisfaction
ratings are calculated across six customer segments, categorized by historical usage and
income levels. Findings show that high-use customers respond significantly more in kW
reduction than do low-use customers, while low-use customers save significantly more in
percentage reduction of annual electricity bills than do high-use customers – results that
challenge the strategy of targeting only high-use customers for CPP tariffs. Across
income levels, average load and bill changes were statistically indistinguishable, as were
satisfaction rates – results that are compatible with a strategy of full-scale implementation
of CPP rates in the residential sector. Finally, the high-use customers earning less than
* Corresponding author. Tel: +1-916-654-4328; fax: +1-916-653-3478
Email address: .
$50,000 annually were the most likely of the groups to see bill increases – about 5% saw
bill increases of 10% or more – suggesting that any residential CPP implementation
might consider targeting this customer group for increased energy efficiency efforts.
Keywords: electricity rates, residential electricity, demand response
1. Introduction
Between May 2000 and June 2001, peak wholesale prices on the California spot
electricity market sustained record highs, and capacity shortages were frequent. While
factors leading up to the onset of the California electricity crisis are complex, there is
reasonable consensus that the lack of real-time response by retail demand was a major
contributor to its severity and duration . Since that time, increasing real-time demand response to electricity
price changes by strengthening the real-time price link between wholesale and retail
markets has become an explicit policy goal at both state and national levels. In California,
policy makers have set a goal for 2007 of meeting 5% of peak demand with a priceresponsive load . At the national level, the Energy
Policy Act of 2005 states that it is now “the policy of the United States that time-based
pricing and other forms of demand response…shall be encouraged, the deployment of
such technology and devices that enable electricity customers to participate in such
pricing and demand response systems shall be facilitated, and unnecessary barriers to
demand response participation in energy, capacity and ancillary service markets shall be
eliminated.”
Historically, utilities have used two strategies to reduce residential peak load:
direct load-control (DLC) programs and time-of-use (TOU) tariffs. Direct load-control
programs, which have existed in California since the early 1980s, offer households
recurring monthly bill credits in exchange for utility control of large electrical end uses,
most commonly central air conditioning. One reason for the popularity of DLC programs
is that, unlike price-based demand response programs, DLC programs are feasible with
the existing metering infrastructure.
While effective in providing load relief when warranted by capacity shortage,
DLC programs may be seen as inequitable for three reasons. First, DLC programs are
voluntary, offering fixed financial incentives for unmeasured load reductions. This
encourages adverse selection that results in “free riders” – participants who provide little
to no load relief during load-control events, but still benefit as much as do those
providing significant load reductions. Second, although customers without central air
conditioning do not cause system peak demand surges on hot days, they are not eligible
for program benefits. Third, when payments to participants exceed system benefits, these
same customers must suffer higher electricity rates to pay for the bill savings enjoyed by
the program participants.
The other common residential peak reduction strategy in use today is voluntary
TOU pricing. TOU tariffs typically have high peak prices on weekday afternoons and
lower off-peak prices for the remaining hours of the week. Experimentation with TOU
rates in the residential sector indicates that TOU prices flatten load shapes by decreasing
usage in the high-price periods and increasing usage in the low-price periods . The
shortcoming of TOU tariffs is that they do not provide additional incentives to reduce
demand further on days when the system is most stressed, because they reflect only longterm average expectations of daily peak marginal costs .
The potential shortcomings of DLC programs and TOU tariffs, combined with the
decreasing cost and increasing functionality of electricity meters, have prompted growing
interest in encouraging peak reductions through dynamic rates. By more closely linking
short-term wholesale and retail electricity prices, tariffs based on dynamic rates provide
the reliability benefits of peak load reductions, while improving the allocation of
electricity procurement costs among residential customers with diverse demands
 .
More than any other retail electricity rate structure, real-time pricing (RTP)
closely tracks time-dependent marginal wholesale costs. Hourly RTP tariffs have been
implemented successfully for large industrial and commercial firms .
Notwithstanding the long-run efficiency benefits of RTP , policy
makers generally consider hourly RTP too complex for small electricity users and are
thus reluctant to allow residential customers to face the inherently volatile wholesale
market. An exception to this generalization can be found in Illinois, where state
legislation has recently prompted the first RTP option for residential customers .
Where dynamic rates are being considered, but RTP is deemed infeasible for
residential customers, a reasonable alternative is critical-peak pricing (CPP). CPP tariffs
augment a time-invariant or TOU rate structure with a dispatchable high or “critical”
price during periods of system stress. The critical price can occur for a limited number of
discretionary days per year, or when system or market conditions meet pre-defined
criteria. Participating customers receive notification of the dispatchable high price,
typically a day in advance, and in some cases are provided with automated control
technologies to support efficient load drop. Because all of the prices in a CPP rate are
preset, CPP is not as economically efficient as RTP; this same characteristic, however,
also makes CPP politically more appealing, because it diminishes the potentially large
price risk associated with RTP.
Empirical evidence supports the view that CPP can achieve significant load
reductions during critical periods. In California, households supplied with sophisticated
end-use controls dropped an average of 41% of baseline load (i.e., load that would have
occurred absent the CPP price signal) over 2-hour hot-weather CPP events. In the
absence of end-use controls, households dropped an average of 13% of baseline load over
5-hour hot-weather CPP events .
While the effectiveness of residential CPP in California to deliver load reduction
appears certain, there is an on-going debate as to whether to implement CPP, because
how to do so remains controversial. The objective of this paper is to provide empirical
evidence that aids in the decision about which, if any, CPP implementation schemes
might be considered for the residential sector.
The analysis described here uses data from 457 residences, determined to be
representative of California households (see Appendix), that participated in the California
Statewide Pricing Pilot (SPP) of 2003 and 2004. Average load changes during summer
events, annual bill changes, and post-experiment satisfaction values are calculated across
six customer segments, categorized by historical usage and income level.
The analysis shows that high-use customers respond significantly more, in kW
reduction, than do low-use customers, while low-use customers save significantly more,
in percentage reduction of annual electricity bills, than do high-use customers. For equity
reasons, these results challenge the strategy of targeting only high-use customers for CPP
Across income levels, average load and bill changes were statistically
indistinguishable, as were satisfaction rates – results that are compatible with a strategy
of full-scale implementation of CPP rates in the residential sector. Finally, the high-use
customers earning less than $50,000 annually were the most likely of the groups to see
bill increases – about 5% saw bill increases of 10% or more – suggesting that any
residential CPP implementation might consider targeting this customer group for
increased energy efficiency efforts.
2. The CPP implementation problem
The three primary criteria for designing sound rate structures are capital
attraction, consumer rationing, and fairness to ratepayers . Capital
attraction, or meeting revenue requirements, can be accomplished through proper design
of nearly any tariff structure, including those based on time-invariant, TOU, CPP or RTP
rates. The consumer rationing objective requires rates that assign resources to those who
value them above the marginal cost of their provision. If, in the short term, this demand
exceeds supply, then resources should be assigned to those who value them the most. In
theory, CPP rates that are designed to more closely reflect short-term wholesale
electricity costs meet this criterion better than do time-invariant or TOU rates, but not as
well as do RTP rates. The final objective, fairness to ratepayers, obligates utilities to
distribute revenue requirements fairly among ratepayers, such that equals are treated
equally, and unequals are treated unequally. Under time-invariant rates, customers with
low peak to off-peak ratios subsidize those with high peak to off-peak ratios. Thus, this
third objective can better be met through rates that more closely reflect time-varying
wholesale costs, because they more accurately apportion costs according to the hour and
day of use.
Where CPP and RTP tend to fall into doubt is in the “practical” attributes of
“simplicity, certainty, convenience of payment, economy in collection, understandability,
public acceptability, and feasibility of application” . Where these
attributes are uncertain or not met, two strategies are commonly used to enhance them.
Dynamic tariffs can be targeted to those customer segments likely to have a high demand
response. Alternatively or at the same time, the tariff might be offered as a "voluntary” or
"default" (rather than mandatory) tariff, allowing customers to "opt in" or "opt out" of the
new tariff. These policy decisions are discussed in greater detail in the next two subsections.
Full-scale vs. targeted tariffs
To improve cost effectiveness, CPP tariffs can be required of or offered to only
those customers who are most likely to contribute load relief. This is typically seen as a
win-win situation, providing utilities with improved cost effectiveness and participants
with lower bills. For example, consumer advocates in California have proposed that CPP
rates be targeted to the largest residential users of electricity, who, they say, are likely to
have the greatest demand response and greatest bill savings, thus improving customer
acceptance, reducing adverse bill impacts, and improving cost effectiveness in
comparison to a class-wide rate.
While this strategy is intuitively appealing, the implied relationships between
customer size, demand response and bill effects are not obvious. Before deciding whether
targeting is an appropriate strategy, one should first determine whether the customer class
can be easily divided into meaningful segments that respond differentially. Given
significantly different response rates, one must then ascertain the differential bill impacts
of these same customer segments. If customers that are more responsive benefit
financially, while those that are less responsive lose financially, targeted implementation
might be a sound strategy, all else being equal. If these relationships do not hold,
however, equity concerns might discount the use of targeting to improve cost
effectiveness.
This decision process is illustrated in Figure 1, which shows the combined effect
of customer response and bill savings on the decision to target tariffs to only high-use
customers. If high-use customers do not respond more than low-use customers in
absolute terms, then targeting will not improve the cost effectiveness of the tariff. If highuse customers respond significantly more and save proportionally less on their electricity
bills than do low-use customers, the use of targeting to improve cost effectiveness is
challenged by equity issues. If high-use customers respond significantly more and save
proportionally more on their electricity bills than do low-use customers, then the use of
targeting to improve cost effectiveness is not challenged by these criteria – which is not
to say that targeting is recommended. That is, meeting the criteria is a necessary but not
sufficient condition for recommending the use of targeting, since a cost-effective
response by low-customers, no matter how small, might still warrant full-scale
implementation.
This study does not include an explicit cost effectiveness analysis, which requires
that the energy cost savings exceed the CPP implementation costs. Where local
distribution companies have already decided to install an advanced metering infrastructure (AMI), incremental costs include billing and marketing costs. The costs avoided
by CPP implementation include energy and capacity cost savings due to household load
reduction. Given the complexities specific to each potential tariff design and
implementation , this issue is well beyond the scope of the present
Figure 1. Decision process for customer targeting
challenged
Targeting not
challenged
High-use customers
save more money than
low-use customers?
High-use customers
respond more than
low-use customers?
Mandatory vs. default or voluntary tariffs
If the primary objectives of implementing CPP are customer rationing and
fairness to ratepayers, without respect to customer acceptance or cost effectiveness, then
full-scale mandatory CPP participation seems the obvious choice. Under this scheme, all
customers face the same high prices during critical hours, irrespective of customer
characteristics. This implementation scheme is generally considered politically difficult,
inviting strong objection because of the significant departure from the status quo of the
time-invariant tariffs that now exist in California .
When low or uncertain customer acceptance levels foretell potential political
backlash from full-scale mandatory implementation, rates offered on a voluntary (opt in)
or default (opt out) basis can be safer alternatives. In both cases, customers are given at
least one rate choice besides CPP, allowing those that are unhappy with the new tariff to
choose another. In the case of voluntary tariffs, customers must actively choose to switch
or “opt in” to the new CPP tariff. In the case of default tariffs, customers are
automatically placed on the new tariff, and must actively choose to switch or “opt out” to
an alternative tariff that mimics the status quo.
The tradeoff between default and voluntary tariffs is mainly one of participation
rates. In California, the initial opt-in rate for the SPP was 20% with a sign-up bonus. At
the end of the pilot, about half of these CPP participants chose to remain on the CPP rate
in absence of a participation payment, suggesting a voluntary participation rate of less
than 10% for CPP tariffs. In Washington State, time-differentiated tariffs offered on an
opt-out basis enjoyed participation rates of about 90% .
The potential costs of increased customer acceptance for default or voluntary CPP
tariffs with respect to mandatory CPP tariffs are twofold. First, peak-demand reductions
are almost certainly lower than what could be achieved with 100% participation. Second,
voluntary CPP tariffs could encourage adverse self-selection such that households with
low peak to off-peak ratios benefit from time-varying rates, while those with high peak to
off-peak ratios benefit from time-invariant rates . This situation might cause shortfalls in a utility's cost recovery or violate the
primary objective of fairness to ratepayers unless the tariff alternatives properly reflect
risk premiums. Furthermore, while default and opt-in tariffs might have better initial
customer acceptance, high overall satisfaction rates for both the SPP and the Washington
rates provide evidence that long-term customer satisfaction might hinge more on the
structure of the rate and customer service than the initial subscription circumstances.
Although the choices among mandatory, default and voluntary rates are complex,
one of the important factors needed to guide this decision is expected customer
acceptance of the proposed new tariff. If customer acceptance is expected to be high, the
relative benefits of mandatory implementation might warrant its consideration. If
customer acceptance is expected to be low or to vary substantially across important
customer segments, default or voluntary tariffs might be safer policy choices. Ultimately,
perceived bill effects might also affect the sustainability of a tariff through longer-term
customer acceptance; thus some policy makers require evidence that customer bill
impacts will not be large.
Figure 2 illustrates some of the conditions influencing decisions about mandatory
implementation. The decision involves weighing the administrative ease and demandresponse benefits of mandatory tariffs against the potential customer backlash. If highincome customers are likely to save significantly more on their electricity bills than lowincome customers, then welfare considerations could make mandatory implementation
politically difficult. At the same time, if certain customer segments are more dissatisfied
with the program than are other customer segments, potential customer backlash might
preclude mandatory implementation. If neither adverse bill effects nor satisfaction levels
differ across customer segments, mandatory implementation is not challenged. This is not
sufficient evidence, however, to recommend mandatory implementation either, since such
a decision must take into consideration economic and political considerations not
addressed here.
Figure 2. Decision process for mandatory implementation
implementation
not challenged
implementation
challenged
Differential
satisfaction
High-income customers
benefit more than
low-income customers?
3. Approach and Results
To shed light on the implementation choices described above, this paper uses
load, billing and satisfaction data from 457 residential CPP customers, shown to be
representative of the California population (see Appendix), to answer the following
questions.
1. Does response to CPP events vary across household types? If all households
provide an equal amount of load relief, targeting does not have the potential to
improve the cost effectiveness of the rate.
2. Do electricity-bill impacts vary across household types? The answer to this
question depends on the structure of the pre-existing tariff and the new CPP
tariff. CPP rates are designed to be revenue neutral, meaning that bills will not
change for non-responding households with a usage pattern identical to the
class average. Revenue neutrality, however, does not perfectly preempt
adverse bill impacts. Customers with high peak to off-peak consumption
ratios relative to the class average are likely to see a bill increase if they do not
respond to the higher peak and critical-peak prices. If adverse bill impacts are
focused on particularly sensitive customer classes, for example low-income
households, mandatory CPP might be viewed as being regressive, and thus
politically unsustainable. In addition, favorable bill impacts on low-use
households would challenge the strategy of targeting only high-use customers.
3. Does customer satisfaction with CPP vary across household types? Previous
studies have shown relatively high customer satisfaction with the CPP rates
tested in the SPP . If this high
customer acceptance is not distributed equally across all household types, a
mandatory implementation scheme might be considered undesirable.
Given the interest in usage and welfare effects, both historical electricity usage
and income levels are used to divide the residential class. Although electricity
consumption is generally presumed to increase with income, an exploratory analysis of
the relationship between usage and income indicates that, in the sample of 457 SPP
customers, income levels explain less than 8% of household electricity consumption
(Figure 3). In this sample, at least, a substantial number of low-income households are
high-use customers and a substantial portion of high-income households are low-use
customers.
Figure 3. Historical monthly summer usage and income
R2 = 0.079
Annual Income Level
Monthly Electricity Usage,
Summer 2002 (kWh)
High Usage
Historical usage values, provided by the three California utilities, are average monthly kWh usage values measured during the summer
of 2002. Income levels are taken from a survey distributed in 2003, before the SPP began. Participants chose from six possible
household income levels: less than $25,000, $25,000 to $49,999, $50,000 to $74,999, $75,000 to $99,999, $100,000 to $149,999, and
$150,000 or more. For analytical purposes, these values were recoded as $15,000 for the lowest income level, $175,000 for the highest
income level, and at the range mid-points for the remaining income levels.
The low correlation (R2 = 0.079) between income and historical summer usage
suggests that the analysis requires a finer delineation of customers ,prompting a division
of the data sample into the six groups shown in Table 1. The remainder of this section
presents the mean satisfaction, response, and bill-change values for each group based on
empirical evidence from the SPP experiment.
Does response to CPP events vary across household types?
Load reduction during CPP events is critical for a tariff implementation where
demand response is a stated policy goal. Previous analysis of SPP data has reported
significant load reductions during CPP events . Determination of
whether a CPP tariff targeted to high-use customers might be more cost effective than a
full-scale tariff implies investigating how load reductions vary across customers with
different historical consumption levels. Further division by income-level categories
provides initial insight into whether low-income homes might be disproportionately
affected by CPP rates. The results of the analysis are presented in Figure 4.
Figure 4. Mean household kW change across 12 CPP events, July through September 2004
Annual Income
Mean Peak-Load Change (kWh/h)
$0 - $24,999
$25,000 - $49,999
Mean peak-load change is the average difference between the actual and baseline loads, where baseline load is an estimate of the load
that would have occurred in the absence of a CPP event. Actual and baseline loads are estimated for each customer using regression
techniques described in .
Figure 4 shows that kW response differs substantially between customers using
less than 600 kWh per summer month and those using at least 600 kWh per summer
month. Overall, kW response by low-use customers (shown by the diamond pattern) is
not statistically different from zero, while high-use customers (shown by the square
pattern) reduce loads by a statistically-significant amount during CPP events (α = 0.05,
the standard adopted throughout the paper). This provides evidence that, given similar
per-customer administrative and marketing costs, a rate targeted at high-use customers
has the potential to be more cost-effective than a full-scale program.1
In the low-use category, response levels are statistically indistinguishable across
the three income levels. In the high-use category, the low-income ($0-$24,999) and
middle-income ($25,000-$49,999) responses do not differ significantly from the highincome (≥$50,000) response. These results provide preliminary evidence that low-income
and middle-income customers might not be unduly disadvantaged by CPP rates, since
they respond as much as or more than do high-income customers at the same usage level.
This finding is preliminary because load reduction during CPP events is only part of the
bill-change equation. Differences in daily load shapes are likely to have a more
pronounced effect on bill changes than will load changes occurring just a few times per
year. To further investigate this issue, the following section addresses bill changes by
customer type.
1 An analysis of differential administrative and marketing costs is beyond the scope of this analysis.
Do electricity-bill impacts vary across household types?
Knowledge of distributional bill impacts or the lack thereof is a critical input into
the initial decision of whether and how to implement CPP. This information is important
because bill-change estimates help identify potential winners and losers. A CPP design
that benefits a few at the expense of many has little chance of customer acceptance and
regulatory approval.
Using calculations provided by the SPP sponsoring utilities, the bill-change value
used in this analysis is calculated as (x-y)/y, where x is the dollar amount of the CPP bill
and y is the dollar amount that would have been billed under the otherwise applicable
tariff, given the same usage. The results, presented in Figure 5, show that the overall
mean bill change for both high and low-usage customers is significantly less than zero (α
= 0.05), meaning that, on average, the SPP participants save money through CPP rates.
Moreover, low-usage customers save proportionally more money on a CPP tariff than do
high-usage customers. Across income levels, mean bill-change values are statistically
indistinguishable. These results imply that (1) customers, on average, save money on
CPP rates, (2) low-usage customers save proportionally more than do high-use
customers, and (3) savings are statistically indistinguishable across income levels.
Figure 5. Mean annual change in electricity bills
Annual Income
Mean Annual Bill Change (% of Bill)
$0 - $24,999
$25,000 - $49,999
Bill change is the utility-calculated difference between the average monthly bills sent out between October 1, 2003 and September 30,
2004 under the CPP tariff and what would have been billed under the old tariff given the same consumption pattern, divided by the
latter. Thus, this variable represents the percentage bill change under the new tariff with respect to the old tariff.
While the results in Figure 5 affirm that CPP does not cause adverse bill impacts
on average, they also imply that some customer types are more likely to see a bill
increase due to CPP implementation. In particular, the insignificant bill savings for the
low-income ($0-$24,999) and middle income ($25,000-$49,999) customer segments in
the high-use category warranted further investigation. A closer look at the individual
billing data showed that 5.0% of these customers saw bill increases of more than 10%.
Based on these findings, future CPP rate policies might consider providing assistance to
these customers for appliance and building efficiency measures.
Does customer satisfaction with CPP vary across household types?
In planning a new tariff, it is important to test customer reaction to its
implementation. Low customer acceptance can engender public and political backlash,
while high customer acceptance can mean smooth adoption. Unfortunately, asking people
how they might react to a hypothetical rate is unlikely to provide accurate answers.
For this analysis satisfaction ratings given by customers actually exposed to CPP
rates were used as predictors of acceptance levels. Figure 6 shows the average
satisfaction ratings for the six groups of customers, organized by usage and income level.
The average ratings, ranging from 7.7 to 8.3 out of a maximum of 10 points, are slightly
higher for low-use customers than for high-use customers, but the difference across usage
is statistically insignificant. Likewise, satisfaction ratings across income levels are
statistically indistinguishable. These results imply that customer satisfaction with CPP
tariffs is high and does not vary significantly across income or usage levels.
Figure 6. Mean customer satisfaction ratings from a post-experiment survey
Annual Income
Mean Satisfaction Rating
High Usage
$0 - $24,999
$25,000 - $49,999
The variable satisfaction is taken from a post-experiment survey of about one-third of the CPP participants. This variable contains
responses to the question: “Overall, how satisfied are you with the new pricing program?” Respondents were directed to rate the
program using a number between 1 and 10, where 1 was “very dissatisfied” and 10 was “very satisfied.”
4. Conclusions
We conclude by applying the empirical evidence presented above to analyze the
choices of tariff implementation. The analysis of load change during CPP events
presented here indicates that high-use customers respond significantly more than do lowuse customers. On average, low-use customers dropped 0.024 kWh/h during CPP events, while high-use
customers 
dropped 0.208 kWh/h during CPP events. In contrast, the analysis of CPP customer bill
change indicates that low-use customers saved an average of 4.0% on their electricity
bills, while high-use customers saved an average of only 1.7%. These results suggest that
targeting high-use customers to improve the cost effectiveness of CPP tariffs is
challenged by equity concerns: those who would benefit most from the tariff should not
be excluded from participation or marketing efforts (Figure 7).
Figure 7. Results for the targeting decision
challenged
Targeting not
challenged
High-use customers
save more money than
low-use customers?
High-use customers
respond more than
low-use customers?
The bill-savings analysis also showed that on average low-income customers did
not pay more under CPP tariffs, and that savings across income levels were statistically
indistinguishable. In addition, satisfaction rates across all customer segments were
uniformly high, averaging between 7.7 and 8.3 out of a maximum of 10. Combined these
results are compatible with a policy of mandatory implementation (Figure 8). This does
not, however, imply that mandatory implementation is recommended by these results,
since economic and political considerations, which differ from jurisdiction to jurisdiction,
are not addressed here.
Figure 8. Results for the mandatory implementation decision
implementation
not challenged
implementation
challenged
Differential
satisfaction
High-income customers
benefit more than
low-income customers?
Moreover, the bill savings of the two lowest-income levels in the high-use group
were statistically indistinguishable from zero, while the remaining six groups showed
statistically significant savings. To offset this disparity, those considering full-scale CPP
rates might focus efficiency and education efforts on high-use, low-income customers.
The overall conclusion from the above analysis is that CPP can be considered for
a voluntary, default or mandatory electric tariff implementation without concern for
differential impacts by income or electricity usage. As a voluntary tariff, care should be
taken to ensure minimization of cross-tariff subsidies, since those expecting to pay more
on CPP rates are likely to choose to remain on time-invariant rates. Although the
voluntary pilot study investigated here received uniformly high satisfaction ratings across
customer segments, consideration of a mandatory CPP tariff should be particularly wary
of customer and political backlash. Consideration of CPP as a default tariff, having
elements of both mandatory and voluntary tariffs, must address both of these issues.
There is no obvious reason to think that the group comparisons and major
conclusions presented in this paper would not hold outside the pilot – to different
implementation schemes (e.g. default or mandatory), geographic areas and seasons. In
contrast, one should be cautious in extrapolating the specific values indicated in this
paper. Although the customer sample used in this analysis has been shown to be
representative of the California population based on measured variables (see Appendix),
there might still be unmeasured variables distinguishing participants from nonparticipants. For example, there was no attempt to define or measure any variable, for
example “agreeableness” or “responsiveness,” that might predispose customers to
participate in the pilot, respond to prices, and give the program a high satisfaction rating.
Thus, extrapolation of these values to a voluntary program within California is
supportable, but extrapolation of these values to any other implementation scheme or
geographic area should be done with caution.
Finally, the focus of this paper has been the implementation of CPP tariffs. This
does not imply that CPP should be implemented to the exclusion of other pricing and
capacity rationing mechanisms. For example, RTP and properly designed reliabilitydifferentiation mechanisms can provide important contributions to system operations
while simultaneously providing increased customer choice .
Thus, consideration of CPP implementation should occur in the context of a broader
demand response portfolio.
Acknowledgements
The work described in this document was funded by the California Energy
Commission under contract number IJA-105-02. This paper was written in partial
fulfillment of the requirements for a Ph.D. in Energy and Resources at UC Berkeley. I
thank my advisors, Alex Farrell, Lee Friedman and Severin Borenstein for their guidance.
The author is solely responsible for any errors or omissions contained in this paper.