Mr. F. Y. Edgeworth on
knife-edge ul comes in front of the vertical plane through nl;
and, since the lower point of attachment of the compensating
spring t I is far below nl, a couple is introduced which com-
pensates for the greater upward force.
The same is the case
in the reverse order, when the lever is deflected upwards.
Hence if the pull exerted by t~ and the other conditions
mentioned below be properly adjusted, the horizontal lever
may be made to have any desired period of free oscillation.
In actual practice some positive stability must be given to
the lever in order that its position of equilibrium may be
definite ; but its period may be made so great that, even if
oscillations of considerable ampl;tude in its own period are
set up, they will be so slow compared with those of the earth-
quake, that the undulating line so drawn will still be practi-
cally straight, so far as the earthquake record is concerned.
In order to insure good compensation, the condition must be
fulfilled that the rate of variation of the compensating couple
is always the same as that of the supporting couple.
this be not the case, the pendulum nmst either be left with
excessive positive stability for small deflections~ or it will be
continually liable to become unstable by the compensating
couple becoming too great when the deflection exceeds a cer-
tain limit.
In the present instance, let the modulus of the
supporting spring be M, the arm at which it acts a ; let the
modulus of the compensating spring be M1, and the distance
between nl and Ul be al.
Then for a deflection of the lever
equal to 8 we have, on the supposition that the length of the
supporting spring ,and link is great compared with al,. for the
return couple Ma ~ cos/? sin 8-- Mlal ~ cos t? sin t?-- Mlfl sin t?,
where fl + a 1 is the total elongation of the spring for the hori-
zontal p.osition of the lever.
Now our condition necessitates
being either zero or negative; and in order to keep within
this condition the length of the unstretched spring and link
are made to reach a little above nl, and the height of u I is
made adjustable, so that Mlal ~ can be adjusted to be as near
Ma ~ as may be desired.
XLI. On Discordant Observations.
By F. Y. EDGEWORTH,
M.A., Lecturer at King's College~ London*.
ISCORDANT observations may be defined as those which
present the appearance of differing in respect of their
law of frequency from other observations with which they ale
In the treatment of such observations there is
great diversity between authorities ; but this discordance of
* Communicated by the Author.
Discordant Observations'.
methods may be reduced by the following reflection.
methods are adapted to different hypotheses about the cause of
a discordant observation ; and different hypotheses are true, or
appropriate, according as the subject-matter, or the degree of
accuracy required, is different.
To fix the ideas, I shall specify three hypotheses : not pre-
tending to be exhaustive, and leaving it to the practical reader
to estimate the ~ priori probability of' each hypothesis.
(a) According to the first hypothesis there are only two
species of erroneous observations--errors of observation proper,
and mistakes.
The frequency of the former is approximately
represented by the curve y-- --~e-h~'2; where the constant ]~
is the same for all the observations.
But the mathematical
law* only holds for a certain range of error.
Beyond certain
limits we may be certaiu that an error of the first category
does not occur.
On the other hand, errors of' the second
category do not occur within those limits.
The smallest
mistake is greater than the largest error of observation proper.
The following example is a type of this hypothesis.
we have a group of numbers, ibrmed each by the addition of
ten digits taken at random from Mathematical Tables.
suppose that the only possible mistake is the addition or sub-
traction of 100 from any one of these sums.
ttere the errors
proper approximately conform to a probability curve (whosej'
modulus is ~/165), and the mistakes$ are quite distinct from
the errors proper.
Here are seven such numbers: each of the first six was
formed by the addition of ten random digits, and the seventh
by prefixing a one to a number similarly formed--
This follows from the supposition that an err(Jr of observation is the
oint result of a considerable, but fimite, number of small sources of error.
he law of facility is in such a case what Mr. Galton calls a Binomial~ or
rather a Multinomial.
(See his paper in Phil. Maff. Jan. 1875, and the
remarks of the present writer in Camb. Phil. Trans. 1886, p. 145, and
Phil. Mag'. April 1886.)
~" I may remind the reader that I follow Laplace in taking as the
constant or parameter of probability-curves the reciprocal of the coefficient
of x : that is X, accordmg to the notation used above.
It is q:2 times
the " Mean Error" in the sense in which that term is used by the
Germans, beginning with Gauss, and many recent English writers
(e. g. Chauvenet) ; and it is ~/Tr times the Mean Error in the (surely more
natural) sense in which Airy, after Laplac% employs the term Mean Error
(Ghauvenet's Mean of the ~.rrors).
~t In physical observations the limit of errors proper must, I suppose,
be more empirical than in this artificial example.
Mr. F. Y. Edgeworth on
The hypothesis entities us to assert that 23 is an error-proper
--an accidental deviation from 45; though the odds against
such an event before its occurrence are considerable, about 100
On the other hand, we may know for certain that 136
is a mistake.
(~) According to the second hypothesis, the type of error
is still the probability-curve with unvarying constant.
the range of its applicability is not so accurately known before-
hand. We cannot at sight distinguish errors proper from mis-
We only know that mistakes may be very large, and
that the large mistakes are so infrequent as not to be likely to
compensate each other in a not unusually numerous group of
observations.
This hypothesis may thus be exemplified :-
As before, we have a series of numbers, each purporting to be
the sum of ten random digits.
But occasionally, by mistake,
the sum (or difference) of two such numbers is recorded.
mistake might be large, but it would not always exceed the
limits of accidental deviation (100 and 0); which need net be
supposed known beforehand.
Here is a sequence of seven
such numbers, which was actually obtained by me (in the
course of 280 decades)--
The hypothesis leaves it doubtful whether 73 may not be a
mistake; the odds against it being an ordinary accidental
deviation being, before the event, about 250 to 1.
(~) According to the third hypothesis all errors are of the
h e_h2,~ But the h is not the same for different
observations.
Mistakes may be regarded as emanating from
a source of error whose h is very small. This hypothesis may
be thus illustrated.
Take at random any number n between
certain limits, say 1 and 100.
Then take at random (from
Mathematical Tables) n digits, add them together and form
their Mean (the sum- n), and multiply this Mean by ten.
The series of Means so formed may be regarded as measure-
ments of varying precision ; the real value of' the object mea-
sured being 45.
The weight, the h 2, being proportionate to n,
one weight is h priori as likely as another.
In order that the
different degrees of precision, the equicrescent values of h,
should be h priori equiprobable, it would be proper, having
formed our n as above, to take the mean of (and then mul-
tiply by 10), not n, but n 2 digits.
Here is a series fbrmed
in this latter fashion :--
n ..................
n ~ ...............
10 × Mean of n ~ )
random digits~ 31
Discordant Observations.
In this table the first'row is obtained by taking at random
ten digits from a page of Statistics, 0 counting for ten.
second row consists of the squares of these numbers.
third row was thus formed from the second :--I took 25
random digits, and divided their sum by 25 ; then multiplied
this mean by 10. I similarly proceeded with 49 (fresh) digits,
and so on.
It will be noticed how the defective precision of
the fourth and seventh observations makes itself felt.
however, a chance that they both erred as far as they could,
and in the same direction.
In the light of these distinctions I propose now to examine
the different methods of treating discordant observations. For
this purpose the methods may be arranged in the following
groups :--
I. The first sort of method is based upon the principle that
the calculus of probabilities supplies no criterion for the cor-
rection of discordance.
All that we can do is to reject certain
huge errors by common sense or simple induction as distin-
guished from the calculation of h posteriori probability.
II. Or, secondly, we may reject observations upon the
ground that they are proved by the Calculus of Probability
to belong to a much worse category than the observations
III. Or, thirdly, we may retain all the observations, affecting
them respectively with weights which are determined by
h posteriori probability.
IV. In a separate category may be placed a method which,
as compared with* the simple Arithmetical Mean, reduces the
effect (upon the Mean) of discordant observations--the method
which consists in taking the Mediant or "Centralwerth"$ of
the observations.
I propose now to test these me~hods by applying them in
turn to all the hypotheses above specified.
I. (a) The first method--which is none other than Airy's,
as I understand his contribution§ to this controversy--is
adapted to the first hypothesis.
Upon the second hypothesis
(/3) the first method is liable to error, which, as will be shown
under the next heading, is avoidable.
(7) Upon the third
hypothesis the first method is not theoretically the most
precise ; but it may be practically very good.
II. Under the second class I am acquainted with three
* This is pointed out by Mr. Wilson in the Monthly Notices of the
Astronomical Society, vol. xxxviii, and by Mr. Galton, Feehner, and
t Cournot, Galton, &c.
:~ Fechner, in Abhandl. Sax. Ges. vol. ~x~i.].
§ Gould's &stronomical Journal, vol. iv. pp. 146-147.
Mr. F. Y. Edgeworth on
species : the criteria of Prof. Stone*, Prof. Chauvenett, and
Prof. Peirce$.
II. (1) Prof. Stone's method is to reject an observation
when it is more likely to have been a mistake than an error
of observation of the same type as the others.
mining this probability he takes account of the ~t priori
probability of a mistake.
He puts for that probability n'
admitting that n cannot be determined precisely.
The use of
undetermined constants like this is, I think, quite legitimate§~
and, indeed, indispensable in the calculation of probabilities.
This being recognized, Prof. Stone's method may be justified
upon almost any hypothesis.
Hypothesis (a) presents two
cases : where the discordant observation exceeds that limit of
errors proper which is known beforehand, and where that
limit is not exceeded.
For example, in the instance ll given
above--where 45 is the Mean, and the Modulus¶ is about 13-
the discordant observation might be either above 100 (e.g. 110)
or below i; (e. g. 84).
Now let us suppose that the h priori
probability of a mistake is not infinitesimal, but say of the
order z~oo~. Since the deviation of 110 from the Mean is
about fivetimes the Modulus, the probability of this deviation
occurring under the typical law of error is nearly a millionth.
This observation is therefore rejected by Method II. (1), which
so far agrees with Method I.
Again, the probability of 84
being an accidental deviation is less than a forty-thousandth;
84--45 beingabout three times the Modulus. Therefore 84 also
is rejected by the criterion.
And we thus lose an observation
which is by hypothesis (a) a good one.
But this loss occurs
very rarely. And the observation thrown away is, to say the
least, not ** a particularly good one, though doubtless it may
happen that it is particularly wan~ed--as in the case of Gem
Colby, adducedtt by Sir G. Ai D .
II. (1) (/9) The second hypothesis is that to which Prof.
Stone's criterion is specially adapted.
Upon this hypothesis,
84 may be a mistake.
In rejecting such discordant observa-
tions, we may indeed lose some good observations, especially if
Month. Not. Astronom. See. Lend. vol. xxviii, pp. 165-168.
t ' Astronomy,' Appendix, Art. 60.
t Ibid. Art. 57.
§ See my paper on h priori Probabilities, in Phil. Mum Sept. 1884 ; also
,' Philosophy of Chance," Mind, 1884, and Camb. t3hil. Trans. 1885,
pp. 148 et seg.
1[ Page 365.
¶ ~/1~, exactly. As determined empirically by me from the mean-
square-of-error of 280 observations (i. e. sums of 10 digits), the Modulus
~* See the remark made under II. (2) (fl).
tt Gould's Astronom. Journ. vol. iv. p. 138.
JDiscordant Observations.
we have exaggerated the hpriori probability of a mistake. But
it may be worth while paying this price for the sake of getting
rid of serious mistakes. ° Especially is this position tenable
according to the definition of the qucesitum in the Theory
of Errors*~ which Laplace countenances.
According to this
view~ the desideratum in a method of reduction is not so
much that it should be most frequently right, as that it should
be most advantageous ; account being taken~ not only of the
~'e~(uenc~/, but also of' the serious'hess, of the errors which it
Prof. Stone's method might diminish our chance of
being right (in the sense of being within a certain very small
distance from the true mark~) ; and yet it might be better than
method I., if it considerably reduced the frequency of largo
and detrimental mistakes.
II. (1) (7) Prof. Stone's method is less applicable to the
third hypothesis.
Though even in this case, 4f the smaller
weights are h priori comparatively rare, it may be safe enough
to regard (m--l) of the m observations as of one and the
same type ; and to reject the ruth if violently discordant with
that supposed type.
The only misgiving which I should venture to express
about this method relates~ not to its essence and philosophy,
but to a technical detail.
Prof. Stone says:--" If we find that
1 [where p is the devia.
value which makes ~,~
e-u~dY "= n
tion of a discordant observation, and a is the modulus of the
probability-curve under which the other observations rang%
and 1 is the h T~iori probability of a mistake], all larger
values of p are with greater probability to be attributed to
mistakes."
But ought we not rather to equate to n' not the
left-hand member of the equation just written~ which may be
called 0(~) but 0'~(P-'~ where m is the number of observa-
I am aware that the point is delicate~ and that high
authority could be cited on the other side.
There is some-
thing paradoxical in Cournot's$ proposition that a certain
See my paper on the Method of Least Squares," Phil. Mag. 1883,
vol. xvi. p. 3(}3 ; also that on " Observations and Statistics," Camb. Phil.
Tr. 1885; and a little work called 'Metyetike' (London : Tem'ple C% 1887).
t The sense defined by Mr. Glaisher~' Memoirs of the Astronomical
Society,' voI. xl. p. 101.
:~ ;Exposition de la tMorie des Chances, Arts. 102~ 114.
"Nous ne nous
dissimulons pas ce qu'il y a de d~licat dans route cette discussion~" I
may say with Cournot.
2]dl. ~£ag. S. 5. Vo]. 23.5To. 143. April 1887.
Mr. F. Y. Edgeworth on
deviation from the Mean in the case of Departmental returns
of the proportion between male and female births is signifi-
cant and indicative of a difference in kind, provided that we
select at random a single French Department; but that the
same deviation may be accidental if it is the maximum of the
respective returns for several Departments.
There is some-
thing plausible in De Morgan's ~ implied assertion that the
deficiency of seven in the first 608 digits of the constant ~r is
theoretically not accidental ; because the deviation from the
Mean 61 amounts to twicet the Modulus of that probability-
curve which represents the frequency of deviation for any
assigned digit.
I submit, however, that Cournot is right, and
that De Morgan, if he is serious in the passage referred to, has
committed a slight inadvertence. When we select out of the ten
digits the one whose deviation from the Mean is greatest, we
ought to estimate the improbability of this deviation occurring
by accident, not with De Morgan as 1--8(1"63), corresponding
to odds of about 45 to 1 against the observed event having
occurred by accident ; but as 1--61°(1"63), corresponding to
odds of about 5 to 1 against an accidental origination.
II. (2) Prof. Chauvenet's criterion differs from Prof.
Stone's in that he makes the h priori probability of a mistake
--instead of being small and undetermined--definite and con-
siderable. In effect he assumes that a mistake is as likely as not
to occur in the course of m observations, where m is the number
of the set which is under treatment.
It is not within fhe scope
of this paper to consider whether this assumption is justified
in the case of astronomical or of any other observations.
suffices here to remark that this assumption coupled with
hypothesis (a) commits us to the supposition that huge mis-
takes occur on an average once in the course of 2m observa-
Upon this supposition no doubt Method II. (2), is a
Hypothesis (19) expressly $ excludes this suppo-
sition ; the mistakes which, according to II. (2), are as likely
as not, must, according to this second hypothesis, be of
moderate extent.
Thus, in the case above put of sums of ten
digits, suppose that the number of such sums under observa-
tion is ten,
According to Prof. Chauvenet's criterion we
must reject any sum which lles outside 45 ± k, ~ here
-- 2-6='95.
* ~ Budget of Paradoxes,' p. 291.
# If we take many batches of random digits, each batch numbering
608, the ~umber of sevens per batch ought to oscillate about the Mean 61,
according to a pro]oability-curve whose Modulus is
608= 10'4.
:~ Above~ p. 366.
Discordant Observations.
This gives for the required limit about 15.
According, then,
to II. (1) (/~), any observation greater than 60, or less than 30,
is more likely than not to be a mistake in the sense of not
belonging to the same law of frequency as the observations
within those limits.
But why on that ground should the
discordant observation be rejected ?
Suppose there were not
merely a bare preponderance of probability, but an actual
certainty, that the suspected observation belonged to a different
category in respect of precision from its neighbours, the best
course certainly would be if possible (as Mr. Glaisher in his
paper " On the Rejection of Discordant Observations" sug-
gests) to retain the observation affected witl~ an inferior weight.
But if we have only the alternative of rejecting or retaining
whole, it is a very delicate question whether retention or re-
jection would be in the long run better.
There is not here
the presumption against retention which arises when, as in
II. (1), the discordant observation is large and rare ; so that,
if it is a mistake, it is likely to be a serious and an uncom-
pensated one.
However, Prof. Chauvenet's method may
quite possibly be better than the No-method of Sir G. Airy.
Much would turn upon the purpose of the calculator--whether
he aimed at being most frequently right* or least seriously
The same may be said with reference to hypo-
thesis (7)-
There is a further difficulty attaching particularly to this
species of Method II.
In its precise determination of a limit,
it takes for granted that the probability-curve to which we
refer the discordant observation is accurately determined.
But, when the number of observations is small, this is far
from being the case.
Neither of the parameters of the curve,
neither the Mean, nor the Modulus, can be safely regarded as
The " probable error" of the Mean is "477 ~/~n,
where c is the Modulus.
The probable error of the Modulus
is conjectured to be not inconsiderable from the fhct that, if
we took m observations at random, squared each of them and
formed the Mean-square-of-error, the "probable error '" of that
Mean-square-of-error would be "477 ~V~ ~" This, however, is
not the most accurate expression for the probable error of the
Modulus-squared as inferred :~ from any given n observations.
See the remarks above, p. 369.
+ Todhunter, art. 1005 (where there is no necessity to take the origin
at one of the extremities of the curve).
:t I allude here to delicate distiDctions between genuine Inverse Pro-
babilitv and other processes, which I have elsewhere endeavoured to
draw, "Camb. Phil. Trans. 1885.
Mr. F. Y. Edgeworth on
To appreciate the order of error which may arise from these
inaccuracies, we may proceed as in my paper of last Octo-
First, let us confine our attention to the Mean, sup-
posing for a moment the Modulus accurate.
Let k have
been determined according to Prof. Chauvenet's method, so
To determine more accurately the probability of an observa-
tion not exceeding a we must put for a, a-e z, where z is the
error of the Mean subject to the law of frequency
The proper course is therefore to evaluate the expression
Expanding 8, and neglecting the higher powers of zt, we
have for the correction of ~(a)the subtrahend Z~-e-~,
where fl is put for a.
Call this modification of 8, ~6. To see
how the primd facie limit fl is affected by this modification,
let us put
[O+~O](~+ Aft)= 2n-;
56(/~) + AB × 61(fl) =0.
e-~ .-+- /~r e-~ 2 _- n
an extension of the limit which may be sensible when n is
In the example given by Prof. Chauvenet the uncorrected
limit as found by him is 1"22. This divided by the Modulus
[which= ",/-2e-='8j is 1"5. This result, our 8, divided by 15
the number of observations, gives '1 as the correction of B ;
"08 as the correction of the limit a.
The limit must be ad-
vanced to 1"30. This does not come up to the discordant
observation 1"40. But we have still to take into account
that we have been employing only the a2parent Modulus (and
Mean Error), not the real one.
In virtue of this consideration
I find--by an analysis analogous to that given in the paper
" Phil. Mag. 1886, vol. xxii. p. 371.
t See ~he pal)or referred to.
Discordant Observations.
just referred to--that the limit must be pushed forward as
much again; so that the suspected observation falls wit]dn
the corrected limit.
I have similarly treated the example
iven by Prof. Merriman in his Textbook on The Method of
east Squares (131).
The limit found by him is 4"30, and
be therefore rejects the observation 4"61.
But I find that
this observation is well within the corrected limit *.
II. (3) Prof. 1Oeiree's criterion is open to the same objec-
tions as that of Prof. Ch:mvenet. Indeed it presents additional
difficulties.
If by ~j the author designates that quantity which
Prof. Stone calls n~ and which I have termed the "h priori"
probability of a mistake~ I am unable to follow the reasoning
by which he obtains a definite value for this y.
aware how easy it is on such subjects to misunderstand an
original writer.
III. We come now to the third class of method, of which
I am acquainted with three species. (1) There is the proeeduro
indicated by De Morgan and developed t by Mr. G!aisher;
which consists in approximating to the weights u~ich are to bo
assigned to the observations respectively, after the analogy of
the Reversion of Series and similar processes.
(2) Another
method, due to Prof. Stone $, is to put
e -h''(z-~')2-~'~(~-~)''
" " " x dl~idh2
as the ~ posteriori probability of the given observations having
resulted from a particular system of weights hi ~ ]12 ~ &c., and a
particular Mean x; and to determine that system so that P
should be a maximum.
(3) Another variety is due to Prof.
Newcomb §.
III. (1) & (2) Neither of the first two Methods are well
adapted to the first two hypotheses. Both indeed may success-
fully treat mistakes by weighting them so lightly ns virtually to
reject them.
But both, I venture to think, are liable to err in
underwelghtlng observations, which, upon the first two hypo-
theses, have the same law of frequenc'~/ as the others. Both, in
fact, are avowedly adapted to the case where the observations
* These corrections may be compensated by another correction to which
the method is open. In determining whether the suspected observation
belongs to the same type as the others, would it not be more correct to
deduce the characters of that type from those others, exclusive of the
suspected observation ? The eli~ct both on the Mean and the Modulus
would be such as to contract the limit.
i" Memoirs of the Astronomical Society.
:~ Monthly Notices of the Astronomical Society, 1874. This Method
was proposed by the present writer in this Journal, 1883 (vol. xvi.
p. 360), m ignorance of Prof. Stone s prior tv.
§ Americml Journal of Mathematics, vol.'viii. No. 4.
On Discordant Observations.
are not presumed beforehand to emanate from the same source
The particular supposition concerning the & priori
distribution of sources which is contemplated by the De-
Morgan-Glaisher Method, has not perhaps been stated by
its distinguished advocates.
The particular assumption made
by the other Method is that one value of each h is as likely as
another over a certain range of values--not necessarilybetween
infinite limits.
I have elsewhere* discussed the validity of
this assumption.
I have also attempted to reduce the in-
tolerable labour involved by this method.
Forming the equa-
tion in x of (n--l) degrees~
nx ~- i _ (n-- 1) Sx 1 x ~- 2 + (n-- 2) Sxlx2 x n-a- &c. = O,
I assume that the penultimate (or antepenultimate) limiting
function or derived equation will give a better value than the
last-derived equationlnx--[n--lSxl, which gives the simple
Arithmetic Mean.
Take the observations above instanced
under hypothesis (7)~
31, 45~ 43, 100, 43, 47"5~ 100.
For convenience take as origin the Arithmetical Mean of
these observations 58"5, say 58.
Then we have the new
--27,--13,--15~ +42,--15,--11~ +42.
]~ere Sxix~-----2494.
And the penultimate limiting equ~
7 x6 x5 x4x3x~+5x4x 3x2 xlx --2494=0.
Whence x:--119.
And x----_+_11 nearly.
To determine
which of these corrections we ought to adopt, the rule is to
take the one which makes P greatest; which is 1' the one
which makes (x--xl)(x--x2)(x--x3)
(x--xT) smallest;
each of the differences being taken positively.
The positive value~ + 11, gives the differences
38, 24, 26, 21~ 36, 22, 21.
For the negative value~ --11, the differences are
16, 2, 4~ 53, 4, 0~ 53
(where 0 of course stands for a fraction). The continued
produc~ of the second series is the smaller.
Hence --11 is
* Camb. Phil. Trans. 1885, p. 151.
¢ See Phil. Mag. 1883~ vol. xvi. p. 371.
Action of TZeat on _Potassic Chlorate and PerchIorate.
the correction to be adopted.
Deducting it from 58, or rather
58"5, we have 47"5~ which is a very respectable approximation
to the real valu% as it may be called~ viz. 45.
III. (3) Prof. Newcomb* soars high above the others, in
that he alone ascends to the philosophical, the utilitarian,
principles on which depends the whole art of reducing obser-
Here are whole pages devofed to estimating and
minimizing the Evil incident to malobservation. With Gauss,
Prof. Neweomb assumesT "that the evil of an error is pro-
portional to the square of its ma~,mtude.
He would doubt-
less admit, with Gauss~ that there is something arbitrary in
this assmnption.
Another somewhat hypothetical datum is
what he$ describes as the"distribution ofprecisions." In view
of this looseness in the data, it becomes a nice question
whether it is worth while expending much labour upon the
calculation.
The answer to this question depends upon an
estimate of probability and utility, concerning which no one
is competent to express an opinion who has not, on the one
handj a philosophical conception of the Theory of Errors~ and~
on the other hand, a practical acquaintance with the art of
Astronomy.
The double qualification is probably possessed
by none in a higher degree than by the distinguished astro-
nomer to whom we owe this method.
IV. It renmins to consider the fourth Method.
length and importance of this discussion will require another
XLII. On the Action of Heat on _potassic Chlorate and _Per-
chlorate. B~/EDMUND J. MILLS, 1).Se., .F.R.S.§
T has been pointed out by Teed[i, and subsequently by
P. Frankland and Dingwall¶~ that potassic chlorate and
perchlorate may be decomposed by heat in such a manner as
to lead in each case to various relations among the products
of decomposition.
It has occurred to me that both of these chemical changes
are instances of Cumulative Resolution**, from which point
of view they admit of very simpl% and at the same time
perfectly adequat% representation.
American Journal of Mathematics, vol. viii. No. 4.
t § 3, p. 348.
$ § 9, p. 359.
§ Communicated by the Author.
II Prec. Chem. Soc. xii. p. 105 ; xvi. 10. 141 ; xxxiii, pp. 24 & 25.
¶ Ibid. xvi. p. 141; xxxii, p. 14; and Trans. Ohem. Soc. 1887~ p. 274.
*~ Phil. Mag. iii. p. 492 (1877).