Optimized norm-conserving Vanderbilt pseudopotentials
D. R. Hamann
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854-8019
and Mat-Sim Research LLC, P. O. Box 742, Murray Hill, NJ, 07974
Fully-nonlocal two-projector norm-conserving pseudopotentials are shown to be
compatible with a systematic approach to the optimization of convergence with the size
of the plane-wave basis. A new formulation of the optimization is developed, including
the ability to apply it to positive-energy atomic scattering states, and to enforce greater
continuity in the pseudopotential. The generalization of norm-conservation to multiple
projectors is reviewed and recast for the present purposes. Comparisons among the
results of all-electron and one- and two-projector norm-conserving pseudopotential
calculations of lattice constants and bulk moduli are made for a group of solids chosen to
represent a variety of types of bonding and a sampling of the periodic table.
I. Introduction
While the subject of pseudopotential generation is generally considered to be
mature, recent concerns with inaccuracies of tabulated sets of potentials in the context of
high-throughput material searches1,2 indicate that room remains for improvement. Since
the introduction of norm-conserving pseudopotentials,3,4 which in combination with
density functional theory5 paved the way for ab-initio calculations of many properties of
solids, two main thrusts have driven their improvement. One of these is computational
efficiency, and the other is accuracy. Both of these issues can be addressed in other
ways. The ultrasoft-pseudopotential method6 and the related projector-augmented-wave
method7 do so, but at the expense of creating more complex representations of the
quantities involved in electronic structure calculations than the simple plane-wave
representation of norm-conserving pseudopotentials (NCPPs). While both are routinely
used for ground-state energy and structural-relaxation calculations, the implementation of
more advanced calculations such as density-functional perturbation theory (DFPT)8 or
many-body perturbation theory9 becomes vastly more complex than that required with
NCPPs. Thus there remains ample motivation to seek further improvements of NCPPs.
Of the two areas for improvement, computational efficiency has received the
greater share of attention. The original NCPPs were semi-local, that is, each angular
momentum componentA of a wave function about an atom was acted upon by a different
local radial potential. A large step forward in computational efficiency was the
transformation of these NCPPs to a local radial potential and a set of separable non-local
projectors, one for each of several angular momenta.10 This “Kleinman Bylander” (KB)
approach greatly reduced the computational cost of the Hamiltonial matrix in the planewave representation and expedited efficient wave-function evolution methods11 that
dominate electronic structure calculations today. The key properties of semi-local
NCPPs were preserved, namely the reproduction of all-electron eigenvalues and
integrated total charge inside the core radii cr A and the related agreement of the first
energy derivatives of the logarithmic derivatives of the outwardly-integrated radial
Schrödinger equation at cr A. At energies further removed from the eigenvalue, however,
the log derivatives and hence scattering properties of the all-electron, semi-local, and KB
potentials all differ.
The other aspect of computational efficiency which received attention was the
rate at which electronic structure results for solids converged with respect to the size of
the plane-wave basis. The general prescription for generating NCPPs consists of
constructing a node-free pseudo wave function which matches the all-electron wave
function to some desired degree of continuity at cr Aand inverting the radial Schrödinger
equation. Several studies analyzed the convergence of the Fourier transform of the semilocal potentials and proposed particular functional forms for the pseudo wave functions
that were found to optimize this convergence.12,13 These approaches gave “one size fits
all” prescriptions. A more flexible approach was introduced by Rappe et al., who
expanded each pseudo wave function as a linear combination of basis functions and
minimized the error of the Fourier-space calculation of its kinetic energy caused by the
truncation of this calculation at a cutoff wave vector
cq while satisfying the usual NCPP
conditions. 14 Dubbed “optimized pseudopotentials,” this method is implemented in the
OPIUM open-source code.15 A portion of this study was motivated by the author’s desire
to overcome some limitations of that code, and a reformulation of the underlying
formalism which couples seamlessly to the accuracy issue to be discussed next is
presented in Sec. II.
The accuracy with which ab-initio pseudopotentials can predict physical
properties of solids is fundamentally limited by that of density functional theory. The
ensuing discussion is confined to the ability of NCPPs to reproduce all-electron results.
A number of different issues influence accuracy. One is the fact that the ground-state
configuration of an atom, usually the best reference in the author’s experience, could not
be used to generate NCPPs for all the desired angular momenta. A best compromise
solution was to use ionized configurations and perhaps fractional occupation of some
orbitals to obtain all the required bound states.4 This limitation was overcome when it
was shown that positive-energy scattering states could be used to construct NCPPs.16
Unfortunately, the Rappe et al. optimization procedure14 cannot be applied to scattering
states because the kinetic energy truncation error cannot be defined. Sec. II also
addresses this problem, introducing a soft “barrier” potential beyond cr Ato create a
decaying tail for the reference all-electron function. The scattering properties of NCPPs
created in this manner behave essentially identically to those calculated from scattering
pseudo wave functions formed using other prescriptions.
A key accuracy issue is the energy range over which an NCPP can reproduce the
scattering properties of the all-electron potential. It was observed early on that
smaller cr As lead to improved agreement, but at the expense of poorer plane wave
convergence.4 Extending the NCPP conditions to require the matching of higher energy
derivatives of the radial log derivatives at cr Awas shown to yield improved agreement,17
but this has not been widely pursued. It is widely recognized that the choice of local
potential in the KB construction changes the scattering properties. A means for adjusting
the local potential by adding step functions to one of the semi-local potentials18 is
included in the OPIUM package,15 and while the steps cancel exactly with the KB
projectors at the reference energies, the overall effects on plane-wave convergence may
be a cause for concern. In general, there is no systematic prescription for improving the
overall scattering properties of a KB NCPP by local-potential adjustment, although trial
and error may yield improved results in some cases. A systematic means for improving
the scattering properties of fully nonlocal NCPPs was introduced by Blöchl, and involved
the introduction of additional separable projectors rather than adjustments of the local
potential.19 He demonstrated that a second projector could greatly improve the
agreement of the scattering properties of the semi-local and fully-nonlocal potentials over
a range of energies, which is often useful but does not necessarily give significantly
improved accuracy compared to all-electron results.
The accuracy focus of the present work is based on Ref. 6, in which Vanderbilt
introduced the popular ultrasoft pseudopotentials. It has been widely overlooked that in
passing towards the ultrasoft potentials, he gave a prescription for a multiple-projector
NCPP which could match scattering properties and norm-conservation to all-electron
results at several energies. One proof-of-principal paper20 was published a few years
after Ref. 6, but was not pursued.21 In Sec. III we review this formalism with revisions
appropriate to an NCPP end product, and show how it may be incorporated into our
formulation of residual kinetic energy convergence optimization. Combining the
terminologies of Ref.14 and Ref.20, we denote these as “optimized norm-conserving
Vanderbilt pseudopotentials,” (henceforth “OV”).
Sec. III also presents comparisons of the KB and OV potentials for the scattering
properties of a representative atom. These improvements are found to be especially
important in cases where shallow core states are treated explicitly. Convergence is
compared for KB and OV, and the manner in which the residual kinetic energy correlates
with the total energy convergence for solids14 is demonstrated. Sec. IV compares OV
over KB in results to all-electron results for a selection of solids with ionic, covalent, and
metallic bonding incorporating atoms from a variety of positions in the periodic table.
II. Kinetic energy truncation error optimization revisited
The actual implementation of the optimization principle of Rappe et al. is very
briefly sketched in the original publication.14 A careful study of the OPIUM source code15
shows that that implementation, also undocumented, differs in a number of ways from the
initial brief description.22 The independent approach followed in this work organizes the
process in a more transparent manner, and allows for easy extension of optimization to a
second Vanderbilt projector. Therefore, we will outline our approach in some detail.
We begin by introducing a generalization of the residual kinetic energy for
angular momentumA and an operator shorthand notation,
where the Fourier transform
is that of a pseudo wave function or a component of a pseudo wave function
the exception of references to spherical Bessel functions jA , the angular momentum
subscriptA will be omitted below, and it will be assumed that we are working with a
single A throughout. A diagonal elementi
of Eq.(1) is equivalent to the Rappe et al.
definition.14
Our approach is organized as a hierarchy of radial basis functions which will be
denoted as
iξ and distinguished by various superscripts. The initial set is simply a set of N
spherical Bessel functions
and the choice of wave vectors
iq will be discussed below. The next basis set is the
orthonormalized version of
Next, we consider the constraints to be satisfied by the pseudo wave function. In
both the original paper and the OPIUM code, continuity of value, slope, and second
derivative were required at cr .14,15 This enforced continuity of value for the semi-local
pseudpotential obtained by inverting the Schrödinger equation, but permitted slope
discontinuities. These caused us some concern, especially for applications like the
calculation of elastic constants via DFPT, where two derivatives of the pseudopotential
must be computed. 23 Denoting the final pseudo wave function simply asϕ and the
reference all-electron wave function asψ , we have
Generalizing the number of continuity constraints at cr from 3 to M, ie.
sets the requirement that the coefficients
iz satisfy the set of M linear equations
Proceeding by the standard singular-value decomposition of the M
C = UΣV , we are led to our next set of basis functions. Columns
V correspond to zero singular values ofC , spanning its null space and yielding our set of
null basis functions
The unique set of coefficients
defines a component of the desired final pseudo wave function which satisfies all the
matching conditions at cr ,
The previous step influenced the choice of wave vectors
iq defining the
set. Our initial choice was to emulate OPIUM, where they are all chosen to match the log
derivative ofψ at cr .15 Since jA are solutions of the spherical wave equation and this
requirement imposes homogeneous Robin boundary conditions on [
0, cr , these are
eigenfunctions which form an orthogonal set. This choice led to only M-1 non-zero
singular values of C, indicating an unanticipated linear dependency. In particular, we
could not satisfy the 3rd derivative constraint. It became clear that the spherical wave
equation imposes relationships among the derivatives of the jA . While several alternative
choices were satisfactory, all at the expense of the orthonormalization step, the simple
expedient of choosing
to match log derivatives and setting
proved very robust.
The members of the basis set
are orthonormal, orthogonal to
ϕ , and have zero
value and M-1 derivatives at cr . The residual energy to be minimized can now be
expressed as
subject to the norm-conservation constraint
is the “norm deficit” of
ϕ with respect to the ψ norm on [0, ]
cr . While
Eqs.(11) and (12) constitute a quadratic form to be minimized subject to quadratic
constraints, a problem which can conventionally treated by Lagrange multipliers, this did
not turn out to be a robust procedure.
Instead, we proceed to our final (promise!) set of “residual” basis functions,
which are formed from linear combinations of the
based on the eigenvectors of
E matrix in Eq. (11). The corresponding eigenvalues
ie span a very large dynamic
range ~106-108, which both yields informative insights into the optimization process and
suggests an ad hoc minimization procedure which has proven to be very robust. The final
pseudo wave function is now
and the residual energy is
where the “force” terms
if are computed from the
iE in Eq. (11) using the
eigenvectors. The norm constraint is Eq. (12) with
iy replaced by
The ad hoc procedure consists of solving the constraint equation for
the smallest eigenvalue,
and where the sign
s = ± . The
−dimensional hypersphere within which the
argument of the square root is positive24 is then searched on a coarse x grid, and
evaluated using Eq.(14), trying each choice for s. The location of the minimum on this
grid is found, along with the corresponding value of s. The values of
refined iteratively by setting derivatives of Eq. (14) to zero,
and recalculating
1x using Eq.(15). This iteration generally converges quickly. As the
large dynamic range of the
ie suggests, the law of diminishing returns sets in quite rapidly,
with minimal improvements beyond
. As a result of this and the
simple form of Eq. (14), the dimension of the hypersphere to be searched is small and the
energy evaluation trivial.
The optimization procedure outlined above is based on a particular choice of the
cutoff wave vector
cq , implicit in Eq. (11). After obtaining the
ix coefficients, however,
one can transform back to the
iy coefficients of the
basis set and use Eq. (11) to
evaluate the function
q for a range of qs. This provides a measure of truncation error
per electron which we will see in Sec. III correlates quite well with the actual
convergence behavior of the total energy in plane-wave calculations, as claimed in Ref.
14. The optimum choice of
cq is guided by experience, and is typically inversely
proportional to cr . For too small a
cq , the (typically exponential) convergence of
q will flatten off for qs larger than
cq , while for too large a value, useful
convergence is unnecessarily sacrificed.
The above formalism may be applied to effectively optimize positive-energy
scattering states if the infinite-range oscillatory tail of these states is replaced by a
smoothly decaying tail beyond cr . An effective method of achieving this is to add a
smooth “barrier” potential to the all-electron potential so that a bound eigenfunction will
exist at the desired energy. A satisfactory form is
where θ is the unit step function and the coefficients v∞and br determine the height and
width of the barrier. Since the value and two derivatives of the barrier function vanish
at cr , 4 derivatives of the all-electron eigenfunction are continuous. While this choice is
ad hoc and the shape of the tail effects the values of the terms in Eq.(11), the optimized
pseudo wave function is quite insensitive to the barrier parameters for sensible choices.
The log derivative at cr is determined by the energy alone, and is identical to that which
would have been obtained with the original scattering-state method.16 The barrier
ψ should have one more node than the highest-lying core state with the same A , or no
nodes if there is none. In the next section, when an additional ψ is required at higher
energy, another node should be added.
The barrier method might typically be employed to generate the d
pseudopotentials for atoms with no valence d electrons. In Fig. 1, we illustrate the
relations among the all-electron and pseudo wave functions for barrier-bound and
scattering Ge d states, calculated at an energy of +0.25Ha.
It was remarked in Ref. 13 that while pseudopotentials calculated with the Rappe
et al. method14 do show fast total energy convergence in the solid, they display “strong
short-wavelength oscillations.” Those authors advanced transferability concerns as a
motivation for pursuing their approach to improving convergence.13 Such oscillations
appear for a number of the potentials produced using the sample input data distributed
with the OPIUM code.15 This does not seem to be the case using the optimization
algorithm described above. The set of smooth Ge pseudopotentials shown in Fig. 2 is
typical of what we find. While we can only speculate on the differences, it is possible
that the surprisingly large dynamic range of the
E eigenvalues plays a role. OPIUM
appears to use a global conjugate-gradient minimization method, which may not treat
what are in effect the
ix coefficients of the less-important
in Eq.(13) as accurately
as do Eqs.(15) and (16).
The effects of increasing the continuity of the optimized pseudopotentials at cr are
less obvious. Ca d semi-local potentials, calculated for an unoccupied shallow bound 3d
state, are shown in Fig. 3 with value-only, first-derivative, and second-derivative
continuity. They are very similar, and it takes the magnification of the inset to really
discern the continuity differences. It is apparent that the optimization procedure tends to
suppress discontinuities even when they are not strictly eliminated.
III. Optimizing Vanderbilt projectors
We will briefly review Vanderbilt’s derivation,6 pausing and introducing an
appropriate simplification at the point where the norm-conserving and ultrasoft versions
diverge. Several reference all-electron wave functions
ψ and corresponding pseudo
wave functions
iϕ at energies
iε will be considered, all at a given A as usual. Let these
actually be r times the radial wave functions so that the kinetic energy operator simplifies
in atomic units. Let us choose a local potential
which joins smoothly to
but is otherwise arbitrary. Following Ref. 6,
we introduce the projectors
iχ are zero for
For a single projector
χ , the non-local potential operator is
Which is the usual KB result,10 although obtained without any reference to the semi-local
potential. Vanderbilt’s generalized this to the case of more projectors, and we will revise
his Eq. (7) for our purposes25 to
Now in general,
would be a non-Hermitian operator. However, after
performing integration by parts on the integrals giving
and subtracting corresponding expressions for the all-electron
, he proved
B will be a symmetric matrix if the generalized norm-conservation condition
is satisfied, where the cr subscripts indicate that the overlap is to be computed on [0, ]
Vanderbilt went on to show that for the ultrasoft case, ie. allowing Eq.(23) to be
violated and compensating appropriately, the energy derivatives of the log derivatives of
pseudo wave functions calculated from
will match those of corresponding allelectron functions at each
iε .6 This also applies to the generalized norm-conserving case,
where Eq.(23) is satisfied, extending this property of the original semi-local
pseudopotentials3 to several energies.
For purposes of ease of integration with plane-wave codes, we have transformed
Eq.(20) one step further, normalizing the
iχ , rescaling
B appropriately, diagonalizing it,
and forming linear combinations of the
iχ using the resulting eigenvectors. Our final
form for the non-local operator is
ib are the eigenvalues of the rescaled
In general we prefer to use the scalar-relativistic radial Schrödinger equation26 for
our all-electron calculations, since by including the mass-velocity, Darwin, and other
higher-order terms it gives a better description of heavier atoms. Since the kinetic energy
is no longer the simple second derivative, the integration-by-parts subtractions of Eq.(22)
and its all-electron analogue no longer cancel, so the exact symmetry of
ensured. In practice, we find that the asymmetry is
10− for both light and
heavy atoms, so we simply symmetrize
B and proceed. This manifests itself in
disagreements of comparable magnitude in comparisons of quantities such as eigenvalues
and norms computed with the final OV potentials, which are typically correct to
~ 10−when non-relativistic all-electron calculations are employed. While they have not
yet been implemented, we expect similar behavior for fully-relativistic calculations
employing the Dirac equation.
Incorporating the norm-conserving Vanderbilt construction into the residual
energy optimization framework,14 we will restrict our attention to two projectors. The
ψ for a given A might be chosen to be a shallow core and a valence
wave function, a valence and a barrier function, or two barrier functions. Typically, we
find a spread of ~1Ha between
ε works well when the choice is not dictated by
the use of two bound functions. It is appropriate for
ψ to have one more node than
inside cr . The procedures of Sec. II are followed to construct a nodeless normconserving
The key observation in proceeding to the calculation of
ϕ is that while the
diagonal terms in Eq.(23) are quadratic constraints, the off-diagonal term is a linear
constraint. Since
ψ will in general have a different log derivative at cr than
ψ , we could
go all the way back to the beginning of our basis set construction. However, the
orthonormal
iξ basis calculated for
ϕ has proven to be perfectly adequate for
off-diagonal norm constraint can now imposed simply by adding a row to the constraint
C in Eq.(7) and an element to the “derivatives” vector,
iz is the set of N
iξ coefficients in Eq.(5). They are formed as the sum of the
coefficients in Eq.(10) and the are the corresponding
iξ coefficients transformed back
from the optimized
ix in Eq.(13) using the
E eigenvectors and the null singular vectors
of the original
C . The optimization of
ϕ now proceeds as in Sec.II from Eq.(7) onward,
with the quadratic 2,2 normalization constraint of Eq.(23) treated as in Eq.(12)
The new null basis set
ϕ now has one fewer member than that for
in principal
E cannot be as well optimized. In practice,
ϕ is either a pseudo valence
state which despite its single node is intrinsically “softer” in q-space than the
corresponding shallow-core
ϕ , or is a scattering state sufficiently higher in energy that it
does not enter into the occupied states in the solid with appreciable amplitude. An
example of each case is shown in Fig. 4, where the convergence of the total energies of Si
and Cu are plotted as functions of plane-wave cutoff energy for KB and OV calculations.
Differences are basically negligible in the relevant range of cutoffs. This figure also
confirms the manner in which
E q correlates with the actual plane-wave behavior,
where we have plotted it for the least-rapidly converging A for each material. (We note in
passing that the pseudo Cu 3s and 3p states converge more rapidly than the 3d, so there is
no significant computational penalty in treating them as valence.)
The improvement in reproducing all-electron (AE) scattering results with KB and
OV pseudopotentials is illustrated in Fig. 5 for K. The 3s and 3p shallow core states are
treated as valence, and the local potential is a smooth polynomial extrapolation of the AE
potential from the minimum cr to zero. The arc tangents of the log derivatives at cr ,
which are somewhat analogous to scattering phase shifts are plotted. These are much
easier to compare visually than the log derivative themselves. The AE and OV results are
identical within the linewidths, while the KB results deviate significantly for the s and d
channels. This is consistent with the one example in Ref. 20, and representative of all the
OV pseudopotentials used in the tests in the next section. While the log derivative error
appears to be quite small at the -0.089 Ha binding energy of the K 4s state, the
differences between the OV and KB pseudo wave functions shown in Fig. 6 are
significant. The OV result reproduces the AE results perfectly outside cr by construction.
A problem that must be addressed with any Hamiltonian containing a separable
non-local operator like Eq.(24) is the fact that its eigenstates are not necessarily ordered
in energy by numbers of nodes. So-called “ghost states” at energies below the nodeless
pseudo wave function from which the pseudopotential was generated can invalidate
results. An analysis of the KB case gives a straightforward prescription to test for this
possibility.27 This does not generalize to the multi-projector case, but we can test a
potential by scanning the log derivative it produces outside cr over a sufficiently wide
range of energies below the lowest desired eigenvalue. A spurious step in a plot such as
Fig. 5 signals the occurrence of a ghost. In practice, the second projector of the OV
method is very effective at suppressing ghosts compared to KB. In either case,
adjustment of the local potential will fix the problem.
IV. Results for solids
The appropriate tests are to compare all-electron density-functional calculations
for solids with pseudopotential calculations. For our reference calculations, we used the
open-source ELK code, which employs the full-potential linear-augmented-planc-wave
plus local-orbital method.28 The default parameters appear to yield well-converged
results, and are employed for all the calculations except for a few cases in which muffintin radii had to be decreased to accommodate short bond lengths. The calculations used
here are effectively scalar-relativistic, based on weighted averages of Dirac equation
solutions within the muffin tines. The local density approximation was used.29 Since
ELK is not able to optimize lattice parameters directly, we chose cubic materials for all
but one case, so that energy vs. volume curves fitted with the Burch-Murnaghan equation
of state30 could easily yield the lattice constant a and the bulk modulus B0. While this
equation of state was used throughout for consistency among the quoted results, five
other functional forms available within ELK28 were tested for several cases. The spreads
among the results were
for a and 1
for B0, with Burch-Murnaghan
typically falling at the center of the distribution.
Plane-wave calculations were carried out using the ABINIT code.31,32 Full
structural optimization was carried out via force and stress minimization, and the bulk
modulus was determined from elastic constants calculated using DFPT.23 Wellconverged Brillouin-zone samples, Fermi smoothing of band occupations for metals, etc.
were kept consistent between the AE and pseudopotential calculations. Plane wave
convergence was tested, and the lattice constants presented in Table I are all converged to
~0.1% and the bulk moduli to ~1% or better at the stated cutoff energies.
The test cases were chosen to represent a variety of types of bonding and to
involve atoms which give a representative, if coarse, sampling of the periodic table.
Most atoms were used in two and sometimes three solids, always represented by the same
pseudopotentials. All the cases we tested have been included, whether or not there was
significant improvement in agreement using OV potentials. All pseudopotentials were
based on the atomic ground-state configuration. All parameters for each element were
identical for the KB and OV potentials. Projectors for s, p, and d were included for all
but first-row atoms, with f projectors for two atoms.
was a smooth polynomial
extrapolation of
in all cases. Semi-core electrons mentioned explicitly were treated
as valence in the calculations. The potentials and test solids are discussed in tabular order
The K calculations included 3s, 3p, and 4s. Two K potentials were used. The
initial KB results for bcc K metal showed sufficient errors that the K* potential was tried
using smaller s
cr , which are generally found to improve results (if at the expense of
convergence). The OV results are in excellent agreement with AE, and identical for both
sets of parameters, while the KB results bracket AE, with somewhat better agreement for
K*. Moving to the ionic insultor KCl, where Cl included only the outer 3s and 3p, the
OV results are once again in excellent agreement with AE and identical for K and K*.
The KB results for both K and K* are in qualitatively worse agreement than for K metal,
with no apparent correlation between the lattice-constant and bulk-modulus errors.
To test a different structure and give K* another chance, we chose KBaN, a half-
Heusler-structure insulator, not yet known experimentally but recently proposed as a
promising piezoelectric.33 N 2s and 2p, and Ba 4d and 6s electrons are included. AE and
OV results are in excellent agreement, while KB show substantial errors. Ba as an
elemental bcc metal provides another test for its potentials. For OV, a is in excellent
agreement and B0 off by +3%, while corresponding errors for KB are +5% and +9%.
Providing another test for N and introducing a 4d transition metal, we chose the
metallic rock-salt compound ZrN. Zr 4s, 4p, 4d, and 5s electrons were included. In
general, we found that transition-metal d electrons limited convergence, and that
including semi-cores in the same shell added little computational effort. We found
excellent agreement for OV, and substantial errors for KB.
La has a bound but unoccupied 4f state which should influence its bonding in a
solid, so we added rock-salt LaN as a test. La 5s, 5p, 5d and 6s electrons were included.
Although anticipated to be an insulator, it was semi-metallic within the local density
approximation. The
E analysis of the optimized 4f pseudo wave function suggested a 30
Ha cutoff, which was apparently necessary. OV results were excellent, but once again
KB showed substantial errors.
Moving to the center of the periodic table, Si showed excellent results for both
OV and KB at a modest cutoff, providing another example of an old adage of the
electronic-structure community: “Anything works for Si.” Only Si 3s and 3p electrons
were included, along a non-linear core correction charge34 in polynomial form.35 To
provide more of a challenge, we studied SiO2 in an artificial cubic
Fd m structure once
mistakenly thought to be that of β crystobalite. It is best described as an expanded
diamond lattice of Si with O inserted midway between each Si neighbor pair, ie. with
1800 Si-O-Si bond angles. Optimizing this structure gives the essentially standard Si-O
bond length of 1.6Å, and so this hypothetical material should be reasonably
representative of real SiO2 bonding. In this case, too, both OV and KB are in good
agreement with AE. To push this case one step further, we took advantage of the Orequired cutoff and introduced the Si* pseudopotential, with the rather deep 2s and 2p
core states treated as valence. The optimization procedure was very effective, and the
OV results remained extremely well converged at 30 Ha (
aB and 0.1 GPa
compared to 40Ha). Unfortunately, Si* with KB did not even bind the solid, the energy
being a monotonically decreasing function of a for 11
aB. The corresponding
Tab. I entries are labeled “Not Available” (NA).
A third Si-based material, the metallic compound CaSi2, was included because it
has the unusual property of showing significant occupation of a Ca 3d state, which is
weakly bound and unoccupied in the atom.36 Including the 3s, 3p, and 4s electrons for
Ca, it is the 3d that controls convergence in the solid, and makes this system an
interesting test for both convergence optimization and the effect of the second projector.
Among several polymorphs, we used the trigonal rhombohedral “tr3” structure,37 space
R m with one formula unit per primitive cell. Qualitatively, buckled Si double
layers similar to (111) double layers in the Si diamond structure are separated by
intercalated Ca atoms. Structural relaxation using ELK was accomplished using a mesh of
~30 a and c lattice constants, relaxing the single internal coordinate, and fitting the
resulting energies with a cubic polynomial in a and c. The B0 calculation using DFPT
within ABINIT was supplemented by a relaxation correction using DFPT internal strain
and interatomic force constants.23 For this system, the OV results are in excellent
agreement with AE, but the KB results show substantial errors, with the differences
presumably arising mainly from the Ca. (A second CaSi2 row has been added to Table I
for the c lattice constant.)
The cubic perovskite structure of SrTiO3 was chosen to have more typical 3d
hybridization in an insulator. Sr 4s, 4p, and 5s were included, with 3s, 3p, 3d, and 4s for
Ti. Once again, the Sr and Ti semi-cores did not limit convergence. The OV results are
in excellent agreement with AE. KB shows a moderate -4% error for a, and a
significantly larger error for B0. Dropping the Ti, rock-salt SrO shows comparable levels
of agreement and disagreement for OV and KB.
The rock-salt metal BiSe was included to have a scattering-state f projector above
the filled Bi 4f core level, with 5d, 6s, and 6p included as valence. Se included only 4s
and 4p. For this compound, both OV and KB gave excellent agreement with AE.
Elemental fcc Cu was included primarily for historical reasons, its 3d potential
being the first published optimized pseudopotential.14 The rather prominent slope
discontinuity seen at cr in Fig. 2 of Ref. 14 initially motivated part of the present work.
With the optimization approach described in Sec. II, however, the unconstrained slope
discontinuity for Cu 3d was even less apparent that that shown in our Fig. 3 for Ca. The
results for the solid, with 3s, 3p, 3d, and 4s show excellent AE-OV agreement, with
substantial errors for KB. The 3d sets the convergence behavior, shown in Fig. 4.
V. Discussion and conclusions
The main conclusion of the work described above is that the neglected Vanderbilt
approach to norm-conserving multi-projector pseudopotentials6 can be used in the context
of systematic convergence optimization,14 and can serve as a competitive choice for
accuracy and computational efficiency compared to ultrasoft6 and projector-augmentedwave potentials.7 Some trends are discernable among the results for the 12 solids studied
as test cases. The outermost core electrons were treated as valence for many of the atoms
in these tests. This is widely known to be particularly important to obtain accurate results
for group 1 and group 2 elements, and can also be important for transition-metal
elements. The greatest differences between OV and KB results occurred in cases with
these cores. With optimization, the plane-wave cutoff requirements with core states
remained relatively modest.
The second observation to be drawn is that the use of the ground-state
configurations of the atoms to generate the OV potentials gives comparably good results
in elemental, covalent, and ionic solids. In fact, the test systems involving Si included
strictly covalent diamond Si, cationic Si in SiO2, and at least in electronegativity terms,
anionic Si in CaSi2.
A third comment is that the KB results for any given system can undoubtedly be
improved by further adjustments of the local potential choice and core radii. While in the
course of this research, some of these parameters were changed to eliminate ghost states
or improve very bad KB results, the OV results and their agreement with AE were
essentially unchanged. Examining the log derivative plots gives some guidance to
improving KB, but there is no systematic approach. The OPIUM code15 provides the
ability to compare all-electron and pseudopotential energy differences between the
reference atomic configuration and other configurations. This capability is incorporated
into the ONCVPSP code developed for this research, and all test configurations involved
one- and two-electron ionized states since the neutral ground state was the reference. For
the atoms used in the test cases, the rms excitation error was 0.012 Ha for KB vs. 0.003
Ha for OV. However, atom-by-atom, the correlation between these results and results for
solids was at best difficult to discern.
A final point to be made is that in no case among the 14 atoms in the tests were
the parameters used in constructing the OV potentials adjusted to “improve” agreement
with the AE results. The agreement was nearly always within the range of the spread of
the equation-of-state fits, and usually better. Some experimentation with the optimization
parameters
cq and N as well as the projector energies
ε (where not fixed by bound
states) was done to improve convergence and balance it among the s
A , but this was all
evaluated within the confines of the pseudopotential generation code, with no reference
to results for solids. With the exception of the “Si* experiment,” decisions on treating
core states as valence were made in advance of any comparisons.
While all the calculations reported here were done using the local density
approximation,29 ELK AE results and OV pseudopotential results were also compared
using the PBE generalized-gradient functional38 for several of the test systems.
Agreement was comparable. However, when a pseudopotential generated with PBE was
(unintentionally) used to compare local-density AE and OV calculations, differences
increased noticeably.
The overall conclusion of this research is that the accuracy of two-projector OV
pseudopotentials in calculating the properties of materials is primarily limited by the
accuracy of the underlying density functional approximations. The open-source ONCVPSP
code is freely available.39
Acknowledgements
The author would like to acknowledge valuable discussions with D. Vanderbilt,
K. M. Rabe, and J. W. Bennett.
Table I. Comparisons of lattice constants and bulk moduli among all-electron, optimized
Vanderbilt, and Kleinman-Bylander calculations for the test set of solids. K* and Si* are
explained in the text. (a) NA (Not Available) is also explained in the text.
Lattice constants (aB)
Bulk moduli (GPa)
ψ, ϕScattering
ψ, ϕBarrier
Ge semi-local
pseudopotentials
Fig. 1. All-electron ( )
ψ and pseudo ( )
ϕ wave functions for the Ge d scattering state at
0.25 Ha, illustrating the use of a soft barrier to induce a bound-state-like tail which allows
residual energy optimization.
Fig. 2. Ge pseudopotentials illustrating the smooth behavior characteristic of the residual
energy optimization approach introduced here.
Pseudopotential continuity
for M ϕ constraints
Convergence error per electron (Ha)
Cutoff energy (Ha)
Fig. 3. Illustration of the pseudopotential continuity results from requiring M=3, 4, or 5
value plus derivative continuity constraints on the pseudo wave function, for the weaklybound unoccupied Ca d state. cr =2.5 aB is indicated by the vertical bar.
Fig. 4. Convergence of the total energy with plane-wave cutoff for Si and Cu solids,
showing the minor effect of the second projector of the OV method compared to KB.
The points are residual energies from the first-projector atomic calculations.
K Scattering
atan[rc(dψ/dr)/ψ ]/π
Energy (Ha)
Fig. 5. K log derivatives vs. energy plotted as atan[ (
π at cr . All-electron,
OV, and KB are compared.
Wavefunctions (aB
Fig 6. K 4s wave functions computed with the all-electron potential, and KB and OV
pseudopotentials.