Journal of Signal and Information Processing, 2012, 3, 146-153
 Published Online May 2012 ( 
First and Second Order Statistics Features for
Classification of Magnetic Resonance Brain Images
Namita Aggarwal, R. K. Agrawal
School of Computer and Systems Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India.
Email: , 
Received January 10th, 2012; revised February 14th, 2012; accepted March 11th, 2012
In literature, features based on First and Second Order Statistics that characterizes textures are used for classification of
images. Features based on statistics of texture provide far less number of relevant and distinguishable features in com-
parison to existing methods based on wavelet transformation. In this paper, we investigated performance of tex-
ture-based features in comparison to wavelet-based features with commonly used classifiers for the classification of
Alzheimer’s disease based on T2-weighted MRI brain image. The performance is evaluated in terms of sensitivity,
specificity, accuracy, training and testing time. Experiments are performed on publicly available medical brain images.
Experimental results show that the performance with First and Second Order Statistics based features is significantly
better in comparison to existing methods based on wavelet transformation in terms of all performance measures for all
classifiers.
Keywords: Alzheimer’s Disease; Magnetic Resonance Imaging; Feature Extraction; Discrete Wavelet Transform; First
and Second Order Statistical Features
1. Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease is a form of dementia that causes
mental disorder and disturbances in brain functions such
as language, memory skills, and perception of reality, time
and space. World Health Organization and National
Institute on Aging (NIA) highlighted that its early and
accurate diagnosis can help in its appropriate treatment.
One of the most popular ways of diagnosing Alzheimer
by physician is a neuropsychological test like Mini Men-
tal State Examination (MMSE) that test memory and
language abilities. But problem with this approach is that
it is subjective, human biased and sometimes does not
give accurate results .
In Alzheimer’s disease, the hippocampus located in
the medial temporal lobe of the brain is one of the first
regions of the brain to suffer damage . The research
works have found that the rate of volume loss over
a certain period of time within the medial temporal lobe
is a potential diagnostic marker in Alzheimer’s disease.
Moreover, lateral ventricles are on average larger in pa-
tients with Alzheimer’s disease. Holodny et al. mea-
sured the volume of the lateral ventricles for its diagno-
Alzheimer’s Association Neuroimaging Workgroup
 emphasized image analysis techniques for diagnos-
ing Alzheimer. Among various imaging modalities, Mag-
netic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is most preferred as it is
non-invasive technique with no side effects of rays and
suitable for the internal study of human brain which pro-
vide better information about soft tissue anatomy. How-
ever, there is a huge MRI repository, which makes the
task of manual interpretation difficult. Hence, computer
aided analysis and diagnosis of MRI brain images have
become an important area of research in recent years.
For proper analysis of these images, it is essential to
extract a set of discriminative features which provide
better classification of MRI images. In literature, various
feature extraction methods have been proposed such as
Independent Component Analysis , Fourier Trans-
form , Wavelet Transform , and Texture based
features . It is a well-known fact that Fourier
transform is useful for extracting frequency contents of a
signal however it cannot be use for analyzing accurately
both time and frequency contents simultaneously. In or-
der to overcome this, wavelet analysis is proposed which
analyze time information accurately with the use of a
fixed-size window. With the use of variable sized win-
dows, it captures both low-frequency and high-frequency
information accurately.
For the classification of Alzheimer’s disease, Chaplot
et al. used Daubechies-4 wavelet of level 2 for the
extraction of features from MRI. Dahshan et al. 
Copyright © 2012 SciRes. JSIP
First and Second Order Statistics Features for Classification of Magnetic Resonance Brain Images
pointed out that the features extracted using Daubechies-
4 Wavelet were too large and may not be suitable for the
classification. The research work used Haar Wavelet of
level 3 for feature extraction and further reduced features
using Principal Component Analysis (PCA) before
classification. Though PCA reduce the dimension of fea-
ture vector, but it has following disadvantages: 1) Inter-
pretation of results obtained by transformed feature vec-
tor become the non-trivial task which limits their us-
ability; 2) The scatter matrix, which is maximized in
PCA transformation, not only maximizes between-class
scatter that is useful for classification, but also maximizes
within-class scatter that is not desirable for classification;
3) PCA transformation requires huge computation time
for high dimensional datasets.
In literature features based on First and Second
Order Statistics that characterizes textures are also used
for classification of images. Features based on statistics
of texture gives far less number of relevant, non-redun-
dant, interpretable and distinguishable features in com-
parison to features extracted using DWT. Motivated by
this, in our proposed method, we use First and Second
Order Statistics for feature extraction. In this paper, we
investigated performance of First and Second order based
features in comparison to wavelet-based features. Since,
the classification accuracy of a decision system also de-
pends on the choice of a classifier. We have used most
commonly and widely used classifiers for the classifica-
tion of MRI brain images. The performance is evaluated
in terms of sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, training and
testing Time.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. A brief
description of wavelet transform and First and Second
order statistics are discussed in Sections 2 and 3 respec-
tively. It is followed by Section 4 which includes experi-
mental setup and results. Finally conclusion and future
directions are included in Section 5.
2. Wavelet Transform
The feature extraction stage is one of the important com-
ponents in any pattern recognition system. The perform-
ance of a classifier depends directly on the choice of fea-
ture extraction and feature selection method employed on
the data. The feature extraction stage is designed to ob-
tain a compact, non-redundant and meaningful represen-
tation of observations. It is achieved by removing redun-
dant and irrelevant information from the data. These fea-
tures are used by the classifier to classify the data. It is
assumed that a classifier that uses smaller and relevant
features will provide better accuracy and require less
memory, which is desirable for any real time system.
Besides increasing accuracy, the feature extraction also
improves the computational speed of the classifier.
In literature, many feature extraction techniques for
images i.e. Fourier transform, Discrete Cosine Transform,
Wavelet Transform and Texture based features are pro-
posed. The Fourier transform provides representation of
an image based only on its frequency content over the
analysis window. Hence, this representation is not spa-
tially localized. In order to achieve space localization, it
is necessary for the space window to be short, therefore
compromising frequency localization. Wavelets are ma-
thematical functions that decompose data into different
frequency components and then study each component
with a resolution matched to its scale. Wavelet provides a
more flexible way of analyzing both space and frequency
contents by allowing the use of variable sized windows.
Hence, Wavelet Transform provides better representation
of an image for feature extraction .
The Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT) of a signal
x(t) is calculated by continuously shifting a scalable
wavelet function  and is defined as
where s and  are scale and translation coefficients
respectively.
Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) is derived from
CWT which is suitable for the analysis of images. Its
advantage is that discrete set of scales and shifts are used
which provides sufficient information and offers high re-
duction in computation time . The scale parameter (s)
is discretized on a logarithmic grid. The translation pa-
rameter 
 is then discretized with respect to the scale
parameter. The discretized scale and translation parame-
ters are given by,
and n are positive integers. Thus, the family of wavelet
functions is represented by
The DWT decomposes a signal x[n] into an approxi-
mation (low-frequency) components and detail (high fre-
quency) components using wavelet function and scaling
functions to perform multi-resolution analysis, and is
given as 
where ci,k, i = 1I are wavelet coefficients and di,k , i =
1I are scaling coefficients.
The wavelet and the scaling coefficients are given by
Copyright © 2012 SciRes. JSIP
First and Second Order Statistics Features for Classification of Magnetic Resonance Brain Images
where gi[n – 2ik] and hI[n – 2Ik] represent the discrete
wavelets and scaling sequences respectively.
The DWT for a two dimensional image x[m, n] can be
similarly defined for each dimension separately. This
allows an image I to decompose into a pyramidal struc-
ture with approximation component (Ia) and detailed
components (Ih, Iv and Id) . The image I in terms of
first level approximation component and detailed com-
ponents is given by
If the process is repeated up to N levels, the image I
can be written in terms of Nth approximation component
) and detailed components as
Figure 1 shows the process of an image I being de-
composed into approximate and detailed components up
to level 3. As the level of decomposition is increased,
compact but coarser approximation of the image is ob-
tained. Thus, wavelets provide a simple hierarchical
framework for better interpretation of the image informa-
tion .
Mother wavelet is the compressed and localized basis
of a wavelet transform. Chaplot et al. employed
level 2 decomposition on MRI brain images using Dau-
bechies-4 mother wavelet and constructed 4761 dimen-
sional feature vector from approximation part for the
classification of two types of MRI brain images i.e. im-
age from AD patients and normal person. Dahshan et al.
 pointed out that the number of features extracted
using Daubechies-4 wavelet were too large and may not
be suitable for the classification. In their proposed me-
thod, they extracted 1024 features using level 3 decom-
position of image using Haar Wavelet and further reduced
features using PCA. Though PCA reduce the dimension
of feature vector, but it has following disadvantages: 1)
Figure 1. Pyramidal structure of DWT up to level 3.
Interpretation of results obtained by transformed feature
vector become the non-trivial task which limits their us-
ability; 2) The scatter matrix, which is maximized in
PCA transformation, not only maximizes between-class
scatter that is useful for classification, but also maxi-
mizes within-class scatter that is not desirable for classi-
fication; 3) PCA transformation requires huge compu-
tation time for high dimensional datasets.
Hence, there is need to construct a smaller set of fea-
tures which are relevant, non-redundant, interpretable
and helps in distinguishing two or more kinds of MRI
images. This will also improve the performance of deci-
sion system in terms of computation time. In literature
 , First and Second Order Statistics based features
are constructed which provide a smaller set of relevant
and non-redundant features for texture classification.
3. Features Based on First and Second Order
Statistics
The texture of an image region is determined by the way
the gray levels are distributed over the pixels in the re-
gion. Although there is no clear definition of “texture” in
literature, often it describes an image looks by fine or
coarse, smooth or irregular, homogeneous or inhomoge-
neous etc. The features are described to quantify proper-
ties of an image region by exploiting space relations
underlying the gray-level distribution of a given image.
3.1. First-Order Statistics
Let random variable I represents the gray levels of image
region. The first-order histogram P(I) is defined as:
number of pixels with gray level
total number of pixels in the region
Based on the definition of P(I), the Mean m1 and Cen-
tral Moments µk of I are given by
where Ng is the number of possible gray levels.
The most frequently used central moments are Vari-
ance, Skewness and Kurtosis given by µ2, µ3, and µ4 re-
spectively. The Variance is a measure of the histogram
width that measures the deviation of gray levels from the
Mean. Skewness is a measure of the degree of histogram
asymmetry around the Mean and Kurtosis is a measure of
the histogram sharpness.
3.2. Second-Order Statistics
The features generated from the first-order statistics pro-
Copyright © 2012 SciRes. JSIP
First and Second Order Statistics Features for Classification of Magnetic Resonance Brain Images
vide information related to the gray-level distribution of
the image. However they do not give any information
about the relative positions of the various gray levels
within the image. These features will not be able to mea-
sure whether all low-value gray levels are positioned to-
gether, or they are interchanged with the high-value gray
levels. An occurrence of some gray-level configuration
can be described by a matrix of relative frequencies
Pθ,d(I1, I2). It describes how frequently two pixels with
gray-levels I1, I2 appear in the window separated by a
distance d in direction θ. The information can be ex-
tracted from the co-occurrence matrix that measures
second-order image statistics , where the pixels
are considered in pairs. The co-occurrence matrix is a
function of two parameters: relative distance measured in
pixel numbers (d) and their relative orientation θ. The
orientation θ is quantized in four directions that represent
horizontal, diagonal, vertical and anti-diagonal by 0˚, 45˚,
90˚ and 135˚ respectively.
Non-normalized frequencies of co-occurrence matrix
as functions of distance, d and angle 0˚, 45˚, 90˚ and 135˚
can be represented respectively as
 refers to cardinality of set, f(k, l) is inten-
sity at pixel position (k, l) in the image of order
and the order of matrix D is
Using Co-occurrence matrix, features can be defined
which quantifies coarseness, smoothness and texture—
related information that have high discriminatory power.
Among them , Angular Second Moment (ASM),
Contrast, Correlation, Homogeneity and Entropy are few
such measures which are given by:
Correlation
Homogeneity
ASM is a feature that measures the smoothness of the
image. The less smooth the region is, the more uniformly
distributed P(I1, I2) and the lower will be the value of
ASM. Contrast is a measure of local level variations
which takes high values for image of high contrast. Cor-
relation is a measure of correlation between pixels in two
different directions. Homogeneity is a measure that takes
high values for low-contrast images. Entropy is a mea-
sure of randomness and takes low values for smooth im-
ages. Together all these features provide high discrimina-
tive power to distinguish two different kind of images.
All features are functions of the distance d and the
orientation θ. Thus, if an image is rotated, the values of
the features will be different. In practice, for each d the
resulting values for the four directions are averaged out.
This will generate features that will be rotations invari-
4. Experimental Setup and Results
In this section, we investigate different combination of
feature extraction methods and classifiers for the classi-
fication of two different types of MRI images i.e. Normal
image and Alzheimer image. The feature extraction meth-
ods under investigations are: Features based on First and
second order statistics (FSStat), Features using Daube-
chies-4 (Db4) as described by Chaplot et al. and
Haar in combination with PCA (HaarPCA) as described
by Dahshan et al. . We will explore the classifiers
used by Chaplot et al. (SVM with linear (SVM-L),
polynomial kernel (SVM-P) and radial kernel (SVM-R)),
Dahshan et al. (K-nearest neighbor (KNN) and
Levenberg-Marquardt Neural Classifier (LMNC)) and
C4.5. The polynomial kernel of SVM is used with de-
grees 2, 3, 4 & 5 and best results obtained in terms of
accuracy are reported. Similarly radial kernel (SVM-R)
is used with various parameters 10i where I = 06 and
only results corresponding to highest Accuracy is re-
ported. Description of LMNC and remaining classifiers
Copyright © 2012 SciRes. JSIP
First and Second Order Statistics Features for Classification of Magnetic Resonance Brain Images
can be found in and respectively.
Textural features of an image are represented in terms
of four first order statistics (Mean, Variance, Skewness,
Kurtosis) and five-second order statistics (Angular sec-
ond moment, Contrast, Correlation, Homogeneity, En-
tropy). Since, second order statistics are functions of the
distance d and the orientation , hence, for each second
order measure, the mean and range of the resulting val-
ues from the four directions are calculated. Thus, the
number of features extracted using first and second order
statistics are 14.
To evaluate the performance, we have considered medi-
cal images from Harvard Medical School website .
All normal and disease (Alzheimer) MRI images are ax-
ial and T2-weighted of 256 × 256 size. For our study, we
have considered a total of 60 trans-axial image slices (30
belonging to Normal brain and 30 belonging to brain
suffering from Alzheimer’s disease). The research works
 have found that the rate of volume loss over a
certain period of time within the medial temporal lobe is
a potential diagnostic marker in Alzheimer disease. More-
over lateral ventricles are on average larger in patients
with Alzheimer’s disease. Hence, only those axial sec-
tions of the brain in which lateral ventricles are clearly
seen are considered in our dataset for experiment. As
temporal lobe and lateral ventricles are closely spaced,
our axial samples thus cover hippocampus and temporal
lobe area sufficiently, which can be good markers to dis-
tinguish two types of images. Figure 2 shows the diffe-
rence in lateral ventricles portion between a normal and
an abnormal (Alzheimer) image.
In literature, various performance measures have been
suggested to evaluate the learning models. Among them
the most popular performance measures are following: 1)
Sensitivity, 2) Specificity and 3) Accuracy.
Sensitivity (True positive fraction/recall) is the pro-
portion of actual positives which are predicted positive.
Mathematically, Sensitivity can be defined as
Sensitivity
Specificity (True negative fraction) is the proportion of
Figure 2. Pyramidal structure of DWT up to level 3.
actual negatives which are predicted negative. It can be
defined as
Specificity
Accuracy is the probability to correctly identify indi-
viduals. i.e. it is the proportion of true results, either true
positive or true negative. It is computed as
where TP: correctly classified positive cases, TN: corre-
ctly classified negative cases, FP: incorrectly classified
negative cases and FN: incorrectly classified positive
In general, sensitivity indicates, how well model iden-
tifies positive cases and specificity measures how well it
identifies the negative cases. Whereas accuracy is ex-
pected to measure how well it identifies both categories.
Thus if both sensitivity and specificity are high (low),
accuracy will be high (low). However if any one of the
measures, sensitivity or specificity is high and other is
low, then accuracy will be biased towards one of them.
Hence, accuracy alone cannot be a good performance
measure. It is observed that both Chaplot et al. and
Dahshan et al. used highly imbalance data whose
classification accuracy was highly biased towards one.
Hence, we have constructed balanced dataset (samples of
both classes are in same proportion) so that classification
accuracy is not biased. Two other performance measures
used are training and testing time of learning model.
The dataset was arbitrarily divided into a training set
consisting of 12 samples and a test set of 48 samples.
The experiment is performed 100 times for each setting
and average sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, training
and testing time are reported in Table 1. The best results
achieved for each classifier corresponding to different
performance measure is shown in bold. All experiments
were carried out using Pentium 4 machine, with 1.5 GB
RAM and a processor speed of 1.5 GHz. The programs
were developed using MATLAB Version 7 using com-
bination of Image Processing Toolbox, Wavelet Toolbox
and Prtools and run under Windows XP environ-
We can observe the following from Table 1:
1) The classification accuracy with FSStat is signifi-
cantly more in comparison to both Db4 and Haar-
PCA for all classifiers.
2) Similar variation in observation is noticed with per-
formance measure sensitivity.
3) For specificity, FSStat provide better results, except
for classifiers SVC-P and LMNC, in comparison to both
Db4 and HaarPCA.
4) The difference between sensitivity and specificity is
Copyright © 2012 SciRes. JSIP
First and Second Order Statistics Features for Classification of Magnetic Resonance Brain Images
Copyright © 2012 SciRes. JSIP
Table 1. Comparison of performance measures values for each combination of feature extraction technique and classifier.
(in percentage)
(in milli-sec)
Due to huge dimension of Db4 feature vector, LMNC could not be executed; Clsf, Fe, Sn, Sp, Acc, Trn, Tst denotes Classifiers, Feature extraction technique,
Sensitivity, Specificity, Accuracy, Training time and Testing time respectively.
large for both Db4 and HaarPCA in comparison to
FSStat. Accuracy obtained using both Db4 and HaarPCA
is more even though the sensitivity is low and specificity
is high which suggest that classification accuracy ob-
tained is biased.
5) The variation in classification accuracy with differ-
ent classifiers is not significant with FSStat in compari-
son with both Db4 and HaarPCA.
6) The training time with FSStat is significantly less in
comparison to both Db4 and HaarPCA. This is because
the number of features obtained with FSStat is less and
does not involve any computation intensive transforma-
tion like PCA in HaarPCA.
7) Testing time of an image is not significant in com-
parison to training time. However, testing time of an im-
age is least with FSStat in comparison to both Db4 and
From above, it can be observed that the performance
of decision system using FSStat is significantly better in
terms of all measures considered in our experiment.
5. Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we investigated features based on First and
Second Order Statistics (FSStat) that gives far less num-
ber of distinguishable features in comparison to features
extracted using DWT for classification of MRI images.
Since, the classification accuracy of a pattern recognition
system not only depends on features extraction method
but also on the choice of classifier. Hence, we investi-
gated performance of FSStat based features in compari-
son to wavelet-based features with commonly used
classifiers for the classification of MRI brain images. The
performance is evaluated in terms of sensitivity, speci-
ficity, classification accuracy, training and testing time.
For all classifiers, the classification accuracy and
sensitivity with textural features is significantly more in
comparison to both wavelet-based feature extraction
techniques suggested in literature. Moreover it is found
that FSStat features are not biased towards either sensitivity
or specificity. Their training and testing time are also
significantly less than other feature extraction techniques
suggested in literature. This is because First and Second
Order Statistics gives far less number of relevant and
distinguishable features and does not involve in com-
putational intensive transformation in comparison to
method proposed in literature.
In future, the performance of our proposed approach
can be evaluated on other disease MRI images to evalu-
ate its efficacy. We can also explore some feature extrac-
tion/construction techniques which provide invariant and
minimal number of relevant features to distinguish two
or more different kinds of MRI.
First and Second Order Statistics Features for Classification of Magnetic Resonance Brain Images