Sequential Model-Based Optimization for
General Algorithm Conﬁguration
(extended version)
Frank Hutter, Holger H. Hoos and Kevin Leyton-Brown
University of British Columbia, 2366 Main Mall, Vancouver BC, V6T 1Z4, Canada
{hutter,hoos,kevinlb}@cs.ubc.ca
Abstract. State-of-the-art algorithms for hard computational problems often expose many parameters that can be modiﬁed to improve empirical performance.
However, manually exploring the resulting combinatorial space of parameter settings is tedious and tends to lead to unsatisfactory outcomes. Recently, automated
approaches for solving this algorithm conﬁguration problem have led to substantial
improvements in the state of the art for solving various problems. One promising
approach constructs explicit regression models to describe the dependence of
target algorithm performance on parameter settings; however, this approach has
so far been limited to the optimization of few numerical algorithm parameters on
single instances. In this paper, we extend this paradigm for the ﬁrst time to general algorithm conﬁguration problems, allowing many categorical parameters and
optimization for sets of instances. We experimentally validate our new algorithm
conﬁguration procedure by optimizing a local search and a tree search solver for
the propositional satisﬁability problem (SAT), as well as the commercial mixed
integer programming (MIP) solver CPLEX. In these experiments, our procedure
yielded state-of-the-art performance, and in many cases outperformed the previous
best conﬁguration approach.
Introduction
Algorithms for hard computational problems—whether based on local search or tree
search—are often highly parameterized. Typical parameters in local search include
neighbourhoods, tabu tenure, percentage of random walk steps, and perturbation and
acceptance criteria in iterated local search. Typical parameters in tree search include
decisions about preprocessing, branching rules, how much work to perform at each
search node (e.g., to compute cuts or lower bounds), which type of learning to perform,
and when to perform restarts. As one prominent example, the commercial mixed integer
programming solver IBM ILOG CPLEX has 76 parameters pertaining to its search
strategy . Optimizing the settings of such parameters can greatly improve performance,
but doing so manually is tedious and often impractical.
Automated procedures for solving this algorithm conﬁguration problem are useful
in a variety of contexts. Their most prominent use case is to optimize parameters on a
training set of instances from some application (“ofﬂine”, as part of algorithm development) in order to improve performance when using the algorithm in practice (“online”).
Algorithm conﬁguration thus trades human time for machine time and automates a task
that would otherwise be performed manually. End users of an algorithm can also apply
algorithm conﬁguration procedures (e.g., the automated tuning tool built into CPLEX
versions 11 and above) to conﬁgure an existing algorithm for high performance on
problem instances of interest.
The algorithm conﬁguration problem can be formally stated as follows: given a
parameterized algorithm A (the target algorithm), a set (or distribution) of problem
instances I and a cost metric c, ﬁnd parameter settings of A that minimize c on I. The
cost metric c is often based on the runtime required to solve a problem instance, or, in
the case of optimization problems, on the solution quality achieved within a given time
budget. Various automated procedures have been proposed for solving this algorithm
conﬁguration problem. Existing approaches differ in whether or not explicit models are
used to describe the dependence of target algorithm performance on parameter settings.
Model-free algorithm conﬁguration methods are relatively simple, can be applied
out-of-the-box, and have recently led to substantial performance improvements across
a variety of constraint programming domains. This research goes back to the early
1990s and has lately been gaining momentum. Some methods focus on optimizing
numerical (i.e., either integer- or real-valued) parameters (see, e.g., ), while others
also target categorical (i.e., discrete-valued and unordered) domains .
The most prominent conﬁguration methods are the racing algorithm F-RACE and our
own iterated local search algorithm PARAMILS . A recent competitor is the genetic
algorithm GGA . F-RACE and its extensions have been used to optimize various
high-performance algorithms, including iterated local search and ant colony optimization
procedures for timetabling tasks and the travelling salesperson problem . Our
own group has used PARAMILS to conﬁgure highly parameterized tree search and
local search solvers for the propositional satisﬁability problem (SAT), as well as
several solvers for mixed integer programming (MIP), substantially advancing the state
of the art for various types of instances. Notably, by optimizing the 76 parameters of
CPLEX—the most prominent MIP solver—we achieved up to 50-fold speedups over the
defaults and over the conﬁguration returned by the CPLEX tuning tool .
While the progress in practical applications described above has been based on
model-free optimization methods, recent progress in model-based approaches promises
to lead to the next generation of algorithm conﬁguration procedures. Sequential modelbased optimization (SMBO) iterates between ﬁtting models and using them to make
choices about which conﬁgurations to investigate. It offers the appealing prospects of
interpolating performance between observed parameter settings and of extrapolating to
previously unseen regions of parameter space. It can also be used to quantify importance
of each parameter and parameter interactions. However, being grounded in the “blackbox function optimization” literature from statistics (see, e.g., ), SMBO has inherited
a range of limitations inappropriate to the automated algorithm conﬁguration setting.
These limitations include a focus on deterministic target algorithms; use of costly initial
experimental designs; reliance on computationally expensive models; and the assumption
that all target algorithm runs have the same execution costs. Despite considerable recent
advances , all published work on SMBO still has three key limitations that
prevent its use for general algorithm conﬁguration tasks: (1) it only supports numerical
parameters; (2) it only optimizes target algorithm performance for single instances; and
(3) it lacks a mechanism for terminating poorly performing target algorithm runs early.
The main contribution of this paper is to remove the ﬁrst two of these SMBO limitations, and thus to make SMBO applicable to general algorithm conﬁguration problems
with many categorical parameters and sets of benchmark instances. Speciﬁcally, we generalize four components of the SMBO framework and—based on them—deﬁne two novel
SMBO instantiations capable of general algorithm conﬁguration: the simple model-free
Random Online Adaptive Racing (ROAR) procedure and the more sophisticated Sequential Model-based Algorithm Conﬁguration (SMAC) method. These methods do not yet
implement an early termination criterion for poorly performing target algorithm runs
(such as, e.g., PARAMILS’s adaptive capping mechanism ); thus, so far we expect them
to perform poorly on some conﬁguration scenarios with large captimes. In a thorough
experimental analysis for a wide range of 17 scenarios with small captimes (involving
the optimization of local search and tree search SAT solvers, as well as the commercial
MIP solver CPLEX), SMAC indeed compared favourably to the two most prominent
approaches for general algorithm conﬁguration: PARAMILS and GGA .
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the SMBO
framework and previous work on SMBO. Sections 3 and 4 generalize SMBO’s components to tackle general algorithm conﬁguration scenarios, deﬁning ROAR and SMAC,
respectively. Section 5 experimentally compares ROAR and SMAC to the existing state
of the art in algorithm conﬁguration. Section 6 concludes the paper.
Existing Work on Sequential Model-Based Optimization (SMBO)
Model-based optimization methods construct a regression model (often called a response
surface model) that predicts performance and then use this model for optimization.
Sequential model-based optimization (SMBO) iterates between ﬁtting a model and gathering additional data based on this model. In the context of parameter optimization, the
model is ﬁtted to a training set {(θ1, o1), . . . , (θn, on)} where parameter conﬁguration
θi = (θi,1, . . . , θi,d) is a complete instantiation of the target algorithm’s d parameters
and oi is the target algorithm’s observed performance when run with conﬁguration θi.
Given a new conﬁguration θn+1, the model aims to predict its performance on+1.
Sequential model-based optimization (SMBO) iterates between building a model and
gathering additional data. We illustrate a simple SMBO procedure in Figure 1. Consider
a deterministic algorithm A with a single continuous parameter x and let A’s runtime as
a function of its parameter be described by the solid line in Figure 1(a). SMBO searches
for a value of x that minimizes this runtime. Here, it is initialized by running A with the
parameter values indicated by the circles in Figure 1(a). Next, SMBO ﬁts a response
surface model to the data gathered; Gaussian process (GP) models are the most
common choice. The black dotted line in Figure 1 represents the predictive mean of a GP
model trained on the data given by the circles, and the shaded area around it quantiﬁes
the uncertainty in the predictions; this uncertainty grows with distance from the training
data. SMBO uses this predictive performance model to select a promising parameter
conﬁguration for the next run of A. Promising conﬁgurations are predicted to perform
well and/or lie in regions for which the model is still uncertain. These two objectives are
parameter x
response y
DACE mean prediction
DACE mean +/− 2*stddev
True function
Function evaluations
EI (scaled)
(a) SMBO, step 1
parameter x
response y
DACE mean prediction
DACE mean +/− 2*stddev
True function
Function evaluations
EI (scaled)
(b) SMBO, step 2
Fig. 1. Two steps of SMBO for the optimization of a 1D function. The true function is shown as a
solid line, and the circles denote our observations. The dotted line denotes the mean prediction
of a noise-free Gaussian process model (the “DACE” model), with the grey area denoting its
uncertainty. Expected improvement (scaled for visualization) is shown as a dashed line.
combined in a so-called expected improvement (EI) criterion, which is high in regions
of low predictive mean and high predictive variance (see the light dashed line in Figure
1(a); an exact formula for EI is given in Equation 3 in Section 4.3). SMBO selects a
conﬁguration with maximal EI (here, x = 0.705), runs A using it, and updates its model
based on the result. In Figure 1(b), we show how this new data point changes the model:
note the additional data point at x = 0.705, the greatly reduced uncertainty around it,
and that the region of large EI is now split into two.
While our example captures the essence of SMBO, recent practical SMBO instantiations include more complex mechanisms for dealing with randomness in the algorithm’s
performance and for reducing the computational overhead. Algorithm Framework 1
gives the general structure of the time-bounded SMBO framework we employ in this
paper. It starts by running the target algorithm with some initial parameter conﬁgurations,
and then iterates three steps: (1) ﬁtting a response surface model using the existing data;
(2) selecting a list of promising conﬁgurations; and (3) running the target algorithm on
(some of) the selected conﬁgurations until a given time bound is reached. This time
bound is related to the combined overhead, tmodel + tei, due to ﬁtting the model and
selecting promising conﬁgurations.
SMBO has is roots in the statistics literature on experimental design for global
continuous (“black-box”) function optimization. Most notable is the efﬁcient global
optimization (EGO) algorithm by Jones et al. ; this is essentially the algorithm used
in our simple example above. EGO is limited to optimizing continuous parameters for
noise-free functions (i.e., the performance of deterministic algorithms). Follow-up work
in the statistics community included an approach to optimize functions across multiple
environmental conditions as well as the sequential kriging optimization (SKO)
algorithm for handling noisy functions (i.e., in our context, randomized algorithms) by
Huang et al. . In parallel to the latter work, Bartz-Beielstein et al. were
the ﬁrst to use the EGO approach to optimize algorithm performance. Their sequential
Algorithm Framework 1: Sequential Model-Based Optimization (SMBO)
R keeps track of all target algorithm runs performed so far and their performances (i.e.,
SMBO’s training data {([θ1, x1], o1), . . . , ([θn, xn], on)}), M is SMBO’s model, ⃗Θnew
is a list of promising conﬁgurations, and tfit and tselect are the runtimes required to ﬁt the
model and select conﬁgurations, respectively.
:Target algorithm A with parameter conﬁguration space Θ; instance set Π; cost
Output:Optimized (incumbent) parameter conﬁguration, θinc
1 [R, θinc] ←Initialize(Θ, Π);
[M, tfit] ←FitModel(R);
[ ⃗Θnew, tselect] ←SelectConﬁgurations(M, θinc, Θ);
[R, θinc] ←Intensify( ⃗Θnew, θinc, M, R, tfit + tselect, Π, ˆc);
6 until total time budget for conﬁguration exhausted;
7 return θinc;
parameter optimization (SPO) toolbox—which has received considerable attention in the
evolutionary algorithms community—provides many features that facilitate the manual
analysis and optimization of algorithm parameters; it also includes an automated SMBO
procedure for optimizing continuous parameters on single instances. We started our
own work in SMBO by comparing SKO vs SPO, studying their choices for the four
SMBO components . We demonstrated that component Intensify mattered most, and
improved it in our SPO+ algorithm . Subsequently, we showed how to reduce the
overhead incurred by construction and use of response surface models via approximate
GP models. We also eliminated the need for a costly initial design by interleaving randomly selected parameters throughout the optimization process instead and exploit that
different algorithm runs take different amounts of time. The resulting time-bounded
SPO variant, TB-SPO, is the ﬁrst SMBO method practical for parameter optimization
given a user-speciﬁed time budget . Although it was shown to signiﬁcantly outperform PARAMILS on some domains, it is still limited to the optimization of continuous
algorithm parameters on single problem instances. In the following, we generalize the
components of the time-bounded SMBO framework (of which TB-SPO is an instantiation), extending its scope to tackle general algorithm conﬁguration problems with many
categorical parameters and sets of benchmark instances.
Randomized Online Aggressive Racing (ROAR)
In this section, we ﬁrst generalize SMBO’s Intensify procedure to handle multiple
instances, and then introduce ROAR, a very simple model-free algorithm conﬁguration
procedure based on this new intensiﬁcation mechanism.
Procedure 2: Intensify( ⃗Θnew, θinc, M, R, tintensify, Π, ˆc)
ˆc(θ, Π′) denotes the empirical cost of θ on the subset of instances Π′ ⊆Π, based on the
runs in R; maxR is a parameter, set to 2 000 in all our experiments
:Sequence of parameter settings to evaluate, ⃗Θnew; incumbent parameter setting,
θinc; model, M; sequence of target algorithm runs, R; time bound, tintensify;
instance set, Π; cost metric, ˆc
Output:Updated sequence of target algorithm runs, R; incumbent parameter setting, θinc
1 for i := 1, . . . , length( ⃗Θnew) do
θnew ←⃗Θnew[i];
if R contains less than maxR runs with conﬁguration θinc then
Π′ ←{π′ ∈Π | R contains less than or equal number of runs using θinc and π′
than using θinc and any other π′′ ∈Π} ;
π ←instance sampled uniformly at random from Π′;
s ←seed, drawn uniformly at random;
R ←ExecuteRun(R, θinc, π, s);
while true do
Smissing ←⟨instance, seed⟩pairs for which θinc was run before, but not θnew;
Storun ←random subset of Smissing of size min(N, |Smissing|);
foreach (π, s) ∈Storun do R ←ExecuteRun(R, θnew, π, s);
Smissing ←Smissing \ Storun;
Πcommon ←instances for which we previously ran both θinc and θnew;
if ˆc(θnew, Πcommon) > ˆc(θinc, Πcommon) then break;
else if Smissing = ∅then θinc ←θnew; break;
else N ←2 · N;
if time spent in this call to this procedure exceeds tintensify and i ≥2 then break;
19 return [R, θinc];
Generalization I: An Intensiﬁcation Mechanism for Multiple Instances
A crucial component of any algorithm conﬁguration procedure is the so-called intensiﬁcation mechanism, which governs how many evaluations to perform with each
conﬁguration, and when to trust a conﬁguration enough to make it the new current best
known conﬁguration (the incumbent). When conﬁguring algorithms for sets of instances,
we also need to decide which instance to use in each run. To address this problem,
we generalize TB-SPO’s intensiﬁcation mechanism. Our new procedure implements a
variance reduction mechanism, reﬂecting the insight that when we compare the empirical
cost statistics of two parameter conﬁgurations across multiple instances, the variance in
this comparison is lower if we use the same N instances to compute both estimates.
Procedure 2 deﬁnes this new intensiﬁcation mechanism more precisely. It takes as
input a list of promising conﬁgurations, ⃗Θnew, and compares them in turn to the current
incumbent conﬁguration until a time budget for this comparison stage is reached.1
1 If that budget is already reached after the ﬁrst conﬁguration in ⃗Θnew, one more conﬁguration
is used; see the last paragraph of Section 4.3 for an explanation why.
In each comparison of a new conﬁguration, θnew, to the incumbent, θinc, we ﬁrst
perform an additional run for the incumbent, using a randomly selected ⟨instance, seed⟩
combination. Then, we iteratively perform runs with θnew (using a doubling scheme)
until either θnew’s empirical performance is worse than that of θinc (in which case
we reject θnew) or we performed as many runs for θnew as for θinc and it is still at
least as good as θinc (in which case we change the incumbent to θnew). The ⟨instance,
seed⟩combinations for θnew are sampled uniformly at random from those on which
the incumbent has already run. However, every comparison in Procedure 2 is based
on a different randomly selected subset of instances and seeds, while FOCUSEDILS’s
Procedure “better” uses a ﬁxed ordering to which it can be very sensitive.
Deﬁning ROAR
We now deﬁne Random Online Aggressive Racing (ROAR), a simple model-free instantiation of the general SMBO framework (see Algorithm Framework 1).2 This surprisingly
effective method selects parameter conﬁgurations uniformly at random and iteratively
compares them against the current incumbent using our new intensiﬁcation mechanism.
We consider ROAR to be a racing algorithm, because it runs each candidate conﬁguration
only as long as necessary to establish whether it is competitive. It gets its name because
the set of candidates is selected at random, each candidate is accepted or rejected online,
and we make this online decision aggressively, before enough data has been gathered
to support a statistically signiﬁcant conclusion. More formally, as an instantiation of
the SMBO framework, ROAR is completely speciﬁed by the four components Initialize, FitModel, SelectConﬁgurations, and Intensify. Initialize performs a single run with
the target algorithm’s default parameter conﬁguration (or a random conﬁguration if
no default is available) on an instance selected uniformly at random. Since ROAR is
model-free, its FitModel procedure simply returns a constant model which is never used.
SelectConﬁgurations returns a single conﬁguration sampled uniformly at random from
the parameter space, and Intensify is as described in Procedure 2.
Sequential Model-based Algorithm Conﬁguration (SMAC)
In this section, we introduce our second, more sophisticated instantiation of the general
SMBO framework: Sequential Model-based Algorithm Conﬁguration (SMAC). SMAC
can be understood as an extension of ROAR that selects conﬁgurations based on a model
rather than uniformly at random. It instantiates Initialize and Intensify in the same way
as ROAR. Here, we discuss the new model class we use in SMAC to support categorical
parameters and multiple instances (Sections 4.1 and 4.2, respectively); then, we describe
how SMAC uses its models to select promising parameter conﬁgurations (Section 4.3).
Finally, we prove a convergence result for ROAR and SMAC (Section 4.4).
2 We previously considered random sampling approaches based on less powerful intensiﬁcation
mechanisms; see, e.g., RANDOM∗deﬁned in .
Generalization II: Models for Categorical Parameters
The models in all existing SMBO methods of which we are aware are limited to numerical
parameters. In this section, in order to handle categorical parameters, we adapt the
most prominent previously used model class (Gaussian stochastic process models) and
introduce the model class of random forests to SMBO.
A Weighted Hamming Distance Kernel Function for GP Models. Most recent work
on sequential model-based optimization uses Gaussian stochastic process
models (GPs; see ). GP models rely on a parameterized kernel function k : Θ×Θ 7→
R+ that speciﬁes the similarity between two parameter conﬁgurations. Previous SMBO
approaches for numerical parameters typically choose the GP kernel function
k(θi, θj) = exp
(−λl · (θi,l −θj,l)2)
where λ1, . . . , λd are the kernel parameters.
For categorical parameters, we deﬁne a new, similar kernel. Instead of measuring the
(weighted) squared distance, it computes a (weighted) Hamming distance:
kcat(θi, θj) = exp
(−λl · [1 −δ(θi,l, θj,l)])
where δ is the Kronecker delta function (ones if its two arguments are identical and zero
otherwise).
For a combination of continuous parameters Pcont and categorical parameters Pcat,
we apply the combined kernel
Kmixed(θi, θj) = exp
(−λl · (θi,l −θj,l)2) +
(−λl · [1 −δ(θi,l, θj,l)])
Although Kmixed is a straightforward generalization of the standard Gaussian kernel in
Equation 1, we are not aware of any prior use of this kernel or proof that it is indeed a
valid kernel function.3 We provide this proof in the appendix. Since Gaussian stochastic
processes are kernel-based learning methods and since Kmixed is a valid kernel function,
it can be swapped in for the Gaussian kernel without changing any other component
of the GP model. Here, we use the same projected process (PP) approximation of GP
models as in TB-SPO .
Random Forests. The new default model we use in SMAC is based on random forests
 , a standard machine learning tool for regression and classiﬁcation. Random forests
are collections of regression trees, which are similar to decision trees but have real
3 Couto gives a recursive kernel function for categorical data that is related since it is also
based on a Hamming distance.
values (here: target algorithm performance values) rather than class labels at their leaves.
Regression trees are known to perform well for categorical input data; indeed, they
have already been used for modeling the performance (both in terms of runtime and
solution quality) of heuristic algorithms (e.g., ). Random forests share this beneﬁt
and typically yield more accurate predictions ; they also allow us to quantify our
uncertainty in a given prediction. We construct a random forest as a set of B regression
trees, each of which is built on n data points randomly sampled with repetitions from
the entire training data set {(θ1, o1), . . . , (θn, on)}. At each split point of each tree, a
random subset of ⌈d · p⌉of the d algorithm parameters is considered eligible to be split
upon; the split ratio p is a parameter, which we left at its default of p = 5/6. A further
parameter is nmin, the minimal number of data points required to be in a node if it is
to be split further; we use the standard value nmin = 10. Finally, we set the number of
trees to B = 10 to keep the computational overhead small.4 We compute the random
forest’s predictive mean µθ and variance σ2
θ for a new conﬁguration θ as the empirical
mean and variance of its individual trees’ predictions for θ. Usually, the tree prediction
for a parameter conﬁguration θn+1 is the mean of the data points in the leaf one ends up
in when propagating θn+1 down the tree. We adapted this mechanism to instead predict
the user-deﬁned cost metric of that data, e.g., the median of the data points in that leaf.
Transformations of the Cost Metric. Model ﬁt can often be improved by transforming
the cost metric. In this paper, we focus on minimizing algorithm runtime. Previous work
on predicting algorithm runtime has found that logarithmic transformations substantially
improve model quality and we thus use log-transformed runtime data throughout this
paper; that is, for runtime ri, we use oi = ln(ri). (SMAC can also be applied to optimize
other cost metrics, such as the solution quality an algorithm obtains in a ﬁxed runtime;
other transformations may prove more efﬁcient for other metrics.) However, we note
that in some models such transformations implicitly change the cost metric users aim to
optimize. For example, take a simple case where there is only one parameter conﬁguration θ for which we measured runtimes (r1, . . . , r10)=(21, 22, . . . , 210). While the true
arithmetic mean of these runs is roughly 205, a GP model trained on this data using a log
transformation would predict the mean to be exp (mean((log(r1), . . . , log(r10)))) ≈45.
This is because the arithmetic mean of the logs is the log of the geometric mean:
geometric mean =
= exp (mean of logs).
For GPs, it is not clear how to ﬁx this problem. We avoid this problem in our random
forests by computing the prediction in the leaf of a tree by “untransforming” the data,
computing the user-deﬁned cost metric, and then transforming the result again.
4 An optimization of these three parameters might improve performance further. We plan on
studying this in the context of an application of SMAC to optimizing its own parameters.
Generalization III: Models for Sets of Problem Instances
There are several possible ways to extend SMBO’s models to handle multiple instances.
Most simply, one could use a ﬁxed set of N instances for every evaluation of the target
algorithm run, reporting aggregate performance. However, there is no good ﬁxed choice
for N: small N leads to poor generalization to test data, while large N leads to a
prohibitive N-fold slowdown in the cost of each evaluation. (This is the same problem
faced by the PARAMILS instantiation BASICILS(N) .) Instead, we explicitly integrate
information about the instances into our response surface models. Given a vector of
features xi describing each training problem instance πi ∈Π, we learn a joint model that
predicts algorithm runtime for combinations of parameter conﬁgurations and instance
features. We then aggregate these predictions across instances.
Instance Features. Existing work on empirical hardness models has demonstrated
that it is possible to predict algorithm runtime based on features of a given problem
instance. Most notably, such predictions have been exploited to construct portfolio-based
algorithm selection mechanisms, such as SATzilla .
For SAT instances in the form of CNF formulae, we used 126 features including
features based on graph representations of the instance, an LP relaxation, DPLL probing,
local search probing, clause learning, and survey propagation. All features are listed in
Figure 2. For MIP instances we computed 39 features, including features based on graph
representations, an LP relaxation, the objective function, and the linear constraint matrix.
All features are listed in Figure 3. To reduce the computational complexity of learning,
we applied principal component analysis (see, e.g., ), to project the feature matrix
into a lower-dimensional subspace spanned by the seven orthogonal vectors along which
it has maximal variance.
For new domains, for which no features have yet been deﬁned, SMAC can still
be applied with an empty feature set or simple domain-independent features, such as
instance size or the performance of the algorithm’s default setting (which, based on
preliminary experiments, seems to be a surprisingly effective feature). Note that in
contrast to per-instance approaches, such as SATzilla , instance features are
only needed for the training instances: the end result of algorithm conﬁguration is a
single parameter conﬁguration that is used without a need to compute features for test
instances. As a corollary, the time required for feature computation is not as crucial in
algorithm conﬁguration as it is in per-instance approaches: in per-instance approaches,
feature computation has to be counted as part of the time required to solve test instances,
while in algorithm conﬁguration no features are computed for test instances at all. In
fact, features for the training instances may well be the result of an extensive ofﬂine
analysis of those training instances, or can even be taken from the literature. Computing
the features we used here took an average of 30 seconds for the SAT domains, and 4.4
seconds for the MIP domains.
Predicting Performance Across Instances. So far, we have discussed models trained
on pairs (θi, oi) of parameter conﬁgurations θi and their observed performance oi.
Now, we extend this data to include instance features. Let xi denote the vector of
Problem Size Features:
1.–2. Number of variables and clauses in original formula: denoted v and c, respectively
3.–4. Number of variables and clauses after
simpliﬁcation with SATelite: denoted v’
and c’, respectively
5.–6. Reduction of variables and clauses by
simpliﬁcation: (v-v’)/v’ and (c-c’)/c’
7. Ratio of variables to clauses: v’/c’
Variable-Clause Graph Features:
8.–12. Variable node degree statistics: mean,
variation coeﬃcient, min, max, and entropy
13.–17. Clause node degree statistics: mean,
variation coeﬃcient, min, max, and entropy
Variable Graph Features:
18–21. Node degree statistics: mean, variation
coeﬃcient, min, and max
22.–26. Diameter:
coeﬃcient,
min, max, and entropy
27.–31. Clustering Coeﬃcient: mean, variation
coeﬃcient, min, max, and entropy
Clause Graph Features:
32–36. Node degree statistics: mean, variation
coeﬃcient, min, max, and entropy
Balance Features:
37.–41. Ratio of positive to negative literals in
each clause: mean, variation coeﬃcient,
min, max, and entropy
42.–46. Ratio of positive to negative occurrences of each variable: mean, variation
coeﬃcient, min, max, and entropy
47.–49. Fraction of unary, binary, and ternary
Proximity to Horn Formula:
50. Fraction of Horn clauses
51.–55. Number of occurrences in a Horn clause
for each variable: mean, variation coeﬃcient, min, max, and entropy
DPLL Probing Features:
56.–60. Number of unit propagations: computed
at depths 1, 4, 16, 64 and 256
61.–62. Search space size estimate: mean depth
to contradiction, estimate of the log of
number of nodes
LP-Based Features:
63.–66. Integer slack vector: mean, variation coeﬃcient, min, and max
67. Ratio of integer variables in LP solution
68. Objective function value of LP solution
Local Search Probing Features, based on 2
seconds of running each of SAPS and GSAT:
69.–78. Number of steps to the best local minimum in a run: mean, median, variation
coeﬃcient, 10th and 90th percentiles
79.–82. Average improvement to best in a run:
mean and coeﬃcient of variation of improvement per step to best solution
83.–86. Fraction of improvement due to ﬁrst local minimum: mean and variation coeﬃcient
87.–90. Coeﬃcient of variation of the number
of unsatisﬁed clauses in each local minimum: mean and variation coeﬃcient
Clause Learning Features (based on 2 seconds of running Zchaﬀrand):
91.–99. Number of learned clauses: mean, variation coeﬃcient, min, max, 10%, 25%,
50%, 75%, and 90% quantiles
100.–108. Length of learned clauses: mean, variation coeﬃcient, min, max, 10%, 25%,
50%, 75%, and 90% quantiles
Survey Propagation Features
109.–117. Conﬁdence of survey propagation: For
each variable, compute the higher of
P(true)/P(false) or P(false)/P(true).
Then compute statistics across variables:
mean, variation coeﬃcient, min, max,
10%, 25%, 50%, 75%, and 90% quantiles
118.–126. Unconstrained variables: For each variable, compute P(unconstrained). Then
compute statistics across variables: mean,
coeﬃcient,
25%, 50%, 75%, and 90% quantiles
Fig. 2. 11 groups of SAT features; these were introduced in .
features for the instance used in the ith target algorithm run. Concatenating parameter
values, θi, and instance features, xi, into one input vector yields the training data
{([θ1, x1], o1), . . . , ([θn, xn], on)}. From this data, we learn a model that takes as input
a parameter conﬁguration θ and predicts performance across all training instances.
For GP models, there exists an approach from the statistics literature to predict mean
Problem Size Features:
1.–2. Number of variables and constraints: denoted n and m, respectively
3. Number of nonzero entries in the linear
constraint matrix, A
Variable-Constraint Graph Features:
4–7. Variable node degree statistics:
max, min, and stddev
8–11. Constraint node degree statistics: mean,
max, min, and stddev
Variable Graph (VG) Features:
12–17. Node degree statistics: max, min, stddev,
25% and 75% quantiles
18–19. Clustering Coefﬁcient: mean and stddev
20. Edge Density: number of edges in the VG
divided by the number of edges in a complete graph having the same number of
LP-Based Features:
21–23. Integer slack vector: mean, max, L2
24. Objective function value of LP solution
Objective Function Features:
25. Standard deviation of normalized coefﬁcients: {ci/m}n
26. Standard deviation of {ci/ni}n
i=1, where
ni denotes the number of nonzero entries
in column i of A
27. Standard deviation of {ci/√ni}n
Linear Constraint Matrix Features:
28.–29. Distribution of normalized constraint matrix entries, Ai,j/bi: mean and stddev
(only of elements where bi ̸= 0)
30.–31. Variation coefﬁcient of normalized absolute nonzero entries per row: mean and
Variable Type Features:
32.–33. Support size of discrete variables: mean
and stddev
34. Percent unbounded discrete variables
35. Percent continuous variables
General Problem Type Features:
36. Problem type:
categorical
attributed by CPLEX (LP, MILP, FIXED-
MILP, QP, MIQP, FIXEDMIQP, MIQP,
QCP, or MIQCP)
37. Number of quadratic constraints
38. Number of nonzero entries in matrix of
quadratic coefﬁcients of objective function,
39. Number of variables with nonzero entries
Fig. 3. Eight groups of features for the mixed integer programming problem. These general MIP
features have been introduced in as a generalization of features for the combinatorial winner
determination problem in .
performance across problem instances . However, due to the issue discussed in
Section 4.1, when using log transformations this approach would not model the cost
metric the user speciﬁes; e.g., instead of the arithmetic mean it would model geometric
mean. This problem would be particularly serious in the case of multiple instances, as
performance often varies by orders of magnitude from one instance to another. As a
consequence, we did not implement a version of SMAC(PP) for multiple instances at this
time. Instead, we adapted RF models to handle predictions across multiple instances. All
input dimensions are handled equally when constructing the random forest, regardless of
whether they refer to parameter values or instance features. The prediction procedure
changes as follows: within each tree, we ﬁrst predict performance for the combinations of
the given parameter conﬁguration and each instance; next, we combine these predictions
with the user-deﬁned cost metric (e.g., arithmetic mean runtime); ﬁnally, we compute
means and variances across trees.
Generalization IV: Using the Model to Select Promising Conﬁgurations in
Large Mixed Numerical/Categorical Conﬁguration Spaces
The SelectConﬁguration component in SMAC uses the model to select a list of promising
parameter conﬁgurations. To quantify how promising a conﬁguration θ is, it uses the
model’s predictive distribution for θ to compute its expected positive improvement
(EI(θ)) over the best conﬁguration seen so far (the incumbent). EI(θ) is large for
conﬁgurations θ with low predicted cost and for those with high predicted uncertainty;
thereby, it offers an automatic tradeoff between exploitation (focusing on known good
parts of the space) and exploration (gathering more information in unknown parts of the
space). Speciﬁcally, we use the E[Iexp] criterion introduced in for log-transformed
costs; given the predictive mean µθ and variance σ2
θ of the log-transformed cost of a
conﬁguration θ, this is deﬁned as
EI(θ) := E[Iexp(θ)] = fminΦ(v) −e
θ+µθ · Φ(v −σθ),
where v := ln(fmin)−µθ
, Φ denotes the cumulative distribution function of a standard
normal distribution, and fmin denotes the empirical mean performance of θinc.5
Having deﬁned EI(θ), we must still decide how to identify conﬁgurations θ with
large EI(θ). This amounts to a maximization problem across parameter conﬁguration
space. Previous SMBO methods simply applied random sampling for
this task (in particular, they evaluated EI for 10 000 random samples), which is unlikely
to be sufﬁcient in high-dimensional conﬁguration spaces, especially if promising conﬁgurations are sparse. To gather a set of promising conﬁgurations with low computational
overhead, we perform a simple multi-start local search and consider all resulting conﬁgurations with locally maximal EI.6 This search is similar in spirit to PARAMILS ,
but instead of algorithm performance it optimizes EI(θ) (see Equation 3), which can
be evaluated based on the model predictions µθ and σ2
θ without running the target algorithm. More concretely, the details of our local search are as follows. We compute EI
for all conﬁguations used in previous target algorithm runs, pick the ten conﬁgurations
with maximal EI, and initialize a local search at each of them. To seamlessly handle
mixed categorical/numerical parameter spaces, we use a randomized one-exchange
neighbourhood, including the set of all conﬁgurations that differ in the value of exactly
one discrete parameter, as well as four random neighbours for each numerical parameter.
In particular, we normalize the range of each numerical parameter to and then
sample four “neighbouring” values for numerical parameters with current value v from
a univariate Gaussian distribution with mean v and standard deviation 0.2, rejecting
new values outside the interval . Since batch model predictions (and thus batch EI
computations) for a set of N conﬁgurations are much cheaper than separate predictions
for N conﬁgurations, we use a best improvement search, evaluating EI for all neighbours
at once; we stop each local search once none of the neighbours has larger EI. Since
5 In TB-SPO , we used fmin = µ(θinc) + σ(θinc). However, we now believe that setting
fmin to the empirical mean performance of θinc yields better performance overall.
6 We plan to investigate better mechanisms in the future. However, we note that the best problem
formulation is not obvious, since we desire a diverse set of conﬁgurations with high EI.
SMBO sometimes evaluates many conﬁgurations per iteration and because batch EI computations are cheap, we simply compute EI for an additional 10 000 randomly-sampled
conﬁgurations; we then sort all 10 010 conﬁgurations in descending order of EI. (The ten
results of local search typically had larger EI than all randomly sampled conﬁgurations.)
Having selected this list of 10 010 conﬁgurations based on the model, we interleave
randomly-sampled conﬁgurations in order to provide unbiased training data for future
models. More precisely, we alternate between conﬁgurations from the list and additional
conﬁgurations sampled uniformly at random.
Theoretical Analysis of SMAC and ROAR
In this section, we provide a convergence proof for SMAC (and ROAR) for ﬁnite
conﬁguration spaces. Since Intensify always compares at least two conﬁgurations against
the current incumbent, at least one randomly sampled conﬁguration is evaluated in
every iteration of SMBO. In ﬁnite conﬁguration spaces, thus, each conﬁguration has a
positive probability of being selected in each iteration. In combination with the fact that
Intensify increases the number of runs used to evaluate each conﬁguration unboundedly,
this allows us to prove that SMAC (and ROAR) eventually converge to the optimal
conﬁguration when using consistent estimators of the user-deﬁned cost metric. The proof
is straight-forward, following the same arguments as a previous proof about FocusedILS
(see ). Nevertheless, we give it here for completeness.
Deﬁnition 1 (Consistent estimator) ˆcN(θ) is a consistent estimator for c(θ) iff
N→∞P(|ˆcN(θ) −c(θ)| < ϵ) = 1.
When we estimate that a parameter conﬁguration’s true cost c(θ) based on N runs
is ˆcN(θ), and when ˆcN(θ) is a consistent estimator of c(θ), cost estimates become
increasingly reliable as N approaches inﬁnity, eventually eliminating the possibility of
mistakes in comparing two parameter conﬁgurations. The following lemma is exactly
Lemma 8 in ; for the proof, see that paper.
Lemma 2 (No mistakes for N →∞) Let θ1, θ2 ∈Θ be any two parameter conﬁgurations with c(θ1) < c(θ2). Then, for consistent estimators ˆcN, limN→∞P(ˆcN(θ1) ≥
ˆcN(θ2)) = 0.
All that remains to be shown is that SMAC evaluates each parameter conﬁguration
an unbounded number of times.
Lemma 3 (Unbounded number of evaluations) Let N(J, θ) denote the number of
runs SMAC has performed with parameter conﬁguration θ at the end of SMBO iteration J. Then, if SMBO’s parameter maxR is set to ∞, for any constant K and
conﬁguration θ ∈Θ (with ﬁnite Θ), limJ→∞P[N(J, θ) ≥K] = 1.
Proof. In each SMBO iteration, SMAC evaluates at least one random conﬁguration
(performing at least one new run for it since maxR = ∞), and with a probability of
p = 1/|Θ|, this is conﬁguration θ. Hence, the number of runs performed with θ is
lower-bounded by a binomial random variable B(k; J, p). Then, for any constant k < K
we obtain limJ→∞B(k; J, p) Thus, limJ→∞P[N(J, θ) ≥K] = 1.
Theorem 4 (Convergence of SMAC) When SMAC with maxR = ∞optimizes a cost
measure c based on a consistent estimator ˆcN and a ﬁnite conﬁguration space Θ, the
probability that it ﬁnds the true optimal parameter conﬁguration θ∗∈Θ approaches
one as the time allowed for conﬁguration goes to inﬁnity.
Proof. Each SMBO iteration takes ﬁnite time. Thus, as time goes to inﬁnity so does
the number of SMBO iterations, J. According to Lemma 3, as J goes to inﬁnity N(θ)
grows unboundedly for each θ ∈Θ. For each θ1, θ2, as N(θ1) and N(θ2) go to inﬁnity,
Lemma 2 states that in a pairwise comparison, the truly better conﬁguration will be
preferred. Thus eventually, SMAC visits all ﬁnitely many parameter conﬁgurations and
prefers the best one over all others with probability arbitrarily close to one.
We note that this convergence result holds regardless of the model type used. In
fact, it even holds for a simple round robin procedure that loops through parameter
conﬁgurations. We thus rely on empirical results to assess SMAC. We present these in
the following sections, after explaining how to build the relevant models.
Experimental Evaluation
We now compare the performance of SMAC, ROAR, TB-SPO , GGA , and
PARAMILS (in particular, FOCUSEDILS 2.3) for a wide variety of conﬁguration
scenarios, aiming to target algorithm runtime for solving SAT and MIP problems. In
principle, our ROAR and SMAC methods also apply to optimizing other cost metrics,
such as the solution quality an algorithm can achieve in a ﬁxed time budget; we plan on
studying their empirical performance for this case in the near future.
Experimental Setup
Conﬁguration scenarios. We used 17 conﬁguration scenarios from the literature, involving the conﬁguration of the local search SAT solver SAPS (4 parameters), the
tree search solver SPEAR (26 parameters), and the most widely used commercial
mixed integer programming solver, IBM ILOG CPLEX7 (76 parameters). SAPS is a
dynamic local search algorithm, and its four continuous parameters control the scaling
and smoothing of clause weights, as well as the percentage of random steps. We use
its UBCSAT implementation . SPEAR is a tree search algorithm for SAT solving
developed for industrial instances, and with appropriate parameter settings it is the best
available solver for certain types of SAT-encoded hardware and software veriﬁcation
instances . SPEAR has 26 parameters, including ten categorical, four integer, and
twelve continuous parameters. The categorical parameters mainly control heuristics
for variable and value selection, clause sorting, resolution ordering, and also enable or
disable optimizations, such as the pure literal rule. The continuous and integer parameters
mainly deal with activity, decay, and elimination of variables and clauses, as well as
with the interval of randomized restarts and percentage of random choices. CPLEX is
the most-widely used commercial optimization tool for solving MIPs, currently used
7 
by over 1 300 corporations and government agencies, along with researchers at over
1 000 universities. In deﬁning CPLEX’s conﬁguration space, we were careful to keep
all parameters ﬁxed that change the problem formulation (e.g., parameters such as the
optimality gap below which a solution is considered optimal). The 76 parameters we
selected affect all aspects of CPLEX. They include 12 preprocessing parameters (mostly
categorical); 17 MIP strategy parameters (mostly categorical); 11 categorical parameters
deciding how aggressively to use which types of cuts; 9 numerical MIP “limits” parameters; 10 simplex parameters (half of them categorical); 6 barrier optimization parameters
(mostly categorical); and 11 further parameters. Most parameters have an “automatic”
option as one of their values. We allowed this value, but also included other values (all
other values for categorical parameters, and a range of values for numerical parameters).
In all 17 conﬁguration scenarios, we terminated target algorithm runs at κmax = 5
seconds, the same per-run cutoff time used in previous work for these scenarios. In
previous work, we have also applied PARAMILS to optimize MIP solvers with very large
per-run captimes (up to κmax = 10 000s), and obtained better results than the CPLEX
tuning tool . We believe that for such large captimes, an adaptive capping mechanism,
such as the one implemented in ParamILS , is essential; we are currently working
on integrating such a mechanism into SMAC.8 In this paper, to study the remaining
components of SMAC, we only use scenarios with small captimes of 5s.
In order to enable a fair comparison with GGA, we changed the optimization objective
of all 17 scenarios from the original PAR-10 (penalized average runtime, counting
timeouts at κmax as 10·κmax, which is not supported by GGA) to simple average runtime
(PAR-1, counting timeouts at κmax as κmax). 9 However, one difference remains: we
minimize the runtime reported by the target algorithm, but GGA can only minimize its
own measurement of target algorithm runtime, including (sometimes large) overheads
for reading in the instance. All instances we used are available at 
labs/beta/Projects/AAC.
Parameter transformations. Some numerical parameters naturally vary on a nonuniform scale (e.g., a parameter θ with an interval that we discretized
to the values {100, 200, 400, 800, 1600} for use in PARAMILS). We transformed
such parameters to a domain in which they vary more uniformly (e.g., log(θ) ∈
[log(100), log(1600)]), un-transforming the parameter values for each call to the target
algorithm.
8 In fact, preliminary experiments for conﬁguration scenario CORLAT (from , with κmax =
10 000s) highlight the importance of developing an adaptive capping mechanism for SMAC:
e.g., in one of SMAC’s run, it only performed 49 target algorithm runs, with 15 of them timing
out after κmax = 10 000s, and another 3 taking over 5 000 seconds each. Together, these runs
exceeded the time budget of 2 CPU days (172 800 seconds), despite the fact that all of them
could have safely been cut off after less than 100 seconds. As a result, for scenario CORLAT,
SMAC performed a factor of 3 worse than PARAMILS with κmax = 10 000s. On the other
hand, SMAC can sometimes achieve strong performance even with relatively high captimes;
e.g., on CORLAT with κmax = 300s, SMAC outperformed PARAMILS by a factor of 1.28.
9 Using PAR-10 to compare the remaining conﬁgurators, our qualitative results did not change.
Comparing conﬁguration procedures. We performed 25 runs of each conﬁguration
procedure on each conﬁguration scenario. For each such run ri, we computed test
performance ti as follows. First, we extracted the incumbent conﬁguration θinc at the
point the conﬁguration procedure exhausted its time budget; SMAC’s overhead due
to the construction and use of models were counted as part of this budget. Next, in
an ofﬂine evaluation step using the same per-run cutoff time as during training, we
measured the mean runtime ti across 1 000 independent test runs of the target algorithm
parameterized by θinc. In the case of multiple-instance scenarios, we used a test set of
previously unseen instances. For a given scenario, this resulted in test performances
t1, . . . , t25 for each conﬁguration procedure. We report medians across these 25 values,
visualize their variance in boxplots, and perform a Mann-Whitney U test to check
for signiﬁcant differences between conﬁguration procedures. We ran GGA through
HAL , using parameter settings recommended by GGA’s author, Kevin Tierney, in
e-mail communication: we set the population size to 70, the number of generations to
100, the number of runs to perform in the ﬁrst generation to 5, and the number of runs
to perform in the last generation to 70. We used default settings for FOCUSEDILS 2.3,
including aggressive capping. We note that in a previous comparison of GGA and
FOCUSEDILS, capping was disabled in FOCUSEDILS; this explains its poor performance
there and its better performance here.
With the exception of FOCUSEDILS, all of the conﬁguration procedures we study
here support numerical parameters without a need for discretization. We present results
both for the mixed numerical/categorical parameter space these methods search, and—to
enable a direct comparison to FOCUSEDILS—for a fully discretized conﬁguration space.
Computational environment. We conducted all experiments on a cluster of 55 dual
3.2GHz Intel Xeon PCs with 2MB cache and 2GB RAM, running OpenSuSE Linux
11.1. We measured runtimes as CPU time on these reference machines.
Experimental Results for Single Instance Scenarios
In order to evaluate our new general algorithm conﬁguration procedures ROAR and
SMAC one component at a time, we ﬁrst evaluated their performance for optimizing
the continuous parameters of SAPS and the mixed numerical/categorical parameters of
SPEAR on single SAT instances; multi-instance scenarios are studied in the next section.
To enable a comparison with our previous SMBO instantiation TB-SPO, we used the
6 conﬁguration scenarios introduced in , which aim to minimize SAPS’s runtime
on 6 single SAT-encoded instances, 3 each from quasigroup completion (QCP )
and from small world graph colouring (SWGCP ). We also used 5 similar new
conﬁguration scenarios, which aim to optimize SPEAR for 5 further SAT-encoded
instances: 3 from software veriﬁcation (SWV ) and 2 from IBM bounded model
checking (IBM ; we only used 2 low quantiles of this hard distribution since SPEAR
could not solve the instance at the 75% quantile within the cutoff time). The conﬁguration
scenarios are named algorithm-distribution-quantile: e.g., SAPS-QCP-MED
aims to optimize SAPS performance on a median-hard QCP instance. The time budget
for each algorithm conﬁguration run was 30 CPU minutes, exactly following .
The model-based approaches SMAC and TB-SPO performed best in this comparison,
followed by ROAR, FOCUSEDILS, and GGA. Table 1 shows the results achieved by
each of the conﬁguration procedures, for both the full parameter conﬁguration space
(which includes numerical parameters) and the discretized version we made for use
with FOCUSEDILS. For the special case of single instances and a small number of allnumerical parameters, SMAC(PP) and TB-SPO are very similar, and both performed
best.10 While TB-SPO does not apply in the remaining conﬁguration scenarios, our more
general SMAC method achieved the best performance in all of them. For all-numerical
parameters, SMAC performed slightly better using PP models, while in the presence of
categorical parameters the RF models performed better. ROAR performed well for small
but not for large conﬁguration spaces: it was among the best (i.e., best or not signiﬁcantly
different from the best) in most of the SAPS scenarios (4 parameters) but only for one of
the SPEAR scenarios (26 parameters). Both GGA and FOCUSEDILS performed slightly
worse than ROAR for the SAPS scenarios, and slightly (but statistically signiﬁcantly)
worse than SMAC for most SPEAR conﬁguration scenarios. Figure 4 visualizes each
conﬁgurator’s 25 test performances for all scenarios. We note that SMAC and ROAR
often yielded more robust results than FOCUSEDILS and GGA: for many scenarios some
of the 25 FOCUSEDILS and GGA runs did very poorly.
Our new SMAC and ROAR methods were able to explore the full conﬁguration
space, which sometimes led to substantially improved performance compared to the
discretized conﬁguration space PARAMILS is limited to. Comparing the left vs the right
side of Table 1, we note that the SAPS discretization (the same we used to optimize
SAPS with PARAMILS in previous work ) left substantial room for improvement
when exploring the full space: roughly 1.15-fold and 1.55-fold speedups on the QCP
and SWGCP instances, respectively. GGA did not beneﬁt as much from being allowed
to explore the full conﬁguration space for the SAPS scenarios; however, in one of the
SPEAR scenarios (SPEAR-IBM-MED), it did perform 1.15 times better for the full space
(albeit still worse than SMAC).
Experimental Results for General Multi-Instance Conﬁguration Scenarios
We now compare the performance of SMAC, ROAR, GGA, and FOCUSEDILS on six
general algorithm conﬁguration tasks that aim to minimize the mean runtime of SAPS,
SPEAR, and CPLEX for various sets of instances. These are the 5 BROAD conﬁguration
scenarios used in to evaluate PARAMILS’s performance, plus one further CPLEX
scenario, and we used the same time budget of 5 hours per conﬁguration run. These
instances come from the following domains: quasigroup completion, QCP ; small
world graph colouring, SWGCP ; winner determination in combinatorial auctions,
REGIONS100 ; mixed integer knapsack, MIK .
Overall, SMAC performed best in this comparison: as shown in Table 2 its performance was among the best (i.e., statistically indistinguishable from the best) in all 6
conﬁguration scenarios, for both the discretized and the full conﬁguration spaces. Our
simple ROAR method performed surprisingly well, indicating the importance of the
10 In this special case, the two only differ in the expected improvement criterion and its optimization.
Full conﬁguration space
Discretized conﬁguration space
SMAC SMAC(PP) TB-SPO ROAR GGA SMAC SMAC(PP) ROAR F-ILS GGA
SA P S-QCP-M E D
SA P S-QCP-Q075
SA P S-QCP-Q095
SA P S-SWGCP-M E D
SA P S-SWGCP-Q075 [·10−1s]
SA P S-SWGCP-Q095 [·10−1s]
SP E A R-IBM-Q025 [·10−1s]
SP E A R-IBM-M E D
SP E A R-SWV-M E D
SP E A R-SWV-Q075 [·10−1s]
SP E A R-SWV-Q095 [·10−1s]
Table 1. Comparison of algorithm conﬁguration procedures for optimizing parameters on single
problem instances. We performed 25 independent runs of each conﬁguration procedure and report
the median of the 25 test performances (mean runtimes across 1 000 target algorithm runs with the
found conﬁgurations). We bold-faced entries for conﬁgurators that are not signiﬁcantly worse than
the best conﬁgurator for the respective conﬁguration space, based on a Mann-Whitney U test. The
symbol “—” denotes that the conﬁgurator does not apply for this conﬁguration space.
SWGCP−q075
SWGCP−q095
(a) SAPS (4 continuous parameters)
(b) SPEAR (26 parameters; 12 of them continuous and 4 integral)
Fig. 4. Visual comparison of conﬁguration procedures’ performance for setting SAPS and
SPEAR’s parameters for single instances. For each conﬁgurator and scenario, we show boxplots for the 25 test performances underlying Table 1, for the full conﬁguration space (discretized
for FOCUSEDILS). ‘S’ stands for SMAC, ‘P’ for SMAC(PP), ‘T’ for TB-SPO, ‘R’ for ROAR,
‘F’ for FOCUSEDILS, and ‘G’ for GGA.
intensiﬁcation mechanism: it was among the best in 2 of the 6 conﬁguration scenarios for
either version of the conﬁguration space. However, it performed substantially worse than
the best approaches for conﬁguring CPLEX—the algorithm with the largest conﬁguration
space; we note that ROAR’s random sampling approach lacks the guidance offered by
either FOCUSEDILS’s local search or SMAC’s response surface model. GGA performed
Full conﬁguration space
Discretized conﬁguration space
SMAC ROAR F-ILS GGA SMAC ROAR F-ILS
SA P S-QCP
SA P S-SWGCP
SP E A R-QCP
SP E A R-SWGCP
CPLEX-RE G I O N S100 [·10−1s]
Table 2. Comparison of algorithm conﬁguration procedures for benchmarks with multiple instances. We performed 25 independent runs of each conﬁguration procedure and report the median
of the 25 test performances (mean runtimes across 1 000 target algorithm runs with the found
conﬁgurations on a test set disjoint from the training set). We bold-face entries for conﬁgurators
that are not signiﬁcantly worse than the best conﬁgurator for the respective conﬁguration space,
based on a Mann-Whitney U test.
slightly better for optimizing CPLEX than ROAR, but also signiﬁcantly worse than either
FOCUSEDILS or SMAC. Figure 5 visualizes the performance each conﬁgurator achieved
for all 6 scenarios. We note that—similarly to the single instance cases—the results of
SMAC were often more robust than those of FOCUSEDILS and GGA.
Although the performance improvements achieved by our new methods might not
appear large in absolute terms, it is important to remember that algorithm conﬁguration
is an optimization problem, and that the ability to tease out the last few percent of
improvement often distinguishes good algorithms. We expect the difference between
conﬁguration procedures to be clearer in scenarios with larger per-instance runtimes. In
order to handle such scenarios effectively, we believe that SMAC will require an adaptive
capping mechanism similar to the one we introduced for PARAMILS ; we are actively
working on integrating such a mechanism with SMAC’s models.
As in the single-instance case, for some conﬁguration scenarios, SMAC and ROAR
achieved much better results when allowed to explore the full space rather than FOCUSED-
ILS’s discretized search space. Speedups for SAPS were similar to those observed in the
single-instance case (about 1.15-fold for SAPS-QCP and 1.65-fold for SAPS-SWGCP),
but now we also observed a 1.17-fold improvement for SPEAR-QCP. In contrast, GGA
actually performed worse for 4 of the 6 scenarios when allowed to explore the full space.
Conclusion
In this paper, we extended a previous line of work on sequential model-based optimization (SMBO) to tackle general algorithm conﬁguration problems. SMBO had previously
been applied only to the optimization of algorithms with numerical parameters on single
problem instances. Our work overcomes both of these limitations, allowing categorical
parameters and conﬁguration for sets of problem instances. The four technical advances
that made this possible are (1) a new intensiﬁcation mechanism that employs blocked
comparisons between conﬁgurations; an alternative class of response surface models,
random forests, to handle (2) categorical parameters and (3) multiple instances; and (4)
a new optimization procedure to select the most promising parameter conﬁguration in a
large mixed categorical/numerical space.
SAPS−SWGCP
SPEAR−SWGCP
CPLEX−regions100
Fig. 5. Visual comparison of conﬁguration procedures for general algorithm conﬁguration scenarios. For each conﬁgurator and scenario, we show boxplots for the runtime data underlying
Table 2, for the full conﬁguration space (discretized for FOCUSEDILS). ‘S’ stands for SMAC, ‘R’
for ROAR, ‘F’ for FOCUSEDILS, and ‘G’ for GGA. FOCUSEDILS does not apply for the full
conﬁguration space, denoted by “—”.
We presented empirical results for the conﬁguration of two SAT algorithms (one
local search, one tree search) and the commercial MIP solver CPLEX on a total of
17 conﬁguration scenarios, demonstrating the strength of our methods. Overall, our
new SMBO procedure SMAC yielded statistically signiﬁcant—albeit sometimes small—
improvements over all of the other approaches on several conﬁguration scenarios, and
never performed worse. In contrast to FOCUSEDILS, our new methods are also able to
search the full (non-discretized) conﬁguration space, which led to further substantial
improvements for several conﬁguration scenarios. We note that our new intensiﬁcation mechanism enabled even ROAR, a simple model-free approach, to perform better
than previous general-purpose conﬁguration procedures in many cases; ROAR only
performed poorly for optimizing CPLEX, where good conﬁgurations are sparse. SMAC
yielded further improvements over ROAR and—most importantly—also state-of-the-art
performance for the conﬁguration of CPLEX.
In future work, we plan to improve SMAC to better handle conﬁguration scenarios
with large per-run captimes for each target algorithm run; speciﬁcally, we plan to integrate
PARAMILS’s adaptive capping mechanism into SMAC, which will require an extension
of SMACs models to handle the resulting partly censored data. While in this paper we
aimed to ﬁnd a single conﬁguration with overall good performance, we also plan to use
SMAC’s models to determine good conﬁgurations on a per-instance basis. Finally, we
plan to use these models to characterize the importance of individual parameters and
their interactions, and to study interactions between parameters and instance features.
Acknowledgements
We thank Kevin Murphy for many useful discussions on the modelling aspect of this
work. Thanks also to Chris Fawcett and Chris Nell for help with running GGA through
HAL, to Kevin Tierney for help with GGA’s parameters, and to James Styles and
Mauro Vallati for comments on an earlier draft of this paper. FH gratefully acknowledges
support from a postdoctoral research fellowship by the Canadian Bureau for International
Education. HH and KLB gratefully acknowledge support from NSERC through their
respective discovery grants, and from the MITACS NCE through a seed project grant.
Proof of Theorem 1
In order to prove the validity of kernel function Kmixed, we ﬁrst prove the following
Lemma 5 (Validity of Kham) For any ﬁnite domain Θ, the kernel function Kham :
Θ × Θ →R deﬁned as
Kham(x, z) = exp(−λ · [1 −δ(x, z)])
is a valid kernel function.
Proof. We use the facts that any constant is a valid kernel function, and that the space
of kernel functions is closed under addition and multiplication. We also use the fact that
a kernel function k(x, z) is valid if we can ﬁnd an embedding φ such that k(x, z) =
φ(x)T · φ(z) .
Let a1, . . . , am denote the ﬁnitely many elements of Θi, and for each element ai
deﬁne an m-dimensional indicator vector vai that contains only zeros except at position
i, where it is one. Deﬁne a kernel function k1(x, z) for x, z ∈Θi as the dot-product of
embeddings φ(x) and φ(z) in an m-dimensional space:
k1(x, z) = v
vx(i) · vz(i) = 1 −δ(x, z).
To bring this in the form of Equation 4, we add the constant kernel function
k2(x, z) = c =
1 −exp(−λ),
and then multiply by the constant kernel function
k3(x, z) = 1/(1 + c) = 1 −exp(−λ).
We can thus rewrite function Kham as the product of valid kernels, thereby proving its
Kham(x, z) = (k1(x, z) + k2(x, z)) · k3(x, z)
exp(−λ) otherwise
= exp [−λδ(x ̸= z)] .
Theorem 1 (Validity of Kmixed). The kernel Kmixed : Θ × Θ →R deﬁned as
Kmixed(θi, θj) = exp
(−λl · (θi,l −θj,l)2) +
(−λl · [1 −δ(θi,l, θj,l)])
is a valid kernel function for arbitrary conﬁguration spaces.
Proof. Since Kmixed is a product of the valid Gaussian kernel
K(θi, θj) = exp
(−λl · (θi,l −θj,l)2)
and one Kham kernel for each categorical parameter, it is a valid kernel.