Predictive modeling of outcomes following definitive
chemoradiotherapy for oropharyngeal cancer based on FDG-
PET image characteristics
Michael R. Folkert1, Jeremy Setton1, Aditya P. Apte2, Milan Grkovski2, Robert J. Young3,
Heiko Schöder3, Wade L. Thorstad4, Nancy Y. Lee1, Joseph O. Deasy2, and Jung Hun Oh2
1Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10065, USA
2Department of Medical Physics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065,
3Department of Radiology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA
4Department of Radiation Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO
63110, USA
In this study, we investigate the use of imaging feature-based outcomes research (“radiomics”)
combined with machine learning techniques to develop robust predictive models for the risk of allcause mortality (ACM), local failure (LF), and distant metastasis (DM) following definitive
chemoradiation therapy (CRT). One hundred seventy four patients with stage III-IV oropharyngeal
cancer (OC) treated at our institution with CRT with retrievable pre- and post-treatment 18Ffluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) scans were identified. From pretreatment PET scans, 24 representative imaging features of FDG-avid disease regions were
extracted. Using machine learning-based feature selection methods, multiparameter logistic
regression models were built incorporating clinical factors and imaging features. All model
building methods were tested by cross validation to avoid overfitting, and final outcome models
were validated on an independent dataset from a collaborating institution. Multiparameter models
were statistically significant on 5-fold cross validation with the area under the receiver operating
characteristic curve (AUC)=0.65 (p=0.004), 0.73 (p=0.026), and 0.66 (p=0.015) for ACM, LF, and
DM, respectively. The model for LF retained significance on the independent validation cohort
with AUC=0.68 (p=0.029) whereas the models for ACM and DM did not reach statistical
significance, but resulted in comparable predictive power to the 5-fold cross validation with
AUC=0.60 (p=0.092) and 0.65 (p=0.062), respectively. In the largest study of its kind to date,
predictive features including increasing metabolic tumor volume, increasing image heterogeneity,
and increasing tumor surface irregularity significantly correlated to mortality, LF, and DM on 5fold cross validation in a relatively uniform single-institution cohort. The LF model also retained
significance in an independent population.
Corresponding author: Jung Hun Oh, PhD, Department of Medical Physics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10065, Tel: (646)-888-8017, Fax: (212)-717-3010, .
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 07.
 
Phys Med Biol. 2017 July 07; 62(13): 5327–5343. doi:10.1088/1361-6560/aa73cc.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
radiomics; FDG-PET; oropharyngeal cancer
Introduction
For patients with head-and-neck squamous cell cancer (HNSCC), contrast-enhanced
volumetric imaging with computed tomography (CT) and/or magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) is the standard of care for clinical workup , and the use of [18F]
fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG) based positron emission tomography (PET) imaging has
become increasingly integrated into initial workup, treatment planning, and monitoring
 .
Multiple studies based on FDG-PET imaging have reported correlations of simple
standardized uptake value (SUV) measures and volume-based measurements, such as
metabolic tumor volume (MTV) and total lesion glycolysis (TLG), with oncologic outcomes
in HNSCC . To a limited degree, more complex analytics that explore the
association of imaging features with oncologic outcomes have also been investigated, as
these may be less dependent on the dose and timing of radiotracer administration . Although it appears that these individual
imaging metrics are predictive to some degree for patient outcomes, they may not have
sufficient predictive power to be clinically useful. The development of multiparametric
models has been proposed as a method to improve prediction of clinical outcomes and select
patients who could benefit from dose reduction or intensification strategies (El Naqa et al
In this study, we investigate the use of imaging feature-based outcomes research
(“radiomics”) combined with machine learning techniques to develop predictive models for
the risk of mortality, local failure (LF), and distant metastasis (DM) in a subset of HNSCC
patients with stage III-IV oropharyngeal cancer (OC) following definitive chemoradiation
therapy. By incorporating multiple imaging metrics, these multiparametric models are tested
to determine whether they may have greater predictive power than any of their individual
components.
Materials and methods
From 12/2002 to 3/2009, all stage III-IV OC patients treated at our institution with definitive
concurrent chemoradiation therapy with retrievable pre- and post-treatment FDG-PET/CT
scans were identified. To ensure relative uniformity in technique and quality of scans for
subsequent analysis, any patient with an FDG-PET/CT scan performed outside of our
institution was excluded unless a repeat FDG-PET/CT scan was obtained at our institution
Folkert et al.
Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
prior to initiation of treatment. Patients with metastatic disease at presentation, noted on
staging or treatment planning imaging, were also excluded as were those patients who were
managed surgically. This resulted in 174 assessable patients. Our Institutional Review Board
approved this retrospective study and all patients provided informed consent.
Image acquisition
Pre-treatment FDG-PET imaging was performed as part of the standard treatment planning
process for definitive concurrent chemoradiation therapy. The mean uptake time was 72±17
minutes. Procedures for FDG-PET/CT imaging at our institution have been previously
described . In brief, patients are instructed to fast for a
minimum of 6 hours, with water intake permitted and encouraged. Prior to administration of
18F-FDG (dose range, 12–15 mCi), a blood glucose level of <200 mg/dL is confirmed. 18F-
FDG is injected intravenously, followed by an uptake period during which patients drink
diluted oral contrast. Low-dose CT (120–140 kV, 80 mA) and PET scans are then obtained
for the torso (3 min/bed position, thoracic inlet to upper thigh) with the arms up, followed by
dedicated images of the head and neck (5 min/bed position) with the arms down. Intravenous
contrast is also administered for radiotherapy planning scans. PET images were acquired on
either a hybrid PET/CT GE or Siemens system, normalized and corrected for scatter,
randoms, attenuation, decay and dead time, and reconstructed using the ordered-subsets
expectation maximization (OSEM) algorithm (2 iterations and 8 subsets for Siemens
scanner, and 2 iterations for GE scanners with 28, 21, and 20 subsets for Discovery LS, ST,
and STE, respectively).
Image analysis
Pre-treatment attenuation-corrected FDG-PET scan images were converted to the
Computational Environment for Radiotherapy Research (CERR) format. CERR is an open
source radiotherapy research toolkit designed to facilitate developing and sharing research
results for radiotherapy planning; it is MATLAB-based software and provides a common file
type for the creation of multi-institutional treatment plan databases for various types of
research studies, including dose-volume outcomes analyses and radiomics studies . Bounding boxes were generated for the primary lesion by creating cuboidal
structures that encompassed the individual FDG-avid elements. For the purposes of this
study, SUV was defined as the decay-corrected measurement of activity per unit volume of
tissue (MBq/ml) adjusted by the total administered activity (MBq) and divided by the
patient’s weight (kg) measured on the date of the scan. A threshold of 42% of the maximum
SUV value (SUVmax) was then applied to define a region of interest (ROI) for further
analysis, and the volume of ROI was defined as MTV .
A total of 24 representative features of the FDG-avid regions, defined as ROIs, were then
extracted for each image. These features include common statistical features such as the
SUVmax and quantizations of the intensity-volume histogram distribution of SUV values
over the defined ROI volume. Additionally, more complex shape and textural features that
take morphological features and second-order gray-level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM)based features of the analyzed ROI into account were included . These are further described in the following
Statistical features
First-order statistical features were derived from the distribution of voxel values over the
analyzed ROI intensity-volume histogram. They include kurtosis, skewness, slope, and the
minimum, maximum, median, and average value of the SUV. Kurtosis is a measure of the
flatness or “peakedness” of the intensity-volume histogram, whereas skewness is a measure
of the asymmetry of the intensity-volume histogram. Slope is the change in volume over the
change in the SUV threshold used to generate the ROI volume.
Shape features
Shape features are related to the morphology of the ROI itself and in this study include
eccentricity, solidity, extent, and Euler number. Eccentricity is a measure of “noncircularity” defined as the ratio of the minor axis to the major axis of the best fitted ellipsoid
to the analyzed ROI, with an eccentricity of 0 or 1 corresponding to a linear or a perfectly
round ROI, respectively. Solidity is derived by calculating the proportion of pixels of the
ROI to the largest possible convex hull polygon structure of the ROI; the convex hull is the
best-fitting polygon that encloses all the pixels of the ROI. An ROI of the same shape and
volume as the convex hull would have a solidity of 1 whereas an irregular ROI would have
solidity < 1. Extent is similar to solidity except that a rectangular prism or cuboid is used,
instead of a convex hull, to measure the proportion. The Euler number is an integral value
that indicates the number of connected objects in the ROI minus the number of holes.
Texture features
The GLCM was constructed by summing up the co-occurrence frequencies for each matrix
of 13 directions across a 3D image with 16 gray-scale levels. Texture features quantify the
voxel-to-voxel interaction within the ROI, and include homogeneity, entropy, contrast, and
coherence (also known as energy in Haralick texture features) . These features are independent of the ROI position, orientation, and size and
reflect the distribution of tumor metabolic uptake while minimizing the potential
contribution of variations in administered dose and time to FDG-PET image acquisition . Homogeneity is a measurement of the similarity in intensity of each voxel
and its neighboring voxels whereas contrast is a measurement of the variability for the
difference in intensity between each voxel and its neighbors. Entropy is a measurement of
the randomness of the intensity level over the voxels in the ROI, and coherence measures the
uniformity of the intensity level in the ROI. As these texture features are dependent on the
intensity relationships between neighboring voxels, noise or artifacts caused in the image
acquisition process may greatly impact on the values of imaging features. To remove or
minimize noise or artifacts, a smoothing method was applied: for a voxel (v) in the ROI, a
sphere with a user-defined radius (from 0.5 cm to 1.5 cm with a step of 0.5 cm) with the
voxel (v) being centered was created. An intensity value averaged from all voxels in the
sphere was placed in the voxel (v). This procedure was performed for all voxels in the ROI.
Image features were extracted from the smoothed image. The post-smoothing was applied
after reconstruction.
Folkert et al.
Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Statistical analysis
All outcomes were measured from the start of radiation therapy to the time of event. Allcause mortality (ACM) time was defined as the time to death from any cause. LF time was
defined as the time to any LF in the high-dose region of radiation therapy treatment. DM
time was defined as the time to first clinical or pathological evidence of distant disease
recurrence. Patients were censored at the date of last follow-up if death did not occur.
Univariate and multivariate survival analyses were performed using Cox proportionalhazards regression for ACM whereas competing-risks analysis, based on Fine and Gray’s
proportional sub-hazards model, was used for LF and DM . After
univariate analysis on clinical variables, multivariate analysis was performed with variables
with p-values < 0.05. For each endpoint, Kaplan-Meier analysis with log-rank test was
performed to investigate the difference of survival rates between a lower risk group and a
higher risk group . Statistical analysis was performed
using Stata/MP version 12 (Stata Corporation, College Station, TX).
Model development
Multiparameter logistic regression models were built incorporating clinical factors and
imaging features. For the best-fitting model selection, leave-one-out cross validation
(LOOCV) with forward feature selection was performed. A model that occurs with the most
frequency during the LOOCV process was chosen as a final model for each endpoint.
Models were characterized by the area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curve (AUC) and p-values were computed using the Spearman’s correlation coefficient
 .
Cross validation
For an unbiased model estimate, a 5-fold cross validation method was iterated 30 times
 . At each iteration, univariate logistic regression analysis was performed,
and features with p-values < 0.05 were used in multiparameter logistic regression as shown
in the above section, resulting in an AUC computed between the predicted and original
outcomes. After the whole process, AUC values were averaged. In addition, ROC curve
analysis was performed to determine an optimal cutoff value using Youden’s index based on
which sensitivity and specificity were computed.
Validation on an independent dataset
Additionally, final outcome models (as shown in the above section) were tested on an
independent cohort, consisting of 65 patients with stage III-IV OC treated with IMRT-based
chemoradiation therapy at another institution (Washington University School of Medicine,
St. Louis, MO, USA) from 7/2003 to 11/2009. PET images were acquired on a Siemens
Biograph Duo scanner or a Siemens Biograph 40 scanner. Patients were instructed to fast for
a minimum of 4 hours. Prior to administration of 18F-FDG (dose range, 10–15 mCi), a
blood glucose level of <200 mg/dL was confirmed. A spiral CT scan was obtained at
approximately 60 min postinjection and noncontrast CT images were obtained for
attenuation correction and fusion with PET images. After that, emission images were
obtained. For segmentation, a threshold of 42% of the maximum SUV value was used, and
Folkert et al.
Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
the same set of image features used in this study was extracted. For more information about
this dataset, see Garsa et al .
Primary cohort patients
We analyzed 174 HNSCC patients with stage III-IV oropharyngeal cancer following
definitive chemoradiation therapy who were treated at our institution. Among them, 48
(27.6%) patients died, and 12 (6.9%) and 33 (19.0%) patients had LF and DM, respectively.
Characteristics of the primary study cohort are provided in Table 1. Median follow-up time
was 55 months (range: 6–112 months). The majority (87.4%) of the patients were male, and
most (69%) were current or former smokers (20.7% and 48.3%, respectively). The average
age was 57 years (range: 27–84 years). The OC subsite was the tonsils in 47.1% of patients,
base of the tongue in 48.9% of patients, and the soft palate or posterior pharyngeal wall in
4% of patients. The overall stage was IV in 78.7% of patients and III in 21.3% of patients;
39.1% of patients had T3 or T4 disease, and the majority had N2 disease (68.4%); only a
small portion of patients in our cohort presented with N3 disease (4.6%). The median value
for MTV was 11.2 cc (range: 2.2–60.9 cc).
All (100%) patients were treated with definitive concurrent chemoradiation therapy. The
median dose to the tumor was 70 Gy (range: 66–70 Gy), and the median dose to the lower
neck was 50.4 Gy (range: 50–70 Gy). Concurrent chemotherapy consisted of cisplatin alone
in 56.1% of patients, cetuximab alone in 10.4% of patients, carboplatin and 5-fluorouracil in
12.1% of patients, cisplatin and bevacizumab in 13.3% of patients, and other multidrug
regimens in the remaining 8.1% of patients.
For pre-treatment scans, the median uptake time was 67 minutes. To investigate whether the
variability in uptake time has impact on the results, patients were split into two groups with
a cutoff of 67 in uptake time and four texture features were compared using Wilcoxon ranksum test. No significant differences were found between the two groups with coherence
(p=0.396), contrast (p=0.880), entropy (p=0.445), and homogeneity (p=0.855).
The four most common sizes of voxel were 3.91×3.91×4.25 mm (n=56; 32.2%),
4.69×4.69×3.27 mm (n=46; 26.4%), 5.33×5.33×4.00 mm (n=28; 16.1%), and
5.15×5.15×2.40 mm (n=20; 11.5%). Using a Kruskal-Wallis test, the comparison of texture
features between patients with the four different voxel sizes resulted in non-significance for
coherence (p=0.278), contrast (p=0.707), entropy (p=0.547), and homogeneity (p=0.778).
We performed a Kruskal-Wallis test to investigate whether there are significant differences
in texture features between different PET/CT scanners. No significant differences were
found with coherence (p=0.271), contrast (p=0.783), entropy (p=0.479), and homogeneity
(p=0.855). These results imply that the impact of variability in uptake time, voxel size, and
scanner on texture features is not significant in this cohort.
Folkert et al.
Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Predictive factors and models
For each endpoint, the predictive power of individual clinical factors (T, N, overall stage,
smoking status, location, Karnofsky performance status [KPS], age, sex, and biologically
equivalent dose with alpha/beta=10 [BED10]) and extracted imaging features were assessed
using logistic regression. When a smoothing sphere with a radius of 0.5 cm was used, better
power was achieved than that without the smoothing method. For instance, contrast and
homogeneity features showed statistical significance in LF with AUC=0.69 (p=0.035) and
AUC=0.70 (p=0.026), respectively, using the smoothing method, whereas there was no
significant texture feature without the smoothing method. Thus, for all tests, we used
imaging features extracted after smoothing the ROI with a sphere with a radius of 0.5 cm.
Table 2 shows single factor AUC and p-value results that had statistical significance
(p<0.05) for at least one endpoint, resulting from univariate logistic regression analysis. For
comparison, SUVmax and SUVmean were also displayed, which did not show statistical
significance for all three endpoints. KPS, T stage, extent, skewness, MTV, and TLG had
significant correlations with all three endpoints. The best predictors were T stage
(AUC=0.67, p<0.001) and skewness (AUC=0.67, p<0.001) for ACM whereas MTV was
significantly associated with both LF and DM with AUC=0.81 (p=0.001) and 0.66
(p=0.004), respectively. BED10 did not reach statistical significance for all three endpoints
with AUC=0.49 (p=0.799), 0.51 (p=0.731), and 0.51 (p=0.490) for ACM, LF, and DM,
respectively.
For the multiparameter logistic regression models, ACM was correlated to kurtosis and
MTV; LF was correlated to homogeneity and MTV; DM was correlated to solidity, kurtosis,
and MTV. The models are given in Table 3. The 5-fold cross validation used for an unbiased
model estimate resulted in AUC=0.65 (standard deviation [SD]=0.02; p=0.004), 0.73
(SD=0.04; p=0.026), and 0.66 (SD=0.04; p=0.015) for ACM, LF, and DM, respectively,
showing statistical significance for all three endpoints.
Validation on an independent cohort
Characteristics of the independent validation cohort are provided in Table 4 . All patients in the independent cohort had stage III-IV OC and were treated with
definitive concurrent chemotherapy. Those patients who were also surgically managed were
excluded, resulting in 65 evaluable patients. Among them, 31 (47.7%) patients died, and 10
(15.4%) and 11 (16.9%) had LF and DM, respectively. Similar to the primary study cohort,
the majority were male (78.5%), and the average age was 58 years (range: 38–78 years).
Smoking status was unknown in 50.8% of patients, but among those whose information was
available, 81.3% were identified as smokers. The majority of patients were stage IV
(86.2%); many had advanced primary tumors, with 69.2% presenting with T3 (20.0%) or T4
(49.2%) disease. Most (63.1%) patients presented with N2 disease although there was a
larger proportion of patients in the independent cohort with N3 disease (7.7%) than the
primary study cohort (4.6%). The median value for MTV was 18.7 cc (range: 3.5–64.7 cc).
The models for ACM, LF, and DM were tested on this independent cohort. As shown in
Table 3, significant predictive power was retained in LF with AUC=0.68 (p=0.029) whereas
the models for ACM and DM showed borderline significance with AUC=0.60 (p=0.092) and
0.65 (p=0.062), respectively.
Folkert et al.
Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Survival analysis
For ACM, Cox proportional-hazards regression was performed whereas for LF and DM,
Fine and Gray’s proportional sub-hazards models were performed with each single clinical
variable, and, using variables with p<0.05, multivariate models were tested. Smoking history
(69% were long-time smokers) was not statistically significant. KPS was most commonly
associated with outcomes (p<0.05 for ACM, LF, and DM) as shown in Table 5. Other
clinical factors significantly associated with outcomes included T stage with DM and ACM
(p=0.001 and 0.010, respectively) and N stage with DM (p=0.001).
It should be noted that MTV was chosen in all three models as shown in Table 3. To
investigate the significance of MTV further, patients were split into two groups by median
MTV for each endpoint, and a Kaplan-Meier analysis with log-rank test was performed.
Statistically significant differences were found for all three endpoints with p=0.034, 0.025,
and 0.026 for ACM, LF, and DM, respectively. Additionally, patients’ MTV values were
sorted in ascending order and grouped into three groups of equal size; those patients in the
middle group were removed. In the comparison between one-third of patients with smaller
MTV and one-third of patients with larger MTV, statistically significant differences were
found for all three endpoints with p=0.014, 0.006, and 0.037 for ACM, LF, and DM,
respectively (Figure 1A). Similarly, for each endpoint, predicted outcomes obtained using
the predictive models shown in Table 3 were sorted, and one-third of patients in the middle
were removed. In the comparison between the riskiest one-third of patients and the least
risky one-third of patients, statistically significant differences were found for all three
endpoints with p<0.001, 0.006, and <0.001 for ACM, LF, and DM, respectively (Figure 1B).
Discussion
In this study, we tested the association of FDG-PET imaging intensity, shape, and textural
features with oncologic outcomes, both as individual factors and as models based on
multiple factors. The strongest observed predictive power was obtained through the use of
multiparametric models. Note that MTV was chosen in all three models as shown in Table 3.
Models with MTV alone achieved reasonable performance with AUC=0.62 (p=0.016), 0.81
(p=0.001), and 0.62 (p=0.028) for ACM, LF, and DM, respectively (see Table 2). On 5-fold
cross validation, multiparameter models were statistically significant with AUC=0.65
(p=0.004), 0.73 (p=0.026), and 0.66 (p=0.015) for ACM, LF, and DM, respectively. This is
also observed in Figure 1, showing more separation in Kaplan-Meier curves between a lower
risk group and a higher risk group when final models in Table 3 were used as compared with
MTV alone.
The utility of FDG-PET imaging for modeling in HNSCC has been a subject of thorough
investigation. Wong et al and Allal et al previously reported on the
association of high SUV with poor outcomes in patients with head and neck cancer. Further
studies have demonstrated that factors that incorporate volume and metabolic information of
the tumor, such as gross tumor volume (GTV) and MTV, correlate better with ultimate
outcomes . This observation has
been validated in independent datasets . TLG, a function of the MTV and
the mean SUV of the defined MTV, has also been identified as an independent predictive
Folkert et al.
Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
factor for disease-free and disease-specific survival . These volume-based factors have been shown to be
predictive and independent from p16 and p53 status . Textural features
have been used to delineate tumor volumes by assisting with discrimination between normal
and malignant tissue , and a recent study by Kwon et al
 identified an FDG-PET “heterogeneity factor” based on the change in tumor volume
over the change in threshold (mathematically similar to the “slope” function described in our
study) that significantly correlated with overall survival in patients with oral cavity cancer.
Multiparametric analysis of medical images has been explored as a modeling tool,
incorporating multiple image features within an imaging modality or over multiple imaging
modalities, in multiple clinical indications . In terms of FDG-PET for HNSCC,
multiparametric analysis using textural features has been investigated to a limited degree;
Cheng et al studied pre-treatment textural features in addition to TLG in a cohort of
70 patients with stage III-IV OC, and developed a risk stratification model incorporating
TLG and uniformity (coherence). They found that the model incorporating both TLG and
uniformity had a stronger association with oncologic outcomes (progression-free, diseasefree, and overall survival) than the individual factors. Apostolova et al reported on the
association of a shape-related factor “asphericity” with progression-free and overall survival
and observed that this spatial irregularity in uptake in the primary tumor correlated with
outcomes, especially when combined with MTV.
In this study, a cuboidal ROI was defined by a single physician to enclose the FDG-avid
region with a generous margin, and then an FDG-PET SUV threshold of 42% was applied
based on the work of Erdi et al to generate an ROI for further analysis. However, use
of the optimal threshold is still controversial . Several studies have
suggested different threshold values including 40% , 42% , and 50% . According to the European Association of Nuclear Medicine (EANM) guidelines
 , 41% and 50% threshold values are recommended. A drawback of
thresholding is the uncertainty regarding the optimal threshold value . It
seems that the optimal threshold depends on several factors including tumor size, tumor site,
PET image size, reconstruction and acquisition parameters, patient biology, etc. Another
disadvantage of the thresholding method is the tendency to overestimate the lesion when
tumor is small . In contrast, manual segmentation also has its drawback
regarding segmentation time, labor, and operator variation. The change of feature values for
different threshold values was investigated. The comparison of FDG-PET SUV thresholds of
42% and 40% resulted in Spearman’s correlation coefficients > 0.91 (p < 0.001) for all
texture features and MTV, suggesting that the differences in texture features and MTV
between 40% and 42% thresholds are minimal.
Hatt et al found that the correlation between MTV and two texture features including
entropy and dissimilarity tends to decrease with increasing MTV, and therefore tumor
volume and texture features can provide complementary information for large tumors (>10
cc). In this study, we used four texture features. In comparison of these texture features
Folkert et al.
Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
between lesions with MTV > 10 cc and MTV ≤ 10 cc, we found that absolute Spearman’s
correlation in entropy and coherence decreased from 0.57 and 0.44 to 0.18 and 0.12,
respectively, which is in accordance with Hatt et al’s finding. In contrast, absolute
Spearman’s correlation in contrast and homogeneity increased from 0.10 and 0.18 to 0.36
and 0.36, respectively. However, the correlation of the two features with MTV was unable to
be compared with Hatt et al’s work, since they did not investigate the correlation between
MTV and the two features.
A question raised by the findings of this study is the mechanism by which the imaging
features are associated with clinical tumor behavior, and how they may relate to tumor
heterogeneity. Henriksson et al previously showed that heterogeneous uptake of FDG
within HNSCC can discriminate between patches of active cells and areas with greater
amounts of necrosis and stromal tissue in tumor xenografts. HNSCC is known to contain
heterogeneous populations of cancer cells, some of which may demonstrate stem cell-like
properties , and may be associated with other forms of malignant
behavior, including metastatic potential and chemotherapy and radiation insensitivity . Intratumoral genetic heterogeneity, defined by one
investigator as the mutant-allele tumor heterogeneity (MATH) value above the median (32
units in the cited study), has also been associated with poor survival outcome in patients
with HNSCC . It is not yet known whether the imaging features
investigated in this study have a biological and/or histopathological correlate to provide a
mechanistic explanation for their predictive power.
Strengths of our study include: the relatively large cohort size, with all patients centrally
pathologically confirmed and staged, and treated with consistent and reviewed radiation
treatment plans; the use of an objective thresholding method to define the analyzed volume
reduced potential bias from individually contoured ROIs; all imaging data was centrally
processed and reviewed; and most importantly, the predictive models were demonstrated to
be robust by validation on an independent dataset at a separate institution, demonstrating
that the LF model is transportable to another institution despite differences in patient
cohorts. However, the current study has several limitations that must be taken into
consideration. In addition to the inherent biases present in any retrospective analysis, further
selection bias may have been introduced at several steps. For example, while limiting the
study patient population to those who had undergone FDG-PET/CT based pre-treatment
imaging at our institution improved our technical access and quality of imaging data for
analysis, it prevented the use of an unselected consecutive cohort. FDG-PET images were
acquired on two separate PET/CT platforms, which may introduce technical issues in image
processing and harmonization. The patient cohort was treated before standardized human
papillomavirus (HPV) testing was performed, and very limited data pertaining to the
patients’ HPV status (p16 or HPV DNA) was available. While prior studies have suggested
that complex image features may be predictive regardless of HPV status , this is a potential confounder that must be addressed in future studies.
Folkert et al.
Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Conclusions
In the largest study of its kind to date, predictive models constructed using FDG-PET
intensity, shape, and textural features significantly correlated to mortality, LF, and DM in a
relatively uniform single-institution cohort as well as on cross validation. Additionally, the
LF model retained significance in an independent population whereas the models for ACM
and DM did not reach statistical significance, but resulted in reasonable predictive
performance. Such models could assist in patient selection for dose reduction following
identification of low-risk patients for LF, or treatment intensification with additional
adjuvant chemotherapy following identification of high-risk patients for distant failure.
However, understanding of the biological basis of image features, and validation with other
datasets will be necessary before these models can be clinically implemented.
Acknowledgments
This research was funded in part through the NIH/NCI Cancer Center Support Grant P30 CA008748 and a research
grant from Varian Medical Systems.