1. Introduction
An important problem of causal inference is how to estimate treatment effects in observational studies, situations (like an experiment) in which a group of units is exposed to a
well-defined treatment, but (unlike an experiment) no systematic methods of experimental
design are used to maintain a control group. It is well recognized that the estimate of a
causal effect obtained by comparing a treatment group with a non-experimental comparison group could be biased because of problems such as self-selection or some systematic
judgment by the researcher in selecting units to be assigned to the treatment.
Matching methods have been widely used in the statistics literature to address this
problem , but are relatively new to the economics literature. Matching
involves pairing together treatment and comparison units that are similar in terms of their
observable characteristics. When the relevant differences between any two units are captured in the observable (pre-treatment) covariates (i.e., outcomes are independent of assignment to treatment, conditional on pre-treatment covariates), matching methods can
yield an unbiased estimate of the treatment impact.
This paper makes three contributions to the literature on matching methods. First,
we discuss and extend propensity score matching methods, which are new to the economics literature . Second, we show
how these methods expose the key issue of the comparability of the treatment and control
groups in terms of their observable characteristics. Third, we show that our methods can
succeed in producing accurate estimates of the treatment impact even when there exist
very few comparison units that are comparable to the treatment units.
The motivation for focusing on propensity score matching methods is that, in many
applications of interest, the dimensionality of the observable characteristics is high. With a
small number of characteristics (e.g., two binary variables), matching is straightforward
(one would group units in four cells). However, when there are many variables, it is difficult to determine along which dimensions to match a unit. Propensity score matching
methods, as we demonstrate below, are especially useful under such circumstances, and
succeed in yielding accurate estimates of the treatment impact.
An important feature of our method is that, after units are matched, the unmatched
comparison units are discarded, and are not directly used in estimating the treatment impact. This contrasts with approaches that use the full set of controls to estimate the treatment impact (e.g., Heckman, Ichimura, and Todd’s kernel-based matching estimator). There are two motivations for our approach. First, in some settings of interest,
data on the outcome variable for the control group are costly to obtain. For example, in
economics, some data sets only provide outcome information for one year; if the outcome
of interest takes place in a later period, possibly thousands of controls have to be linked
across data sets or re-surveyed. In such settings, the ability to obtain the needed data for a
subset of relevant controls, discarding the irrelevant potential controls, is extremely valuable.
Second, even if information on the outcome is available for all comparison units
(as it is in our data), the process of searching for the best subset from the comparison
group is very revealing of the extent of overlap between the treatment and comparison
groups in terms of pre-treatment characteristics. Since methods that use the full set of
controls extrapolate or smooth across the treatment and control groups, it is extremely
useful to know how many of the controls are in fact comparable and hence how much
smoothing one’s estimator is expected to perform.
The data we use, obtained from Lalonde , are from the National Supported
Work Demonstration, a labor market experiment in which participants were randomized
between treatment (on-the-job training lasting between nine months and a year) and control groups. Following Lalonde, we use the experimental controls to set a benchmark estimate for the treatment impact and then set them aside, wedding the treated units from
the experiment to comparison units from the Population Survey of Income Dynamics
(PSID) and the Current Population Survey (CPS). We compare estimates obtained using
our non-experimental methods to the experimental benchmark. We show that we succeed
in replicating the benchmark treatment impact and in selecting from the large set of comparison units those which are most comparable to the treated units.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the theory behind our
estimation strategy. In Section 3, we analyze the shortcomings of the standard matching
approach and propose algorithms to deal with problems of incomplete matching. In Section 4, we describe the NSW data, which we then use in Section 5 to implement our
matching procedures. Section 6 concludes the paper.
2. Matching Methods
2.1 The Role of Randomization
A cause is viewed as a manipulation or treatment that brings about a change in the variable
of interest, compared to some baseline, called the control . The
basic problem in identifying a causal effect is that the variable of interest is observed under
either the treatment or control regimes, but never both.
Formally, let i index the population under consideration. Yi1 is the value of the
variable of interest when unit i is subject to treatment (1), and Yi0 is the value of the same
variable when the unit is exposed to the control (0). The treatment effect for a single unit,
i, is defined as τ i
0 . The primary treatment effect of interest in nonexperimental settings is the expected treatment effect over the treated population; hence:
where Ti=1 (=0) if the i-th unit was assigned to treatment (control).1 The problem of unobservability is summarized by the fact that we can estimate E(Yi1|Ti=1), but not
E(Yi0|Ti=1).
The difference, τ e
0 , can be estimated, but is potentially a biased estimator of τ . Intuitively, if the treated and control units systematically
differ in their characteristics, then in observing only Yi0 for the control group we do not
1 In a non-experimental setting, because the treatment and control groups may differ systematically, we
must consider them to be drawn from different populations with potentially different treatment effects. In
contrast, in a randomized experiment, the treatment and control groups are drawn from the same population. Thus, in an experiment, the treatment effect for the treated is identical to the treatment effect for the
correctly estimate Yi0 for the treated group. Such bias is of paramount concern in nonexperimental studies. The role of randomization is to prevent this:
where Yi = TiYi1 + (1–Ti)Yi0 (the observed value of the outcome) and, || is the symbol for
independence. The treated and control groups do not systematically differ from each
other, making the conditioning on Ti in the expectation unnecessary , and yielding τ |T=1 = τ
2.2 Exact Matching on Covariates
To substitute for the absence of experimental control units, we assume that data can be
obtained for a (large) set of potential controls, which of course are not necessarily drawn
from the same population as the treated units, but for whom we observe the same set of
pretreatment covariates, Xi. The following proposition extends the framework of the previous section to non-experimental settings:
Proposition 1 : If for each unit we observe a vector of covariates Xi, and
, ∀i, then the population treatment effect for the treated, τ |T=1, is identified: it is equal to the treatment effect conditional on covariates and assignment to
treatment, τ |T=1,X , averaged over the distribution X|Ti=1.
untreated, and therefore to the population average treatment effect.
2 We are also implicitly making what is sometimes called the stable-unit-treatment-value assumption . This amounts to the assumption that Yi1 (Yi0) does not depend upon which units other
Proof: Y Y
which allows us to write:
Intuitively, this assumes that, conditioning on observable covariates, we can take assignment to treatment as having been random and that, in particular, unobservables play no
role in the treatment assignment; comparing two individuals with the same observable
characteristics, one of whom was treated and one of whom was not, is by Proposition 1
like comparing those two individuals in a randomized experiment. Under this assumption,
the conditional treatment effect, τ |T=1,X, is estimated by an argument identical to the one
used above for ignorable assignment, simply by conditioning on X and then averaging over
X|T=1 to estimate the treatment effect.
One way to estimate this equation would be through matching units on their vector
of covariates, Xi. In principle, we could stratify the data into bins, each defined by a particular value of X; within each bin this amounts to conditioning on X. The limitation of
this method is that it relies on the availability of sufficiently rich data on controls so that no
bin containing a treated unit is without a control. For example, if all n variables are dichotomous, the number of possible values for the vector X will be 2n. Clearly, as the
than i were assigned to the treatment group.
number of variables increases, the number of cells will increase exponentially, reducing the
probability of finding exact matches for each of the treated units.
2.3 Propensity Score and Dimensionality Reduction
Rosenbaum and Rubin suggest the use of the propensity score -- the conditional probability of receiving treatment given a set of covariates -- to reduce the dimensionality of the matching problem alluded to in the previous section:
Proposition 2: Let p(Xi) be the probability of a unit i having been assigned to treatment,
defined as
Proposition 3:
Proof: Follows immediately from Propositions 1 and 2.
Thus, the conditional independence result extends to the use of the propensity
score, as does by immediate implication our result on the computation of the conditional
treatment effect, now τ |T=1,p(X). The point of using the propensity score is that it sub-
stantially reduces the dimensionality of the problem, allowing us to condition on a scalar
variable rather than in a general n-space.
3. Propensity Score Matching Algorithms
In the discussion that follows, we assume that the propensity score is known, which of
course it is not. The Appendix discusses a straightforward method for estimating it.3
Matching on the propensity score follows from Proposition 3. An unbiased estimate of the treatment effect arises from conditioning on p(Xi), which entails exact matching on p(Xi). But it is very rare to find two units with exactly the same propensity score,
so the objective becomes to match a treated unit to the control units whose propensity
scores are sufficiently close to that of the treated unit to consider them as being approximately the same. In particular, we want them to be close enough to consider the conditioning on p(Xi) in Proposition 3 to be approximately valid.
We define a distance metric, which allows us to seek the nearest match. In the
context of matching on the propensity score, the simplest metric is:
where i is typically a treated unit and J is a set of control units (|J| denotes the cardinality
of J). The objective then would be:
3 Note that the propensity score is used only to select a subset of the control group, and does not enter directly into the estimation of the treatment effect. Nonetheless, standard errors should adjust for the estimation error in the propensity score, which ours currently do not. As far as we know, the best way to do
this for our estimator has not yet been addressed in the literature. Heckman, Ichimura, and Todd 
do adjust their asymptotic standard errors for the estimation of the propensity score, though for a different
estimator.
where m(i) denotes the set of control units matched with the treated unit i, and where we
sum over the n treated units since we are estimating the treatment effect for the treated
population. If the treated units are exactly matched to controls, then D=0.
When no exact matches are available, matters become more complicated. Examples of simple algorithms applied in the literature include ranking
the treated observations in descending (or ascending) order of the estimated propensity
score, and then matching (without replacement) each treated unit, in turn, to the closest
control. An even simpler method involves randomly ordering the treated units, and again
matching without replacement.
When there is substantial overlap in the distribution of the propensity score between the control and treatment groups, any matching protocol will usually bring D close
to its minimum; the randomized protocols are simply easy ways to cut through the problem. But when the control and the treated units are very different, finding a satisfactory
match using the standard algorithm can be very problematic. In particular, if there are only
a handful of control units comparable to the treated units, then once these controls have
been matched, the remaining treated units will have to be matched to controls that are very
different. There are two solutions to the problem. Rosenbaum considers the use of network flow methods in finding the best matching function,
m(·), independent of the order in which units are matched.
In this paper, we explore another approach: matching units with replacement.
When control units are very different from the treated group, matching with replacement
allows many treated units to be matched to the same control unit. The simplest method is
to match each treated unit to the single control unit with the closest propensity score (we
call this the nearest-match method). This method selects the smallest possible control
But to the extent that our motivation for matching is to condition on p(Xi), we
might be willing to admit more than the single best match. In particular, if we consider all
units within some tolerance level, δ (chosen by the researcher), to have approximately
the same propensity score, then when a treated unit has several controls within a δ radius, we could use all of these controls. When implementing this method (the radius
method), we make one modification, namely that if a treated unit has no control units
within a δ -radius, we take the nearest control. Note that like the nearest-match method,
a given control may be matched to more than one treated unit.
In switching from the nearest-match to the radius method, we end up using more
controls. Adding control units has two effects. The first is to worsen the quality of the
match on the propensity score; this follows immediately from the algorithm described earlier. The second is to change the variance of the estimate by using a larger and different
sample. The fact that the sample is larger will tend to increase the precision of the estimates, but the larger sample may also embody greater variability; which effect dominates
will depend on the application. In essence, then, we face a potential bias-variance tradeoff.
In general it is difficult to know which point on the tradeoff is desired, since in applications one does not know the relationship between δ and the resulting bias. In addition to
demonstrating the efficacy of these methods in general, our application also explores this
bias-variance tradeoff.
4. The Data
4.1 The National Supported Work Program
The NSW was a U.S. federally funded program which aimed to provide work experience
for individuals who had faced economic and social problems prior to enrollment in the
program .4 Candidates for the
experiment were selected on the basis of eligibility criteria, and then were either randomly
assigned to, or excluded from, the training program. Table 1 provides the characteristics
of the sample we use (185 treated and 260 control observations).5 The table highlights the
role of randomization: the distribution of the covariates for the treatment and control
groups are not significantly different. We use two non-experimental control groups, drawn
from the CPS and PSID .
4 Four groups were targeted: Women on Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), former addicts, former offenders, and young school dropouts. Several reports extensively document the NSW program. For a general summary of the findings, see Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation
5 The data we use are a sub-sample of the data used in Lalonde . The analysis in Lalonde is
based on one year of pre-treatment earnings. But as Ashenfelter and Ashenfelter and Card 
suggest, the use of more than one year of pre-treatment earnings is key in accurately estimating the treatment effect, because many people who volunteer for training programs experience a drop in their earnings
just prior to entering the training program. Using the Lalonde sample of 297 treated and 425 control
units, we exclude the observations for which earnings in 1974 could not be obtained, thus arriving at a
reduced sample of 185 treated observations and 260 control observations. Because we obtain this subset by
looking at pre-treatment covariates, we do not disturb the balance in observed and unobserved characteristics between the experimental treated and control groups.
4.2 Distribution of the Treatment and Control Samples
Tables 2 and 3 (rows 1 and 2) present the sample characteristics of the two control groups
and the treatment group. The differences are striking: the PSID and CPS sample units are
8 to 9 years older than those in the NSW group; their ethnic composition is different; they
have on average completed high school degrees, while NSW participants were by and
large high school dropouts; and, most dramatically, pre-treatment earnings are much
higher for the control units than for the treated units, by more than $10,000. A more synoptic way to view these differences is to use the estimated propensity score as a summary
statistic. Using the method outlined in the Appendix, we estimate the propensity score for
the two composite samples (NSW-CPS and NSW-PSID), incorporating the covariates
linearly and with some higher-order terms (age squared, education squared). Figures 1
and 2 provide a simple diagnostic on the data examined, plotting the histograms of the
estimated propensity scores for the NSW-CPS and NSW-PSID samples. Note that the
histograms do not include the controls (11,168 units for the CPS and 1,254 units for the
PSID) whose estimated propensity score is less than the minimum estimated propensity
score for the treated units. As well, the first bins of both diagrams contain most of the remaining controls (4,398 for the CPS and 1,007 for the PSID). Hence, it is clear that very
few of the control units are comparable to the treated units. In fact, one of the strengths of
the propensity score method is that it dramatically highlights this fact. In comparing the
other bins, we note that the number of controls in each bin is approximately equal to the
number of treated units in the NSW-CPS sample, but in the NSW-PSID sample many of
the upper bins have far more treated units than control units. This last observation will be
important in interpreting the results of the next section.
5. Matching Results
Figures 3 to 6 provide a snapshot of the matching methods described in Section 3 and applied to the NSW-CPS sample, where the horizontal axis displays treated units (indexed
from lowest to highest estimated propensity score) and the vertical axis depicts the propensity scores of the treated units and their matched-control counterparts (the corresponding figures for the NSW-PSID sample look very similar). Figures 3 to 5 share the
common feature that the first 100 or so treated units are well matched to their control
counterparts: the solid and the dashed lines virtually overlap. But the treated units with
estimated propensity scores of 0.4 or higher are not well matched. In Figure 3, units that
are randomly selected to be matched earlier find better matches, but those matched later
are poorly matched, because the few control units comparable to the treated units have
already been used. Likewise, in Figure 4, where units are matched from lowest to highest,
treated units in the 140th to 170th positions are forced to use controls with ever-higher
propensity scores. Finally, for the remaining units (from approximately the 170th position
on), the controls with high propensity scores are exhausted and matches are found among
controls with much lower estimated propensity scores. Similarly, when we match from
highest to lowest, the quality of matches begins to decline after the first few treated units,
until we reach treated units whose propensity score is (approximately) 0.4.
Figure 6 depicts the matching achieved by the nearest-match method. We note
immediately that by matching with replacement we are able to avoid the deterioration in
the quality of matches noted in Figures 3 to 5; the solid and the dashed lines largely coincide. Looking at the line depicting controls more carefully, we note that it has flat sections
not seen on the line for treated units. These flats are exactly the regions in which a single
control is being matched to more than one treated unit. Thus, even though there is a
smaller sample size, we are better able to match the distribution of the propensity score of
the treated units.
In Table 2 we explore the matched samples and the estimated treatment impacts
for the CPS. From rows 1 and 2, we already noted that the CPS sample is very different
from the NSW population. The aim of matching is to choose sub-samples whose characteristics more closely resemble the NSW population. Rows 3 to 5 of Table 2 depict the
matched samples that emerge from matching without replacement. Note that the characteristics of these samples are essentially identical, suggesting that these three methods
yield the same control groups. (Figures 3 to 5 obscure this fact because they compare the
order in which units are matched, not the resulting control groups.) The matched samples
are much closer to the NSW sample than the full CPS control group. The matched CPS
group has an age of 25.3 (compared with 25.8 and 33.2 for the NSW and full CPS samples); its ethnic composition is the same as the NSW sample (note especially the difference
in the full CPS in terms of the variable Black); Nodegree and marital status align; and,
perhaps most significantly, the pre-treatment earnings are similar for both 1974 and 1975.
None of the differences between the matched groups and the NSW sample are statistically
significant. Looking at the nearest-match and radius methods, little significant improvement can be discerned, although most of the variables are marginally better matched. This
suggests that the observation made regarding Figure 1 (that the CPS, in fact, has a sufficient number of controls overlapping with the NSW) is borne out in terms of the matched
Turning to the estimates of the treatment impact, in row 1 we see that the benchmark estimate of the treatment impact from the randomized experiment is $1,794. Using
the full CPS control group, the estimate is –$8,498 using a difference in means and $1,066
using regression adjustment. The raw estimate is very misleading when compared with the
benchmark, though the regression-adjusted estimate is better. The matching estimates are
much closer, most dramatically for the difference in means, where the estimates range
from $1,559 to $1,605; the regression-adjusted estimates are similar. The fact that the
difference in means and regression-adjusted estimates are very similar to the benchmark
and to each other demonstrates the success of this method in selecting a suitable control
Using the PSID sample (Table 3), somewhat different conclusions are reached.
Like the CPS, the PSID sample is very different from the NSW sample. Unlike the CPS,
the matched-without-replacement samples are not fully comparable to the NSW. They are
reasonably comparable in terms of age, schooling, and ethnicity, but in terms of pretreatment income we observe a large (and statistically significant) difference. As well, the
estimates of the treatment impact, both by a difference in means and through regression
adjustment, are far from the experimental benchmark. In contrast, the matched-withreplacement samples use even fewer (56) controls, but are able to match the pre-treatment
earnings of the NSW sample and the other variables as well. This corresponds to our observation regarding Figure 2, namely that there are very few controls in the PSID that are
similar to units in the NSW; when this is the case, we expect more sensitivity to the
method used to match observations. The treatment impact as estimated by the nearestmatch method through a difference in means ($1,890) is very similar to the experimental
benchmark, but differs by $425 when estimated through regression adjustment (though it
is still closer than the estimates in rows 1 to 4). The difference in the two estimates is less
surprising when we consider the sample size involved: we are using only 56 of the 2,490
potential controls from the PSID. The disappointment, then, is not that the regression estimate is poor, but that there are so few controls comparable to the treated units.
In both Tables 2 and 3 the radius method of matching yields broadly similar results
to the nearest-match method. As we increase the radius we use more and more controls.
For the CPS we expand the number from 119 to 1,731 (for a radius of δ =0.0001), and
for the PSID the number expands from 56 to 337. For both samples the estimates of the
treatment impact become worse (the bias increases), and the standard errors do not appreciably decline. As more controls are used, the regression-adjusted treatment impact increasingly differs from the difference-in-means treatment impact, because as the composite
sample becomes less and less well-balanced in terms of pre-treatment covariates, controlling for these characteristics has a greater impact. Thus, in this application there seems to
be little value in using additional controls beyond the nearest matches; of course, this may
differ in other applications.
6. Conclusion
This paper has presented a propensity score matching method that is able to yield accurate
estimates of the treatment effect in non-experimental settings where the treated group differs substantially from the pool of potential controls. The method is able to pare the large
pool of potential controls down to the relevant comparisons without using information on
outcomes, thereby, if necessary, allowing outcome data to be collected only for the subset
of relevant controls. Of course, the quality of the estimate that emerges from the resulting
comparison is limited by the overall quality of the comparison group that is used. Using
Lalonde’s data set, we demonstrated the ability of this technique to work in practice. Even though in a typical application the researcher would not have the benefit of
checking his or her estimator against the experimental-benchmark estimate, the conclusion
of our analysis is that it is extremely valuable to check the comparability of the treatment
and control units in terms of pre-treatment characteristics, which the researcher can check
in most applications.
In particular, the propensity score method dramatically highlights the fact that
most of the controls are very different from the treated units. In addition to this, when
there are very few control units remaining after having discarded the irrelevant controls,
the choice of matching algorithm becomes important. We demonstrated that when there
are a sufficient number of comparable controls (in our application, when using the CPS)
the nearest-match method does no worse than the matching-without-replacement methods
that would typically be applied, and in situations where there are very few comparable
controls (in our application, when using the PSID), matching with replacement fares better
than the alternatives. Extensions of matching with replacement (radius matching), though
interesting in principal, were of little value in our application.
It is something of an irony that the data which we used were originally employed
by Lalonde to demonstrate the failure of standard non-experimental methods in
accurately estimating the treatment effect. Using matching methods on both of his samples, we were able to replicate the experimental benchmark, but beyond this we focused
attention on the value of flexibly adjusting for observable differences between the treat-
ment and control groups. The process of trying to find a subset of the PSID controls comparable to the NSW units led us to realize that the PSID is a poor comparison group, especially when compared to the CPS.
Because matching methods are focused on the process of constructing a suitable
control group in non-experimental settings, the methods which we discuss are a useful addition and complement to the standard techniques in the researcher’s arsenal.
Appendix: Estimating the Propensity Score6
The first step in estimating the treatment effect is to estimate the propensity score. Any
standard probability model can be used, e.g., logit or probit. It is important to remember
that the role of the score is only to reduce the dimensions of the conditioning; as such, it
has no behavioral assumptions attached to it. For ease of estimation, most applications in
the statistics literature have concentrated on the logit model:
where Ti is the treatment status, and h(Xi) is made up of linear and higher-order terms of
the covariates on which we condition to obtain an ignorable treatment assignment.7
In estimating the score through a probability model, the choice of which interaction or higher-order term to include is determined solely by the need to condition fully on
the observable characteristics that make up the assignment mechanism. The following
proposition forms the basis of the algorithm we use to estimate the propensity score :
Proposition A:
Proof: From the definition of p(X) in Proposition 2:
The algorithm works as follows. Starting with a parsimonious logistic function
with linear covariates to estimate the score, rank all observations by the estimated propensity score (from lowest to highest). Divide the observations into strata such that within
each stratum (or block) the difference in score for treated and control observations is insignificant (a t-test on a difference in means between the treated and control groups is a
criterion used in this algorithm). Proposition A tells us that within each stratum the distribution of the covariates should be approximately the same across the treated and control
groups, once the score is controlled for. Within each stratum, we can test for statistically
significant differences between the distribution of covariates for treated and control units;
operationally, t-tests on differences in the first moments are often sufficient but a joint Ftest for the difference in means for all the variables within each block could also be performed.8 When the covariates are not balanced within a particular block, the block may be
too coarsely defined; recall that Proposition A deals with observations with an identical
6 This discussion is drawn from a related paper, Dehejia and Wahba .
7 Because we allow for higher-order terms in X, this choice is not very restrictive. By re-arranging and
taking logs, we obtain:
. A Taylor-series expansion allows us an
arbitrarily precise approximation. See also Rosenbaum and Rubin .
8 More generally, one can also consider higher moments or interactions, but usually there is little difference in the results.
propensity score. The solution adopted is to divide the block into finer blocks and test
again for no difference in the distribution of the covariates within the finer blocks. If,
however, some covariates remain unbalanced for many blocks, the score may be poorly
estimated, which suggests that additional terms (interaction or higher-order terms) of the
unbalanced covariates should be added to the logistic specification to control better for
these characteristics. This procedure is repeated for each given block until covariates are
balanced. The algorithm is summarized below.
A Simple Algorithm for Estimating the Propensity Score
• Start with a parsimonious logit function to estimate the score.
• Sort data according to estimated propensity score (ranking from lowest to highest).
• Stratify all observations such that estimated propensity scores within a stratum for
treated and control units are close (no significant difference); e.g., start by dividing observations in blocks of equal score range (0-0.2,...,0.8-1).
• Statistical test: for all covariates, differences-in-means across treated and control units
within each block are not significantly different from zero.
1. If covariates are balanced between treated and control observations for all blocks,
2. If covariate i is not balanced for some blocks, divide block into finer blocks and reevaluate.
3. If covariate i is not balanced for all blocks, modify the logit by adding interaction
terms and/or higher-order terms of the covariate i and re-evaluate.
A key property of this estimation procedure is that it uses a well-defined criterion
to determine which interaction terms to use in the estimation, namely those terms that balance the covariates. It also makes no use of the outcome variable, and embodies one of the
specification tests proposed by Lalonde and others in the context of evaluating the
impact of training on earnings, namely to test for the regression-adjusted difference in the
earnings prior to treatment.