BEYOND NO FREE LUNCH: REALISTIC ALGORITHMS FOR
ARBITRARY PROBLEM CLASSES
JAMES A. R. MARSHALL∗, THOMAS G. HINTON
combinatorial problems, search, neutrality, permutation closure, randomised algorithms, No Free Lunch
1. Introduction
The various No Free Lunch theorems are important theoretical results, indicating that no ‘black-box’ problem solver can be expected to achieve better than
random performance without any information about the problem it is to be applied
to. Such results have been proved for oﬀtraining-set generalisation in supervised
learning , and for search and optimisation . It is known that a crucial
assumptions of the No Free Lunch theorems is that a (block) uniform distribution
holds over the set of problems, or objective functions, under consideration and that
this set be closed-under-permuation (c.u.p.). The c.u.p. requirement means that
any permutation of any objective function in the problem set under consideration,
through changing the mapping between elements of the search space and objective
values, results in another objective function that is also a member of that problem
set. However, it has been shown that realistic problem sets are highly unlikely to
satisfy the c.u.p. assumption . As a result, a large ﬁeld of increasingly sophisticated work has developed seeking to prove that ‘Almost No Free Lunch’ results
that are nearly as strong as the original No Free Lunch results, typically based
on information theoretic considerations, still apply in realistic problem scenarios
(e.g. ).
In this paper we take a simplifying step back in an attempt to cut the increasingly
complicated ‘Gordian knot’ that (Almost) No Free Lunch research has come to
represent. Our approach is simple and intuitive, yet allows general results easily to
be arrived at. We begin by examining the implications of the search version of the
No Free Lunch theorem for real-world search algorithms, showing that revisiting
algorithms also break the permutation closure condition required for the No Free
Lunch theorem to hold. Thus allowing realistic, revisiting algorithms means there
can be some best algorithm; the pertinent question then is whether we can identify
this best algorithm, and it turns out that we can indeed. To answer this question
we go on to present a novel analysis of search algorithms as stochastic processes,
enabling us to present a No Free Lunch-like result that holds for arbitrary sets
of problems, and for realistic algorithms that do not avoid revisiting points in
the search space.
Speciﬁcally we show that random enumeration has the best
expected performance of all search algorithms applied to optimisation problems,
for any distribution over any problem set. The implication of this is that empirical
demonstration of superior search performance (relative to enumeration) for some
algorithm on some problem set still predicts inferior performance on some second
problem set if we know nothing about its relationship with the ﬁrst. We thus ‘cut
the Gordian knot’ by simplifying the assumptions underlying the No Free Lunch
JAMES A. R. MARSHALL∗, THOMAS G. HINTON
theorem, and show why violations of its assumptions are unimportant for real-world
search algorithms and problems.
1.1. The Sharpened No Free Lunch Theorem. We begin by informally summarising the Sharpened No Free Lunch theorem. No Free Lunch arguments typically consider a search space X, a set of possible objective values Y, and objective
functions of the form f : X 7→Y. The set of all possible objective functions is
then denoted F = YX . The original No Free Lunch theorems prove that, across
all possible objective functions (or problems) F, all non-revisiting algorithms have
equivalent performance under an arbitrary performance measure . Algorithms
are deﬁned here as pseudo-random processes choosing previously unvisited points
to visit based on the quality of prior visited points. Subsequently it was shown
that the No Free Lunch theorem only holds if the set of objective functions under
consideration is closed under permutation (c.u.p.).
The resulting theorem can be paraphrased as:
Theorem 1 (Sharpened No Free Lunch Theorem). All non-revisiting algorithms
have equivalent performance over a set of objective functions F, under some arbitrary performance measure, iﬀF is closed under permutation.
Theorem 1 has subsequently been extended to also hold for ‘block-uniform’ distributions over subsets that are c.u.p. . This condition for the No Free Lunch
theorem to hold is satisﬁed by the original requirement in of a uniform distribution over F, because the uniform distribution is a special case of a block-uniform
distribution. Subsequently it has been shown that permutation closure is very unlikely to be satisﬁed in realistic scenarios , leading many researchers to conclude
that No Free Lunch results have little consequence for practical applications of
search algorithms.
2. Revisiting Algorithms
We now examine one of the fundamental assumptions in the proof of the No
Free Lunch result, that the algorithms used are non-revisiting in the solution space.
That is, the algorithms visit every point in the solution space exactly once. It has
been remarked previously that such algorithms are impractical due to the time and
space cost of storing and querying the set of visited points , although this is not
strictly correct. It has also been suggested that revisiting algorithms, in the form
of algorithms having a degree of redundancy in their solution encoding, have much
to recommend them .
If we relax the assumption of non-revisiting algorithms, we can demonstrate the
following result.
Theorem 2 (Revisiting Breaks Permutation Closure). A revisiting search over a
given search space under a given c.u.p. set of objective functions can be formally
expressed as a non-revisiting search over some larger search space under a set of
objective functions that is not c.u.p., for any set containing only objective functions
mapping to more than one element.
Searching under a c.u.p. set of objective functions F with an algorithm
A which revisits some points xi ∈X is equivalent to a non-revisiting search of a
new set of extended objective functions F ′ on a larger space X ′, which contains i
additional points x′
i under the constraint that ∀i : f(xi) = f(x′
For F ′ to be closed-under-permutation it must deﬁnitely be larger than F, as
it contains functions with the same codomain (because the search is presumed to
BEYOND NO FREE LUNCH: REALISTIC ALGORITHMS FOR ARBITRARY PROBLEM CLASSES3
be eventually exhaustive) on the larger domain X ′, and increasing the size of the
domain necessarily increases the number of possible permutations. However, by
construction |F| = |F ′|, and so F ′ cannot be closed-under-permutation. □
Note that this theorem holds regardless of the degree of revisiting, so algorithms
which revisit all points in the search space with equal frequency also eﬀectively
break permutation closure of the set of objective functions.
We discuss the implications of this theorem for previous No Free Lunch results
on encoding redundancy in section 4. For now we brieﬂy note the following
obvious but simplifying result:
Corollary 1 (Free Lunches). All violations of the No Free Lunch theorems can be
expressed as non-block-uniform distributions over problem subsets that are closed
under permutation.
Proof: For uniform distributions over c.u.p. sets this follows directly from theorem 2 and the observation that non-c.u.p. sets are special cases of non-uniform
distributions over c.u.p. sets. The extension to block-uniform distributions is by
applying theorem 2 to each c.u.p. subset. □
It is interesting to note that while violation of permutation closure leads to search
algorithms potentially having diﬀerent performance, this does not tell us to what
extent algorithms might diﬀer in performance. If induced performance diﬀerences
are small, then searching for a superior algorithm for some problem set could be
like looking for a ‘needle in a haystack’. Here we present a ﬁrst approach to quantifying the extent to which revisiting algorithms diﬀer in performance, according
to the amount of revisiting they allow. That violation of permutation closure leads
to algorithms potentially having diﬀerent performance has been known since .
However, the strength of the Sharpened NFL theorem makes its contrapositive correspondingly weak; if F is not c.u.p., then there exists at least one performance
measure under which at least one pair of algorithms have diﬀering performance on
F. This leads to the relevant question of how likely two randomly selected algorithms are to have diﬀerent performance for a given non-c.u.p. problem set, which
has not previously been addressed. If most algorithms have identical performance
on a given problem set, then looking for an algorithm with superior performance
may be like looking for a needle in a haystack. If, however, almost all algorithms
have diﬀerent performance then empirical comparison of diﬀerent algorithms becomes sensible. In fact the probability of two arbitrarily chosen algorithms having
a diﬀerent set of traces over some problem set, and hence potentially diﬀerent performance under some appropriate performance measure, grows super-polynomially
with increased frequency of revisiting, and so we can make a stronger claim than
the contrapositive of the Sharpened No Free Lunch theorem provides: when revisiting is allowed, performance diﬀerences can be expected. The proof for this claim
Theorem 3. Let A be an algorithm which performs a revisiting search on a space
X and revisits r points before exhausting X. The probability that A and a similar
algorithm B are indistinguishable in performance decreases super-polynomially as
the amount of revisiting increases, except where all elements of the search space are
mapped to the same objective value.
Let F ′∗be the permutation closure of F ′, and F = f ∗where f ∗is
the permutation orbit of function f. Let C ⊆Y be the codomain of f, and let
λi be the number of points in X which f maps to i ∈C (λ is the histogram of
JAMES A. R. MARSHALL∗, THOMAS G. HINTON
f ). Searching a set of functions takes each function to a trace, so the size of an
algorithm’s trace set is |F ′| = |F| =
i∈C λi!. Since F ′ is not c.u.p. this set of traces
will be a small fraction of the traces for F ′∗; we must make some assumptions about
the behaviour of our algorithm to ﬁnd |F ′∗|. Consider the case where the algorithm
revisits points assigned to the most common objective value, j ∈C, r times during
the search – the algorithm may do this by, for example, enumerating X until it
knows j and then revisiting a point mapped to it r times – this simplistic revisiting
algorithm is easy to analyse, and upper bounds the probability of distinguishability
by ensuring that every function in F ′ has the same histogram and minimising the
size of its permutation closure. Knowing that all the functions in F ′ have the same
histogram, constructed by distributing the r revisits amongst the i bins of λ, the
upper bound follows from the observation that Q
i! is maximised by allocating
all r revisits to the largest bin in λ (this claim can be shown by a simple induction).
Since every function in F ′ has the same histogram, in which ∀x ̸= j : λ′
j = λj + r, |F ′∗| =
i∈C(λi+[i=j]·r)!. The ratio p =
|F ′∗| is then the fraction
of the set of all possible traces which a given algorithm will produce. Observing
that a uniformly randomly chosen algorithm searching a given objective function
gives a uniform distribution over the traces for that function, we see that for an
algorithm A searching F ′ an arbitrarily chosen algorithm B shares a trace with
A with probability p, and so p bounds from above the probability that A and a
random B are indistinguishable.
Some manipulation gives that p =
(|X |+r)! · (λj+r)!
, from which we can show
i=1 ln λj+i
|X |+i. We can upper-bound this with an integral, which gives us
p(r) = |F ′|
|F ′∗| < (r −1 + λj)(r−1+λj) × |X||X |
× (r −1 + |X|)(r−1+|X |) ,
from which we can see that 1/p(r) is at least superpolynomial in r (excepting
the trivial case where λj = |X|). □
Thus the probability that two algorithms selected uniformly at random are distinguishable increases very quickly as the extent to which the algorithms revisit
increases. The expected number of points needing to be evaluated before a diﬀerence is found, and hence the computational complexity of detecting diﬀerences in
algorithms’ performance, is an interesting question that is outside the scope of the
current paper. Furthermore, this approach will still not enable us to reason about
relative performance of algorithms.
Returning to the main argument of the paper, we will next propose an alternative
way of reasoning about revisiting algorithms and their expected performance over
arbitrary sets of possible objective functions. This approach will indeed allow us
to reason about algorithms’ relative performance.
3. Realistic Performance Measures and Random Search Algorithms
Proving No Free Lunch for arbitrary performance measures is a powerful result,
based on an unrealistic assumption; that search algorithms are described by exhaustive non-revisiting enumerations of the search space and, equivalently that the
set of objective functions considered be closed under permutation.
For the remainder of this paper we change our viewpoint from regarding search
algorithms as deterministic exhaustive, possibly repeating, searches, to regarding
them as stochastic processes. We also change from considering arbitrary performance measures, to considering performance measures representative of the goals
of search and optimisation. These two changes in perspective will enable us to
BEYOND NO FREE LUNCH: REALISTIC ALGORITHMS FOR ARBITRARY PROBLEM CLASSES5
reason about the expected performance of realistic search algorithms, and make
concrete recommendations to the practitioner.
First we deﬁne a sensible performance measure. As mentioned above, showing
that No Free Lunch does not hold does not enable us to reason usefully about relative performance of diﬀerent algorithms. We therefore deﬁne a sensible performance
measure that reﬂects the goal of search and optimisation algorithms: ﬁnding good
points in the search space. Concentrating on a particular performance measure will
allow us to make deﬁnitive observations and recommendations on the relative performance of diﬀerent search algorithms. This would not be possible if we allowed
ourselves arbitrary performance measures (since an arbitrary performance measure
is not required to distinguish between algorithms simply because some performance
measure could do so).
Deﬁnition 1 (Sensible performance measures). Let S(A, f, n) be the set of distinct
values of objective function f observed by algorithm A after n points have been
evaluated. Then a sensible performance measure M, which we wish to maximise,
deﬁnes the performance of A on f after n points using only S(A, f, n), with the
additional constraint that S1 ⊆S2 =⇒M(S1) ≤M(S2)
Such measures capture the basic criterion against which search algorithms are
assessed: how good are the solutions they generate? At ﬁrst, it may appear that
this performance measure discards the other important criterion of search algorithm
performance: how long does it take to generate good solutions? However, as we
shall see time is implicit in this performance measure, as we shall make comparisons
of searches having equal length.
We now make the following No Free Lunch-like statement for revisiting algorithms.
Proposition 1 (Maximising Sensible Performance). For any distribution over any
set of objective functions F, a randomly chosen enumeration A can be expected
to equal or outperform a randomly chosen non-minimally-revisiting algorithm B,
under any sensible performance measure M at any time t in the search.
For any t ≥|X| it is clear that a minimally revisiting algorithm has
maximal performance as the full codomain of the objective will have been observed
and, from deﬁnition 1, M is required to depend only on the part of the codomain
which has been seen.
When t < |X|, A samples t points from X without replacement, whereas B
samples t points from X with some non-zero probability of replacement (as a consequence of being non-minimally-revisiting). Consequently the expected number of
distinct points sampled by A is greater than the expected number sampled by B.
Similarly the expected size of the set of objective values observed by A exceeds (or
equals, for functions whose codomain is of size 1) that of the set observed by B.
Call these two sets of objective values SA and SB.
SA and SB are subsets drawn randomly from the codomain of the objective,
and the only eﬀect B can have on the distribution of values drawn is to reduce
its range, so that |SB| ≤|SA|. For a randomly chosen set S of objective values,
E(M(S)) increases with |S| (this is clear from the deﬁnition of a sensible measure),
and so E(M(SA)) > E(M(SB)). This holds for any individual objective function,
the extension to arbitrary distributions over arbitrary sets being by linearity of
expectation. □
JAMES A. R. MARSHALL∗, THOMAS G. HINTON
It is sometimes remarked that No Free Lunch approaches typically ignore the
time and space complexity of the algorithms, therefore it is interesting at this
point to note that enumeration can typically be implemented with excellent time
and space complexity; O(log|X|) time for each point queried1 and O(log |X|) space
overall, when solutions can be represented as ﬁnite strings.
No algorithm with
lower space complexity can have better performance in the NFL sense (it would
necessarily revisit, as it could not have a state for each point in which it would
deterministically query that point), and only algorithms with better performance
in the NFL sense can optimise faster in wall-clock time. This further indicates
enumeration’s pre-eminent position as the general search algorithm, and motivates
its use as a benchmark by practitioners.
An interesting consequence of proposition 1 is
Corollary 2 (Random Search Performance). Random search algorithms, those that
ignore the outcome of their search in selecting subsequent search points, can diﬀer
in performance.
Proof: This follows directly from proposition 1 and observing that random search
algorithms, as deﬁned above, include both blind enumeration, and revisiting algorithms. □
The deﬁnition of random search algorithms as being those that ignore the objective values generated during the search was proposed by . Corollary 2 is
interesting, as the fundamental prediction of the No Free Lunch result has been
stated as being that “if an algorithm performs better than random search on some
class of problems then it must perform worse than random search on the remaining problems” (emphasis authors’) . Corollary 2 shows that the property of
‘randomness’ is actually not of great importance for No Free Lunch-like statements
regarding realistic search algorithms.
Finally, an important result emerges as a direct consequence of proposition 1:
Corollary 3 (Performance Prediction). Empirically-demonstrated better-than-enumeration
performance of some algorithm on some problem set predicts worse-than-enumeration
performance on any other disjoint problem set whose relationship to the ﬁrst is unknown.
Proof: For some algorithm A let us denote expected deviation from the expected
performance of enumeration on a problem set ψ as E(∆A(ψ)). Then, from proposition 1, E(∆enum(ψ)) = 0 for any ψ, and similarly for any non-minimally-revisiting
algorithm A whose performance on ψ we know nothing about, E(∆A(ψ)) < 0. If we
have an unknown problem set φ whose relationship with set ψ is unknown then, by
deﬁnition, E(∆A(φ)|ψ) = E(∆A(φ)), which must also be negative by proposition
A related but diﬀerent result based on considerations of function complexity has
previously been presented , which demonstrates that for any function where an
algorithm performs well there is another function of similar complexity on which
it performs badly. Our result is both simpler and more generally applicable, in
that it makes no reference to the details of the algorithms or the complexity of the
functions involved, but weaker in its predictions, in that it predicts no correlation
between performances on the two problem sets, rather than a negative relation.
1The time taken to exhaust the search space is thus O(|X|), which also cannot be improved upon.
BEYOND NO FREE LUNCH: REALISTIC ALGORITHMS FOR ARBITRARY PROBLEM CLASSES7
4. Encoding Redundancy, Neutrality and Revisiting
In No Free Lunch contexts, revisiting by an algorithm might occur through the
decision not to keep track of search points visited so far.
An additional cause
for revisiting is encoding redundancy. We can represent encoding in a No Free
Lunch context by considering an additional set W of encoded solutions, which are
decoded into their corresponding points in the search space by a ‘growth’ function
g : W 7→X . If this mapping is not injective, then we have a redundant encoding.
Such redundancy is often found in heuristic search algorithms, and will turn a nonrevisiting algorithm in the space of encoded solutions into a revisiting algorithm
in the true solution space, so that the No Free Lunch theorem no longer holds.
Radcliﬀe & Surry may not have noticed this fact, as their method of proving the No
Free Lunch result relies on setting the search space W and solution space X to be the
same, and the growth function g to be the identity mapping. It has previously been
suggested in that a non-uniform (i.e. biased) encoding redundancy would break
the No Free Lunch theorem. Here we have demonstrated that in fact non-uniformity
is not the key requirement for breaking No Free Lunch, encoding redundancy alone
is suﬃcient.
Previously Igel and Toussaint have presented an analysis of encoding redundancy, or neutrality, in No Free Lunch situations, arguing that under encoding
redundancy all algorithms still have equal expected performance . In fact the
No Free Lunch theorem does not hold once redundancy is introduced for, as shown
above, redundant and hence revisiting algorithms break permutation closure of any
set of objective functions. Thus care must be taken in interpreting these results; the
assumption of theorem 1 in is violated and hence the subsequent claim that the
time to ﬁnd an optimum averaged over all functions is the same for all algorithms
when redundancy is allowed is incorrect. Igel and Toussaint actually analyse the
diﬃculty of search problems in terms of the proportion of distinct solutions (members of X) mapped to the same global optimum (member of set Y); this is not
the same thing as considering multiple encoded solutions (members of W) mapped
to the same actual solution (member of set X). As their analysis considers only
algorithms that are non-revisiting in the solution space the No Free Lunch result is
still applicable and their analysis valid, however nothing has been said about the
eﬀects of true encoding neutrality on the performance of search algorithms. When
encoding redundancy is correctly deﬁned as a non-injective mapping between a
larger representation space and a smaller solution space, the stochastic search results presented here become applicable. The observation that encoding redundancy
in a given problem leads to enumeration having the best expected performance may
raise questions about the theoretical basis for the claimed beneﬁts of neutrality and
self-adaptation , which are outside the scope of this paper.
5. Conclusions
In this paper we have shown that the requirement for the Sharpened No Free
Lunch theorem to hold, that the problem set under consideration be closed under
permutation, is in fact a necessary and suﬃcient condition for a version of the
theorem, extended to also admit revisiting algorithms, to hold. It has previously
been shown that the c.u.p. condition is very unlikely to be satisﬁed for realistic
problem classes. We have shown further that realistic, revisiting algorithms also
violate this condition. That the No Free Lunch theorems’ assumptions are typically
violated has been used many times as an argument that they can reasonably be
ignored by those working with search algorithms, while a branch of research has
also grown up showing conditions under which ‘Almost’ No Free Lunch results hold.
JAMES A. R. MARSHALL∗, THOMAS G. HINTON
If the conditions of No Free Lunch are violated then some algorithm can have
best expected performance, but this does not help us to ﬁnd it, or to say anything
about it. The main contribution of this paper is to propose a statistical analysis of search algorithms as random processes, demonstrating that algorithms that
minimise the extent to which they revisit points in the search space have higher
expected performance. The result of this is the demonstration that for arbitrary
sets of objective functions, including those which are not closed under permutation
and over which arbitrary probability distributions hold, enumeration has better
expected sensible performance than any arbitrary revisiting algorithm. Note that
arbitrary problem distributions obviously includes realistic problem distributions,
such as the universal distribution . It is also interesting to note that, through use
of a string encoding, an algorithm to perform a blind enumeration of a search space
will typically have excellent algorithmic time and space complexity, in O(|X|) and
O(log |X|) respectively.
This paper may also help guide practice. Theorem 3 should be of great interest
to those empirically investigating the performance of search algorithms. It does not
say that superior performance on one problem set will necessarily result in inferior
performance on another, but does say that if we have no information whatsoever
about the relationship between two problem sets, performance observed to be better than enumeration on one still predicts performance worse than enumeration on
the other. Of course, it is rare that one knows nothing at all about the relationship
between problem sets, even if it is simply that at an intuitive level problems from
the two sets seem similar in some way. Furthermore as an experimenter collects performance statistics for their algorithms on the unknown problem set, uncertainty
over the algorithms’ performance on that set will decrease so that they are able
to predict performance on previously unseen instances with increasing conﬁdence.
Nevertheless, consider the best policy if you were asked to play the following simple
game: a third-party gives you an algorithm and a set of performance data for it
on some problem set, then tells you that you have a choice of whether to apply
the algorithm to one problem from some other problem set, or to apply a random
enumerative search. No information whatsoever is given about the new problem
set, and the aim of this game is to achieve the best performance on the new unseen problem on your ﬁrst attempt. Theorem 3 indicates that you should choose
enumeration instead of the known algorithm. Obviously one rarely, if ever, wishes
to win such a game, and applying a known algorithm to an unknown problem set
has another payoﬀin terms of information gained, but hopefully theorem 3, the
computational simplicity of enumeration, and the game outlined above will all help
to convince practitioners that an algorithm’s empirical performance on some problem set should be directly compared against a deterministically enumerative search
started at some uniformly randomly selected point in the search space or, equivalently, a uniform random search using sampling without replacement. At present
such practice is far from common.
Acknowledgments
We thank D. Wolpert, S. McGregor, R. Cliﬀord, A. Harrow, T. Kovacs and
certain anonymous reviewers for helpful discussions and comments.