ORIGINAL PAPER
The ethics of information transparency
Matteo Turilli Æ Luciano Floridi
Published online: 10 March 2009
 Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2009
The paper investigates the ethics of information
transparency (henceforth transparency). It argues that
transparency is not an ethical principle in itself but a proethical condition for enabling or impairing other ethical
practices or principles. A new deﬁnition of transparency is
offered in order to take into account the dynamics of
information production and the differences between data
and information. It is then argued that the proposed deﬁnition provides a better understanding of what sort of
information should be disclosed and what sort of information should be used in order to implement and make
effective the ethical practices and principles to which an
organisation is committed. The concepts of ‘‘heterogeneous
organisation’’ and ‘‘autonomous computational artefact’’
are further deﬁned in order to clarify the ethical implications of the technology used in implementing information
transparency. It is argued that explicit ethical designs,
which describe how ethical principles are embedded into
the practice of software design, would represent valuable
information that could be disclosed by organisations in
order to support their ethical standing.
Information transparency  Semantic
information  Computer ethics  Software design
Introduction
‘‘Transparency’’ has at least two different meanings that,
unfortunately, are irreconcilable and hence potentially
misleading. In the disciplines of information management
studies, business ethics and information ethics, ‘‘transparency’’ tends to be used to refer to forms of information
visibility, which is increased by reducing or eliminating
obstacles. In particular, transparency refers to the possibility of accessing information, intentions or behaviours
that have been intentionally revealed through a process of
disclosure. In the disciplines of computer science and IT
studies, however, ‘‘transparency’’ is more likely to refer to
a condition of information invisibility, such as when an
application or computational process is said to be transparent to the user. In this paper, we shall use the term
‘‘transparency’’ only in the former sense, speciﬁcally in
relation to the choice of which information is to be made
accessible to some agents by an information provider.
Not all authors in the area of business and business
ethics explicitly use the expression ‘‘information transparency’’. However, it is clear that they usually link the
concept of transparency with the process of making
M. Turilli (&)
Oxford University Computing Laboratory (OUCL),
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
e-mail: 
M. Turilli
Oxford e-Research Centre (OeRC), University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK
M. Turilli  L. Floridi
Information Ethics Group (IEG), University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK
M. Turilli  L. Floridi
Research Group in Philosophy of Information (GPI), University
of Hertfordshire, Hatﬁeld, UK
M. Turilli
Centre for Ethics and Economics and Business,
Universidade Cato´lica Portugueasa, Lisbon, Portugal
L. Floridi
Department of Philosophy, University of Hertfordshire,
Hatﬁeld, UK
Ethics Inf Technol 11:105–112
DOI 10.1007/s10676-009-9187-9
explicitly and openly available (disclosing) some information that can then be exploited by potential users for
their decision-making processes. Winkler, for example,
stresses how disclosed information is used, by offering a
deﬁnition of ‘‘transparency’’ in terms of ‘‘amount […] of
information […] upon which economic agents base their
decisions or expectations’’ . Other authors,
like Vaccaro, Madsen and DiPiazza, focus on the act of
disclosing
information,
‘‘transparency’’
‘‘degree of completeness of information, provided by each
company to the market, concerning its business activities’’
 and as the ‘‘obligation to
willingly provide to shareholders the information needed to
make decisions’’ .
The previous deﬁnitions highlight the fact that, from the
perspective of those who gain access to information (e.g. the
public, employees or regulatory bodies), transparency
dependson factorssuch as the availability of information, the
conditions of its accessibility and how the information,
which has been made transparent, may pragmatically or
epistemically support the user’s decision-making process.
Information providers (e.g. companies, organisations or
public institutions) shape such factors by choosing which
information could or should be disclosed, also according to
current legislation, and by deciding in which form information might be most suitably made available. Such choices
and decisions depend on evaluating business, legal and
ethical constraints and implications.
Considering the ethical implications of disclosing information is a major challenge for information providers. On
the one hand, providers have to evaluate the potential ethical
or unethical use of disclosed information. For example,
facilitating access to electronic medical records may help
life-saving research, but may simultaneously expose patients
to fraud or a breach of privacy, as their personal information
is disclosed. Alternatively considered, information transparency has the potential to show whether the providers are
not only abiding by the legal requirements, but also effectively practising the ethical principles to which they are
allegedly committed. For example, disclosed information
may contain details that publicly indicate whether companies’ activities are consistent with principles of equality,
fairness, informational privacy, social welfare or environmental care.
The public perception of providers’ ethical standings
following the disclosure of information may represent, in
some cases, a business opportunity. Consider, for example,
the case of the so-called ethical, green and socially responsible banks . Their business
also depends on disclosing information about the ethical
principles endorsed for the regulation of the banks’ investments, proﬁt margins or customer care. Banks disclose
such information to conﬁrm and publicise the banks’ ethical
standings and ‘‘good’’ business practice to their potential and
current clients.
Clearly, the ethical implications of information transparency can be a double-edged sword for a company, since
disclosing ethically sensitive information shows its degree
of ethical coherence. When information users perceive
ethical standards to be low, the information provider’s
image and business may be damaged. The international
wave of dissent suffered by Shell UK following the wellknown environmental case of Brent Spar , or the large debate caused by Monsanto and its
ethical arguments for the support of genetically modiﬁed
crops are paradigmatic examples of how delicate and exacting the
understanding and management of the ethical implications
of information transparency can be.
Such implications become even more far-reaching when
the level of automation of information management, so
pervasive in many companies and institutions, is factored in.
The increasing rate of deployment of technologies capable of
operating with some degree of autonomy is transforming
companies and institutions into heterogeneous organisations1 in which individuals and technological devices
amalgamate and contribute to the management of the
information ﬂow, performing activities side by side. In these
heterogeneous organisations, the production, management,
preservation and access of information are processes of
critical importance and hence the ethical implications of
information transparency become even more challenging.
The rest of this paper focuses on the ethics of information transparency and the problem of what kind of
information should be made available by information
providers. More speciﬁcally, we shall address three correlated questions:
What is the ethical nature of information transparency?
What information affects the ethical nature of information transparency?
What information should be disclosed in order to
implement information transparency in heterogeneous
organisations?
The ethical nature of information transparency
Information transparency, understood in terms of disclosed
information, does not necessarily imply ethical consequences, since the disclosed information may be ethically
neutral. Information transparency may not affect ethical
1 For a comprehensive deﬁnition of heterogeneous organisations and
for a discussion of the ethical implications of designing their
computational artefacts see Turilli .
M. Turilli, L. Floridi
principles and have only ethically unrelated effects, if any
effect at all. For example, the user interface of operating
systems (e.g. Windows, OSX or Linux) often discloses
information about the underlying computational processes
without any ethical consequence. Users may be informed
whether their interaction with a program is correct, whether
they have received new e-mails or whether there are new
upgrades to install. Disclosing such information is a design
fundamental
functional
human–computer
interactions, but that need not qualify as an ethical choice.
Another example of information transparency without
ethical connotations is provided by the debate about the
economical suitability of disclosing information. Lamming
et al. analyse the consequences of bilaterally disclosing sensitive information and tacit knowledge in supply
relationships. In this context, the degree of transparency is
considered to be the property of a commercial relationship
and is evaluated for its commercial importance. Winkler
 analyses the role of (information) transparency in
monetary policymaking. In his analysis, information disclosure is evaluated, alongside issues of information
communication and interpretation, in relation to its ability
to affect the efﬁciency of monetary policies.
Information transparency is not an ethical principle per se,
seeing that it can be ethically neutral, but itcan easily become
an ethically ‘‘enabling’’ or ‘‘impairing’’ factor, that is a proethical condition, when the disclosed information has an
impact on ethical principles. Such an impact depends on at
least two types of relationship that occur between disclosed
information and ethical principles. One is dependence: some
amount of information is required in order to endorse ethical principles. The other is regulation: ethical principles
regulate information ﬂow by constraining its access,
usage, dissemination and storage (see Fig. 1). Information
transparency is ethically enabling when it provides the
information necessary for the endorsement of ethical principles (dependence) or (and this might be an inclusive or)
when it provides details on how information is constrained
(regulation). Conversely, ethical principles can be impaired
if false details (misinformation) or inadequate or excessive
amounts of information are disclosed.
Accountability, safety, welfare and informed consent are
examples of ethical principles that depend on the disclosure
of some information in order to be endorsed. The ‘‘enabling’’
role of information transparency for accountability is well
described by Mallin, who argues for the necessity of
implementing information transparency into corporate
governance because otherwise ‘‘accountability would not
exist in any meaningful way’’ . Analogously,
the recall of 13 million Firestone tyres by Ford in 2001 that
were prone to spontaneous ‘blow-out’ and the
recall of 10 million laptops by several makers because their
batteries posed a ﬁre hazard show how safety
and welfare ‘‘enablement’’ may depend on the disclosure of
information to the public.
Privacy, anonymity and copyright2 are typical examples
of ethical principles that regulate the ﬂow of information.
Information transparency enables such principles by providing the details of their regulative constraints to the
public. Consent forms for the treatment of personal information clarify the extent to which privacy and anonymity
will be granted, describing the constraints on access and
use of disclosed information. Similarly, details about
copyright provide information about how particular information expressed in some form can be copied or used, for
example, in derivative work.
Information transparency may impair all of the above
ethical principles when false, misleading, partial or inappropriate details are released to the public. Partial details
about the management of personal data may impair privacy
and anonymity but also generate mistaken beliefs that
could further impair accountability or justify a sense of
false security or welfare. The ﬁnancial downfall of Enron/
Andersen, Tyco International, WorldCom and Parmalat
 , are all infamous examples of
how partial information and misinformation disclosed to
the public impaired accountability, safety and welfare.
The potential for information transparency to be ethically enabling or impairing poses a general problem
concerning the best way to decide what information should
be disclosed when ethical consequences are taken into
Ethical Principles / Information Transparency
Dependence
Ethical principles necessitate
information
Regulation
Ethical principles regulate
information
Accountability
Informed Consent
Freedom of Expression
Fig. 1 Relations of dependence and regulation between ethical
principles and information. Dependence relation between ethical
principles and transparency subsists when ethical principles need to
be supported by information. Regulation relation subsists when
ethical principles constrain the ﬂow of information
2 Copyright is here considered as the expression of the ethical
principles that inspired the legislators in formulating such a right. For
an analysis of the ethical roots of copyright in the United States of
America see Warwick .
The ethics of information transparency
account. Radical approaches to information transparency—
such as full disclosure or completely withholding information relative to the activity of an organisation—merely
fail to guarantee positive ethical implications while risking
the promotion of negative ones. Unfortunately, there is no
easy way to ensure that information transparency is
endorsed maximising its ethically enabling characteristics.
The information to be disclosed must be carefully considered by evaluating its potential ethical consequences on a
case-by-case basis.
Information and the ethical nature of information
transparency
The term ‘‘information’’ in ‘‘information transparency’’ is a
qualiﬁcation that indicates what is made accessible (that is,
‘‘transparent’’) to the user. The problem of choosing what
type of information should be disclosed ﬁrst requires
understanding the characteristics of the entity that is to be
disclosed. Information is a term with many meanings,
depending on the context in which, and the purposes for
which it is used . The information disclosed,
when implementing information transparency, is supposed
to consist of meaningful, veridical, comprehensible, accessible and useful data. This is not a mere litany of properties.
This type of information is called semantic information and
consists of true3 semantic content that can be used for epistemic purposes. Semantic information can be pragmatically
connected with agents’ processes of decision-making
(Sequoiah-Grayson, forthcoming) but note that here information is considered from the point of view of agents,
companies or organisations that have to disclose information, not of those who have to use it.
Semantic information differs radically from data. A
minimal deﬁnition of data is ‘‘lack of uniformity’’ . A datum is something that ‘makes a difference’ and,
as such, can be perceived, measured and captured via an
interaction. Data can be thought of as a precondition for the
experience, pre-epistemic entities the existence of which is
empirically inferred. Different physical media like books,
DVDs or web pages, contain data that can be codiﬁed into
different formats or languages. Data are, for example, the
strings contained in web pages or in databases but also the
binary digits obtained through the changes in laser intensity
as it interacts with the microscopic indentations of a
DVD’s surface.
Both data and information are outcomes of elaboration
processes. Data may be produced by interactions between
physical objects or between agents and the environment.
The head of a hard disk produces data when it magnetises a
portion of a ferromagnetic plate; researchers produce (raw)
data when conducting experiments or observations. Data
may also be derived by means of elaborations, as in the
case of computations operated by software or when agents
add metadata to a database or tag objects such as photographs, video and web sites.
Information is produced through the elaboration of data.
Semantic information can be thought of as the result of a
set of operations performed by an agent taking raw data as
input and producing well-formed, meaningful and truthful
data (that is, information) as output (see Fig. 2). Semantic
information is not the result of a ‘snapshot’ or passive
observation, but depends on agents’ proactive meaningful
data elaborations (semanticisation). For example, given a
set of data about the performance of ﬁnancial stock, a
broker (agent) can derive the information that a speciﬁc set
of bank transactions will have to be executed. Analogously,
a manager derives information about the overall ﬁnancial
status of her/his company by elaborating on a vast set of
The products of semantic elaborations performed by
agents over data are informative only if truthful. For
example, the results of the elaborations performed by
Andersen on the ﬁnancial data of Enron proved to be
uninformative. They were meaningful data, since they were
comprehensible, but they did not convey the truth about the
factual ﬁnancial status of the company. On the other hand,
veridical business reports about companies’ productivity,
business plans and, more generally, all the true semantic
Information
Operations
Interpretation
Correlation
Enabled or impaired
Ethical Principles
Ethical Principles
Impartiality
Accountability
Fig. 2 Process of deriving information from data. Data are the input
of operations that produce information as output. The ethical nature of
information transparency as an ethically enabling (or impairing)
feature depends on the set of ethical principles constraining such
operations
3 For a deﬁnite clariﬁcation of the need to include truth among the
necessary conditions that qualify semantic information see Sequoiah-
Grayson . For a review of the debate and an argument in favour
of including truth values into the deﬁnition of semantic information
see Floridi .
M. Turilli, L. Floridi
content that can be properly codiﬁed and elaborated about a
company, represent factual situations of that company.
As reported in the previous section of the paper, transparency is usually thought of as the process of disclosing a
certain amount of information (or data) generated by an
organisation. Such information can be codiﬁed by means of
different media. People outside and/or inside the organisation can access such information and use it for their
needs. Ideally, if considered altogether, the disclosed
information constitutes a complete picture of the state of
the organisation at a given point in time. The problem is
that the elaboration processes that have produced such
information usually remain opaque.
The elaboration processes of information are not ethically neutral. They are therefore relevant when the ethical
implications of transparency are taken into account.
Consider, for example, a set of ﬁnancial statements. When
disclosed without explaining how the reported information has been collected, correlated or interpreted, it is all
but impossible to understand whether such information is
a product of an ethical practise. The same applies to
statistical results reported without specifying the methodology that has been used, or the type of analysis that
has been applied to the data. It follows that information
transparency should disclose not only information but also
details about how such information has been produced.
Such details are a necessary condition for verifying the
consistency between the ethical principles endorsed at the
time of producing information and the ethical principles
that information transparency should enable. In other
words, the possibility of enabling ethical principles by
means of information transparency depends on such
consistency.
Recall how transparency can enable (or impair) ethical
principles (Fig. 1) and consider the schematisation of the
production process of information (Fig. 2). The ethical
principle of accountability, for example, posits that an
agent should be held accountable for the consequences of
her/his actions or projects. This principle requires information about the outcome of the agent’s actions to be
enabled (Fig. 3). Without such information, it would be
impossible to evaluate the performance of the agent’s
actions or projects against qualitative and quantitative
parameters. The problem is that neither data (input) nor
information (output) is enough for this evaluation. One also
needs to know whether such information has been produced while respecting ethical principles of, for example,
accuracy and fairness, and whether the semantic content
produced is veridical about its subject matter (i.e. agent’s
actions). Without disclosing the ethical principles endorsed
in the elaboration process it is impossible to check whether
the ethical principle of, in this case, accountability has been
The same holds true not only for the ethical principles
that depend on information (as for accountability) but also
for the principles that regulate the information ﬂow. Consider the principle of anonymity and companies that offer
anonymising proxies for TCP/IP services, like web surﬁng,
e-mailing and chatting. For these companies, it is crucial to
disclose information about how they manage the ﬂow of
personal and Internet usage information, in order to prove
to their customers that there is no correlation between their
identity and their activities online. Disclosing such information requires clarifying whether principles of, for
example, fairness or accuracy have been endorsed in its
production process. In this example, the principle of
anonymity can be ‘‘enabled’’ only on the basis of that
clariﬁcation.
Again, analogous considerations can be made for those
processes that produce data but no information. Such processes take primary/raw data as input and produce further
data as output. During these processes, data are codiﬁed and
correlated. Such operations may have an ethical impact as,
for example, in cases of data produced by experiments and
observations or when mining, correlating or aggregating
data from different databases. All of these operations may be
subject to considerations of fairness, accuracy, impartiality
or respect and, as such, have to be taken into account
when addressing the ethical ‘‘enabling’’ consequences of
disclosing a dataset.
The clariﬁcation of how the ethical implications of
information and data production processes contribute to the
ethical impact of disclosed information leads to a shift in
the way transparency should be endorsed. The value of
Need/Control
Enabled Ethical Principles (Fig 1)
Accountability
Information Transparency
Information
Details on Information Creation Process (Fig 2)
Agents’ activities
Computational artefacts operations
Financial figures
Fig. 3 Schematic generalisation
The ethics of information transparency
disclosing only ethical or professional codes, recordings or
summaries of activities, minutes
or meeting reports
diminishes when compared to the effects of making
transparent also the details about how such information has
been produced, elaborated and interpreted. This shift is not
surprising once one appreciates that transparency is not an
ethical principle in itself. Information transparency, as
deﬁned above, is a pro-ethical condition that becomes a
valuable tool for uncovering the ethical principles that
ideally inspire organisations’ decisions and those principles
that are factually endorsed in their everyday activities. In
this way, organisations, companies or public institutions
cannot limit their ethical involvement to public declarations of intent but have to show how the ethical principles,
to which they are committed, are prioritised and translated
into practise and governance.
Disclosing details about the ethical implications of
human choices and actions that compose the process
of information production can be achieved by means of
accounting or regulatory methods, which may be mandated
by legal systems. For example, policies deﬁne procedures
that allow for reconstructing the employees’ behaviour,
that indicate what to choose in case of a conﬂict of interests
or whom to refer in case of doubt. The problem is that the
management of information is increasingly outsourced to
autonomous computational artefacts and it is unclear how
their operations relate to ethics. So, the next step is to look
at how one may assess the ethical characteristics of the
process of information production in the context of heterogeneous organisations, where human and artiﬁcial agents
are parts of a single, overall system.
Implementing information transparency
in heterogeneous organisations
Contemporary organisations usually deploy a vast array of
technologies for information management. Such technologies
duplicating,
validating, communicating and manipulating the ﬂow of
digital information. Such systems are composed of manmade objects, such as hardware devices or software
products, which here will be referred to as computational
artefacts.
Computational artefacts may need human interaction to
perform their operations or they may be designed to work
with some degree of autonomy. The former are usually
deployed in order to augment individuals’ capabilities,
while individuals tend to outsource some of their activities
to the latter. For example, mobile phones and word processors extend users’ capabilities for oral and written
communication; automated customer support systems,
automated trading systems or business process management
activities
individuals.
Organisations that deploy these types of artefacts
become heterogeneous as their activities depend upon
individuals and computational artefacts and their interactions.
individuals
computational
simultaneously operate and collaborate with a degree of
autonomy in order to achieve the organisations’ goals.
Financial institutions, public administration, power plants,
transportation and defence systems are some obvious
examples of large-scale heterogeneous organisations.
Heterogeneous organisations face speciﬁc ethical challenges, which have their origins in the digital nature of
computational artefacts and their autonomous manipulation
of the information ﬂow . Digitalisation makes
information ‘greasier’ and the ﬂow of information is facilitated in the infosphere by its ontological
malleability . Large amounts of digital
information can not only be easily managed—duplicated,
stored, distributed—but can also be mined at an unprecedented speed. Data coming from different sources can be
automatically correlated and cross-referenced, thus allowing the rapid derivation of new data and information.
Derivation and duplication of information and its globalscale and real time communication represent concrete
challenges for the endorsement of ethical principles and
rights—privacy, copyright, trust and safety being just some
well-known and paradigmatic examples.
Organisations deploy information policies in order to
avoid and manage such challenges. Among others, security
policies are particularly relevant, as they usually deﬁne
procedures for authenticating, authorising and accounting
for access to, and manipulation of, information. These
procedures aim to guarantee that, for example, only a
speciﬁc set of reliable, legally entitled or trusted people
gain access to personal information. In this way, procedures
information
instrument to guarantee that ethical principles are endorsed
in organisations’ activities.
As argued in the previous section of this paper, details of
these procedures should be disclosed when an organisation
is committed to enabling a set of ethical principles correlated to information. In the context of heterogeneous
organisations, disclosing such details implies the clariﬁcation of how both humans and computational artefacts put
the relevant procedures into practice. Disclosing only the
human implementation portion of such procedures would
give a partial coverage of the activity of the organisations
and, as a consequence, allow only partial transparency of
their ethical implication. However disclosing information
about how computational artefacts put procedures into
practice requires an evaluation of their design. This evaluation should clarify, for example, what parameters are
M. Turilli, L. Floridi
used for authorising the manipulation of information,
whether information is properly encrypted when transmitted and, more generally, whether all the operations
performed by computational artefacts are compatible with
the normative constraints of the ethical principles endorsed
by an organisation and translated into policies.
This type of design evaluation is problematic because it
is unclear how ethics relates to computational artefacts.
While it is possible to clarify how ethics can be enforced
through policies, and how such policies are translated into
procedures, it is problematic to establish a direct link
between the computational operations performed by the
artefacts and the ethical principles by which those procedures originally transpired. Computational operations are
theoretical entities expressed in formal languages that are
semantically very distant from the richness of the natural
languages in which ethical principles and (the majority of)
procedures are expressed.
The problem of embedding ethics into software design is
enormous and relates to several disciplines such as software and requirement engineering, law, normative ethics,
applied and information/computer ethics and sociology
 . From a theoretical
standpoint, it is necessary to understand what it means to
consider ethics in the context of software engineering.
Ultimately, such analysis has to be grounded on phenomenological investigations to facilitate integration into the
practice of software design. Alongside such investigations,
it is necessary to develop speciﬁc formal tools that make it
feasible to shift from the informal language, used to
investigate ethical requirements, to the formal aspects of
software development.
In Turilli a method has been proposed for the
translation of (any arbitrary number of) ethical principles
into preconditions for the execution of the artefact’s
operations. The ﬁrst step of the proposed translation
method is the adoption of descriptive qualitative techniques
for eliciting the ethical requirements relevant to the environment in which the computational artefact will be
deployed. In the second step, these ethical requirements are
translated into a design speciﬁcation by means of a conceptual tool that has been called ‘control closure’. Such a
tool can be readily formalised so as to be compatible with
the software development practice (Sanders and Turilli
The method of embedding ethical principles into the
practice of software design by means of the control closure
uncovers the connection between the operations performed
by computational artefacts and the preconditions under
which such operations can be performed. Ethical principles
relative, for example, to the management of information
ﬂow, can be represented by a class of preconditions that
constrains the execution of computational operations. Such
preconditions are described at the time of design, thus
providing the opportunity to consider the ethical implication of software speciﬁcation.
This method creates a bridge between ethical principles
and the formal details of computational artefacts’ behaviours,
possibility
implementing
information transparency in a way that enables a chosen set
of ethical principles. Assuming that details of how organisations’ activities are performed by both humans and
computational artefacts are disclosed, and that such details
account for what ethical principles have been factually
endorsed in the processes of information production,
information transparency can enable the ethical principles
to which heterogeneous organisations are committed. For
example, disclosing complete details about what ethical
principles are respected by computational artefacts in
manipulating the information ﬂow of an organisation offers
the possibility to be fully accountable, to verify that safety
standards are respected or to increase public trust.
Conclusions
In this paper, we have offered two main contributions to
the analysis of information transparency. The ﬁrst consists
in a deﬁnition of the ethical nature of information transparency, not as ethical principle in itself, but as a proethical condition, that is, an operation that becomes ethically
‘‘enabling’’
information
considered in a relationship of ‘dependence’ or ‘regulation’
with ethical principles.
The second contribution concerns the problem of
deﬁning what kind of information should be disclosed by
an organisation when the ethical nature of information
transparency is taken into account. The common understanding of information transparency as the process of
disclosing a set of data has been challenged as too limited,
in favour of a more inclusive deﬁnition that takes into
account also the ethical principles factually endorsed in
producing information. On the basis of such a deﬁnition,
we have argued that disclosing not only information but
also details of how such information has been produced
enables those ethical principles that either depend on
information or regulate it.
These two contributions have each been contextualised
and explained. In so doing, we have analysed the challenge
of implementing the ethical nature of information transparency in the context of heterogeneous organisations. The
analysis has led to the conclusion that in many circumstances there may be a real need to disclose the ethical
information
management,
including those performed by computational artefacts. A
corollary of such analysis has been the clariﬁcation of the
The ethics of information transparency
necessity of developing methods for understanding the
ethical implications of designing computational artefacts.
This paper provides a ﬁrst step into the investigation of
the challenging issue of how information transparency is
related to ethics. The problem of assessing the ethical
implications of how disclosed information is utilised by
individuals in their decision-making processes will be the
next stage in this research. It is a stage that will have to
wait for a new article in its own right.
Acknowledgements
One of us, Turilli, wishes to thank the Director
of the Centre for Ethics and Economics and Business for his kind
invitation to present a previous version of this paper at the conference
ICT, transparency and social responsibility, 7–9 October, 2007 Universidade Cato´lica Portuguesa, Lisbon, Portugal. Turilli also wishes
to thank all the conference participants, particularly Deborah Johnson,
Jeroen van den Hoven and Antonino Vaccaro for their useful feedback. Special thanks are extended to the Oxford e-Science Research
Centre for their ﬁnancial and scientiﬁc support. We both express our
gratitude to members of the IEG, University of Oxford, and of the
GPI, University of Hertfordshire, for their critique of earlier versions
of this work. We remain the only persons responsible for any of its
shortcomings.