c⃝2002 Association for Computational Linguistics
Squibs and Discussions
Human Variation and Lexical Choice
Ehud Reiter∗
Somayajulu Sripada†
University of Aberdeen
University of Aberdeen
Much natural language processing research implicitly assumes that word meanings are ﬁxed in
a language community, but in fact there is good evidence that different people probably associate
slightly different meanings with words. We summarize some evidence for this claim from the
literature and from an ongoing research project, and discuss its implications for natural language
generation, especially for lexical choice, that is, choosing appropriate words for a generated text.
1. Introduction
A major task in natural language generation (NLG) is lexical choice, that is, choosing
lexemes (words) to communicate to the reader the information selected by the system’s
content determination module. From a semantic perspective lexical choice algorithms
are based on models of word meanings, which state when a word can and cannot be
used; of course, lexical choice algorithms may also consider syntactic constraints and
pragmatic features when choosing words.
Such models assume that it is possible to specify what a particular word means to
a particular user. However, both the cognitive science literature and recent experiments
carried out in the SUMTIME project at the University of Aberdeen, of which the current
authors are a part, suggest that this may be difﬁcult to do because of variations among
people, that is, because the same word may mean different things to different people.
More precisely, although people may agree at a rough level about what a word means,
they may disagree about its precise deﬁnition, and in particular, to what objects or
events a word can be applied. This means that it may be impossible even in principle
to specify precise word meanings for texts with multiple readers, and indeed for texts
with a single reader, unless the system has access to an extremely detailed user model.
A corpus study in our project also showed that there were differences in which words
individuals used (in the sense that some words were used only by a subset of the
authors) and also in how words were orthographically realized (spelled).
This suggests that it may be risky for NLG systems (and indeed human authors) to
depend for communicative success on the human reader’s interpreting words exactly
as the system intends. This in turn suggests that perhaps NLG systems should be
cautious in using very detailed lexical models and also that it may be useful to add
some redundancy to texts in case the reader does not interpret a word as expected.
This is especially true in applications in which each user reads only one generated text;
if users read many generated texts, then perhaps over time they will learn about and
adapt to the NLG system’s lexical usage. Human variability also needs to be taken
into account by natural language processing (NLP) researchers performing corpora
analyses; such analyses should not assume that everyone uses identical rules when
making linguistic decisions.
∗Department of Computing Science, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB24 3UE, UK. E-mail:
 
† Department of Computing Science, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB24 3UE, UK. E-mail:
 
Downloaded from by guest on 26 March 2025
Computational Linguistics
Volume 28, Number 4
2. Evidence for Human Lexical Variation
2.1 Previous Research
Linguists have acknowledged that people may associate different meanings with the
same word. Nunberg , for example, writes:
There is considerable variation among speakers in beliefs about what
does and does not constitute a member of the category. . . . Take jazz. I
may believe that the category includes ragtime, but not blues; you may
believe the exact opposite. After all, we will have been exposed to a
very different set of exemplars. And absent a commonly accepted authority, we must construct our own theories of categories, most probably in the light of varying degrees of musical sophistication.
Many modern theories of mental categorization 
assume that mental categories are represented by prototypes or exemplars. Therefore,
if different people are exposed to different category prototypes and exemplars, they
are likely to have different rules for evaluating category membership.
Parikh made a similar point and backed it up with some simple experimentation. For example, he showed squares from the Munsell chart to participants and
asked them to characterize the squares as red or blue; different individuals characterized the squares in different ways. In another experiment he showed that differences
remained even if participants were allowed to associate fuzzy-logic-type truth values
with statements.
In the psychological community, Malt et al. investigated what names participants gave to real-world objects. For example, these researchers wished to know
whether participants would describe a pump-top hand lotion dispenser as a bottle or a
container. They were primarily interested in variations across linguistic communities,
but they also discovered that even within a linguistic community there were differences in how participants named objects. They state (page 242) that only 2 of the 60
objects in their study were given the same name by all of their 76 native-Englishspeaker participants.
In the lexicographic community, ﬁeld-workers for the Dictionary of American Regional English (DARE) asked a representative set of Americans
to respond to ﬁll-in-the-blank questionnaires. The responses they received revealed
substantial differences among participants. For example, there were 228 different responses to question B12, When the wind begins to increase, you say it’s
, the most
common of which were getting windy and blowing up; and 201 different responses to
question B13, When the wind begins to decrease, you say it’s
, the most common of
which were calming down and dying down.
2.2 SUMTIME Project
The SUMTIME project at the University of Aberdeen is researching techniques for generating summaries of time-series data.1 Much of the project focuses on content determination (see, for example, Sripada et al. ), but it is also examining lexical choice
algorithms for time-series summaries, which is where the work described in this article originated. To date, SUMTIME has primarily focused on two domains, weather
forecasts and summaries of gas turbine sensors, although we have recently started
1 See ⟨ general information about SUMTIME.
Downloaded from by guest on 26 March 2025
Reiter and Sripada
Human Variation and Lexical Choice
work in a third domain as well, summaries of sensor readings in neonatal intensive
care units.
2.2.1 Gas Turbine Domain. In order to develop a lexicon for describing patterns in
gas turbine sensor data, we asked two experts to write short descriptions of 38 signal
fragments. (A signal fragment is an interval of a single time-series data channel.) The
descriptors were small, with an average size of 8.3 words. In no case did the experts
produce exactly the same descriptor for a fragment. Many of the differences simply
reﬂected usage of different words to express the same underlying concept; for example,
one expert typically used rise to describe what the other expert called increase. In other
cases the differences reﬂected different levels of detail. For example, one fragment was
described by expert A as Generally steady with a slow rising trend. Lots of noise and a few
small noise steps, whereas expert B used the shorter phrase Rising trend, with noise. Both
experts also had personal vocabulary; for example, the terms bathtub and dome were
used only by expert A, whereas the terms square wave and transient were used only by
Most importantly from the perspective of this article, there were cases in which the
differences between the experts reﬂected a difference in the meanings associated with
words. For example, both experts used the word oscillation. Six signals were described
by both experts as oscillations, but two signals, including the one shown in Figure 1,
were described as oscillations only by expert B. We do not have enough examples
to solidly support hypotheses about why the experts agreed on application of the
term oscillation to some signals and disagreed on its application to others, but one
explanation that seems to ﬁt the available data is that the experts agreed on applying
the term to signals that were very similar to a sine wave , but sometimes disagreed on its application
to signals that were less similar to a sine wave, such as Figure 1.
2.2.2 Meteorology Domain. In the meteorology domain we accumulated and analyzed a corpus of 1,099 human-written weather forecasts for offshore oil rigs, together
with the data ﬁles (produced by a numerical weather simulation) that the forecasters
examined when writing the forecasts. The forecasts were written by ﬁve different forecasters. A short extract from a typical forecast is shown in Figure 2; this text describes
changes in wind speed and direction predicted to occur two days after the forecast
was issued. An extract from the corresponding data ﬁle is shown in Table 1; it describes the predicted wind speed and direction from the numerical weather simulation
at three-hourly intervals.
As in the gas turbine domain, our corpus analysis showed that individual forecasters had idiosyncratic vocabulary that only they used. For example, one forecaster
used the verb freshening to indicate a moderate increase in wind speed from a low
or moderate initial value, but no other forecaster used this verb. There were also
Signal fragment (gas turbine exhaust temperature): Is this an oscillation?
Downloaded from by guest on 26 March 2025
Computational Linguistics
Volume 28, Number 4
FORECAST 00-24 GMT, WEDNESDAY, 04-Oct 2000
WIND(10M):
WSW 20-24 BACKING SSW 10-14 BY MIDDAY THEN
VEERING SW 24-28 BY EVENING
Wind (at 10m) extract from ﬁve-day weather forecast issued on October 2, 2000.
differences in orthography. For example, some forecasters lexicalized the four basic
directions as N, E, S, and W, whereas others used the lexicalizations N’LY, E’LY, S’LY,
We performed a number of semantic analyses to determine when different forecasters used different words; these invariably showed differences between authors.
For example, we attempted to infer the meaning of time phrases such as by evening by
searching for the ﬁrst data ﬁle record that matched the corresponding wind descriptor.
The forecast in Figure 2, for example, says that the wind will change to SSW 10–14
at the time suggested by BY MIDDAY. In the corresponding data shown in Table 1,
the ﬁrst entry with a direction of SSW and a speed in the 10–14 range is 1200; hence
in this example the time phrase by midday is associated with the time 1200. A similar
analysis suggests that in this example the time phrase by evening is associated with the
time 0000 (on 5-10-00).
We repeated this procedure for every forecast in our corpus and statistically analyzed the results to determine how individual forecasters used time phrases. More
details about the analysis procedure are given by Reiter and Sripada . As reported in that paper, the forecasters seemed to agree on the meaning of some time
phrases; for example, all forecasters predominantly used by midday to mean 1200.
They disagreed, however, on the use of other terms, including by evening. The use of
by evening is shown in Table 2; in particular, whereas forecaster F3 (the author of the
text in Figure 2) most often used this phrase to mean 0000, forecasters F1 and F4 most
often used this phrase to mean 1800. The differences between forecasters in their usage
of by evening are signiﬁcant at p < .001 under both a chi-squared test (which treats
time as a categorical variable) and a one-way analysis of variance (which compares
the mean time for each forecaster; for this test we recoded the hour 0 as 24).
2.2.3 Knows Java Experiment. Some colleagues pointed out to us that meteorology
in particular was a domain with an established sublanguage and usage conventions,
whose words might correspond to technical terms, and wondered what would hap-
Wind (at 10m) extract from October 2, 2000, data ﬁle (output of numerical weather model).
Wind Direction
Wind Speed
Downloaded from by guest on 26 March 2025
Reiter and Sripada
Human Variation and Lexical Choice
How often by evening was used to refer to each time, for each forecaster (mode in boldface
pen in a domain in which there was no established sublanguage and technical terminology. We therefore performed a small experiment at the University of Aberdeen
in which we asked 21 postgraduate students and academic staff members to ﬁll
out a questionnaire asking which of the following individuals they would regard as
knowing Java:2
A cannot program in Java, but knows that Java is a popular
programming language.
B cannot write a Java program from scratch, but can make very simple
changes to an existing Java program (such as changing a string constant
that speciﬁes a URL).
C can use a tool such as JBuilder to write a very simple Java program,
but cannot use control ﬂow constructs such as while loops.
D can write Java programs that use while loops, arrays, and the Java
class libraries, but only within one class; she cannot write a program that
consists of several classes.
E can create complex Java programs and classes, but needs to
occasionally refer to documentation for details of the Java language and
class libraries.
Respondents could tick Yes, Unsure, or No. All 21 respondents ticked No for A and Yes
for E. They disagreed about whether B, C, and D could be considered to know Java; 3
ticked Yes for B, 5 ticked Yes for C, and 13 ticked Yes for D. In other words, even among
this relatively homogeneous group, there was considerable disagreement over what
the phrase knows Java meant in terms of actual knowledge of the Java programming
2 The questionnaire in fact contained a sixth item: “F can create complex Java libraries and almost never
needs to refer to documentation because she has memorised most of it.” However, a few participants
were unsure whether create complex Java libraries meant programming or meant assembling compiled
object ﬁles into a single archive ﬁle using a tool such as tar or jartool, so we dropped F from our study.
Downloaded from by guest on 26 March 2025
Computational Linguistics
Volume 28, Number 4
3. Implications for Natural Language Generation
3.1 Lexical Choice
The previous section has argued that people in many cases do associate different
meanings with lexemes and phrases such as oscillation, by evening, and knows; and that
some words, such as bathtub and freshening, are used only by a subset of authors in a
particular domain. What impact does this have on lexical choice?
In applications in which users read only one generated text, it may be necessary
to restrict lexeme deﬁnitions to those that we expect all users to share. Indeed, essentially this advice was given to us by a domain expert in an earlier project on generating
personalized smoking-cessation letters . In applications in which users read many generated texts over a period of time, however, an
argument could be made for using a richer vocabulary and set of lexeme deﬁnitions
and expecting users to adapt to and learn the system’s vocabulary and usage over the
course of time; it may be appropriate to add “redundant” information to texts (section 3.2) while the user is still learning the system’s lexical usage. This strategy has
some risks, but if successful, can lead to short and less awkward texts. Consistency is
essential if this strategy is followed; the system should not, for example, sometimes
use by evening to mean 1800 and sometimes use by evening to mean 0000.
We are not aware of previous research in lexical choice that focuses on dealing
with differences in the meanings that different human readers associate with words.
Perhaps the closest research strand is that which investigates tailoring word choice and
phrasing according to the expertise of the user . For example, the Coordinated Multimedia
Explanation Testbed (COMET) could generate
Check the polarity for skilled users and Make sure the plus on the battery lines up with the
plus on the battery compartment for unskilled users. General reviews of previous lexical
choice research in NLG are given by Stede and Wanner ; Zukerman and
Litman review research in user modeling and NLP.
In the linguistic community, Parikh has suggested that utility theory be
applied to word choice. In other words, if we know (1) the probability of a word’s
being correctly interpreted or misinterpreted and (2) the beneﬁt to the user of correct
interpretation and the cost of misinterpretation, then we can compute an overall utility
to the user of using the word. This seems like an interesting theoretical model, but in
practice (at least in the applications we have looked at), whereas it may be just about
possible to get data on the likelihood of correct interpretation of a word, it is probably
impossible to calculate the cost of misinterpretation, because we do not have accurate
task models that specify exactly how the user will use the generated texts (and our
domain experts have told us that it is probably impossible to construct such models).
3.1.1 Near Synonyms. A related problem is choosing between near synonyms, that
is, words with similar meanings: for example, choosing between easing and decreasing
when describing changes in wind speed, or saw-tooth transient and shark-tooth transient
when describing gas turbine signals. The most in-depth examination of choosing between near synonyms was undertaken by Edmonds , who essentially suggested
using rules based on lexicographic work such as Webster’s New Dictionary of Synonyms
 .
Edmonds was working on machine translation, not generating texts from nonlinguistic data, and hence was looking at larger differences than the ones with which
we are concerned. Indeed, dictionaries do not in general give deﬁnitions at the level
of detail required by SUMTIME; for example, we are not aware of any dictionary that
Downloaded from by guest on 26 March 2025
Reiter and Sripada
Human Variation and Lexical Choice
deﬁnes oscillation in enough detail to specify whether it is appropriate to describe the
signal in Figure 1 as an oscillation. We also have some doubts, however, as to whether
the deﬁnitions given in synonym dictionaries such as Gove do indeed accurately represent how all members of a language community use near synonyms. For
example, when describing synonyms and near synonyms of error, Gove (page 298)
states that faux pas is “most frequently applied to a mistake in etiquette.” This seems
to be a fair match to DARE’s ﬁeldwork question (see section 2.1) JJ41, An embarrassing
mistake: Last night she made an awful
, and indeed DARE (volume 2, page 372)
states that faux pas was a frequent response to this question. DARE adds, however,
that faux pas was less often used in the South Midland region of the United States (the
states of Kentucky and Tennessee and some adjacent regions of neighboring states)
and also was less often used by people who lacked a college education. So although
faux pas might be a good lexicalization of a “mistake in etiquette” for most Americans,
it might not be appropriate for all Americans; and, for example, if an NLG system
knew that its user was a non-college-educated man from Kentucky, then perhaps it
should consider using another word for this concept.
3.2 Redundancy
Another implication of human variation in word usage is that if there is a chance that
people may not interpret words as expected, it may be useful for an NLG system to
include extra information in the texts it generates, beyond what is needed if users could
be expected to interpret words exactly as the system intended. Indeed, unexpected
word interpretations could perhaps be considered to be a type of “semantic” noise;
and as with all noise, redundancy in the signal (text) can help the reader recover the
intended meaning.
For example, the referring-expression generation model of Dale and Reiter 
selects attributes to identify referents based on the assumption that the hearer will
interpret the attributes as the system expects. Assume, for instance, that there are
two books in focus, B1 and B2, and the system’s knowledge base records that B1 has
color red and B2 has color blue. Then, according to Dale and Reiter, the red book is a
distinguishing description that uniquely identiﬁes B1.
Parikh, however, has shown that people can in fact disagree about which objects
are red and which are blue; if this is the case, then it is possible that the hearer will not
in fact be able to identify B1 as the referent after hearing the red book. To guard against
this eventuality, it might be useful to add additional information about a different
attribute to the referring expression; for example, if B1 is 100 pages and B2 is 1,000
pages, the system could generate the thin red book. This is longer than the red book and
thus perhaps may take longer to utter and comprehend, but its redundancy provides
protection against unexpected lexical interpretations.
3.3 Corpus Analysis
A ﬁnal point is that differences between individuals should perhaps be considered
in general by people performing corpus analyses to derive rules for NLG systems
 . To take one randomly chosen example, Hardt and Rambow
 suggest a set of rules for deciding on verb phrase (VP) ellipsis that are based
on machine learning techniques applied to the Penn Treebank corpus. These achieve
a 35% reduction in error rate against a baseline rule. They do not consider variation
in author, and we wonder if a considerable amount of the remaining error is due to
individual variation in deciding when to ellide a VP. It would be interesting to perform
a similar analysis with author speciﬁed as one of the features given to the machine
learning algorithm and see whether this improved performance.
Downloaded from by guest on 26 March 2025
Computational Linguistics
Volume 28, Number 4
4. Natural Language Generation versus Human-Written Texts
To ﬁnish on a more positive note, human variation may potentially be an opportunity
for NLG systems, because they can guarantee consistency. In the weather-forecasting
domain we examined, for example, users receive texts written by all ﬁve forecasters,
which means that they may have problems reliably interpreting phrases such as by
evening; an NLG system, in contrast, could be programmed always to use this phrase
consistently. An NLG system could also be programmed to avoid idiosyncratic terms
with which users might not be familiar (bathtub, for example) and not to use terms in
cases in which people disagree about their applicability (e.g., oscillation for Figure 1).
Our corpus analyses and discussions with domain experts suggest that it is not always
easy for human writers to follow such consistency rules, especially if they have limited
amounts of time.
Psychologists believe that interaction is a key aspect of the process of humans
agreeing on word usage . Perhaps a small group of people
who constantly communicate with each other over a long time period (presumably the
circumstances under which language evolved) will agree on word meanings. But in the
modern world it is common for human writers to write documents for people whom
they have never met or with whom they have never otherwise interacted, which may
reduce the effectiveness of the natural interaction mechanism for agreeing on word
In summary, dealing with lexical variation among human readers is a challenge
for NLG systems and will undoubtably require a considerable amount of thought,
research, and data collection. But if NLG systems can do a good job of this, they
might end up producing superior texts to many human writers, which would greatly
enhance the appeal of NLG technology.
Acknowledgments
Our thanks to the many individuals who
have discussed this work with us (not all of
whom agree with our analysis!), including
Regina Barzilay, Ann Copestake, Robert
Dale, Phil Edmonds, Jim Hunter, Adam
Kilgarriff, Owen Rambow, Graeme Ritchie,
Rosemary Stevenson, Sandra Williams, and
Jin Yu. We are also grateful to the
anonymous reviewers for their helpful
comments. Special thanks to DARE editor
Joan Hall for providing us with the DARE
ﬁeldwork data. Last but certainly not least,
this work would not have been possible
without the help of our industrial
collaborators at Intelligent Applications and
WNI/Oceanroutes. This work was
supported by the UK Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council
(EPSRC), under grant GR/M76681.