Machine Learning, 7, 227-252 
© 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston. Manufactured in The Netherlands.
The Induction of Dynamical Recognizers
JORDAN B. POLLACK
 
Laboratory for AI Research & Computer & Information Science Department, The Ohio State University,
2036 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210
Abstract. A higher order recurrent neural network architecture learns to recognize and generate languages after
being "trained" on categorized exemplars. Studying these networks from the perspective of dynamical systems
yields two interesting discoveries: First, a longitudinal examination of the learning process illustrates a new form
of mechanical inference: Induction by phase transition. A small weight adjustment causes a "bifurcation" in the
limit behavior of the network. This phase transition corresponds to the onset of the network's capacity for generalizing
to arbitrary-length strings. Second, a study of the automata resulting from the acquisition of previously published
training sets indicates that while the architecture is not guaranteed to find a minimal finite automaton consistent
with the given exemplars, which is an NP-Hard problem, the architecture does appear capable of generating non-
regular languages by exploiting fractal and chaotic dynamics. I end the paper with a hypothesis relating linguistic
generative capacity to the behavioral regimes of non-linear dynamical systems.
Keywords. Connectionism, language, induction, dynamics, fractals
1. Introduction
Consider the two categories of binary strings in Table 1. After a brief study, a human or
machine learner might decide to characterize the "accept" strings as those containing an
odd number of l's and the "reject" strings as those containing an even number of l's.
The language acquisition problem has been around for a long time. In its narrowest for-
mulation, it is a version of the inductive inference or "theory from data" problem for syn-
tax: Discover a compact mathematical description of string acceptability (which generalizes)
from a finite presentation of examples. In its broadest formulation it involves accounting
for the psychological and linguistic facts of native language acquisition by human children,
or even the acquistion of language itself by Homo Sapiens through natural selection .
Table 1. What is the rule which
defines the language?
J.B. POLLACK
The problem has become specialized across many scientific disciplines, and there is a
voluminous literature. Mathematical and computational theorists are concerned with the
basic questions and definitions of language learning , with understanding the
complexity of the problem , or with good algorithms . An excellent survey of this approach to the problem
has been written by . Linguists are concerned with grammatical
frameworks which can adequately explain the basic fact that children acquire their language
 , while psychologists and psycholinguists are
concerned, in detail, with how an acquisition mechanism substantiates and predicts em-
pirically testable phenomena of child language acquisition. , it does induction in a novel and interesting fashion, and searches
through a hypothesis space which, theoretically, is not constrained to machines of finite
These results are of import to many related neural models currently under development,
e.g., , and ultimately relates
to the question of how linguistic capacity can arise in nature.
Of necessity, I will make use of the terminology of non-linear dynamical systems for
the remainder of this article. This terminology is not (yet) a common language to most
computer and cognitive scientists and thus warrants an introduction. The view of neural
networks as non-linear dynamical systems is commonly held by the physicists who have
helped to define the modern field of neural networks ,
although complex dynamics have generally been suppressed in favor of more tractable
convergence (limit point) dynamics. But chaotic behavior has shown up repeatedly in studies
of neural networks , and a few scientists have begun to explore
how this dynamical complexity could be exploited for useful purposes, e.g., .
In short, a discrete dynamical system is just an iterative computation. Starting in some
"initial condition" or state, the next state is computed as a mathematical function of the
current state, sometimes involving parameters and/or input or noise from an environment.
Rather than studying the function of the computations, much of the work in this field has
INDUCTION OF DYNAMICAL RECOGNIZERS
been concerned with explaining universal temporal behaviors. Indeed, iterative systems
have some interesting properties: Their behavior in the limit reaches either a steady state
(limit point), an oscillation (limit cycle), or an aperiodic instability (chaos). In terms of
computer programs, these three "regimes" correspond, respectively, to those programs
which halt, those which have simple repetitive loops, and those which have more "creative"
infinite loops, such as broken self-modifying codes, an area of mechanical behavior which
has not been extensively studied. When the state spaces of dynamical systems are plotted,
these three regimes have characteristic figures called "attractors": Limit points show up
as "point attractors," limit cycles as "periodic attractors," and chaos as "strange attrac-
tors," which usually have a "fractal" nature. Small changes in controlling parameters can
lead through "phase transitions" to these qualitatively different behavioral regimes; a "bifur-
cation" is a change in the periodicity of the limit behavior of a system, and the route from
steady-state to periodic to aperiodic behavior follows a universal pattern. Finally, one of
the characteristics of chaotic systems is that they can be very sensitive to initial conditions,
and a slight change in the initial condition can lead to radically different outcomes. Fur-
ther details can be found in articles and books on the field, e.g., .
2. Automata recurrent networks, and dynamical recognizers
I should make it clear from the outset that the problem of inducing some recognizer for
a finite set of examples is "easy," as there are an infinite number of regular languages which
account for a finite sample, and an infinite number of automata for each language. The
difficult problem has always been finding the "minimal description," and no solution is
asymptotically much better than "learning by enumeration'--brute-force searching of all
automata in order of ascending complexity. Another difficult issue is the determination
of grammatical class. Because a finite set of examples does not give any clue as to the
complexity class of the source language, one apparently must find the most parsimonious
regular grmrnnar, context-free grammar, context-sensitive grammar, etc., and compare them.
Quite a formidable challenge for a problem-solver!
Thus, almost all language acquisition work has been done with an inductive bias of presup-
posing some grammatical framework as the hypothesis space. Most have attacked the prob-
lem of inducing finite-state recognizers for regular languages, e.g., , ~ is a finite input alphabet, 5 is a transition function from
Q x ~ ~ Q and F is a set of final (accepting) states, a subset of Q. A string is accepted
by such a device, if, starting from qo, the sequence of transitions dictated by the tokens
in the string ends up in one of the final states.
Table 2. ~ function for
parity machine.
J.B. POLLACK
is usually specified as a table which lists a new state for each state and input. As
an example, a machine which accepts boolean strings of odd parity can be specified as
Q = {qo, ql}, Z = {0, 1}, F = {ql}, and 6 as shown in table 2.
Although such machines are usually described with fully explicit tables or graphs, tran-
sition functions can also be specified as a mathematical function of codes for the current
state and the input. For example, variable-length parity can be specifed as the exclusive-or
of the current state and the input, each coded as a single bit. The primary result in the
field of neural networks is that under simplified assumptions, networks have the capacity
to perform arbitrary logical functions, and thus to act as finite-state controllers . In various configurations, modern multilayer feed-forward
networks are also able to perform arbitrary boolean functions . Thus when used recurrently, these networks have the
capacity to be any finite state recognizer as well. The states and tokens are assigned binary
codes (say with one bit indicating which states are in F), and the code for the next state
is simply computed by a set of boolean functions of the codes for current state and current
But the mathematical models for neural nets are "richer" than boolean functions, and
more like polynomials. What does this mean for automata? In order not to confuse theory
and implementation, I will first defne a general mathematical object for language recogni-
tion as a forced discrete-time continuous-space dynamical system plus a precise initial con-
dition and a decision function. The recurrent neural network architecture presented in the
next section is a constrained implementation of this object.
By analogy to a finite-state recognizer, a Dynamical Recognizer is a quadruple {Z, r.,
fl, G}, where Z C R k is a "space" of states and zk(0) is the initial condition. ~ is a finite
input alphabet. ~ is the "dynamic" a parameterized set (one for each token) of transfor-
mations on the space ~ooi:Z ~ Z, and G(Z) ~
{0, 1} is the "decision" function.
Each finite length string of tokens in ~*, al, a2, ... an, has a final state associated with
it, computed by applying a precise sequence of transformations to the initial state: zk(n)
= cooi(...(~%2(60o1(Zk(0))))). The language accepted and generated 1 by a dynamical
recognizer is the set of strings in ~* whose final states pass the decision test.
In the "Mealy Machine" formulation , which I use in the model below,
the decision function applies to the penultimate state and the final token: G(zk(n - 1), an)
{0, 1}. Just as in the case for finite automata, labeling the arcs rather than the nodes
can often result in smaller machines.
There are many variants possible, but both ~2 and G must be constrained to avoid the
vacuous case where some w or G is as powerful as a Turing Machine. For purposes of
this paper, I will assume that G is as weak as a conventional neural network decision func-
tion, e.g., a hyperplane or a convex region, and that each 60 is as weak as a linear or quasi-
linear transformation. G could also be a graded function instead of a forced decision, which
would lead to a "more-or-less" notion of string acceptability, or it could be a function
which returned a more complex categorization or even a representation, in which case
I would be discussing dynamicalparsers. Finally, one could generalize from discrete sym-
bols to continuous symbols , or from discrete-
time to continuous-time systems .
INDUCTION OF DYNAMICAL RECOGNIZERS
There are some difficult questions which can be asked immediately about dynamical
recognizers. What kind of languages can they recognize and generate? How does this
mathematical description compare to various formal grammars on the grounds of parsimony,
efficiency of parsing, neural and psychological plasubility, and learnability? I do not yet
have the definitive answers to these questions, as this paper is the first study, but will touch
on some of these issues later.
One thing is clear from the outset, that even a linear dynamical recognizer model can
function as an arbitrary finite state automaton. The states of the automaton are "embedded"
in a finite dimensional space such that a linear transformation can account for the state
transitions associated with each token. Consider the case where each of k states is a k-
dimensional binary unit vector (a 1-in-k code). Each ~%i is simply a permutation matrix
which "lists" the state transitions for each token, and the decision function is just a logical
mask which selects those states in F. It is perhaps an interesting theoretical question to
determine the minimum dimensionality of such a linear "embedding" for an arbitrary regular
With the introduction of non-linearities, more complex grammars can also be accounted
for. Consider a one-dimensional system where Z is the unit line, zo = 1, G tests if z(n)
> .75, and ~ = {L, R}. If the transformation ~0 L is "multiply z by 0.5" and ~0R is "multi-
ply z by 2 modulo 2" (which only applies when z(i) is 0 or 1), then the recognizer accepts
the balanced parentheses language. In other words, it is just as mathematically possible
to embed an "infinite state machine" in a dynamical recognizer as it is to embed a finite
state machine. I will return to these issues in the conclusion.
To begin to address the question of learnability, I now present and elaborate upon my
earlier work on Cascaded Networks , which were used in a recurrent fashion
to learn parity and depth-limited parenthesis balancing, and to map between word sequences
and propositional representations .
3. The model
A Cascaded Network is a well-behaved higher-order (Sigma-Pi) connectionist architecture
to which the back-propagation technique of weight adjustment 
can be applied. Basically, it consists of two subnetworks in a master-slave relationship:
The function (slave) network is a standard feed-forward network, with or without hidden
layers. However, the weights on the function network are dynamically computed by the
linear context (master) network. A context network has as many outputs as there are weights
in the function network. Thus the input to the context network is used to "multiplex" the
function computed, a divide and conquer heuristic which can make learning easier.
When the outputs of the function network are used as recurrent inputs to the context
network, a system can be built which learns to associate specific outputs for variable length
input sequences. A block diagram of a Sequential Cascaded Network is shown in Figure
1. Because of the multiplicative connections, each input is, in effect, processed by a dif-
ferent function. Given an initial context, zk(0) (all .5's by default), and a sequence of inputs,
J.B. POLLACK
INPUT SEQUENCE
Figure 1. A Sequential Cascaded Network. The outputs of the master net (left) are the weights in the slave net
(right), and the outputs of the slave net are recurrent inputs to the master net.
Yj(O, t = 1...n, the network computes a sequence of output/state vectors, zi(t), t = 1...n
by dynamically changing the set of weights, wij(t). Without hidden units, the forward-pass
computation is:
wij(t) = Z
wok Zk(t- 1)
g(~a wq(t) yj(t))
which reduces to:
zi(t) = g(~
wijk zk(t -
where g(v) = 1/1 + e -v is the usual sigmoid function used in back-propagation systems.
In previous work, I assumed that a teacher could supply a consistent and generalizable
final-output for each member of a set of strings, which turned out to be a significant over-
constraint. In learning a two-state machine like parity, this did not matter, as the 1-bit state
fully determines the output. However, for the case of a higher-dimensional systems, we
may know what the final output of a system should be, but we don't care what its final state is.
Jordan showed how recurrent back-propagation networks could be trained with
"don't care" conditions. If there is no specific target for an output unit during a particular
training example, simply consider its error gradient to be 0. This will work, as long as
that same unit receives feedback from other examples. When the don't-cares line up, the
weights to those units will never change. One possible fix, so-called "Back Propagation
INDUCTION OF DYNAMICAL RECOGNIZERS
through time" , involves a complete unrolling of a recurrent loop
and has had only modest success , probably because of conflicts arising from
equivalence constraints between interdependent layers. My fix involves a single backspace,
unrolling the loop only once. For a particular string, this leads to the calculation of only
one error term for each weight (and thus no conflict) as follows. After propagating the
errors determined on only a subset of the weights from the "acceptance" unit:
da) Za(n) (1 - Za(n)) yj(n)
zk(n -- 1)
The error on the remainder of the weights (OE/Ow~k, i ~
a) is calculated using values
from the penultimate time step:
OWaj k OWaj(n )
The schematic for this mode of back propagation is shown in figure 2, where the gra-
dient calculations for the weights are highlighted. The method applies with small varia-
tions whether or not there are hidden units in the function or context network, and whether
or not the system is trained with a single "accept" bit for desired output, or a larger pattern
 ). The important point is that
the gradients connected to a subset of the outputs are calculated directly, but the gradients
connected to don't-care recurrent states are calculated one step back in time. The forward
and backward calculations are performed over a corpus of variable-length input patterns,
and then all the weights are updated. As the overall squared sum of errors approaches 0,
the network improves its calculation of final outputs for the set of strings in the training
set. At some threshold, for example, when the network responds with above .8 for accept
strings, and below .2 for reject strings, training is halted. The network now classifies the
training set and can be tested on its generalization to a transfer set.
Unfortunately, for language work, the generalization must be infinite.
J.B. POLLACK
Figure 2. The Backspace Trick. Only partial information is available for computing error gradients on the weights,
so the penultimate configuration is used to calculate gradients for the remaining weights.
4. Induction as phase transition
In my original studies of learning the simple regular language of odd parity, I ex-
pected the network to merely implement "exclusive or" with a feedback link. It turns out
that this is not quite enough. Because termination of back-propagation is usually defined
as a 20% error (e.g., logical 'T' is above 0.8), recurrent use of this logic tends to a limit
point. In other words, separation of the finite exemplars is no guarantee that the network
can recognize sequential parity in the limit. Nevertheless, this is indeed possible as illustrated
by the figures below.
A small cascaded network composed of a 1-input 3-output function net (with bias con-
nections, 6 weights for the context net to compute) and a 2-input 6-output context net (with
bias connections, 18 weights) was trained an odd parity of a small set of strings up to length
5 (table 1). Of the 3 outputs, two were fed back recurrently as state, and the third was
used as the accept unit. At each epoch, the weights in the network were saved in a file
for subsequent study. After being trained for about 200 epochs, the network tested suc-
cessfully on much longer strings. But it is important to show that the network is recogniz-
ing parity "in the limit."
In order to observe the limit behavior of a recognizer at various stages of adaptation,
we can observe its response to either ~* or to a very long "characteristic string" (which
INDUCTION OF DYNAMICAL RECOGNIZERS
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
40 50 60 70 80 90 100
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Length of String
Figure 3. Three stages in the adaptation of a network learning parity. (a) the test cases are separated, but there
is a limit point for 1" at about 0.6. (b) after another epoch, the even and odd sequences are slightly separated.
(c) after a little more training, the oscillating cycle is pronounced.
has the best chance of breaking it). For parity, a good characteristic string is the sequence
of l's, which should cause the most state changes. Figure 3 shows three stages in the adap-
tation of a network for parity, by testing the response of three intermediate configurations
to the first 100 strings of 1" In the first figure, despite success at separating the small train-
ing set, a single attractor exists in the limit, so that long strings are indistinguishable. After
another epoch of training, the even and odd strings are slightly separated, and after still
further training, the separation is significant enough to drive a threshold through.
This "phase transition" is shown more completely in figure 4. The vertical axis represents,
again, the network's accept/reject response to characteristic strings, but the horizontal axis
shows the evolution of this response across all 200 epochs. Each vertical column contains
25 (overlapping) dots marking the network's response to the first 25 characteristic strings.
Thus, each "horizontal" line in the graph plots the evolution of the network's response
to one of the 25 strings. Initially, all strings longer than length l are not distinguished.
J.B. POLLACK
./ .......
".._...;:~
"~::~..~-~-. ':'J"-: .-"-~.%L ~,
"- "" ....
~:-'--'!-'=:-.~l'~J,~ .....
~"-'~ - ~ --..:_~:_-.~::-
Figure 4. A bifurcation diagram showing the response of the parity-learner to the first 25 characteristic strings
over 200 epochs of training.
From epoch 60 to epoch 80, the network is improving at separating finite strings. At epoch
84, the network is still failing in the limit, but at epoch 85, the network undergoes a "bifur-
cation" where a small change in weights transforms the network's limit behavior from
limit point to a limit cycle. This phase transition is so "adaptive" to the classification task
that the network rapidly exploits it.
I want to stress that this is a new and very interesting form of mechanical induction.
Before the phase transition, the machine is in principle not capable of performing the serial
parity task; after the phase transition it is, and this change in abilities is rapidly exploited
by adaptive search. This kind of learning dynamic may be related to biological evolution
through natural selection as well as to insight problem-solving (the "aha" phenomenon).
The induction is not "one shot" or instantaneous, but more like a "punctuated equilibria"
in evolution, where a "pre-adaptive" capacity enables a population some advantage which
then drives very rapid change. Metcalfe & Wiebe report psychological experiments
on insight problems in which human subjects measurably undergo a similar cognitive phase
transition, reporting no progress on the problems until the solution appears.
5. Benchmarking results
Connectionist and other machine learning algorithms are, unfortunately, very sensitive to
the statistical properties of the set of exemplars which make up the learning environment
or data-set. When researchers develop their own learning environments, there is a difficult
methodological issue bearing on the status of repetitive data-set refinement, especially when
experimental results bear on psychologically measured statistics, or the evolution of the
INDUCTION OF DYNAMICAL RECOGNIZERS
data-set is considered too irrelevant to publish. This has correctly led some researchers
to include the learning environment as a variable to manipulate . Besides this complicated path, the other methodologically clean choices are to use
"real world" noisy data, to choose data once and never refine it, or to use someone else's
published training data, For this paper, I chose to use someone else's.
Tomita performed elegant experiments in inducing finite automata from positive
and negative exemplars. He used a genetically inspired two-step hill-climbing procedure,
which manipulated 9-state automata by randomly adding, deleting or moving transitions,
or inverting the acceptability of a state. Starting with a random machine, the current machine
was compared to a mutated machine, and changed only when an improvement was made
in the result of a heuristic evaluation function. The first hill-climber used an evaluation
function which maximized the difference between the number of positive examples ac-
cepted and the number of negative examples accepted. The second hill-climber used an
evaluation function which maintained correctness of the examples while minimizing the
automaton's description (number of states, then number of transitions) Tomita did not ran-
domly choose his test cases, but instead, chose them consistently with seven regular
languages he had in mind (see table 4). The difficulty of these problems lies not in the
languages Tomlta had in mind, but in the arbitrary and impoverished data sets he used.
Table 3. Training data for seven languages from Tomita .
SetlAccept
10101010101010
S~ 2 Reje~
INDUCTION OF DYNAMICAL RECOGNIZERS
Table 3. (cont.)
Set 6 Accept
Set 6 Reject
0111101111
101111011111
1001001001
Set 7 Accept
Set 7 Reject
00110011000
0101010101
100100110101
0000100001111
011111011111
Each training environment was simply defined by two sets of boolean strings, which are
given in table 3. For uniformity, I ran all seven cases, as given, on a sequential cascaded
network of a 1-input 4-output function network (with bias connections, making 8 weights
for the context net to compute) and a 3-input 8-output context network with bias connec-
tions. The total of 32 context weights are essentially arranged as a 4 by 2 by 4 array. Only
three of the outputs of the function net were fed back to the context network, while the
fourth output unit was used as the accept bit. The standard back-propagation learning rate
was set to 0.3 and the momentum to 0.7. All 32 weights were rest to random numbers be-
tween ___0.5 for each run. Training was halted when all accept strings returned output bits
above 0.8 and reject strings below 0.2.
J.B, POLLACK
Table 4. Minimal regular languages for the seven training sets.
Language #
Description
no odd zero strings after odd 1 strings
pairwise, an even sum of 01's and 10's
number of rs - number of O's = 0 mod 3
5.L Results
Of Tomita's 7 cases, all but data-sets #2 and #6 converged without a problem in several
hundred epochs. Case 2 would not converge, and kept treating negative case 110101010
as correct; I had to modify the training set (by adding reject strings 110 and 11010) in
order to overcome this problem. Case 6 took several restarts and thousands of cycles to
In the spirit of the machine learning community, I recently ran a series of experiments
to make these results more empirical. Table 5 compares Tomita's stage one "number of
mutations" to my "average nmnber of epochs." Because back-propagation is sensitive to
initial conditions , running each problem once does not give a
good indication of its difficulty, and running it many times from different random starting
weights can result in widely disparate timings. So I ran each problem 10 times, up to 1000
epochs, and average only those runs which separated the training sets (accepts above .6;
rejects below .4). The column labeled "% Convergent" shows the percent of the 10 runs
for each problem which separated the accept and reject strings within 100 cycles. Although
it is difficult to compare results between completely different methods, taken together, the
average epochs and the percent convergent numbers give a good idea of the difficulty of
the Tomita data-sets for my learning architecture.
Table 5. Performance comparison between Tomita's Hill-climber and Pollack's model (Backprop).
No. Mutations
Avg. Epochs
% Convergent
(Hill-Climber)
(Backprop)
(Backprop)
INDUCTION OF DYNAMICAL RECOGNIZERS
5.2. Analysis
Tomita ran a brute-force enumeration to find the minimal automaton for each language,
and verified that his hill-climber was able to find them. These are displayed in Figure 5.
Unfortunately, I ran into some difficulty trying to figure out exactly which finite state auto-
mata (and regular languages) were being induced by my architecture.
For this reason, in figure 6, I present "prefixes" of the languages recognized and generated
by the seven first-run networks. Each rectangle assigns a number, 0 (white) or 1 (black),
Figure 5. The minimal FSA~s recognizing Tomita's 7 data sets.
J.B. POLLACK
Figure 6 Recursive rectangle figures for the 7 induced languages. See text for detail.
INDUCTION OF DYNAMICAL RECOGNIZERS
Figure 6 (cont.)
J.B. POLLACK
Figure 6 (cont.)
to all boolean strings up to length 9 (which is the limit of visibility), and thus indicates,
in black, the strings which are accepted by the respective network. Starting at the top of
each rectangle, each row r contains 2 r subrectangles for all the strings of length r in lex-
ical order, so the subrectangle for each string is sitting right below its prefix. The top left
subrectangle shows a number for the string 0, and the top right shows a number for the
string 1. Below the subrectangle for 0 are the subrectangtes for the strings 00 and 01, and
so on. The training sets (table 4) are also indicated in these figures, as inverted "X's" in
the subrectangles corresponding to the training strings.
Note that although the figures display some simple recursive patterns, none of the ideal
minimal automata were induced by the architecture. Even for the first language 1", a 0
followed by a long string of l's would be accepted by the network. My architecture generally
has the problem of not inducing "trap" or error states. It can be argued that other FSA
inducing methods get around this problem by presupposing rather than learning the trap
If the network is not inducing the smallest consistent FSA, what is it doing? The physical
constraint that an implemented network use finitely specified weights means that the states
and their transitions cannot be arbitrary--there must be some geometric relationship among
Based upon the studies of parity, my initial hypothesis was that a set of clusters would
be found, organized in some geometric fashion: i.e., an embedding of a finite state machine
into a fmite dimensional geometry such that each token's transitions would correspond to
a simple transformation of space. I wrote a program which examined the state space of
these networks by recursively taking each unexplored state and combining it with both 0
and 1 inputs. A state here is a 3-dimensional vector, values of the three recurrently used
output units. To remove floating-point noise, the program used a parameter e and only
counted states in each e-cube once. Unfortunately, some of the machines seemed to grow
drastically in size as e was lowered. In particular, Figure 7 shows the log-log graph of the
number of unique states versus e for the machine resulting from training environment 7.
Using the method of this set was found to have a correla-
tion dimension of 1.4--good evidence that it is "fractal."
INDUCTION OF DYNAMICAL RECOGNIZERS
Round-off distance
Figure 7. The number of states in the 7th machine grew dramatically as e was lowered.
Because the states of the benchmark networks are "in a box" 
of low dimension, we can view these machines graphically to gain some understanding
of how the state space is being arranged. Each 3-d vector is plotted as a point in the unit
cube. Partial graphs of the state spaces for the first-run networks are shown in Figure 8.
States were computed for all boolean strings up to and including length 10, so each figure
contains 2048 points, often overlapping.
The images (a) and (d) are what I initially expected, clumps of points which closely
map to states of equivalent FSAs. Images (b) and (e) have limit "ravines" which can each
be considered states as well. However, the state spaces, (c), (f), and (g) of the dynamical
recognizers for Tomita cases 3, 6, and 7, are interesting, because, theoretically, they are
infinite state machines, where the states are not arbitrary or random, requiring an infinite
table of transitions, but are constrained in a powerful way by mathematical principle.
In thinking about such a principle, consider systems in which extreme observed com-
plexity emerges from algorithmic simplicity plus computational power. When I first saw
some of the state space graphs (Figure 8), they reminded me of Barnsley's Iterated Func-
tional Systems , where a compactly coded set of affine transformations
is used to iteratively construct displays of fractals, previously described recursively using
line-segment rewrite rules . The calculation is simply the repetitive
transformation (and plotting) of a state vector by a sequence of randomly chosen affine
transformations. In the infinite limit of this process, fractal "attractors" emerge (e.g., the
widely reproduced fern).4
By eliminating the sigmoid, commuting the yj and zk terms in Eq. 1:
Wijk yj(t)) xk(t -- 1)
J.B. POLLACK
Figure & Images of the state spaces for the 7 Tomita training environments. Each box contains 2048 points, the
states corresponding to all boolean strings up to length 10.
and treating the yj's as an infinite random sequence of binary unit vectors (1-in-j codes),
the forward pass calculation for my network can be seen as the same process used in an
Iterated Function System (IFS). Thus, my figures of state-spaces, which emerge from the
projection of ~* into Z, are fractal attractors, as defined by Barnsley.
6. Related work
The architecture and learning paradigm I used is also being studied by Lee Giles and col-
leagues, and is closely related to the work of Elman and Servan-Schreiber et al on Simple
Recurrent Networks. Both architectures rely on extending Jordan's recurrent networks in
a direction which separates visible output states from hidden recurrent states, without making
INDUCTION OF DYNAMICAL RECOGNIZERS
~. {i".'.i::-.
Figure 8. (cont.)
the unstable "back-propagation through time" assumption. Besides our choice of language
data to model, the two main differences are that:
(1) They use a "predictive" paradigm, where error feedback is provided at every time step
in the computation, and I used a "classification" paradigm, feeding back only at the
end of the given examples. Certainly, the predictive paradigm is more psychologically
plausible as a model of positive only presentation (c.f., Culicover & Wexler, pp. 63-65),
but the Tomita learning environments are much more impoverished.
I have no commitment to negative information; all that is required is some desired
output which discriminates among the input strings in a generalizable way. Positive
versus negative evidence is merely the simplest way (with 1 bit) to provide this
discrimination.
(2) They use a single layer (first order) recurrence between states, whereas I use a higher
order (quadratic) recurrence. The multiplicative connections are what enable my model
to have "fractal" dynamics equivalent in the limit to an IFS, and it may be that the
LB. POLLACK
first-order recurrence, besides being too weak for general boolean functions and thus for arbitrary regular languages (such as parity), also results
only in simple steady-state or periodic dynamics.
Besides continued analysis, scaling the network up beyond binary symbol alphabets and
beyond syntax, immediate follow-up work will involve comparing and contrasting our respec-
tive models with the other two possible models, a higher order network trained on predic-
tion, and a simple recurrent network model trained on classification.
7. Conclusion
If we take a state space picture of the one-dimensional dynamical recognizer for paren-
thesis balancing developed earlier, it looks like Figure 9. An infinite state machine is em-
bedded in a finite geometry using "fractal" self-similarity, and the decision function is
cutting through this set. The emergence of these fractal attractors is interesting because
I believe it bears on the question of how neural-like systems could achieve the power to
handle more than regular languages.
This is a serious question for connectionism to answer, because since Chomsky ,
it has been firmly established that regular languages, recognizable by Markov chains, finite-
state machines, and other simple iterative/associative means, are inadequate to parsimon-
iously describe the syntactic structures of natural languages. Certain phenomena, such as
center embedding, are more compactly described by context-free grammars which are
recognized by Push-down Automata, whereas other phenomena, such as crossed-serial
dependencies and agreement, are better described by context-sensitive grammars, recognized
by Linear Bounded Automata.
On the one hand, it is quite clear that human languages are not formal, and thus are
only analogically related to these mathematical syntactic structures. This might lead con-
nectionists to erroneously claim that recursive computational power is not of the "essence
of human computation ?'5 It is also quite clear that without understanding these complexity
issues, connectionists can stumble again and again into the trap of making strong claims
for their models, easy to attack for not offering an adequate replacement for established
theory. . But it is only because of "long-
term lack of competition" that descriptive theories involving rules and representations can
be defended as explanatory theories. Here is an alternative hypothesis for complex syntac-
tic structure:
The state-space limit of a dynamical recognizer, as ~* --* ~, is an Attractor, which
is cut by a threshold (or similar decision) function. The complexity of the generated
language is regular if the cut falls between disjoint lim# points or cycles, context-
free if it cuts a "self-similar" (reeursive) region, and context-sensitive if it cuts a
"chaotic" (pseudo-random) region.
There is certainly substantial need for work on the theoretical front to more thoroughly
formalize and prove or disprove the six main theorems implied by my hypothesis. I do
INDUCTION OF DYNAMICAL RECOGNIZERS
... ..........................
_.t'.,~" X~," - "'ms"""""" "" "'. ,.~-" """
"'"--..~."'"'"
-~.~,. ,r. ,'-..
....... g0 1
. ...........
"-.-... ....
"'--. .........
| ...............
°'"'"'-....
... .-'''"'"
"'- .............................................
Figure 9. Slicing through the "fractal" state space of the balanced parenthesis dynamical recogmzer.
not expect the full range of context-free or context sensitive systems to be covered by con-
ventional quasi-linear processing constraints, and the question remains wide open as to
whether the syntactic systems which can be described by neural dynamical recognizers
have any convergence with the needs of natural language systems.
Because information processing provides the "essence" of complex forms of cognition,
like language, it is important to understand the relationship between complex emergent
behaviors of dynamical systems (including neural systems) and traditional notions of com-
putational complexity, including the Chomsky hierarchy as well as algorithmic informa-
tion theory , but the study of this relationship is still in its infancy.
In , I constructed a Turing Machine out of connectionist parts, and essen-
tially showed that rational values, constants, precise thresholds, and multiplicative con-
nections (all used in the sequential cascaded network architecture) were sufficient primitives
for computationally universal recurrent neural networks.
Cellular Automata, which we might view as a kind of low-density, synchronous, uniform,
digital restriction of neural networks, have been studied as dynamical systems and proven to be as powerful as universal Turing Machines, e.g., . Furthermore, has shown that there are simple mathematical
models for dynamical systems which are also universal, and it follows directly that deter-
mination of the behavior of such dynamical systems in the limit is undecidable and un-
predictable, even with precise initial conditions. In stronger terms, the theoretical founda-
tions of computer and information science may be in accord with the lack of predictability
in the universe.
Finally, Crutchfield and Young have studied the computational complexity of
dynamical systems reaching the onset of chaos via period-doubling. They have shown that
these systems are not regular, but are finitely described by Indexed Context-Free Grammars.
It may, of course, be just a coincidence that several modern computational linguistic gram-
matical theories also fall in this class .
In conclusion, I have merely illuminated the possibility of the existence of a naturalistic
alternative to explicit recursive rules as a description for the complexity of language. Such
a mathematical description would be compact, "parsimonious" in fact, since the infinite
state machine does not require infinite description, but only a finitely described set of
weights. It was shown to be feasible to learn this type of description from a finite set of
J.B. POLLACK
examples using pseudo-continuous hill-climbing parameter-adaptation (in other words, back-
propagation). However, performance in the limit appears to jump in discrete steps, induc-
tive phase transitions which might correspond to psychological "stages" of acquisition.
Finally, the languages so described can be recognized and generated efficiently by neural
computation systems.
Acknowledgments
This work has been partially sponsored by the Office of Naval Research under grant
N00014-89-J-1200. Thanks to the numerous colleagues who have discussed and/or criticized
various aspects of this work or my presentation of it, including: T. Bylander, B. Chan-
drasekaran, J. Crutchfield, L. Giles, E. Gurari, S. Hanson, R. Kasper, J. Kolen, W. Ogden,
T. Patten, R. Port, K. Supowit, P. Smolensky, D.S. Touretzky, and A. Zwicky.
1. To turn a recognizer into a generator, simply enumerate the strings in ~* and filter out those the recognizer
2. For the simple low dimensional dynamical systems usually studied, the "'knob" or control parameter for
such a bifurcation diagram is a scalar variable; here the control parameter is the entire 32-D vector of weights
in the network, and back-propagation turns the knob.
3. Tomita assumed a trap state which did not mutate, and compared the incom-
ing token to a thresholded set of token predictions, trapping if the token was not predicted.
4. Barnsley's use of the term "attractor" is different than the conventional use of the term given in the introduc-
tion, yet is technically correct in that it refers to the "limit" of an iterative process. It can be thought of
as what happens when you randomly drop an infinite number of microscopic iron filing "points" onto a
piece of paper with a magnetic field lying under it; each point will land "on" the underlying attractor.
5. , p. 119.