JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
Context-aware Recommender Systems for
Learning: a Survey and Future Challenges
Katrien Verbert, Member, IEEE, Nikos Manouselis, Member, IEEE, Xavier Ochoa, Martin Wolpers,
Hendrik Drachsler, Ivana Bosnic, Student Member, IEEE and Erik Duval, Member, IEEE
Abstract—Recommender systems have been researched extensively by the Technology Enhanced Learning (TEL) community during
the last decade. By identifying suitable resources from a potentially overwhelming variety of choices, such systems offer a promising
approach to facilitate both learning and teaching tasks. As learning is taking place in extremely diverse and rich environments,
the incorporation of contextual information about the user in the recommendation process has attracted major interest. Such
contextualization is researched as a paradigm for building intelligent systems that can better predict and anticipate the needs of
users, and act more efﬁciently in response to their behavior. In this paper, we try to assess the degree to which current work in
TEL recommender systems has achieved this, as well as outline areas in which further work is needed. First, we present a context
framework that identiﬁes relevant context dimensions for TEL applications. Then, we present an analysis of existing TEL recommender
systems along these dimensions. Finally, based on our survey results, we outline topics on which further research is needed.
Index Terms—Adaptive and Intelligent Educational Systems, Personalized E-Learning, System Applications and Experience.
INTRODUCTION
Recommender systems have been researched and deployed extensively over the last decade in various application areas, including e-commerce and e-health. Several
recommendation algorithms, such as content-based ﬁltering , collaborative ﬁltering , knowledge-based
ﬁltering and their hybridizations , are widely
discussed in the literature and in several surveys of the
state-of-the-art .
Also in the Technology Enhanced Learning (TEL)
domain, the deployment of recommender systems has
attracted increased interest during the past years. This
interest is reﬂected in the growth of dedicated workshops and special issues on Social Information Retrieval
 and Recommender Systems for TEL and is
well justiﬁed. Whereas Google and other search engines
are bound to have a higher recall as they index most of
• K.Verbert and E. Duval are with the KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
E-mail: katrien.verbert, 
• N. Manouselis is with Agro-Know Technologies, Greece and Universidad
de Alcala, Spain
E-mail: 
• X. Ochoa is with the Escuela Superior Polit´ecnica del Litoral (ESPOL),
Guayaquil, Ecuador
E-mail: 
• M. Wolpers is with the Fraunhofer-Institut f¨ur Angewandte Informationstechnik FIT, Sankt Augustin, Germany
E-mail: 
• H. Drachsler is with the Open Universiteit Nederland, Heerlen, Nederland
E-mail: 
• I. Bosnic is with the University of Zagreb, Croatia
E-mail: 
what is available on the Web, their precision for learning
is low . It is difﬁcult to express a speciﬁc learning
requirement through keywords. For example, search engines do a poor job when a learner needs content about
”relativity theory”, oriented to high school level, with a
duration of about 30 minutes. Finding relevant resources
can be even more difﬁcult when requirements are not
always fully known by the learner, such as her level of
competence or adequate technical format.
Recommender systems for learning try to address
these challenges - i.e. they attempt to ﬁlter content
for different learning settings. A recent survey of recommender systems in TEL has been elaborated by
Manouselis et al. . The authors presented an extensive overview of TEL recommender systems. In addition,
evaluation perspectives on current research in this area
and future challenges with respect to the evaluation of
TEL recommenders were discussed.
The notion of context has started to attract signiﬁcant
attention in this research, as indicated by contributions
to a recent special issue on context-aware recommender
systems . Among others, advancements of network
and mobile services and the growing tool and device
landscape provide many new opportunities for the TEL
domain to adjust itself to this landscape appropriately
 . A new set of recommender systems for learning
has been developed in recent years to demonstrate the
potential of contextual recommendation.
From an operational perspective, context is often de-
ﬁned as an aggregate of various categories that describe
the setting in which a recommender is deployed, such
as the location, current activity and available time of the
learner. A ﬁrst example of a context-aware recommender
system for learning considers the location of the user and
the noise level at this location as a basis to suggest learn-
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
ing resources . If the learner is in a cafeteria, the noise
level associated to this location might have an impact on
her level of concentration and likelihood of interruption.
Therefore, a contextual recommender would in such a
context suggest learning activities to assess her knowledge on previously learned topics, e.g. through simple
questionnaires that she can resume easily at a later point
in time. A second example considers proximity between
learners to support collaborative learning . If a contextual recommender is able to detect people nearby who
are working on similar learning activities, the system
can suggest suitable peer learners to collaborate with.
A third example also takes into account the device
that the learner is currently using . For example,
if a learner is being recommended material to study
the theory of relativity while commuting from work to
school using a smartphone, short, audiovisual material
that ﬁts the screen of the smartphone should be more
relevant than a long, text-only document. Accordingly,
the recommender system should rank the short videos
higher than the long documents. This re-ranking of the
recommended resources is not possible if the system
does not know about the context of the user.
In this perspective, new challenges emerge for capturing and understanding context and exploiting such information for creating intelligent recommendations adapted
to current learner needs, without her being necessarily
aware of the fact that such contextual variables (e.g. the
noise level) are measured and taken into consideration.
In this article, we try to particularly investigate the way
in which contextual information may be used by TEL
recommender systems, as well as to assess the current
maturity of work in this area. The research contribution
of this article is threefold:
1) First, we present a context framework for contextual recommendation in TEL. This framework
identiﬁes relevant context dimensions for TEL applications.
2) Second, the framework is used to drive an in-depth
analysis of context-aware TEL recommenders.
3) Finally, based on an analysis of existing contextaware recommender systems, we outline directions
of future research in this area.
In contrast to earlier surveys on recommender systems
for learning , this article focuses speciﬁcally on a
particular set of recommender systems that incorporate
contextual information in the recommendation process.
As outlined by the context-aware recommendation community, much work is needed to advance this ﬁeld
 . We discuss the challenges that this community has
identiﬁed in recent years, as well as how these challenges
can be tackled for the TEL ﬁeld.
The article is organized as follows: ﬁrst, we present
relevant background that situates this work within existing research on context-aware recommender systems.
We also discuss particularities of the TEL application
domain in this ﬁeld. Then, we present a context framework for TEL that is used to drive the analysis of recommender systems. An analysis of existing context-aware
recommender systems for learning along the dimensions
of our context framework is presented in Section 4. Finally, we present future challenges for the development
and evaluation of context-aware recommender systems
for learning that are able to generate recommendations
adapted to the current contextual needs of the user.
BACKGROUND
TEL and Recommendation
Technology enhanced learning aims to design, develop
and test socio-technical innovations that will support
and enhance learning practices of both individuals and
organizations . It is therefore a domain that generally
covers technologies to support teaching and learning
activities, including recommendation technologies that
facilitate retrieval of relevant learning resources. In this
section, we discuss particularities of the TEL domain for
recommendation and existing work in this area.
Particularities of TEL for Recommendation
Recommender systems are an extensively studied and
well established ﬁeld of research and application .
Major search engines like Google and electronic shops
like Amazon have incorporated recommendation technology in their services in order to personalize their
results. Unfortunately, the algorithms underlying regular
recommender systems are not directly transferable to the
area of TEL. The TEL area offers some speciﬁc characteristics that are not met by today’s general purpose
recommendation approaches .
The main difference is, of course, that each learner
uses her own tools, methods, paths, collaborations and
processes. Consequently, guidance within the learning
process must be personalized to an extreme extent. For
example, rather than recommending resources that other
users with similar interests have used, the recommendation must also respect the actual learning situation of
the learner, including the learning history, environment,
timing and accessible resources.
Furthermore, learning activities take place in learning
environments that are composed of numerous tools and
systems. For example, learning management systems
(LMS) as a notion of learning environments provide
access to learning resources and collaboration facilities,
but do not ensure that teachers or students of a course
use them only. Often, learners use additional tools to
collaborate or ﬁnd resources - for instance, in case that
the learning material offered in the LMS is not sufﬁcient.
Adaptive learning environments (ALEs) address this
issue by providing support for personalized access to
learning material . Such systems often track learner
progress and provide adaptive page content, for instance
to automatically compensate for missing prerequisite
knowledge. In addition, personal learning environments
(PLEs) enable learners to compile the tools they
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
want to address a learning challenge. PLEs also offer the
advantage of capturing the learning activity to a greater
extent than an LMS can .
Learning situations become even more complex due
to the fact that pedagogical approaches differentiate
between formal and informal learning processes. Both
have different requirements for the learning environment
and, as such, for the recommendation within the environment. Often, it is not possible to draw a clear line between formal and informal learning scenarios. For example, recommender systems need to deal with the tension
of recommendations for activities liked by the learner
and those required by the teacher . Consequently,
the need for massive amounts of data about the user and
her activities within all of her learning environments is
necessary to facilitate precise recommendations.
This leads to the problem of usage data availability. Many recommendation algorithms rely on massive
amounts of usage data from numerous users to make
precise recommendations. In TEL, this situation often
does not occur. Instead, many learning activities take
place with only a few learners participating. This situation occurs in both formal and informal learning settings,
e.g. in courses or in learning networks that
assemble and dissolve continuously.
At least some tailoring of the respective approach is
necessary. In this article, we outline how such tailoring is
possible by taking the context of the learner into account
in a much more speciﬁc way than applied in today’s
recommendation approaches. First, we present a brief
overview of existing TEL recommender systems that
rely on traditional recommendation algorithms. Then,
we discuss context deﬁnitions and existing research on
the incorporation of contextual information in the recommendation process.
TEL Recommender Systems
Recommender systems in TEL are quite diverse. A recent
survey of recommender systems in TEL has been presented by Manouselis et al. . Most systems suggest
learning resources and/or people who can
help with a learning activity. Course recommenders 
typically provide advice to learners on courses to enroll
in. Several social navigation systems rely on
recommendation techniques to suggest resource sequences.
While not traditionally considered as recommender systems, Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) use information about the learner to suggest personalized hints
while she is solving a problem.
Recommender systems usually rely on collaborative
ﬁltering, content-based ﬁltering, knowledge-based ﬁltering or hybrid recommendation algorithms. A discussion of the advantages and drawbacks of the various
techniques for TEL has been presented in . These
algorithms use information about users and resources to
generate recommendations. Interestingly, most TEL recommender systems rely on proﬁles of learners or teachers that describe additional information as opposed to
interests or preferences only. The knowledge level of the
learner is often used to personalize recommendations,
such as her knowledge of course concepts or past
academic grades . Learning styles are also considered
by some recommender systems in TEL , often
based on the Felder-Silverman inventory.
Similarly, many systems rely on resource proﬁles that
describe multiple attributes of resources. In addition to
general characteristics like keywords, title and author,
many systems use educational metadata that describe for
instance the difﬁculty level of a resource. This difﬁculty
level is then used to recommend resources according
to the knowledge level of the learner. In addition, the
interactivity level, resource type (e.g. question, deﬁnition
or case study) and intended end-user role of the resource
are often considered. These attributes are used to suggest
different types of resources that are appropriate for the
learning activity. Technical characteristics like the format
of resources as well as annotation metadata that capture
comments from users are also used. CoFIND for
instance relies on metadata that describe what users
value in a resource. Examples deﬁned by the authors
are ”detailed” or ”simple to understand”.
Although multiple attributes are often considered, additional context dimensions (such as the current location,
current activity or device) are not incorporated in most
of these systems. In this article, we investigate the way
in which such additional contextual information may be
used by TEL recommender systems.
Context in TEL
One of the most cited deﬁnitions of context is the definition of Dey et al. that deﬁnes context as ”any
information that can be used to characterize the situation
of an entity. An entity is a person, place, or object that is
considered relevant to the interaction between a user and an
application, including the user and applications themselves”.
This deﬁnition is referenced extensively within various
application domains, including by researchers in TEL
 . Dourish suggests that context has a dual
origin: (1) technical and (2) social science based. From
a social perspective, Dourish argues that context is not
something that describes a setting or situation, but rather
a feature of interaction. Researchers in TEL have argued
that this user-centred emphasis on factors affecting an
activity is precisely what makes this notion of context
meaningful for learning . From a technical perspective, there is a need to deﬁne context in a more
speciﬁc way as an operational term . To operationalize context, researchers have attempted to deﬁne context
by enumerating categories. Early work of Schilit et al.
 divided context in three categories:
• computing context, such as network connectivity,
communication costs, and communication bandwidth, and nearby resources such as printers, displays and workstations;
• user context, such as the proﬁle of the user, location,
people nearby and social situation;
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
• physical context, such as lighting, noise levels, trafﬁc
conditions and temperature.
Chen and Kotz added time as a fourth context
category. Schmidt et al. added a task category and
deﬁne the following dimensions: the user, the social
environment of the user, tasks, location, infrastructure, physical conditions and time. Zimmermann et al. list
individuality, activity, location, time and relations as fundamental context categories. Individuality is subdivided
into four elements: natural entity, human entity, artiﬁcial
entity and group entity. This deﬁnition is one of the most
comprehensive context deﬁnitions to date.
In TEL, such enumerations have also been proposed as
an attempt to deﬁne the context of the learner or teacher
as an operational term. Many enumerations are deﬁned
for mobile learning applications. Berri et al. distinguish between technical and learner context elements.
The ﬁrst category deals with the technical aspects of
mobile devices and their operational environment, including the capacity and bandwidth of the wireless network,
and input (i.e. keypad) and output (i.e. small screen)
constraints. The second category deﬁnes learner context
elements, including aims and objectives of the learner,
prerequisites, background, current level of understanding and
subject domain. Beale and Lonsdale argue that it is
essential to capture interactions between the environment,
the user, their tasks, and other users. Environment constitutes computing, time and physical context characteristics.
Wang deﬁnes six dimensions: identity, time, facility,
activity, location, and community.
Derntl and Hummel deﬁne world context that
constitutes location and date and time, physical context (persons, books, journals, learning equipment), digital context
(e-papers, e-collaborations, e-learning services), device
context (hardware, software, connectivity) and learner
information context (personal information such as name,
expertise and interests and task speciﬁc information).
The learner information dimension therefore covers both
activity and user dimensions of other deﬁnitions. Li et
al. deﬁne ﬁve context dimensions: who (user), what
(object), how (activities), where (location) and when (time).
Many other deﬁnitions typically list three or four context dimensions. Further examples include deﬁnitions
of Schmidt , Tankelevi˘ciene and Dama˘sevi˘cius ,
Kurti and Hu and Moore .
Fig. 1 presents how these deﬁnitions relate to each
other. The columns are derived from elements that researchers have tried to classify as context categories and
the rows show the different context deﬁnitions. Whereas
the terminology and scope of elements differ signiﬁcantly, there is also a lot of overlap between existing
context deﬁnitions. The ﬁrst four deﬁnitions from Shilit
et al. , Chen and Kotz , Schmidt et al. and
Zimmermann et al. are generic deﬁnitions of context that have been used in many application domains.
The other deﬁnitions have been proposed by researchers
in TEL. Most of these deﬁnitions refer to similar context
categories as deﬁned by generic deﬁnitions: location,
time, computing, user, activity and social relations. Physical
conditions, such as lighting and noise level, are deﬁned
less often in a TEL context. In contrast, resource context
(including both physical and digital resources that are
relevant to the user) is used more often within TEL
applications.
Although the scope of context categories differs (i.e.
some deﬁnitions specify only a few categories that cover
several elements whereas other deﬁnitions attempt to
deﬁne context categories more precisely), there are many
similarities between the context deﬁnitions. The alignment in Fig. 1 presents how the existing context deﬁnitions relate to each. Such an alignment can be used to
identify the meaning of context elements across different
context-aware TEL applications and can be used to de-
ﬁne mappings between contextual data representations.
In Section 3, we present a context framework for learning
that uniﬁes the various deﬁnitions and that attempts to
deﬁne context categories and data elements within these
categories in a uniform and precise way.
Context-aware Recommender Systems
Traditionally, collaborative, content-based, knowledgebased and hybrid recommender systems deal with two
types of entities, users and items. As discussed in Section
2.1.1, TEL applications have inherent additional complexities and may not ﬁt well into the traditional twodimensional user/item approach based on ratings only.
Of interest for TEL recommenders is the incorporation of
additional information about learners and teachers and
their context in the recommendation process. Such data
can be used to adapt recommendations based on individual learner characteristics, such as learning goals and
knowledge levels, and additional contextual information
such as available time, location, people nearby, etc.
Pioneering work on context-aware recommender systems (CARS) has been done by Adomavicius and
Tuzhilin . The authors researched approaches where
the traditional user/item paradigm was extended to
support additional dimensions capturing the context
in which recommendations are made. Such contextual
information can be obtained in a number of ways:
• Explicit context capturing relies on manual input
from users. Registration modules are often used to
capture information of users or rating modules are
used to retrieve interests and preferences.
• Implicit methods capture contextual information automatically from the environment, for instance by
obtaining the current location or device type.
• Contextual information can also be inferred by analyzing user interactions with tools and resources,
for instance to estimate the current task of the user.
Different paradigms have been proposed to incorporate contextual information in the recommendation process. A ﬁrst recommendation via context-driven querying and
search approach uses contextual information to query or
search a certain repository of resources (e.g., restaurants)
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
Fig. 1. Context deﬁnitions
and presents the best matching resources (e.g., nearby
restaurants that are currently open) to the user. A second
contextual preference elicitation and estimation approach
is a more recent trend in context-aware recommender
system research. This approach attempts to model and
learn contextual user preferences. These recommender
systems are built on knowledge of partial contextual user
preferences and typically deal with data records of the
form <user, item, context, rating>. Each record therefore
captures how much a user liked a particular item in a
speciﬁc context (e.g. weekend or weekday).
Three approaches have been identiﬁed to deal with
such contextual preferences. In a contextual pre-ﬁltering
approach, contextual information is used to ﬁlter the
dataset before applying a traditional recommendation
algorithm. In a contextual post-ﬁltering approach, recommendations are generated on the entire dataset. The
resulting set of recommendations is adjusted using the
contextual information. Contextual modeling approaches
use contextual information directly in the recommendation function as an explicit predictor of a rating for an
item. Whereas contextual pre-ﬁltering and post-ﬁltering
approaches can use traditional recommendation algorithms, the contextual modeling approach uses multidimensional recommendation algorithms. Examples of
heuristic-based and model-based approaches have been
described in .
Several contextual recommender systems have been
developed that use these paradigms in various application domains. Examples include context-aware recommender systems that suggest gas stations to a driver
of a car , contextualized media delivery systems
 and intelligent tourist guides . For example,
COMPASS is a recommender system that uses a
context-driven querying and search approach to provide
a tourist with information about nearby monuments,
hotels and people. In an evaluation experiment, time and
location were used to contextualize recommendations.
Interestingly, the authors report that ’last time visited’
had a negative inﬂuence on the perceived usefulness of
the system. These results illustrate that careful analysis
of data that is taken into account is necessary when
deploying contextualization algorithms.
The inﬂuence of various parameters on the recommendation process is therefore currently of major interest.
This challenge has been identiﬁed by several authors.
Yujie and Licai outline that it is difﬁcult to describe
clearly and uniformly what types of contexts are truly
needed in CARS because of the variety of application
scenarios and user needs. Discovering valid context types
and instances and then implementing them are therefore
serious challenges that CARS should face and resolve.
Adomavicius et al. identify the development of highperforming context-aware recommender systems and testing
them on practical applications as an important challenge.
They argue that most work on context-aware recommender systems has been conceptual, where a certain
method has been developed, tested on some (often limited) data, and shown to perform well in comparison
to certain benchmarks. Among others, they argue that
there has been little work done on developing novel
data structures and new system architectures for CARS
that incorporate context sensors and various ﬁlters and
converters in a modular fashion. A third important
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
challenge is the evaluation and lack of publicly available
datasets . In order to assess the impact of various
contextual parameters, datasets are needed that contain
contextual data. The interest in this area is reﬂected by
the organization of several workshops and challenges
related to, among others, contextual movie recommendation that have been organized in recent years .
Overall, the ﬁeld of context-aware recommender systems is promising, but much work is needed to explore
it comprehensively. In this article, we explore the challenges outlined above for the development of CARS for
learning. As a ﬁrst step in this direction, we deﬁne a context framework for TEL that identiﬁes relevant context
categories for the analysis and development of CARS for
learning. Then, we present an analysis of CARS that have
been deployed in recent years within the TEL domain. In
particular, we focus on context dimensions that are used
to contextualize recommendations, context sensors that
capture contextual information, contextual recommendation algorithms and evaluation methods and results.
A CONTEXT FRAMEWORK FOR TEL
The need to deﬁne and model context more precisely
and in a consistent way has been identiﬁed by several
researchers . A precise deﬁnition and model of
context can facilitate the identiﬁcation of what does and
does not constitute context and can enable re-use and
exchange of contextual data across applications.
To this extent, we introduce a simple classiﬁcation
of context information that is relevant to context-aware
applications in TEL. This classiﬁcation was constructed
by the analysis and integration of existing context definitions. The categories and their context elements are
detailed in this section. The classiﬁcation is by no means
exhaustive, but attempts to deﬁne context elements in
a precise way. We also identify relevant standards and
speciﬁcations that can be used to represent data elements
within these categories in a uniform way. The classiﬁcation is used in the remainder of this paper to drive the
analysis of context-aware recommender systems for TEL.
Computing context has been researched extensively by
the pervasive and mobile research community ,
including by researchers in the mobile learning area
 . Computing characteristics can be classiﬁed in
three areas:
• Network includes static and dynamic properties of
the network, such as maximum and available bandwidth.
• Hardware comprises input and output capabilities of
devices, storage or CPU capabilities, etc.
• Software describes whether the delivery context supports certain APIs, document formats, operating
systems, application-layer protocols, etc.
The acquisition and use of computing context is necessary to support intelligent interfaces that can for instance select suitable learning resources for the device
that is used. The prevalent standards for describing
computing characteristics are W3C Composite capabilities/preferences proﬁle (CC/PP) , User Agent Proﬁle
(UAproﬁle) , developed by OMA, and the Usage
Environment Description (UED) standard which was
standardized within MPEG-21 Digital Item Adaptation
 . CC/PP deﬁnes only a basic structure of components and attributes without specifying a particular
vocabulary of terms . UAProﬁle adopts CC/PP and
provides a concrete vocabulary mainly targeting mobile
devices. UED deﬁnes both the structure and a comprehensive vocabulary. Device proﬁles can also be identiﬁed
using the open source WURFL project (Wireless Universal Resource FiLe) . WURFL is a community effort
that collects a wide range of device descriptions.
In addition to computing context, location context has
dominated research on context-aware mobile computing to a large extent . Location models have been
proposed that capture human-readable and geometric
information of objects, including persons and devices,
and relationships between objects. These include: (1)
proximity of objects within a space, (2) communicative
ability, and (3) orientation, that can for instance indicate
to which display device a user is looking .
Location contexts that are often referenced by learning applications include classroom, home and outdoor
 and several variations on these elements .
Some learning applications use more accurate resolution
within these categories through a locating sensor, such
as GPS (Global Positioning System) or Wi-Fi. Such quantitative models refer to coordinates with two or three
dimensions . Several standards and speciﬁcations
have been elaborated to facilitate the exchange of location data. Endeavors in this area are among other driven
by the Open GIS Consortium and ISO/TC21 . To
our knowledge, their use in TEL applications is limited.
Time context includes date and time information or, less
speciﬁc, information about the week, month or semester
of the year. Time is often used in conjunction with
other pieces of context, either as a timestamp or as time
span, indicating an instant or period during which other
contextual information is known or relevant .
Physical conditions
Physical context describes the environmental conditions
where the system or user is situated, and commonly includes measures for heat, light and sound . Whereas
physical context has been researched extensively in
home automation research, its use by TEL applications
is still limited. In learning scenarios, lighting and noise
are sometimes considered as important criteria .
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
Activity context reﬂects the tasks, objectives or actions
of the user. Examples of models that have been elaborated in a TEL context are the Contextualized Attention
Metadata (CAM) and the UICO models. Both
models enable the capturing of actions of the user, which
are comprised of events within an application, and session
and time related data. Such data is then analyzed to infer
information about the current task, objective or topic of
interest of the user, for instance by using domain ontologies that describe the subject domain . The models
provide elements to capture additional contextual data,
but do not deﬁne speciﬁc types of such data.
Resource context captures relevant characteristics of
physical or virtual resources. The IEEE Learning Object Metadata (LOM) standard is a standard for
the description of learning resources. The elements are
organized into several categories, including a general description of the resource, technical requirements and characteristics, educational characteristics, relations between
resources and annotation comments on the educational
use of the resources. Other standards that are often used
for the description of learning resources are the Dublin
Core Metadata Element Set and MPEG-7 .
Learner models have been researched extensively in the
educational adaptive hypermedia and the educational
user modeling research areas. In this section, we summarize brieﬂy the main learner characteristics that have
been proposed by Brusilovsky and Mill´an , Specht
 and Nguyen and Do . Relevant standards and
speciﬁcations for partial representations of learner data
are IMS LIP, IMS ePortfolio, IMS Enterprise, IEEE RCD,
FOAF and HR-XML. A detailed discussion of data elements available in these standards is beyond the scope
of this paper. Interesting work in this area has been
presented by Dolog and Nejdl .
Basic personal information
Basic personal information typically includes identiﬁcation information, name, contact information, afﬁliations,
authentication information, information on accessibility, including language capabilities and disabilities, and other
personal characteristics such as gender, age, profession and
educational level.
Knowledge/performance
The knowledge category represents prior knowledge
levels of the learner . Other researchers categorize
this information under a performance nominator that
stores information about measured performance of a
learner through learning material .
Learner interests capture interests or preferences of
learners and are key characteristics to support personalization . Values that are typically stored include
search terms of the user, her tags, comments and resources she created, read or rated.
Learning goals
The distinction is often made between short-term goals,
where a learner intends to solve a certain problem, and
long-term goals that are related to a course or plans for
life-long learning. Goal hierarchies have been proposed
that decompose higher level goals in subgoals .
Learning and cognitive styles
Learners differ in their preferred way of learning presentation and cognitive processing. Examples for considering different cognitive styles are visual, textual, or
auditory presentation of information. Different learning
styles include the presentation of examples, presentation
of theoretical knowledge, and practical exercises .
Among others, researchers in TEL often refer to the
Felder-Silverman and Honey and Mumford 
inventory of learning styles that describes learning styles
along several dimensions. An interesting analysis of
learning style classiﬁcations has been presented in .
The modeling and use of affective information is a
popular research topic in various research areas. Researchers widely refer to Russell’s two-dimension
’circumplex model of affect’, where emotions are seen
as combinations of arousal and valence. The OCC 
model is also referenced widely. This model speciﬁes
22 emotion categories. In TEL, research on the inﬂuence
of emotions on learning has also gained major interest
in recent years. Some researchers have used Russell’s
model as a basis to use emotional data to support
learning. The work of the Affective Computing Group
at MIT Media Lab is also very prominent in this
research area.
Background
The background of the user is a common name for a set
of features related to her previous experience outside the
core domain of a speciﬁc system . Elements typically
modeled include experience of work in related areas,
religion and cultural characteristics.
Social relations
Social relations describe social associations, connections,
or afﬁliations between two or more persons . For
instance, social relations can contain information about
friends, neutrals, enemies, neighbors, co-workers, and
relatives. Other researchers identify community as
an important context dimension. In TEL applications, the
distinction is sometimes made between experts, teachers
and peer learners . The FOAF speciﬁcation is
often used to describe such user relations and roles.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
Discussion
Fig. 2 summarizes the context categories and their elements that have been described in this section. The
categorization is used in Section 4 to identify to which
extent current context-aware TEL recommender systems
are able to generate recommendations adapted to the
current contextual needs of users.
Fig. 2. Context framework
Existing work in recommender systems identiﬁes a subtle difference between various parameters of
contextual information. They refer to multi-dimensional
spaces for representing contextual variables, and identify
mainly three categories/dimensions within which variables may be grouped (i.e user, item, context). Nevertheless, the challenge is reaching towards an identiﬁcation
of variables, as well as their grouping in categories
accepted by all researchers and developers. For instance,
one could argue that physical conditions are part of
location variables, or at least strongly linked to them.
Or that learner models are actually user models that
are not related to the context. To this end, reaching a
generalization that will incorporate all single- or multidimensional representations in a single model can be
considered unrealistic. Rather, one could see as a possible line of future work ways to map/link the various
representations among them, so that contextual data may
be exchanged among different systems. In Section 5 on
future challenges, this is discussed under the prism of a
Linked Data approach.
SURVEY OF CONTEXT-AWARE TEL RECOM-
Context dimensions
Fig. 3 summarizes the context elements that are used by
the context-aware recommender systems we surveyed.
Nine out of 22 systems consider the computing context of
the user to suggest suitable learning resources according
to hardware, software or network constraints. As illustrated in Fig. 4, Zhao et al. rely on WURFL 
descriptions of mobile devices and COLDEX uses the
CC/PP W3C recommendation . The other systems
rely on ad-hoc representations of the computing context.
Relying on existing standards and speciﬁcations offers
interesting perspectives to extend, exchange and reuse
computing related data for new and different application
The location context of the user is taken into account
by ten systems. Lehsten et al. detect location as a
basis to infer whether the learner is attending a lecture.
If she is not attending, a stream of the lecture or other
relevant learning resources are recommended. Seven
systems sense the location of the user and nearby objects
to support situated or collaborative learning activities.
For instance, Rogers et al. and Zhou and Rechert
 use location to suggest learning resources during
outdoor learning activities. In MOBIlearn , location
is detected for generating recommendations of both relevant learning resources and peers who are nearby in
a museum. PERKAM also uses location context to
suggest learning resources and peer learners who are
nearby. The system visualizes the distance to potential
peer helpers.
Another set of context-aware recommender systems
uses location context to support language learning.
TANGO uses nearby objects to suggest learning resources. For example, when the learner enters a meeting
room, the system asks her where the remote control of
the air conditioner is. If the learner scans the tag labeled
on the remote control, the answer is correct. PALLAS
 incorporates time and location dimensions to send
automatic notiﬁcations to the learner when she is in
the vicinity of a point of interest, such as a French art
exhibition. In addition, related learning resources are
recommended, such as resources related to a building.
Other systems track the location of the user as a basis
to take into account physical conditions that are associated
with this location - such as CALS and TenseITS .
Noise level is for instance considered as an important
criterion to estimate the possible level of concentration.
Such physical conditions are used for learning resource
recommendations. For instance, if a learner is on a bus
where the likelihood of interruption is high, questions
may be suggested to assess her knowledge on a previously learned topic that she can easily resume. Weather
and lighting are also outlined as relevant physical conditions , but to our knowledge these elements have
not yet been implemented in a prototype.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
Ten systems consider the time context of the learner.
Timestamp data is in most cases used in conjunction
with location information to determine where a user
is at a speciﬁc point in time . Other systems work
with interval data to contextualize recommendations
according to the available study time of the learner
 .
The activity context of the user is used by ﬁfteen systems. Many systems use the current task of the learner
as a basis to suggest resources that are relevant for this
task. 3A , APOSDLE , Berri et al. , C-LINK
 , Khribi et al. and MOBIlearn identify the
topic of the activity to adapt recommendations to the
current topic of interest. Nine systems capture and use
actions of the user, such as a learner scanning an RFID
(Radio-Frequency IDentiﬁcation) tag or a QR (Quick
Response) code as a basis to suggest relevant resources.
For instance, Teng et al. use this approach to
bridge paper-based learning with online learning. More
speciﬁcally, they recommend digital resources related
to a text fragment or scaffolded questions the user is
reading on paper.
Like traditional User x Item recommender systems for
TEL that were described in Section 2.1.2, many systems
rely on proﬁles of resources and users. In addition to
general information like author, title and keywords, both
technical and educational characteristics of resources are
often described. Also annotation metadata that capture
comments of users are used. The IEEE LOM standard is used by four systems to describe these elements.
DEPTHS relies on Dublin Core . The learner
proﬁle captures in many cases the knowledge level of
the learner in addition to her interests and preferences.
Two systems consider the learning style of the learner.
Finally, social relations are used by nine recommender
systems. DEPTHS relies on the assumption that
peer helpers who have already a close connection to
the learner will be more likely to help a learner with an
activity. These relations are represented using the FOAF
 speciﬁcation and used to suggest peer helpers.
Chen and Chao developed a system that connects
traditional books with a web-based discussion forum.
Learners receive messages from an online learning community based on their reading status, which they report
through their mobile device. These messages are aimed
to increase motivation and include links to additional
learning resources. Within the Learning in Process (LIP)
project , a context-aware recommender system was
developed to suggest courses, learning resources and
peer learners based on roles of users in a corporate environment. The approach is also deployed by APOSDLE
 to support recommendation of learning resources
and peers. The 3A recommender targets contextaware recommendation in personal learning environments . Context is measured and represented by
different types of relations, including social relations and
relations between resources. We elaborate in the next
section how these contextual data are acquired.
Context acquisition
As presented in Fig. 3, the majority of the recommender systems rely on a combination of explicit, implicit and/or inferred contextual data. We discuss brieﬂy
the context sensors that are used.
Computing context
Computing context is sensed implicitly by the surveyed
systems. Information about the device is often transmitted by including the identiﬁer of the device in the
HTTP request . This identiﬁer is then used to retrieve
relevant information about the device from a repository
of device proﬁles. Alternatively, if no information about
the device is available in the repository, information
such as screen size is sometimes captured in the request
header .
Location context
Location context is also often sensed implicitly through
GPS or Wi-Fi location sensors, or a combination of both
 . MOBIlearn uses an ultrasound positioning
system. The approach is required in contexts such as
museums where an accurate description of the location is
required to identify the object closest to the user. Other
systems that require precise location information often
rely on an explicit method that requires a user to scan an
RFID tag or QR code when entering a room .
TenseITS relies on an explicit approach where the
user is asked to manually input the location type, such
as home, university or transportation. Whereas such an
approach may work to evaluate ﬁrst prototypes, the
acquisition can easily be automated for the location types
that are listed by the authors.
Time context
Timestamp data is in all cases captured implicitly. Time
interval data, such as available study time, is entered
explicitly in work of Berri et al. , LIP and
TenseITS . In CALS , a learning schedule is used
that enables users to enter such data in a schedule that
they can use to plan their learning activities. Whereas
the approach also requires an effort from end-users, data
acquisition is incorporated into their workﬂow.
Activity context
Many systems rely on explicit user interactions to capture information about the activity context. These interactions can be scanning a QR or RFID tag 
or providing manual text input - such as the current
line number during reading or the current topic of
interest . The current task of the learner is in most
cases entered manually by the teacher or the learner.
APOSDLE and C-LINK are examples of systems that infer the activity context from user interactions
with tools and resources. For instance, APOSDLE uses
a classiﬁcation algorithm to detect the current task of
the learner, based on a task model that is created by
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
Fig. 3. Context elements used
experts . The algorithm uses among others the window title of the active application to infer information
about the current task. In addition, a domain model is
used to detect the current topic of resources. C-LINK
 and Khribi et al. extract terms from currently
visited resources to infer the current topic of interest.
The advantage of the approach is that it can be applied to
other domains without the need for a domain taxonomy.
Physical conditions
Physical conditions are captured explicitly by the user
or implicitly from the environment. Current prototypes
only implement noise level indicators. TenseITS relies on manual input to capture such information. CALS
 uses a microphone to automate such acquisition.
Resource context
Descriptions of resources are often added manually by
authors or experts. Such approaches are only suitable
for systems that work on a closed corpus of resources.
Other systems such as MOBIlearn and C-LINK 
use annotations of other users as a basis to capture
relevant information about resources. C-LINK also automates metadata generation, e.g. by extracting keywords
or by using automatic classiﬁcation methods. Such an
approach is also employed by APOSDLE , DEPTHS
 and Khribi et al. . Several metadata generation
frameworks that integrate a broad set of algorithms to
generate metadata have been elaborated in the TEL ﬁeld
 . Such frameworks can potentially be used by
some systems that currently rely on manual annotation.
User context
Information about the user is captured in different ways,
depending on the type of information. CALS and
Santos et al. capture information about learning
styles. Both systems use a registration module that enables the user to select her best matching learning style
based on the Felder-Silverman inventory.
Interests of the user are captured explicitly through
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
Fig. 4. Overview of context-aware recommender systems
registration or rating modules , implicitly through
interactions of the user with the system or by
combining both approaches. For instance, C-LINK 
and COLDEX use a rating module to capture explicit
interest indicators and track which resources the user
contributes or downloads as implicit interest indicators.
PERKAM uses a registration module to capture
initial interest indicators. These indicators are reﬁned
when a learner adds resources to her folder. Such a
combined approach is useful to avoid cold-start issues
of recommendation algorithms. MOBIlearn uses the
time the learner spends on a location to estimate interest.
Knowledge levels are captured explicitly by some systems. For example, CALS requests such information from the learner, whereas TANGO relies on
teachers to set knowledge levels indicators after examination. TANGO then reﬁnes knowledge levels during
system use with an implicit approach. For example,
when the learner provides correct answers, her knowledge level indicators are adapted. DEPTHS also incorporates indicators based on the level of participation
in activities. Many systems rely on an implicit approach
only through self-assessment tools available in learning
environments. COLDEX infers the knowledge level of
the learner based on the number of resources a learner
has downloaded. There are obvious trade-offs between
the approaches: explicit examination by a teacher will
provide a more accurate description of the knowledge
level than an estimate based on number of downloads.
Nevertheless, such estimates may be valuable in scenarios that unobtrusively try to obtain an indication of the
knowledge level.
Social relation context
Explicit approaches to capture social relations rely on
a manual representation of the group structure or
the organization in corporate environments . Implicit
approaches use for instance enrollment data from learning management systems or social networks . Other
systems infer social relations by analyzing interactions
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
between users to obtain indications of the
level of collaboration between different members of a
group. DEPTHS for instance uses such data to
suggest peers who can help with a learning activity
based on previous collaborations.
Contextual recommendation algorithms
As described in Section 2.3, different methods have
been proposed to incorporate contextual information in
the recommendation process , including recommendation via context-driven querying and search, contextual pre-
ﬁltering, contextual post-ﬁltering and contextual modeling.
Fourteen systems rely on a recommendation via contextdriven querying and search method (see Fig. 4). These
systems match contextual data to resource metadata
in order to retrieve suitable resources. For instance,
MOBIlearn matches the location and current topic
of interest to descriptions of learning resources and
peers. TANGO matches the knowledge level of
the learner and her location to resource descriptions.
Several systems rely on an ontology-based query method
to ﬁlter suitable resources, including APOSDLE 
and DEPTHS . The main difference with traditional
recommender systems, discussed in Section 2.1.2, is that
additional context data are used to retrieve relevant
resources from a repository.
Many other systems use a post-ﬁltering algorithm to ﬁlter the results of a traditional recommendation algorithm
based on contextual information. For instance, COLDEX
 ﬁlters the results of a traditional recommendation
algorithm based on computing context constraints. PL-
CR2 and Berri et al. ﬁlter the results based on
both computing and time constraints. The post-ﬁltering
algorithm of CALS also takes into account physical
conditions. C-LINK , Zhao et al. and the 3A recommender use a contextual modeling technique that
adapts a traditional recommendation algorithm to take
into account contextual information. The 3A recommendation algorithm adapts a version of Google’s PageRank
algorithm to the particular modeling framework that
considers relation context. C-LINK and Zhao et al.
 attempt to learn and model user preferences in
contextualized user proﬁles. Such systems adapt traditional algorithms to incorporate multidimensional user
preferences, for instance which resources a user liked
when she was working on a particular activity. Whereas
evaluation results are promising, potential drawbacks
and additional challenges related to data sparsity have
not been discussed.
More generally, there is a need to explore more comprehensively tradeoffs between the different approaches
in order to develop a better understanding on which
algorithms to use and how to combine them . So
far, only Santos et al. compared the performance
of different combinations of contextual recommendation
algorithms. We discuss in Section 5.3 how such evaluations can be facilitated.
Recommendation outputs
All surveyed recommender systems offer suggestions for
suitable learning resources (see Fig. 4). In many cases,
these resources are closed corpus resources that were
made available and annotated to support the target
learning activities, such as outdoor or language learning
activities based on available objects. Nine systems enable
recommendation of open corpus resources. These systems rely on automatic annotation and/or
annotations that are made by peers . Seven
systems provide suggestions for suitable peer learners or
teachers in addition to learning resources. These people
are suggested based on proximity or social relations
 , or a combination of both . In addition, some
systems include support for recommending messages to
guide and motivate the learner. These messages are
sometimes automatically triggered based on activity or
location context or provided manually by teachers
or peers .
Evaluation
Whereas several promising context-aware recommender
systems for TEL have been elaborated in recent years,
most of these systems are still in prototype phase. Only
a few systems have been used in more elaborate trial
experiments - including LIP , COLDEX , PERKAM
 , MOBILearn , APOSDLE and work of
Rogers et al. and Santos et al. .
Learning efﬁciency and effectiveness
The effect on learning efﬁciency and/or learning effectiveness has been evaluated for ﬁve systems. Evaluation
results of Rogers et al. indicate that suggesting
resources during outdoor learning activities helps children to reﬂect and has a positive effect on the learning outcome. The impact on learning effectiveness of
PERKAM was measured in an experiment that
consisted of several phases, including a comparison of
the knowledge learned with and without the system.
Among others, results indicate that more learners were
able to successfully complete the task within a ﬁxed time
interval when using the system. In a similar way, Zhao
et al. evaluated learning effectiveness in comparison with learners who use a text book only. Results
indicate that users receive better test scores and that
learning interest increased with more than 10 minutes.
The used metric is somewhat unconventional, but at
least some attempt is made to measure the effect on
learning. Teng et al. measured effectiveness in a
comparative evaluation and conclude that there is no
signiﬁcant difference with students who did not use
the recommender. Evaluation results of APOSDLE 
indicate that the impact on learning effectiveness and
efﬁciency is dependent on the domain in which the
system is deployed. In highly specialized domains where
knowledge is well documented, the approach turned out
to have a bigger impact on learning than in domains
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
with few available resources. Whereas conclusions are
in some cases still preliminary, at least some efforts
have been made to assess the impact of context-aware
recommender systems on learning.
Accuracy of recommendations has been evaluated for
ﬁve systems. Khribi et al. measured the accuracy
of the approach with precision and recall measures.
Results indicate that precision increases when more
recently visited pages are considered to capture context and decreases when the number of recommended
resources increases. Whereas the approach is promising, the number of visited pages considered is limited
to four in the evaluation experiment and seems a bit
arbitrary. The accuracy of PL-CR2 was evaluated
in a simulation experiment. Results indicate that the
method outperforms traditional content-based and collaborative ﬁltering recommendation techniques with a
signiﬁcant increase of precision. Evaluation results of
the 3A recommendation algorithm indicate that the
incorporation of relations outperforms standard collaborative ﬁltering in terms of recall. In several experiments,
Santos et al. gathered feedback on the accuracy
of different types of recommendations. Among others,
they conclude that recommendations based on learning styles are most appreciated, whereas collaboration
recommendations were considered less relevant. Such
evaluations are interesting, as they provide some insight
into the relevancy of different contextual data in the
recommendation process.
Usefulness and usability
The perceived usefulness and usability have been evaluated for more systems. These evaluations were conducted with a wide range of methods and data collection approaches such as questionnaires, interviews and
log data. In some cases, these evaluations consisted of
elaborate trial experiments where users were asked to
use the system for an extended period of time - such
as evaluations of APOSDLE , LIP , Teng et al.
 and MOBIlearn . In other cases, preliminary
indicators were collected by asking users to perform
certain tasks with the developed prototype . Whereas
the perceived usefulness was high in all cases, many
usability issues have been identiﬁed. Such usability issues were identiﬁed for both context acquisition techniques as well as delivery of recommendations to endusers. Teng et al. outline difﬁculties with scanning
QR codes using cameras as a basis to capture activity
context. Evaluation results of MOBIlearn indicate
that users were often confused because they did not
understand why certain recommendations were made
and why they changed. Similar issues were identiﬁed in
usability evaluations of TANGO and LIP , where
usability issues were identiﬁed as critical for the use of
the system. We elaborate in the next section on future
research opportunities to address these issues.
FUTURE CHALLENGES
Although several promising prototypes of context-aware
recommenders for learning have been elaborated, important challenges remain in order to validate the developed
prototypes and to assess their impact on learning. In
this section, we brieﬂy discuss the results of our survey
and challenges involved in this endeavor, as well as how
these challenges relate to what other researchers in this
area have proposed.
Context acquisition challenges
Many of the surveyed systems rely on manual input
from users. Whereas such manual input is useful to
evaluate ﬁrst prototypes, we believe that requesting such
involvement from end-users may signiﬁcantly hamper
the uptake of context-aware recommendation for learning. In addition, several systems indicate that they use
contextual data, but do not describe the methods that
are used to capture these data (see Fig. 3).
An interesting future direction of research is the development of context sensors for learning that automate
the acquisition of the context dimensions in a modular
and generic fashion. Such modular approach has been
proposed by several researchers, for context-aware systems in general , and TEL in speciﬁc . Results
of our survey indicate that the biggest challenge lies in
capturing the user and activity context dimensions (actions, current topic of interest, tasks). Researchers in TEL
have argued that factors affecting an activity is precisely
what makes the notion of context meaningful for learning . However, in contrast to other dimensions
such as computing, location and social relations that
have been researched more extensively by the mobile
learning and social network analysis communities, these
dimensions still rely in many cases on explicit capturing
methods. Whereas some promising examples of systems
that automate activity context acquisition have been
presented, the approaches either rely on task models that
are created by experts or have only been partially
evaluated .
To address this challenge, there is a need for interdisciplinary collaborative research from different research communities, including the learning analytics,
educational data mining, adaptive hypermedia and user
modeling communities. In recent years, much progress
has been made in these areas to capture data from the
learner in all her respective learning environments and
to measure learning indicators related to low level activity data . Learning context sensors for the various
dimensions outlined above would enable researchers
in the recommender systems for TEL ﬁeld to reuse
existing efforts in this area. As discussed in Section 2.1.2,
many existing recommender systems for learning do
not yet incorporate additional context dimensions. The
availability of context sensors would be of major interest
to incorporate contextual information in recommender
systems for learning on a much larger scale than in
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
today’s prototypes. In addition to the exploration and
use of existing techniques to extract contextual data, an
interesting future line of research would be to investigate
how contextual data can be collected implicitly by using
a combination of open data sources and APIs. A simple
example combines timestamp and location information
with a weather service to suggest situated learning activities. Elaborating such scenarios for both capturing
relevant contextual data as well as using such data
for generating contextual recommendations constitutes
another interesting area of research.
Context representation challenges
Current recommender systems rely on custom representations of contextual data. Some systems use standardized representations for describing resource and computing characteristics. The lack of a standard representation
for contextual data prevents the sharing and reuse of
data across systems .
To address this issue, several solutions have been
proposed. Held et al. indicate that contextual data
should be structured, interchangeable, composable, uniform, extensible and standardized. In addition, the authors present a novel format, Comprehensive Structured
Context Proﬁles (CSCP), that is based on RDF. The need
for standardization has also been identiﬁed by .
Schmidt argues that one of the key success factors of
technology enhanced learning in the last years has been
the standardization activities. The author proposes to
include context aspects in the standardization activities,
such as SCORM or IEEE LOM. An interesting future
line of research would be an integration of both research
directions by elaborating a standardized representation
of contextual data and mapping those data to existing
standards and speciﬁcations, so that data compliant to
these standards and speciﬁcations can be exchanged and
reused. The development of a standard representation
for both implicit and explicit user data, as well as
relevant contextual data that can be associated to these
data, will be taken up in a working group of the CEN
Workshop on ’Learning Technologies’ (WS/LT). Initiatives such as LinkedEducation.org have a big potential
to interconnect data compliant to existing standards
and speciﬁcations. The interest in this research area is
reﬂected in several research contributions to a recent
workshop on linked learning .
Evaluation challenges
In order to prove the successful application of contextual
recommender systems in TEL, the evaluation of this
technology needs to be further strengthened. Particularly interesting would be having more comprehensive
evaluation studies that assess the impact of individual
context elements on the recommendation process. Such
evaluation has for instance been explored by Santos and
Boticario . For example, some context dimensions
may have a negative inﬂuence on the recommendation
process as outlined in .
In order to facilitate evaluation, a more structured and
coordinated approach to identify the effects of the context dimensions and their combinations would beneﬁt
from generalizing the data according to the framework
presented in this paper. Following this approach, existing
research efforts can be aligned to enable comparative
evaluation studies. The approach would also enable to
identify possible gaps and to address them respectively.
In addition, we propose the creation of controlled
experiments where the inﬂuence of different dimensions
can be measured. These experiments could follow the
same line as the TREC challenges organized in the
Information Retrieval Community and have already
been conducted by the context-aware recommendation
community. Examples include recommendation of suitable movies depending on time (e.g. the Christmas week
and the week leading to the Oscars ceremony) and
for a given mood . For the creation of such experiments in the TEL ﬁeld, datasets need to be collected
from the use of TEL systems. Based on such datasets,
correlations between different contextual variables may
be discovered that could identify relevant contextual
variables for TEL recommendation. Particularly relevant
would be an exploratory investigation on the correlation
between contextual variables and actions (i.e. ratings,
downloads, reads, etc.) of users. Such an explorative
analysis could identify potential differences in behavior
based on contextual variables - such as day of the week,
learning environment and available peers - and used to
deﬁne meaningful recommendation challenges for the
TEL ﬁeld. Research opportunities to support this process
are described in the next section.
Dataset sharing challenges
As drawing conclusions about the validity and generalizability of scientiﬁc experiments depends on the
possibility of veriﬁcation, repeatability, and comparisons
of results , a collection of datasets is needed to
compare the results of different recommendation algorithms and the inﬂuence of contextual data on the
recommendation process . In an increasing number of scientiﬁc disciplines, large data collections are
emerging as important community resources . A
ﬁrst step towards the identiﬁcation and sharing of TEL
datasets stems from the dataTEL theme team of the
STELLAR Network of Excellence - recently accepted
as an EATEL Special Interest Group (SIG). A special
dataTEL Cafe event took place during the RecSysTEL
Workshop 2010 to discuss the submitted datasets
and to facilitate dataset sharing in the TEL community.
Details about the datasets and initial evaluation results
of recommendation algorithms with these datasets have
been reported in .
Although interesting datasets have been collected, so
far only a few datasets are available that collect data
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
of a large number of users. In addition, most datasets
contain only information about learners or teachers and
resources. In some datasets time context is captured.
Additional context data is available in only one dataset
that was captured within the APOSDLE project .
However, the current sample is too small for experimental evaluations. The collection of large data collections
that incorporate contextual information about learners is
therefore still a major challenge that needs to be tackled.
To this extent, a framework is needed that enables (1)
to share available datasets from recommender systems in
TEL among researchers in this ﬁeld and (2) to track the
outcomes of context-aware recommendation algorithms
on these datasets. Additional considerations related to
the privacy of users will need to be researched to enable the sharing and reuse of datasets. We discuss this
challenge in the next section.
The sharing of datasets is an open issue that is recognized by several other people. For example, following
the National Science Foundation (NSF, USA), the JISC
(UK) has opened a new research program for
the management of research data that ”[...] is recognised as
one of the most pressing challenges facing the higher education
and research sectors. Research data generated by publiclyfunded research is seen as a public good and should be available
for veriﬁcation and re-use.” .
Privacy challenges
Privacy and legal protection rights are a major challenge
that needs to be tackled when capturing and using
contextual data for recommendation. So far, researchers
have often ignored privacy issues. However, if contextaware recommender technologies want to move beyond
the current prototype phase, practical solutions regarding legal and privacy issues are needed.
The challenge needs to be tackled from two perspectives: (1) the privacy of the target users needs to be
preserved in order to deploy current prototypes in reallife settings and (2) the sharing and exchange of data
is a key requirement to enable comparative evaluation
studies - as discussed in the previous section.
In principle, researchers do not want to harm the
privacy rights of the target users and are willing to
make scientiﬁc data available. However, they are inexperienced how to address both issues in a proper way. They
are missing a condensed overview of the legal situation
and practical solutions regarding dataset sharing.
In order to overcome these challenges, guidelines need
to be developed that document data protection laws like
the European Directive on data protection 95/46/EC
 . The main principles of this directive have been
discussed in and include (i) informed consent: users
must be made aware of what data is being gathered and
what it is being used for, (ii) control: where consent has
been given for the gathering and use of contextual data,
users should be given information, access, and control
over data, and (iii) security: data has to be stored securely.
Several frameworks to address these requirements are
discussed in the literature ;
• In a privacy as conﬁdentiality paradigm, privacy has
been deﬁned as ’the right to be let alone’ . One
way of achieving data conﬁdentiality is to enable the
use of information-based services, while either minimizing the collection of information, or securing
the collected information from unauthorized access.
Another way is to guarantee anonymity, e.g. by
anonymizing the collected data.
• In a privacy as control paradigm, privacy is deﬁned
as the ability to control what happens with information. A reason for this notion is that revelation of
data is necessary and beneﬁcial under many circumstances and that control may help to prevent abuses
of data. Identity Management Systems (IDMS) 
are an important class of tools that provide the
ability to control information that is revealed.
• In a privacy as practice paradigm, the objectives are to
make it possible to intervene in the ﬂows of existing
data by making transparent the way in which information is collected and used for decision-making.
We discuss in the next section how such an approach
can be supported from a user interface point of view.
The documentation of these frameworks as well as
research on the use of these frameworks in TEL settings
is an interesting further line of research. Initial work in
this area has been presented by .
Interaction challenges
Several challenges related to user interfaces were identi-
ﬁed by researchers in this ﬁeld. Usability evaluations of
the LIP , MOBIlearn and TANGO systems
indicate that the development of user interfaces is critical
for context-aware recommender systems. Among others,
people are often confused because they do not understand why certain recommendations are made and why
these recommendations change.
As outlined in , it is important to explain the
rationale behind recommendations to end-users. The
complexity of recommendation algorithms often prevents users from comprehending recommended results
and can lead to trust issues when recommendations
fail. This complexity is often aggravated by contextual
recommendation algorithms that use various types of
contextual information in the recommendation process.
In addition, recommendation results might change automatically when the context of the user changes. Such
automatic updates can be confusing to the user.
To deal with this issue, it is important to provide
explanations and justify decisions . An important
line of research in this area is the use of visualization
techniques to provide users with insights in the recommendation process. As an example, social visualizations
can help to explain recommendation results by explicitly
exposing relationships among content and people 
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
 . The PERKAM system already uses visualization techniques to present the relationship and distance
between peer learners. Such visualizations can be used
to easily locate suggested peer learners.
Moreover, visualization techniques can increase understanding of the input and output of a recommender
system. Such visualizations can enable the user to meaningfully revise input parameters and thus improve recommendations . This objective is particularly important in contextualized recommendations that estimate
relevant contextual elements based on user behavior.
As the prediction of the current task or interest of the
user is a challenging task, there is a need to develop
mixed approaches that enable users to provide feedback
and help steer this process. As such, the combination
of visualization and recommendation techniques to empower users with actionable knowledge to become an
active and responsible part-taker in the recommending
process, instead of being the typical passive provider
of just personal preferences and social connections, is
a highly relevant research topic.
Towards global data infrastructures
As it has been pointed out by D. Rehak in his Digital
Content Manifesto that is driving the US-based
Learning Registry initiative, the information world is
fragmented but still an abundance of learning information exists. For any learning activity, it can be suspected that somewhere relevant digital content can be
found. The aim is to enable a learning layer over all
this Web-accessible content, facilitating the deployment
of contextualized services that will allow users to ﬁnd
and access relevant content more easily. In this sense,
very large, cloud-based data infrastructures like the one
that Learning Registry is setting up for the USA, are
expected to provide a new perspective into the way
that intelligent systems (in general) and recommender
systems (in particular) will be developed for TEL. A
similar example is the content infrastructure of the
EU-oriented Open Discovery Space CIP PSP initiative
( that also tries to
create a very big data infrastructure collecting learning
content and usage data around it. Such global learning data infrastructures can help in scaling up TEL
recommender systems by allowing them to consume,
process and use a rich variety of contextualized usage
data streams, and thus enable novel forms of real time
intelligence that can only become possible on extremely
large data volumes. The existence of global data infrastructures is expected to really stretch the scalability,
the robustness and reactivity of today’s algorithms and
systems, since there is going to be a need to meet
a number of upcoming requirements. TEL, as well as
other domains, will need to ﬁnd ways to develop recommender systems that will be able to grow with the
volume of data to be handled (being limited only by
the availability of computing resources), to operate at
the time scale of the processes they are designed to
support (providing recommendations right at the time
when requested or needed), and to be able to handle a
large variety of data that will be often missing, corrupted
or inconsistent (taking recommendations outside the lab
simulations and in typical operating environments). We
would expect this to become the next major research
challenge in contextual recommender systems for TEL.
CONCLUSION
In this article, we have presented a survey of contextaware recommender systems that have been deployed in
TEL settings. The research contributions of this article are
threefold. First, a context framework has been presented
that identiﬁes context dimensions for the analysis and
development of context-aware recommender systems for
TEL. This framework can be used to drive the discussion
of contextualization of a variety of TEL applications. In
addition, such a framework can facilitate comparative
evaluation studies by aligning existing efforts in this
area. Second, we have presented an in-depth analysis
of context-aware recommender systems that have been
deployed in educational settings. The analysis sheds
light on the use of context in current prototypes, the techniques that are employed to incorporate these variables
in the recommendation process and current practices to
evaluate the potential impact of the approaches on the
learning process.
Third, we have outlined future challenges for the
development and validation of context-aware recommender systems for learning. Results of our survey
indicate that there has been much advancement in the
development of context-aware TEL recommenders in
recent years. Many promising prototypes illustrate the
potential and opportunities that these systems create.
Nevertheless, important challenges related to the capturing and use of contextual data remain that need to be
tackled in order to increase uptake and validate research
efforts in realistic trial experiments. We hope that these
ideas can help to further shape exciting and relevant
research on context-aware TEL recommenders.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Shlomo Berkovsky
for his valuable comments on earlier versions of this
manuscript. In addition, we would like to thank the
anonymous reviewers for their suggestions that helped
to improve this work to a great extent. Part of this work
has been supported by the EU FP7 STELLAR Network of
Excellence (grant agreement no. 231913). Katrien Verbert
is a Postdoctoral Fellow of the Research Foundation -
Flanders (FWO). The work of Nikos Manouselis has been
funded with support by the EU project VOA3R - 250525
of the CIP PSP Programme ( The work
of Martin Wolpers has received funding from the EC
Seventh Framework Programme under
grant agreement no 231396 (ROLE). The contribution of
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
Xavier Ochoa was supported by VLIR through the RIP
Project ZEIN2010RIP09. The work of Hendrik Drachsler
was supported by the Netherlands Laboratory for Lifelong Learning (NELLL) within the AlterEgo project.