The combination of vision and touch depends on spatial proximity
Sergei Gepshtein,
Vision Science Program, School of Optometry, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA, &
Laboratory for Perceptual Dynamics, Brain Science Institute, RIKEN, Japan
Johannes Burge,
Vision Science Program, School of Optometry, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA
Marc O. Ernst, and
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen, Germany
Martin S. Banks
Vision Science Program, School of Optometry and Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, Department
of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA
The nervous system often combines visual and haptic information about object properties such that
the combined estimate is more precise than with vision or haptics alone. We examined how the system
determines when to combine the signals. Presumably, signals should not be combined when they
come from different objects. The likelihood that signals come from different objects is highly
correlated with the spatial separation between the signals, so we asked how the spatial separation
between visual and haptic signals affects their combination. To do this, we first created conditions
for each observer in which the effect of combination—the increase in discrimination precision with
two modalities relative to performance with one modality—should be maximal. Then under these
conditions, we presented visual and haptic stimuli separated by different spatial distances and
compared human performance with predictions of a model that combined signals optimally. We
found that discrimination precision was essentially optimal when the signals came from the same
location, and that discrimination precision was poorer when the signals came from different locations.
Thus, the mechanism of visual-haptic combination is specialized for signals that coincide in space.
haptics; inter-sensory integration; multidimensional classification; objects; optimality; proximity
principle; spatial attention; vision
Introduction
The nervous system often combines information from different senses in a way that approaches
statistical optimality. As a consequence, the precision of the combined estimate is better than
the precision that could be derived from either sense alone . In combining singlemodality estimates, the nervous system gives more weight to the less variable estimate. Thus,
a modality that affords the more precise estimate at the moment contributes more to perception
Corresponding author: Sergei Gepshtein. Email: . Address: Laboratory for Perceptual Dynamics, Computational
Neuroscience Group, Brain Science Institute, RIKEN, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan..
Commercial relationships: none.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
J Vis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 28.
 
J Vis. ; 5(11): 1013–1023. doi:10.1167/5.11.7.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
than the other modalities do. In other words, the combined estimate is closer to the more precise
single-modality estimate. By putting more weight on the less variable sensory estimate, the
nervous system takes advantage of the fact that the precision of estimates from different
modalities varies differently as a function of stimulation conditions.
However, signals from different senses should not be combined indiscriminately. Consider,
for example, a person looking at one object while touching another. It is inappropriate to
combine visual and haptic information in this situation because the information comes from
different objects. How does the nervous system determine when to combine information from
different senses in order to increase perceptual precision, and when not to combine in order to
avoid combining information from different objects? This question is related to the binding
problem, the problem of establishing a correspondence between representations in different
submodalities that stem from the same object .
We investigated the inter-modality binding problem for vision and touch. We asked whether
the nervous system uses the spatial proximity of visual and haptic signals to determine when
they should be combined. Previous work used visual and haptic stimuli that coincided in space
and found nearly optimal combination, indicated by the higher precision of the inter-modality
relative to within-modality estimates . The
improvement in precision is the “footprint” of combination; we used this footprint to determine
when combination occurs for signals varying in their relative spatial positions.
We presented visual and haptic stimuli separated by different distances. Observers compared
the sizes of two such inter-modality stimuli. If observers combined the visual and haptic signals,
their performance should improve relative to their within-modality performance. We compared
human performance with the performance of a model that combines single-modality signals
optimally. We found that human performance approached statistical optimality when the visual
and haptic signals came from the same location, and that the combination effect gradually
decreased as the spatial separation between signals increased. Indeed, with sufficiently large
offsets, inter-modality discrimination performance was essentially the same as within-modality
performance. These findings support the view that inter-modal combination of sensory signals
is specialized for object perception.
Optimal conditions for combination
To measure the effect of spatial separation between visual and haptic signals on the combination
of these signals, we needed to create situations in which the effect of combining signals would
be the largest. If the within-modality signals are Gaussian distributed and their noises are
independent, the variance of the combined estimate with optimal weighting of the visual and
haptic estimates is
where σV, σH, and σVH are the standard deviations of the visual, haptic, and combined estimates
 . We define precision
as the inverse of the standard deviation. The smaller the standard deviation is, the higher the
precision. The precision of the optimally combined estimate is always higher than or equal to
the highest precision of the within-modality estimates because
Gepshtein et al.
J Vis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 28.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
The highest possible precision of the inter-modality relative to the within-modality estimates
occurs when σV = σH. Figure 1 illustrates this: The standard deviation of the combined estimate
is plotted for different values of σV and σH.
Gepshtein and Banks examined whether visual-haptic estimates are optimal in the sense
of Equation 1. The authors first measured size discrimination with haptics alone and vision
alone, and they found that visual precision varied with object orientation while haptic precision
did not (Figure 1A). The curve labeled σVH in Figure 1A represents the inter-modality standard
deviation predicted by the optimal model (Equation 1) from the within-modality measurements
of Gepshtein and Banks. The ratio of the predicted standard deviation and the smallest withinmodality standard deviation (visual or haptic; Figure 1B) is a measure of the expected
improvement in the precision of the combined estimate relative to the within-modality
estimates. When σV = σH, the ratio is
, which is the largest possible improvement. Thus,
at the object orientation for which σV = σH, the precision of size estimation by an observer
using all the available information is better by ∼29% than using only one or the other modality.
Apparatus and stimuli
The apparatus is described in Ernst and Banks and Gepshtein and Banks . Visual
and haptic stimuli were two planes that could be presented at different slants, but which were
always parallel to one another.
The head was stabilized with a chin-and-forehead rest. Observers viewed two surfaces with
both eyes and/or grasped them with the index finger and thumb to estimate the inter-surface
distance. Stimulus distance from the eyes varied randomly (49-61 cm) to make the distance to
one surface an unreliable cue to inter-surface distance.
The visual stimuli were random-element stereograms of two parallel planes. The simulated
surfaces were 50 × 50 mm on average and were textured with uniformly distributed random
dots (average radius = 2 mm, covering on average 5% of the surfaces). They were otherwise
transparent. Surface area was randomized so projected area and side overlap were not useful
cues to inter-surface distance. Element size and density were also randomized for the same
reason. Textures were regenerated for each presentation. CrystalEyes™ liquid-crystal shutter
glasses were used to present different images to the two eyes. Refresh rate was 96 Hz (48 Hz
for each eye).
The haptic stimuli were generated using PHANToM™ force-feedback devices, one for the
index finger and one for the thumb. The digits were attached to the corresponding PHANToM
devices with a thimble and elastic band. Observers knew that the thimbles and bands were
present (because we had to fit them to each digit at the beginning of an experimental run), but
they quickly became unaware of them during an experimental run.
Each PHANToM device measures the 3-D positions of the tip of a digit and applies force to
the digit to simulate the haptic experience of 3-D objects. In our experiments, the two
PHANToM devices simulated two vertically separated planes by applying forces, normal to
the planes, to the two digits. The upper simulated plane was contacted by the index finger from
above, so the force was delivered upward to that digit. The lower plane was contacted by the
thumb from below so that force was delivered downward. The observer’s hand was not visible.
Before, but not during, stimulus presentation, the tips of the finger and thumb were represented
visually by small cursors; the cursors were not predictive of the intersurface distance in the
Gepshtein et al.
J Vis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 28.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
The haptically and visually specified separations between the planes generally differed, but
the haptic planes were of the same size and orientation as the visual planes. Observers touched
the haptic stimulus (the index finger from above and the thumb from below) near the horizontal
midlines of the planes. They nearly always kept their digits in one position after making contact.
The same six observers with normal or corrected-to-normal vision participated in all
experiments. Two (authors JDB and SSG) were aware of the experimental purpose.
Before each trial, the observer saw two ‘1starter’ spheres whose positions indicated the
orientation of, but not the distance between, the surfaces in the upcoming trial. The observer
inserted the finger and thumb into the spheres (which could be seen but not felt) and the spheres
and cursors (representing the finger tips) disappeared. The disappearance was a signal to draw
the finger and thumb together. In haptics-alone conditions, the observer felt two parallel
(invisible) surfaces. The surfaces were extinguished 1 s after both fingers made contact. In
vision-alone conditions, the movement of the fingers made both surfaces visible for 1 s (no
useful haptic cue was available). In visual-haptic conditions, the observer felt and saw the
surfaces simultaneously for 1 s. After the first stimulus disappeared, the ‘starter’ spheres
reappeared, the observer inserted the fingers, and the second presentation occurred.
Two stimuli were presented on each trial: a standard stimulus and a variable-size stimulus.
The standard’s size was always 50 mm. The temporal order of the two stimuli was random.
After the two presentations, observers indicated the one with the apparently greater intersurface distance. No feedback was given. The visual, haptic, and visual-haptic conditions were
presented in separate blocks of trials.
Before beginning the actual experiment, observers practiced the task in separate vision-only,
haptics-only, and visual-haptic conditions. The practice sessions were identical to experimental
sessions except that they contained only five trials per condition.
Experiment 1: Finding the best orientation for each observer
In this within-modality experiment, we determined for each observer the stimulus orientation
for which σV ≈ σH. Two stimuli were presented in the center of the work space in random
temporal order on each trial: a standard stimulus whose inter-surface distance was always 50
mm, and a variable-size stimulus whose inter-surface distance was 41, 44, 47, 49, 51, 53, 56,
or 59 mm. Observers made a forced-choice response indicating which of the two stimuli
contained the larger inter-surface distance. The value of the independent variable—intersurface distance— was varied according to the method of constant stimuli. Each pairing of the
standard and variable-size stimuli was presented 30 times to each observer.
The stimulus orientations can be expressed as surface slants relative to the line of sight. Those
slants were 0, 22.5, 45, 67.5, and 90 deg. The surfaces were rotated about a horizontal axis, so
the tilt was always 90 deg. In Experiments 2 and 3 (which were the main
experiment and a control experiment, respectively), we kept the slant constant at the value
determined for every observer in this experiment.
The results for one observer are shown in Figure 2A. Each panel shows the proportion of trials
in which the variable-size stimulus was judged as larger than the standard as a function of the
size of the variable stimulus. The top and bottom rows show data for vision only and haptics
Gepshtein et al.
J Vis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 28.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
only, respectively. Each column corresponds to a different object orientation. The curves are
the cumulative Gaussian functions (the psychometric functions) that best fit the data using a
maximum-likelihood fitting procedure. The slope of each curve is proportional to the standard
deviation (σ) of the underlying Gaussian distribution. We used σ to quantify the observer’s
performance in this task: The steeper psychometric function, the smaller the standard deviation
of the underlying distribution and the better the discrimination. The data in the upper row of
Figure 2A show that visual discrimination worsened as the object was rotated from 0 to 90 deg
relative to the line of sight. The data in the lower row show that haptic discrimination did not
change with orientation. Data from all observers exhibited a similar pattern .
Figure 2B plots standard deviation of each psychometric function in Figure 2A as a function
of object orientation. We will refer to the standard deviations as just-noticeable differences, or
JNDs. We interpolated the JNDs using linear regression to find the orientation at which the
visual and haptic JNDs were approximately equal (vertical arrow). As we said, testing at that
orientation maximizes the expected improvement in the precision of the combined estimate
relative to the within-modality estimates. We used that orientation for each observer in the
subsequent experiments.
Experiment 2: Comparing inter- and within-modal performance
In the main experiment, we measured size discrimination JNDs for visual-haptic stimuli as a
function of the spatial offset between the visual and haptic parts of the stimulus. The standard
and variable-size stimuli were presented in random temporal order on each trial. The visual
and haptic inter-surface distances (Figure 3) in the standard stimuli were always 50 mm. The
visual and haptic inter-surface distances in the variable-size stimuli were equal to one another
and ranged from {41, 41} to {59, 59} mm (eight values altogether). The inter-surface distance
was varied according to the method of constant stimuli.
In each stimulus, the visual and haptic parts were positioned symmetrically relative to the center
of the workspace. The distances from the center of the workspace to the middle of the haptic
and the middle of the visual parts of stimuli were {-45, 45}, {-30, 30}, {-15, 15}, {0, 0}, {15,
-15}, {30, -30}, and {45, -45} mm along the horizontal axis, yielding spatial offsets of -90,
-60, -30, 0, 30, 60, and 90 mm. The spatial offsets were the same in the standard and variablesize stimuli presented on each trial. When the spatial offset was zero, the visual and haptics
parts of the stimulus were superimposed. When the offset differed from zero, the visual and
haptic parts were displaced by equal but opposite horizontal distances from the middle of the
workspace (Figure 3). Thus, when the haptic part of the stimulus appeared on one side of the
workspace (preceded by the visible starter spheres indicating the desired position and
orientation of the hand), the observers learned to direct gaze to the corresponding position on
the other side. The observers were told that the visual and haptic parts of the stimulus always
came from the same object. The different offsets were presented in random order within each
block of trials.
Each pairing of standard and variable-size stimuli was presented 30 times to each observer.
Observers indicated which of the two stimuli contained the apparently greater inter-surface
distance. No feedback was given.
Figure 4 shows the JNDs for the various conditions of the main experiment. The gray and black
horizontal lines represent haptic-alone and visual-alone JNDs, respectively, from the
Experiment 1, in which the stimuli were always positioned in the middle of the workspace.
The dashed horizontal lines represent the JNDs predicted by the optimal combination model
(Equation 1). The diamonds represent the JNDs observed with the visual-haptic stimuli. JNDs
Gepshtein et al.
J Vis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 28.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
were generally smallest when the spatial offset was zero. This effect is clearest in the right
panel, which plots the average JNDs for the six observers.
When the spatial offset was zero, the observed visual-haptic JNDs approached the values, one
would expect for optimal combination of the visual and haptic signals. (The only exception
was observer MDT, whose overall performance is better in Experiment 2 than in Experiment
1.) When the offset was large, the visual-haptic JNDs approached the within-modality JNDs.
The results of statistical tests are given in the text accompanying Figures 6 and 7. The results
suggest that the spatial separation between the visual and haptics parts of the stimulus helps
determine whether the signals will be combined.
Experiment 3: Control for Experiment 2
There is, however, another plausible explanation for the change in JNDs with spatial offset
that we observed in Experiment 2. In that experiment, we tested unimodal discrimination
performance only in the center location. Perhaps the increases in JNDs at larger spatial offsets
were caused by increases in the variability of the within-modality estimates at those spatial
positions rather than by a breakdown in inter-modality combination. To test this possibility,
we measured within-modality JNDs at three positions: -45, 0, and 45 mm from midline; these
correspond respectively to the spatial offsets of -90, 0, and 90 mm in Experiment 2. This
experiment was otherwise identical to Experiment 1.
The results are shown in Figure 5. The circles represent the JNDs for vision alone (filled) and
haptics alone (unfilled) at the three positions. The squares represent the predictions of the
optimal model at those positions for every observer (left panels) and averaged across observers
(right panel). The diamonds represent the same observed visual-haptic JNDs as in Figure 4.
When the spatial offset was zero, the visual-haptic JNDs were again consistently smaller than
the JNDs with vision alone and with haptics alone. Presumably, the reduction of JNDs was
caused by combining the two signals optimally or nearly optimally. When the spatial offset
was not zero, the visual-haptic JNDs approached the JNDs with vision alone and haptics alone.
Presumably, that happened because the signals were not combined.
The results in Figure 5 are summarized in Figure 6. The observed within- and inter-modality
JNDs and the predicted inter-modality JNDs for optimal combination are plotted as a function
of the absolute value of the spatial offset. The JNDs at ±90-mm offsets were averaged for each
observer to obtain the values labeled "90-mm offset". The predicted and observed intermodality JNDs are represented by the gray and hatched bars, respectively.
The predicted and observed inter-modality JNDs were quite similar when the offset was 0 mm
(t = 0.83, p > .05); additionally, the observed inter-modality JNDs were always smaller than
the within-modality JNDs. The observed inter-modality JNDs were always higher than the
predicted JNDs when the offset was |90| mm (t = 8.42, p < .001); they became similar to the
within-modality JNDs.
Figure 7 plots the results across observers. Observed inter-modality JNDs are plotted against
predicted JNDs. The diagonal line represents perfect agreement between observed and
predicted JNDs. The zero-offset data are much closer to that line (reduced χ2 = 0.54) than the
|90|-mm offset data . Thus, observers
combined visual and haptic estimates in a nearly optimal fashion when the offset was zero and
did not when it was |90| mm.
Gepshtein et al.
J Vis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 28.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Discussion
Summary of results
Size discrimination with visual-haptic stimuli was most precise when visual and haptic signals
were spatially coincident. In fact, when the signals were coincident, discrimination
performance was statistically indistinguishable from optimal (Equation 1). When they were
not coincident, visual-haptic discrimination precision decreased: At large spatial offsets, it was
as low as the precision with one sense alone. Thus, the spatial separation between visual and
haptic signals is one factor that determines whether the nervous system combines visual and
haptic signals.
Inter-sensory object perception
The visual system correctly interprets most images it receives from the environment in part
because of the perceptual grouping mechanisms that link image features arising from the same
physical source . Features that are near one another spatially tend to come from the same object
and be linked perceptually. Spatially separated features tend to come from different objects
and not be linked perceptually . The work reported here shows that visual and haptic
signals are more likely to be combined when they are spatially coincident. Thus, our results
are clearly related to the visual proximity principle in perceptual organization. As with the
visual proximity principle, using spatial proximity as a cue for inter-sensory combination
should aid everyday object perception by maximizing the probability that signals from the same
rather than different objects are combined.
The model generally used in inter-sensory cue combination states
how sensory precision should increase when inter-sensory signals are combined. The model
does not incorporate the spatial proximity of the signals. Our results suggest that a more general
model is needed: a model in which the mechanism of cue combination takes into account cues
(such as spatial proximity) indicating whether the inter-sensory signals come from the same
Factors influencing signal combination
There are many properties of signals that are likely to affect the nervous system’s ability to
combine information from different senses. In the work presented here, we showed that spatial
separation between visual and haptic signals affects this ability. Gepshtein and Banks 
showed that the difference in size between visual and haptic signals affects the ability for visualhaptic combination as well. In that study, observers made size judgments between spatially
coincident visual and haptic signals. Gepshtein and Banks varied the conflict between the two
signals: the difference in the sizes specified by vision and haptics. Visual-haptic discrimination
performance was best when the conflict was zero and became successively poorer as the
conflict became larger (their Figure S2). Other studies have found that separation in time also
affects the ability to combine signals . Because signals from different modalities
vary along many dimensions, it is a multidimensional classification problem. Such a problem
is often solved by computing a measure of signal similarity that takes into account signal
Gepshtein et al.
J Vis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 28.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
differences on multiple dimensions . Such a measure could be used by the nervous system to determine whether
to combine the signals. To further investigate how signal similarity in several dimensions
affects the integration of visual and haptic information, one could examine the precision of a
multi-modal estimate while varying the stimulus along several sensory dimensions, as we did
here for one dimension. A satisfactory model of this process would have a measure of signal
similarity that reliably predicts the precision of the multi-modal estimate. In that case, different
combinations of signal parameters (e.g., visual and haptic size, location, time of occurrence,
etc.) that correspond to the same similarity value should yield the same precision.
It would be interesting to know whether inter-sensory combination is affected by higher-level
variables such as occlusion relationships, or whether it is affected by only low-level variables
such as spatial proximity. For example, imagine that an occluder is placed in front of the gap
between the visual and haptic parts of our stimulus. With amodal completion , the two parts might appear to belong to the same object. Would observers then combine
more widely separated visual and haptic signals than we observed? Such a finding would
suggest that high-level variables are indeed involved in inter-sensory combination.
What causes the gradual effect of spatial separation?
We observed a gradual rather than abrupt change in the amount of inter-sensory combination
as spatial separation was increased. The most likely cause of this gradual effect is statistical:
If signal similarity was not reduced on any other dimension (e.g., temporal similarity), the
signals might always be combined when the spatial offset is zero, never combined when the
offset is large, and combined some of the time at intermediate offsets. If this occurred, a gradual
effect of spatial separation would be observed as in our experiments.
Are the results a manifestation of spatial attention?
The inter-modality task required attending to both visual and haptic information. If we make
the common assumption that attention has a limited spatial extent, then the separation of the
visual and haptic signals should have affected how attention was allocated to the two signals.
When the signals were in the same location, attention could be directed to one region in space.
When they were in different locations, attention either had to be divided or its spatial extent
had to be expanded in order to incorporate both locations. If we make the additional reasonable
assumption that dividing or expanding attention leads to greater variability in sensory estimates
 , we would predict better discrimination
performance when the visual and haptic signals coincided and poorer performance when they
This divided attention (or expanded attention) account does not contradict the combination
model presented in Equation 1. Rather, the ability to devote attention to visual and haptic signals
when the signals are coincident could be part of the mechanism by which inter-modality
combination occurs. And the inability to divide attention to two different locations when the
signals are not coincident could be part of the mechanism by which inter-modality combination
does not occur. Along these lines, Macaluso, Frith, and Driver and Spence, McDonald,
and Driver have argued that inter-modality attention and inter-modality integration are
mediated by the same neural substrate.
Do the results manifest a unified multi-modal percept?
The improvement in precision observed in the inter-modality experiment could in principle
result from a perceptual process or a decision strategy. By the former, we mean that the
observer’s judgments are based on a unified multi-modal estimate resulting from the weighted
combination of visual and haptic signals . By the latter,
Gepshtein et al.
J Vis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 28.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
we mean that the observer’s decision is based solely on comparing (and weighting
appropriately) the two unimodal signals with-out actually combining them into a unified
percept. That is, the information could still be used optimally, but without the percept of a
single object. Our study cannot distinguish these two possibilities because they could both be
affected by spatial proximity.
Conclusions
We examined the rules that govern the combination of signals from two different senses. When
visual and haptic signals were presented in the same location, combination occurred and this
yielded an improvement in perceptual precision that approached statistical optimality. When
visual and haptic signals were separated by more than ∼3cm, combination did not seem to
occur because perceptual precision was no better than the precision expected from vision or
haptics alone. Thus, the spatial separation of visual and haptic signals is one factor that
determines whether the nervous system combines signals from different senses.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by grants from NIH (EY12851), AFOSR (F49620-01-1-0417), and Silicon Graphics.
Part of this work was presented at the annual Vision Sciences Society meeting, 2004.