FlowNet: Learning Optical Flow with Convolutional Networks
Philipp Fischer∗‡, Alexey Dosovitskiy‡, Eddy Ilg‡, Philip H¨ausser, Caner Hazırbas¸, Vladimir Golkov∗
University of Freiburg
Technical University of Munich
{fischer,dosovits,ilg}@cs.uni-freiburg.de,
{haeusser,hazirbas,golkov}@cs.tum.edu
Patrick van der Smagt
Technical University of Munich
 
Daniel Cremers
Technical University of Munich
 
Thomas Brox
University of Freiburg
 
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have recently
been very successful in a variety of computer vision tasks,
especially on those linked to recognition. Optical ﬂow estimation has not been among the tasks where CNNs were successful. In this paper we construct appropriate CNNs which
are capable of solving the optical ﬂow estimation problem
as a supervised learning task. We propose and compare
two architectures: a generic architecture and another one
including a layer that correlates feature vectors at different
image locations.
Since existing ground truth datasets are not sufﬁciently
large to train a CNN, we generate a synthetic Flying Chairs
dataset. We show that networks trained on this unrealistic
data still generalize very well to existing datasets such as
Sintel and KITTI, achieving competitive accuracy at frame
rates of 5 to 10 fps.
1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks have become the method
of choice in many ﬁelds of computer vision. They are classically applied to classiﬁcation , but recently presented architectures also allow for per-pixel predictions like
semantic segmentation or depth estimation from single
images . In this paper, we propose training CNNs endto-end to learn predicting the optical ﬂow ﬁeld from a pair
of images.
While optical ﬂow estimation needs precise per-pixel localization, it also requires ﬁnding correspondences between
two input images. This involves not only learning image
feature representations, but also learning to match them at
different locations in the two images. In this respect, optical
∗Supported by the Deutsche Telekom Stiftung
‡These authors contributed equally
Figure 1. We present neural networks which learn to estimate optical ﬂow, being trained end-to-end. The information is ﬁrst spatially compressed in a contractive part of the network and then
reﬁned in an expanding part.
ﬂow estimation fundamentally differs from previous applications of CNNs.
Since it was not clear whether this task could be solved
with a standard CNN architecture, we additionally developed an architecture with a correlation layer that explicitly
provides matching capabilities. This architecture is trained
end-to-end. The idea is to exploit the ability of convolutional networks to learn strong features at multiple levels of
scale and abstraction and to help it with ﬁnding the actual
correspondences based on these features. The layers on top
of the correlation layer learn how to predict ﬂow from these
matches. Surprisingly, helping the network this way is not
necessary and even the raw network can learn to predict optical ﬂow with competitive accuracy.
Training such a network to predict generic optical ﬂow
requires a sufﬁciently large training set. Although data augmentation does help, the existing optical ﬂow datasets are
still too small to train a network on par with state of the art.
 
Getting optical ﬂow ground truth for realistic video material
is known to be extremely difﬁcult . Trading in realism
for quantity, we generate a synthetic Flying Chairs dataset
which consists of random background images from Flickr
on which we overlay segmented images of chairs from .
These data have little in common with the real world, but
we can generate arbitrary amounts of samples with custom
properties. CNNs trained on just these data generalize surprisingly well to realistic datasets, even without ﬁne-tuning.
Leveraging an efﬁcient GPU implementation of CNNs,
our method is faster than most competitors. Our networks
predict optical ﬂow at up to 10 image pairs per second on
the full resolution of the Sintel dataset, achieving state-ofthe-art accuracy among real-time methods.
2. Related Work
Optical Flow.
Variational approaches have dominated
optical ﬂow estimation since the work of Horn and
Schunck . Many improvements have been introduced
 . The recent focus was on large displacements,
and combinatorial matching has been integrated into the
variational approach . The work of termed Deep-
Matching and DeepFlow is related to our work in that feature information is aggregated from ﬁne to coarse using
sparse convolutions and max-pooling.
However, it does
not perform any learning and all parameters are set manually. The successive work of termed EpicFlow has
put even more emphasis on the quality of sparse matching
as the matches from are merely interpolated to dense
ﬂow ﬁelds while respecting image boundaries. We only use
a variational approach for optional reﬁnement of the ﬂow
ﬁeld predicted by the convolutional net and do not require
any handcrafted methods for aggregation, matching and interpolation.
Several authors have applied machine learning techniques to optical ﬂow before. Sun et al. study statistics of optical ﬂow and learn regularizers using Gaussian
scale mixtures; Rosenbaum et al. model local statistics of optical ﬂow with Gaussian mixture models. Black et
al. compute principal components of a training set of
ﬂow ﬁelds. To predict optical ﬂow they then estimate coef-
ﬁcients of a linear combination of these ’basis ﬂows’. Other
methods train classiﬁers to select among different inertial
estimates or to obtain occlusion probabilities .
There has been work on unsupervised learning of disparity or motion between frames of videos using neural
network models. These methods typically use multiplicative interactions to model relations between a pair of images. Disparities and optical ﬂow can then be inferred from
the latent variables. Taylor et al. approach the task
with factored gated restricted Boltzmann machines. Konda
and Memisevic use a special autoencoder called ‘synchrony autoencoder’. While these approaches work well
in a controlled setup and learn features useful for activity
recognition in videos, they are not competitive with classical methods on realistic videos.
3. Network Architectures
Convolutional
Convolutional
networks trained with backpropagation have recently been
shown to perform well on large-scale image classiﬁcation
by Krizhevsky et al. . This gave the beginning to a
surge of works on applying CNNs to various computer vision tasks.
While there has been no work on estimating optical ﬂow
with CNNs, there has been research on matching with neural networks. Fischer et al. extract feature representations from CNNs trained in supervised or unsupervised
manner and match these features based on Euclidean distance. Zbontar and LeCun train a CNN with a Siamese
architecture to predict similarity of image patches. A drastic difference of these methods to our approach is that they
are patch based and leave the spatial aggregation to postprocessing, whereas the networks in this paper directly predict complete ﬂow ﬁelds.
Recent applications of CNNs include semantic segmentation , depth prediction , keypoint prediction and edge detection . These tasks are similar to optical ﬂow estimation in that they involve per-pixel
predictions. Since our architectures are largely inspired by
the recent progress in these per-pixel prediction tasks, we
brieﬂy review different approaches.
The simplest solution is to apply a conventional CNN in
a ‘sliding window’ fashion, hence computing a single prediction (e.g. class label) for each input image patch .
This works well in many situations, but has drawbacks:
high computational costs (even with optimized implementations involving re-usage of intermediate feature maps) and
per-patch nature, disallowing to account for global output
properties, for example sharp edges. Another simple approach is to upsample all feature maps to the desired
full resolution and stack them together, resulting in a concatenated per-pixel feature vector that can be used to predict
the value of interest.
Eigen et al. reﬁne a coarse depth map by training an
additional network which gets as inputs the coarse prediction and the input image. Long et al. and Dosovitskiy et
al. iteratively reﬁne the coarse feature maps with the
use of ‘upconvolutional’ layers 1 . Our approach integrates
ideas from both works. Unlike Long et al., we ‘upconvolve’
not just the coarse prediction, but the whole coarse feature
maps, allowing to transfer more high-level information to
the ﬁne prediction. Unlike Dosovitskiy et al., we concate-
1These layers are often named ’deconvolutional’, although the operation they perform is technically convolution, not deconvolution
Figure 2. The two network architectures: FlowNetSimple (top) and FlowNetCorr (bottom).
nate the ‘upconvolution’ results with the features from the
‘contractive’ part of the network.
Convolutional neural networks are known to be very
good at learning input–output relations given enough labeled data. We therefore take an end-to-end learning approach to predicting optical ﬂow: given a dataset consisting
of image pairs and ground truth ﬂows, we train a network
to predict the x–y ﬂow ﬁelds directly from the images. But
what is a good architecture for this purpose?
A simple choice is to stack both input images together
and feed them through a rather generic network, allowing
the network to decide itself how to process the image pair to
extract the motion information. This is illustrated in Fig. 2
(top). We call this architecture consisting only of convolutional layers ‘FlowNetSimple’.
In principle, if this network is large enough, it could learn
to predict optical ﬂow. However, we can never be sure that a
local gradient optimization like stochastic gradient descent
can get the network to this point. Therefore, it could be beneﬁcial to hand-design an architecture which is less generic,
but may perform better with the given data and optimization
techniques.
A straightforward step is to create two separate, yet identical processing streams for the two images and to combine
them at a later stage as shown in Fig. 2 (bottom). With
this architecture the network is constrained to ﬁrst produce
meaningful representations of the two images separately
and then combine them on a higher level. This roughly
resembles the standard matching approach when one ﬁrst
extracts features from patches of both images and then compares those feature vectors. However, given feature representations of two images, how would the network ﬁnd correspondences?
To aid the network in this matching process, we introduce a ‘correlation layer’ that performs multiplicative patch
comparisons between two feature maps.
An illustration
of the network architecture ‘FlowNetCorr’ containing this
layer is shown in Fig. 2 (bottom). Given two multi-channel
feature maps f1, f2 : R2 →Rc, with w, h, and c being their
width, height and number of channels, our correlation layer
lets the network compare each patch from f1 with each path
For now we consider only a single comparison of two
patches. The ’correlation’ of two patches centered at x1 in
the ﬁrst map and x2 in the second map is then deﬁned as
c(x1, x2) =
o∈[−k,k]×[−k,k]
⟨f1(x1 + o), f2(x2 + o)⟩
for a square patch of size K := 2k + 1. Note that Eq. 1
is identical to one step of a convolution in neural networks,
but instead of convolving data with a ﬁlter, it convolves data
with other data. For this reason, it has no trainable weights.
Computing c(x1, x2) involves c · K2 multiplications.
Comparing all patch combinations involves w2 · h2 such
computations, yields a large result and makes efﬁcient forward and backward passes intractable. Thus, for computa-
Figure 3. Reﬁnement of the coarse feature maps to the high resolution prediction.
tional reasons we limit the maximum displacement for comparisons and also introduce striding in both feature maps.
Given a maximum displacement d, for each location x1
we compute correlations c(x1, x2) only in a neighborhood
of size D := 2d + 1, by limiting the range of x2. We use
strides s1 and s2, to quantize x1 globally and to quantize x2
within the neighborhood centered around x1.
In theory, the result produced by the correlation is fourdimensional: for every combination of two 2D positions we
obtain a correlation value, i.e. the scalar product of the two
vectors which contain the values of the cropped patches respectively. In practice we organize the relative displacements in channels. This means we obtain an output of size
(w × h × D2). For the backward pass we implemented the
derivatives with respect to each bottom blob accordingly.
Reﬁnement.
CNNs are good at extracting high-level abstract features of images, by interleaving convolutional layers and pooling, i.e. spatially shrinking the feature maps.
Pooling is necessary to make network training computationally feasible and, more fundamentally, to allow aggregation
of information over large areas of the input images. However, pooling results in reduced resolution, so in order to
provide dense per-pixel predictions we need a way to reﬁne
the coarse pooled representation.
Our approach to this reﬁnement is depicted in Figure 3.
The main ingredient are ‘upconvolutional’ layers, consisting of unpooling (extending the feature maps, as opposed to
pooling) and a convolution. Such layers have been used previously . To perform the reﬁnement, we
apply the ‘upconvolution’ to feature maps, and concatenate
it with corresponding feature maps from the ’contractive’
part of the network and an upsampled coarser ﬂow prediction (if available). This way we preserve both the high-level
information passed from coarser feature maps and ﬁne local information provided in lower layer feature maps. Each
step increases the resolution twice. We repeat this 4 times,
resulting in a predicted ﬂow for which the resolution is still
4 times smaller than the input.
We discover that further reﬁnement from this resolution
does not signiﬁcantly improve the results, compared to a
Ground truth
FlowNetS+v
Figure 4. The effect of variational reﬁnement. In case of small
motions (ﬁrst row) the predicted ﬂow is changed dramatically. For
larger motions (second row), big errors are not corrected, but the
ﬂow ﬁeld is smoothed, resulting in lower EPE.
computationally less expensive bilinear upsampling to full
image resolution. The result of this bilinear upsampling is
the ﬁnal ﬂow predicted by the network.
In an alternative scheme, instead of bilinear upsampling
we use the variational approach from without the matching term: we start at the 4 times downsampled resolution
and then use the coarse to ﬁne scheme with 20 iterations to
bring the ﬂow ﬁeld to the full resolution. Finally, we run 5
more iterations at the full image resolution. We additionally
compute image boundaries with the approach from and
respect the detected boundaries by replacing the smoothness coefﬁcient by α = exp(−λb(x, y)κ), where b(x, y)
denotes the thin boundary strength resampled at the respective scale and between pixels. This upscaling method is
more computationally expensive than simple bilinear upsampling, but adds the beneﬁts of variational methods to
obtain smooth and subpixel-accurate ﬂow ﬁelds. In the following, we denote the results obtained by this variational
reﬁnement with a ‘+v’ sufﬁx. An example of variational
reﬁnement can be seen in Fig. 4.
4. Training Data
Unlike traditional approaches, neural networks require
data with ground truth not only for optimizing several parameters, but to learn to perform the task from scratch. In
general, obtaining such ground truth is hard, because true
pixel correspondences for real world scenes cannot easily be
determined. An overview of the available datasets is given
in Table 1.
Frames with
Ground truth
ground truth
density per frame
Middlebury
Flying Chairs
Table 1. Size of already available datasets and the proposed Flying
Chairs dataset.
4.1. Existing Datasets
The Middlebury dataset contains only 8 image pairs
for training, with ground truth ﬂows generated using four
different techniques. Displacements are very small, typically below 10 pixels.
The KITTI dataset is larger (194 training image
pairs) and includes large displacements, but contains only a
very special motion type. The ground truth is obtained from
real world scenes by simultaneously recording the scenes
with a camera and a 3D laser scanner. This assumes that the
scene is rigid and that the motion stems from a moving observer. Moreover, motion of distant objects, such as the sky,
cannot be captured, resulting in sparse optical ﬂow ground
The MPI Sintel dataset obtains ground truth from rendered artiﬁcial scenes with special attention to realistic image properties. Two versions are provided: the Final version contains motion blur and atmospheric effects, such as
fog, while the Clean version does not include these effects.
Sintel is the largest dataset available (1,041 training image
pairs for each version) and provides dense ground truth for
small and large displacement magnitudes.
4.2. Flying Chairs
The Sintel dataset is still too small to train large CNNs.
To provide enough training data, we create a simple synthetic dataset, which we name Flying Chairs, by applying
afﬁne transformations to images collected from Flickr and
a publicly available rendered set of 3D chair models .
We retrieve 964 images from Flickr2 with a resolution of
1, 024 × 768 from the categories ‘city’ (321), ‘landscape’
(129) and ‘mountain’ (514). We cut the images into 4 quadrants and use the resulting 512 × 384 image crops as background. As foreground objects we add images of multiple chairs from to the background. From the original
dataset we remove very similar chairs, resulting in 809 chair
types and 62 views per chair available. Examples are shown
in Figure 5.
To generate motion, we randomly sample afﬁne transformation parameters for the background and the chairs. The
chairs’ transformations are relative to the background transformation, which can be interpreted as both the camera and
the objects moving. Using the transformation parameters
we render the second image, the optical ﬂow and occlusion
All parameters for each image pair (number, types, sizes
and initial positions of the chairs; transformation parameters) are randomly sampled. We adjust the random distributions of these parameters in such a way that the resulting displacement histogram is similar to the one from Sintel
2Non-commercial public license. We use the code framework by Hays
and Efros 
(details can be found in the supplementary material). Using this procedure, we generate a dataset with 22,872 image pairs and ﬂow ﬁelds (we re-use each background image
multiple times). Note that this size is chosen arbitrarily and
could be larger in principle.
4.3. Data Augmentation
A widely used strategy to improve generalization of neural networks is data augmentation . Even though
the Flying Chairs dataset is fairly large, we ﬁnd that using augmentations is crucial to avoid overﬁtting. We perform augmentation online during network training.
augmentations we use include geometric transformations:
translation, rotation and scaling, as well as additive Gaussian noise and changes in brightness, contrast, gamma, and
color. To be reasonably quick, all these operations are processed on the GPU. Some examples of augmentation are
given in Fig. 5.
As we want to increase not only the variety of images
but also the variety of ﬂow ﬁelds, we apply the same strong
geometric transformation to both images of a pair, but additionally a smaller relative transformation between the two
images. We adapt the ﬂow ﬁeld accordingly by applying the
per-image augmentations to the ﬂow ﬁeld from either side.
Speciﬁcally we sample translation from a the range
[−20%, 20%] of the image width for x and y; rotation from
[−17◦, 17◦]; scaling from [0.9, 2.0]. The Gaussian noise
has a sigma uniformly sampled from [0, 0.04]; contrast is
sampled within [−0.8, 0.4]; multiplicative color changes to
the RGB channels per image from [0.5, 2]; gamma values
from [0.7, 1.5] and additive brightness changes using Gaussian with a sigma of 0.2.
5. Experiments
We report the results of our networks on the Sintel,
KITTI and Middlebury datasets, as well as on our synthetic
Flying Chairs dataset. We also experiment with ﬁne-tuning
of the networks on Sintel data and variational reﬁnement of
the predicted ﬂow ﬁelds. Additionally, we report runtimes
of our networks, in comparison to other methods.
5.1. Network and Training Details
The exact architectures of the networks we train are
shown in Fig. 2. Overall, we try to keep the architectures of
different networks consistent: they have nine convolutional
layers with stride of 2 (the simplest form of pooling) in six
of them and a ReLU nonlinearity after each layer. We do not
have any fully connected layers, which allows the networks
to take images of arbitrary size as input. Convolutional ﬁlter sizes decrease towards deeper layers of networks: 7 × 7
for the ﬁrst layer, 5 × 5 for the following two layers and
3 × 3 starting from the fourth layer. The number of feature
maps increases in the deeper layers, roughly doubling after
Figure 5. Two examples from the Flying Chairs dataset. Generated image pair and color coded ﬂow ﬁeld (ﬁrst three columns), augmented
image pair and corresponding color coded ﬂow ﬁeld respectively (last three columns).
each layer with a stride of 2. For the correlation layer in
FlowNetC we chose the parameters k = 0, d = 20, s1 = 1,
s2 = 2. As training loss we use the endpoint error (EPE),
which is the standard error measure for optical ﬂow estimation. It is the Euclidean distance between the predicted ﬂow
vector and the ground truth, averaged over all pixels.
For training CNNs we use a modiﬁed version of the
caffe framework. We choose Adam as optimization method because for our task it shows faster convergence than standard stochastic gradient descent with momentum. We ﬁx the parameters of Adam as recommended
in : β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.999. Since, in a sense, every
pixel is a training sample, we use fairly small mini-batches
of 8 image pairs. We start with learning rate λ = 1e−4
and then divide it by 2 every 100k iterations after the ﬁrst
300k. With FlowNetCorr we observe exploding gradients
with λ = 1e−4. To tackle this problem, we start by training
with a very low learning rate λ = 1e−6, slowly increase it
to reach λ = 1e−4 after 10k iterations and then follow the
schedule just described.
To monitor overﬁtting during training and ﬁne-tuning,
we split the Flying Chairs dataset into 22, 232 training and
640 test samples and split the Sintel training set into 908
training and 133 validation pairs.
We found that upscaling the input images during testing
may improve the performance. Although the optimal scale
depends on the speciﬁc dataset, we ﬁxed the scale once for
each network for all tasks. For FlowNetS we do not upscale,
for FlowNetC we chose a factor of 1.25.
Fine-tuning.
The used datasets are very different in terms
of object types and motions they include. A standard solution is to ﬁne-tune the networks on the target datasets.
The KITTI dataset is small and only has sparse ﬂow ground
truth. Therefore, we choose to ﬁne-tune on the Sintel training set. We use images from the Clean and Final versions
of Sintel together and ﬁne-tune using a low learning rate
λ = 1e−6 for several thousand iterations. For best performance, after deﬁning the optimal number of iterations using
a validation set, we then ﬁne-tune on the whole training set
for the same number of iterations. In tables we denote ﬁnetuned networks with a ‘+ft’ sufﬁx.
5.2. Results
Table 2 shows the endpoint error (EPE) of our networks
and several well-performing methods on public datasets
(Sintel, KITTI, Middlebury), as well as on our Flying
Chairs dataset. Additionally we show runtimes of different
methods on Sintel.
The networks trained just on the non-realistic Flying
Chairs perform very well on real optical ﬂow datasets, beating for example the well-known LDOF method. After ﬁne-tuning on Sintel our networks can outperform the
competing real-time method EPPM on Sintel Final and
KITTI while being twice as fast.
From Table 2 one can see that FlowNetC is better
than FlowNetS on Sintel Clean, while on Sintel Final the
situation changes. On this difﬁcult dataset, FlowNetS+ft+v
is even on par with DeepFlow.
Since the average endpoint error often favors over-smoothed solutions, it is interesting to see qualitative results of our method. Figure 7
shows examples of the raw optical ﬂow predicted by the two
FlowNets (without ﬁne-tuning), compared to ground truth
and EpicFlow. The ﬁgure shows how the nets often produce visually appealing results, but are still worse in terms
of endpoint error. Taking a closer look reveals that one reason for this may be the noisy non-smooth output of the nets
especially in large smooth background regions. This we can
partially compensate with variational reﬁnement.
The KITTI dataset contains strong projective
transformations which are very different from what the networks encountered during training on Flying Chairs. Still,
the raw network output is already fairly good, and additional
ﬁne-tuning and variational reﬁnement give a further boost.
Interestingly, ﬁne-tuning on Sintel improves the results on
Sintel Clean
Sintel Final
Middlebury train
Middlebury test
Time (sec)
EpicFlow 
DeepFlow 
FlowNetS+v
FlowNetS+ft
FlowNetS+ft+v
FlowNetC+v
FlowNetC+ft
FlowNetC+ft+v
Table 2. Average endpoint errors (in pixels) of our networks compared to several well-performing methods on different datasets. The
numbers in parentheses are the results of the networks on data they were trained on, and hence are not directly comparable to other results.
Ground truth
Figure 6. Examples of optical ﬂow prediction on the Flying Chairs
dataset. The images include ﬁne details and small objects with
large displacements which EpicFlow often fails to ﬁnd. The networks are much more successful.
KITTI, probably because the images and motions in Sintel are more natural than in Flying Chairs. The FlowNetS
outperforms FlowNetC on this dataset.
Flying Chairs.
Our networks are trained on the Flying
Chairs, and hence are expected to perform best on those.
When training, we leave aside a test set consisting of 640
images. Table 2 shows the results of various methods on this
test set, some example predictions are shown in Fig. 6. One
can see that FlowNetC outperforms FlowNetS and that the
nets outperform all state-of-the-art methods. Another interesting ﬁnding is that this is the only dataset where the variational reﬁnement does not improve performance but makes
things worse. Apparently the networks can do better than
variational reﬁnement already. This indicates that with a
more realistic training set, the networks might also perform
even better on other data.
In Table 2 we show the per-frame runtimes of
different methods in seconds. Unfortunately, many methods only provide the runtime on a single CPU, whereas our
FlowNet uses layers only implemented on GPU. While the
error rates of the networks are below the state of the art,
they are the best among real-time methods. For both training and testing of the networks we use an NVIDIA GTX Titan GPU. The CPU timings of DeepFlow and EpicFlow are
taken from , while the timing of LDOF was computed
on a single 2.66GHz core.
5.3. Analysis
Training data.
To check if we beneﬁt from using the
Flying Chairs dataset instead of Sintel, we trained a network just on Sintel, leaving aside a validation set to control
the performance. Thanks to aggressive data augmentation,
even Sintel alone is enough to learn optical ﬂow fairly well.
When testing on Sintel, the network trained exclusively on
Sintel has EPE roughly 1 pixel higher than the net trained
on Flying Chairs and ﬁne-tuned on Sintel.
The Flying Chairs dataset is fairly large, so is data augmentation still necessary? The answer is positive: training
a network without data augmentation on the Flying Chairs
results in an EPE increase of roughly 2 pixels when testing
on Sintel.
Comparing the architectures.
The results in Table 2 allow to draw conclusions about strengths and weaknesses of
the two architectures we tested.
First, FlowNetS generalizes to Sintel Final better than
FlowNetC. On the other hand, FlowNetC outperforms
FlowNetS on Flying chairs and Sintel Clean. Note that Flying Chairs do not include motion blur or fog, as in Sintel
Final. These results together suggest that even though the
number of parameters of the two networks is virtually the
same, the FlowNetC slightly more overﬁts to the training
data. This does not mean the network remembers the training samples by heart, but it adapts to the kind of data it is
presented during training. Though in our current setup this
can be seen as a weakness, if better training data were available it could become an advantage.
Second, FlowNetC seems to have more problems with
large displacements.
This can be seen from the results
Ground truth
Figure 7. Examples of optical ﬂow prediction on the Sintel dataset. In each row left to right: overlaid image pair, ground truth ﬂow and 3
predictions: EpicFlow, FlowNetS and FlowNetC. Endpoint error is shown for every frame. Note that even though the EPE of FlowNets is
usually worse than that of EpicFlow, the networks often better preserve ﬁne details.
on KITTI discussed above, and also from detailed performance analysis on Sintel Final (not shown in the tables).
FlowNetS+ft achieves an s40+ error (EPE on pixels with
displacements of at least 40 pixels) of 43.3px, and for
FlowNetC+ft this value is 48px. One explanation is that the
maximum displacement of the correlation does not allow to
predict very large motions. This range can be increased at
the cost of computational efﬁciency.
6. Conclusion
Building on recent progress in design of convolutional
network architectures, we have shown that it is possible to
train a network to directly predict optical ﬂow from two input images. Intriguingly, the training data need not be realistic. The artiﬁcial Flying Chairs dataset including just
afﬁne motions of synthetic rigid objects is sufﬁcient to predict optical ﬂow in natural scenes with competitive accuracy. This proves the generalization capabilities of the presented networks. On the test set of the Flying Chairs the
CNNs even outperform state-of-the-art methods like Deep-
Flow and EpicFlow. It will be interesting to see how future
networks perform as more realistic training data becomes
available.
Acknowledgments
The work was partially funded by the ERC Starting
Grants VideoLearn and ConvexVision, by the DFG Grants
BR-3815/7-1 and CR 250/13-1, and by the EC FP7 project
610967 (TACMAN).