The Counting Stroop: An Interference
Task Specialized for Functional
Neuroimaging—Validation Study
With Functional MRI
George Bush,1–3* Paul J. Whalen,2 Bruce R. Rosen,1,3 Michael A. Jenike,2
Sean C. McInerney,2 and Scott L. Rauch1–3
1Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Center, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02129
2Department of Psychiatry, Psychiatric Neuroscience Program, Massachusetts General Hospital
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02129
3Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142
Abstract: The anterior cingulate cortex has been activated by color Stroop tasks, supporting the hypothesis
that it is recruited to mediate response selection or allocate attentional resources when confronted with
competing information-processing streams. The current study used the newly developed ‘‘Counting
Stroop’’ to identify the mediating neural substrate of cognitive interference. The Counting Stroop, a Stroop
variant allowing on-line response time measurements while obviating speech, was created because
speaking produces head movements that can exceed those tolerated by functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI), preventing the collection of vital performance data. During this task, subjects report by
button-press the number of words (1–4) on the screen, regardless of word meaning. Interference trials
contain number words that are incongruent with the correct response (e.g., ‘‘two’’ written three times),
while neutral trials contain single semantic category common animals (e.g., ‘‘bird’’). Nine normal
right-handed adult volunteers underwent fMRI while performing the Counting Stroop. Group fMRI data
revealed signiﬁcant (P # 10-4) activity in the cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex when
contrasting the interference vs. neutral conditions. On-line performance data showed 1) longer reaction
times for interference blocks than for neutral ones, and 2) decreasing reaction times with practice during
interference trials (diminished interference effects), indicating that learning occurred. The performance
data proved to be a useful guide in analyzing the image data. The relative difference in anterior cingulate
activity between the interference and neutral conditions decreased as subjects learned the task. These
ﬁndings have ramiﬁcations for attentional, cognitive interference, learning, and motor control mechanism
theories. Hum. Brain Mapping 6:270–282, 1998.
r 1998 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
Key words: Stroop; cognitive interference; attention; functional magnetic resonance imaging; cingulate;
learning; habituation; practice; response selection; motor
Contract grant sponsor: Clinical Investigator Training Program of
Harvard/MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology-Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, in collaboration with Pﬁzer, Inc.; Contract grant sponsor: NIMH; Contract grant number: MH-01215.
The results from this study were presented in preliminary form at
the Fourth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Neuroscience Society in
Boston, MA. 
*Correspondence to: George Bush, M.D., M.M.Sc., Psychiatric Neuroscience Program, Massachusetts General Hospital-East, CNY-9, Building 149, Thirteenth Street, Charlestown, MA 02129. Phone: (617)
724–6142; Fax: (617) 726–4078; E-mail: 
Received for publication 28 July 1997; accepted 7 April 1998
r Human Brain Mapping 6:270–282 r
r 1998 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
INTRODUCTION
Cognitive interference occurs when the processing
of one stimulus feature impedes the simultaneous
processing of a second stimulus attribute. Although
many investigators have reported aspects of this topic,
the essence of the second experiment described in the
landmark article of Stroop (hereafter, ‘‘Color
Stroop’’) has become the prototypical interference task.
Elegant in its simplicity and extremely reliable [Santos
and Montgomery, 1962; Jensen, 1965; Smith and Nyman, 1974; Schubo and Hentschel, 1977], it possesses
the ability to tell us much about the essential mechanisms of attention and cognition in both normal
humans and those with neuropsychological impairments [Treisman and Fearnley, 1969; Dyer, 1973; MacLeod, 1991].
A number of excellent review articles [Jensen and
Rohwer, 1966; Dyer, 1973; MacLeod, 1991] have detailed the historical background and subsequent signiﬁcance of Stroop’s work. Actually, the ‘‘Stroop interference effect’’ traditionally describes the second of three
different tasks reported on in Stroop . Speciﬁcally, he reported that it took longer for subjects to
name the color of the ink that color words were written
in when the ink color and color word did not match
(e.g., the word red written in blue ink, correct answer
blue) than it did for them to simply name the color of
colored squares.
The underlying neural substrate of cognitive interference has yet to be determined. We focused upon the
anterior cingulate cortex in this study, hypothesizing
that it plays a central role in interference and attentional tasks by mediating response selection and/or by
allocating attentional resources when confronted with
competing information-processing streams, consistent
with the theories of Vogt et al. , Paus et al. ,
Posner and Dehaene , and Devinsky et al. .
Although the exact mechanistic role of cingulate cortex
in distributed attentional networks is debated [Posner
and Petersen, 1990; Mesulam, 1990; Colby, 1991], the
anterior cingulate is incorporated into all these models
of attention. Convergent evidence from positron emission tomography (PET) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies has implicated the anterior cingulate cortex as playing a pivotal role in
attention. Speciﬁcally, anterior cingulate activation has
been observed during Color Stroop tasks [Pardo et al.,
1990; Bench et al., 1993; George et al., 1994; Carter et al.,
1995]. The anterior cingulate has also been recruited
during a divided attention task [Corbetta et al., 1991;
Bush et al., 1995].
Seeking to develop an fMRI probe that might shed
new light on attentional processing in both normals
and neuropsychiatrically impaired populations, we
initially considered the traditional Color Stroop. Despite its numerous positive features, however, some
serious drawbacks limit its use in the fMRI environment. In any cognitive experiment, it is important to
have an objective measure of task performance. Concomitantly collected performance data are vital, in that
they 1) show that subjects are actually engaged in the
task and 2) allow one to examine changes in neuronal
activity as it relates to subjects’ performance as they
practice the task. Unfortunately, speaking produces
head movements that can exceed those tolerated by
fMRI (which can be seriously affected by motion of
only 2–3 mm). An alternative strategy of arbitrarily
labelling four buttons with color names is not optimal,
as it adds an undesired layer of cognitive complexity
and requires subjects to have training in order to learn
the designated button-color combinations. Use of a
Color Stroop with fewer colors might avoid the issue
of cognitive complexity, but a review [MacLeod, 1991]
of relevant studies that varied stimulus set sizes
[Golden, 1974; Gholson and Hohle, 1968; Ray, 1974;
McClain, 1983; Williams, 1977] and response set sizes
[Ray, 1974; Nielssen, 1975; La Heij et al., 1985] could
not provide a deﬁnitive conclusion on effects of manipulating either parameter. Therefore, to facilitate
comparisons with existing Stroop task neuroimaging
data, a stimulus/response set size of four is desirable.
With regard to practice effects, it is true that subjects
can improve Color Stroop performance with extensive
practice, but this generally occurs over a period of
hours to days, if at all [MacLeod, 1991]. Use of a task
that subjects learn quickly (such as the Counting
Stroop) allows one to examine practice-related neuronal modulation with fMRI.
The Counting Stroop was created to address these
issues. It is a button-press Stroop interference variant
that 1) allows on-line response time measurements
without requiring speech, and 2) demonstrates signiﬁcant behavioral improvement within 100 trials. The
current study used the Counting Stroop to identify and
characterize the mediating neural substrate of cognitive interference, with particular attention to the activity of the anterior cingulate cortex.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Informed consent was obtained following the established guidelines of the Massachusetts General Hospir The Counting Stroop r
tal Subcommittee on Human Subjects. All 9 subjects (5
males, 4 females, mean age 24.2 years (SD, 2.3 years)
were strongly right-handed as assessed by the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory [Oldﬁeld, 1971]. All had
normal or corrected-to-normal vision and were native
English speakers. No subject had a history of neurological, major medical, or psychiatric disorder; and none
were taking medication. All speciﬁcally denied a history of attention deﬁcit disorder or serious head injury.
Subjects entered the study with knowledge that they
would be paid for each session.
Psychophysical procedures
For the Counting Stroop (see Fig. 1), subjects were
told that they would see sets of 1–4 identical words
appear on the screen, and were instructed to report, via
button-press, the number of words in each set, regardless of what the words were. During ‘‘neutral’’ blocks,
the words were names of common animals (dog, cat,
bird, or mouse). During ‘‘interference’’ blocks, the
stimuli consisted of the number words ‘‘one,’’ ‘‘two,’’
‘‘three,’’ or ‘‘four.’’ Thus, both sets of stimuli were
common words within a single semantic category,
balanced for length of word. Subjects were instructed
that the keypad buttons represented one, two, three,
and four from left to right, and subjects used the index
and middle ﬁngers of each hand to respond. Subjects
were explicitly told that the sets would change every
1.5 sec. Furthermore, they were 1) instructed to ‘‘answer as quickly as possible, but since getting the
correct answer is important, do not sacriﬁce accuracy
for speed,’’ and 2) told, ‘‘Do not ’blur your vision’ in an
attempt to make the task easier—Keep the words in
sharp focus.’’ After instructions were reviewed, and
just prior to entering the scanner, subjects completed a
1-min computerized practice version of the task (20
neutral trials followed by 20 interference trials).
As illustrated in Figure 1, scans started and ended
with 30 sec of ﬁxation on a small dot. Eye movements
were not monitored. Subjects completed two scans
each of the Counting Stroop, where four 30-sec blocks
of the neutral words alternated with four interference
blocks. Given a ﬁxed interstimulus interval of 1.5 sec,
subjects completed 20 trials during each (neutral/
interference) block, 80 trials of each type during a
single scan, and 160 total trials of each type during the
two-scan session. The order of presentation, regarding
the neutral and interference blocks, was counterbalanced across runs and subjects.
Functional MRI scanning techniques
and data analysis
Functional MRI scanning techniques developed by
the Massachusetts General Hospital NMR Center were
used. These methods have been extensively described
previously [Cohen and Weisskoff, 1991; Kwong, 1995;
Tootell et al., 1995]. Subjects were scanned in a General
Electric Signa 1.5 Tesla high-speed imaging device
(modiﬁed by Advanced NMR Systems, Wilmington,
MA) using a quadrature head coil. The Instascan
software is a variant of the echoplanar technique ﬁrst
described by Mansﬁeld . Head stabilization was
achieved using a plastic bite bar, molded to each
subject’s dentition. The subjects lay on a padded
scanner couch in a dimly-illuminated room, and wore
foam ear plugs that attenuate high-intensity scanner
sounds, but allow spoken instructions to be heard well.
Stimuli were generated on a Macintosh 100 MHz
PowerPC(tm) computer using a Radius interface
(model 0355, Videovision), and projected, via a Sharp
XG-2000V color LCD projector, through a collimating
lens onto a hemicircular tangent screen. This rearprojection screen was secured vertically within the
magnet bore at neck level after the subject had been
positioned. Subjects viewed the images through a
Trial examples and block design. Top: Examples of single trials for
the two types of stimuli. Both sets of word stimuli were common
words from a single semantic category. During ‘‘neutral’’ trials,
common animal names (dog, cat, bird, or mouse) were used.
During ‘‘interference’’ blocks, the words consisted of number
names (one, two, three, or four). In both examples, the correct
answer would be to press button number 4. Bottom: An example
of how these 1.5-sec individual trials were blocked for a single
representative fMRI scan. After a 30-sec period of ﬁxation (F),
subjects completed 4 min of alternating 30-sec blocks of neutral
(N) and interference (I) trials, and ﬁnished with 30 sec of ﬁxation.
For the second scan, the block order was counterbalanced.
r Bush et al. r
tilted mirror placed directly in front of their heads.
Individual words subtended approximately 1° of the
visual angle vertically, and a group of four words
subtended a visual angle of approximately 6° vertically.
Initially, a sagittal localizer scan was done to provide
both a reference for slice selection in later scans and a
high resolution scan for localization according to
Talairach and Tournoux (SPGR, 60 slices, resolution 0.898 3 0.898 3 2.8 mm). Next, shimming was
done to maximize ﬁeld homogeneity [Reese et al., 1995]. In
the third scan series, subjects had an MR angiogram,
taken in the form of a spoiled gradient recall (SPGR,
resolution 0.78125 3 .78125 3 2.8 mm), to identify
large- and medium-diameter blood vessels. The fourth
series was a set of T1-weighted high-resolution axial
anatomic scans (resolution 3.125 3 3.125 3 9 mm). For
the functional series, asymmetric spin-echo (ASE) sequences (TE 5 50 msec, TR 5 2,000 msec, ﬂip angle
90°, FOV 5 40 3 20 cm, matrix 5 64 3 64, in-plane
resolution 3.125 3 3.125 mm, slice thickness 5 9 mm,
150 images/slice) were used to minimize macrovascular signal contributions. The angiogram, T1 anatomical, and ASE functional slices (series 3–5) were collected
using identical slice prescriptions. Twelve contiguous,
interleaved slices, parallel to the anterior-posterior
commissure line, were obtained for all studies.
All data sets had the amount of motion quantiﬁed,
and were then motion-corrected. The mean displacement for all studies was 0.9 mm (SD, 1.2 mm).
Motion-correction was accomplished using an algorithm developed by Jiang et al. , based on that of
Woods et al. . This process corrupts the images
from the ﬁrst and last slices of a stack; therefore, these
were discarded from further analysis. The functional
scans were transformed into a standardized anatomical space [Talairach and Tournoux, 1988].
Statistical analysis of functional images for regions
of signiﬁcant change was accomplished using a multistep process. Nonparametric statistical maps were
calculated using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) statistic, and displayed in pseudocolor, scaled according to
signiﬁcance, and (after reslicing into coronal orientation) superimposed on (resliced) T1-weighted highresolution sagittal localizer scans. As an objective
measure of activated regions, an automated regiondeﬁning algorithm was used on smoothed KS maps
[Jiang et al., 1996; Bush et al., 1996]. Smoothing was
done using a Gaussian ﬁlter with a sigma of 1.1, giving
an effective resolution of 8.1 3 8.1 mm full width half
maximum (FWHM). Signiﬁcance values of local
maxima (P # 10-4) within these identiﬁed regions are
reported based upon the native (unsmoothed) statistical maps.
Based on off-line pilot work, in which we observed
subjects demonstrating improved performance over a
period of minutes, we predicted that the group reaction time data could be used as a guide in analyzing
image data. Speciﬁcally, we sought to examine scan
epochs during which, as a group, subjects showed
signiﬁcant interference effects. We predicted that this
approach would permit us to cull out those epochs that
did not show a difference in reaction time between
interference and neutral block-pairs (and thus would
presumably be contributing noise to the analysis),
therefore narrowing our focus to epochs containing
processes involved in cognitive interference.
Behavioral results
As has been stated, one of the main goals for the
study was to use the reaction time (RT) results as a
guide in analyzing the imaging data. In this manner
we could have a measure of when signiﬁcant interference was occurring and also observe how practicerelated learning of the task modulated neuronal activity. Subjects showed an overall increase in RT during
interference blocks (mean 709 msec, SD 119 msec) as
compared to neutral blocks (mean 663 msec, SD 107
msec). All 9 subjects exhibited longer RTs during
interference blocks, displaying a mean increase in RT
of 46 msec (SD 20). A repeated-measures condition
(interference vs. neutral) 3 epoch (8 time epochs
across 2 scans) ANOVA demonstrated a signiﬁcant
main effect for condition (F 5 40.16, df 5 1, P , 0.001)
and epoch (F 5 4.48, df 5 7, P , 0.001), and a
signiﬁcant condition 3 epoch interaction (F 5 3.3, df 5
7, P , 0.01). Figure 2 illustrates this interaction, as the
early RT disadvantage during interference vs. neutral
epochs diminished with practice, decreasing to nonsigniﬁcant levels over the course of two scans. Planned
comparisons demonstrated signiﬁcant increases in RT
for interference vs. neutral conditions during the ﬁrst
ﬁve block-pair epochs. Importantly, while the RTs
during interference blocks were observed to decrease
(presumably due to practice effects), the neutral task
RTs remained relatively constant from beginning to
end of the scans.
Accuracy data (percentage correct) remained stable
throughout the scanning sessions for all subjects
(mean 5 96.6%, SD 5 2.3%, range 5 88.8–100%). Mean
accuracy scores were no different for interference trials
during scan 1 (94.5%, SD 2.3%) and scan 2 (96.3%, SD
3.0%) (NS), and they were no different for neutral trials
(scan 1 5 97.2%, SD 2.1%; scan 2 5 98.2%, SD 2.0%)
r The Counting Stroop r
(NS). Subjects showed a small but statistically signiﬁcant decrement in accuracy during interference trials
(95.4%, SD 2.1%) as compared to neutral trials (97.7%,
SD 1.9%) (t 5 -2.44, P 5 0.02).
Functional MRI results
As predicted (and illustrated in Fig. 3a), activation
was seen in the anterior cingulate when comparing all
interference blocks with all neutral blocks (i.e., 8
block-pairs per subject). This anterior cingulate activation was in close proximity to those found in other
Stroop neuroimaging studies [Pardo et al., 1990; George
et al., 1994, 1997; Carter et al., 1995; Derbyshire et al.,
1998]. This activity reﬂects the overall differences in RT
observed between the interference and neutral blocks
seen accompanying Figure 3b.
The RT performance data proved useful when interpreting the fMRI data. Interestingly, while using scan
results from all 8 interference-neutral block-pairs gave
a P 5 6.7 3 10-6 in the anterior cingulate region,
analysis of only the ﬁrst 5 block-pairs (i.e., those which
demonstrated a signiﬁcant RT difference; see Fig. 2)
yielded a ‘‘more signiﬁcant’’ P value in this region of
interest of 9.9 3 10-7. Thus, the relative difference in
fMRI signal during the ﬁrst 5 block-pairs alone was
statistically more signiﬁcant than when using all 8
block-pairs, despite the smaller number of images
compared (and hence the test’s reduced power to
detect a difference).
Therefore, using the behavioral data as a guide, the
Counting Stroop was seen to activate a network of
brain regions involved in attention, response selection,
motor planning, and motor output. These areas included the anterior cingulate cortex, middle frontal
gyri, premotor and primary motor cortex, inferior temporal gyrus, and superior parietal lobule (see Table I).
Decreasing anterior cingulate activity with practice
Activity within the anterior cingulate region paralleled the observed practice-related interference block
Performance data. Mean reaction times for the 8 interferenceneutral word block-pairs were collected while subjects were being
scanned. During the ﬁrst 5 of 8 block-pairs, subjects took
signiﬁcantly longer to respond during interference blocks than they
did during the paired neutral blocks (one tailed t-tests, df 5 19, P #
0.05). Reaction time differences were reduced to nonsigniﬁcance in
the ﬁnal 3 block-pairs.
Anterior cingulate activation and overall reaction time difference.
a: Top left shows for the anterior cingulate activation (y 5 9 mm)
the grand intersubject averaged fMRI data for interference blocks
minus the neutral blocks. The KS statistical map data are superimposed upon a 3-mm-thick, Talairach-transformed, high-resolution
coronal slice that is an averaged structural scan from all 9 subjects.
To assist with localization, a Talairach-transformed parasagittal
slice (x 5 6) is shown at lower right, with a white line indicating the
source of the coronal slice, and a yellow dot indicating the position
of the local maximum within the anterior cingulate activation.
b: Signiﬁcant overall increase in reaction times during interference
blocks vs. neutral blocks (paired t-test, t 5 6.33, df 5 8, P , 0.001).
r Bush et al. r
RT decrease. A three-block running average analysis
of activation in the right anterior cingulate (Fig. 4)
illustrates this relationship in two ways. First, it shows
a decrease in relative fMRI activation with task practice between the interference and neutral conditions.
Second, it reveals that high signiﬁcance values were
obtained when comparing scan data taken from the
ﬁrst three interference-neutral block-pairs (P 5 1.6 3
10-5), whereas comparing scan data for the last three
interference-neutral
block-pairs
nonsigniﬁcant result. Such results, taken together, indicate
that the largest fMRI signal effect occurred during the
ﬁrst few blocks (i.e., when interference effects were
greatest).
Such a decrease over time in the signiﬁcance values
comparing interference and neutral epochs would
suggest that anterior cingulate activity progressively
decreased during successive interference blocks, but
Running average of anterior cingulate activation parallels practice
effects. Running averages of intersubject group averaged fMRI
signal in anterior cingulate cortex were obtained by selectively
comparing activation during speciﬁc interference vs. neutral blockpairs (ﬁrst block-pair 1, then pairs 1 1 2, 1 1 2 1 3, 2 1 3 1 4,
etc.) in order to detect changes in regional activation over time.
Despite the drastic reduction in the number of time points
compared, signiﬁcant activity was observed to occur in the
anterior cingulate in the initial block-pairs. Paralleling the reaction
time data (Fig. 2), this activity was reduced with practice to
nonsigniﬁcance over the course of the two scans.
TABLE I. Regions activated during Counting Stroop:
Interference minus neutral blocks*
Talairach coordinates
9.4 3 1025
R. middle frontal gyrus (BA 9/46)
9.4 3 1026
L. middle frontal gyrus (BA 9)
9.9 3 1027
R. anterior cingulate (BA 24/32)
5.5 3 1027
L. precentral gyrus (BA 4)
1.8 3 1026
L. premotor cortex (BA 6)
5.8 3 1025
R. inferior temporal gyrus (BA 37)
2.7 3 1025
L. superior parietal lobule (BA 7)
* Stereotactic coordinates and statistical signiﬁcance values for local maxima meeting threshold and
cluster size criteria (see Materials and Methods) are presented according to the conventions of Talairach
and Tournoux . Coordinates are expressed in millimeter units. The origin (0, 0, 0) is the anterior
commissure at the midsagittal plane, with x . 0 corresponding to right of midsagittal, y . 0
corresponding to anterior, and z . 0 corresponding to superior. Brodmann’s areas are indicated after
the named structure (in parentheses and prefaced by ‘‘BA’’).
r The Counting Stroop r
could alternatively have been produced by a progressive increase in variance without a change in mean
signal intensity. Figure 5, in fact, shows the former to
have been the case (i.e., that the absolute anterior
cingulate activation (as measured by fMRI signal)
decreased over time, and that the relative difference in
fMRI signal between interference and neutral blockpairs steadily decreased in parallel with the observed
decrease in RTs). Furthermore, reference to Figure 5,
with a large increase in signal during the second
neutral epoch (an increase driven by data from a single
subject outlier), also helps to explain why an ANOVA
of the anterior cingulate cortex scan data which found
a signiﬁcant main effect of condition (F 5 8.33, df 5 1,
P 5 0.02) failed to ﬁnd a signiﬁcant time effect or
interaction.
The alternative explanation for such a relative decrease in signiﬁcance with time (i.e., progressively
increasing variability of the anterior cingulate cortical
activity (fMRI signal) over time) was examined and
found not to explain the data. While the normalized
fMRI signal observed in the anterior cingulate activation varied between a range of 533–610, the standard
deviations of the fMRI signal found for each block
remained quite constant within a narrow range (6.8–
8.6). More importantly, the mean standard deviation of
fMRI signal in the anterior cingulate cortex activation
was found to remain the same for interference epochs
of scan 1 (7.80) and scan 2 (7.80), and actually decreased over time from scan 1 (8.25) to scan 2 (7.71) for
neutral epochs, indicating that differential variability
in fMRI signal cannot explain the observed progressive
decrease in signiﬁcance illustrated in the running
average of anterior cingulate activation (Fig. 4).
None of the other activations (in prefrontal, primary
motor, premotor, and parietal cortex) showed a signiﬁcant, consistent trend with practice. While a running
average of the left prefrontal activation tended towards a progressive increase over time, an ANOVA
did not support a signiﬁcant time effect.
DISCUSSION
Functional MRI was used to examine the neural
substrate of the Counting Stroop, a cognitive interference task. There were six principal ﬁndings: 1) The
Counting Stroop successfully produced a state of
cognitive interference, as revealed by prolonged reaction times during interference blocks as compared to
neutral blocks. 2) The anterior cingulate cortex, which
has been hypothesized to allocate attentional resources
when faced with competing information-processing
streams or to mediate response selection, was indeed
more active during interference blocks of the Counting
Stroop. 3) The Counting Stroop successfully permitted
collection of performance data as subjects were scanned.
This RT data provided independent veriﬁcation of
subjects’ engagement in the task, and by showing a
signiﬁcant condition 3 time interaction, enabled a
more reﬁned analysis of regional cortical activity (i.e.,
one focused upon epochs with demonstrated cognitive
interference effects). 4) In addition to the anterior
cingulate locus, a network of attentional/motor control cortical regions was also activated during interference vs. neutral blocks. 5) Progressive relative decreases between interference and neutral conditions in
both on-line RT data and fMRI signal in the anterior
cingulate suggest that practice led to modulation of
neuronal activity in this area. 6) Although implicit in
the above ﬁndings, the most exciting ﬁnding should be
stated explicitly, namely, that two different cognitive
Decreasing absolute and relative fMRI activity in anterior cingulate
cortex observed with practice. Mean percent signal change from a
common least common value baseline for all subjects is graphed for
interference and neutral epochs. The absolute values of fMRI signal
intensities decreased over time for the interference condition.
Moreover, the difference between the interference and neutral
conditions (thick black line) gradually decreased with practice,
paralleling the reaction time performance data (Fig. 2).
r Bush et al. r
interference tasks (i.e., the Color and Counting Stroops)
both activated the same subterritory of the anterior
cingulate cortex. We assert, therefore, as the Color
Stroop is an excellent task with which to study interference during PET image acquisition, that we have
demonstrated that the Counting Stroop is a valid
homologue for fMRI.
Relationship of the Counting Stroop to other
interference tasks
Before discussing the neurobiological ﬁndings, it is
important to place the Counting Stroop in perspective
as an interference task. Although incorporating speciﬁc modiﬁcations for use in the fMRI environment, it
retains the essential aspects of a traditional cognitive
interference task. Namely, it places two cognitive
processes, reading and counting, into competition
during the interference (incongruent) trials. In contrast, the word stimuli used in the neutral trials (also
common words from a single semantic category) do
not interfere signiﬁcantly with the counting process.
Cognitive interference is manifested by the observed
increase in RT required to count the stimuli when the
elements to be counted are themselves numerical
words. Although we took the advice of MacLeod
 and did not mix trial types in this initial effort,
experiments are underway examining facilitation effects (i.e., congruency between the stimulus word and
number of words, such as ‘‘two’’ written twice).
Other investigators have used similar numerositybased interference tasks in psychophysical studies.
Using a between-subjects design and verbal response,
Windes found that subjects took longer to report
the quantity of numerals than to name them. Similar
results have been reported using a variety of techniques. Morton , using a card-sorting paradigm
with both digits and digit names, Shor and Fox
et al. , using a list reading format and stimuli
including digits on die faces and random patterns, and
Reisberg et al. , using list reading of grouped
digits or digit names, have all reported interference
effects. Additionally, Flowers et al. showed that
response mode (oral naming, card sorting, and manual
and oral ‘‘tapping’’) could inﬂuence RT results when
using numerosity stimuli.
While these previous studies serve to support the
underlying model (i.e., that Stroop-like cognitive interference can be obtained using incongruent numerical
stimuli), some subtle yet important distinctions differentiate the Counting Stroop from these other tasks. The
Counting Stroop’s use of a computerized single-trial
format and its employment of a button-press response
mode are important differences in that they increase
the ﬂexibility of study design possibilities and the
accuracy of data recording. For example, future studies
may focus upon the neurobiological differences, if any,
underlying manual vs. verbal responses, as discussed
Anterior cingulate cortex: Role in cognitive
interference, attention, and response selection
Perhaps the most important ﬁnding of the present
study is that the Counting Stroop activated a subregion of anterior cingulate cortex, the anterior cingulatecognitive division (ACcd, caudal areas 248/328), that
has often been reported to be active in neuroimaging
studies using variations of the Color Stroop paradigm
[Pardo et al., 1990; George et al., 1994, 1997; Carter et
al., 1995; Derbyshire et al., 1998], in other cognitive
interference tasks [Taylor et al., 1994], in divided
attention tasks [Corbetta et al., 1991; Bush et al., 1995],
in response selection/generation tasks [Petersen et al.,
1988; Frith et al., 1991; Paus et al., 1993; Kawashima et
al., 1996], in anticipation of cognitively demanding
tasks [Murtha et al., 1996], and in error detection tasks
[Dehaene et al., 1994]. This ‘‘cross-activation’’ of ACcd
by different tasks, as depicted in Figure 6, lends
support to the hypothesized involvement of the anterior cingulate cortex in tasks that require subjects to
resolve processing conﬂicts between competing information streams by sensory and/or response selection.
Figure 6 also shows that activation in ACcd, obtained
in response to tasks emphasizing sensory/response
selection, can be contrasted with activity seen in the
anterior cingulate-affective division (ACad, rostral areas 24/25/32/33) during response to emotionallyladen stimuli. Notably, the ACad activation by Whalen
et al. was obtained in the same group of
subjects as the present study, as they performed a
Counting Stroop variant that substitutes emotionally
charged words for numerical ones. This ACcd/ACad
distinction is supported by a large body of work [Vogt
et al., 1992; Devinsky et al., 1995; Mega and Cummings, 1997a,b; Mayberg, 1997].
As seen in Figure 6, the neuroimaging studies using
cognitive/motor tasks (i.e., those emphasizing attentional allocation/response selection) do show some
variability, but rather consistently activate the ACcd.
The ACcd activation in the current study is approximately 3 mm from that reported by Pardo et al. ,
and only 9 mm from loci identiﬁed by George et al.
 and Carter et al. . Bench et al. did
report anterior cingulate in their incongruent minus
colored cross-naming subtraction (albeit in ACad,
r The Counting Stroop r
approximately 30 mm anterior to that of the Counting
Stroop ACcd activation), though they did not obtain
any anterior cingulate activation in their incongruent
minus congruent (facilitation) comparison. It must be
noted that with the exception of the direct attempt of
Bench et al. in their experiment 2 to replicate the
task conditions of Pardo et al. , none of the ﬁve
studies were directly comparable. Pardo et al. 
looked at incongruent words [interference] vs. congruent words (e.g., ‘‘red’’ written in red ink) (facilitation),
and used a ﬁxed interstimulus interval. Bench et al.
 used multiple contrast conditions and two
different interstimulus intervals, pointing out the importance of stimulus and timing issues. The study of
George et al. examined incongruent color words
vs. color-naming of hatch marks, and utilized a selfpaced format rather than ﬁxed-interval timing. While
all three of these PET studies (and the current fMRI
study) used homogeneous block designs (i.e., blocks
contained only one type of trial, such as incongruent
words), the PET study of Carter et al. employed
a heterogeneous block design (mixing trial types within
blocks), ﬁxed interstimulus intervals, and words (animal names written in colored ink) as the neutral
condition. Given these differences in imaging modalities, experimental design, task characteristics, subtractions used, and stimulus attributes, as well as the
degree of intersubject anatomic and physiologic vari-
Functional dissection of anterior cingulate cortex: Neuroimaging
studies. Locations of local maxima from selected functional neuroimaging studies are superimposed on a schematic parasagittal view
of anterior cingulate cortex . Cognitive/motor tasks are represented by red
dots, which tend to cluster in the more dorsal anterior cingulate
cognitive division (ACcd), while emotional/symptom provocation
tasks are represented by blue dots, which tend to cluster in the
rostral anterior cingulate affective division (ACad). The anterior
cingulate activation from the current study (green triangle) lies at
the center of the cognitive division cluster. All points were in
anterior cingulate cortex, anterior to y 5 0 mm [Talairach and
Tournoux, 1988]. Special notes for selected local maxima are as
follows (counterclockwise from right): George et al., 1997 (normal
controls, Color Stroop); Bush et al., 1995 (divided attention minus
passive task); Kawashima et al., 1996 (GO-NOGO task, their Table
2); Carter et al., 1995 (interference minus congruent Stroop, their
Table 3); Derbyshire et al., 1998 (Color Stroop); Paus et al., 1993
(antistimuli minus prostimuli, their Table 4); Frith et al., 1991
 ; Raichle et al.,
1994 (center of region of interest); Petersen et al., 1988 (visual and
auditory association tasks, their Table 4); Corbetta et al., 1991
(divided attention minus passive task); Whalen et al., 1997 (Emotional Counting Stroop performed after Counting Stroop by same
group of subjects in present study); and Bench et al., 1993 (their
experiment 2, Stroop minus crosses, three consolidated points).
CC, corpus callosum.
r Bush et al. r
ability, the degree of convergence in results from these
studies implicating anterior cingulate is impressive.
Stroop tasks are not the only ones that support the
role of ACcd as a mediator of competing information
streams. The ACcd region identiﬁed by the Counting
Stroop directly overlaps the ACcd locus Corbetta et al.
 identiﬁed (x 5 7, y 5 11, z 5 34 mm) in a PET
study of divided attention, as well as the ACcd region
(x 5 6, y 5 6, z 5 46 mm) localized in an fMRI
replication using the same divided-attention paradigm
[Bush et al., 1995]. In these studies subjects were asked
to monitor paired visual stimulus arrays for changes in
the shape, speed, or color of the elements. The stimuli
remained the same throughout, but during selective
attention blocks subjects were instructed to attend only
to a single feature (e.g., shape), whereas during the
divided-attention condition subjects were required to
report changes in any of the three features. ACcd was
active in both studies during the divided-attention
task, consistent with its attention-directing/response
selection role when faced with information from multiple rival input channels.
Of particular relevance to this hypothesis are the
reported PET ﬁndings of Kawashima et al. .
Using ﬁnger movements as the output in a visual
GO/NO-GO task, they found a network of regions
including, among others, ACcd, and prefrontal, premotor, precentral, and insular cortex. Casey et al. 
also reported anterior cingulate and prefrontal cortical
fMRI activation during a GO/NO-GO task. The GO/
NO-GO task, much like the Stroop tasks, requires the
subject to utilize a top-down generated processing
strategy (i.e., to modify behavior based upon a relevant instruction set), and a key element is that a
motor response must be inhibited. Although existing
GO/NO-GO work in primates [Kalaska and Crammond, 1995] and humans [Rosahl and Knight, 1995;
Casey et al., 1996; Kawashima et al., 1996] has focused
on prefrontal cortical function in this type of motor
inhibitory task, it is entirely plausible that the ACcd
may play a more important role than heretofore recognized, especially in light of the extensive reciprocal
connections the ACcd maintains with both prefrontal
cortex and lower motor areas in humans and other
primates [Pandya et al., 1981; Vogt and Pandya, 1987;
Vogt, 1993; Dum and Strick, 1993; Bates and Goldman-
Rakic, 1993; Devinsky et al., 1995].
Similarly, it should be noted that while the current
study focuses attention on the cognitive division of the
anterior cingulate, it does not presume that this region
is the only one relevant to performance of cognitive
interference, response selection, or attentional tasks.
The present results, as well as numerous previous
studies, support the role of a network of prefrontal,
motor, and parietal cortical structures recruited during
such tasks. This should not be surprising, as a number
of researchers have proposed parallel distributed models of attention that include these structures [Goldman-
Rakic, 1988; Posner and Petersen, 1990; Mesulam, 1990;
Colby, 1991].
Practice effects and attenuation of the anterior
cingulate response
Interest in the effects of practice on Stroop task
performance has been evident from the start. In fact,
the third experiment in the classic paper of Stroop
 bore the title, ‘‘The Effects of Practice Upon
Interference.’’ There, he found that although extensive
practice on his color-naming interference task did lead
to an improvement in performance (i.e., a decrease in
RTs while naming incongruent color words), such
practice did not completely eliminate interference
effects. Similarly, the careful treatment by MacLeod
and Dunbar of this issue reported that performance of the Color Stroop improved after many hours
of practice, a ﬁnding that is further supported by the
work of Feinstein et al. and Ogura . While
most agree, however, not all groups have found that
practice lessens interference in Stroop-like tasks [Shor
et al., 1972].
Other investigators have looked at different facets of
the practice issue. Reisberg et al. observed rapid
learning of a numerosity-based interference task. Dulaney and Rogers , based on differential patterns
of practice-related performance improvement on a
modiﬁed Color Stroop, suggested that different mechanisms might underlie the reduction in interference in
groups of young and old subjects. Cohen et al. 
even developed a neural networks simulation modeling hypothesized mechanisms responsible for improvement with practice on the Color Stroop.
In a particularly germane analysis, Roe et al. 
compared manual (button-press) vs. verbal response
modes. They reported that extensive practice improved with both, but that interference effects declined
more rapidly when subjects responded manually as
opposed to verbally. Nielssen also found that
manual responding was affected more quickly by
practice, and White reported that manual responding was generally faster than verbal. Our results
indirectly support these conclusions, as we observed
signiﬁcant improvement over the course of 5–6 min of
practice. Despite the convergence among these studies,
r The Counting Stroop r
however, the issue is not settled, as Redding and
Gerjets and Roe et al. failed to obtain a
signiﬁcant difference between the two response modes.
Future studies may be able to use the Counting Stroop
format to resolve the questions of which mode is faster
(manual vs. oral) and which mode (if either) is more
subject to practice effects, without contamination from
an unnecessary layer of cognitive complexity (i.e.,
converting Color Stroop responses to button-presses).
Our fMRI ﬁnding that ACcd activity during interference blocks (relative to neutral ones) decreases with
practice is bolstered by the work of Raichle et al. .
In this PET study of practice-related changes during a
verbal response selection task, they found that activation of the ACcd steadily decreased with practice, and
that the original level of activation could be restored by
showing subjects a novel (unpracticed) set of stimuli.
Parenthetically, it is difficult to explain away the
observed practice-related decrements in the ACcd in
the current study as a pure ‘‘novelty effect,’’ as the task
was not novel (all subjects completed a 40-trial practice
block before scanning), and the block order was effectively counterbalanced. Friston et al. reported
similar decrements in activation (in the cerebellum)
with practice of a simple ﬁnger sequencing motor task.
Certainly, the results of these studies, as well as those
of the current study, are in line with the supposition
expressed by Adams that the central level of
energy expenditure should decrease with skill acquisition, presumably because the processing becomes more
efficient.
CONCLUSIONS
Based on the performance data, the Counting Stroop
was observed to produce cognitive interference akin to
that of the Color Stroop. The button-press response
mode enabled collection of vital on-line performance
data, a feature that should make the Counting Stroop a
useful tool in future studies of normals and neuropsychiatrically impaired populations. Certainly, in the
current study, the RT data proved to be an important
guide in analysis of the fMRI data. The fMRI scan data,
highlighting the role of the anterior cingulate cortex
(speciﬁcally the ACcd), were found to agree with those
of other Color Stroop and divided-attention imaging
studies. Also, in keeping with other studies of learning,
the fMRI response of the anterior cingulate paralleled
observed practice effects (as measured by the on-line
performance data).
Future studies might exploit the various similarities
and differences between the Counting and Color
Stroops in studies of attention, cognitive interference,
learning, and motor control mechanisms. Certainly,
the Counting Stroop gains immensely by its ability to
draw upon the enormous Color Stroop literature. In
return, the Counting Stroop can serve as a useful
fMRI probe in searching for the neural substrates of
various neuropsychiatric disorders such as attention
deﬁcit disorder, schizophrenia, obsessive-compulsive
disorder, depression, parkinsonism, and head injuries
[Benes, 1993; Kingma et al., 1996]. Beyond these potential clinical applications, single-trial fMRI [Buckner et
al., 1996; Dale and Buckner, 1997), and/or combined
use of fMRI and event-related potentials, may help
settle whether the anterior cingulate is activated prestimulus [Murtha et al., 1996] and/or poststimulus
[Abdullaev and Posner, 1997; Dehaene et al., 1994].
Finally, subtle task manipulations (e.g., trial sequencing, stimulus word substitutions) can help us to better
understand mechanisms of attention, response selection, practice and learning effects, manual vs. oral
responding, and cognitive interference and facilitation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Mary T. Foley, Terrance A. Campbell, Richard McNally, Robert Weisskoff, Kenneth
Kwong, Cary Savage, Michael Vevea, Thomas J. Brady,
and our intrepid volunteers for their generous assistance. Support for this work was provided by the
Clinical Investigator Training Program of the Harvard/
MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology-Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, in collaboration with
Pﬁzer,Inc.(G.B.)andgrantMH-01215fromNIMH(S.L.R.).