Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 4166–4176
July 5 - 10, 2020. c⃝2020 Association for Computational Linguistics
Perturbed Masking: Parameter-free Probing for Analyzing and
Interpreting BERT
Zhiyong Wu1, Yun Chen2, Ben Kao1, Qun Liu3
1The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
2Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Shanghai, China
3Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Hong Kong, China
{zywu,kao}@cs.hku.hk, , 
By introducing a small set of additional parameters, a probe learns to solve speciﬁc linguistic tasks (e.g., dependency parsing) in a
supervised manner using feature representations (e.g., contextualized embeddings). The
effectiveness of such probing tasks is taken
as evidence that the pre-trained model encodes linguistic knowledge. However, this approach of evaluating a language model is undermined by the uncertainty of the amount
of knowledge that is learned by the probe itself. Complementary to those works, we propose a parameter-free probing technique for
analyzing pre-trained language models (e.g.,
BERT). Our method does not require direct supervision from the probing tasks, nor do we
introduce additional parameters to the probing process. Our experiments on BERT show
that syntactic trees recovered from BERT using our method are signiﬁcantly better than
linguistically-uninformed baselines. We further feed the empirically induced dependency
structures into a downstream sentiment classi-
ﬁcation task and ﬁnd its improvement compatible with or even superior to a human-designed
dependency schema.
Introduction
Recent prevalent pre-trained language models
such as ELMo , BERT , and XLNet 
achieve state-of-the-art performance for a diverse
array of downstream NLP tasks. An interesting
area of research is to investigate the interpretability of these pre-trained models (i.e., the linguistic
properties they capture). Most recent approaches
are built upon the idea of probing classiﬁers .
A probe is a simple neural network (with a small additional set of parameters)
that uses the feature representations generated by
a pre-trained model (e.g., hidden state activations,
attention weights) and is trained to perform a supervised task (e.g., dependency labeling). The performance of a probe is used to measure the quality of the generated representations with the assumption that the measured quality is mostly attributable to the pre-trained language model.
One downside of such approach, as pointed out
in , is that a probe introduces a new set of additional parameters, which
makes the results difﬁcult to interpret. Is it the pretrained model that captures the linguistic information, or is it the probe that learns the downstream
task itself and thus encodes the information in its
additional parameter space?
In this paper we propose a parameter-free probing technique called Perturbed Masking to analyze
and interpret pre-trained models. The main idea
is to introduce the Perturbed Masking technique
into the masked language modeling (MLM) objective to measure the impact a word xj has on
predicting another word xi (Sec 2.2) and then induce the global linguistic properties (e.g., dependency trees) from this inter-word information.
Our contributions are threefold:
• We introduce a new parameter-free probing technique, Perturbed Masking, to estimate inter-word
correlations. Our technique enables global syntactic information extraction.
• We evaluate the effectiveness of our probe over
a number of linguistic driven tasks (e.g., syntactic
parsing, discourse dependency parsing). Our results reinforce the claims of recent probing works,
and further complement them by quantitatively
evaluating the validity of their claims.
• We feed the empirically induced dependency
structures into a downstream task to make a comparison with a parser-provided, linguist-designed
dependency schema and ﬁnd that our structures
perform on-par or even better (Sec 6) than the
parser created one.
This offers an insight into
the remarkable success of BERT on downstream
Perturbed Masking
We propose the perturbed masking technique to
assess the impact one word has on the prediction
of another in MLM. The inter-word information
derived serves as the basis for our later analysis.
Background: BERT
BERT1 is a large Transformer
network that is pre-trained on 3.3 billion tokens of
English text. It performs two tasks: (1) Masked
Language Modeling (MLM): randomly select and
mask 15% of all tokens in each given sequence,
and then predict those masked tokens. In masking, a token is (a) replaced by the special token
[MASK], (b) replaced by a random token, or (c)
kept unchanged. These replacements are chosen
80%, 10%, and 10% of the time, respectively.
(2)Next Sentence Prediction: given a pair of sentences, predict whether the second sentence follows the ﬁrst in an original document or is taken
from another random document.
Token Perturbation
Given a sentence as a list of tokens x
[x1, . . . , xT ], BERT maps each xi into a contextualized representation Hθ(x)i, where θ represents
the network’s parameters. Our goal is to derive a
function f(xi, xj) that captures the impact a context word xj has on the prediction of another word
We propose a two-stage approach to achieve our
goal. First, we replace xi with the [MASK] token
and feed the new sequence x\{xi} into BERT. We
use Hθ(x\{xi})i to denote the representation of
xi. To calculate the impact xj ∈x\{xi} has on
Hθ(x\{xi})i, we further mask out xj to obtain
the second corrupted sequence x\{xi, xj}. Similarly, Hθ(x\{xi, xj})i denotes the new representation of token xi.
We deﬁne f(xi, xj) as:
f(xi, xj) = d (Hθ(x\{xi})i, Hθ(x\{xi, xj})i)
1In our experiments, we use the base, uncased version
from .
where d(x, y) is the distance metric that captures
the difference between two vectors. We experimented with two options for d(x, y):
• Dist: Euclidean distance between x and y
• Prob: d(x, y) = a(x)xi −a(y)xi,
where a(·) maps a vector into a probability distribution among the words in the vocabulary. a(x)xi
represents the probability of predicting token xi
base on x.
By repeating the two-stage perturbation on
each pair of tokens xi, xj ∈x and calculating
f(xi, xj), we obtain an impact matrix F, where
Fij ∈RT×T . Now, we can derive algorithms to
extract syntactic trees from F and compare them
with ground-truth trees that are obtained from
benchmarks. Note that BERT uses byte-pair encoding and may split a word
into multiple tokens(subwords). To evaluate our
approach on word-level tasks, we make the following changes to obtain inter-word impact matrices. In each perturbation, we mask all tokens of a
split-up word. The impact on a split-up word is obtained by averaging2 the impacts over the split-up
word’s tokens. To measure the impact exerted by a
split-up word, we assume the impacts given by its
tokens are the same; We use the impact given by
the ﬁrst token for convenience.
Span Perturbation
Given the token-level perturbation above, it is
straightforward to extend it to span-level perturbation.
We investigate how BERT models the
relations between spans, which can be phrases,
clauses, or paragraphs. As a preliminary study,
we investigate how well BERT captures document
structures.
We model a document D as N non-overlapping
text spans D
[e1, e2, . . . , eN], where each
span ei contains a sequence of tokens ei
2, . . . , xi
For span-level perturbation, instead of masking
one token at a time, we mask an array of tokens
in a span simultaneously. We obtain the span representation by averaging the representations of all
the tokens the span contains. Similarly, we calculate the impact ej has on ei by:
f(ei, ej) = d (Hθ(D\{ei})i, Hθ(D\{ei, ej})i)
where d is the Dist function.
2We also experimented with other alternatives, but observe no signiﬁcant difference.
transitions
transitions
Figure 1: Heatmap of the impact matrix for the sentence “For those who follow social media transitions
on Capitol Hill, this will be a little different.”
Visualization with Impact Maps
Before we discuss speciﬁc syntactic phenomena,
let us ﬁrst analyze some example impact matrices derived from sample sentences.
We visualize an impact matrix of a sentence by displaying
a heatmap. We use the term “impact map” to refer
to a heatmap of an impact matrix.
We extract impact matrices by feeding BERT with 1,000 sentences from the English
Parallel Universal Dependencies (PUD) treebank
of the CoNLL 2017 Shared Task (Zeman et al.,
We follow the setup and pre-processing
steps employed in pre-training BERT. An example
impact map is shown in Figure 1.
Dependency. We notice that the impact map
contains many stripes, which are short series of
vertical/horizontal cells, typically located along
the diagonal. Take the word “different” as an example (which is illustrated by the second-to-last
column in the impact matrix). We observe a clear
vertical stripe above the main diagonal. The interpretation is that this particular occurrence of the
word “different” strongly affects the occurrences
of those words before it. These strong inﬂuences
are shown by the darker-colored pixels seen in the
second last column of the impact map. This observation agrees with the ground-truth dependency
tree, which selects “different” as the head of all
remaining words in the phrase “this will be a little different.” We also observe similar patterns on
“transitions” and “Hill”. Such correlations lead us
to explore the idea of extracting dependency trees
from the matrices (see Section 4.1).
transitions
Figure 2: Part of the constituency tree.
Constituency. Figure 2 shows part of the constituency tree of our example sentence generated
by Stanford CoreNLP . In
this sentence, “media” and “on” are two words
that are adjacent to “transitions”. From the tree,
however, we see that “media” is closer to “transitions” than “on” is in terms of syntactic distance.
If a model is syntactically uninformed, we would
expect “media” and “on” to have comparable impacts on the prediction of “transitions”, and vice
versa. However, we observe a far greater impact
(darker color) between “media” and “transitions”
than that between “on” and “transitions”. We will
further support this observation with empirical experiments in Section 4.2.
Other Structures. Along the diagonal of the
impact map, we see that words are grouped into
four contiguous chunks that have speciﬁc intents
(e.g., a noun phrase – on Capitol Hill). We also
observe that the two middle chunks have relatively
strong inter-chunk word impacts and thus a bonding that groups them together, forming a larger
verb phrase. This observation suggest that BERT
may capture the compositionality of the language.
In the following sections we quantitatively evaluate these observations.
Syntactic Probe
We start with two syntactic probes – dependency
probe and constituency probe.
Dependency Probe
With the goal of exploring the extent dependency
relations are captured in BERT, we set out to answer the following question: Can BERT outperform linguistically uninformed baselines in unsupervised dependency parsing? If so, to what extent?
We begin by using the token-level perturbed
masking technique to extract an impact matrix F
for each sentence. We then utilize graph-based algorithms to induce a dependency tree from F, and
compare it against ground-truth whose annotations
are linguistically motivated.
Experiment Setup.
We evaluate the induced
trees on two benchmarks: (1) the PUD treebank
described in Section 3. (2) the WSJ10 treebank,
which contains 7,422 sentences (all less than 10
words after punctuation removal) from the Penn
Treebank (PTB) . Note that
the original PTB does not contain dependency annotations. Thus, we convert them into Universal
Dependencies using Stanford CoreNLP. We denote this set as WSJ10-U.
Next, two parsing algorithms, namely, the
Eisner algorithm and Chu-Liu/Edmonds
(CLE) algorithm , are utilized to extract the projective and non-projective unlabeled
dependency trees, respectively. Given that our impact matrices have no knowledge about the dependency root of the sentence, we use the gold root in
our analysis. Introducing the gold root may artiﬁcially improve our results slightly. We thus apply
this bias evenly across all baselines to ensure a fair
comparison, as done in .
We compared our approach against the following baselines: (1) right-(left-) chain baseline,
which always selects the next(previous) word as
dependency head. (2) A random BERT baseline,
with which we randomly initialize weights of the
BERT model , then use our
methods to induce dependency trees.
We measure model performance using Unlabeled Attachment Score (UAS). We note that UAS
has been shown to be highly sensitive to annotation variations . Therefore, it may
not be a fair evaluation metric for analyzing and
interpreting BERT. To reﬂect the real quality of the
dependency structures that are retained in BERT,
we also report Undirected UAS (UUAS) and the Neutral Edge Direction (NED) scores .
Tables 1 and 2 show the results of
our dependency probes.
From Table 1, we see
that although BERT is trained without any explicit supervision from syntactic dependencies, to
some extent the syntax-aware representation already exists in it. The best UAS scores it achieves
(Eisner+Dist) are substantially higher than that of
the random BERT baseline with respect to both
WSJ10-U(+41.7) and PUD(+31.5). Moreover, the
Dist method signiﬁcantly outperforms the Prob
Parsing UAS
Right-chain
Left-chain
Random BERT
Eisner+Dist
Eisner+Prob
Table 1: UAS results of BERT on unsupervised dependency parsing.
Eisner+Dist
Right-chain
Table 2: Performance on PUD when evaluated using
UAS, UUAS, and NED.
method on both datasets we evaluated. We thus
use Dist as the default distance function in our
later discussion. We also note that the Eisner algorithm shows a clear advantage over CLE since
English sentences are mostly projective. However,
our best performing method does not go much beyond the strong right-chain baseline (with gold
root modiﬁed), showing that the dependency relations learned are mostly those simple and local
For reference, the famous unsupervised parser –
DMV achieves a 43.2
UAS on WSJ10 with Collins conventions.
Note that the DMV parser utilizes POS tags for
training while ours start with the gold root. The
results are therefore not directly comparable. By
putting them together, however, we see potential
room for improvement for current neural unsupervised dependency parsing systems in the BERT
From Table 2, we see that although BERT
only outperforms the right-chain baseline modestly in terms of UAS, it shows signiﬁcant improvements on UUAS (+12.2) and NED (+28.4).
We also make similar observation with WSJ10-
U. This suggests that BERT does capture interword dependencies despite that it may not totally
agree with one speciﬁc human-designed governordependent schema.
We manually inspect those
discrepancies and observe that they can also be
syntactically valid. For instance, consider the sen-
tence “It closed on Sunday.”. For the phrase “on
Sunday”, our method selects the functional word
“on” as the head while the gold-standard annotation uses a lexical head (“Sunday”)3.
The above ﬁndings prove that BERT has learned
its own syntax as a by-product of self-supervised
training, not by directly copying any human design. However, giving the superior performance
of BERT on downstream tasks, it is natural to ask
if BERT is learning an empirically useful structure
of language. We investigate this question in Sec 6.
Constituency Probe
We now examine the extent BERT learns about the
constituent structure of sentences. We ﬁrst present
the algorithm for unsupervised constituent parsing, which executes in a top-down manner by recursively splitting larger constituents into smaller
Top-Down Parsing.
Given a sentence as a sequence of tokens x = [x1, . . . , xT ] and the corresponding impact matrix F. We start by ﬁnding
the best splitting position k that will separate the
sentence into constituents ((x<k), (xk, (x>k))),
where x<k = [x1, . . . , xk−1].
The best splitting position ensures that each constituent has a
large average impact between words within it (thus
those words more likely to form a constituent)
while at the same time the impact between words
of different constituents are kept as small as possible (thus they are unlikely to be in the same constituent). Mathematically, we decide the best k for
the constituent x = [xi, xi+1, . . . , xj] by the following optimization:
i,...k + Fk+1,...,j
−Fk+1,...,j
where Fi,...,k
b=i f(xa,xb)
We recursively split (x<k) and (x>k) until only single words remain. Note that this top-down strategy is similar to that of ON-LSTM and PRPN , but differs
from them in that ON-LSTM and PRPN decide the
splitting position based on a “syntactic distance
vector” which is explicitly modeled by a special
network component. To distinguish our approach
from the others, we denote our parser as MART
(MAtRix-based Top-down parser)
3This speciﬁc choice is actually agreed with the YM schema.
Experiment Setup.
We follow the experiment
setting in Shen et al and evaluate our
method on the 7,422 sentences in WSJ10 dataset
and the PTB23 dataset (the traditional PTB test set
for constituency parsing).
Table 3 shows the results of our constituency probes.
From the table, we see that
BERT outperforms most baselines on PTB23, except for the second layer of ON-LSTM. Note
that all these baselines have speciﬁcally-designed
architectures for the unsupervised parsing task,
while BERT’s knowledge about constituent formalism emerges purely from self-supervised training on unlabeled text.
It is also worth noting that recent results have suggested that
the parsing algorithm used by ON-LSTM (PRPN)
is biased towards the right-branching trees of English, leading to inﬂated F1 compared to unbiased parsers. To ensure a fair comparison with
them, we also introduced this right-branching bias.
However, our results show that our method is also
robust without this bias (e.g., only 0.9 F1 drops on
To further understand the strengths and weaknesses of each system, we analyze their accuracies by constituent tags. In Table 3, we show the
accuracies of ﬁve most common tags in PTB23.
We ﬁnd that the success of PRPN and ON-LSTM
mainly comes from the accurate identiﬁcation of
NP (noun phrase), which accounts for 38.5% of all
constituents. For other phrase-level tags like VP
(verb phrase) and PP (prepositional phrase), the
accuracies of BERT are competitive. Moreover,
for clause level tags, BERT signiﬁcantly outplays
ON-LSTM. Take SBAR (clause introduced by a
subordinating conjunction) for example, BERT
achieves an accuracy of 51.9%, which is about 3.4
times higher than that of ON-LSTM. One possible
interpretation is that BERT is pre-trained on long
contiguous sequences extracted from a documentlevel corpus. And the masking strategy (randomly
mask 15% tokens) utilized may allow BERT to
learn to model a sequence of words (might form
a clause).
Discourse Probe
Having shown that clause-level structures are
well-captured in BERT using the constituency
probe, we now explore a more challenging probe
– probing BERT’s knowledge about the struc-
Parsing F1
Accuracy on PTB23 by Tag
ON-LSTM 1st-layer
ON-LSTM 2nd-layer
ON-LSTM 3rd-layer
300D ST-Gumbel w/o Leaf GRU
300D RL-SPINN w/o Leaf GRU
Right-Branching
Left-Branching
Table 3: Unlabeled parsing F1 results evaluated on WSJ10 and PTB23.
Accuracy by distance
Right-chain
Left-chain
Random BERT
Eisner+Dist
Table 4: Performance of different discourse parser. The
distance is deﬁned as the number of EDUs between
head and dependent.
ture of a document. A document contains a series of coherent text spans, which are named Elementary Discourse Units (EDUs) .
EDUs are connected to
each other by discourse relations to form a document. We devise a discourse probe to investigate how well BERT captures structural correlations between EDUs.
As the foundation of the
probe, we extract an EDU-EDU impact matrix for
each document using span-level perturbation.
We evaluate our probe on the discourse
dependency corpus SciDTB .
We do not use the popular discourse corpora RST-
DT and PDTB (Prasad et al.)
because PDTB focuses on local discourse relations but ignores the whole document structure,
while RST-DT introduces intermediate nodes and
does not cover non-projective structures. We follow the same baseline settings and evaluation procedure in Sec 4.1, except that we remove gold root
from our evaluation since we want to compare the
accuracy by syntactic distances.
Table 4 shows the performance of our
discourse probes. We ﬁnd that both Eisner and
CLE achieve signiﬁcantly higher UAS (+28) than
the random BERT baseline.
This suggests that
BERT is aware of the structure of the document
it is given. In particular, we observe a decent accuracy in identifying discourse relations between
adjacent EDUs, perhaps due to the “next sentence prediction” task in pre-training, as pointed
out in . However, our
probes fall behind the left-chain baseline, which
beneﬁts from its strong structural prior4 (principal
clause mostly in front of its subordinate clause).
Our ﬁnding sheds some lights on BERT’s success
in downstream tasks that have paragraphs as input
(e.g., Question Answering).
BERT-based Trees VS Parser-provided
Our probing results suggest that although BERT
has captured a certain amount of syntax, there are
still substantial disagreements between the syntax
BERT learns and those designed by linguists. For
instance, our constituency probe on PTB23 signiﬁcantly outperforms most baselines, but it only
roughly agree with the PTB formalism (41.2%
F1). However, BERT has already demonstrated
its superiority in many downstream tasks. An interesting question is whether BERT is learning an
empirically useful or even better structure of a language.
To answer this question, we turn to neural networks that adopt dependency parsing trees as the
explicit structure prior to improve downstream
4For reference, a supervised graph-based parser achieves an UAS of 57.6 on SciDTB
We replace the ground-truth dependency
trees those networks used with ones induced from
BERT and approximate the effectiveness of different trees by the improvements they introduced.
We conduct experiments on the Aspect Based
Sentiment Classiﬁcation (ABSC) task . ABSC is a ﬁne-grained sentiment
classiﬁcation task aiming at identifying the sentiment expressed towards each aspect of a given
target entity.
As an example, in the following
comment of a restaurant, “I hated their fajitas,
but their salads were great”, the sentiment polarities for aspect fajitas is negative and that of
salads is positive. It has been shown in Zhang
et al. that injecting syntactic knowledge
into neural networks can improve ABSC accuracy.
Intuitively, given an aspect, a syntactically closer
context word should play a more important role in
predicting that aspect’s sentiment. They integrate
the distances between context words and the aspect on a dependency tree into a convolution network and build a Proximity-Weighted Convolution
Network (PWCN). As a naive baseline, they compare with network weighted by relative position
between aspect and context words.
We experimented on two datasets from
SemEval 2014 , which consist of reviews and comments from two categories:
LAPTOP and RESTAURANT. We adopt the standard evaluation metrics: Accuracy and Macro-
Averaged F1. We follow the instructions of Zhang
et al. to run the experiments 5 times with
random initialization and report the averaged performance. We denote the original PWCN with relative position information as PWCN-Pos, and that
utilizes dependency trees constructed by SpaCy5
as PWCN-Dep. SpaCy has reported an UAS of
94.5 on English PTB and so it can serve as a
good reference for human-designed dependency
schema. We also compare our model against two
trivial trees (left-chain and right-chain trees). For
our model, we feed the corpus into BERT and extract dependency trees with the best performing
setting: Eisner+Dist. For parsing, we introduce an
inductive bias to favor short dependencies . To ensure a fair comparison,
we induce the root word from the impact matrix F
instead of using the gold root. Speciﬁcally, we select the root word xk based on the simple heuristic
j=1 f(xi, xj).
5 
Restaurant
+right-chain
+left-chain
Table 5: Experimental results of aspect based sentiment
classiﬁcation.
Table 5 presents the performance of
different models.
We observe that the trees induced from BERT is either on-par (LAPTOP)
or marginally better (RESTAURANT) in terms of
downstream task’s performance when comparing
with trees produced by SpaCy. LAPTOP is considerably more difﬁcult than RESTAURANT due to the
fact that the sentences are generally longer, which
makes inducing dependency trees more challenging. We also see that the Eisner trees generally
perform better than the right-/left- chain baselines.
It is also worth noting that the right-chain baseline
also outperforms PWCN+Dep on RESTAURANT,
which leads to an exciting future work that investigates how encoding structural knowledge can help
Our results suggest that although the tree structures BERT learns can disagree with parserprovided-linguistically-motivated ones to a large
extent, they are also empirically useful to downstream tasks, at least to ABSC. As future work,
we plan to extend our analysis to more downstream tasks and models, like those reported in
Shi .
Related Work
There has been substantial research investigating
what pre-trained language models have learned
about languages’ structures.
One rising line of research uses probing classi-
ﬁers to investigate the different syntactic properties captured by the model. They are generally referred to as “probing task” ,
“diagnostic classiﬁer” ,
and “auxiliary prediction tasks” .
The syntactic properties investigated range from
basic ones like sentence length , syntactic tree depth , and segmentation 
to challenging ones like syntactic labeling , dependency parsing , and constituency parsing . However,
when a probe achieves high accuracy, it’s difﬁcult
to differentiate if it is the representation that encodes targeted syntactic information, or it is the
probe that just learns the task . Their
goal is to check if the attention heads of a given
pre-trained model can track syntactic relations better than chance or baselines.
In particular, Raganato and Tiedemann analyze a machine
translation model’s encoder by extracting dependency trees from its self-attention weights, using
Chu-Liu/Edmonds algorithm. Clark et al. 
conduct a similar investigation on BERT, but the
simple head selection strategy they used does not
guarantee a valid dependency tree. Mareˇcek and
Rosa propose heuristic methods to convert attention weights to syntactic trees.
However, they do not quantitatively evaluate their approach. In their later study , they propose a bottom-up algorithm to
extract constituent trees from transformer-based
NMT encoders and evaluate their results on three
languages. Htut et al. reassess these works
but ﬁnd that there are no generalist heads that can
do holistic parsing.
Hence, analyzing attention
weights directly may not reveal much of the syntactic knowledge that a model has learned. Recent
dispute about attention as explanation also suggests that the attention’s behavior does not necessarily represent that
of the original model.
Another group of research examine the outputs
of language models on carefully chosen input sentences .
They extend previous works 
on subject-verb agreement test (generating the correct number of a verb far away from its subject) to
provide a measure of the model’s syntactic ability. Their results show that the BERT model captures syntax-sensitive agreement patterns well in
However, subject-verb agreement cannot provide more nuanced tests of other complex structures (e.g., dependency structure, constituency structure), which are the interest of our
Two recent works also perturb the input sequence for model interpretability . However, these
works only perturb the sequence once. Rosa and
Mareˇcek utilize the original MLM objective to estimate each word’s “reducibility” and import simple heuristics into a right-chain baseline to
construct dependency trees. Li et al. focus
on evaluating word alignment in NMT, but unlike
our two-step masking strategy, they only replace
the token of interest with a zero embedding or a
randomly sampled word in the vocabulary.
Discussion & Conclusion
One concern shared by our reviewers is that performance of our probes are underwhelming: the
induced trees are barely closer to linguist-deﬁned
trees than simple baselines (e.g., rightbranching)
and are even worse in the case of discourse parsing. However, this does not mean that supervised
probes are wrong or that BERT captures less syntax than we thought. In fact, there is actually no
guarantee that our probe will ﬁnd a strong correlation with human-designed syntax, since we do
not introduce the human-designed syntax as supervision. What we found is the “natural” syntax inherent in BERT, which is acquired from selfsupervised learning on plain text. We would rather
say our probe complements the supervised probing ﬁndings in two ways. First, it provides a lowerbound (on the unsupervised syntactic parsing ability of BERT). By improving this lower-bound,
we could uncover more “accurate” information to
support supervised probes’ ﬁndings. Second, we
show that when combined with a down-stream
application (sec 6), the syntax learned by BERT
might be empirically helpful despite not totally
identical to the human design.
In summary, we propose a parameter-free probing technique to complement current line of work
on interpreting BERT through probes. With carefully designed two-stage perturbation, we obtain
impact matrices from BERT. This matrix mirrors
the function of attention mechanism that captures
inter-word correlations, except that it emerges
through the output of BERT model, instead of
from intermediate representations. We devise algorithms to extract syntactic trees from this matrix. Our results reinforce those of who demonstrated
that BERT encodes rich syntactic properties. We
also extend our method to probe document structure, which sheds lights on BERT’s effectiveness
in modeling long sequences.
Finally, we ﬁnd
that feeding the empirically induced dependency
structures into a downstream system can further improve its accuracy. The improvement is compatible with or even superior to
a human-designed dependency schema. This offers an insight into BERT’s success in downstream
tasks. We leave it for future work to use our technique to test other linguistic properties (e.g., coreference) and to extend our study to more downstream tasks and systems.
Acknowledgement
We would like to thank Dr.Lingpeng Kong from
DeepMind for his constructive feedback of the paper. This research is supported by Hong Kong Research Grant Council GRF grants 17254016.