IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, JULY 2020
CCNet: Criss-Cross Attention for Semantic
Segmentation
Zilong Huang, Xinggang Wang, Member, IEEE, Yunchao Wei, Lichao Huang, Humphrey
Shi, Member, IEEE, Wenyu Liu, Senior Member, IEEE, and Thomas S. Huang, Life Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Contextual information is vital in visual understanding problems, such as semantic segmentation and object detection. We
propose a Criss-Cross Network (CCNet) for obtaining full-image contextual information in a very effective and efﬁcient way. Concretely,
for each pixel, a novel criss-cross attention module harvests the contextual information of all the pixels on its criss-cross path. By taking
a further recurrent operation, each pixel can ﬁnally capture the full-image dependencies. Besides, a category consistent loss is
proposed to enforce the criss-cross attention module to produce more discriminative features. Overall, CCNet is with the following
merits: 1) GPU memory friendly. Compared with the non-local block, the proposed recurrent criss-cross attention module requires 11×
less GPU memory usage. 2) High computational efﬁciency. The recurrent criss-cross attention signiﬁcantly reduces FLOPs by about
85% of the non-local block. 3) The state-of-the-art performance. We conduct extensive experiments on semantic segmentation
benchmarks including Cityscapes, ADE20K, human parsing benchmark LIP, instance segmentation benchmark COCO, video
segmentation benchmark CamVid. In particular, our CCNet achieves the mIoU scores of 81.9%, 45.76% and 55.47% on the Cityscapes
test set, the ADE20K validation set and the LIP validation set respectively, which are the new state-of-the-art results. The source codes
are available at 
Index Terms—Semantic Segmentation, Graph Attention, Criss-Cross Network, Context Modeling
INTRODUCTION
EMANTIC segmentation, which is a fundamental problem in the computer vision community, aims at assigning semantic class labels to each pixel in a given image. It has been extensively and actively studied in many
recent works and is also critical for various signiﬁcant
applications such as autonomous driving , augmented
reality ,image editing , civil engineering , remote
sensing imagery and agricultural pattern analysis ,
 . Speciﬁcally, current state-of-the-art semantic segmentation approaches based on the fully convolutional network
(FCN) have made remarkable progress. However, due
to the ﬁxed geometric structures, the conventional FCN is
inherently limited to local receptive ﬁelds that only provide
short-range contextual information. The limitation of insuf-
ﬁcient contextual information imposes a great adverse effect
on its segmentation accuracy.
To make up for the above deﬁciency of FCN, some works
have been proposed to introduce useful contextual information to beneﬁt the semantic segmentation task. Speciﬁcally,
Chen et al. proposed atrous spatial pyramid pooling
Z. Huang, X. Wang and W. Liu are with the School of Electronic
Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: , , ).
Y. Wei is with the Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Faculty of Engineering
and Information Technology, University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo,
NSW 2007, Australia. (e-mail: ).
L. Huang is with Horizon Robotics. (e-mail: ).
H. Shi is with the University of Oregon and the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign. (e-mail: ).
T. S. Huang was with the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
(e-mail: ).
Corresponding author: Xinggang Wang. Zilong Huang and Xinggang Wang
contributed equally to this work.
(a) Non-local block
(b) Criss-Cross Attention block
Rich context
Few context
Fig. 1. Diagrams of two attention-based context aggregation methods.
(a) For each position (e.g., blue), the Non-local module generates
a dense attention map which has N weights (in green). (b) For each
position (e.g., blue), the criss-cross attention module generates a sparse
attention map which only has about 2
N weights. After the recurrent
operation, each position (e.g., red) in the ﬁnal output feature maps can
collect information from all pixels. For clear display, residual connections
are ignored.
 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, JULY 2020
module with multi-scale dilation convolutions for contextual information aggregation. Zhao et al. further introduced PSPNet with pyramid pooling module to capture
contextual information. However, the dilated convolution
based methods , , collect information from a few
surrounding pixels and cannot generate dense contextual
information actually. Meanwhile, the pooling based methods , aggregate contextual information in a nonadaptive manner and the homogeneous context extraction
procedure is adopted by all image pixels, which does not
satisfy the requirement that different pixels need different
contextual dependencies.
To incorporate dense and pixel-wise contextual information, some fully-connected graph neural network
(GNN) methods were proposed to augments traditional
convolutional features with an estimated full-image context
representation. PSANet learns to aggregate contextual
information for each position via a predicted attention
map. Non-local Networks utilizes a self-attention mechanism , , which enables a single feature from any
position to perceive features of all the other positions, thus
harvesting full-image contextual information, see Fig. 1 (a).
These non-local operations could be viewed as a denselyconnected GNN module based on attention mechanism .
This feature augmentation method allows a ﬂexible way to
represent non-local relations between features and has led to
signiﬁcant improvements in several vision recognition tasks.
However, these GNN-based non-local neural networks need
to generate huge attention maps to measure the relationships for each pixel-pair, leading to a very high complexity
of O(N 2) for both time and space, where N is the number
of input features. Since the dense prediction tasks, such as
semantic segmentation, inherently require high resolution
feature maps, the non-local based methods will often with
high computation complexity and occupy a huge number
of GPU memory. Thus, is there an alternative solution to
achieve such a target in a more efﬁcient way?
To address the above mentioned issue, our motivation is
to replace the common single densely-connected graph with
several consecutive sparsely-connected graphs, which usually require much lower computational resources. Without
loss of generality, we use two consecutive criss-cross attention modules, in which each one only has sparse connections
N) for each position in the feature map. For each
pixel/position, the criss-cross attention module aggregates
contextual information in its horizontal and vertical directions. By serially stacking two criss-cross attention modules,
each position can collect contextual information from all
pixels in the given image. The above decomposition strategy
will greatly reduce the complexities of both time and space
from O(N 2) to O(N
We compare the differences between the non-local module and our criss-cross attention module in Fig. 1.
Concretely, both non-local module and criss-cross attention
module feed the input feature map to generate an attention
map for each position and transform the input feature
map into an adapted feature map. Then, a weighted sum
is adopted to collecting contextual information from other
positions in the adapted feature map based on the attention
maps. Different from the dense connections adopted by the
non-local module, each position (e.g., blue) in the feature
map is sparsely connected with other ones which are in the
same row and the same column in our criss-cross attention
module, leading to the predicted attention map only has
N weights rather than N in non-local module.
To achieve the goal of capturing the full-image dependencies, we innovatively and simply take a recurrent
operation for the criss-cross attention module. In particular,
the local features are ﬁrstly passed through one criss-cross
attention module to collect the contextual information in
horizontal and vertical directions. Then, by feeding the feature map produced by the ﬁrst criss-cross attention module
into the second one, the additional contextual information
obtained from the criss-cross path ﬁnally enables the fullimage dependencies for all positions. As demonstrated in
Fig. 1 (b), each position (e.g.red) in the second feature
map can collect information from all others to augment
the position-wise representations. We share parameters of
the criss-cross modules to keep our model slim. Since the
input and output are both convolutional feature maps, crisscross attention module can be easily plugged into any
fully convolutional neural network, named as CCNet, for
learning full-image contextual information in an end-to-end
manner. Thanks to the good usability of criss-cross attention
module, CCNet is straight forward to extend to 3D networks
for capturing long-range temporal context information.
In addition, to drive the proposed recurrent criss-cross
attention method to learn more discriminative features, we
introduce a category consistent loss to augment CCNet. Particularly, the category consistent loss enforces the network
to map each pixel in the image to an n-dimensional vector
in the feature space, such that feature vectors of pixels that
belong to the same category lie close together while feature
vectors of pixels that belong to different categories lie far
We have carried out extensive experiments on multiple
large-scale datasets. Our proposed CCNet achieves top performance on four most competitive semantic segmentation
datasets, i.e., Cityscapes , ADE20K , LIP and
CamVid . In addition, the proposed criss-cross attention
even improves the state-of-the-art instance segmentation
method, i.e., Mask R-CNN with ResNet-101 . These
results well demonstrate that our criss-cross attention module is generally beneﬁcial to the dense prediction tasks. In
summary, our main contributions are three-fold:
We propose a novel criss-cross attention module in
this work, which can be leveraged to capture contextual information from full-image dependencies in a
more efﬁcient and effective way.
We propose category consistent loss which can enforce criss-cross attention module to produce more
discriminative features.
We propose CCNet by taking advantages of recurrent criss-cross attention module, achieving leading
performance on segmentation-based benchmarks,
including Cityscapes, ADE20K, LIP, CamVid and
Compare with our original conference version , the
following improvements are conducted: 1) We further enhance the segmentation ability of CCNet by augmenting a
simple yet effective category consistent loss; 2) we propose
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, JULY 2020
a more generic CCNet by extending the criss-cross attention
module from 2D to 3D; 3) we include more extensive experiments on the LIP, CamVid and COCO datasets to verify the
effectiveness and generalization ability of our CCNet.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst review related work in Section 2 and describe the architecture
of our network in Section 3. In Section 4, ablation studies
are given and experimental results are analyzed. Section 5
presents our conclusion and future work.
RELATED WORK
Semantic segmentation
The last years have seen a renewal of interest on semantic
segmentation. FCN is the ﬁrst approach to adopt fully
convolutional network for semantic segmentation. Later,
FCN-based methods have made remarkable progress in image semantic segmentation. Chen et al. and Yu et al. 
removed the last two downsample layers to obtain dense
prediction and utilized dilated convolutions to enlarge the
receptive ﬁeld. Unet , DeepLabv3+ , MSCI ,
SPGNet , ReﬁneNet and DFN adopted encoderdecoder structures that fuse the information in low-level
and high-level layers to make dense predictions. The scaleadaptive convolutions (SAC) and deformable convolutional networks (DCN) methods improved the standard
convolutional operator to handle the deformation and various scales of objects. CRF-RNN and DPN used
Graph model, i.e., CRF, MRF, for semantic segmentation.
AAF used adversarial learning to capture and match the
semantic relations between neighboring pixels in the label
space. BiSeNet was designed for real-time semantic segmentation. DenseDecoder built feature-level long-range
skip connections on cascaded architecture. VideoGCRF 
used a densely-connected spatio-temporal graph for video
semantic segmentation. RTA proposed the region-based
temporal aggregation for leveraging the temporal information in videos. In addition, some works focus on human
parsing task. JPPNet embed pose estimation into human
parsing task. CE2P proposed a simple yet effective
framework for computing context embedding while preserving edges. SANet used parallel branches with scale
attention to handle large scale variance in human parsing.
Semantic segmentation is also actively studied in the context
of domain adaptation and dstillation , , and
weakly supervised setting , , , etc.
Contextual information aggregation
It is a common practice to aggregate contextual information
to augment the feature representation in semantic segmentation networks. Deeplabv2 proposed atrous spatial
pyramid pooling (ASPP) to use different dilation convolutions to capture contextual information. DenseASPP 
brought dense connections into ASPP to generate features
with various scale. DPC utilized architecture search
techniques to build multi-scale architectures for semantic
segmentation. Chen et al. made use of several attention masks to fuse feature maps or prediction maps from
different branches. PSPNet utilized pyramid spatial
pooling to aggregate contextual information. Recently, Zhao
et al. proposed the point-wise spatial attention network
which uses predicted attention map to guide contextual
information collection. Auto-Deeplab utilized neural
architecture search to search an effective context modeling.
He et al. proposed an adaptive pyramid context module
for semantic segmentation. Liu et al. utilized recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) to capture long-range dependencies.
There are some works use graph models to model
contextual
information.
Conditional
(CRF) , , , Markov random ﬁeld (MRF) were
also utilized to capture long-range dependencies for semantic segmentation. Vaswani et al. applied a self-attention
model on machine translation. Wang et al. proposed
the non-local module to generate the huge attention map
by calculating the correlation matrix between each spatial
point on the feature maps, then the attention map guided
dense contextual information aggregation. OCNet and
DANet utilized Non-local module to harvest the
contextual information. PSA learned an attention map
to aggregate contextual information for each individual
point adaptively and speciﬁcally. Chen et al. proposed
graph-based global reasoning networks which implements
relation reasoning via graph convolution on a small graph.
CCNet vs. Non-Local vs. GCN. Here, we speciﬁcally
discuss the differences among GCN , Non-local Network and CCNet. In term of contextual information
aggregation, only the center point can perceive the contextual information from all pixels by the global convolution
ﬁlters in GCN . In contrast, Non-local Network and
CCNet guarantee that a pixel at any position perceives
contextual information from all pixels. Though GCN 
alternatively decomposes the square-shape convolutional
operation to horizontal and vertical linear convolutional
operations which is related to CCNet, CCNet takes the crisscross way to harvest contextual information which is more
effective than the horizontal-vertical separate way. Moreover, CCNet is proposed to mimic Non-local Network 
for obtaining dense contextual information through a more
effective and efﬁcient recurrent criss-cross attention module, in which dissimilar features get low attention weights
and features with high attention weights are similar ones.
GCN is a conventional convolution neural network,
while CCNet is a graph neural network in which each pixel
in the convolutional feature map is considered as a node
and the relation/context among nodes can be utilized to
generate better node features.
Graph neural networks
Our work is related to deep graph neural network (GNN).
Prior to graph neural networks, graphical models, such as
the conditional random ﬁeld (CRF) , , , markov
random ﬁeld (MRF) , were widely used to model the
long-range dependencies for image understanding. GNNs
were early studied in , , . Inspired by the success
of CNNs, a large number of methods adapt graph structure
into CNNs. These methods could be divided into two main
steams, the spectral-based approaches , , , 
and the spatial-based approaches , , , . The
proposed CCNet belongs to the latter.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, JULY 2020
Criss-Cross
Attention Module
Criss-Cross
Attention Module
Recurrent Criss-Cross Attention (R=2)
Segmentation
Concatenation
Input/output
feature extraction
Fig. 2. Overview of the proposed CCNet for semantic segmentation.
In this section, we give the details of the proposed Criss-
Cross Network (CCNet) for semantic segmentation. We
ﬁrst present a general framework of our CCNet. Then, the
2D criss-cross attention module which captures contextual
information in horizontal and vertical directions will be
introduced. To capture the dense and global contextual
information, we propose to adopt a recurrent operation for
the criss-cross attention module. To further improve RCCA,
we introduce a discriminative loss function to drive RCCA
to learn category consistent features. Finally we propose the
3D criss-cross attention module for leveraging temporal and
spatial contextual information simultaneously.
Network Architecture
The network architecture is given in Fig. 2. An input image
is passed through a deep convolutional neural network
(DCNN), which is designed in a fully convolutional fashion , to produce feature map X with the spatial size
of H × W. In order to retain more details and efﬁciently
produce dense feature maps, we remove the last two downsampling operations and employ dilation convolutions in
the subsequent convolutional layers, leading to enlarging
the width/height of the output feature map X to 1/8 of the
input image.
Given X, we ﬁrst apply a convolutional layer to obtain
the feature map H of dimension reduction. Then, H is
fed into the criss-cross attention module to generate a new
feature map H′ which aggregate contextual information together for each pixel in its criss-cross path. The feature map
H′ only contains the contextual information in horizontal
and vertical directions which are not powerful enough for
accurate semantic segmentation. To obtain richer and denser
context information, we feed the feature map H′ into the
criss-cross attention module again and output the feature
map H′′. Thus, each position in H′′ actually gathers the
information from all pixels. Two criss-cross attention modules before and after share the same parameters to avoid
adding too many extra parameters. We name this recurrent
structure as recurrent criss-cross attention (RCCA) module.
Then, we concatenate the dense contextual feature H′′
with the local representation feature X. It is followed by one
or several convolutional layers with batch normalization
and activation for feature fusion. Finally, the fused features
are fed into the segmentation layer to predict the ﬁnal
segmentation result.
Criss-Cross Attention
To model full-image dependencies over local feature representations using light-weight computation and memory, we
introduce a criss-cross attention module. The criss-cross attention module collects contextual information in horizontal
and vertical directions to enhance pixel-wise representative
capability. As shown in Fig. 3, given a local feature map
H ∈RC×W ×H, the module ﬁrst applies two convolutional
layers with 1 × 1 ﬁlters on H to generate two feature maps
Q and K, respectively, where {Q, K} ∈RC′×W ×H. C′ is
the number of channel, which is less than C for dimension
reduction.
After obtaining Q and K, we further generate an attention map A ∈R(H+W −1)×(W ×H) via Afﬁnity operation. At
each position u in the spatial dimension of Q, we can obtain
a vector Qu ∈RC′. Meanwhile, we can also obtain the
set Ωu ∈R(H+W −1)×C′ by extracting feature vectors from
K which are in the same row or column with position u.
Ωi,u ∈RC′ is the i-th element of Ωu. The Afﬁnity operation
is then deﬁned as follows.
di,u = QuΩ⊺
where di,u ∈D is the degree of correlation between features Qu and Ωi,u, i = [1, ..., H + W −1], and D ∈
R(H+W −1)×(W ×H). Then, we apply a softmax layer on D
over the channel dimension to calculate the attention map
Another convolutional layer with 1 × 1 ﬁlters is applied
on H to generate V ∈RC×W ×H for feature adaptation. At
each position u in the spatial dimension of V, we can obtain
a vector Vu ∈RC and a set Φu ∈R(H+W −1)×C. The set Φu
is a collection of feature vectors in V which are in the same
row or column with position u. The contextual information
is collected by an Aggregation operation deﬁned as follows.
Ai,uΦi,u + Hu,
u is a feature vector in H′ ∈RC×W ×H at position
u and Ai,u is a scalar value at channel i and position u in
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, JULY 2020
Aggregation
Fig. 3. The details of criss-cross attention module.
𝒇(𝑨, u𝒙,𝜽𝒚, 𝜽𝒙,𝜽𝒚)
𝒇(𝑨, 𝜽𝒙,u𝒚, 𝜽𝒙,𝜽𝒚)
𝒇(𝑨′, u𝒙,u𝒚, 𝜽𝒙,u𝒚)
𝒇(𝑨′, u𝒙,u𝒚, u𝒙,𝜽𝒚)
Fig. 4. An example of information propagation when the loop number is
A. The contextual information is added to local feature H
to augment the pixel-wise representation. Therefore, it has
a wide contextual view and selectively aggregates contexts
according to the spatial attention map. These feature representations achieve mutual gains and are more robust for
semantic segmentation.
Recurrent Criss-Cross Attention (RCCA)
Despite the criss-cross attention module can capture contextual information in horizontal and vertical directions, the
connections between one pixel and its around ones that are
not in the criss-cross path are still absent. To tackle this
problem, we innovatively and simply introduce a RCCA
operation based on the criss-cross attention. The RCCA
module can be unrolled into R loops. In the ﬁrst loop, the
criss-cross attention takes the feature map H extracted from
a CNN model as the input and output the feature map H′,
where H and H′ are with the same shape. In the second
loop, the criss-cross attention takes the feature map H′ as the
input and output the feature map H′′. As shown in Fig. 2,
the RCCA module is equipped with two loops (R = 2)
which is able to harvest full-image contextual information
from all pixels to generate new features with dense and rich
contextual information.
We denote A and A′ as the attention maps in loop 1
and loop 2, respectively. Since we are interested only in
contextual information spreads in spatial dimension rather
than in channel dimension, the convolutional layer with
1 × 1 ﬁlters can be view as the identical connection. In the
case of R = 2, the connections between any two spatial
positions in the feature map built up by the RCCA module
can be clearly and quantitatively described by introducing
function f deﬁned as follows.
∃i ∈RH+W −1, s.t. Ai,u = f(A, uCC
, ux, uy),
where u(ux, uy) ∈RH×W is any spatial position in H
and uCC(uCC
) ∈RH+W −1 is a position in the crisscross structure centered at u. The function f is actually
an one-to-one mapping from the position pair (uCC, u) ∈
R(H+W −1)×(H×W ) in the feature map to a particular element Ai,u ∈R(H+W −1)×(H×W ) in the attention map
A ⊂R(H+W −1)×(H×W ), where uCC maps to a particular
row i in A and u maps to a particular column in A.
With the help of function f, we can easily describe the
information propagation between any position u in H′′ and
any position θ in H. It is obvious that information could
ﬂow from θ to u when θ is in the criss-cross path of u.
Then, we focus on another situation in which θ(θx, θy)
is NOT in the criss-cross path of u(ux, uy). To make it easier
to understand, we visualize the information propagation in
Fig. 4. The position (θx, θy), which is blue, ﬁrstly passes the
information into the (ux, θy) and (θx, uy) (light green) in the
loop 1. The propagation could be quantiﬁed by function f. It
should be noted that these two points (ux, θy) and (θx, uy)
are in the criss-cross path of u(ux, uy). Then, the positions
(ux, θy) and (θx, uy) pass the information into the (ux, uy)
(dark green) in the loop 2. Thus, the information in θ(θx, θy)
could eventually ﬂow into u(ux, uy) even if θ(θx, θy) is
NOT in the criss-cross path of u(ux, uy).
In general, our RCCA module makes up for the deﬁciency of criss-cross attention that cannot obtain the dense
contextual information from all pixels. Compared with crisscross attention, the RCCA module (R = 2) does not bring
extra parameters and can achieve better performance with
the cost of a minor computation increment.
Learning Category Consistent Features
For semantic segmentation tasks, the pixels belonging to
the same category should have the similar features, while
the pixels from different categories should have far apart
features. We name such a characteristic as category consistency. The deep features produced by RCCA have fullimage context; however, the aggregated feature may have
the problem of over-smoothing, which is a common issue
in graph neural networks. To address this potential issue,
beside the cross-entropy loss ℓseg to penalize the mismatch
between the ﬁnal predicted segmentation maps and ground
truth, we further introduce the category consistent loss to
drive RCCA module to learn category consistent features
In , a discriminative loss function with three competing terms is proposed for instance segmentation. In particular, the three terms, denoted as ℓvar, ℓdis, ℓreg, are adopted to
1) penalize large distances between features with the same
label for each instance, 2) penalize small distances between
the mean features of different labels, and 3) draw mean
features of all categories towards the origin, respectively.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, JULY 2020
Motivated by , we ﬁrst adapt a discriminative loss for
semantic segmentation rather than instance segmentation,
then replace the ﬁrst term with more robust one: instead
of using quadratic function as the distance function to penalize mismatch all along, we design a piece-wise distance
function to make the optimization more robust.
Let C be the set of classes that are present in the minibatch images. Nc is the number of valid elements belonging
to category c ∈C. hi ∈H is the feature vector at spatial
position i. µc is the mean feature of category c ∈C (the
cluster center). ϕ is a piece-wise distance function. δv and δd
are respectively the margins. In particular, Eq. 6 is a piecewise distance function and the function ϕvar will be zero,
quadratic, and linear function when the distance from the
center µc is within dv, in range of (δv, δd], and exceeds δd,
respectively.
ϕvar(hi, µc),
|C|(|C| −1)
ϕdis(µca, µcb),
∥µc −hi∥−δd + (δd −δv)2,
∥µc −hi∥> δd
(∥µc −hi∥−δv)2,
δv < ∥µc −hi∥≤δd
∥µc −hi∥≤δv
 (2δd −∥µca −µcb∥)2,
∥µca −µcb∥≤2δd
∥µca −µcb∥> 2δd
To reduce the computation load, we ﬁrst apply a convolutional layer with 1 × 1 ﬁlters on the output of RCCA
module for dimension reduction and then apply these three
loss on the feature map with fewer channels. The ﬁnal loss
ℓis weighted sum of all losses.
ℓ= ℓseg + αℓvar + βℓdis + γℓreg,
where α, β and ℓare the weight parameters. In our experiments we set δv = 0.5, δd = 1.5, α = β = 1, γ = 0.001 and
16 as the number of channels for dimension reduction.
3D Criss-Cross Attention
To adapt our method from 2D applications to 3D dense
prediction tasks, we introduce 3D Criss-Cross Attention.
In general, the architecture of 3D Criss-Cross Attention is
an extension the 2D version by additional collecting more
contextual information from the temporal dimension. As
shown in Fig. 5, given a local feature map H ∈RC×T ×W ×H,
where T is axial dimension (i.e., temporal dimension in
video data). The module ﬁrstly applies two convolutional
layers with 1 × 1 × 1 ﬁlters on H to generate two feature
maps Q and K, respectively, where {Q, K} ∈RC′×T ×W ×H.
After obtaining the feature maps Q and K, we further
generate an attention map A ∈R(T +H+W −2)×T ×W ×H via
1x1x1 Conv
Aggregation
1x1x1 Conv
1x1x1 Conv
Fig. 5. The details of 3D criss-cross attention module.
the Afﬁnity operation. At each position u of Q, we can obtain a vector Qu ∈RC′. u contains three coordinate values
(t, x, y). We can also obtain the set Ωu ∈R(T +H+W −2)×C′
by extracting feature vectors from K with at least two
coordinate values equal to u. Ωi,u ∈RC′ is the i-th element
of Ωu. The Afﬁnity operation is then deﬁned as follows.
di,u = QuΩi,u
where di,u ∈D is the degree of correlation between feature Qu and Ωi,u, i = [1, ..., (T + H + W −2)], D ∈
R(T +H+W −2)×T ×W ×H. Then, we apply a softmax layer on
D over the ﬁrst dimension to calculate the attention map A.
Another convolutional layer with 1 × 1 × 1 ﬁlters is
applied on H to generate V ∈RC×T ×W ×H for feature
adaptation. At each position u in the spatial dimension
of V, we can obtain a vector Vu
RC and a set
Φu ∈R(T +H+W −2)×C. The the set Φu is a collection of
feature vectors in V which are in the criss-cross structure
centered at u. The contextual information is collected by the
Aggregation operation:
Ai,uΦi,u + Hu,
u is a feature vector in the output feature map H′ ∈
RC×T ×W ×H at position u. Ai,u is a scalar value at channel
i and position u in A.
EXPERIMENTS
To evaluate the effectiveness of the CCNet, we carry out
comprehensive experiments on the Cityscapes dataset ,
the ADE20K dataset , the COCO dataset , the LIP
dataset and the CamVid dataset . Experimental
results demonstrate that CCNet achieves state-of-the-art
performance on Cityscapes, ADE20K and LIP. Meanwhile,
CCNet can bring constant performance gain on COCO for
instance segmentation. In the following subsections, we ﬁrst
introduce the datasets and implementation details, then
we perform a series of ablation experiments on Cityscapes
dataset. Finally, we report our results on ADE20K, LIP,
COCO and CamVid datasets.
Datasets and Evaluation Metrics
We adopt Mean IoU (mIOU, mean of class-wise intersection
over union) for Cityscapes, ADE20K, LIP and CamVid and
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, JULY 2020
the standard COCO metrics Average Precision (AP) for
Cityscapes is tasked for urban segmentation. Only
the 5,000 ﬁnely annotated images are used in our
experiments and are divided into 2,975/500/1,525
images for training, validation, and testing, respectively.
ADE20K is a recent scene parsing benchmark containing dense labels of 150 stuff/object categories.
The dataset includes 20k/2k/3k images for training,
validation and testing, respectively.
LIP is a large-scale single human parsing dataset.
There are 50,462 images with ﬁne-grained annotations at pixel-level with 19 semantic human part
labels and one background label. Those images are
further divided into 30k/10k/10k for training, validation and testing, respectively.
COCO is a very challenging dataset for instance
segmentation that contains 115k images over 80 categories for training, 5k images for validation and 20k
images for testing.
CamVid is one of the datasets focusing on semantic
segmentation for autonomous driving scenarios. It is
composed of 701 densely annotated images with size
720 × 960 from ﬁve video sequences.
Implementation Details
Network Structure For semantic segmentation, we choose
the ImageNet pre-trained ResNet-101 as our backbone
network, remove its last two down-sampling operations,
and employ dilated convolutions in the subsequent convolutional layers following the previous work , resulting
in the output stride as 8. For human parsing, we choose
CE2P as our baseline and replace the Context Embedding module with RCCA. For instance segmentation,
we choose Mask-RCNN as our baseline. For video semantic segmentation, we also choose Cityscapes pre-trained
ResNet-101 as our backbone network with 3D RCCA.
Training settings SGD with mini-batch is used for training.
For semantic segmentation, the initial learning rate is 1e-2
for Cityscapes and ADE20K. Following the prior works ,
 , we employ a poly learning rate policy where the initial
learning rate is multiplied by 1−(
max iter)power with power
= 0.9. We use the momentum of 0.9 and a weight decay of
0.0001. For Cityscapes, the training images are augmented
by randomly scaling (from 0.75 to 2.0), then randomly
cropping out high-resolution patches (769 × 769) from the
resulting images. Since the images from ADE20K are with
various sizes, we adopt an augmentation strategy of resizing
the short side of input image to a length randomly chosen
from the set {300, 375, 450, 525, 600}. For human parsing,
the model are trained and tested with the input size of
473 × 473. For instance segmentation, we take the same
training settings as that of Mask-RCNN . For video
semantic segmentation, we sample 5 temporally ordered
frames from a training video as training data and the input
size is 504 × 504.
Comparison with state-of-the-arts on Cityscapes (test).
Performance on val set
DeepLabv3 
ResNet-101
DeepLabv3+ 
Xception-65
DPC †
Xception-71
ResNet-101
Performance on test set
DeepLab-v2 
ResNet-101
ReﬁneNet ‡
ResNet-101
SAC ‡
ResNet-101
GCN ‡
ResNet-101
DUC ‡
ResNet-101
ResNet-38 
WiderResnet-38
PSPNet 
ResNet-101
BiSeNet ‡
ResNet-101
ResNet-101
PSANet ‡
ResNet-101
DFN ‡
ResNet-101
DenseASPP ‡
DenseNet-161
ResNet-101
† use extra COCO dataset for training.
‡ train with both the train-ﬁne and val-ﬁne datasets.
Experiments on Cityscapes
Comparisons with state-of-the-arts
Results of other state-of-the-art semantic segmentation solutions on Cityscapes are summarized in Tab. 1. For val
set, we provide these results for reference and emphasize
that these results should not be simply compared with our
method, since these methods are trained on different (even
larger) training sets or different basic network. Among these
approaches, Deeplabv3 adopts multi-scale testing strategy. Deeplabv3+ and DPC both use a more stronger
backbone (i.e., Xception-65 & 71 vs. ResNet-101). In addition,
DPC makes use of additional dataset, i.e., COCO, for
pre-training beyond the training set of Cityscapes. The
results show that the proposed CCNet with single-scale
testing still achieve comparable performance without bells
and whistles.
Additionally, we also train the best learned CCNet with
ResNet-101 as the backbone using both training and validation sets and make the evaluation on the test set by
submitting our test results to the ofﬁcial evaluation server.
Most of methods , , , , , , , ,
 , adopt the same backbone as ours and the others , utilize stronger backbones. From Tab. 1, it
can be observed that our CCNet substantially outperforms
all the previous state-of-the-arts on test set. Among the
approaches, PSANet is the most related to our method
which generates sub attention map for each pixel. One of
the differences is that the sub attention map has 2 × H × W
weights in PSANet and H + W −1 weights in CCNet.
Even with lower computation cost and memory usage, our
method still achieves better performance.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, JULY 2020
Ground Truth
Fig. 6. Visualization results of RCCA with different loops on Cityscapes validation set.
Performance on Cityscapes (val) for different number of loops in RCCA.
FLOPs and memory increment are estimated for an input of
1 × 3 × 769 × 769.
Memory(M▲)
Ablation studies
To verify the rationality of the CCNet, we conduct extensive
ablation experiments on the validation set of Cityscapes
with different settings for CCNet.
The effect of the RCCA module Tab. 2 shows the performance on the Cityscapes validation set by adopting different
number of loop in RCCA. All experiments are conducted
using ResNet-101 as the backbone. Besides, the input size
of training images is 769 × 769 and the size of the input
feature map H of RCCA is 97 × 97. Our baseline network is
the ResNet-based FCN with dilated convolutional module
incorporated at stage 4 and 5, i.e., dilation rates are set to
2 and 4 for these two stages respectively. The increment of
FLOPs and memory usage are estimated when R = 1, 2, 3,
respectively.
We observe that adding a criss-cross attention module
into the baseline, donated as R = 1, improves the performance by 2.9%, which can effectively demonstrates the
signiﬁcance of criss-cross attention. Furthermore, increasing
the number of loops from 1 to 2 can further improve
the performance by 1.8%, demonstrating the effectiveness
of dense contextual information. Finally, increasing loops
from 2 to 3 slightly improves the performance by 0.4%.
Meanwhile, with the increasing the number of loops, the
FLOPs and usage of GPU memory keep increasing. These
results prove that the proposed criss-cross attention can signiﬁcantly improve the performance by capturing contextual
information in horizontal and vertical direction. In addition,
Performance on Cityscapes (val) for different kinds of category
consistent loss.
Function Type
Mean mIOU(%)
Quadratic function
Piece-wise function
the proposed RCCA is effective in capturing the dense
and global contextual information, which can ﬁnally beneﬁt
the performance of semantic segmentation. To balance the
performance and resource usage, we choose R = 2 as
default settings in all the following experiments.
To further validate the effectiveness of the criss-cross
module, we provide the qualitative comparisons in Fig. 6.
We leverage the white circles to indicate those challenging
regions that are easily to be misclassiﬁed. It can be seen
that these challenging regions are progressively corrected
with the increasing the number of loops, which can well
prove the effectiveness of dense contextual information
aggregation for semantic segmentation.
The effect of the category consistent loss Tab. 4 also shows
the performance on the Cityscapes validation set by adopting the proposed category consistent loss. The category
consistent loss is donated as “CCL” in the table. As we
can see, adopting the category consistent loss could stably
bring ˜0.7% mIoU gain with both Resnet-101 and Resnet-
50, which prove the effectiveness of the proposed category
consistent loss for semantic segmentation. To prove that
the proposed piece-wise function is more robust than the
original one, we conduct 10 times of the training processes
using ResNet-50 for each kind of loss function. The training
is deemed to fail when the loss value is NaN, thus we can
calculate the success rate (number of successful training /
total number of training). The experimental results in Table 3
demonstrate that using the piece-wise function has higher
training success rate than using the original one. Besides,
using the piece-wise function could achieve slightly better
performance than a single quadratic function. Because we
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, JULY 2020
Comparison of context aggregation approaches on Cityscapes (val).
ResNet101-Baseline
ResNet101+GCN
ResNet101+PSP
ResNet101+ASPP
ResNet101+NL
ResNet101+RCCA(R=2)
ResNet101+RCCA(R=2)+CCL
ResNet50-Baseline
ResNet50+GCN
ResNet50+PSP
ResNet50+ASPP
ResNet50+NL
ResNet50+HV
ResNet50+HV&VH
ResNet50+RCCA(R=2)
ResNet50+RCCA(R=2)+CCL
relax the punishment in the Eq. 6 to reduce the numerical
values and gradients especially when the distance from the
center exceeds δd. This relaxation makes the optimization
much more stable.
Comparison of other context aggregation approaches We
compare the performance of several different context aggregation approaches on the Cityscapes validation set with
ResNet-50 and ResNet-101 as backbone networks.
Speciﬁcally, the baselines of context aggregation mainly
include: 1) Peng et al. utilized global convolution
ﬁlters for contextual information aggregation, donated as
“+GCN”. 2) Zhao et al. proposed Pyramid pooling
which is the simple and effective way to capture global contextual information, donated as “+PSP”; 3) Chen et al. 
used different dilation convolutions to harvest pixel-wise
contextual information at the different range, donated as
“+ASPP”; 4) Wang et al. introduced non-local network
for context aggregation, donated as “+NL”.
In Tab. 4, both “+NL” and “+RCCA” achieve better
performance compared with the other context aggregation
approaches, which demonstrates the importance of capturing full-image contextual information. More interestingly,
our method achieves better performance than “+NL”. This
reason may be attributed to the sequentially recurrent operation of criss-cross attention. Concretely, “+NL” generates
an attention map directly from the feature which has limit
receptive ﬁeld and short-range dependencies. In contrast,
our “+RCCA” takes two steps to form dense contextual
information, leading to that the latter step can learn a better
attention map beneﬁting from the feature map produced by
the ﬁrst step in which some long-range dependencies has
already been embedded.
To prove the effectiveness of attention with criss-cross
shape, we compare criss-cross shape with other shapes in
Tab. 4. “+HV” means stacking horizontal attention and
vertical attention. “+HV&VH” means summing up features
Comparison of Non-local module and RCCA. FLOPs and memory
increment are estimated for an input of 1 × 3 × 769 × 769.
GFLOPs(▲) Memory(M▲) mIOU(%)
+RCCA(R=2)
of two parallel branches, i.e. “HV” and “VH”.
We further explore the amount of computation and
memory footprint of RCCA. As shown in Tab. 5, compared
with “+NL” method, the proposed “+RCCA” requires 11×
less GPU memory usage and signiﬁcantly reduces FLOPs
by about 85% of non-local block in computing full-image
dependencies, which shows that CCNet is an efﬁcient way
to capture full-image contextual information in the least
amount of computation and memory footprint. To further
prove the effectiveness of the recurrent operation, we also
run non-local module in the recurrent way, donated as
“+NL(R=2)”. As we can seen, the recurrent operation can
bring more than 1 point gain. Because the recurrent operation leads to that the latter step can learn a better attention
map beneﬁting from the feature map produced by the
ﬁrst step in which some long-range dependencies has already been embedded. However, compared with “+RCCA”,
“+NL(R=2)” needs huge GPU memory usage, which limits
the use of self-attention.
Visualization of Attention Map To get a deeper understanding of our RCCA, we visualize the learned attention
masks as shown in Fig. 7. For each input image, we select
one point (cross in green) and show its corresponding
attention maps when R = 1 and R = 2 in columns 2
and 3, respectively. It can be observed that only contextual
information from the criss-cross path of the target point is
captured when R = 1. By adopting one more criss-cross
module, i.e., R = 2, RCCA can ﬁnally aggregate denser and
richer contextual information compared with that of R = 1.
Besides, we observe that the attention module could capture
semantic similarity and full-image dependencies.
Experiments on ADE20K
In this subsection, we conduct experiments on the AED20K
dataset, which is a very challenging scene parsing dataset.
As shown in Tab. 6, CCNet with CCL achieves the stateof-the-art performance of 45.76%, outperforms the previous state-of-the-art methods by more than 1.1% and also
outperforms the conference version CCNet by 0.5%. Some
successful segmentation results are given in Fig 8. Among
the approaches, most of methods , , , , ,
 adopt the ResNet-101 as backbone and ReﬁneNet 
adopts a more powerful network, i.e., ResNet-152, as the
backbone. EncNet achieves previous best performance
among the methods and utilizes global pooling with imagelevel supervision to collect image-level context information. In contrast, our CCNet adopts an alternative way
to integrate contextual information by capture full-image
dependencies and achieve better performance.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, JULY 2020
Ground Truth
Fig. 7. Visualization of attention module on Cityscapes validation set. The left column is the input images, the 2 and 3 columns are pixel-wise
attention maps when R = 1 and R = 2 in RCCA.
Ground Truth
Fig. 8. Visualized examples on ADE20K val set with/without category
consistent loss (CCL).
Experiments on LIP
In this subsection, we conduct experiments on the LIP
dataset, which is a very challenging human parsing dataset.
The framework of CE2P is utilized, with ImageNet pretrained ResNet-101 as bockbone and using RCCA (R=2)
rather than PSP as context embedding module. The
category consistent loss is used to boost the performance.
The hyper-parameter setting strictly follows that in the
CE2P . Among the approaches, Deeplab (VGG-16) ,
Attention and SAN adopt the VGG-16 as backbone
and Deeplab (ResNet-101) , JPPNet , CE2P and
CCNet adopt ResNet-101 as the backbone. As shown in
Tab. 7, CCNet achieves the state-of-the-art performance of
55.47%, outperforms the previous state-of-the-art methods
by more than 2.3%. This signiﬁcant improvement demonstrates the effectiveness of proposed method on human
parsing task. Fig. 9 shows some visualized segmentation
results. The top two rows show some successful segmentation results It shows our method can produce accurate
Ground Truth
Fig. 9. Visualized examples for human parsing result on LIP val set.
segmentation even for complicated poses. The third row
shows a failure segmentation result where the “skirt” is
misclassiﬁed as “pants”. But it’s difﬁcult to recognize even
for humans.
Experiments on COCO
To further demonstrate the generality of CCNet, we conduct the instance segmentation task on COCO using
the competitive Mask R-CNN model as the baseline.
Following , we modify the Mask R-CNN backbone by
adding the RCCA module right before the last convolutional
residual block of res4. We evaluate a standard baseline of
ResNet-50/101. All models are ﬁne-tuned from ImageNet
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, JULY 2020
Fig. 10. Visualized examples for instance segmentation result on COCO val set.
pre-training. We use the ofﬁcial implementation1 with endto-end joint training whose performance is almost the same
as the baseline reported in . For fair comparison, we do
not use the category consistent loss in our method. We
report the results in terms of box AP and mask AP in
Tab. 8 on COCO. The results demonstrate that our method
substantially outperforms the baseline in all metrics. Some
segmentation results for comparing baseline with “+RCCA”
are given in Fig 10. Meanwhile, the network with “+RCCA”
also achieves the better performance than the network with
one non-local block “+NL”.
Experiments on CamVid
To further demonstrate the effectiveness of 3D-RCCA, we
carry out the experiments on CamVid , which is one
of the ﬁrst datasets focusing on video semantic segmentation for driving scenarios. We follow the standard protocol
proposed in to split the dataset into 367 training, 101
validation and 233 test images. For fair comparison, we
only report single-scale evaluation scores. As can be seen
in Tab. 9, we achieve an mIoU of 79.1%, outperforming all
other methods by a large margin.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed techniques, we perform training under the same settings with
the different length of input frames. We apply the CNNs
on each frame for extracting features and then concatenate
and reshape them to satisfy the required shape of 3D Criss-
Coss Attention module. We use the R = 3 for collecting
dense spatial and temporal contextual information. Here,
to make a training sample, we try two kinds of length (T)
of input frames. For T = 1, we randomly sample 1 frame
from a training video, donated as “CCNet3D (T = 1)”.
For T = 5, we sample 5 temporally ordered frames from
a training video, donated as “CCNet3D (T = 5)”. As can be
seen in Tab. 9, “CCNet3D (T = 5)” outperforms “CCNet3D
(T = 1)” by 1.2%.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have presented a Criss-Cross Network
(CCNet) for deep learning based dense prediction tasks,
1. 
Comparison with state-of-the-arts on ADE20K (val).
ReﬁneNet 
ResNet-152
ResNet-101
PSPNet 
ResNet-101
PSANet 
ResNet-101
DSSPN 
ResNet-101
UperNet 
ResNet-101
EncNet 
ResNet-101
ResNet-101
Comparison with state-of-the-arts on LIP (val).
DeepLab (VGG-16) 
Attention 
DeepLab (ResNet-101) 
JPPNet 
Comparison on COCO (val).
which adaptively captures contextual information on the
criss-cross path. To obtain dense contextual information, we
introduce RCCA which aggregates contextual information
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, JULY 2020
Results on the CamVid test set.
SegNet 
Dilate8 
BiSeNet 
PSPNet 
DenseDecoder 
ResNeXt101
VideoGCRF‡ 
CCNet3D (T=1) ‡
CCNet3D (T=5) ‡
‡ the initialized model is pre-trained on Cityscapes.
from all pixels. The experiments demonstrate that RCCA
captures full-image contextual information in less computation cost and less memory cost. Besides, to learn discriminative features, we introduce the category consistent loss.
Our CCNet achieves outstanding performance consistently
on several semantic segmentation datasets, i.e., Cityscapes,
ADE20K, LIP, CamVid and instance segmentation dataset,
i.e., COCO. The source codes of CCNet are released to
facilitate related research and applications.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was in part supported by NSFC (No. 61733007
and No. 61876212), ARC DECRA DE190101315, ARC
DP200100938, HUST-Horizon Computer Vision Research
Center, and IBM-ILLINOIS Center for Cognitive Computing
Systems Research (C3SR) - a research collaboration as part
of the IBM AI Horizons Network.