Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 452–461
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 7–11, 2017. c⃝2017 Association for Computational Linguistics
Recurrent Attention Network on Memory for Aspect Sentiment Analysis
Zhongqian Sun
Lidong Bing∗
Tencent Inc.
{patchen, sallensun, lyndonbing, willyang}@tencent.com
We propose a novel framework based on
neural networks to identify the sentiment
of opinion targets in a comment/review.
Our framework adopts multiple-attention
mechanism to capture sentiment features
separated by a long distance, so that it
is more robust against irrelevant information.
The results of multiple attentions
are non-linearly combined with a recurrent neural network, which strengthens the
expressive power of our model for handling more complications. The weightedmemory mechanism not only helps us
avoid the labor-intensive feature engineering work, but also provides a tailor-made
memory for different opinion targets of a
We examine the merit of our
model on four datasets: two are from SemEval2014, i.e. reviews of restaurants and
laptops; a twitter dataset, for testing its
performance on social media data; and a
Chinese news comment dataset, for testing
its language sensitivity. The experimental
results show that our model consistently
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods
on different types of data.
Introduction
The goal of aspect sentiment analysis is to identify the sentiment polarity (i.e., negative, neutral,
or positive) of a speciﬁc opinion target expressed
in a comment/review by a reviewer. For example, in “I bought a mobile phone, its camera is
wonderful but the battery life is short”, there are
three opinion targets, “camera”, “battery life”, and
“mobile phone”. The reviewer has a positive sentiment on the “camera”, a negative sentiment on the
∗Corresponding author.
“battery life”, and a mixed sentiment on the “mobile phone”. Sentence-oriented sentiment analysis
methods 
are not capable to capture such ﬁne-grained sentiments on opinion targets.
In order to identify the sentiment of an individual opinion target, one critical task is to model appropriate context features for the target in its original sentence. In simple cases, the sentiment of
a target is identiﬁable with a syntactically nearby
opinion word, e.g.
“wonderful” for “camera”.
However, there are many cases in which opinion
words are enclosed in more complicated contexts.
E.g., “Its camera is not wonderful enough” might
express a neutral sentiment on “camera”, but not
negative. Such complications usually hinder conventional approaches to aspect sentiment analysis.
To model the sentiment of the above phraselike word sequence (i.e. “not wonderful enough”),
LSTM-based methods are proposed, such as target
dependent LSTM (TD-LSTM) .
TD-LSTM might suffer from the problem that after it captures a sentiment feature far from the
target, it needs to propagate the feature word by
word to the target, in which case it’s likely to lose
this feature, such as the feature “cost-effective”
for “the phone” in “My overall feeling is that the
phone, after using it for three months and considering its price, is really cost-effective”.1 Attention
mechanism, which has been successfully used in
machine translation , can
enforce a model to pay more attention to the important part of a sentence. There are already some
works using attention in sentiment analysis to exploit this advantage . Another observation is that some types of
1 Although LSTM could keep information for a long distance by preventing the vanishing gradient problem, it usually
requires a large training corpus to capture the ﬂexible usage
of parenthesis.
sentence structures are particularly challenging for
target sentiment analysis. For example, in “Except Patrick, all other actors don’t play well”, the
word “except” and the phrase “don’t play well”
produce a positive sentiment on “Patrick”.
hard to synthesize these features just by LSTM,
since their positions are dispersed. Single attention based methods ) are
also not capable to overcome such difﬁculty, because attending multiple words with one attention
may hide the characteristic of each attended word.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework
to solve the above problems in target sentiment
analysis. Speciﬁcally, our framework ﬁrst adopts
a bidirectional LSTM (BLSTM) to produce the
memory (i.e. the states of time steps generated
by LSTM) from the input, as bidirectional recurrent neural networks (RNNs) were found effective for a similar purpose in machine translation
 . The memory slices are
then weighted according to their relative positions
to the target, so that different targets from the
same sentence have their own tailor-made memories. After that, we pay multiple attentions on the
position-weighted memory and nonlinearly combine the attention results with a recurrent network,
i.e. GRUs. Finally, we apply softmax on the output of the GRU network to predict the sentiment
on the target.
Our framework introduces a novel way of applying multiple-attention mechanism to synthesize
important features in difﬁcult sentence structures.
It’s sort of analogous to the cognition procedure
of a person, who might ﬁrst notice part of the
important information at the beginning, then notices more as she reads through, and ﬁnally combines the information from multiple attentions to
draw a conclusion. For the above sentence, our
model may attend the word “except” ﬁrst, and
then attends the phrase “don’t play well”, ﬁnally
combines them to generate a positive feature for
“Patrick”. Tang et al. also adopted the idea
of multiple attentions, but they used the result of
a previous attention to help the next attention attend more accurate information. Their vector fed
to softmax for classiﬁcation is only from the ﬁnal
attention, which is essentially a linear combination
of input embeddings (they did not have a memory
component). Thus, the above limitation of single
attention based methods also holds for . In contrast, our model combines the results
of multiple attentions with a GRU network, which
has different behaviors inherited from RNNs, such
as forgetting, maintaining, and non-linearly transforming, and thus allows a better prediction accuracy.
We evaluate our approach on four datasets: the
ﬁrst two come from SemEval 2014 , containing reviews of restaurant domain
and laptop domain; the third one is a collection of
tweets, collected by ; to examine whether our framework is language-insensitive
(since languages show differences in quite a few
aspects in expressing sentiments), we prepared a
dataset of Chinese news comments with people
mentions as opinion targets. The experimental results show that our model performs well for different types of data, and consistently outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods.
Related Work
The task of aspect sentiment classiﬁcation belongs
to entity-level sentiment analysis. Conventional
representative methods for this task include rulebased methods and statisticbased methods . Ganapathibhotla and Liu extracted
2-tuples of (opinion target, opinion word) from
comments and then identiﬁed the sentiment of
opinion targets. Deng and Wiebe adopted
Probabilistic Soft Logic to handle the task. There
are also statistic-based approaches which employ
SVM or MaxEnt-LDA .
These methods need either laborious feature engineering work or massive extralinguistic resources.
Neural Networks (NNs) have the capability of
fusing original features to generate new representations through multiple hidden layers. Recursive
NN (Rec-NN) can conduct semantic compositions
on tree structures, which has been used for syntactic analysis and sentence sentiment analysis . adopted Rec-NN
for aspect sentiment classiﬁcation, by converting
the opinion target as the tree root and propagating
the sentiment of targets depending on the context
and syntactic relationships between them. However, Rec-NN needs dependency parsing which
is likely ineffective on nonstandard texts such as
news comments and tweets. 
employed Convolution NNs to identify the senti-
Recurrent Attention On Memory
Figure 1: Model architecture. The dotted lines on the right indicate a layer may or may not be added.
ment of a clause which is then used to infer the
sentiment of the target. The method has an assumption that an opinion word and its target lie
in the same clause. TD-LSTM 
utilizes LSTM to model the context information
of a target by placing the target in the middle and
propagating the state word by word from the beginning and the tail to the target respectively to
capture the information before and after it. Nevertheless, TD-LSTM might not work well when the
opinion word is far from the target, because the
captured feature is likely to be lost reported similar problems of LSTM-based
models in machine translation).
 introduced the concept of
memory for NNs and proposed a differentiable
process to read and write memory, which is called
Neural Turing Machine (NTM). Attention mechanism, which has been used successfully in many
areas ,
can be treated as a simpliﬁed version of NTM because the size of memory is unlimited and we only
need to read from it. Single attention or multiple
attentions were applied in aspect sentiment classiﬁcation in some previous works . One difference between
our method and is that we introduce a memory module between the attention
module and the input module, thus our method
can synthesize features of word sequences such as
sentiment phrases (e.g. “not wonderful enough”).
More importantly, we combine the results of attentions in a nonlinear way. 
only uses one attention, while our model uses multiple attentions. The effectiveness of multiple attentions was also investigated in QA task , which shows that multiple attentions
allow a model to attend different parts of the input
during each pass. assigns attention scores to memory slices independently and
their attention process is more complex, while we
produce a normalized attention distribution to attend information from the memory.
The architecture of our model is shown in Figure 1, which consists of ﬁve modules: input module, memory module, position-weighted memory
module, recurrent attention module, and output
Suppose the input sentence is s
{s1, . . . , sτ−1, sτ, sτ+1, . . . , sT }, the goal of our
model is to predict the sentiment polarity of the
target sτ. For simplicity, we notate a target as one
word here, where necessary, we will elaborate how
to handle phrase-form targets, e.g. “battery life”.
Input Embedding
Let L ∈Rd×|V | be an embedding lookup table generated by an unsupervised method such
as GloVe or CBOW
 , where d is the dimension
of word vectors and |V | is the vocabulary size.
The input module retrieves the word vectors from
L for an input sequence and gets a list of vectors {v1, . . . , vt, . . . , vT } where vt ∈Rd. L may
or may not be tuned in the training of our framework. If it is not tuned, the model can utilize the
words’ similarity revealed in the original embedding space. If it is tuned, we expect the model
would capture some intrinsic information that is
useful for the sentiment analysis task.
BLSTM for Memory Building
MemNet simply used the sequence of word vectors as memory, which cannot
synthesize phrase-like features in the original sentence. It is straightforward to achieve the goal with
the models of RNN family. In this paper, we use
Deep Bidirectional LSTM (DBLSTM) to build the
memory which records all information to be read
in the subsequent modules.
At each time step t, the forward LSTM not only
outputs the hidden state −→h l
t at its layer l .
Position-Weighted Memory
The memory generated in the above module is the
same for multiple targets in one comment, which
is not ﬂexible enough for predicting respective
sentiments of these targets. To ease this problem,
we adopt an intuitive method to edit the memory
to produce a tailor-made input memory for each
target. Speciﬁcally, the closer to the target a word
is, the higher its memory slide is weighted. We de-
ﬁne the distance as the number of words between
the word and the target. One might want to use
the length of the path from the speciﬁc word to
the target in the dependency tree as the distance,
which is a worthwhile option to try in the future
work, given the condition that dependency parsing
on the input text is effective enough. Precisely, the
weight for the word at position t is calculated as:
wt = 1 −|t −τ|
where tmax is truncation length of the input. We
also calculate ut =
tmax to memorize the relative offset between each word and the target. If
the target is a phrase, the distance (i.e.
is calculated with its left or right boundary index according to which side wt locates.
ﬁnal position-weighted memory of a target is
M = {m1, . . . , mt, . . . , mT } where mt = (wt ·
t , ut) ∈R
d L+1. The weighted memory
is designed to up-weight nearer sentiment words,
and the recurrent attention module, discussed below, attends long-distance sentiment words. Thus,
they work together to expect a better prediction accuracy.
Recurrent Attention on Memory
To accurately predict the sentiment of a target,
it is essential to: (1) correctly distill the related
information from its position-weighted memory;
and (2) appropriately manufacture such information as the input of sentiment classiﬁcation. We
employ multiple attentions to fulﬁl the ﬁrst aspect,
and a recurrent network for the second which nonlinearly combines the attention results with GRUs
(since GRUs have less number of parameters). For
example, “except” and “don’t play well” in “Except Patrick, all other actors don’t play well” are
attended by different attentions, and combined to
produce a positive sentiment on “Patrick”.
Particularly, we employ a GRU to update the
episode e after each attention. Let et−1 denote the
episode at the previous time and iAL
is the current
information attended from the memory M, and the
process of updating et is as follows:
r = σ(WriAL
z = σ(WziAL
˜et = tanh(WxiAL
+ Wg(r ⊙et−1))
et = (1 −z) ⊙et−1 + z ⊙˜et
where Wr, Wz ∈RH×(−→d L + ←−d L + 1), Ur, Uz ∈
RH×H, Wg ∈RH×(−
d L+1), Wx ∈RH×H,
and H is the hidden size of GRU. As we can see
from Equations (10) and (11), the state of episode
et is the interpolation of et−1 and the candidate
hidden vector ˜et. A vector of 0’s is used as e0.
For calculating the attended information iAL
t, the input of an attention layer (AL for short) includes the memory slices mj(1 ≤j ≤T) and
the previous episode et−1. We ﬁrst calculate the
attention score of each memory slice as follows:
(mj, et−1[, vτ]) + bAL
where [, vτ] indicates when the attention result relies on particular aspects such as those of products,
we also add the target vector vτ because different
product aspects have different preference on opinion words; when the target is a person, there is no
need to do so. If the target is a phrase, vτ takes
the average of word embeddings. We utilize the
previous episode for the current attention, since it
can guide the model to attend different useful information. also adopts multiple
attentions, but they don’t combine the results of
different attentions.
Then we calculate the normalized attention
score of each memory slice as:
Finally, the inputs to a GRU (i.e. Eqs. 8 to 11) at
time t are the episode et−1 at time t −1 and the
content iAL
, which is read from the memory as:
Output and Model Training
After N-time attentions on the memory, the ﬁnal
episode eN serves as the feature and is fed into a
softmax layer to predict the target sentiment.
The model is trained by minimizing the cross
entropy plus an L2 regularization term:
yc log fc(x; θ) + λ ∥θ ∥2 (15)
where C is the sentiment category set, D is the
collection of training data, y ∈R|C| is a one-hot
vector where the element for the true sentiment is
1, f(x; θ) is the predicted sentiment distribution
of the model, λ is the weight of L2 regularization
term. We also adopt dropout and early stopping to
ease overﬁtting.
Experiments
Experimental Setting
We conduct experiments on four datasets, as
shown in Table 1.
The ﬁrst two are from SemEval 2014 , containing reviews of restaurant and laptop domains, which are
widely used in previous works. The third one is
a collection of tweets, collected by . The last one is prepared by us for testing
the language sensitivity of our model, which contains Chinese news comments and has politicians
and entertainers as opinion targets. We purposely
add more negation, contrastive, and question comments to make it more challenging. Each comment is annotated by at least two annotators, and
only if they agree with each other, the comment
will be added into our dataset. Moreover, we replace each opinion target (i.e. word/phrase of pronoun or person name) with a placeholder, as did
in . For the ﬁrst two datasets,
we removed a few examples having the “conﬂict
label”, e.g., “Certainly not the best sushi in New
York, however, it is always fresh” (whose vocabulary size is 1.9M2) for our experiments on the English datasets, as previous works did 
on the tweet dataset. In contrast, we prefer to use
2 
Laptop reviews
Restaurant reviews
News comments
Table 1: Details of the experimental datasets.
the general embeddings from for all datasets, so that the experimental results can better reveal the model’s capability and
the ﬁgures are directly comparable across different
papers. The embeddings for Chinese experiments
are trained with a corpus of 1.4 billion tokens with
Compared Methods
We compare our proposed framework of Recurrent Attention on Memory (RAM) with the following methods:
• Average Context: There are two versions of
this method.
The ﬁrst one, named AC-S,
averages the word vectors before the target
and the word vectors after the target separately. The second one, named AC, averages
the word vectors of the full context.
• SVM : The traditional state-of-the-art method using SVMs on
surface features, lexicon features and parsing
features, which is the best team in SemEval
• Rec-NN : It ﬁrstly uses
rules to transform the dependency tree and
put the opinion target at the root, and then
performs semantic composition with Recursive NNs for sentiment prediction.
• TD-LSTM : It uses a forward LSTM and a backward LSTM to abstract the information before and after the
target. Finally, it takes the hidden states of
LSTM at last time step to represent the context for prediction. We reproduce its results
on the tweet dataset with our embeddings,
and also run it for the other three datasets.
• TD-LSTM-A: We developed TD-LSTM to
make it have one attention on the outputs of
3 
forward and backward LSTMs, respectively.
• MemNet : It applies attention multiple times on the word embeddings,
and the last attention’s output is fed to softmax for prediction, without combining the
results of different attentions. We produce its
results on all four datasets with the code released by the authors.4
For each method, the maximum number of training iterations is 100, and the model with the minimum training error is utilized for testing. We will
discuss different settings of RAM later.
Main Results
The ﬁrst evaluation metric is Accuracy, which is
used in . Because the datasets
have unbalanced classes as shown in Table 1,
Macro-averaged F-measure is also reported, as did
in . As shown
by the results in Table 2, our RAM consistently
outperforms all compared methods on these four
datasets. AC and AC-S perform poorly, because
averaging context is equivalent to paying identical attention to each word which would hide the
true sentiment word. Rec-NN is better than TD-
LSTM but not as good as our method. The advantage of Rec-NN is that it utilizes the result of
dependency parsing which might shorten the distance between the opinion target and the related
opinion word. However, dependency parsing is
not guaranteed to work well on irregular texts such
as tweets, which may still result in long path between the opinion word and its target, so that the
opinion features would also be lost while being
propagated. TD-LSTM performs less competitive
than our method on all the datasets, particularly
on the tweet dataset, because in this dataset sentiment words are usually far from person names,
4 
Restaurant
Macro-F1 Acc Macro-F1
0.6340♮0.6330♮0.6524
0.6630* 0.6590*
TD-LSTM-A 0.7214
Table 2: Main results. The results with ‘*’ are retrieved from the papers of compared methods, and those
with ‘♮’ are retrieved from Rec-NN paper.
Restaurant
Table 3: The impacts of attention layers. (Word embeddings are not tuned in the training stage.)
for which case the multiple-attention mechanism
is designed to work. TD-LSTM-A also performs
worse than our method, because its two attentions,
i.e. one for the text before the target and the other
for the after, cannot tackle some cases where more
than one features being attended are at the same
side of the target.
Our method steadily performs better than Mem-
Net on all four datasets, particularly on the News
comment dataset, its improvement is more than
10%. MemNet adopts multiple attentions in order to improve the attention results, given the assumption that the result of an attention at a later
hop should be better than that at the beginning.
MemNet doesn’t combine the results of multiple
attentions, and the vector fed to softmax is the
result of the last attention, which is essentially
the linear combination of word embeddings. As
we described before, attending too many words
in one time may hide the characteristic of each
word, moreover, the sentiment transition usually
combines features in a nonlinear way. Our model
overcomes this shortcoming with a GRU network
to combine the results of multiple attentions. The
feature-based SVM, which needs labor-intensive
feature engineering works and a mass of extra linguistic resources, doesn’t display its advantage,
because the features for aspect sentiment analysis cannot be extracted as easily as for sentence
or document level sentiment analysis.
Effects of Attention Layers
One major setting that affects the performance of
our model is the number of attention layers. We
evaluate our framework with 1 to 5 attention layers, and the results are given in Table 3, where
NAL means using N attentions. In general, our
model with 2 or 3 attention layers works better,
but the advantage is not always there for different
datasets. For example, for the Restaurant dataset,
our model with 4 attention layers performs the
best. Using 1 attention is always not as good as
using more, which shows that one-time attention
might not be sufﬁcient to capture the sentiment
features in complicated cases. One the other hand,
the performance is not monotonically increasing
with respect to the number of attentions. RAM-
4AL is generally not as good as RAM-3AL, it
is because as the model’s complexity increases,
the model becomes more difﬁcult to train and less
generalizable.
Effects of Embedding Tuning
The compared embedding tuning strategies are:
• RAM-3AL-T-R: It does not pre-train word
embeddings, but initializes embeddings randomly and then tunes them in the supervised
Restaurant
RAM-3AL-T-R
RAM-3AL-NT
Table 4: The impact of different embedding tuning strategies.
(a) Example of multiple attentions. The target is “windows”.
(b) Example of single attention. The target is “windows”.
Figure 2: Comparison of single attention and multiple attentions. Attention score by Eq. 13 is used as
the color-coding.
training stage.
• RAM-3AL-T: Using the pre-trained embeddings initially, and they are also tuned in the
• RAM-3AL-NT: The pre-trained embeddings
are not tuned in the training.
From Table 4, we can see that RAM-3AL-T-
R performs very poorly, especially when the size
of training data is smaller.
The reason could
be threefold: (1) The amount of labelled samples in the four experimental datasets is too small
to tune reliable embeddings from scratch for the
in-vocabulary words (i.e.
existing in the training data); (2) A lot of out-of-vocabulary (OOV)
words, i.e. absent from the training data, but exist
in the testing data; (3) It increases the risk of over-
ﬁtting after adding the embedding parameters to
the solution space (it requires the embeddings not
only to ﬁt model parameters, but also to capture
the similarity among words). During training, we
indeed observed that the training error converges
too fast in RAM-3AL-T-R. RAM-3AL-T can utilize the embedding similarity among words at the
beginning of training, but ﬁne tuning will destroy
this similarity during training. On the other hand,
the initial embeddings of OOV words in the testing data are not tuned, so that their similarity with
vocabulary words are also destroyed. In addition,
RAM-3AL-T also suffers from the risk of overﬁtting. RAM-3AL-NT performs the best on all four
datasets, and we also observe that the training error converges gradually while the model parameters are being updated with the error signal from
the output layer.
Case Study
We pick some testing examples from the datasets
and visualize their attention results. To make the
visualized results comprehensible, we remove the
BLSTM memory module to make the attention
module directly work on the word embeddings,
thus we can check whether the attention results
conform with our intuition. The visualization results are shown in Figures 2 and 3.
Figures 2a and 2b present the differences between using two attentions and using one attention, which show that multiple attentions are useful to attend correct features. As shown in Figure 2a, in order to identify the sentiment of “windows”, the model ﬁrstly notices “welcomed” and
secondly notices “compared” before the aspect target “windows”. Finally it combines them with the
GRU network, and generates a negative sentiment
because the compared item (i.e. “windows”) after
a positive sentiment word (i.e. “welcomed”) is less
preferred. While the attention result of the model
(a) Example of a Chinese contrastive sentence, whose translation is “$T$’s quality and ability are absolutely stronger than
$PEOPLE$!!!”. The target is “$T$”.
(b) The sentence from 3a with a different target, i.e. “$PEOPLE$’s quality and ability are absolutely stronger than $T$!!!”.
Figure 3: Example of multiple opinion targets. Attention score by Eq. 13 is used as the color-coding.
with only one attention, as shown in Figure 2a, is a
sort of uniform distribution and mingles too many
word vectors in a linear way, which would ruin the
characteristic of each word.
Figures 3a and 3b present a case that there
are more than one opinion targets in a comment,
which cannot be analyzed with sentence-level sentiment analysis methods properly. Speciﬁcally, it’s
a comparative sentence in which the reviewer has
a positive sentiment on the ﬁrst commented person, but a negative sentiment on the second person, and our model predicts both of them correctly.
Although all useful information (e.g. “than” and
“stronger”) is attended in both cases, the attention
procedures of them show some interesting differences. They mainly attend important information
after the target $T$ in the ﬁrst attention layer AL1.
After that, Figure 3b attends more information before $T$ in AL2. Since the same words in Figures
3a and 3b have different memory slices due to position weighting and augmented offset feature, as
described in Section 3.3, our model predicts opposite sentiments on the two persons. For example in
Figure 3b, the model ﬁrst attends a positive word
“stronger” and then attends “than” before the target, so it reverses the sentiment and ﬁnally predicts
a negative sentiment.
Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we proposed a framework to identify the sentiment of opinion targets. The model
ﬁrst runs through the input to generate a memory,
in the process of which it can synthesize the word
sequence features. And then, the model pays multiple attentions on the memory to pick up important information to predict the ﬁnal sentiment, by
combining the features from different attentions
non-linearly. We demonstrated the efﬁcacy of our
model on four datasets, and the results show that
it can outperform the state-of-the-art methods.
Although multiple-attention mechanism has the
potential to synthesize features in complicated
sentences, enforcing the model to pay a ﬁx number
of attentions to the memory is unnatural and even
sort of unreasonable for some cases. Therefore,
we need a mechanism to stop the attention process automatically if no more useful information
can be read from the memory. We may also try
other memory weighting strategies to distinguish
multiple targets in one comment more clearly.