Linear-scaling ab-initio calculations for large and complex systems
Emilio Artacho1∗, Daniel S´anchez-Portal,2 Pablo Ordej´on,3 Alberto Garc´ıa,4 and Jos´e M. Soler5
1Pˆole Scientiﬁque de Mod´elisation Num´erique, Ecole Normale Sup´erieure de Lyon, 69364 Lyon, Cedex 07, France
2Department of Physics and Materials Research Laboratory, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA
3Departamento de F´ısica, Universidad de Oviedo, 33007 Oviedo, Spain
4Departmento de Fisica Aplicada II, Universidad del Pais Vasco, 48080 Bilbao, Spain
5Depto. de F´ısica de la Materia Condensada, C-III, and Inst. Nicol´as Cabrera, Universidad Aut´onoma, 28049 Madrid, Spain
 
A brief review of the Siesta project is presented in the context of linear-scaling density-functional
methods for electronic-structure calculations and molecular-dynamics simulations of systems with
a large number of atoms. Applications of the method to diﬀerent systems are reviewed, including
carbon nanotubes, gold nanostructures, adsorbates on silicon surfaces, and nucleic acids.
progress in atomic-orbital bases adapted to linear-scaling methodology is presented.
I. INTRODUCTION
It is clearer every day the contribution that ﬁrstprinciples calculations are making to several ﬁelds in
physics, chemistry, and recently geology and biology. The
steady increase in computer power and the progress in
methodology have allowed the study of increasingly more
complex and larger systems . It has been only recently
that the scaling of the computation expense with the system size has become an important issue in the ﬁeld. Even
eﬃcient methods, like those based on Density-Functional
theory (DFT), scale like N 2-3, being N the number of
atoms in the simulation cell. This problem stimulated
the the ﬁrst ideas for methods which scale linearly with
system size , a ﬁeld that has been the subject of important eﬀorts ever since .
The key for achieving linear scaling is the explicit use
of locality, meaning by it the insensitivity of the properties of a region of the system to perturbations suﬃciently
far away from it . A local language will thus be needed
for the two diﬀerent problems one has to deal with in a
DFT-like method: building the self-consistent Hamiltonian, and solving it. Most of the initial eﬀort was dedicated to the latter using empirical or semi-empirical
Hamiltonians. The Siesta project started in 1995
to address the former.
Atomic-orbital basis sets were
chosen as the local language, allowing for arbitrary basis
sizes, what resulted in a general-purpose, ﬂexible linearscaling DFT program . A parallel eﬀort has been the
search for orbital bases that would meet the standards
of precision of conventional ﬁrst-principles calculations,
but keeping as small a range as possible for maximum
eﬃciency. Several techniques are presented here.
Other approaches pursued by other groups are also
shortly reviewed in section II. All of them are based on
local bases with diﬀerent ﬂavors, oﬀering a fair variety of
choice between systematicity and eﬃciency. Our developments of atomic bases for linear-scaling are presented
in section III. Siesta has been applied to quite varied
systems during these years, ranging from metal nanostructures to biomolecules. Some of the results obtained
are brieﬂy reviewed in section IV.
II. METHOD AND CONTEXT
Siesta is based on DFT, using local-density and
generalized-gradients functionals , including spin polarization, collinear and non-collinear . Core electrons
are replaced by norm-conserving pseudopotentials 
factorized in the Kleinman-Bylander form , including
scalar-relativistic eﬀects, and non-linear partial-core corrections . The one-particle problem is then solved using linear combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO). There
are no constraints either on the radial shape of these orbitals (numerically treated), or on the size of the basis,
allowing for the full quantum-chemistry know-how 
(multiple-ζ, polarization, oﬀ-site, contracted, and diﬀuse
orbitals). Forces on the atoms and the stress tensor are
obtained from the Hellmann-Feynman theorem with Pulay corrections , and are used for structure relaxations
or molecular dynamics simulations of diﬀerent types.
Hamiltonian,
one-particle
Schr¨odinger equation is solved yielding the energy and
density matrix for the ground state. This task is performed either by diagonalization (cube-scaling, appropriate for systems under a hundred atoms or for metals) or
with a linear-scaling algorithm. These have been extensively reviewed elsewhere .
Siesta implements two
O(N) algorithms based on localized Wannier-like
wavefunctions.
Secondly, given the density matrix, a new Hamiltonian
matrix is obtained. There are diﬀerent ways proposed
in the literature to perform this calculation in order-N
operations.
(i) Quantum chemists have explored algorithms for
Gaussian-type orbitals (GTO) and related technology
 . The long-range Hartree potential posed an important problem that has been overcome with Fast Mul-
tipole Expansion techniques plus near-ﬁeld corrections
 . Within this approach, periodic boundary conditions
for extended systems require additional techniques that
are under current development .
(ii) Among physicists tradition favors more systematic
basis sets, such as plane-waves and variations thereof.
Working directly on a real-space grid was early proposed
as a natural possibility for linear scaling . Multigrid
techniques allow eﬃcient treatment of the Hartree problem, making it very attractive. However, a large prefactor
was found for the linear scaling, making the order-N
calculations along this line not so practical for the moment. The introduction of a basis of localized functions
on the points of the grid (blips) was then proposed as
an operative method within the original spirit . It is
probably more expensive than LCAO alternatives, but
with the advantage of a systematic basis. Another approach works with spherical Bessel functions conﬁned
to (overlapping) spheres wisely located within the simulation cell. As for plane-waves, a kinetic energy cutoﬀ
deﬁnes the quality of the basis within one sphere. The
number, positioning, and radii of the spheres are new
variables to consider, but the basis is still more systematic than within LCAO.
(iii) There are mixed schemes that use atomic-orbital
bases but evaluate the matrix elements using plane-wave
or real-space-grid techniques.
The method of Lippert
et al. uses GTO’s and associated techniques for the
computation of the matrix elements of some terms of the
Kohn-Sham Hamiltonian. It uses plane-wave representations of the density for the calculation of the remaining
terms. This latter method is conceptually very similar to
the one presented earlier by Ordej´on et al. , on which
Siesta is based. The matrix elements within Siesta are
also calculated in two diﬀerent ways : some Hamiltonian terms in a real-space grid and other terms (involving two-center integration) by very eﬃcient, direct LCAO
integration . While Siesta uses numerical orbitals,
Lippert’s method works with GTOs, which allow analytic
integrations, but require more orbitals.
Except for the quantum-chemical approaches, the
methods mentioned require smooth densities, and thus
soft pseudopotentials. A recent augmentation proposal
 allows a substantial improvement in grid convergence
of the method of Lippert et al. , possibly allowing for
all-electron calculations.
III. ATOMIC ORBITALS ADAPTED TO LINEAR
The main advantage of atomic orbitals is their eﬃciency (fewer orbitals needed per electron for similar precision) and their main disadvantage is the lack of systematics for optimal convergence, an issue that quantum
chemists have been working on for many years . They
have also clearly shown that there is no limitation on precision intrinsic to LCAO.
Orbital range. The need for locality in linear-scaling
algorithms imposes a ﬁnite range for matrix elements,
which has a strong inﬂuence on the eﬃciency of the
There is a clear challenge ahead for ﬁnding
short-range bases that still give a high precision. The
traditional way is to neglect matrix elements between faraway orbitals with values below a tolerance. This procedure implies a departure from the original Hilbert space
and it is numerically unstable for short ranges. Instead,
the use of orbitals that would strictly vanish beyond a
certain radius was proposed . This gives sparse matrices consistently within the Hilbert space spanned by
the basis, numerically robust even for small ranges.
In the context of Siesta, the use of pseudopotentials
imposes basis orbitals adapted to them. Pseudoatomic
orbitals (PAOs) are used, i.e., the DFT solution of the
atom with the pseudopotential.
PAO’s conﬁned by a
spherical inﬁnite-potential wall , has been the starting point for our bases. Fig. 1 shows s and p conﬁned
PAOs for oxygen.
Smoother conﬁning potentials have
been proposed as a better converging alternative .
A single parameter that deﬁnes the conﬁnement radii
of diﬀerent orbitals is the orbital energy shift ,
∆EPAO, i.e., the energy increase that each orbital experiences when conﬁned to a ﬁnite sphere. It deﬁnes all
radii in a well balanced way, and allows the systematic
convergence of physical quantities to the required precision.
Fig. 2 shows the convergence of geometry and
cohesive energy with ∆EPAO for various systems.
varies depending on the system and physical quantity,
but ∆EPAO ≈100 −200 meV gives typical precisions
within the accuracy of current GGA functionals.
Multiple-ζ. To generate conﬁned multiple-ζ bases, a
ﬁrst proposal suggested the use of the excited PAOs
in the conﬁned atom.
It works well for short ranges,
but shows a poor convergence with ∆EPAO, since some
of these orbitals are unbound in the free atom. In the
split-valence scheme, widely used in quantum chemistry,
GTOs that describe the tail of the atomic orbitals are left
free as separate orbitals for the extended basis. Adding
the quantum-chemistry GTOs’ tails to the PAO
bases gives ﬂexible bases, but the conﬁnement control
with ∆EPAO is lost. The best scheme used in Siesta
calculations so far is based on the idea of adding,
instead of a GTO, a numerical orbital that reproduces
the tail of the PAO outside a radius RDZ, and continues smoothly towards the origin as rl(a −br2), with a
and b ensuring continuity and diﬀerenciability at RDZ.
This radius is chosen so that the norm of the tail beyond has a given value. Variational optimization of this
split norm performed on diﬀerent systems shows a very
general and stable performance for values around 15%
(except for the ∼50% for hydrogen). Within exactly the
same Hilbert space, the second orbital can be chosen as
the diﬀerence between the smooth one and the original
PAO, which gives a basis orbital strictly conﬁned within
the matching radius RDZ, i.e., smaller than the original
PAO. This is illustrated in Fig. 1. Multiple-ζ is obtained
by repetition of this procedure.
Polarization orbitals. A shell with angular momentum
l + 1 (or more shells with higher l) is usually added to
polarize the most extended atomic valence orbitals (l),
giving angular freedom to the valence electrons.
(empty) l + 1 atomic orbitals are not necessarily a good
choice, since they are typically too extended. The normal
procedure within quantum chemistry is using GTOs
with maximum overlap with valence orbitals. Instead,
we use for Siesta the numerical orbitals resulting from
the actual polarization of the pseudoatom in the presence
of a small electric ﬁeld . The pseudoatomic problem
is then exactly solved (within DFT), yielding the l + 1
orbitals through comparison with ﬁrst order perturbation
theory. The range of the polarization orbitals is deﬁned
by the range of the orbitals they polarize. It is illustrated
in Fig. 3 for the d orbitals of silicon.
The performance of the schemes presented here has
been tested for various applications (see below) and a systematic study will be presented elsewhere . It has been
found in general that double-ζ, singly polarized (DZP)
bases give precisions within the accuracy of GGA functionals for geometries, energetics and elastic/vibrational
properties.
Other possibilities. Scale factors on orbitals are also
used, both for orbital contraction and for diﬀuse orbitals.
Oﬀ-site orbitals can be introduced. They serve for the
evaluation of basis-set superposition errors . Spherical Bessel functions are also included, that can be used
for mixed bases between our approach and the one of
Haynes and Payne .
IV. BRIEF REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS
Carbon Nanostructures.
A preliminary version of
Siesta was ﬁrst applied to study the shape of large hollow carbon fullerenes up to C540, the results contributing to establish that they do not tend to a spherical-shape
limit but tend to facet around the twelve corners given
by the pentagons. Siesta has been also applied to carbon nanotubes. In a ﬁrst study, structural, elastic and
vibrational properties were characterized . A second
work was dedicated to their deposition on gold surfaces,
and the STM images that they originate , specially
addressing experiments on ﬁnite-length tubes. A third
study has been dedicated to the opening of single-wall
nanotubes with oxygen, and the stability of the open,
oxidized tubes for intercalation studies .
Gold Nanostructures. Gold nanoclusters of small sizes
(up to Au75) were found to be amorphous, or nearly
so, even for sizes for which very favorable geometric structures had been proposed before. In a further study the
origin of this striking situation is explained in terms of
local stresses . Chains of gold atoms have been studied addressing the experiments which show them displaying remarkably long interatomic spacings (4 - 5 ˚A). A
ﬁrst study arrives at the conclusion that a linear gold
chain would break at interatomic spacings much smaller
than the observed ones. It is illustrated in Fig. 4 . A
possible explanation of the discrepancy is reported elsewhere. 
Surfaces and Adsorption. A molecular dynamics simulation was performed on the clean surface of liquid
silicon close to the melting temperature, in which surface
layering was found, i.e., density oscillations of roughly
atomic amplitude, like what was recently found to happen in the surface of other liquid metals .
them, though, the origin for silicon was found to be orientational, reminescent of directed octahedral bonding.
Adsorption studies have also been performed on solid silicon surfaces, Ba on Si(100) and C60 on Si(111) .
Both works study adsorption geometries and energetics.
For Ba, interactions among adsorbed atoms and diﬀusion features are studied.
For C60, STM images have
been simulated and compared to experiments.
Nucleic Acids.
Feasibility tests on DNA were performed in the early stages of the project, by relaxing
a dry B-form poly(dC)-poly(dG) structure with a minimal basis . In preparation of realistic calculations,
a thorough study of 30 nucleic acid pairs has been
performed addressing the precision of the approximations
and the DZP bases, and the accuracy of the GGA functional , obtaining good results even for the hydrogen
bridges. Based on that, a ﬁrst study of dry A-DNA has
been performed, with a full relaxation of the structure,
and an analysis of the electronic characteristics .
V. CONCLUSIONS
The status of the Siesta project has been brieﬂy reviewed, putting it in context with other methods of linerscaling DFT, and brieﬂy describing results obtained with
Siesta for a variety of systems. The eﬀorts dedicated
to ﬁnding schemes for atomic bases adapted to linearscaling have been also described. A promising ﬁeld still
very open for future research.
Acknowledgments. We are grateful for ideas, discussions, and support of Jos´e L. Martins, Richard M. Martin, David A. Drabold, Otto F. Sankey, Julian D. Gale,
and Volker Heine. EA is very grateful to the Ecole Normale Sup´erieure de Lyon for its hospitality. PO is the
recipient of a Sponsored Research Project from Motorola
PCRL. EA and PO acknowledge travel support of the
Ψk network of ESF. This work has been supported by
Spain’s DGES grant PB95-0202.
Permanent address: Departamento de F´ısica de la Materia Condensada, C-III, and Instituto Nicol´as Cabrera,
Univ. Aut´onoma, 28049 Madrid, Spain.
 M. Payne, M. Teter, D. Allan, T. Arias, and J. D.
Joannopoulos, Rev. Mod. Phys. 64, 1045 .
 P. Ordej´on, D. A. Drabold, R. M. Martin and M. P.
Grumbach, Phys. Rev. B 51, 1456 , and references
 For review see: P. Ordej´on, Comp. Mat. Sci. 12, 157
 ; S. Goedecker, Rev. Mod. Phys., in press.
 W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 3168 .
 P. Ordej´on, E. Artacho, and J. M. Soler, Phys. Rev. B
53, R10441 .
 P. Ordej´on, E. Artacho, and J. M. Soler, Mat. Res. Soc.
Symp. Proc. 408, 85 .
 D. S´anchez-Portal, P. Ordej´on, E. Artacho, and J. M.
Soler, Int. J. Quant. Chem. 65, 453 .
 D. S´anchez-Portal, P. Ordej´on, E. Artacho, and J. M.
Soler, to be published.
 J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and, M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 77, 3865 .
 T. Oda, A. Pasquarello, and R. Car, Phys. Rev. Let. 80,
3622 .
 N. Troullier and J. L. Martins, Phys. Rev. B 43, 1993
 L. Kleinman and D. M. Bylander, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48,
1425 .
 S. G. Louie, S. Froyen, and M. L. Cohen, Phys. Rev. B
26, 1738 .
 S. Huzinaga et. al. Gaussian basis sets for molecular calculations, Elsevier Science ; R. Poirier, R. Kari
and, R. Csizmadia, Handbook of Gaussian Basis Sets Elsevier Science , and references therein.
 J. Kim, F. Mauri, and G. Galli, Phys. Rev. B. 52,1640
 C. White, B. Johnson, P. Gill and M. Head-Gordon,
Chem. Phys. Lett. 230, 8 .
 K. N. Kudin and G. E. Scuseria, Chem. Phys. Lett., in
 E. Hern´andez and M. J. Gillan, Phys. Rev. B 51, 10157
 ; E. Hern´andez, M. J. Gillan, C. M. Goringe, Phys.
Rev. B 53, 7147 .
 E. Hern´andez, M. J. Gillan and C. M. Goringe, Phys.
Rev. B 55, 13485 ; C. M. Goringe, E. Hern´andez,
M. J. Gillan and I. J. Bush, Computer Phys. Commun.
102, 1 ; D. R. Bowler and M. J. Gillan, Computer
Phys. Commun. 112, 103 .
 P. D. Haynes and M. C. Payne, Comp. Phys. Comm.
102, 17 .
 G. Lippert, J. Hutter, and M. Parrinello, Mol. Phys. 92,
477 .
 O. F. Sankey and D. J. Niklewski, Phys. Rev. B 40, 3979
 G. Lippert, J. Hutter, and M. Parrinello, Theo. Chem.
Accounts, in press.
 A. Horsﬁeld, Phys. Rev. B 56, 6594 .
 J. M. Soler, unpublished.
 D. S´anchez-Portal, E. Artacho, and J. M. Soler, J. Phys.:
Condens. Matter 8, 3859 .
 J. L. Martins and J. M. Soler, unpublished.
 M. Machado, P. Ordej´on, D. S´anchez-Portal, E. Artacho,
and J. M. Soler, submitted to J. Chem. Phys.
 P. Ordej´on, D. S´anchez-Portal, E. Artacho, and J. M.
Soler, Fuller. Sci. Technol., in press; D. S´anchez-Portal,
E. Artacho, J. M. Soler, A. Rubio and P. Ordej´on, Phys.
Rev. B, in press.
 A. Rubio, D. S´anchez-Portal, E. Artacho, P. Ordej´on and
J. M. Soler, Phys. Rev. Lett., in press.
 M. S. C. Mazzoni, H. Chacham, P. Ordej´on, D. S´anchez-
Portal, J. M. Soler and E. Artacho, submitted to Phys.
Rev. Lett.
 I. L. Garz´on, K. Michaelian, M. R. Beltr´an, A. Posada-
Amarillas, P. Ordej´on, E. Artacho, D. S´anchez-Portal,
and J. M. Soler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 1600 .
 J. M. Soler, M. R. Beltr´an, K. Michaelian, I. L. Garz´on,
P. Ordej´on, D. S´anchez-Portal, and E. Artacho, to be
published.
 H. Ohnishi, Y. Kondo, and K. Takayanagi, Nature 395,
780 ; A. I. Yanson, G. Rubio Bollinger, H. E. van
den Brom, N. Agra¨ıt, and J. M. van Ruitenbeek, Nature
395,783 .
 J. A. Torres, E. Tosatti, A. dal Corso, F. Ercolessi, J. J.
Kohanoﬀ, F. Di Tolla, and J. M. Soler, Surf. Sci. Lett.,
 D. S´anchez-Portal, J. Junquera, P. Ordej´on, A. Garc´ıa,
E. Artacho, and J. M. Soler, to be published.
 G. Fabricius, E. Artacho, D. S´anchez-Portal, P. Ordej´on,
D. A. Drabold and J. M. Soler, submitted to Phys. Rev.
 M. J. Regan et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 9730 , and
references therein.
 J. Wang, J. Hallmark, D. S. Marshall, W. J. Ooms, P.
Ordej´on, J. Junquera, D. S´anchez-Portal, E. Artacho and
J. M. Soler, Phys. Rev. B (Rapid Comm.), in press.
 J. I. Pascual, J. G´omez-Herrero, A. Bar´o, D. S´anchez-
Portal, E. Artacho, P. Ordej´on, J. M. Soler, to be published.
 E. Artacho, D. S´anchez-Portal, P. Ordej´on and J. M.
Soler, to be published.
FIG. 1. Conﬁned pseudoatomic orbitals for oxygen. s in
(a) and (b). p in (c) and (d). Rc is the conﬁnement radius
obtained for ∆EPAO = 250 meV. The original PAOs are represented with thinner lines. The split smooth functions are
plotted with thicker lines in (a) and (c), while the resulting
double-ζ orbitals are plotted with thicker lines in (b) and (d).
FIG. 2. Convergence with energy shift ∆EPAO of (a) lattice parameters of bulk Si (◦), Au (⋆), and MgO (•), and bond
length (△) and angle (×) of H2O; and (b) corresponding cohesive (bond) energies.
FIG. 3. d polarization orbitals for silicon for two diﬀerent
conﬁnement conditions. (a) Obtained with the electric-ﬁeld
polarization method, and (b) the conﬁned d PAOs.
FIG. 4. Cohesive energy (a), and stretching force (b) in a
linear gold chain as a function of interatomic distance. Black
dots are for the translationally invariant chain, white circles
and squares are for supercells of 4 and 8 atoms, respectively,
where the system is allowed to break.
Cohesive energy (eV/atom)
Nearest −neighbors distance (Ang.)
Stretching force (nN)