IMPROVED COSMOLOGICAL CONSTRAINTS FROM NEW, OLD,
AND COMBINED SUPERNOVA DATA SETS
M. Kowalski,1 D. Rubin,2,3 G. Aldering,2 R. J. Agostinho,4 A. Amadon,5 R. Amanullah,6 C. Balland,7 K. Barbary,2,3
G. Blanc,8 P. J. Challis,9 A. Conley,10 N. V. Connolly,11 R. Covarrubias,12 K. S. Dawson,2 S. E. Deustua,13
R. Ellis,14 S. Fabbro,15 V. Fadeyev,16 X. Fan,17 B. Farris,18 G. Folatelli,12 B. L. Frye,19 G. Garavini,20
E. L. Gates,21 L. Germany,22 G. Goldhaber,2,3 B. Goldman,23 A. Goobar,20 D. E. Groom,2 J. Haissinski,24
D. Hardin,7 I. Hook,25 S. Kent,26 A. G. Kim,2 R. A. Knop,27 C. Lidman,28 E. V. Linder,6 J. Mendez,29,30
J. Meyers,2,3 G. J. Miller,31 M. Moniez,24 A. M. Moura˜o,15 H. Newberg,32 S. Nobili,20
P. E. Nugent,2 R. Pain,7 O. Perdereau,24 S. Perlmutter,2,3 M. M. Phillips,33 V. Prasad,2
R. Quimby,14 N. Regnault,7 J. Rich,5 E. P. Rubenstein,34 P. Ruiz-Lapuente,30
F. D. Santos,35 B. E. Schaefer,36 R. A. Schommer,37 R. C. Smith,38
A. M. Soderberg,14 A. L. Spadafora,2 L.-G. Strolger,39
M. Strovink,2,3 N. B. Suntzeff,40 N. Suzuki,2
R. C. Thomas,2 N. A. Walton,41 L. Wang,40
W. M. Wood-Vasey,9 and J. L. Yun4
(The Supernova Cosmology Project)
Received 2007 October 25; accepted 2008 April 2
We present a new compilation of Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia), a new data set of low-redshift nearby-Hubble-ﬂow
SNe, and new analysis procedures to work with these heterogeneous compilations. This ‘‘Union’’ compilation of 414
SNe Ia, which reduces to 307 SNe after selection cuts, includes the recent large samples of SNe Ia from the Supernova
Legacy Survey and ESSENCE Survey, the older data sets, as well as the recently extended data set of distant supernovae observed with the Hubble Space Telescope (HST ). A single, consistent, and blind analysis procedure is used
for all the various SN Ia subsamples, and a new procedure is implemented that consistently weights the heterogeneous
data sets and rejects outliers. We present the latest results from this Union compilation and discuss the cosmological
constraints from this new compilation and its combination with other cosmological measurements (CMB and BAO).
The constraint we obtain from supernovae on the dark energy density is  ¼ 0:713þ0:027
0:029(stat)þ0:036
0:039(sys), for a ﬂat,
CDM universe. Assuming a constant equation of state parameter, w, the combined constraints from SNe, BAO, and
1 Institut fu¨r Physik, Humboldt-Universita¨t zu Berlin, Newtonstrasse 15,
Berlin 12489, Germany.
2 E. O. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley,
3 Department of Physics, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA
94720-7300.
4 Centro de Astronomia e Astrofı´sica da Universidade de Lisboa, Observato´rio Astrono´mico de Lisboa, Tapada da Ajuda, 1349-018 Lisbon, Portugal.
5 DSM/DAPNIA, CEA/Saclay, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France.
6 Space Sciences Laboratory, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley,
7 LPNHE, CNRS-IN2P3, University of Paris VI & VII, Paris, France.
8 APC, Universite´ Paris 7, 10 rue Alice Domon et Le´onie Duquet, 75205
Paris Cedex 13, France.
9 Center for Astrophysics, Harvard University, 60 Garden Street, Cambridge,
10 Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Toronto, 60 St.
George Street, Toronto, ON M5S 3H8, Canada.
11 Department of Physics, Hamilton College, Clinton, NY 13323.
12 Observatories of the Carnegie Institution of Washington, 813 Santa Barbara Street, Pasadena, CA 9110.
13 American Astronomical Society, 2000 Florida Avenue, NW, Suite 400,
Washington, DC 20009.
14 California Institute of Technology, East California Boulevard, Pasadena,
15 CENTRAe Dep. de Fisica, IST,Avenida Rovisco Pais,1049Lisbon, Portugal.
16 Department of Physics, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz,
17 Steward Observatory, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721.
18 Department of Physics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1110
West Green, Urbana, IL 61801-3080.
19 Department of Physical Sciences, Dublin City University, Glasnevin,
Dublin 9, Ireland.
20 Department of Physics, Stockholm University, Albanova University
Center, S-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden.
21 Lick Observatory, P.O. Box 85, Mount Hamilton, CA 95140.
22 Centre for Astrophysics and Supercomputing, Swinburne University of
Technology, John Street, Hawthorn, VIC 3122, Australia.
23 M.P.I.A., Ko¨nigstuhl 17, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.
24 Laboratoire de l’Acce´lerateur Line´aire, IN2P3-CNRS, Universite´ Paris
Sud, B.P. 34, 91898 Orsay Cedex, France.
25 Sub-Department of Astrophysics, University of Oxford, Denys Wilkinson
Building, Keble Road, Oxford OX1 3RH, UK.
26 Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, P.O. Box 500, Batavia, IL 60510.
27 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Vanderbilt University, Nashville,
28 European Southern Observatory, Alonso de Cordova 3107, Vitacura,
Casilla 19001, Santiago 19, Chile.
29 Isaac Newton Group, Apartado de Correos 321, 38780 Santa Cruz de La
Palma, Islas Canarias, Spain.
30 Department of Astronomy, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
31 Southwestern College, Department of Astronomy, 900 Otay Lakes Road,
Chula Vista, CA 91910.
32 Physics Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, SC1C25, Troy,
33 Las Campanas Observatory, Carnegie Observatories, Casilla 601, LaSerena,
34 Advanced Fuel Research, Inc., 87 Church Street, East Hartford, CT
35 Department of Physics, Faculty of Sciences, University of Lisbon, Ed. C8,
Campo Grande, 1749-016 Lisbon, Portugal.
36 Louisiana State University, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Baton
Rouge, LA 70803.
37 Deceased.
38 Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory, Casilla 603, La Serena, Chile.
39 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Western Kentucky University,
Bowling Green, KY.
40 Department of Physics, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX
41 Institute of Astronomy, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 0HA, UK.
The Astrophysical Journal, 686:749–778, 2008 October 20
# 2008. The American Astronomical Society. All rights reserved. Printed in U.S.A.
CMB give w ¼ 0:969þ0:059
0:063(stat)þ0:063
0:066(sys). While our results are consistent with a cosmological constant, we obtain only relatively weak constraints on a w that varies with redshift. In particular, the current SN data do not yet signiﬁcantly constrain w at z > 1. With the addition of our new nearby Hubble-ﬂow SNe Ia, these resulting cosmological
constraints are currently the tightest available.
Subject headinggs: cosmological parameters — cosmology: observations — supernovae: general
Online material: color ﬁgures, machine-readable tables
<![%ONLINE; [toctitlegrptitleOnline Material/title/
titlegrplabelColor ﬁgures/labelentrytitlegrptitleﬁgref rid="fg2" place="NO"Figure 2/ﬁgref/title/
titlegrp/entryentrytitlegrptitleﬁgref rid="fg3" place="NO"Figure 3/ﬁgref/title/titlegrp/
entryentrytitlegrptitleﬁgref
place="NO"Figure
8/ﬁgref/title/titlegrp/
entryentrytitlegrptitleﬁgref
place="NO"Figure
9/ﬁgref/title/titlegrp/
entryentrytitlegrptitleﬁgref
rid="fg10"
place="NO"Figure
10/ﬁgref/title/titlegrp/
entryentrytitlegrptitleﬁgref
rid="fg14"
place="NO"Figure
14/ﬁgref/title/titlegrp/
entryentrytitlegrptitleﬁgref
rid="fg15"
place="NO"Figure
15/ﬁgref/title/titlegrp/
entryentrytitlegrptitleﬁgref
rid="fg16"
place="NO"Figure
16/ﬁgref/title/titlegrp/
entrylabelMachine-readable tables/labelentrytitlegrptitletableref rid="tb9" place="NO"Table 9/
tableref/title/titlegrp/entryentrytitlegrptitletableref rid="tb10" place="NO"Table 10/tableref/title/
titlegrp/entryentrytitlegrptitletableref rid="tb11" place="NO"Table 11/tableref/title/titlegrp/
entryentrytitlegrptitletableref rid="tb12" place="NO"Table 12/tableref/title/titlegrp/entry/toc]]>
1. INTRODUCTION
The evidence for dark energy has evolved from the ﬁrst hints,
for the case of a ﬂat universe , through the more deﬁnite evidence for the general case of unconstrained curvature , to the current work, which
aims to explore the properties of dark energy . Several new cosmological measurement techniques and several new Type Ia supernova (SN Ia) data
sets have helped begin the laborious process of narrowing in on
the parameters that describe the cosmological model. The SN Ia
measurements remain a key ingredient in all current determinations of cosmological parameters . It is therefore necessary to understand
how the current world data set of SN Ia measurements is constructed and how it can be used coherently, particularly since no
one SN Ia sample by itself provides an accurate cosmological
measurement.
Until recently, the SN Ia compilations primarily consisted of a
relatively uniform high-redshift (z  0:5) data set from a single
study put together with a low-redshift (z  0:05) sample collected
in a different study or studies. However, once there were several
independent data sets at high redshift, it became more important
and interesting to see the cosmological constraints obtainable by
combining several groups’ work. Riess et al. provided a ﬁrst compilation analysis of this kind, drawing on data
chosen from Perlmutter et al. , Riess et al. , Schmidt
et al. , Knop et al. , Tonry et al. , and Barris
et al. . Many of the subsequent cosmology studies have
used this compilation as the representation of the SN Ia sample,
in particular the selection of supernovae that Riess et al. nicknamed the ‘‘Gold’’ sample. Other recent compilations
that have been used are those of Wood-Vasey et al. and
Davis et al. .
At present a number of updates should be made to the SN Ia
data sets, and a number of analysis issues should be addressed,
including several that will recur with every future generation of
SN compilations. These include the following major goals:
1. It is important to add a new low-redshift SN Ia sample to
complement the large and rapidly growing number of distant SNe.
Especially valuable are the SNe in the smooth, nearby Hubble
ﬂow (z above 0.02). Since this part of the Hubble diagram is
currently not well constrained, new nearby SNe lead to a relatively
large incremental improvement . It is interesting to
note that the largest contribution in this redshift range still comes
from the landmark Calan/Tololo survey .
2. The analysis should reﬂect the heterogeneous nature of the
data set. In particular, it is important that a sample of poorer
quality will not degrade the impact of the higher quality data,
such as the Supernova Legacy Survey (SNLS) and ESSENCE
high-redshift data sets, which have recently been published.
3. The different supernova data sets should be analyzed with
the same analysis procedure. The previous compilations combined
measurements and peak-magnitude ﬁts that were obtained with
disparate light curve ﬁtting functions and analysis procedures,
particularly for handling the color correction for both extinction
and any intrinsic color-luminosity relation.
4. A reproducible, well-characterized approach to selecting
the good SNe Ia and rejecting the questionable and outlier SNe
should be used. Previous compilations relied to a large extent on
the heterogeneous classiﬁcation information provided by the original authors. The selection process was somewhat subjective: The
Gold compilation of Riess et al. excluded SNe that
Knop et al. considered comparably well-conﬁrmed SNe Ia.
5. To the extent possible, the analysis should not introduce
biases into the ﬁt, including some that have only recently been
recognized as being present in methods of determining extinction
properties of SNe Ia.
To reach the goal of carrying out these improvements, we present
in this paper a new SN compilation, a new nearby-Hubble-ﬂow
SN Ia data set, and new analysis procedures. Several additional
smaller enhancements are also presented.
With respect to goal 1, it is important to note that both nearby
and distant supernovae are needed to measure cosmological parameters. The brightness of nearby supernovae in the Hubble ﬂow
iscomparedtothatof high-redshift supernovae,which—following
the dynamics of the universe—might appear dimmer or brighter
than expected for a reference cosmology. Nearby SN light curves
typically have better observational coverage and signal-to-noise
ratio (S/N) than their high-redshift counterparts. However, they
are signiﬁcantly more difﬁcult to discover since vast amounts
of sky have to be searched to obtain a sizable number of supernovae, due to the small volume of the low-redshift universe. We
present light curves from the Supernova Cosmology Project (SCP)
Spring 1999Nearby SupernovaCampaign(Aldering2000), which
consisted primarily of wide-ﬁeld magnitude-limited searches and
extensive photometric and spectroscopic follow-up observations
using a large number of ground-based telescopes. We provide
BVRI light curves for eight nearby supernovae in the Hubble ﬂow.
We then address goal 2 by combining the new data sample with
published data of nearby and distant supernovae to construct the
largest Hubble diagram to date (but presumably not for long). In
this combination we adjust the weight of SNe belonging to a sample to reﬂect the dispersion we determine for the sample. With our
prescription, SN samples with signiﬁcant unaccounted-for statistical or systematic uncertainties are effectively deweighted.
All SN light curves are ﬁtted consistently in the observer frame
system using the spectral-template–based ﬁt method of Guy et al.
 (also known as SALT). Where possible, the original bandpass functions are used (goal 3).
To address goal 4, we adopt a robust analysis technique based
on outlier rejection that we show is resilient against contamination. The analysis strategy was developed to limit the inﬂuence
of human subjectivity. Spectroscopic classiﬁcation is arguably the
most subjective component of SN cosmology (primarily because
KOWALSKI ET AL.
of the observational challenges associatedwith high-redshift supernova spectroscopy), and we avoid decisions of whether to include
a speciﬁc SN that are based on spectroscopic features that go
beyond that of the authors’ classiﬁcation.
Following Conley et al. , the full analysis chain was
developed in a blind fashion—that is, hiding the best-ﬁtting
cosmological parameters until the analysis was ﬁnalized. This
helps resist the impulse to stop searching for systematic effects
once the ‘‘right’’ answer is obtained. We derive constraints on the
cosmological parameters, taking care to test and remove possible
sources of bias introduced in the ﬁtting procedure (goal 5).
The paper is organized as follows. In x 2 we methodically
present the data reduction and photometric calibration of the light
curves from the SCP Nearby 1999 Supernova Campaign: the
reader more interested in goals 2–5 and the subsequent cosmological analysis might want to only skim this section. In x 3 we
combine the new supernovae with a large set of nearby and highredshift supernovae from the literature and ﬁt the full set of light
curves in a consistent manner. We then proceed to determine
stringent constraints on the dynamics of the universe. Section 4
explains the methods employed for cosmological parameter estimation, which includes blinding the analysis and using robust
statistics. We evaluate the systematic errors of the measurements
in x 5 and summarize the resulting constraints on M, , w, and
other parameters in x 6.
2. A NEW SAMPLE OF NEARBY SUPERNOVAE
The SN light curve data presented in this paper were obtained
as part of the SCP Nearby 1999 Supernova Campaign . The search portion of this campaign was designed to
discover Type Ia supernovae in the smooth nearby Hubble ﬂow
and was performed in collaboration with a number of wide-ﬁeld
CCD imagingteams: EROS-II , NGSS , QUEST-I , NEAT , and Spacewatch . In some cases the
wide-ﬁeld searches were focused entirely on supernova discovery
(EROS-II and NGSS), while in other cases the primary data had
different scientiﬁc goals, such as discovery of near-Earth objects
(NEAT, Spacewatch), quasars, or microlenses (QUEST-I). The
wide-ﬁeld cameras operated in either point and track (NGSS,
NEAT, EROS-II) or driftscan (QUEST-I, Spacewatch) modes,
and in total covered hundreds of square degrees per night. Over a
2 month period beginning in 1999 February, a total of more than
1300 deg2 was monitored for SNe.Since the search was magnitude
limited—no speciﬁc galaxies were targeted—it resembles typical
searches for high-redshift supernovae. This is important because
common systematics effects, such as Malmquist bias, are then expected to more nearly cancel when comparing low-redshift with
high-redshift supernovae.
A total of 32 spectroscopically conﬁrmed SNe were discovered
by the search component of this campaign. Of these, 22 were of
Type Ia, and 14 (of these) were discovered near maximum light,
making them useful for cosmological studies. In addition, early
alerts of potential SNe by LOTOSS and
similar galaxy-targeted searches, and the WOOTS-I and MSACS cluster-targeted
searches, provided a supplement to the primary sample as the
wide-area searches ramped up. Extensive spectroscopic screening and follow-up was obtained using guest observer time on the
CTIO 4 m, KPNO 4 m, APO 3.5 m, Lick 3 m, NOT, INT, MDM
2.4 m, ESO 3.6 m, and WHT 4.2 m telescopes. The results of
these observations have been reported elsewhere . Photometric
follow-up observations were obtained with the LICK 1 m, YALO
1 m, CTIO 0.9 m, CTIO 1.5 m, MARLY, Danish 1.5m, ESO 3.6 m,
KPNO 2.1 m, JKT 1 m, CFHT 3.6 m, KECK-I 10 m, WIYN 3.5m,
and MLO 1 m telescopes. These consist of UBVRI photometry
with a nominal cadence of 3–7 days. The follow-up observations
were performed between February and 1999 June, and additional
reference images to determine the contribution of host galaxy light
contamination were obtained in spring 2000.
From this campaign we present BVRI light curves for the eight
Type Ia SNe that fall into the redshift range 0:015 P zP 0:15 and
for which we were able to obtain enough photometric follow-up
data: SN 1999aa ,
SN 1999ao , SN 1999ar , SN 1999aw , and SN 1999bi,
SN 1999bm, SN 1999bn, and SN 1999bp .
Further information on these SNe is summarized in Table 1.
Photometric data on SN 1999aw have already been published
by Strolger et al. ; here we present a self-consistent reanalysis of that photometry.
2.1. Data Reduction and Photometric Calibration
The data were preprocessed using standard algorithms for bias
and ﬂat ﬁeld correction. In addition, images that showed signiﬁcant fringing were corrected by subtracting the structured sky
residuals obtained from the median of fringing-affected images.
Reﬂecting an original goal of this program—to obtain data for
nearby SNe Ia matching that of the high-redshift data of Perlmutter
et al. —we have employed aperture photometry to measure
the SN light curves. For measurement of moderately bright point
sources projected onto complex host galaxy backgrounds in ﬁelds
sparsely covered by foreground stars, aperture photometry has
higher systematic accuracy, but slightly lower statistical precision,
than PSF ﬁtting. We used an aperture radius equal to the FWHM
of a point source, as determined from the ﬁeld stars in the image.
The aperture correction, which is deﬁned as the fraction of total
light that is outside the FWHM radius, is determined by approximating an inﬁnite aperture by a 4 ; FWHM radius aperture. The
aperture correction for a given image is then obtained by a weighted
average for all the stars in the ﬁeld.
In all, photometric observations employed a total of 12 different telescopes and 14 different detector/ﬁlter systems. This presented the opportunity to obtain a more accurate estimate of
systematic errorsinduced bydifferent instrumental setups—which
might otherwise be masked by apparent internal consistency—
and thereby come closer to achieving calibration on a system
Summary of Supernova Coordinates and Redshifts
R.A. (J2000.0)
Decl. (J2000.0)
SN1999aa.........
08 27 42.03
+21 29 14.8
SN1999ao.........
06 27 26.37
35 50 24.2
SN1999aw........
11 01 36.37
06 06 31.6
SN1999ar .........
09 20 16.00
+00 33 39.6
SN1999bi .........
11 01 15.76
11 45 15.2
SN1999bm .......
12 45 00.84
06 27 30.2
SN1999bn ........
11 57 00.40
11 26 38.4
SN1999bp ........
11 39 46.42
08 51 34.8
Notes.—Units of right ascension are hours, minutes, and seconds, and units of
declination are degrees, arcminutes, and arcseconds. The heliocentric redshift was
determined using narrow host-galaxy features for all but one SN. In the case of
SN 1999aw: due to the faintness of its host, the redshift was determined from the
SN spectra.
IMPROVED COSMOLOGICAL CONSTRAINTS
No. 2, 2008
consistent with that of high-redshift SNe as required for accurate
measurement of the cosmological parameters. Of course, the need
to account for the speciﬁc characteristics of these many different
instruments, and their cross-calibration, made the calibration a
particularly challenging component of this analysis, which we
have addressed in a unique fashion.
Our photometric calibration procedure is subdivided into three
1. Determination of zero points, color terms, and atmospheric
extinction for photometric nights on telescopes at high-quality
sites, simultaneously employing observations of both Landolt
 standard stars and SN ﬁeld tertiary standard stars.
2. Use of the tertiary standard stars to simultaneously determine color terms for all other instruments, and zero points for all
other images.
3. Determination of SN magnitudes, including the SN host
subtraction and photometric correction necessary for nonstandard
bandpasses.
In steps 1 and 2 the robustness of the ﬁts was ensured by heavily
deweighting signiﬁcant outliers, using an automated iterative
prescription.
Elaborating further on step 1, the instrumental magnitudes were
converted to magnitudes on the standard BV(RI )KC system using
the relation
mx ¼ ˜mx þ mzp þ kx þ cx(mx  my);
where ˜mx is the instrumental magnitude measured in band x, mx
and my are the apparent magnitudes in bands x and y,  is the air
mass, mzp is the zero point, and kx and cx are the atmospheric extinction and ﬁlter correction terms for band x. A simultaneous ﬁt
in two bands of standard stars cataloged by Landolt and
our SN ﬁeld stars allowed determination of mzp, kx, , and cx, as
well as mx and my for our tertiary standard stars. In total, 125
Landolt standards, spread across 16 photometric nights, were
used for calibration in B, V, R, and I, respectively. Accordingly,
the uncertainties on the night and telescope-dependent terms kx
and cx are typically very small. Their covariance with the other
parameters is properly accounted for. The catalog of tertiary standard stars generated as a by-product of this procedure are reported in Appendix B.
Then, in step 2, the apparent magnitudes from the tertiary standard stars were used to determine color terms for all remaining
instruments and zero points for all images. Since BVRI do not require air mass–color cross terms over the range of air masses coveredbyour observations,andsinceabsorptionbyanycloudspresent
would be gray, it was possible to absorb the atmospheric extinction into the zero point of each image. The catalog of tertiary standard stars includes both rather blue and red stars, therefore allowing
reliable determination of the color terms. The color terms obtained
for all instruments are summarized in Table 7 of Appendix A.
In order to determine the counts from the SN in a given aperture, the counts expected from the underlying host galaxy must
be subtracted. In our approach, the image with the SN and the
reference images without SN light are ﬁrst convolved to have
matching point-spread functions. Stars in the images are used to
approximate the PSF as a Gaussian, which for the purposes of
determining the convolution kernel needed to match one PSF to
another is usually adequate. The instrumental magnitudes of objects (including galaxies) in the ﬁeld are then used to determine
the ratio of counts between the images. For a given image, the
counts due to the SN are obtained by subtracting the counts from
the reference image scaled by the ratio of counts averaged over
all objects. Note that with this approach the images are never
spatially translated, thereby minimizing pixel-to-pixel correlations
due to resampling.
Several contributions to the uncertainty were evaluated and
added in quadrature: photon statistics, uncertainties in the image
zero points, and uncertainties in the scaling between reference
and SN image. In addition, possible systematic errors introduced
during sky subtraction and ﬂat-ﬁelding are evaluated using ﬁeld
stars. The variance of ﬁeld star residuals is used to rescale all
uncertainties. Also, an error ﬂoor is determined for all instruments
by investigation of the variance of the residuals as a function of
the calculated uncertainty. Such an error might occur due to largescale variation in the ﬂat-ﬁeld. An appropriate error ﬂoor was
found to be typically 1%–2% of the signal counts.
2.2. Bandpass Determination
The bandpasses for all telescopes have to be established in
order to correct for potential mismatches to the Landolt/Bessell
system .
The bandpass is the product of the quantum efﬁciency of the
CCD, the ﬁlter transmission curve, the atmospheric transmission,
and the reﬂectivity of the telescope mirrors. Figure 1 shows the
bandpass curves for the various instruments used in this work.
The relevant data were obtained either from the instrument documentation or through private communication.
We test for consistency of the bandpasses using synthetic photometry . For this,
stellar spectra that best match the published UBVRI colors of our
standard stars are selected from the catalog of Gunn & Stryker
 . The spectra that best match the published colors of the
standard stars are further adjusted using cubic splines to exactly
match the published colors. For instruments without standard star
observations, a second catalog is generated using our determination of BVRI magnitudes ofﬁeld stars. With the spectra of standard
and ﬁeld stars at hand, we perform synthetic photometry for the
variousbandpassfunctions.Thebandpassfunctionsarethenshifted
in central wavelength by k until they optimally reproduce the
observed instrumental magnitudes. The change in color-term, cx,
when shifting the passband is dcx/dk  0:001, 0.0008, 0.0005,
0.0003 81 for B, V, R, and I, respectively. An alternative procedure is to evaluate the color terms for a given bandpass in an
analogous way as for the observed magnitudes (see eq. ). We
then determine the wavelength shift to apply to the bandpasses
in order to reproduce the instrumental color terms. The two approaches agree on average to within 1 8 with an rms of about
20 8. The results are summarized in Table 8 of Appendix A. The
associated systematic uncertainty on the photometric zero point
due to this shift depends on the color of the object and for B
V  1 will remain below 0.02 mag.
3. LIGHT CURVES
3.1. Light Curves from the SCP Nearby 1999
Supernova Campaign
Figure 2 shows the BVRI light curves from the SCP Nearby
1999 campaign (the data are provided in Table 10). Different telescopes are marked by different symbols. Empty symbols represent
uncorrected photometric data, and ﬁlled symbols represent data
corrected for nonstandard bandpasses, the so-called S-corrections
 . The S-corrections represent the magnitude shift
needed to bring the data obtained with different bandpasses to
a common standard system (in our case the Bessell system). The
S-corrections are obtained from a synthetic photometry calculation using the ‘‘instrument-dependent’’ bandpass functions
KOWALSKI ET AL.
described above and a spectrophotometric light curve model. The
spectrophotometric SN light curve model was adjusted using
spline functions to match the colors of the light curve models of
our SNe. The light curve models are shown in Figure 2 to guide
the eye only. They are obtained in two different ways depending
on the quality of the available photometric data. For the four SNe
with z < 0:1, we have used the ﬁt method explained in Wang
et al. , which has six parameters per band. This method
allows effective ﬁtting of R- and I-band data, which exhibits a
second ‘‘bump’’ of variable strength appearing approximately
30 days after the maximum. However, since this ﬁt method has
six free parameters per ﬁtted band, one can use it only for light
curves with dense temporal sampling with high signal-to-noise
ratio. For the more distant SNe 1999ar, 1999bi, 1999bm, and
1999bn we use a more constrained light curve ﬁtting method
based on template matching. A library of template light curves
obtained from well-observed supernovae is K-corrected to the observed redshift. The best-matching light curve is chosen as a
model for the supernova. The light curve models along with the
S-corrections shown in Figure 2 are meant to guide the eyeand will
not be used in the remainder of the paper; we continue with the
concept of using instrumental magnitudes along with instrumentdependent passbands when ﬁtting the light curve parameters.
The light curve parameters such as peak magnitude, stretch,
and color at maximum are obtained using the spectral template
method of Guy et al. , which is described in more detail in
x 3.3. The method is well suited to this task since it uses telescopespeciﬁc bandpass functions for modeling the observer-frame light
curves. The B-band (left) and V-band (right) observer-frame light
curves are shown in Figure 3, along with the light curves predicted by the spectral template for the corresponding bandpass.
In the bottom part of the plots we show the residuals from the
model prediction. In most cases the model describes the data reasonably well, with 2/dof  1. Systematic deviations, such as
observed in the late-time behavior of the B-band light curve of
SN 1999aw, are likely to be attributable to the limitations of the
two-parameter spectral template model in capturing the full diversity of Type Ia supernovae light curves.
Figure 4 (right and middle) shows the ﬁtted B  V color at
maximum,aswell asthe stretch distribution.Thestretchdistribution
has one low-stretch supernova (SN 1999bm) but is otherwise dominatedbysupernovaewithlargerstretches.TwolowerstretchSNeIa
were found in these searches but are not presented here because of
their faintness—in one case combined with proximity to the cuspy
core of an elliptical host—prevented an analysis using the techniquesdescribedhere.Inanycase,the larger number of high-stretch
supernovae is not very signiﬁcant (a K-S test resulted in a 20%
probabilitythat thetwodistributionsareconsistentwitheach other).
For two of the eight supernovae, lightcurve data have previously
been published. Jha et al. , Krisciunas et al. , and
Altavilla et al. presented independent data on SN1999aa.
When comparing the ﬁt results for SN 1999aa we ﬁnd agreement to within 1% in maximum B-band luminosity, color, and
stretch. Spectroscopic and photometric data on SN 1999aw
were previously reported by Strolger et al. . While the raw
data of Strolger et al. are largely the same as that presented here, the reduction pipelines used are independent. A
main difference is the treatment of nonstandard bandpasses. We
report the original magnitudes and correct for nonstandard bandpasses during the ﬁt of the light curve, while in Strolger et al.
Fig. 1.—Bandpasses for the various instruments used in the Spring 1999 Nearby Supernova Campaign. For comparison, the ﬁlled regions represent the passband
transmission functions of the Bessell system.
IMPROVED COSMOLOGICAL CONSTRAINTS
No. 2, 2008
 corrections based on the color coefﬁcient have been applied
to the data. When ﬁtting for peak B-band magnitude, color, and
stretch, we obtain differences of B ¼ 0:04; (B  V ) ¼ 0:02,
and s ¼ 0:005.
Figure 4 (left) shows the redshift distribution relative to the
sample of other nearby supernovae (see x 3.2 for a deﬁnition of
that sample). As can be seen, the distribution extends to redshifts
z  0:15, an underpopulated region in the Hubble diagram.
3.2. Literature Supernovae
Here we discuss the set of previously published nearby and
distant supernovae included in the analysis. Not all SN light curves
are of sufﬁciently good quality to allow their use in the following
cosmological analysis. For all supernovae in the sample, we require that data from at least two bands with rest-frame central
wavelength between 3470 8 (U band) and 6600 8 (R band) exist
and that there are in total at least ﬁve data points available.
Further, we require that there is at least one observation existing between 15 days before and 6 days after the date of maximal
B-band brightness, as obtained from an initial ﬁt to the light curves
(see x 3.3). The 6 day cut is scaled by stretch for consistency. In
addition, we observed that for a smaller number of poorer light
curves, the uncertainties resulting from the ﬁts are unphysically
small compared to what is expected from the photometric data.
In these cases, we randomly perturb each data point by a tenth (or
if necessary by a ﬁfth) of its photometric error and reﬁt the light
curves. The remaining 16 SNe, where convergence cannot be
obtained even after perturbation of the data, are excluded from
further analysis (note that these SNe are generally poorly measured and would have low weight in any cosmological analysis).
For the nearby SN sample, we use only supernovae with CMBcentric redshifts z > 0:015, in order to reduce the impact of uncertainty due to host galaxy peculiar velocities. We checked that
our results do not depend signiﬁcantly on the value of the redshift
cutoff (tested for a range z ¼ 0:01 0:03).
The number of SNe passing these cuts are summarized in
Table 2. Each individual supernova is listed in Table 11, and the
last column indicates any cuts that the supernova failed.
The list contains 17 supernovae from Hamuy et al. ,
11 from Riess et al. , 16 from Jha et al. , and 6 from
Krisciunas et al. . Our light curve data for
SN 1999aa are merged with that of Jha et al. . To this list
of nearby supernovae from the literature we add the new nearby
supernovae presented here. For SN 1999aw, we use only the light
curve data presented in this paper. Hence, the sample contains 58
nearby supernovae.
Fig. 2.—SNe light curves of the SCP Nearby 1999 campaign. The ﬁlled symbols represent the S-corrected data, and the empty symbols the raw photometric data.
Both the S-corrected data as well as the model parameterization (dashed line) are shown to guide the eye only and are not used any further in the remaining paper. [See
the electronic edition of the Journal for a color version of this ﬁgure.]
KOWALSKI ET AL.
Fig. 3.—B and V light curves and residuals. The multiple curves represent the model predictions for the different bandpasses and are obtained by integrating the
product of passband and the redshifted spectral template. [See the electronic edition of the Journal for a color version of this ﬁgure.]
Fig. 3—Continued
The sample of high-redshift supernovae is comparably heterogeneous. We use all of the 11 SNe from Knop et al. that
have light curves obtained with HST. Of the 42 supernovae from
Perlmutter et al. , 30 satisfy the selection cuts described
above (as can be seen in the photometry data of Table 12). Of the
16 SNe used by the High-Z Team , two are already included in the Perlmutter et al. sample, and of the remaining 14, 12 pass our cuts.
Included also are 22 SNe from Barris et al. and the
8 SNe from Tonry et al. that are typed to be secure or
likely SNe Ia. We do not use SN 1999fv and SN 1999 fh, as the
Fig. 3—Continued
Fig. 4.—Left: Redshift distribution; middle: stretch distribution; right: B  Vjt¼Bmax distribution.
IMPROVED COSMOLOGICAL CONSTRAINTS
number of available data points does not exceed the number of
light curve ﬁt parameters.
We add the 73 SNe Ia from the ﬁrst year of SNLS , of which one does not pass the ﬁrst phase cut (03D3cc).
Note that in Astier et al. 2 of the 73 supernovae were excluded from their cosmological parameter ﬁts because they were
signiﬁcant outliers (see discussion in x 4.3). Riess et al. have published 37 supernovae that were discovered and
followed using HST. Of these, 29 passed our light curve quality
cuts. This sample contains the highest-redshift supernovae in our
compilation. Finally, we use the 84 SNe from the ESSENCE
survey , of which
75 pass our cuts.
3.3. Light Curve Fitting
The spectral-template–based ﬁt method of Guy et al. ,
also known as SALT, is used to ﬁt consistently both new and
literature light curve data. This method is based on a spectral
template that has been adapted in an iterative procedure to reproduce a training set of nearby SNe UBVR
light curve data. The training set consists of mostly z < 0:015
SNe and hence does not overlap with the sample we use for
determination of cosmological parameters. To obtain an expected
magnitude for a supernova at a certain phase, the model spectrum
is ﬁrst redshifted to the corresponding redshift followed by an
integration of the product of spectrum and bandpass transmission.
The spectral-template–based ﬁt method has the advantage that it
consistently allows the simultaneous ﬁt of multiband light curves
with arbitrary (but known) bandpass transmission functions. In
view of the large number of ﬁlters and instruments used for the
new nearbySN samples as well as the very diverse light curve data
found in the literature, this is particularly important here. In addition, frequent practical problems associated with K-corrections—
such as the propagation of photometric errors—are handled
naturally.
The spectral template based ﬁt method of Guy et al. ﬁts
for the time of maximum, the ﬂux normalization as well as restframe color at maximum deﬁned as c ¼ B  Vjt¼Bmax þ 0:057
and timescale stretch s. It is worth noting that by construction,
the stretch in SALT has a related meaning to the conventional
time-axis stretch .
However, as a parameter of the light curve model it also absorbs
other, less pronounced, stretch-dependent light curve dependencies.
The same is true for the color c.
Recently, direct comparisons between alternative ﬁtters, such
as SALT, its update , and MLCS2k2 show good consistency between the ﬁt results, e.g., the
amount of reddening . Our own tests have
shown that for well-observed supernovae, the method produces
very consistent results (peak magnitude, stretch) when compared
to the more traditional method of using light-curve templates
 . However, we noticed that ﬁts of poorly
observed light curves in some cases do not converge properly.
Part of the explanation is that in the case of the spectral template
based ﬁt method, the data before t < 15 days are not used as an
additional constraint. More typically, the SALT ﬁtter can fall into
an apparent false minimum, and we then found it necessary to
restart it repeatedly to obtain convergence. Note that the small
differences between the light curve ﬁt parameters of Table 11 and
the values shown in Table 10 of Wood-Vasey et al. are
primarily cases where the Wood-Vasey et al. SALT ﬁt did
not converge and a few cases where we found it necessary to remove an
extreme outlier photometry point from the light curve.
The light curves from Barris et al. and the I-band light
curves of 4 supernovae of P99 need a different analysis
procedure, since in these cases the light of the host galaxy was
not fully subtracted during the image reduction. We hence allow
for a constant contribution of light from the host galaxy in the
light curve ﬁts. The supernovae were ﬁtted with additional parameters: the zero level of the I-band light curve in the case of the
four SNe from the P99 set and the zero level of all the bands in the
case of the Tonry et al. data. The additional uncertainties
due to these unknown zero levels have been propagated into the
resulting light curve ﬁt parameters.
The ﬁtted light curve parameters of all SNe can be found in
Table 11.42
4. HUBBLE DIAGRAM CONSTRUCTION
AND COSMOLOGICAL PARAMETER FITTING
The full set of light curves as described in x 3.2 have been
ﬁtted, yielding B-band maximum magnitude mmax
, stretch s, and
color c ¼ B  Vjt¼Bmax þ 0:057. In this section, these are input
to the determination of the distance modulus. The analysis
method is chosen to minimize bias in the estimated parameters
(see x 4.2). An outlier rejection based on truncation is performed
that is further described in x 4.3, before constraints on the cosmological parameters are computed.
4.1. Blind Analysis
Following Conley et al. we adopt a blind analysis strategy. The basic aim of pursuing a blind analysis is to remove
potential bias introduced by the analyst. In particular, there is a
documented tendency for an analysis
to be checked for errors in the procedure (even as trivial as bugs
in the code) up until the expected results are found but not much
beyond. The idea of a blind analysis is to hide the experimental
outcome until the analysis strategy is ﬁnalized and debugged.
However, one does not want to blind oneself entirely to the data,
as the analysis strategy will be partially determined by the properties of the data. The following blindness strategy is used, which
is similar to the one invented in Conley et al. . The data are
ﬁt assuming a CDM cosmology, with the resulting ﬁt for M
stored without being reported. The ﬂux of each supernova data
point is then rescaled according to the ratio of luminosity distances obtained from the ﬁtted parameters and arbitrarily chosen
dummy parameters (in this case M ¼ 0:25;  ¼ 0:75). This
procedure preserves the stretch and color distribution and, as
42 See 
Number of Supernovae after Consecutive
Application of Cuts
Requirement
All ......................................................
z > 0:015............................................
Fit successful......................................
Color available...................................
First phase <6 days...........................
5 data points ...................................
Outlier rejection .................................
Note.—See x 4.3 for a discussion of the outlier
rejection cut.
KOWALSKI ET AL.
long as the ﬁtted parameters are not too different from the target parameters, approximately preserves the residuals from the
Hubble diagram. In developing the analysis, one is only exposed
to data blinded by the procedure described above. Only after the
analysis is ﬁnalized and the procedure frozen is the blinding
turned off.
Note that this prescription allows—in a consistent way—the
inclusion of future data samples. A new data sample would be
ﬁrst investigated in a blind manner following the tests outlined in
x 4.4, and if no anomalies are observed, one would combine it
with the other data sets.
4.2. Unbiased Parameter Estimation
Type Ia supernovae obey a redder-dimmer relation and a widerbrighter relation . The redder-dimmer relation in
principle can be explained by dust extinction; however, the total
to selective extinction ratios generally obtained empirically are
smaller than expected from Milky-Way–like dust . At the same time, the exact slope of the stretchmagnitude relation is not (yet) predicted by theory. The absence
of a strong theoretical prediction motivates an empirical treatment
of stretch and color corrections. Here we adopt the corrections of
Tripp :
 M þ (s  1)  c:
Since the -color correction term must account for both dust and
any intrinsic color-magnitude relation, it is clearly an empirical
approximation. The validity of -color correction relies on only
one assumption—that is, nearby supernovae and distant supernovae have an identical magnitude-color relation. If either the
intrinsic SNe properties or the dust extinction properties of the
supernovae are evolving with redshift, these assumptions may
be violated. Observational selection effects may also introduce
biases that invalidate equation (2). These potential sources of
systematic error will be evaluated in x 5.1.
The 2 corresponding to that of equation (2) is given as
B  (z; M; ; w)
ij ci cj Cij
The sum in the denominator represents the statistical uncertainty
as obtained from the light-curve ﬁt with Cij representing the covariance matrix ofﬁtted parameters: peak magnitudes, color, and
stretch (i.e., C11 ¼ 2
mB) and ci ¼ f1; ; g are the corresponding correction parameters.
The quantity tot represents an astrophysical dispersion obtained by adding in quadrature the dispersion due to lensing, lens ¼
0:093z (see x 5.6), the uncertainty in the Milky-Way dust extinction correction (see x 5.8), and a term reﬂecting the uncertainty
due to host galaxy peculiar velocities of 300 km s1. The dispersion term sys contains an observed sample-dependent dispersion due to possible unaccounted-for systematic errors. In
x 4.3 we discuss the contribution of sys further.
Note that equation (3) can be derived using minimization of a
generalized 2. Deﬁning a residual vector for a supernova R ¼
B  model; s  s 0; c  c 0
Þ and supposing that the light-curve
ﬁt returns covariance matrix C, we can write
SNe RTC1R:
Here s 0 and c 0 take the role of the true stretch and color, which
have to be estimated from the measured ones. Minimizing this
equation over all possible values of s 0 and c 0 gives the 2 in
equation (3). The 2 is minimized, not marginalized, over  and
; marginalization would yield a biased result due to the asymmetry of the 2 about the minimum.
Frequently, equation (3) is minimized by updating the denominator iteratively, i.e., only between minimizations . As shown in Figure 5 and discussed next, this method
produces biased ﬁt results, an artifact previously noted by Wang
et al. .
We use a Monte Carlo simulation to estimate any biases from
the ﬁtting procedure. Random supernova samples resembling
Fig. 5.—Monte Carlo simulation of the resulting  (left) and  (right) distributions as ﬁtted with the unbiased and biased method. The true values  ¼ 1:5 and
 ¼ 2:5 are represented by the arrows.
IMPROVED COSMOLOGICAL CONSTRAINTS
No. 2, 2008
the observed one are generated and then ﬁtted. The true stretch
and color are sampled from a normal distribution of width 0.1
and for the peak magnitude an intrinsic dispersion of 0.15 mag is
assumed. A further dispersion corresponding to the measurement
errors is added. By construction, the SN samples have the same
redshift and stretch, color, and peak magnitude uncertainties as the
real sample. The test values for  and  were chosen as 1.5 and
2.5. This bias on  and , as would be obtained from the iterative method’s ﬁts to the simulated data sets, is visible in Figure 5
as the unshaded histogram. The large potential bias on  ( 
0:5), if the 2 had been chosen according to equation (3) with
the iteratively updated denominator, is a result of the fact that
the measurement error on c for high-redshift SNe is similar
to and often even exceeds the width of the color distribution
We have investigated other sources of bias in the ﬁtted parameters. A measurement bias will be introduced because overall,
brighter SNe will have smaller photometric errors, and hence
larger weights, than dimmer ones. If the photometric error bars
are small enough that the intrinsic dispersion dominates the uncertainty, this bias will be small. Hence, low-redshift, well-observed
SNe are biased less than high-redshift, poorly observed SNe, resulting in biased cosmological parameters. This bias was studied
using the Monte Carlo simulation described above. For the sample under investigation we found a bias M ¼ 0:01 had been
introduced. In principle this bias can be corrected; however,
since it is roughly a factor of 3 smaller than the statistical or systematic uncertainties, we chose not to carry out this step.
4.3. Robust Statistics
Figure 6 shows the distribution of rest-frame B-band corrected
magnitude residuals (left) from the best ﬁt as obtained with the
full data set. The right plot shows the pull distribution, where the
pull is deﬁned as the corrected B magnitude residual divided by
its uncertainty. The distributions have outliers that, if interpreted
as statistical ﬂuctuations, are highly improbable. Hence, these
outliers point to non-Gaussian behavior of the underlying data,
due to either systematic errors in the observations, contamination,
or intrinsic variations in Type Ia SNe. The fact that an outlier is
present even in the high-quality SNLS supernova set (see Table 3)
suggests that contamination or unmodeled intrinsic variations
might be present. However, other samples that typically were
observed with a more heterogeneous set of telescopes and instruments show larger fractions of outliers, indicating additional potential observation-related problems.
In order to limit the inﬂuence of outliers, we use a robust
analysis technique. First, the SN samples are ﬁtted for M, the absolute magnitude of the SNe, using median statistics . The quantity minimized is  ¼ P
modelj/Þ, where the uncertainty  in the denominator includes
the covariance terms in the denominator of the right-hand side of
equation (3). We then proceed to ﬁt each sample by itself using the , , and M from the combined ﬁt, as  is not a wellbehaved quantity for small numbers of SNe.
For each sample, we remove SNe with a pull exceeding a certain value cut relative to the median ﬁt of the sample. Currently
available algorithms, which correct the peak magnitude using,
e.g., stretch or m15, are capable of standardizing SNe Ia to a
level of 0.10–0.15 mag. To reﬂect this we add in quadrature a
systematic dispersion to the known uncertainties. The list of known
uncertainties include observational errors, distance modulus uncertainties due to peculiar velocities (with v ¼ 300 km s1)
and gravitational lensing (relevant only for the highest-redshift
SNe; see x 5.6 for a discussion). The additional systematic dispersion has two components: a common irreducible one, possibly
associated with intrinsic variations in the SN explosion mechanism, as well as an observer-dependent component. To obtain
self-consistency the systematic dispersion is recalculated during the analysis. One starts by assuming a systematic dispersion
of sys ¼ 0:15 magnitudes, then computes the best-ﬁtting cosmology for the particular sample using median statistics, removes
the outlier SNe with residuals larger than a cut value cut, iterates
sys such that the total 2 per degree of freedom is unity, and in
a ﬁnal step redetermines the best-ﬁtting cosmology using regular
2 statistics to obtain an updated sys. From that point in the
Fig. 6.—Residual of rest-frame, stretch and color-corrected, B-band magnitude (left) and pull distribution (right) from the best-ﬁtting cosmology. The ﬁlled
histogram shows the rejected outliers. The pull distribution is overlaid with a normal distribution of unit width.
KOWALSKI ET AL.
analysis, after outliers are rejected and sys determined, only
regular 2 statistics are applied.
When using a robust analysis, it is necessary to check that
(1) in the absence of contamination the results are not altered from
the Gaussian case and (2) in the presence of a contaminating contribution, its impact is indeed reduced. In order to investigate
this, we begin with a model for the contamination. We assume
the data sample to be composed of two types of objects, one
representing the desired SNe Ia and a second contribution characterizing the contamination. We then use a maximum-likelihood
analysis of the observed pull distribution shown in Figure 6 (right)
to determine the normalization, width and mean of the contaminating distribution. The uncontaminated pull distribution is assumed to be a Gaussian distribution of unit width and zero mean.
The observed pull distribution is best-ﬁtted by an additional
contaminating contribution that is 50% wider (m ¼ 0:23 mag)
and that has a mean shifted by m ¼ 0:3m, normalized to 18%
of the area. A mock simulation that is based on this superposition
of two normal distributions illustrates the beneﬁts of using the
robust analysis. Figure 7 (right) shows the bias of the mean relative to the center of the main component as a function of the
outlier rejection cut value. Outlier rejection can reduce the
bias by a factor of 3 with a remaining bias of less than 0.01 mag.
Even for a wide range of contaminant parameters (m ¼ 0:15 2;
m ¼ 0 2 mag) the bias obtained for the robust analysis remains
below 0.015 mag. Only in cases where the contamination is larger
than 30% does the outlier rejection algorithm become unstable.
Besides reducing the potential bias due to contamination, robust statistics can also lead to tighter parameter constraints through
reduction of the intrinsic dispersion. The right panel of Figure 7
shows for the simulated data the average standard deviation as a
function of the outlier rejection cut for the 16% contamination case
described above. As a reference, the case of a single uncontaminated population of SNe is shown as well. Note that a cut at 3 
reduces the dispersion noticeably in the case of a contaminated
sample, while the uncontaminated single population is affected
negligibly (the standard deviation is reduced by 1.3%, e.g., from
0.15 to 0.148 mag).
For the real data, we consider two values cut ¼ 2; 3 as well as
the case in which all SNe are kept. We chose as our main cut value
cut ¼ 3 since, after application of the outlier rejection, standard
2 statistics is still a good approximation while at the same time a
potential bias introducedby contaminationis signiﬁcantly reduced.
Note also that the impact of individual SNe that have residuals
close to cut is small for large statistics: an additional SN will shift
the mean distance modulus of NSNe by at most cut N 1/2
SNe standard
deviations. Hence, for NSNe k 10 and cut ¼ 3 the algorithm can
be considered stable relative to ﬂuctuations of individual SNe.
4.4. Sample Characteristics, Dispersion, and Pull
Figure 8 illustrates the heterogeneous character of the samples. It shows the Hubble and residual diagrams for the various
samples, as well as the histogram of the SN residuals and pulls
from the best ﬁt. The difference in photometric quality is illustrated in the rightmost column of Figure 8, by showing the error
on the color measurement. As can be seen, some samples show a
signiﬁcant redshift-dependent gradient in the errors, while others
have small, nearly constant errors . The sample of Astier et al. shows a
small color uncertainty up to z  0:8 and degrades signiﬁcantly
once the color measurement relies on the poorer z-band data
 .
Our analysis is optimized for large, multicolor samples such
as that of Astier et al. , since these now dominate the total
sample. There is often a better analysis approach for any given
speciﬁc sample that would emphasize the strengths of that sample’s measurements and yield a tighter dispersion and more statistical weight. However, for this combined analysis of many
samples it was more important to use a single uniform analysis
for every sample, at the cost of degrading the results for some of
the smaller samples. This particularly affects some of the very
earliest samples, such as Riess et al. , Perlmutter et al.
 , and Barris et al. , where the color measurements
had originally been used with different priors concerning the dust
distribution. Treating these samples with the current analysis thus
gives signiﬁcantly larger dispersions (and hence less weight) to
these samples than their original analyses. As a check, we have
veriﬁed that by repeating the analysis according to Perlmutter
et al. we reproduce the original dispersions.
Number of Supernovae Passing the Different Outlier Rejection Cuts, and Sample-dependent
Systematic Dispersion (sys ) and rms around the Best-Fit Model
No Outlier Cut
Hamuy et al. .....................
Krisciunas et al. ...............
Riess et al. ........................
Jha et al. ...........................
This work.....................................
Riess et al. +HZT..............
Perlmutter et al. ................
Tonry et al. .......................
Barris et al. .......................
Knop et al. .......................
Riess et al. ........................
Astier et al. .......................
Miknaitis et al. .................
Union............................................
Note.—The compilation obtained with the cut ¼ 3 cut will be referred to as the Union robust set.
IMPROVED COSMOLOGICAL CONSTRAINTS
No. 2, 2008
Fig. 7.—Mock simulation of bias (left) and standard deviation (right) of the mean magnitude as a function of the outlier rejection cut. The simulated SN set consists
of one population of 270 SNe with intrinsic dispersion of 0.15 mag and zero mean and a second population of 50 SNe with intrinsic dispersion of 0.26 mag and mean
0.13 mag. The effect of outlier rejection on a single population without contamination is shown as a reference curve.
Fig. 8.—From left to right: (a) Hubble diagrams for the various samples; (b) binned magnitude residuals from the best ﬁt (bin width: z ¼ 0:01); (c) unbinned
magnitude residuals from the best ﬁt; (d) histogram of the residuals from the best ﬁt; (e) pull of individual SNe as a function of redshift; ( f ) histogram of pulls; (g) SN
color as a function of redshift; (h) uncertainty of the color measurement as an illustration of the photometric quality of the data. [See the electronic edition of the Journal
for a color version of this ﬁgure.]
Figure 9 shows diagnostic variables used to test for consistency
between the various samples. The leftmost plot shows the systematic dispersion and rms around the best-ﬁt model. One expects
that there is an intrinsic dispersion associated with all SNe that
provides a lower limit to the sample-dependent systematic dispersion. To estimate the intrinsic dispersion one can look at various
quantities, such as the smallest sys or, perhaps more appropriately,
the median of sys. The median of sys, which is about 0.15 mag
(shown as the leftmost dashed vertical line), is a robust measure of
the intrinsic dispersion, as long as the majority of samples are not
dominated by observer-dependent, unaccounted-for uncertainties.
As a test for tension between the data sets, we compare for
each sample the average residual from the best-ﬁt cosmology. This
is shown in the middle panel of Figure 9. As can be seen, most
samples fall within 1 , and none deviate by more then 2 . The
larger samples show no indication of inconsistency. This changes
if one considers, instead of the mean, the slope, dresidual/dz, of the
residuals as a function of the redshift. The right panel of Figure 9
shows a large fraction of signiﬁcant outliers in the slope. The
largest slope outlier is found for the Miknaitis et al. sample (see also the middle panel of Fig. 8). The sign of the slope is
consistent with the presence of a Malmquist bias . The uncertainties associated
with such a Malmquist bias are discussed in x 5.5. While in general there is no clear trend in the sign of the slope deviations, it is
clear that any results that depend on the detailed slope, such as a
changing equation of state, should be treated with caution.
5. SYSTEMATIC ERRORS
Detailed studies of the systematic effects have been published
as part of the analysis of individual data sets. The list includes
photometric zero points, Vega spectrum, light curve ﬁtting, contamination, evolution, Malmquist bias, K-corrections, and gravitational lensing, which have also been discussed in earlier work
by authors of this paper and those that are common to all the samples (e.g., due to astrophysical or fundamental calibration effects).
To ﬁrst order, the measurement of cosmological parameters depends on the relative brightness of nearby SNe (z  0:05) compared to their high-redshift counterparts (z  0:5). If low- and
high-redshift SNe are different, this can be absorbed in different
absolute magnitudes M. We hence cast the common systematic
uncertainties into an uncertainty in the difference M ¼ Mlow 
Mhigh-z. We have chosen zdiv ¼ 0:2 as the dividing redshift as
it conveniently splits the samples according nearby and distant
SN searches. Note, however, that our resulting systematic errors
change by less than 25% of its value for zdiv in the range 0.1–0.5.
In addition we allow for a set of extra parameters, Mi, one for
each sample i.
Systematic uncertainties are then propagated by adding these
nuisance parameters to B:
for zdiv < 0:2;
B þ Mi þ M
for zdiv  0:2;
with the term M 2/2
M þ PNsamples
Mi being added to
the 2 as deﬁned through equation (3).
We have checked that this treatment of systematic errors is
consistent (in our case to better than 5% of its value) with the more
common procedure, applicable to one-dimensional constraints, in
which part of the input data are offset by M to obtain the
systematic variations in the resulting parameter (e.g., w or M).
In the following we discuss the different contributions to M,
and summarize them in x 5.9. The resulting systematic errors on
the cosmological parameters are discussed in x 6.
5.1. Stretch and Evolution
With the large statistics at hand one can test the errors associated
with the empirical stretch and color corrections. These corrections
would become sources of systematic error if (1) different SN
populations were to require different corrections and (2) if the SN
Fig. 9.—From left to right: Systematic dispersion ( ﬁlled circles) and rms around the best-ﬁt model (open circles); the mean, sample averaged, deviation from the
best-ﬁt model; the slope of the Hubble residual (in magnitudes) vs. redshift, dresidual/dz. The parameters characterizing the different samples are used to uncover potential
systematic problems. [See the electronic edition of the Journal for a color version of this ﬁgure.]
IMPROVED COSMOLOGICAL CONSTRAINTS
populations were to show differences between nearby and distant
objects (either due to selection effects or due to evolution of the
SN environment).
A potential redshift dependence of the correction parameters
can be tested by separately ﬁtting low-redshift and high-redshift
objects. For this test, a CDM cosmology was assumed with
M ¼ 0:28 and M ¼ 0:72 (the values we obtain from the ﬁt of
the full sample); however, the results are rather insensitive to the
assumed cosmological parameters. The obtained ﬁtted parameters  and  are presented in Table 4.
The values of  at high and low redshift agree very well, providing strong constraints on evolution of the color-correction.
Such evolution effects could arise, for example, due to a different
mix of dust reddening and intrinsic color at different redshifts.
The fact that  agrees so well supports the choice of the empirical
color correction.43
The  at low redshift and high redshift are only marginally
consistent with each other. We will take the difference at face
value and estimate the impact it would have on the ﬁnal result.
The average stretch is hsi  0:96 and hence the difference in the
average stretch correction is h1 si  0:015. If  indeed is
redshift-dependent and this was not accounted for, one would
obtain a bias of M ¼ 0:015 mag.
Effects of potentially different SN populations should be considered as well. It has recently been argued by Scannapieco &
Bildsten and Mannucci et al. that one needs to
allow for two types of SN-progenitor timescales to explain the
observed rates in different galaxy types. One class of objects
traces the star formation rate directly, while the second class has
a delay time trailing the star formation rate by a few billion years.
If indeed two populations are present, they might evolve differently with redshift. It is therefore important to check that the
empirical corrections suit both populations. To test the effect of
different SN populations one can subdivide the sample according
to SN subtypes or host environments .
Sullivan et al. have found using well-observed SNe
and hosts from SNLS that the stretch of a light curve is correlated
with its host environment as well as with the two classes of
SN-progenitor systems postulated by Scannapieco & Bildsten
 and Mannucci et al. . Therefore, we divide the SN
sample into two approximate equally large samples with s <
0:96 and s  0:96. The two independent samples are then ﬁtted,
with the results shown in Table 4. The resulting parameters
M (for a ﬂat universe) and w (for a ﬂat universe together with
BAO+CMB) for the two samples are less than 1  apart, and
hence, there is no evidence for an underlying systematic effect.
Nevertheless, this will be a very important number to watch, once
future high-quality SN data sets are added. (Note that, while the
resulting values of s for the two samples are consistent with each
other, they appear inconsistent with the value obtained for the
complete sample. This apparent inconsistency arises in part due to
a bias introduced by dividing the stretch distribution in the middle.
Larger stretch SNe, misclassiﬁed due to measurement errors as
belonging to the low-stretch SNe sample, as well as lower stretch
SNe, misclassiﬁed as belonging to the large stretch SNe sample,
will for both samples result in a  biased to larger values.)
We have also investigated whether the sample can be subdivided according to the color of the SNe. We found that the results of such a test can be very misleading. While in principle one
would expect to ﬁnd that the best-ﬁtted cosmological parameters
do not depend on color selection criteria (e.g., c < ccut and c >
ccut), we ﬁnd by means of Monte Carlo simulation described in
x 4.2 that a signiﬁcant bias is introduced into the measurements.
This bias is also observed in the data. For example, by choosing
ccut ¼ 0:02 we ﬁnd that for our sample of SNe M changes by
0.1. The bias arises from truncating an asymmetric distribution. In the case of color, the asymmetry in the distribution is
introduced by the fact that extinction by dust leads only to reddening. Hence, the number of objects that would belong to
ctrue < ccut but, due to a large measurement error, are ﬁtted with
cobserved > ccut, are not compensated by objects misclassiﬁed in
the opposite way. The number of misclassiﬁed objects is a function of the measurement errors and, hence, is larger toward higher
redshift. The simulated data sets result in a signiﬁcant bias both in
M as well as . The size of the bias, however, depends on assumptions made for the underlying color distribution. Hence, for
the current data sample, splitting the data set in two color bins
introduces a bias so large and difﬁcult to control that the results of
the test become meaningless. Note that if one had very small error bars on the color measurement over the full redshift range ,
the bias can be kept small. This would allow for additional tests
of systematic uncertainties due to reddening corrections.
5.2. Sample Contamination
As discussed in x 4.3, the method of robust statistics was applied to limit the effect of outliers, which could be present if the
data are contaminated by non–Type Ia SNe, or by other events
that do not have the standard candle properties of regular SN Ia.
It was shown in x 4.3 that the bias due to contamination can be
limited for this analysis to M ¼ 0:015 mag, which we hence
use as the uncertainty due to contamination.
In previous compilations, such as that of Riess et al. no formal outlier criteria were applied. Instead, with some
exceptions, the original classiﬁcations made by the authors of the
data sample were used. Spurious candidates are sometimes removed from the data samples by hand ,
making it extremely difﬁcult to estimate the effect of the remaining
contamination. Our method of outlier rejection provides a simple
and objective alternative.
5.3. Light Curve Model and K-Corrections
The light curve model is a parametric description with two free parameters. As such, it has limitations in
capturing the full diversity of Type Ia SNe. By visual inspection
we ﬁnd, for example, that the ﬁtted maximum magnitude can differ from the data by a few hundredths of a magnitude. A particular
problem could arise if the observation strategies for nearby and
distant SNe differ. In fact, the high-redshift data sets have on
Fit Parameters as Obtained for Different Supernova Subsamples
All ................
1.24 (0.10)
2.28 (0.11)
0.29 (0.03)
0.97 (0.06)
z > 0:2..........
1.46 (0.16)
2.26 (0.14)
z  0:2..........
1.07 (0.12)
2.23 (0.21)
s < 0:96........
1.56 (0.27)
2.18 (0.18)
0.27 (0.05)
0.98 (0.09)
s  0:96........
1.51 (0.37)
2.34 (0.17)
0.30 (0.04)
0.93 (0.07)
a A ﬂat universe was assumed in the constraints on M.
b Constraints on w were obtained from combining SNe with CMB and BAO
measurements. A ﬂat universe was also assumed. (see x 6 for more details).
43 Note that if  were not obtained by ﬁtting but instead was ﬁxed, e.g.,  ¼
RB ¼ 4:1, a bias can be expected if the average reddening changes as a function of redshift.
KOWALSKI ET AL.
average earlier observations of the light curve, which is a result of the rolling-search techniques frequently used to ﬁnd and
follow-up SNe. Hence, when comparing low-z to high-z SNe, the
ﬁtted light curve parameters are obtained from slightly different
parts of the light curve. The mismatch between template and the
data light curve might thus be more pronounced in one sample
than the other. To quantify the effect, we have performed an extensive Monte Carlo simulation. A set of BVR light curve templates are obtained from a quartic spline ﬁt to data, including the
well-observed SNe 1990N, 1994D, 1998aq, 2001el, 2002bo,
2003du, 2004eo, and 2005cf . The templates are
then used to sample random realizations of the light curves with
cadence, S/N, and date of the ﬁrst detection of the nearby and
distant SN sample. These simulated light curves are then ﬁtted.
The difference in the stretch and color-corrected peak magnitude
between the nearby and distant sample can be used to estimate
the systematic uncertainty. For the nine templates we obtain the
average difference between nearby and distant SNe of 0.02 mag
with an rms scatter of 0.015. We adopt an associated systematic
uncertainty of M ¼ 0:02 mag due to this.
There is another source of uncertainty arising from the diversity
of SNe Ia light curves. If a certain class of SNe is misrepresented
(e.g., if they are brighter than average for their typically ﬁtted
stretch value) and if the fraction of such SNe changes as a function
of redshift, it will lead to a systematic bias in the cosmological
parameters. Appendix D has addressed this issue by subdividing
the sample according to stretch and redshift. If a signiﬁcant light
curve misrepresentation were present, one would expect to see differences in the ﬁtted light curve– correction parameters. No statistically signiﬁcant differences have been observed, and we assign
no additional contribution to the uncertainties from such an effect.
The light curve model is based on a spectral template series.
It thereby eliminates theneed for aseparate K-correction(seex 3.3).
The model has been trained with nearby SNe data and hence will
be affected by systematic errors associated with that training data.
These are largest for the U band, which suffers from low training
statistics and difﬁcult ﬂux calibration. However, the validity of the
model in the U band has been veriﬁed with the SNLS data set to
better than 0.02 mag . Here we adopt their
assessment of the resulting systematic error of M ¼ 0:02.
5.4. Photometric Zero Points
With present methods, ground-based photometric zero-point
calibration is generally limited to an accuracy of k1% . The largest contribution to the photometric error
of the peak magnitude arises from the color correction M 
c. The color measurement is based on the measurement of the
relative ﬂux in two (or more) bands and as a result some of the
uncertainties cancel. Nevertheless, since the color of SNe at different redshifts are obtained from different spectral regions, the
uncertainty in the reference Vega spectrum limits the achievable accuracy to c  0:01 0:015 mag .
Here we assume an uncertainty of M ¼ 0:03 for the photometric peak magnitude due to zero-point calibration. Part of this
uncertainty is common to all samples (as the same set of calibration stars is being used), while the other part is sample-dependent
(e.g., tied to the calibration procedure), and we divide the error
equally among the two categories.
5.5. Malmquist Bias
Malmquist bias arises in ﬂux-limited surveys, when SNe are
detected because they are overly bright. What matters for cosmology is whether the bias is different for the low-z and high-z
samples. Perlmutter et al. , Knop et al. , and Astier
et al. have evaluated the effects of Malmquist bias for the
SCP and SNLS SN samples as well as the nearby SN sample and
found that they nearly cancel. Since an individual estimate of
Malmquist bias for all the different samples is beyond the scope
of this work, we attribute a conservative systematic uncertainty
of M ¼ 0:02 for all samples, which is consistent with previous estimates.
In addition, we investigated whether the signiﬁcant redshift
dependence of the Hubble residuals observed for the Miknaitis
et al. sample (see x 4.4), if interpreted as due to Malmquist
bias, exceeds ourclaimeduncertainty. A simulation wasperformed
in which we introduced a magnitude cutoff such that the resulting slope, d/dz, matches the observed slope of 0.6. The associated Malmquist bias with that sample is then 0.05 mag.
If this is compared to the average Malmquist bias obtained for
magnitude-limited searches, the extra bias is only 0.03 mag
larger—not much larger than the systematic uncertainty we
have adopted. While we do not treat the ESSENCE data sample differently from the others, we note that Wood-Vasey et al.
 made their extinction prior redshift-dependent to account for the fact that at higher redshifts an increasingly larger
fraction of the reddened SNe was not detected. The linear color
correction employed in our analysis is independent of a prior
and therefore unaffected by a redshift-dependent reddening
distribution.
5.6. Gravitational Lensing
Gravitational lensing decreases the mode of the brightness distribution and causes increased dispersion in the Hubble diagram
at high redshift (see Fig. 10). The effect has been discussed in
detail in the literature . We treat lensing as a statistical
phenomenon only, although with the detailed optical and NIR
data available for the GOODS ﬁeld, the mass distribution in the
line of sight and hence the lensing (de)magniﬁcation may be
estimated for individual SNe . What is
important for this work is that they ﬁnd no evidence for selection
effects (i.e., Malmquist bias) due to lensing of the high-redshift
Considering both strong and weak lensing, Holz & Linder
 found that lensing will add a dispersion of 0:093z mag,
which, if the statistics of SNe is large enough, can be approximated as an additional Gaussian error. Here we added the additional dispersion from gravitational lensing in quadrature to the
‘‘constant’’ systematic dispersion and observational error. This
effectively deweights the high-redshift SNe. However, only for
the highest-redshift SNe is the additional uncertainty comparable
to that of the intrinsic dispersion.
Flux magniﬁcation and demagniﬁcation effects due to over- or
underdensities of matter near the line of sight cancel. But one
obtains a bias if magnitudes instead ofﬂuxes are used. However,
the bias is 0:004z mag and therefore still much smaller than the
statistical error on the luminosity distance obtained from the ensemble of high-redshift SNe. While not yet relevant for this
analysis, future high-statistics samples will have to take this effect into account.
Another potential bias is introduced by the 3  outlier rejection,
since the lensing PDF is asymmetric. Using the PDFs of Holz
& Linder we have checked that the bias is never larger
than 0:006z mag. We take the worst-case value of 0.009 mag (i.e.,
for a SNe at z  1:5) as a conservative systematic uncertainty
for gravitational lensing, since this is still an almost negligible
IMPROVED COSMOLOGICAL CONSTRAINTS
No. 2, 2008
5.7. Gray Intergalactic Dust
The possibility that SNe are dimmed due to hypothetical gray
intergalactic dust, as suggested byAguirre , was constrained
by O¨ stman & Mo¨rtsell and Mo¨rtsell & Goobar by
studying the colors of high-redshift quasars. Applying their constraints on intergalactic dust, we ﬁnd that the cosmological parameters are shifted by about 1 statistical standard deviation, i.e.,
for a ﬂat universe M ¼ 0:03. This should not be considered
a systematic uncertainty, but rather an upper limit on the effect of
hypothetical large grains of cosmic dust in the line of sight.
5.8. Galactic Extinction
All light curve data were corrected for Galactic extinction using the extinction law of Cardelli et al. using an RV of 3.1.
The E(B  V) values were derived from the sky map of Schlegel
et al. and have a typical statistical error of 10%. For nearby
SNe we hence obtain an additional uncertainty of
B  (RB  ) E(B  V )
Þ  0:2E(B  V );
where  is the color correction coefﬁcient from equation (2). We
add this statistical error in quadrature to each nearby SNe. Highredshift SNe are measured in redder bands and, since RR  ,
are less affected by Galactic extinction.
There is also a common systematic error of 10% in the overall
reddening normalization. The average Galactic E(B  V) for
the low-redshift sample is 0.063, and we add a 0:063 ; 0:2 ¼
0:013 mag systematic uncertainty to M.
5.9. Summary of Systematic Errors
In our treatment of the above systematic errors we distinguish
between systematic errors common between data sets, which are
largely of astrophysical nature, and the more observer-dependent
ones associated with individual samples. Table 5 summarizes
what are considered the relevant contributions to the systematic
uncertainties in this analysis. They are propagated into the ﬁnal
result through equation (5).
6. COSMOLOGICAL FIT RESULTS
Our analysis of cosmological model ﬁts includes both statistical and systematic errors. The individual contributions to the
systematic error identiﬁed in Table 5 are of very different nature and hence are assumed uncorrelated. We hence obtain the
combined systematic error by adding in quadrature the individual contributions. The resulting error was propagated according
to the prescription described in x 5. Our constraints on the matter
density M, assuming a ﬂat universe, are summarized in Table 6.
Both statistical (68% conﬁdence) and systematic errors are quoted.
Figure 11 plots our results for the joint ﬁt to the matter density
and cosmological constant energy density, M and , and the
effect of varying the outlier cut, while Figure 12 illustrates the
effects of systematics. For comparison with previous work, Figure 13 shows our joint constraints on M and  (statistical error
only) and the Riess et al. constraints obtained from the
Gold compilation of data primarily from the HZT, SCP, and
SNLS and a recent compilation of Davis et al.
 , which is based on light curve ﬁts from Riess et al. 
and Wood-Vasey et al. . The results obtained in this work
are consistent with those of previous studies; however, compared
to the recent SN ﬁt results of Astier et al. , Riess et al.
 , Wood-Vasey et al. , and Davis et al. , we obtain a 15%–30% reduction in the statistical error.
About half the improvement can be attributed to the new SCP
Nearby 1999 SNe. Their impact is evident in the rightmost column of Figure 13 (as well as in Fig. 14). The impact of these SNe
is somewhat larger because the sample has a best-ﬁt systematic
uncertainty of zero. If instead one would introduce the requirement that sys  0:1, there would be an increase of about 10% in
the uncertainties of the cosmological parameters.
Figure 13 shows the constraints on the equation of state parameter w (assumed constant) and M. A ﬂat universe was assumed. Again, the constraints are consistent with, but stronger
Fig. 10.—Top: Binned Hubble diagram (bin size z ¼ 0:01). Bottom: Binned residuals from the best-ﬁtting cosmology. [See the electronic edition of the Journal for
a color version of this ﬁgure.]
Most Relevant Common and Sample-dependent Systematic
Errors of This Analysis
Sample-dependent
 and  correction..............................
Contamination.....................................
Light curve model...............................
Zero point............................................
Malmquist bias....................................
Gravitational lensing...........................
Galactic extinction normalization.......
Total in mag........................................
M ¼ 0:040
Mi ¼ 0:033
KOWALSKI ET AL.
than, those from Riess et al. and Davis et al. . The
current SN data do not provide strong constraints on the equation
of state parameter w byitself, since it is to a largeextent degenerate
with M. However, the degeneracy can be broken by combining with other measurements involving M. Figure 14 shows the
constraints obtained from the detection of baryon acoustic oscillations and from the 5 year data
release of the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe . The constraints from the CMB data follow from the reduced distance to the surface of last scattering at
z ¼ 1089 (or shift parameter). It is important to realize that for
parameter values far from the concordance model, the shift in
the sound horizon must also be taken into account. The reduced
distance R is often written as
Rconc ¼ (MH 2
where the Hubble parameter is H(z) ¼ H0½M(1þ z)3 þ (1
M)(1þ z)3(1þw)1/2. The WMAP 5 year CMB data alone yield
R0 ¼ 1:715  0:021 for a ﬁt assuming a constant w . Deﬁning the corresponding 2
as 2 ¼ ½(Rconc  R0)/R02, one can then deduce constraints on
M and w. However, this assumes a standard matter (and radiation) dominated epoch for calculating the sound horizon. The
more proper expression for the shift parameter accounts for deviation in the sound horizon:
R ¼ (M H 2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
dz=(H(z)=H0)
Since dark energy is generally negligible at high redshift, the factor in square brackets is usually unity [for example, it deviates
from unity by less than 1% even for w0 ¼ 1, wa ¼ 0:9, i.e.,
w(z ¼ 1089) ¼ 0:1]. However, for extreme models that upset
the matter-dominated behavior at high redshifts, the correction will be important in calculating whether the geometric shift
parameter accords with CMB observations (apart from any issue
of ﬁtting other observations). Violation of early matter domination causes the ‘‘wall’’ in likelihood apparent in Figure 16. Also
see, e.g., Linder & Miquel and Wright .
Fit Results on Cosmological Parameters M, k, and w
SNe....................................
0:287þ0:029þ0:039
0:0270:036
SNe + BAO ......................
0:285þ0:020þ0:011
0:0200:009
1:011þ0:076þ0:083
0:0820:087
SNe + CMB......................
0:265þ0:022þ0:018
0:0210:016
0:955þ0:060þ0:059
0:0660:060
SNe + BAO + CMB.........
0:274þ0:016þ0:013
0:0160:012
0:969þ0:059þ0:063
0:0630:066
SNe + BAO + CMB.........
0:285þ0:020þ0:011
0:0190:011
0:009þ0:009þ0:002
0:0100:003
SNe + BAO + CMB.........
0:285þ0:020þ0:010
0:0200:010
0:010þ0:010þ0:006
0:0110:004
1:001þ0:069þ0:080
0:0730:082
Notes.—The parameter values are followed by their statistical (stat) and systematic (sys) uncertainties.
The parametervalues andtheir statistical errorswere obtained from minimizing the2 of eq. (3). The ﬁtto the
SNe data alone results in a 2 of 310.8 for 303 degrees offreedom with a 2 of less than one for the other
ﬁts. The systematic errors were obtained from ﬁtting with extra nuisance parameters according eq. (5) and
subtracting from the resulting error, w/sys, the statistical error: sys ¼ and cut ¼ 2 outlier rejected data set
(dashed line). As can be seen, outlier rejection shifts the contours along the
degenerate axis by as much as 0.5  toward a ﬂat universe. In the remaining
ﬁgures, we refer to the cut ¼ 3 outlier rejected set as the Union set.
IMPROVED COSMOLOGICAL CONSTRAINTS
No. 2, 2008
Fig. 12.—Left plot: Contours at 68.3%, 95.4%, and 99.7% conﬁdence level on  and M obtained with the Union set, without ( ﬁlled contours) and with (open
contours) inclusion of systematic errors. The right plot shows the corresponding conﬁdence level contours on the equation of state parameter w and M, assuming a
constant w.
Fig. 13.—Contours at 68.3%, 95.4%, and 99.7% conﬁdence level on  and M (top row) and M and w (bottom row). The results from the Union set are shown as
ﬁlled contours. The empty contours in the left column represent the Gold sample , and the middle column the constraints from Davis et al.
 . While our results are statistically consistent with the previous work, the improvements in the constraints on the cosmological parameters are evident. The right
column shows the impact of the SCP Nearby 1999 data.
BAO measurements from the SDSS data provide a distance constraint at a redshift z ¼ 0:35. Percival
et al. have derived BAO distances for z ¼ 0:2, in addition
to the z ¼ 035 SDSS-data point, using the combined data from
SDSS and 2dFGRS. However, some points of tension were noted
between the data sets , especially evident for CDM models. We con-
ﬁrm this observation and found that the z ¼ 0:2 data point, if
combined with SN and CMB data according to the prescription
in Appendix A of Percival et al. leads to an 2.5  inconsistency. Neither the z ¼ 0:35 BAO data point from Percival et al.
 nor the slightly weaker constraint from Eisenstein et al.
 shows such kind of tension. Given the differences between the two data sets, we use the z ¼ 0:35 SDSS data point of
Eisenstein et al. but with the caveat that BAO constraints
need further clariﬁcation. Eisenstein et al. provides a constraint on the distance parameter A:
A(z) ¼ (MH 2
0)1=2H(z)1=3z2=3
dz 0=H(z 0)
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
dz=(H(z)=H0)
to be A(z ¼ 0:35) ¼ 0:469  0:017. Note that BAOs also depend
on accurate accounting of the sound horizon and receive the same
correction factor shown in brackets in equation (8). This results in
a similar wall to the acceptable conﬁdence contour reﬂecting violation of early matter domination. To see that such violation has
severe implications, note that most models above the wall have
a total linear growth factor a factor of 10 below the concordance
cosmology.
The joint constraints from SN data, BAO, and CMB are shown
in Figure 14, and the corresponding numbers are given in Table 6.
As can be seen, the constraints obtained from combining either
BAO or CMB with SNe data give consistent results and comparable error bars, while the combination of all three measurements
improves only the statistical error. The impact of including systematic errors (only from SNe, from eq. ) is shown in the upper
right panel of Figure 14.
The results quoted so far were derived assuming a ﬂat universe.
Allowing for spatial curvature k, our constraints from combining SNe, CMB and BAO are consistent with a ﬂat CDM universe (as seen in Table 6). Figure 15 shows the corresponding
constraints in the M- plane.
Finally, one can attempt to investigate constraints on a redshiftdependent equation of state (EOS) parameter w(z). Initially, we
consider this in terms of
w(z) ¼ w0 þ wa
shown by Linder to provide excellent approximation to a
wide variety of scalar ﬁeld and other dark energy models. Later,
we examine other aspects of time variation of the dark energy
EOS. Assuming a ﬂat universe and combining the Union set with
constraints from CMB, we obtain constraints on w0, the present
value of the EOS, and wa, giving a measure of its time variation,
as shown in Figure 16. (A cosmological constant has w0 ¼ 1,
wa ¼ 0.) Due to degeneracies within the EOS and between the
EOS and the matter density M, the SN data set alone does not
give appreciable leverage on the dark energy properties. By adding other measurements, the degeneracies can be broken and
currently modest cosmology constraints obtained.
Fig. 14.—Contours at 68.3%, 95.4%, and 99.7% conﬁdence level on w and M, for a ﬂat universe. The top plot shows the individual constraints from CMB, BAO,
and the Union SN set, as well as the combined constraints ( ﬁlled gray contours, statistical errors only). The upper right plot shows the effect of including systematic
errors. The lower right plot illustrates the impact of the SCP Nearby 1999 data. [See the electronic edition of the Journal for a color version of this ﬁgure.]
KOWALSKI ET AL.
Figure 16 (left) shows the combination of the SN data with
either the CMB constraints or the BAO constraints. The results
are similar; note that including either one results in a sharp cutoff
at w0 þ wa ¼ 0, from the physics as mentioned in regards to
equation (8). Since w(z 31) ¼ w0 þ wa in this parameterization,
any model with more positive high-redshift w will not yield a
matter-dominated early universe, altering the sound horizon in
conﬂict with observations.
Note that BAO do not provide a purely ‘‘low’’ redshift constraint, because implicit within the BAO data analysis, and hence
the constraint, is that the high-redshift universe was matterdominated (so the sound horizon at decoupling is properly calculated). Thus, one cannot avoid the issue of modeling how
the dark energy EOS behaves at high redshifts by using this constraint rather than the CMB. SN data are
especially useful in constraining w(z) because there is no dependence at all on the high-redshift behavior, unlike CMB and
As one might expect, because of the different orientations of
the conﬁdence contours and the different physics that enters,
combining both the CMB and BAO constraints with the SN data
clears up the degeneracies somewhat, as seen in Figure 16, with
and without systematics. Inclusion of curvature does not substantially increase the contours.
We emphasize that the wall in w0-wa space is not imposed a
priori and does not represent a breakdown of the parameterization, but a real physical effect from violating early matter domination. Nevertheless, we can ask what limits could be put on the
early dark energy behavior—either its presence or its equation of state—if we do not use the w0-wa parameterization. A
simple but general model for w(z) creates a series of redshift
bins and assumes w is constant over each bin. The constraints
from this are shown in Figure 17. Note that the data points are
correlated.
Riess et al. made a somewhat similar investigation with
the emphasis on the impact of the highest-redshift SNe. A difference to the work of Riess et al. is that we do not decorrelate the constraints in the different redshift bins. While this
implies that the binwise constraints shown in Figure 17 are correlated, it ensures that the w-constraints shown for a given bin
are conﬁned to the exact redshift range of the bin. If instead
one applies a decorrelation procedure, some of the tight constraints from lower redshifts feed through to higher redshifts
(i.e., z > 1). See de Putter & Linder for general discussion of this issue. Unlike Riess et al. we additionally place
a w bin at higher redshift than the SN data (z > 2), to account
for the expansion history of the early universe, and do not ﬁx w in
this bin. The Riess ‘‘strong’’ prior has a fourth bin for z > 1:8,
but ﬁxes w ¼ 1. The ‘‘strongest’’ prior does not have a fourth
bin. Forcing either of these behaviors on the z > 2 universe
results in unfairly tight constraints and the danger of bias ; in failing to separate the SN
bins from those of the CMB and BAO essentially the entire
constraint in the redshift zk 1 bin is from the CMB .
Consider the top row of Figure 17. These results are for bins
with z < 0:5, 0:5 < z < 1:0, 1:0 < z < 2:0, and z > 2:0. The
only constraint that can be concluded from the highest-redshift
bin is that w½2;1 P 0, but this constraint comes entirely from
CMB and BAO, which requires that the early universe is matterdominated (see the above discussion of the wall in the wa-w0
plane). We then look at the z ¼ 1 2 bin for constraints on w,
which would be due to the z > 1 SNe and we ﬁnd essentially no
constraint.
The lowest-redshift bin is constrained to w½0;0:5  1  0:1.
The next bin is compatible with 1, but the central value is
high. This deviation from 1 seems to be due to the unexpected
brightness (by about 0.1 mag) of the Hubble data at z > 1 (see
Fig. 10). (Recall that w at some z inﬂuences distances at larger
redshifts.) We clearly see that to be sensitive to appreciable deviations from w ¼ 1 such as 0.1 mag at z  1, which is key
to constraining theories of dark energy, one requires better statistics for the very high-redshift supernovae (and comparably
good systematics).
Given that the strongest constraints on w are contained in the
ﬁrst bin, one might attempt to search for a redshift dependence of
w at lower redshifts by changing the borders of the bins. The
smallest errors are obtained roughly with the binning z < 0:1,
Fig. 15.—Contours at 68.3%, 95.4%, and 99.7% conﬁdence level on  and M
obtained from CMB, BAO, and the Union SN set, as well as their combination (assuming w ¼ 1). [See the electronic edition of the Journal for a color version of this
IMPROVED COSMOLOGICAL CONSTRAINTS
No. 2, 2008
Fig. 16.—Contours at 68.3%, 95.4%, and 99.7% conﬁdence level on wa and w0 for a ﬂat universe. Left: The Union SN set was combined with CMB or BAO constraints.
Right: Combination of SNe, CMB, and BAO data, with and without systematic uncertainties included. The diagonal line represents w0 þ wa ¼ 0; note how the likelihoods
based on observational data remain below it, favoring matter domination at z 3 1. [See the electronic edition of the Journal for a color version of this ﬁgure.]
Fig. 17.—Constraints at 68% conﬁdence level on w(z), where w(z) is assumed to be constant over each redshift bin. The left column combines the Union SN set with
BAO constraints only, while the right column includes also constraints from the CMB. The top row illustrates the fact that only extremely weak constraints on the
equation of state exist at z > 1. The bottom row shows a different binning that minimizes the mean bin error. Note that for z > 2 (dark gray: No SN constraint) only upper
limits exist, basically enforcing matter domination, coming from either CMB data or, in the case without CMB data, from requiring substantial structure formation
(a linear growth factor within a factor of 10 of that observed).
0:1 < z < 0:4, 0:4 < z < 2:0, and 2:0 < z. These constraints
are shown in the bottom row of Figure 17. The results are similar to the results from the other binning, with the lowest two
bins centered around w ¼ 1 and the next bin centered around a
more positive value. No signiﬁcant redshift dependence is observed. Note the tight limit on the 0:4 < z < 2 bin is not saying
w(z > 1)  1, even approximately, since the leverage on w(z)
is coming from the 0:4 < z < 1 part of the bin (this illustrates
the importance of considering multiple binnings).
To sum up, even in combination with current BAO and CMB
data, current SN data sets cannot tell us whether an energy
density component other than matter existed at z > 1 and cannot
tell us whether such a component, if it existed, had an equation of
state with negative pressure. In the future, however, SN data that
achieve Hubble diagram accuracy of 0.02 mag out to z ¼ 1:7
will be able to address these questions and provide independent
checks of the z > 1 universe.
Note that while constraints on a possible redshift dependency of w have been shown in Figures 16 and 17, we do not
present values for the projected, one-dimensional constraints
for several reasons. First, the bounds are still very weak and
as a result the error bars show highly non-Gaussian errors (as
visible in Fig. 16). In addition, our treatment of systematic errors has not been optimized for a redshift-dependent w and a
potential systematic redshift dependence of the distance modulus is only partially taken into account. As a consequence, the
resulting (already large) systematic errors on w(z) would be
underestimated.
In this analysis so far we have not excluded any SNe based on
extreme values of stretch or color, therefore including also the
peculiar class of underluminous 1991bg-like SNe that are typically associated with small stretch values. After unblinding, in
an effort to study the robustness of our results, we have introduced a stretch cut, s > 0:6, to eliminate SN1991bg-like SNe
from the sample. The most signiﬁcant consequence of this cut
came with the removal of SN 1995ap, a supernova in the Riess
et al. sample. By itself the removal of this one supernova can change the cosmological ﬁtted parameters in the
M- and M-w planes by nearly 1  along the more degenerate contour axis (and away from a ﬂat universe). However, without SN 1995ap, the test for tension between data sets
that we applied in x 4.4 would show the Riess et al. data
set to be a 3.5  outlier and one would be forced, unless the
tension can be resolved otherwise, to remove the data set from
the compilation. The net result of the s > 0:6 cut would then be a
0.25  change in w; M, and  in the direction of the more
degenerate contour axis. The results presented in this paper are
based on the sample without the stretch cut; however, since the
parameters along the direction of the degeneracy are well constrained once CMB or BAO data are added, the combined constraints essentially do not depend on whether or not the stretch
cut is applied.
7. CONCLUSION
The cosmological parameter constraints from the Union SN Ia
compilation shown in Figures 12, 14, 16, and 17 reﬂect the current best knowledge of the world’s Type Ia supernova data sets.
Speciﬁcally, in addition to the older data, they include the new
data sets of nearby Hubble-ﬂow SNe Ia we presented in this
paper, the recent large, homogeneous, high–S/N SNLS and
ESSENCE data sets published by Astier et al. and Miknaitis
et al. as well as the high-redshift supernovae in Riess et al.
 . Equally important is that a number of outstanding
analysis issues have been addressed that improve the reliability and reduce the biases of the current Union SN Ia compilation,
and should stand us in good stead for future compilations. We are
making the ingredients and results of the Union compilation available at the associated Web site (see footnote 42), and we intend to
provide occasional updates to this as new information becomes
available.
Several conclusions can be drawn from the new larger SCP
Union SN Ia compilation that could not be approached with smaller
data sets. In particular, the large statistics can be used to address
systematic uncertainties in novel ways.
We test for evolution by subdividing the sample into low-stretch
and high-stretch SNe. According to recent evidence these two samples might be dominated by different progenitor systems , which are likely to show different evolutions. Hence, performing consistent but independent cosmology ﬁts for the two
subsamples provides a powerful test for potential evolutionary
effects. The resulting cosmological ﬁtted parameters are found
to be consistent. This comparison is particularly meaningful,
as the statistical uncertainties from the subsamples are comparable to the total (stat+sys) uncertainties obtained from the full
With the larger Union data set, it is possible to begin to examine the rate of true outliers from the Hubble-plot ﬁt. It appears
that the current selection criteria for SNe Ia can ﬁnd very homogeneous sets of supernovae, but not perfectly homogeneous sets.
With these criteria, there are apparently true outliers, at the percent
level for the SNLS sample and up to 10% for other samples. The
analysis performed here was made robust to outliers, reducing the
associated error on cosmological parameters to a level comparable
to other sources of systematic error.
Compilations offer the chance to test for observer-dependent
systematic effects, i.e., tension between the data sets. The blind
analysis performed here is an important element in rigorous estimation of systematics. While in general we ﬁnd a high degree of
consistency between samples, we see modest tension when comparing the slope of the Hubble residuals as a function of redshift,
d/dz. For the present compilation, our cosmology results are expected to hold within the quoted systematic uncertainties. However,
once the homogeneous data sets get larger—and the systematic
errors dominate over the statistical ones for the different sets—
such tests will become even more important, as they allow one to
perform cross-checks with different data sets calibrated in different ways. Future data samples can be added to the Union set, by
ﬁrst blinding the data and then performing a diagnostic analysis
similar to the one performed here. Only after any inconsistencies
can be resolved, would the new data be unblinded.
We proposed a scheme to incorporate both sample-dependent
and common systematic errors. We showed in x 5 that systematic
errors can be approached by treating the systematics as a normal
distribution of a parameterized systematic term. We ﬁnd that the
combination of SNe constraints with CMB constraints, due to their
larger complementarity with SNe data, results in smaller systematic errors than the combination with BAO constraints. Adding
BAO, CMB, and SNe constraints leads to yet smaller statistical error bars, while the error bars including systematics do not
The robustness of the detection of the accelerating expansion of the universe is continually increasing as improved systematics analysis is reinforced by larger SN data sets. The current
IMPROVED COSMOLOGICAL CONSTRAINTS
knowledge of the nature of dark energy is still modest, however,
with the uncertainty on the assumed-constant equation of state
only under 10% if multiple probes are combined. The current
‘‘world’’ estimate presented here employing the full set of
current SN data, plus other measurements, gives a best constraint of w ¼ 0:969þ0:059
0:063(stat)þ0:063
0:066(sys) on a constant EOS
parameter w at 68.3% conﬁdence level. However, allowing for
time variation in the dark energy equation of state further opens
the possibilities for the physics driving the acceleration, consistent with all current observations. In particular, present SN
data sets do not have the sensitivity to answer the questions of
whether dark energy persists to z > 1 or whether it had negative
pressure then.
On the positive side, with the more sophisticated analyses and
tests carried out here, we still have encountered no limits to the
potential use of future, high-accuracy SN data as cosmological
probes. New data sets for nearby, moderate-redshift, and highredshift well-characterized SNe Ia are forthcoming and we expect realistic, robust constraints to catch up with our optimistic
hopes on understanding the accelerating universe.
This work is based on observations made with: the Lick and
Keck Observatories; the Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory4 m Blanco Telescope;theYale/AURA/Lisbon/OSU (YALO)
1 m Telescope at Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory; the
Apache Point Observatory 3.5 m telescope, which is owned and
operated by the Astrophysical Research Consortium; the WIYN
Observatory, owned and operated by the WIYN Consortium,
which consists of the University of Wisconsin, Indiana University,
Yale University, and the National Optical Astronomy Observatory
(NOAO); the Isaac Newton Telescope, which is operated on the
island of La Palma by the Isaac Newton Group in the Spanish
Observatorio del Roque de los Muchachos of the Instituto de
Astrofı´sica Canarias; the Nordic Optical Telescope, operated on
the island of La Palma jointly by Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Norway, and Sweden, in the Spanish Observatorio del Roque
de los Muchachos of the Instituto de Astroﬁsica de Canarias;
and the MDM Observatory 2.4 m Hiltner Telescope. The authors
wish to thank the telescope allocation committees and the observatory staffs for their support for the extensive supernova search
campaign and follow-up observations that contributed to the results reported here. In particular, we wish to thank C. Bailyn and
S. Tourtellotte for assistance with YALO observations, D. Harner
for obtaining WIYN data, and D. Folha and S. Smartt for the
INT 2.5 m service observing. For their efforts in the coordinated
supernova search, we wish to acknowledge the NEATsearch team
(E. Helin, S. Pravdo, D. Rabinowitz, and K. Lawrence) at JPL and
the Spacewatch program at the University of Arizona (which includes R. S. McMillan, T. Gehrels, J.A. Larsen, J. L. Montani,
J. V. Scotti, N. Danzl, and A. Gleason). We also wish to thank
B. Schmidt, A. Filippenko, M. Schwartz, A. Gal-Yam, and
D. Maoz for providing us with early announcements of supernova candidates.
This work was supported in part by the Director, Ofﬁce of
Science, Ofﬁce of High Energy and Nuclear Physics, US Department of Energy, through contract DE-AC02-05CH11231.
This research used resources of the National Energy Research
Scientiﬁc Computing Center, which is supported by the Ofﬁce
of Science of the US Department of Energy under contract DE-
AC02-05CH11231. The use of Portuguese time for the YALO
telescope was supported by Fundac¸a˜o para a Cieˆncia e Tecnologia, Portugal, and by Project PESO/ESO/P/PRO/1257/98.
M. K. acknowledges support from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). P. E. N. acknowledges support from the
US Department of Energy Scientiﬁc Discovery through Advanced
Computing program under contract DE-FG02-06ER06-04. A. M.
M. acknowledges ﬁnancial support from Fundac¸a˜o para a Cieˆncia
e Tecnologia (FCT), Portugal, through project PESO/P/PRO/
APPENDIX A
INSTRUMENTS AND COLOR TERMS
The color terms obtained for all instruments are summarized in Table 7. Table 8 shows the applied shifts of the passbands, which are
needed to reproduce the colors of the observed standard and ﬁeld stars.
Color Terms for Instruments and Bands
Telescope and Instrument
CTIO 1.5 m SITE2K6...................
0.095 (0.003)
0.029 (0.001)
0.028 (0.002)
0.018 (0.001)
CTIO 1.5 m TK1...........................
0.017 (0.002)
0.037 (0.001)
0.026 (0.002)
0.015 (0.001)
CTIO 0.9 m TK2...........................
0.097 (0.005)
0.016 (0.002)
0.006 (0.004)
0.022 (0.002)
DANISH DFOSC ..........................
0.133 (0.002)
0.033 (0.001)
0.067 (0.001)
0.000 (0.3001)
JKT Tek1 .......................................
0.055 (0.006)
0.020 (0.004)
0.030 (0.008)
0.053 (0.007)
LICK 1 m DEWAR2.....................
0.094 (0.007)
0.026 (0.007)
0.052 (0.007)
0.018 (0.004)
LICK 1 m DEWAR5.....................
0.226 (0.033)
0.073 (0.016)
0.106 (0.007)
0.034 (0.002)
YALO ANDICAM.........................
0.094 (0.002)
0.035 (0.001)
0.373 (0.002)
0.041 (0.001)
ESO 3.6 m EFOSC........................
0.048 (0.005)
0.048 (0.002)
0.048 (0.002)
0.010 (0.001)
KPNO 2.1 m T1KA ......................
0.103 (0.006)
0.021 (0.002)
0.029 (0.007)
0.023 (0.002)
CFHT STIS2..................................
0.105 (0.009)
0.002 (0.009)
0.079 (0.005)
0.043 (0.002)
WIYN S2KB..................................
0.059 (0.019)
0.002 (0.019)
0.018 (0.035)
0.016 (0.015)
MARLY .........................................
0.296 (0.003)
0.017 (0.002)
KOWALSKI ET AL.
APPENDIX B
TERTIARY STANDARD STAR CATALOG
Table 9 lists the coordinates and magnitudes of the tertiary calibration stars.
The Applied Shifts of the Passbands, Which Are Needed to Reproduce the Colors
of the Observed Standard and Field Stars
Instrument
CTIO 1.5 m SITE2K6...................................
CTIO 1.5 m SITE2K6 (small) ......................
CTIO 1.5 m TK1...........................................
CTIO 0.9 m TK2...........................................
DANISH DFOSC ..........................................
JKT Tek1 .......................................................
LICK 1 m DEWAR5 (small).........................
LICK 1 m DEWAR2.....................................
LICK 1 m DEWAR5.....................................
YALO ANDICAM.........................................
ESO 3.6 m EFOSC........................................
KPNO 2.1 m T1KA ......................................
CFHT STIS2..................................................
Coordinates and Magnitudes of Tertiary Calibration Stars
R.A. (J2000.0)
Decl. (J2000.0)
1............................
08 27 37.43
21 31 18.8
14.495 (0.003)
0.5145 (0.006)
0.3005 (0.005)
0.6109 (0.006)
2............................
08 27 41.27
21 25 01.9
14.978 (0.006)
0.6927 (0.013)
0.4188 (0.004)
0.2622 (0.008)
3............................
08 28 02.64
21 33 56.1
14.817 (0.005)
0.9347 (0.014)
0.4969 (0.004)
0.1772 (0.012)
4............................
08 27 38.16
21 29 54.5
15.115 (0.004)
0.6558 (0.008)
0.4143 (0.004)
0.7879 (0.006)
5............................
08 27 47.99
21 33 01.1
15.550 (0.007)
0.5243 (0.010)
0.3240 (0.005)
0.6872 (0.007)
6............................
08 27 44.64
21 31 11.6
15.382 (0.004)
0.7130 (0.010)
0.4010 (0.004)
0.7809 (0.007)
7............................
08 27 48.47
21 33 20.1
15.575 (0.008)
0.5614 (0.016)
0.3434 (0.006)
0.7287 (0.008)
8............................
08 27 21.11
21 29 17.8
15.438 (0.007)
0.7989 (0.015)
0.4610 (0.005)
0.8839 (0.007)
9............................
08 27 55.51
21 24 46.4
15.693 (0.008)
0.6203 (0.018)
0.3835 (0.006)
0.8045 (0.008)
10..........................
08 27 29.04
21 27 07.9
15.514 (0.006)
0.8045 (0.013)
0.4345 (0.005)
0.6378 (0.008)
Note.—Units of right ascension are hours, minutes, and seconds, and units of declination are degrees, arcminutes, and arcseconds. Uncertainties are given in
parentheses. Table 9 is available in its entirety in the electronic edition of the Astrophysical Journal. A portion is shown here for guidance regarding its form and
IMPROVED COSMOLOGICAL CONSTRAINTS
No. 2, 2008
APPENDIX C
LIGHT CURVES FROM THE NEARBY SUPERNOVA CAMPAIGN
Table 10 shows the BVRI magnitudes from the Nearby Supernova Campaign. The ﬁtted light curve parameters of all SNe can be
found in Table 11.
Supernovae of the Union Compilation
1993ag....................
17.79 (0.05)
0.91 (0.02)
0.09 (0.02)
36.77 (0.15)
1993o......................
17.61 (0.05)
0.90 (0.01)
0.01 (0.02)
36.82 (0.15)
1993h......................
16.74 (0.09)
0.68 (0.01)
0.21 (0.01)
35.17 (0.17)
1993b......................
18.38 (0.09)
0.99 (0.03)
0.04 (0.04)
37.57 (0.15)
1992bs....................
18.18 (0.05)
1.00 (0.02)
0.03 (0.02)
37.55 (0.15)
1992br ....................
19.40 (0.11)
0.65 (0.04)
0.03 (0.05)
38.19 (0.16)
1992bp....................
18.28 (0.03)
0.87 (0.02)
0.04 (0.02)
37.52 (0.15)
1992bo....................
15.75 (0.13)
0.74 (0.01)
0.03 (0.01)
34.65 (0.19)
1992bl ....................
17.29 (0.06)
0.79 (0.02)
0.01 (0.02)
36.36 (0.15)
1992bh....................
17.59 (0.05)
0.98 (0.01)
0.10 (0.01)
36.66 (0.15)
Notes.—Uncertainties are given in parentheses. Explanation of cuts: (o) 3  outlier; (p) insufﬁcient early data; (c) no color; (d) too few
data points; (f) ﬁt not converged. Table 11 is available in its entirety in the electronic edition of the Astrophysical Journal. A portion is
shown here for guidance regarding its form and content.
References.—(1) Hamuy et al. 1996; (2) Krisciunas et al. 2004a, 2004b; (3) Riess et al. 1999; (4) Jha et al. 2006; (5) this work;
(6) Riess et al. 1998 + HZT; (7) Perlmutter et al. 1999; (8) Tonry et al. 2003; (9) Barris et al. 2004; (10) Knop et al. 2003; (11) Riess et al.
2007; (12) Astier et al. 2006; (13) Miknaitis et al. 2007.
BVRI Magnitudes
221.81.............
LICK 1 m DEWAR2
15.828 (0.032)
222.67.............
15.642 (0.018)
15.680 (0.028)
15.689 (0.040)
15.717 (0.105)
223.67.............
15.462 (0.020)
15.486 (0.036)
15.514 (0.083)
225.65.............
15.211 (0.017)
15.260 (0.028)
15.276 (0.030)
15.312 (0.025)
227.73.............
LICK 1 m DEWAR2
15.006 (0.016)
15.060 (0.024)
15.080 (0.018)
229.62.............
14.924 (0.017)
14.965 (0.026)
15.092 (0.030)
232.61.............
14.908 (0.017)
14.913 (0.028)
15.062 (0.030)
15.253 (0.025)
235.60.............
14.919 (0.021)
14.898 (0.032)
15.037 (0.031)
15.307 (0.029)
241.60.............
15.183 (0.013)
15.062 (0.027)
15.266 (0.030)
15.575 (0.024)
243.88.............
LICK 1 m DEWAR5
15.236 (0.051)
15.724 (0.039)
Notes.—Uncertainties are given in parentheses. Table 10 is available in its entirety in the electronic edition of the Astrophysical
Journal. A portion is shown here for guidance regarding its form and content.
KOWALSKI ET AL.
APPENDIX D
LIGHT CURVE DATA FROM PERLMUTTER ET AL.
The photometric light curve data from the 42 supernovae of Perlmutter et al. are shown in Table 12.