The YAGO-NAGA Approach to Knowledge Discovery
Gjergji Kasneci, Maya Ramanath, Fabian Suchanek, Gerhard Weikum
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
D-66123 Saarbruecken, Germany
kasneci,ramanath,suchanek, 
This paper gives an overview on the YAGO-NAGA approach to information extraction for building a conveniently searchable, large-scale, highly accurate knowledge base of common facts. YAGO harvests infoboxes
and category names of Wikipedia for facts about individual entities, and it reconciles these with the taxonomic backbone of WordNet in order to ensure that all
entities have proper classes and the class system is consistent. Currently, the YAGO knowledge base contains
about 19 million instances of binary relations for about
1.95 million entities. Based on intensive sampling, its
accuracy is estimated to be above 95 percent. The paper presents the architecture of the YAGO extractor
toolkit, its distinctive approach to consistency checking,
its provisions for maintenance and further growth, and
the query engine for YAGO, coined NAGA. It also discusses ongoing work on extensions towards integrating
fact candidates extracted from natural-language text
INTRODUCTION
Universal, comprehensive knowledge bases have been
an elusive AI goal for many years. Ontologies and thesauri such as OpenCyc, SUMO, WordNet, or UMLS
(for the biomedical domain) are achievements along this
But they are typically focused on intensional
knowledge about semantic classes. For example, they
would know that mathematicians are scientists, that
scientists are humans (and mammals and vertebrates,
etc.); and they may also know that humans are either
male or female, cannot ﬂy (without tools) but can compose and play music, and so on. However, the currently
available ontologies typically disregard the extensional
knowledge about individual entities: instances of the
semantic classes that are captured and interconnected
in the ontology. For example, none of the above mentioned ontologies knows more than a handful of concrete mathematicians (or famous biologists etc.). Today, the best source for extensional knowledge is probably Wikipedia, providing a wealth of knowledge about
individual entities and their relationships. But most of
this knowledge is only latent, by being embedded in the
natural-language text of Wikipedia articles or, in the
best case, reﬂected in the semistructured components
of Wikipedia: infoboxes and the category system.
A comprehensive knowledge base should know all individual entities of this world (e.g., Nicolas Sarkozy),
their semantic classes (e.g., Sarkozy isa Politician), relationships between entities (e.g., Sarkozy presidentOf
France), as well as validity times and conﬁdence values
for the correctness of such facts. Moreover, it should
come with logical reasoning capabilities and rich support for querying. The beneﬁts from solving this grand
challenge would be enormous.
Potential applications
include but would not be limited to:
1. a machine-readable, formalized encyclopedia that
can be queried with high precision like a semantic
2. an enabler for semantic search on the Web, for
detecting entities and relations in Web pages and
reasoning about them in expressive (probabilistic)
3. a backbone for natural-language question answering that would aid in dealing with entities and
their relationships in answering who/where/when/
etc. questions;
4. a key asset for machine translation (e.g., English
to German) and interpretation of spoken dialogs,
where world knowledge provides essential context
for disambiguation;
5. a catalyst for acquisition of further knowledge and
largely automated maintenance and growth of the
knowledge base.
To illustrate the ﬁrst two points, consider the following
diﬃcult “knowledge queries” that a student, journalist,
or researcher may pose to the Web:
Q1: Which Grammy winners were born in Europe?
Q2: Which French politicans are married to singers?
Q3: Which Nobel prize winners had an academic advisor who graduated from the same university?
Q4: Give me a comprehensive list of HIV drugs that
inhibit proteases (a speciﬁc family of enzymes).
Figure 1: Excerpt of the YAGO Knowledge Base
Regardless of how well these information needs are
formulated as keyword queries or question phrases, current search engines would hardly produce good answers.
In the best case, the user would have to browse through
many potentially relevant pages and manually compile
the bits and pieces of the desired answers.
knowledge base would support precise query formulation (not necessarily in natural language) that explicitly
indicates entities and relations, and would provide the
best answers in a concise manner.
This paper gives an overview of the YAGO-NAGA1
approach to automatically building and maintaining a
conveniently searchable, large and highly accurate knowledge base, by applying information-extraction (IE) methods to Wikipedia and other sources of latent knowledge.
The project started in summer 2006 at the Max Planck
Institute for Informatics, with continuous enhancements
and extensions.
The YAGO knowledge base represents all facts in the
form of unary and binary relations: classes of individual entities, and pairs of entities connected by speciﬁc
relationship types. This data model can be seen as a
typed graph with entities and classes corresponding to
nodes and relations corresponding to edges. It can also
be interpreted as a collection of RDF triples with two
adjacent nodes and their connecting edge denoting a
1YAGO = Yet Another Great Ontology
NAGA = Not Another Google Answer
(subject, predicate, object) triple. Figure 1 shows an
excerpt of the knowledge base.
The knowledge base
is publicly available at 
~suchanek/yago. It can be queried for knowledge discovery by the NAGA search engine. An online demo is
accessible at 
Section 2 outlines the architecture of YAGO. Section
3 presents the extractor toolkit for building the YAGO
core knowledge base. Section 4 presents the consistency
checking methods, which ensure the high accuracy of
YAGO’s facts.
Section 5 discusses our ongoing work
on how YAGO can be automatically maintained and
further grown. Section 6 presents the NAGA model and
system for querying YAGO and ranking search results.
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
The YAGO architecture is depicted in Figure 2. In
contrast to many other IE projects, YAGO emphasizes
high accuracy and the consistency of the harvested knowledge rather than aiming for high recall (coverage) of
facts. YAGO primarily gathers its knowledge by integrating information from Wikipedia and WordNet. It
performs rule-based IE on the infoboxes and category
system of Wikipedia, and reconciles the resulting facts
with WordNet’s taxonomical class system. This is done
by performing consistency checks whenever a new fact
is considered for addition to the knowledge base. This
approach resulted in the YAGO core knowledge base , currently containing 249,015 classes, 1,941,578 individual entities, and about 19 million facts (instances
of binary relations) for 93 diﬀerent relations.
Extensive sampling showed that the accuracy is at least 95
percent , and many of the remaining errors (false
positives) are due to entries in Wikipedia itself (which
we considered as ground truth).
As the rule-based core extractors are limited in coverage, YAGO can also employ pattern-, NLP- and learningbased IE techniques on text sources such as
Wikipedia texts, news articles, research literature, or
Web pages of interest and clear style. These techniques,
in combination with the diversity and mixed quality of
the sources, introduce a higher risk of degrading in precision, and are computationally much more expensive.
Therefore, the text-oriented harvesting of YAGO is carried out in two phases. The gathering phase employs
recall-oriented IE methods, and aims at high throughput. The output is interpreted as a set of fact hypotheses. Subsequently, the scrutinizing phase assesses the
hypotheses against the existing knowledge base, in a
batched manner, and ﬁlters out facts that show high indication of being inconsistent with essential invariants
and prior knowledge .
Wikipedia Categories. As for the category system,
the Wikipedia community has manually placed (the article about) Nicolas Sarkozy into categories such as:
Presidents of France, L´egion d’honneur recipients, or
Alumni of Sciences Po (the Paris Institute of Political
Studies). These give YAGO clues about instanceOf relations, and we can infer that the entity Nicolas Sarkozy
is an instance of the classes PresidentsOfFrance, L´egionD’HonneurRecipients, and
AlumniOfSciencesPo.
Occasionally, YAGO encounters a misleading category
name that does not indicate a class membership (instanceOf). An example is the category Hollywood Walk
of Fame, which includes many actors and musicians.
Semantically, however, these people are not instances
of a class Walk (which would be a subclass of Motion),
nor are they instances of some superclass Awards but
rather awards winners which in turn would be a subclass of humans. YAGO employs linguistic processing
(noun phrase parsing) and also some heuristics (e.g.,
the head word in the noun phrase should be in plural
form), in order to cope with these pitfalls and achieve
high accuracy in harvesting the category system.
Ongoing Work:
Temporal Validity.
is dynamic, and facts change with time.
ran YAGO on Wikipedia in spring 2007, we extracted
the fact Jacques Chirac presidentOf France, seemingly
contradicting our current result Nicolas Sarkozy presidentOf France. To resolve this situation, we need temporal annotations for facts. To ensure that our knowledge model is not inﬂated with ad-hoc features, we decided to adapt the reiﬁcation technique of RDF and use
our standard binary-relation approach to represent validity times. This works as follows. Both of the above
facts have identiﬁers, say Id1 (for the fact about Chirac)
and Id2 (for the fact about Sarkozy), to which we can
refer in other facts. We create additional facts like Id1
ValidSince 17 May 1995, Id1 ValidUntil 16 May 2007,
and Id2 ValidSince 17 May 2007. This technique is general, it can also be used to represent arbitrary ternary
and higher-arity relations in our model. Likewise, metarelations such as witnesses for a fact - remembering
sources that support a fact’s validity, use the same representation.
In principle, YAGO could also handle divorces and
identify spouses for speciﬁc time periods, but often this
kind of information is not available in the semistructured parts of Wikipedia. Therefore, we have starting
working on specialized text-oriented extractors with the
speciﬁc target of detecting validity times. One problem
in this task is that temporal statements often refer to
relative timepoints (e.g., last Monday), have diﬀerent
granularities such as “May 2007” vs. “17 May 2007”, or
are incomplete (e.g., showing either an “until”or “since”
statement but not both, even for terminated intervals).
To deal with these situations, we represent every timepoint as a pair of (earliest, latest) intervals and use
plus/minus inﬁnity for missing information in such an
interval. As we ﬁnd more accurate or complete time
statements or gather more evidence for certain facts in
the IE process, we can reﬁne the temporal facts in the
knowledge base .
YAGO CONSISTENCY CHECKERS
Rationale.
YAGO pays particular attention to the
consistency of its knowledge base.
Solely performing
IE on infoboxes and categories of Wikipedia may result in a large but incoherent collection of facts: redundant and potentially inconsistent, overly speciﬁc in
some parts and left blank in others in an arbitrary way.
For example, we may know that Nicolas Sarkozy is an
instance of PresidentsOfFrance, but we may not be able
to automatically infer that he is also an instance of Presidents and most likely also an instance of FrenchPeople.
Likewise, the fact that he is a president (or minister of
the interior or mayor to also include former positions)
does not automatically tell us that he is a politician.
To overcome these problems, YAGO intensively uses
the WordNet thesaurus and integrates the facts from
Wikipedia with the taxonomic backbone provided by
WordNet, using techniques outlined in the rest of this
Class Hierarchy. YAGO initializes its class system by
importing all WordNet classes and their hypernymy/
hyponymy (superclass/subclass) relations. Each individual entity that YAGO discovers in Wikipedia needs
to be mapped into at least one of the existing YAGO
If this fails, the entity and its related facts
are not admitted to the knowledge base. Analogously,
classes that are derived from Wikipedia category names
such as PresidentsOfFrance need to be mapped, with a
subclassOf relationship, to one or more proper superclasses such as Presidents or FrenchPeople. These procedures ensure that we can maintain a consistent knowledge base, where consistency eliminates dangling entities or classes and also guarantees that the subclassOf
relation is acyclic. The empirically assessed accuracy of
the subclassOf relation is around 97 percent.
Type Conditions. As all entities are typed by their
assignment to one or more classes, binary relations have
a type signature as well. For example, the isCEOof relation can be speciﬁed to have a domain BusinessPerson
or simply Person and a range Company (where we denote relations as powerset functions). When the extractor produces a candidate fact like Nicolas Sarkozy is-
CEOof France, we can reject it because the second argument, France, is not a company. Similarly, the hypothesis Nicolas Sarkozy marriedTo ´Elys´ee Palace which may,
perhaps, be incorrectly inferred from sentences such as
“Nicolas Sarkozy loves his work with the ´Elys´ee Palace”
(or from an incorrect interpretation of the infobox attribute Residence), is falsiﬁed by the type invariant that
marriages are between persons.
Ongoing Work: Constraints on Relations. A very
powerful constraint for the consistency of IE results is
declaring a relation to be transitive and acyclic (or requiring that its transitive closure is acyclic). The class
hierarchy is one important usage case; the locatedIn relation between geographic entities is another one. Going
even further, we are considering support for functional
dependencies, inclusion dependencies, and inverse relations. For example, a person can have only one birth
place, which would allow us to prune out many spurious
candidates for alternative birth places that we may see
in Web pages. As for inclusion dependencies, we can
derive Paris locatedIn France from the fact Paris capitalOf France, without necessarily seeing it in explicit
form. Finally, the presidentOf fact would be an example for exploiting inverse relations. Once we accept that
Nicolas Sarkozy presidentOf France, we could automatically infer that France hasPresident Nicolas Sarkozy
(for the same time interval).
GROWING YAGO
Keeping YAGO Up-To-Date. We can maintain the
YAGO knowledge base, with its current scope, by periodically re-running the extractors on Wikipedia and
WordNet. It takes a few hours to build the entire knowledge base. When validity times or intervals can be properly inferred, this would retain previously compiled facts
(e.g., former CEOs) as long as they do not cause any
inconsistencies.
Adding Natural-Language Text Sources. Further
growth of YAGO, beyond the harvesting of infoboxes
and category systems, calls for text-oriented IE with
more or less powerful NLP capabilities. Our own tool
LEILA can be employed for this purpose. It uses a
dependency-grammar parser for deep parsing of naturallanguage sentences, with heuristics for anaphora resolution (e.g., pronouns referring to subjects or objects in
a preceding sentence). This produces a tagged graph
representation, whose properties can be encoded as features for a statistical learner (e.g., an SVM) that classiﬁes fact candidates into acceptable facts vs. false hypotheses. LEILA provides reasonably good accuracy,
but requires about a minute to process a long Wikipedia
article on a standard PC, and works for one speciﬁc relation at a time. Simpler NLP methods, such as part-ofspeech tagging (for word categories: nouns, verbs, etc.),
are much faster but would have signiﬁcantly lower precision. Statistics, like frequencies of witnesses, can be
used to improve precision, but proper tuning of statistical thresholds is all but easy. The YAGO architecture
supports all these approaches. However, with the open
issues in understanding the three-way tradeoﬀs between
precision, recall, and eﬃciency, we do not yet employ
these techniques at large scale.
Ongoing Work. For growing YAGO we can leverage
the existing YAGO core in several ways.
We believe
that the core contains more or less all entities of interest and their most important classes. For example, all
notable politicians, athletes, pop stars, movies, cities,
rivers, etc.
should have a Wikipedia entry, and thus
are included in YAGO, too.
Certainly, this does not
hold for classes like computer scientists, medical drugs,
But we could incorporate other sources such as
DBLP or UMLS, and adapt the YAGO extractors to
them. With the YAGO core as semantic backbone, we
can quickly test sentences, paragraphs, or entire Web
pages as to whether they contain one or two interesting entities. And when aiming at a particular binary
relation, we can exploit our type system: a sentence or
paragraph is promising only if it contains two entities
of the proper types. For example, for hypothesizing a
fact of the isCEOof relation, a sentence must contain a
person and a company to be worth undergoing deeper
analysis. Testing the type of an entity is a fast lookup
in the core knowledge base.
To preserve the consistency of YAGO when adding
new facts gathered with “riskier” IE methods, we can
utilize the type and constraint checkers that YAGO already has. For eﬃciency, we batch newly acquired facts
and run the consistency checking procedures for several thousand hypotheses together, dropping those that
violate vital checks or too many “soft constraints”.
QUERYING YAGO BY NAGA
Query Language. For querying the YAGO knowledge
base, we have designed a query language that builds on
the concepts of SPARQL (the W3C standard for querying RDF data), but extends these capabilities by more
expressive pattern matching.
Our prototype system,
NAGA (Not Another Google Answer) , implements
this query language and provides a statistical ranking
model for query results.
A query is a conjunction of fact templates, where each
template would have to be matched by an edge and its
incident nodes in the knowledge graph. For example,
the ﬁrst two example queries of Section 1 can be expressed as follows:
Q1: $x hasWonPrize GrammyAward,
$x bornIn $y,
$y locatedIn Europe
Q2: $x isa politician,
$x citizenOf France,
$x marriedTo $y,
$y isa singer
where $x and $y are variables for which we are seeking bindings so that all query patterns are matched together.
The relation names in the query can also be regular
expressions, which have to be matched by an entire path
in the knowledge graph. This is a powerful way of dealing with transitive relations and variants of relations
where the user may not exactly know by which relations
the entities of interest are connected. For example, if
the bornIn relation actually refers to cities and the locatedIn relation captures a city-county-state-country hierarchy, we should replace the last condition in Q1 by
the fact template $y (locatedIn)* Europe. And if we do
not care whether the persons that we are looking for are
born in Europe or are citizens of a European country,
we may use the template $y (citizenOf | bornIn | originatesFrom).(locatedIn)* Europe instead of the last two
conditions of Q1. Regular expressions are also helpful in
dealing with the class hierarchy in a ﬂexible way. In Q2
the relation label isa is actually a shorthand notation for
the regular expression instanceOf.(subclassOf)*, thus
enabling ministers or mayors, which are subclasses of
politicians, to be returned as query results.
The query language also provides support for formulating temporal conditions on the validity of the facts of
interest. For example, if we want to retrieve all French
presidents whose terms started in this millenium, we
can phrase this as:
f: ($x presidentOf France),
(f since $t),
 
We are working on enhancing the query language to provide more elaborate capabilities for temporal queries.
NAGA has further advanced features, most notably, for
specifying relatedness queries among a set of entities
 . For example, the query:
connect (Nicolas Sarkozy, Zinedine Zidane,
Gerard Depardieu, Miles Davis)
asks for commonalities or other relationships among
Sarkozy, the soccer player Zidane, the actor Depardieu,
and the trumpet player Miles Davis. A possible answer
(technically, a Steiner tree in the underlying knowledge
graph) could be that all four are recipients of the French
L´egion d’honneur order.
Ranking. Whenever queries return many results, e.g.,
hundreds of (mostly unimportant) politicians, we need
ranking. NAGA employs a novel kind of statistical language model (LM) for this purpose, capturing
the informativeness of a query result : users prefer
salient facts or interesting facts, e.g., Nicolas Sarkozy
and not the mayor of a small provincial town. In addition, we need to consider the conﬁdence that the result facts are indeed correct. Our IE methods assign a
conﬁdence weight to each fact f in the knowledge base
based on the empirically assessed goodness of the extractor and the extraction target (e.g., rule-based for
birthdates vs. linguistic for birth places) and the trustworthiness of the fact’s witnesses s (i.e., sources from
which it was extracted). One possible way of combining
these aspects (among various options) would be:
confidence(f) =
max {accuracy(f, s) × trust(s) | s ∈witnesses(f)}
where trustworthiness could be based on PageRankstyle authority or on empirical assessment by experts
(e.g., high for Wikipedia, low for blogs).
The conﬁdence in a query-result graph that consists of multiple
facts is the product of the individual facts’ conﬁdence
values, postulating statistical independence among the
For informativeness, NAGA employs an LM for graphstructured data. In the following we give a simpliﬁed
explanation of the model introduced in . Conceptually, we construct a statistical model for each possible
result graph g with connected edges (facts) gi, and consider the probability that the query q, consisting of fact
templates qi, was generated from g:
λP[qi|gi] + (1 −λ)P[qi]
where we factorize over edges for tractability and use
P[qi] for smoothing with parameter λ (analogously to
standard LM’s). Applying Bayes’ rule, simplifying the
resulting expression and omitting sub-expressions that
do not inﬂuence the ranking of results, we obtain:
We can interpret 1/P[qi] as an idf-style weighting of
the individual subqueries (emphasizing the more selective patterns in the query). The main parameters to
be estimated are the P[qi|gi] values, which reﬂect informativeness for the given query. We use a “background
corpus” for this purpose, either a large Web sample or
the entirety of Wikipedia texts. We compute the number of witnesses for gi, that is, the frequency of the
two entities (or classes) in gi co-occurring (in the same
sentence, paragraph, or Web page). Analogously, the
number of witnesses for qi is the frequency of the nonvariable parts of qi occurring together. Our current implementation precomputes these statistics based on the
Wikipedia corpus. With these ingredients we can ﬁnally
P[qi|gi] ≈#witnesses(gi)
#witnesses(qi)
For example, as partial results to query Q1, famous
Grammy winners such as Eric Clapton, Phil Collins,
or Enya should be among the highest ranked results.
For the overall scoring of query results, NAGA uses
a weighted linear combination of informativeness and
conﬁdence:
score(q, g) = α
confidence(gi)
Ongoing Work: Personalization. The notion of informativeness is, strictly speaking, a subjective measure: an individual user wants to see a salient result
that is also interesting to her. This calls for a personalized ranking model or at least a user-group-speciﬁc
model. An elegant property of the LM approach pursued in NAGA is that we can easily compose multiple
LM’s using a probabilistic mixture model. We can estimate parameters of a user- or community-speciﬁc LM
and combine this with a global LM, both models using
the same mathematical structure but diﬀerent parameters.
For the personalized LM, we monitor the history of
queries and browsing interactions on the online knowledge base. A click on a fact is interpreted as positive
feedback that the fact is interesting to the user, and this
evidence is spread to the graph neighborhood, with exponential decay and attention to the edge types along
which propagation is meaningful . As an example,
assume that a user has intensively explored epic movies
and orchestral music, and then poses query Q1. The
personalized ranking would prioritize European ﬁlmmusic composers such as Ennio Morricone, Hans Zimmer, or Javier Navarrete.
CONCLUSION
The YAGO core is publicly available and has been imported into and integrated with various other knowledgemanagement projects including DBpedia (dbpedia.org),
SUMO (www.ontologyportal.org), UMBEL (umbel.
org), and Freebase (www.freebase.com). Our ongoing
work to improve YAGO mostly centers around making
it larger while retaining its high accuracy. This entails
deeper considerations on scalability issues, for example,
by utilizing database-style query processing and optimization techniques, along the lines of .
YAGO shares many of its goals and methodologies
with parallel projects along related lines. These include
Avatar , Cimple/DBlife , DBpedia , Know-
ItAll/TextRunner , Kylin/KOG , and
the Libra technology (and probably more). Together they form an exciting trend of leading research
towards the elusive goal of machine-readable, comprehensive knowledge bases.