Matching Local Self-Similarities across Images and Videos
Eli Shechtman
Michal Irani
Dept. of Computer Science and Applied Math
The Weizmann Institute of Science
76100 Rehovot, Israel
We present an approach for measuring similarity between visual entities (images or videos) based on matching internal self-similarities.
What is correlated across
images (or across video sequences) is the internal layout of local self-similarities (up to some distortions), even
though the patterns generating those local self-similarities
are quite different in each of the images/videos. These internal self-similarities are efﬁciently captured by a compact local “self-similarity descriptor”, measured densely
throughout the image/video, at multiple scales, while accounting for local and global geometric distortions. This
gives rise to matching capabilities of complex visual data,
including detection of objects in real cluttered images using
only rough hand-sketches, handling textured objects with
no clear boundaries, and detecting complex actions in cluttered video data with no prior learning. We compare our
measure to commonly used image-based and video-based
similarity measures, and demonstrate its applicability to object detection, retrieval, and action detection.
1. Introduction
Determining similarity between visual data is necessary
in many computer vision tasks, including object detection
and recognition, action recognition, texture classiﬁcation,
data retrieval, tracking, image alignment, etc. Methods for
performing these tasks are usually based on representing
an image using some global or local image properties, and
comparing them using some similarity measure.
The relevant representations and the corresponding similarity measures can vary signiﬁcantly.
Images are often represented using dense photometric pixel-based properties or by compact region descriptors (features) often
used with interest point detectors.
Dense properties include raw pixel intensity or color values (of the entire image, of small patches or fragments ), texture
ﬁlters or other ﬁlter responses . Common compact region descriptors include distribution based descriptors (e.g., SIFT ), differential descriptors (e.g., local
derivatives ), shape-based descriptors using extracted
edges (e.g. Shape Context ), and others. For a comprehensive comparison of many region descriptors for image
matching see .
Figure 1. These images of the same object (a heart) do NOT share
common image properties (colors, textures, edges), but DO share
a similar geometric layout of local internal self-similarities.
Although these representations and their corresponding
measures vary signiﬁcantly, they all share the same basic
assumption – that there exists a common underlying visual
property (i.e., pixels colors, intensities, edges, gradients or
other ﬁlter responses) which is shared by the two images (or
sequences), and can therefore be extracted and compared
across images/sequences. This assumption, however, may
be too restrictive, as illustrated in Fig. 1. There is no obvious image property shared between those images. Nevertheless, we can clearly notice that these are instances of
the same object (a heart). What makes these images similar
is the fact that their local intensity patterns (in each image)
are repeated in nearby image locations in a similar relative
geometric layout. In other words, the local internal layouts of self-similarities are shared by these images, even
though the patterns generating those self-similarities are
not shared by those images. The notion of self similarity
in video sequences is even stronger than in images. E.g.,
people wear the same clothes in consecutive frames and
backgrounds tend to change gradually, resulting in strong
self-similar patterns in local space-time video regions.
In this paper we present a “local self-similarity descriptor” which captures internal geometric layouts of local
self-similarities within images/videos, while accounting for
small local afﬁne deformations. It captures self-similarity
of color, edges, repetitive patterns (e.g., the right image in
Fig. 1) and complex textures in a single uniﬁed way. A textured region in one image can be matched with a uniformly
colored region in the other image as long as they have a
similar spatial layout. These self-similarity descriptors are
estimated on a dense grid of points in image/video data, at
multiple scales. A good match between a pair of images (or
a pair of video sequences), corresponds to ﬁnding a matching ensemble of such descriptors – with similar descriptor
values at similar relative geometric positions, up to small
non-rigid deformations. This allows to match a wide vari-
ety of image and video types which are difﬁcult to match
otherwise: Complex objects in cluttered images are shown
to be detected with only rough hand sketches; Differently
textured instances of the same object are detected even if
there are no clear boundaries; Complex actions performed
by different people wearing different clothes with different
backgrounds, are detected with no prior learning, based on
a single example clip.
Self-similarity is closely related to the notion of statistical co-occurrence of pixel intensities across images, captured by Mutual Information (MI) . Alternatively, internal joint pixel statistics are often computed and extracted
from individual images and then compared across images
(e.g., ). Most of these methods are restricted to
measuring statistical co-occurrence of pixel-wise measures
(intensities, color, or simple local texture properties), and
are not easily extendable to co-occurrence of larger more
meaningful patterns such as image patches (in some cases,
such as MI, this limitation is due to the curse of dimensionality). Moreover, statistical co-occurrence is assumed to be
global (within the entire image) – a very strong assumption
which is often invalid. Some of these methods further require a prior learning phase with many examples .
In our approach, self-similarities are measured locally
(within a surrounding image region), and not globally. Our
framework explicitly models local and global geometric deformations of self-similarities. Furthermore, we use patches
(at different scales) as the basic unit for measuring internal
self-similarities (these capture more meaningful image patterns than individual pixels). Local self-similarities of image patterns have also been employed for the purpose of texture edge detection , for detecting symmetries , and
for other applications. The use of global self-similarity (between entire pre-aligned video frames) has also been proposed in video for gait recognition.
Finally, we compare our measure to several commonly
used image-based and video-based similarity measures, and
demonstrate its applicability to object detection, retrieval,
and action detection.
2. Overview of our approach
We would like to compare a “template” image F(x, y)
(or a video clip F(x, y, t)) to another image G(x, y) (or
video G(x, y, t)). F and G need not be of the same size.
In fact, in most of our examples, F is a small template (of
an object or action of interest), which is searched within a
larger G (a larger image, a longer video sequence, or a collection of images/videos).
“Corresponding” points in F and G can look very different (e.g., see Fig. 3). While measuring similarity across
images can be quite complex, the similarity within each image can be easily revealed with very simple similarity measures, such as a simple SSD (Sum of Square Differences),
Figure 2. Extracting the local “self-similarity” descriptor.
(a) at an image pixel.
(b) at a video pixel.
resulting in local self-similarity descriptors which can now
be matched across images (see Fig. 3).
We associate a “local self-similarity” descriptor dq with
every pixel q. This is done by correlating the image patch
centered at q with a larger surrounding image region (e.g.,
of radius 40 pixels), resulting in a local internal “correlation surface” (Fig. 2.a). We use the term “local” to denote
a small portion of the image (e.g., 5%) as opposed to the
entire image. The correlation surface is then transformed
into a binned log-polar representation (Fig 2.a). This
representation has two important beneﬁts: (i) It results in a
compact descriptor dq for every pixel q. (ii) This descriptor
accounts for increasing positional uncertainty with distance
from the pixel q, thus accounting for local spatial afﬁne deformations (i.e., small variations in scale, orientation,
and shear). On top of that, our descriptor accounts for additional local non-rigid deformations (see Sec. 3.1).
When matching video data – the patches, regions, correlation surfaces (volumes), and the self-similarity descriptors, are all space-time entities (Fig 2.b). The space-time
video descriptor accounts for local afﬁne deformations both
in space and in time (thus accommodating also small differences in speed of action). Sec. 3 describes in detail how
the local self-similarity descriptors are computed for images
and for video data.
In order to match an entire image/video F to G, we compute the local self-similarity descriptors dq densely throughout F and G . All the local descriptors in F form together
a single global “ensemble of descriptors”, which maintains
their relative geometric positions. A good match of F in G
corresponds to ﬁnding a similar ensemble of descriptors in
G – similar both in the descriptor values, and in their relative geometric positions (up to small local shifts, to account
for small deformations). This is described in Sec. 4.
We show results of applying this approach to detection
of complex objects in cluttered images (Sec. 5), to image
retrieval with simple hand sketches (Sec. 6), and to action
detection in complex videos (Sec. 7).
Corresponding “Self-similarity descriptors”.
show a few corresponding points (1,2,3) across two images of the
same object, with their “self-similarity”descriptors. Despite the
large difference in photometric properties between the two images,
their corresponding “self-similarity” descriptors are quite similar.
3. The local “self-similarity descriptor”
3.1. The Spatial image descriptor
Fig 2.a illustrates the procedure for generating the selfsimilarity descriptor dq associated with an image pixel q.
The surrounding image patch (typically 5 × 5) is compared
with a larger surrounding image region centered at q (typically of radius 40), using simple sum of square differences
(SSD) between patch colors (we used CIE L*a*b* space).
The resulting distance surface SSDq(x, y) is normalized
and transformed into a “correlation surface” Sq(x, y):
Sq(x, y) = exp
SSDq(x, y)
max (varnoise, varauto(q))
where varnoise is a constant that corresponds to acceptable photometric variations (in color, illumination or due
to noise), and varauto(q) takes into account the patch contrast and its pattern structure, such that sharp edges are more
tolerable to pattern variations than smooth patches. In our
implementation varauto(q) is the maximal variance of the
difference of all patches within a very small neighborhood
of q (of radius 1) relative to the patch centered at q.
The correlation surface Sq(x, y) is then transformed into
log-polar coordinates centered at q , and partitioned into 80
bins (20 angles, 4 radial intervals). We select the maximal
correlation value in each bin. The maximal values in those
bins form the 80 entries of our local “self-similarity descriptor” vector dq associated with the pixel q. Finally, this descriptor vector is normalized by linearly stretching its values to the range [0..1], in order to be invariant to the differences in pattern and color distribution of different patches
and their surrounding image regions.
Fig. 3 displays the local self-similarity descriptor computed at several corresponding image locations in two differently looking images of the same object. Note that despite the large difference in photometric properties between
the two images, their local self-similarity descriptors at corresponding image points (computed separately within each
image) are quite similar.
Properties & beneﬁts of the “self-similarity descriptor”:
(i) Self-similarities are treated as a local image property, and
are accordingly measured locally (within a surrounding image region), and not globally (within the entire image). This
extends the applicability of the descriptor to a wide range of
challenging images.
(ii) The log-polar representation accounts for local afﬁne
deformations in the self-similarities.
(iii) By choosing the maximal correlation value in each bin,
the descriptor becomes insensitive to the exact position of
the best matching patch within that bin (similar to the observation used for brain signal modelling, e.g. in ). Since
the bins increase in size with the radius, this allows for addition radially increasing non-rigid deformations.
(iv) The use of patches (at different scales) as the basic unit
for measuring internal self-similarities captures more meaningful image patterns than individual pixels. It treats colored regions, edges, lines and complex textures in a single
uniﬁed way. A textured region in one image can be matched
with a uniformly colored region or a differently textured region in the other image, as long as they have a similar spatial
layout, i.e., those regions have similar shapes. Note that this
is done without any explicit segmentation or edge detection,
and can thus also handle regions (textured or uniform) with
unclear boundaries.
3.2. The Space-time video descriptor
The notion of self similarity in video sequences is even
stronger than it is in images. People tend to wear the same
clothes in consecutive video frames and background scenes
tend to change gradually, resulting in strong self-similar
patterns in local space-time video regions.
The self-similarity descriptor presented in Sec. 3.1 is extended into space-time. Patches, regions, correlation surfaces (volumes), and the self-similarity descriptors, become
space-time entities (see Fig 2.b). In our implementation we
used 5 × 5 × 1 patches, correlated against a surrounding
60 × 60 × 5 space-time video region. The resulting “correlation volume” is transformed to a log-log-polar representation (logarithmic intervals both in space and in time, but
polar only in space, resulting in a cylindrically shaped volume – see Fig 2.b). The resulting self-similarity descriptor
vector is of size 182.
4. Matching global ensembles of local descriptors
In order to match an entire image/video F to G, we compute the local self-similarity descriptors dq densely throughout F and G. These descriptors are computed 5 pixels apart
from each other (in every image or video frame). All the
local descriptors in F form together a global “ensemble of
descriptors”. A good match of F in G corresponds to ﬁnding a similar ensemble of descriptors in G – similar both in
the descriptor values, and in their relative geometric positions (up to small local shifts, to account for small global
non-rigid deformations).
However, not all descriptors in the ensemble are informative. We ﬁrst ﬁlter out non-informative descriptors,
namely: (i) descriptors that do not capture any local selfsimilarity (i.e., whose center patch is salient, not similar
to any of the other patches in its surrounding image/video
region), and (ii) descriptors that contain high self-similarity
everywhere in their surrounding region (corresponding to
a large homogeneous region, i.e., a large uniformly colored
or uniformly-textured region). The former type of noninformative descriptors (saliency) are detected as descriptors whose entries are all below some threshold (before normalizing the descriptor vector – see Sec 3.1). The latter
type of non-informative descriptors (homogeneity) are detected by employing the sparseness measure of . Discarding non-informative descriptors is important, as these
may lead to ambiguous matches later in the matching phase.
Note that the remaining descriptors still form a dense collection (much denser than sparse interest points ).
Moreover, typical interest points locations would not necessarily correspond to locations of informative self-similarity
descriptors, whereas a uniform patch or an edge-like patch
may form an informative one.
To ﬁnd a good match for the “ensemble of descriptors” of
F within G, we use a modiﬁed version of the efﬁcient “ensemble matching” algorithm of . This algorithm employs
a simple probabilistic “star graph” model to capture the relative geometric relations of a large number of local descriptors. In our applications, we connect all the descriptors in
the template F into a single such ensemble of descriptors,
and employ their search method for detecting a similar ensemble of descriptors within G (which allows for some local ﬂexibility in descriptor positions and values). We used
a sigmoid function on the L1 distance to measure the similarity between descriptors. The ensemble search algorithm
generates a dense likelihood map in the size of G, which
corresponds to the likelihood of detecting F at each and
every point in G (i.e., according to its degree of match). Locations with high likelihood values are regarded as detected
locations of F within G.
Since self-similarity may appear at various scales and in
different region sizes, we extract self-similarity descriptors
at multiple scales. In the case of images we use a Gaussian image pyramid for generating those scales; in case of
video data we use a space-time video pyramid. We use the
same parameters (patch size, surrounding region, etc.) for
all scales. Thus, the physical extent of a small 5 × 5 patch
in a coarse scale, corresponds to the extent of a large image
patch at a ﬁne scale. An ensemble of descriptors is generated and searched for each scale independently, generating
its own likelihood map. To combine information from multiple scales, we ﬁrst normalize each log-likelihood map by
the number of descriptors in its scale (these numbers may
vary signiﬁcantly from scale to scale). The normalized loglikelihood surfaces are then combined by a weighted average with weights corresponding to the degree of sparseness of these log-likelihood surfaces.
5. Object detection in images
We applied the approach presented in the previous sections to detect objects of interest in cluttered images. Given
a single example image of an object of interest (the “template image” – e.g., the ﬂower in Fig. 4.a), we densely computed its local image descriptors of Sec. 3.1 to generate an
“ensemble of descriptors”.
We search for this templateensemble in several cluttered images (e.g., Fig. 4.b) using
the algorithm of Sec. 4. Image locations with high likelihood values were regarded as detections of the template
image and are overlayed on top of the dark gray image. We
used the same threshold for all examples in each of the ﬁgures (but varied it for different templates). No prior image
segmentation was involved, nor any prior learning.
We have applied our algorithm to real image templates
as well as to rough hand-sketched templates – see Figs. 4,
5, 6, 7. Note that in the case of sketched templates, although the sketch is uniform in color, such a global constraint is not imposed on the searched objects.
because the self-similarity descriptor tends to be more local, imposing self-similarity only within smaller object re-
Figure 4. Object detection. (a) A single template image (a ﬂower).
(b) The images against which it was compared with the corresponding detections. The continuous likelihood values above a
threshold (same threshold for all images) are shown superimposed
on the gray-scale images, displaying detections of the template at
correct locations (red corresponds to the highest values).
Figure 5. Detection using a sketch. (a) A hand-sketched template. (b) Detected locations in other images.
gions. (For example, the objects in our examples were typically 150 −200 pixels in each dimension, whereas the selfsimilarity descriptor is constrained to a radius of 40 pixels around each pixel). Our method is therefore capable of
detecting similarly shaped objects with global photometric
variability (e.g., people with pants and shirts of different
colors/textures, etc.)
Comparison to other descriptors and measures:
We further compared the matching performance of our
descriptors with some state-of-the-art local descriptors evaluated in .
We selected a subset of local descriptors
which ranked highest (and used the implementation in ).
These included: gradient location-orientation histogram
(GLOH) – a log-polar extension of SIFT that was
shown to be more robust and distinctive, local Shape Context (an extended version with orientations ), and
four other descriptors. For a sound comparison of these descriptors with ours, they were extracted densely on edges
(at multiple scales) to avoid homogeneous regions and lack
of interest points, and combined using the same “ensemble matching” method described in Sec. 4. In addition, we
compared our method against Mutual Information, applied
globally to the template (we tried both on color and on grayscale representations).
We compared our method to the
above methods on many challenging pairs of images (more
than 60 pairs with templates such as ﬂowers, hearts, peace
symbols, etc.; each template was compared against multiple
Figure 6. Detection using a sketch. (a) A hand-sketched template.
(b) The images against which it was compared with the
corresponding detections.
images). Correct detection of the template was declared if
there was a unique high peak detected within the other image, at the correct object. All of the above-mentioned methods failed in the majority of the cases to ﬁnd the template in
the correct position in the other image, whereas our method
found it correctly in 86% of them. A few (representative)
examples are displayed in Fig. 7.
6. Image retrieval by “sketching”
We further examined the feasibility of our method for
image retrieval from a database of images using rough
hand-sketched queries.
We generated 8 rough handsketches corresponding to various complex human poses.
We also generated a database of 72 images (downloaded
from the internet), with the demand that each of the 8 poses
appears within at least 9 of the database images . Fig. 8
shows the hand-sketched queries (templates) and the 9 topranked images retrieved for each query.
The score for
each database image given a query image was computed as
the highest likelihood value obtained for that query image
within that database image. On top of that we have veriﬁed
that the peak values were obtained at the correct locations.
False detections are marked by a red frame. Note the high
detection rate: in all cases the 5 top-ranked images were
correct, and for most pose-queries it found 8 out of the 9
database images within its top 9 matches. Note the cluttered backgrounds and the high geometric and photometric
variability between different instances of each pose. Moreover, note the high variability of the different instances of
the same pose (different images within a column), vs. the
small differences across different poses (e.g., pose of column 3 vs. 4, and 5 vs. 6; serving a role similar to that of
distractors).
Previous methods for image retrieval using image
sketches (e.g., ) assume that the sketched query image and the database image share similar low-resolution
photometric properties (colors, textures, low-level wavelet
coefﬁcients, etc.).
This assumption is not valid for the
database of Fig. 8. Other methods assume similarity of the
contour of objects (e.g., ) or proximity of corresponding
extracted edges (e.g., ). While many objects are well
Figure 7. Comparison to other descriptors and match measures. We compared our method with several other state-of-the-art local
descriptors and matching methods on more than 60 challenging image pairs. All these methods failed to ﬁnd the template in Image 2 in the
majority of the pairs, whereas our method found the objects in the correct location in 86% of them. Each method was used to generate a
likelihood surface, and peaks above 90% of its highest value are displayed. Displayed are a few such examples (these are representative
results, each template was compared against multiple images not shown in the ﬁgure) – see text for more details. The object in each pair
of images was of similar size (up to +/- 20% in scale), but is often displayed larger, for visibility purposes.
characterized by their edges, there are many other objects
that do not have such clear edges, e.g. see Fig. 1. Our
descriptor captures both edge properties as well as region
properties and therefore can address such cases.
7. Action detection in video
Applying the ensemble matching algorithm of Sec. 4
with the space-time self-similarity descriptors (Sec. 3.2)
gives rise to simultaneous detection of multiple complex
actions in video sequences of different people wearing different clothes with different backgrounds, without requiring any prior learning (i.e., based on a single example clip).
Our approach can be applied to complex video sequences
without requiring any foreground background segmentation , nor any motion estimation or tracking. Unlike , our method requires no prior learning (nor
multiple examples of each action), nor assumes existence of
common space-time features across sequences.
Our approach is probably most closely related to the capabilities presented in our previous work . However,
unlike , our new method can handle highly aliased video
sequences with non-instantaneous motions. Furthermore,
our method can match both stationary and moving objects
(as opposed to only moving objects in ).
Fig. 9 shows results of applying our action detection algorithm for detecting a ballet turn in a video clip of .
We also compare our results to their results on this video
data. They had 2 miss detections and 4 false alarms (see
ﬁgure and video clip). Our new algorithm has detected all
instances of the action correctly, with no false alarms or
missed detections. The superior results are because we can
now handle strong temporal aliasing, and explicitly account
Figure 8. Image retrieval by sketching. 8 hand-sketched template queries (top row) were used to retrieve images from a database of 72
images. Each of these poses appears within 9 database images (see text). The 9 top-ranked images retrieved by each template query are
presented in the column below the template (in decreasing match score). False detections are marked by a red frame.
(a) The action clip:
Figure 9. Action detection and comparison to .
few sample frames from a template video clip (ballet turn).
(b) A few sample frames from a long ballet video sequence
(25 seconds) with two dancers, against which the template
was compared.
(c) In the results obtained by there are
2 missed detections and 4 false alarms.
A few frames from
those erroneous video segments are shown here (marked by
(d) OUR NEW RESULTS:
All instances of the action
were detected correctly with no false alarms or missed detections.
These results are easier to grasp in video. Please see:
www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/∼vision/SelfSimilarities.html.
(a) Turn 1:
Figure 10. Action detection. (a) A few sample frames from two
different action templates of different ice-skating turns – turn1 (in
pink) and turn2 (in green). (b) A few sample frames from a long
ballet video sequence (30 seconds) of a different ice-skater, and
the corresponding detection results below. All instances of the two
actions were detected correctly with no false alarms or missed
detections, despite the strong temporal aliasing.
Please see:
www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/∼vision/SelfSimilarities.html.
for some non-rigid deformations (both spatial and temporal)
between the template action clip and the matched video.
Fig. 10 shows detection of two different types of iceskating movements. The template clips (one example clip
for each movement type) were obtained from one ice-skater,
and were used to detect these actions in a long ice-skating
sequence of a different ice-skater wearing different clothes,
at a different place. These sequences contain very strong
temporal aliasing and therefore cannot be handled well by
methods like . Unlike (who also showed results
on ice-skating video sequences), our approach requires no
prior learning from multiple examples of each action, and
does not rely on having common extractable features across
action sequences. Moreover our sequences are characterized by a much higher motion aliasing.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thanks Y. Caspi
and O. Boiman for their helpful comments. This work was supported in part by the Alberto Moscona Foundation. The research
was conducted at the Moross Laboratory for Vision and Motor
Control at the Weizmann Institute of science.