HAL Id: hal-00686211
 
Submitted on 8 Apr 2012
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Physical systems with random uncertainties: Chaos
representations with arbitrary probability measure
Christian Soize, R. Ghanem
To cite this version:
Christian Soize, R. Ghanem.
Physical systems with random uncertainties: Chaos representations
with arbitrary probability measure. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 2004, 26 (2), pp.395-410.
￿10.1137/S1064827503424505￿. ￿hal-00686211￿
PHYSICAL SYSTEMS WITH RANDOM UNCERTAINTIES: CHAOS
REPRESENTATIONS WITH ARBITRARY PROBABILITY
CHRISTIAN SOIZE† AND ROGER GHANEM‡
The basic random variables on which random uncertainties can in a given model
depend can be viewed as deﬁning a measure space with respect to which the solution to the mathematical problem can be deﬁned. This measure space is deﬁned on a product measure associated with
the collection of basic random variables. This paper clariﬁes the mathematical structure of this space
and its relationship to the underlying spaces associated with each of the random variables. Cases of
both dependent and independent basic random variables are addressed. Bases on the product space
are developed that can be viewed as generalizations of the standard polynomial chaos approximation.
Moreover, two numerical constructions of approximations in this space are presented along with the
associated convergence analysis.
Key words. stochastic analysis, uncertainty quantiﬁcation, stochastic representations
AMS subject classiﬁcations. 60H35, 60H15, 60H25, 60H40, 65C50
DOI. 10.1137/S1064827503424505
1. Introduction. Characterizing the membership of a mathematical function
in the most suitable functional space is a critical step toward analyzing it and identifying sequences of eﬃcient approximants to it. In most cases encountered in scientiﬁc computing, many of the relevant functional spaces are associated with the same
Lebesgue measure which is often omitted from the analysis. However, in the context
of modeling physical systems that exhibit uncertainty either in their behavior or in
their environment, probability theory is often used as a framework for modeling the
uncertainty . In these cases, the functional spaces over which the various quantities of interest are deﬁned are associated with diﬀerent measures. These
are typically mixtures of probability measures, each tagging the probabilistic content
of some related function . This paper describes the most general mathematical
setting for characterizing such problems in the case where random uncertainties are
deﬁned by a ﬁnite number of basic vector-valued random variables with arbitrary
probability distributions. This arbitrariness is manifested by the possibility of a multidimensional, non-Gaussian probability measure for each basic vector-valued random
variable, whose components are a set of generally dependent random variables.
In the paper, a general stochastic physical system is thought of as a nonlinear
transformation of a ﬁnite set of basic random variables deﬁned over a suitable product
space. For clarity of presentation, and without loss of generality, the paper deals with
transformations taking values in a ﬁnite-dimensional vector space.
The extension
to transformations with values in a Hilbert space can be readily obtained, with the
present case being a ﬁnite-dimensional approximation, such as obtained via ﬁnite
∗Received by the editors March 24, 2003; accepted for publication (in revised form) March 4,
2004; published electronically December 22, 2004. The authors acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of
Sandia National Laboratories through contract 14652 and the Oﬃce of Naval Research under grant
N000149910900.
 
†Laboratoire de Mecanique, Universit´e Marne La-Vall´ee, 5, Boulevard Descartes, 77454 Marnela-Vall´ee cedex 2, France ( ).
‡201 Latrobe Hall, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218 ( ).
CHRISTIAN SOIZE AND ROGER GHANEM
element formalisms.
Clearly, the ﬁnite-dimensional assumption on the basic random variables corresponds to the situation where the uncertainty in the problem is inherently associated
with a ﬁnite number of random variables. This assumption can also be justiﬁed for
situations where the uncertainty derives from inﬁnite-dimensional stochastic processes
or ﬁelds that have been reduced through adapted techniques such as the Karhunen–
Loeve expansion or the polynomial chaos decomposition .
The ﬁnite-dimensional character of the basic random variables permits the natural extension of the standard Wiener chaos decomposition, well deﬁned for Gaussian
basic random variables, to the case of second-order random variables with arbitrary
probability measure. The Hilbert space to which the random solution of the mathematical problem belongs can be constructed as a tensor product of Hilbert spaces
associated with the basic variables. Each of these spaces is itself written as a tensor
product of Hilbert spaces.
In this paper, the ﬁnite-dimensional chaos decomposition is constructed as a
Hilbertian basis of the Hilbert space of the solution, taking into consideration the
tensorized structure of this vector space. This Hilbertian basis is thus obtained as the
tensor product of Hilbertian bases associated with the basic random variables. This
construction diﬀers from two standard constructions. The ﬁrst one deals with the case
of Gaussian inﬁnite-dimensional basic variables for which mathematical methods used
for the construction of Fock spaces are applicable . The second standard
method deals with multidimensional polynomial approximations over product vector
spaces. The standard approach to this problem coincides with the stochastic problem
in the case where each basic random variable consists of mutually independent components. The present work, therefore, can be viewed as an extension of the second
construction to relax the independence assumption.
It should be noted that the mathematical tools used in this paper consist of
standard results in Hilbert spaces, speciﬁcally, the Hilbertian basis theorem and the
orthogonal projection theorem . It is shown that these simple tools can be used
to construct a complete mathematical framework in which eﬃcient solutions can be
developed to physical systems with general random uncertainties modeled by basic
vector-valued random variables which are not necessarily Gaussian, and for which the
components are not necessarily independent. The resulting mathematical framework
is very well suited for the analysis, within a computational context, of these systems.
Chaos decomposition techniques have indeed been recently applied to a wide range
of problems in scientiﬁc computing relating to uncertain systems . Attempts at developing chaos decompositions that are adapted to non-
Gaussian basic variables have also been presented in the literature , and the present
work can be viewed as delineating the correct mathematical framework in which these
extensions to these eﬀorts should be described.
The paper is self-contained in that quantities are deﬁned when they ﬁrst appear
and enough detail is provided to assist the reader in implementing the framework. In
the ﬁrst part of the paper (sections 2–5), the mathematical construction is carried
out for the ﬁnite-dimensional chaos representation for vector-valued random variables
with arbitrary probability measure. In the second part (section 6), the implementation
of the chaos decomposition is demonstrated through its application to the model of
a physical system with random uncertainties. Construction and convergence issues
are also addressed. Finally, in the third part (the appendix), data is provided for the
construction of orthogonal polynomials with respect to the most common probability
CHAOS WITH ARBITRARY PROBABILITY MEASURE
2. Deﬁning vector-valued random variables. Consider a physical system
featuring random uncertainties in some of the parameters of its mathematical model.
The random uncertainties are identiﬁed with the p basic vector-valued random variables Z1, . . . , Zp. The solution describing the behavior of the physical system is a
vector-valued random variable Y = 
f(Z1, . . . , Zp) in which 
f is a nonlinear mapping.
Consider an Rmj-valued random variable Zj deﬁned on a probability space
(A, T , P) with mean mZj and a positive-deﬁnite covariance matrix CZj admitting
the Cholesky factorization
Then, Zj can be normalized:
Zj = mZj + LT
where Xj is an Rmj-valued random variable with mean zero and covariance matrix
equal to the identity.
Consequently, random variable Y = 
f(Z1, . . . , Zp) can be
rewritten as Y = f(X1, . . . , Xp) in which the nonlinear mapping f is such that
f(X1, . . . , Xp) = 
f(mZ1 + LT
Z1X1, . . . , mZp + LT
ZpXp). Thus, without any loss of
generality, the subsequent analysis will be carried out for normalized random vectors.
Next, consider the measurable function (x1, . . . , xp) →f(x1, . . . , xp) from Rm1 ×
· · ·×Rmp into Cm. Moreover, let PX1,...,Xp(dx1, . . . , dxp) be the probability measure
of the random variable (X1, . . . , Xp) with values in Rm1 × · · · × Rmp and let Y =
f(X1, . . . , Xp) be a Cm-valued random variable. Furthermore, assume that Y is a
second-order random variable, that is,
∥f(X1, . . . , Xp)∥2
in which E{.} denotes the mathematical expectation, and where ∥.∥denotes the
Hermitian norm in Cm associated with the inner product ⟨f, g⟩Cm = m
j=1 fj¯gj, in
which an overbar denotes complex conjugation. This inner product reduces in an
obvious manner to the real case. It is assumed that the random vectors X1, . . . , Xp
are mutually independent, resulting in
PX1,...,Xp = PX1 ⊗· · · ⊗PXp,
where PXj is the probability distribution of random variable Xj. Let L2
µ(F, G) denote the space of µ-square-integrable functions from topological vector space F into
topological vector space G, in which µ is a probability measure on F equipped with
its Borel ﬁeld.
3. Hilbert spaces for ﬁnite-dimensional chaos representations. A mathematical structure appropriate for the construction of the ﬁnite-dimensional chaos
representation requires the characterization of the complex Hilbert space H(m) to
which (x1, . . . , xp) →f(x1, . . . , xp) belongs. Given the multiparameter dependence
of Y = f(X1, . . . , Xp) and the multidimensional nature of each of these parameters, real Hilbert spaces Hj and H, associated with the measures PXj(dxj) and
CHRISTIAN SOIZE AND ROGER GHANEM
PX1,...,Xp(dx1, . . . , dxp), must also be characterized:
PXj (Rmj, R),
PX1,...,Xp (Rm1 × · · · × Rmp, Cm)
PX1,...,Xp (Rm1 × · · · × Rmp, R)
We can then write H(m) as
H(m) = H ⊗Cm,
in which H is a real Hilbert space deﬁned by
Throughout this paper, the tensor product H1 ⊗H2 of two real Hilbert spaces
H1 and H2 is deﬁned with respect to the universal property of the tensor product.
In addition, in order to simplify the notation, the tensor product H1 ⊗H2 has to be
understood as the completion H1
⊗H2 of the space H1 ⊗H2.
Real Hilbert space Hj and complex Hilbert space H(m) are equipped with the
following inner products:
⟨u, v⟩Hj =
Rmj u(xj)v(xj)PXj(dxj)
u(Xj)v(Xj)
⟨f, g⟩H(m) =
f(x1, . . . , xp), g(x1, . . . , xp)
Cm PX1,...,Xp(dx1, . . . , dxp)
f(X1, . . . , Xp), g(X1, . . . , Xp)
4. Finite-dimensional chaos representation. The chaos representation of
random variable Y = f(X1, . . . , Xp) is obtained by representing (x1, . . . , xp) →
f(x1, . . . , xp) on a Hilbertian basis (complete orthonormal family of functions) of
H(m). Since X = (X1, . . . , Xp) is a random variable with values in a ﬁnite-dimensional
vector space, the associated chaos representation of Y is said to be ﬁnite-dimensional.
4.1. Hilbertian basis for Hj. Consider a Hilbertian basis of real Hilbert space
Hj given by
αj, αj = (αj
1, . . . , αj
βj⟩Hj = E{φj
Therefore any function h ∈Hj can be expanded as
CHAOS WITH ARBITRARY PROBABILITY MEASURE
hαj = ⟨h, φj
= E{h(Xj) φj
Since the real constants belong to Hj, if the Hilbertian basis is chosen such that
It should be noted that polynomial bases in general satisfy this condition.
4.2. Hilbertian basis for H(m). Let
b1, . . . , bm
be the canonical basis of
Rm, which is then also a basis for Cm. Then a Hilbertian basis of complex Hilbert
space H(m) is given by
α1 ⊗· · · ⊗φp
α1 ∈Nm1, . . . , αp ∈Nmp,
j = 1, . . . , m
4.3. Representation of f in H(m). By (3), mapping (x1, . . . , xp) →f(x1, . . . , xp)
from Rm1 × · · · × Rmp into Cm belongs to H(m) and can then be written as
f(x1, . . . , xp) =
fj,α1···αp φ1
α1(x1) × · · · × φp
αp(xp) bj,
fj,α1···αp =
α1 ⊗· · · ⊗φp
f(x1, . . . , xp), bj
α1(x1) × · · · × φp
αp(xp) PX1,...,Xp(dx1, . . . , dxp).
fj(x1, . . . , xp) =
f(x1, . . . , xp), bj
denote the projection of f(x1, . . . , xp) on bj. Therefore (17) can be rewritten as
f(x1, . . . , xp) =
fα1···αp φ1
α1(x1) × · · · × φp
fα1···αp = ⟨f, φ1
α1 ⊗· · · ⊗φp
Rmp f(x1, . . . , xp)
α1(x1) × · · · × φp
αp(xp) PX1,...,Xp(dx1, . . . , dxp),
f(X1, . . . , Xp) φ1
α1(X1) × · · · × φp
and where ⟨., .⟩H(m)×H is the bilinear form on H(m) × H deﬁned by the right-hand side
of the second equation (21).
CHRISTIAN SOIZE AND ROGER GHANEM
4.4. Chaos representation of random variable Y . Consequently, the chaos
representation of random variable Y = f(X1, . . . , Xp) is
fα1···αp φ1
α1(X1) × · · · × φp
5. Construction of a Hilbertian basis for Hj. For a ﬁxed j, the Rmj-valued
random normalized variable Xj has probability distribution PXj(dxj) which is represented by a probability density function pXj(xj) with respect to the Lebesgue measure
dxj. While in general the mj components of Xj are mutually dependent, the case of
independent components is of particular interest. Therefore, after treating the general
case, the case of mutually independent components is treated separately.
5.1. Mutually dependent components of Xj. Let Xj =
1, . . . , Xj
the Rmj-valued random variable with probability distribution
PXj(dxj) = pXj(xj) dxj.
1), . . . , pXj
mj) be the marginal probability density functions of order 1
Rmj −1 pXj(xj
1, . . . , xj
k+1, . . . , xj
1 · · · dxj
k+1 · · · dxj
The support Smj of pXj is such that
pXj(xj) = 0
if xj /∈Smj.
It should be noted that Smj can be Rmj or any bounded or compact subset thereof.
For later use, the support sk of density pXj
k) is such that
It is noted here also that sk can be R or any bounded or compact subset thereof, and
that, in general, Smj ̸= s1 × · · · × smj.
5.1.1. Hilbert spaces Hj,k and Kj. The real Hilbert space associated with
marginal distribution pXj
k is now introduced. Let
be the Hilbert space associated with the probability measure PXj
equipped with the inner product
⟨r, s⟩Hj,k =
r(q) s(q) pXj
k(q) dq = E
be a Hilbertian basis of real Hilbert space Hj,k which is such that
Hj,k = δℓℓ′.
CHAOS WITH ARBITRARY PROBABILITY MEASURE
Let Kj be the real Hilbert space deﬁned by
equipped with the inner product
⟨u, v⟩Kj =
u(q1, . . . , qmj) v(q1, . . . , qmj)
1(q1) × · · · × pXj
mj (qmj) dq1 · · · dqmj.
It should be noted that ⟨u, v⟩Kj is diﬀerent from E
u(Xj)v(Xj)
which is equal to
⟨u, v⟩Hj. From (30), the following Hilbertian basis for Kj is deduced:
ℓ1 ⊗· · · ⊗ψmj
ℓ1 ∈N, . . . , ℓmj ∈N
5.1.2. Hilbertian basis for Hj.
Lemma 1. For all xj = (xj
1, . . . , xj
mj) belonging to the support Smj of pXj(xj),
Hilbertian basis {φj
αj ∈Nmj} of real Hilbert space Hj is given by
1) × · · · × pXj
1) × · · · × ψmj
k is a Hilbertian basis of real Hilbert space Hj,k and αj = (αj
1, . . . , αj
Proof. In a ﬁrst step, (33) is established. Let h ∈Hj, and let xj →g(xj) be the
function such that
g(xj) = h(xj)
1) × · · · × pXj
¿From (31), we deduce that ∥g∥2
Hj and since h ∈Hj, we deduce that g ∈Kj.
Therefore, this function can be expanded as
1) × · · · × pXj
× · · · × ψmj
Equation (34) can be rewritten as
1) × · · · × pXj
1) × · · · × ψmj
Since h belongs to Hj, use of (12) yields (33).
CHRISTIAN SOIZE AND ROGER GHANEM
The second step in the proof consists in verifying that the family deﬁned by (33)
is an orthonormal system in Hj. A simple calculation yields the following equation:
Using (29) results in
k = δαjβj.
The ﬁnal step in the proof consists in verifying that the family of functions deﬁned
by (33) is complete in Hj, which is straightforward considering the completeness of
Hilbertian basis ψj
αj in Hj,k.
5.2. Mutually independent components of Xj. Under the assumption of
independence of the components of Rmj-valued random variables Xj, the following
equation holds:
pXj(xj) = pXj
1) × · · · × pXj
¿From Lemma 1, it is deduced that the Hilbertian basis {φj
αj, αj ∈Nmj} of the real
Hilbert space Hj is given by
αj(xj) = ψ1
1) × · · · × ψmj
where xj = (xj
1, . . . , xj
mj) and αj = (αj
1, . . . , αj
mj). In this case, it should be noted that
real Hilbert space Kj coincides with real Hilbert space Hj. Moreover, it should noted
in this case that the support Smj becomes the product of the supports s1, . . . , smj,
Smj = s1 × · · · × smj.
5.3. Classical orthogonal polynomials as bases for Hj,k. A close connection exists between classical orthogonal polynomials and chaos decompositions. Indeed, to each of the classical polynomials is associated a weight function that can
be construed as a density of a measure on an appropriate space. In the terminology used in this paper, the orthogonal polynomials refer to the Hilbertian basis
k)} of the real Hilbert space Hj,k associated with the probability measure
k (see sections 5.1.1 and 5.1.2). For notational convenience,
k} is rewritten as ψℓ(q), pXj
k) as w(q), and the support sk is denoted by s.
With this notation, the inner product in Hj,k is rewritten as
⟨ψℓ, ψℓ′⟩Hjk =
ψℓ(q)ψℓ′(q)w(q) dq
ψℓ(q)ψℓ′(q)w(q) dq
Table 1 (see appendix) shows the weights w(q), the support, and the expressions of
ψℓ(q) for a number of classical orthogonal polynomials. Recurrence expressions for
the construction of the orthogonal polynomials are given in Table 2.
CHAOS WITH ARBITRARY PROBABILITY MEASURE
6. Physical system with random uncertainties. This section demonstrates
the implementation of the chaos decomposition through an example from dynamics.
6.1. Deﬁnition of the physical system. Consider a physical system modeled
as an elliptic linear boundary-value problem over a bounded domain B of Rd, with d a
ﬁnite positive integer. Let the associated operator depend on p1 stochastic processes,
W 1(ζ), . . . , W p1(ζ), and p2 vector-valued random variables (p = p1 + p2), representing the uncertain behavior of the underlying physical system. Each of the p1 random
processes can itself be discretized in terms of a countable set of random variables via
the Karhunen–Loeve expansion . The number of terms retained in this expansion for each process depends on the correlation length of its random ﬂuctuations,
increasing as this length decreases. Each of the processes W j(ζ) is thus replaced
by an Rmj-valued random variable Zj, where mj is the number of terms retained in
the Karhunen–Loeve expansion of the jth process. The operator associated with the
boundary-value problem can thus be expressed as explicitly dependent on p random
variables Zj, which can be transformed into a set of orthogonal random variables X
as described in (2).
6.2. Joint probability density function of the Karhunen–Loeve random
variables. The representation of a stochastic process through the Karhunen–Loeve
expansion results in a countable set of random variables the probability measure of
which is a function of the probability measure of the process. In the case where the
latter is a Gaussian process, the random variables form an orthonormal Gaussian sequence. The theoretical development presented in this paper relies on the availability
of the joint probability distribution of the basic random variables on which the solution, being represented in its chaos decomposition, depends. In this section, the joint
probability density function of the Karhunen–Loeve random variables is developed
in terms of the probability measure of the associated process, thus permitting the
integration of the Karhunen–Loeve representation into the foregoing analysis.
Let {Z(ζ), ζ ∈B} be a second-order centered stochastic process indexed by a
bounded set B of Rd with values in Rν. The matrix-valued correlation function of Z
is thus given by
RZ(ζ, ζ′) = E
Z(ζ)Z(ζ′)T 
and is assumed to be such that
∥RZ(ζ, ζ′)∥2
HS dζ′ dζ < ∞,
where ∥.∥HS is the Hilbert–Schmidt norm. For instance, since B is a bounded set
of Rd, the condition deﬁned by (43) is satisﬁed if Z is a mean-square continuous
stochastic process on B. Then let V = L2
dζ(B, Rν) be the Hilbert space of Rν-valued
square-integrable functions on B equipped with the inner product
⟨u(ζ), v(ζ)⟩Rν dζ.
Due to (43), the linear operator RZ deﬁned by the following bilinear form on V × V,
⟨RZu, v⟩V =
⟨RZ(ζ, ζ′)u(ζ′), v(ζ)⟩Rν dζ′ dζ,
CHRISTIAN SOIZE AND ROGER GHANEM
is a Hilbert–Schmidt operator . Consequently, the eigenvalue problem
has a sequence of real positive eigenvalues λ1 ≥λ2 ≥· · · →0 such that ∞
∞. The associated eigenfunctions form a Hilbertian basis of V. In this case, the
Karhunen–Loeve decomposition of stochastic process (Z(ζ), ζ ∈B) can be written as
λj ξj φj(ζ)
where the sequence of random variables {ξj} is such that
E{ξj} = 0,
E{ξiξj} = δij.
Truncating the KL expansion at the µth term deﬁnes the approximation Zµ(ζ)
λj ξj φj(ζ).
It is noted that
For all θµ = (θµ
1 , . . . , θµ
µ) in Rµ, the characteristic function of the Rµ-valued random
variable ξµ = (ξµ
1 , . . . , ξµ
µ) is deﬁned by
Φξµ(θµ) = E {exp {i⟨ξµ, θµ⟩Rµ}}
and can be rewritten as
Φξµ(θµ) = E
= E {exp (i ⟨Z, vµ⟩V)} ,
Introducing the characteristic functional, ΦZ(v) of stochastic process Z, deﬁned
for suitable function v, the following equation results:
Φξµ(θµ) = E{exp (i⟨Z, vµ⟩V)}
CHAOS WITH ARBITRARY PROBABILITY MEASURE
Thus given the characteristic functional of stochastic process Z and the eigenfunctions
of its correlation operator, (54) and (55) can be used to obtain the characteristic
function of ξµ, its truncated Karhunen–Loeve representation.
In this paper, the Karhunen–Loeve expansion is used as a means to project
stochastic processes onto ﬁnite-dimensional representations. While no convergence
analysis regarding the eﬀect of these ﬁnite representations on the accuracy of the
chaos decompositions is carried out, existing results present an equivalence, as
the number of terms in the Karhunen–Loeve expansion increases, between convergence with respect to various norms, as well as between convergence with respect to
the underlying measure.
6.3. Construction of the chaos representation of the random solution
and convergence analysis. The projection of the weak formulation of the elliptic
boundary value problem with random uncertainties onto an m-dimensional subspace
can be achieved through any one of a number of procedures, such as the ﬁnite element
method (FEM), resulting in a random linear algebraic problem of the form
A(X1, . . . , Xp) Y = F ,
where F is a given element of Cm, and A is a random m×m complex matrix depending
on the basic vector-valued random variables X1, . . . , Xp. It is moreover assumed that
the Cm-valued solution Y of (56) exists almost surely. Consequently, random matrix
A(X1, . . . , Xp)−1 exists almost surely, deﬁning a nonlinear mapping f such that
Y = f(X1, . . . , Xp).
Finally, it is also assumed that mapping f is such that (3) is veriﬁed, and, consequently, Y = f(X1, . . . , Xp) is the unique second-order random solution of random
matrix (56).
Taking into account (22), a representation of the solution is sought with respect
to the chaos basis of the form
Yα1···αp φ1
α1(X1) × · · · × φp
with the Cm-valued coeﬃcient Yα1···αp. With r1, . . . , rp denoting the lengths |α1|, . . . ,
|αp| of multi-indices α1, . . . , αp, respectively, let
α1,|α1|≤r1
αp,|αp|≤rp
Yα1···αp φ1
α1(X1) × · · · × φp
where |αk| = mk
j and r = (r1, . . . , rp).
6.3.1. Construction through sampling and convergence analysis. According to the third equation in (21), coeﬃcients Yα1···αp of the chaos development
of Y are given by the following expression:
Yα1···αp = E
α1(X1) × · · · × φp
Equation (60) is well adapted for the evaluation of the coeﬃcients Yα1···αp through
a Monte Carlo numerical simulation of (56). This results in the following estimate of
the chaos coeﬃcients:
α1···αp = 1
α1(X1(ak)) · · · φp
αp(Xp(ak)),
CHRISTIAN SOIZE AND ROGER GHANEM
where Y (ak) and Xj(ak) refer, respectively, to the kth realization of Y and Xj,
where the former is obtained by solving the deterministic equation
A(X1(ak), . . . , Xp(ak)) Y (ak) = F .
The convergence of the chaos decomposition is analyzed by studying the convergence
of the r-sequence, E{∥Y −Y r∥2
C}. Although this sequence is indexed only by r,
the estimation of the chaos coeﬃcients of Y r through sampling introduces a new
parameter ns. An appropriate metric for investigating the convergence of the overall
approximation can thus be written as
J (r, ns) = 1
∥Y (ak) −Y r,ns(ak)∥2
Y r,ns(ak) =
α1,|α1|≤r1
αp,|αp|≤rp
α1···αp φ1
α1(X1(ak)) × · · · × φp
αp(Xp(ak)).
6.3.2. Construction through Hilbertian projections and convergence
analysis. An alternative construction of the coeﬃcients Yα1···αp consists in substituting the truncated chaos decomposition of Y , given in (59), into equation (56)
and interpreting the resulting equality in the weak sense using the bilinear form in
H(m) × H deﬁned in (21). This results in
A(X1, . . . , Xp)Y r φ1
α1(X1) · · · φp
α1(X1) × · · · × φp
for multi-indices αk such that |αk| ≤rk. Substituting (58) into the previous equation
and assuming that (15) holds, and since F is a constant vector, yields
α1,|α1|≤r1
αp,|αp|≤rp
Aα1···αpβ1···βpY r
α1···αp = F δ0β1 · · · δ0βp,
where deterministic matrix A is given by
Aα1···αpβ1···βp =E
A(X1, . . . , Xp) φ1
α1(X1) · · · φp
β1(X1)× · · · × φp
This ﬁnite-dimensional deterministic algebraic system of equations yields the chaos
coeﬃcients of Y r. Unlike the construction via sampling introduced previously, the
computed chaos coeﬃcients now depend on the multi-index r = (r1, . . . , rp) used
in the approximation.
In a few special cases, the right-hand side of (67) can be
evaluated analytically. In general, however, the mathematical expectation is estimated
via Monte Carlo sampling resulting in matrix Ans
α1···αpβ1···βp. The solution of (66)
associated with this approximation is denoted by Y ns,r
α1···αp. Since in the present case,
realizations Y (ak) of the exact solution are not available, estimation of the r-sequence
E{∥Y −Y r∥2
C} cannot be directly investigated. Let a new r-sequence be given by
If this sequence is upper bounded by a positive ﬁnite constant, then
all of the chaos coeﬃcients of Y r converge to the chaos coeﬃcients of the exact
solution. Indeed, the boundedness of the sequence E{∥Y r∥2
C} implies the convergence
of each chaos coeﬃcient of Y r to the corresponding chaos coeﬃcients of Y . Thus,
the sequence E{∥Y r∥2
C} is a well-adapted sequence for monitoring the convergence of
the chaos approximation.
CHAOS WITH ARBITRARY PROBABILITY MEASURE
7. Conclusion. With the steady increase in availability and magnitude of computational resources, error analysis and ﬁdelity in model-based predictions have taken
a central role in modeling and computational sciences. Issues related to uncertainty
quantiﬁcation, both as far as modeling the uncertainty, propagating it through computational models, and managing its consequences are concerned, are gaining in signiﬁcance.
This paper has presented the mathematical foundation for formulating
and resolving the technical issues associated with the probabilistic formulation of uncertainty quantiﬁcation, using the polynomial chaos decomposition. The focus has
been on the class of problems involving a ﬁnite number of basic random variables,
with the Karhunen–Loeve decomposition permitting the eﬃcient approximation of
the inﬁnite-dimensional case with a sequence of ﬁnite-dimensional subspaces.
The representations presented in the paper can be readily implemented into numerical codes, either using existing software via a Monte Carlo sampling scheme, or
using stochastic codes that are adapted to the chaos decompositions. In either case,
procedures for error analysis and convergence studies are presented in the paper. Such
studies are essential for the meaningful combination of errors stemming from the discretization of the governing partial diﬀerential equations with those stemming from
the stochastic discretization.
Finally, the methods presented herein can be extended in a straightforward manner to situations where the Hermitian range space of the transformations is replaced
with more general spaces such as the space of matrices or a Banach space .
8. Appendix. This appendix shows data needed to construct the most common
orthogonal polynomials .
These in turn are used to construct the bases φℓ(q)
of Hilbert spaces Hj,k.
Each of these polynomials is also associated with a onedimensional well-known probability density function, which is also indicated. Table 1
displays the polynomial name, its weight, support, associated probability measure,
and the relation to the Hilbertian basis. Table 2 shows, for each polynomial, the
recurrence relation allowing its construction.
CHRISTIAN SOIZE AND ROGER GHANEM
Classical orthogonal polynomials, their weights, support, and normalization.
Polynomial
Weight: w(q)
Support: s
Associated
probability measure
Hilbertian basis ψℓ(q)
Hℓ(q): Hermite
(2π)−1/2e−q2/2
Pℓ(q): Legendre
ℓ(q): Laguerre
Tℓ(q): Chebyshev
(1 −q2)−1/2
a > −1; b > −1
ℓ!(a+b+1+2ℓ)Γ(a+b+ℓ+1)
2a+b+1Γ(a+ℓ+1)Γ(b+ℓ+1)
CHAOS WITH ARBITRARY PROBABILITY MEASURE
Recurrence relations for the classical orthogonal polynomials.
Polynomial
Recurrence relation
Hℓ(q): Hermite
Hℓ= qHℓ−1 −(ℓ−1)Hℓ−2
Pℓ(q): Legendre
ℓ(2ℓ−1)qPℓ−1 −1
ℓ(ℓ−1)Pℓ−2
ℓ(q): Laguerre
1(q) = a + 1 −q
ℓ(2ℓ−1 + a −q)La
ℓ(ℓ−1 + a)La
Tℓ(q): Chebyshev
Tℓ= 2qTℓ−1 −Tℓ−2
= Aℓ(q)P (a,b)
−BℓP (a,b)
(a+b+2ℓ−1)[(a+b+2ℓ−2)(a+b+2ℓ)q+a2−b2]
2ℓ(a+b+ℓ)(a+b+2ℓ−2)
Bℓ= 2(a+ℓ−1)(b+ℓ−1)(a+b+2ℓ)
2ℓ(a+b+ℓ)(a+b+2ℓ−2)
CHRISTIAN SOIZE AND ROGER GHANEM