Structured Pruning of Deep Convolutional
Neural Networks
Sajid Anwar, Kyuyeon Hwang and Wonyong Sung
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Seoul National University
Seoul 151-744, Korea
{Sajid, khwang}@dsp.snu.ac.kr, 
Real time application of deep learning algorithms is often hindered by high
computational complexity and frequent memory accesses. Network pruning
is a promising technique to solve this problem. However, pruning usually
results in irregular network connections that not only demand extra
representation efforts but also do not fit well on parallel computation. We
introduce structured sparsity at various scales for convolutional neural
networks, which are channel wise, kernel wise and intra kernel strided
sparsity. This structured sparsity is very advantageous for direct
computational resource savings on embedded computers, parallel computing
environments and hardware based systems. To decide the importance of
network connections and paths, the proposed method uses a particle filtering
approach. The importance weight of each particle is assigned by computing
the misclassification rate with corresponding connectivity pattern. The
pruned network is re-trained to compensate for the losses due to pruning.
While implementing convolutions as matrix products, we particularly show
that intra kernel strided sparsity with a simple constraint can significantly
reduce the size of kernel and feature map tensors. The pruned network is
finally quantized with reduced word length precision. This results in
significant reduction in the total storage size providing advantages for
on-chip memory based implementations of deep neural networks.
Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) have been successfully applied to several diverse
classification problems including speech and image recognition . In CNN design, we
need to decide the optimum network architecture and parameters count for a specific task.
Large networks have the capacity to learn more difficult functions at the cost of increased
computational complexity. However if the current parameters count is greater than the
unknown optimum number, overfitting may occur. On the other hand, too few parameters limit
the network’s learning capability. One efficient approach for training is to learn a task with a
large sized network and prune it by removing redundant and duplicate connections. This
results in comparable level of performance with fewer parameters and better generalization
 . Another important problem is porting deep learning algorithms to resource limited
portable devices. With the advances in deep learning, it can make the smartphones and other
machines even smarter. For this purpose, researchers have proposed ideas for designing the
best performing lightweight networks. Lightweight neural networks have improved
generalization and the parameters can be saved in on chip memory. This results in energy
savings as frequent DRAM accesses consume much energy. Since deep neural networks
conduct many multiply and accumulate (MAC) operations, sparsity helps in reducing these
computations. However, the computational complexity of a neural network depends on not
only the number of parameters or arithmetic operations but the architecture, layer types and
connectivity patterns. Irregular sparsity is difficult to exploit for efficient computation. The
proposed work investigates and proposes ideas to solve such problems with structured pruning
and fixed point optimization.
Pruning is useful in several ways. First, gradual network pruning inherits knowledge from the
bigger and cumbersome network. Secondly, directly learning a complex function with
lightweight network may not yield acceptable results. Moreover, in practice, the optimum
network architecture is unknown. In the literature large sized deep networks have
achieved state-of-the-art performance on various challenging tasks. It is therefore appropriate
to first learn a task with many parameters followed by pruning redundant and less important
connections.
Pruning techniques can be broadly categorized as structured or unstructured. Unstructured
pruning does not follow a specific geometry or constraint. In most cases, this technique needs
extra information to represent sparse locations. It depends on sparse representation for
computational benefits. On the other hand, structured sparsity places non-zero parameters at
well-defined locations. This kind of constraint enables modern CPUs and graphics processing
units (GPUs) to easily exploit computational savings. In this work, we explore channel, kernel,
and intra-kernel sparsity as a means of structured pruning. In channel level pruning, all the
incoming and outgoing weights to/from a feature map are pruned. Channel level pruning can
directly produce a lightweight network. Kernel level pruning drops a full k×k kernel, whereas
the intra-kernel sparsity prunes weights in a kernel. The proposed work shows that when
combined with convolution lowering , the intra kernel strided sparsity can significantly
speedup convolution layer processing. The kernel level pruning is a special case of intra-kernel
sparsity with 100% pruning. These granularities can be applied in various combinations and
different orders.
Network pruning has been studied by several researches - . The works of have
shown that a much bigger portion of weights can be set to zero with minimum or no loss in
performance. They train a network with L1/L2 norm augmented loss functions and gradually
prune it. If the value of a connection is less than a threshold, the connection is dropped. The
authors in further extend this work by quantizing the finally pruned network . However
 and have to use sparse representation to benefit from the induced sparsity. Units in the
hidden layers are pruned in for a feed-forward deep neural network. Computational
complexity is reduced with sparse connectivity in convolution and fully connected layers in
 . prunes multi-layered feed forward networks with genetic algorithm and simulated
annealing. A survey on pruning techniques is reported in . These works - utilize
unstructured sparsity in feed forward neural networks. A recently published work induces
channel wise sparsity in a network . Compared to , the proposed work explores
sparsity at multiple levels using an efficient search followed by fixed point optimization.
Dropout and Dropconnect zeroes neuron outputs and weights only during training
and the network architecture does not change at evaluation time. Both techniques train
different subsets of network parameters during training which results in better generalization.
Our work drops parameters permanently and yields network with fewer parameters at test time.
In , convolutions are converted to matrix-matrix multiplication, which follows from the
same logic that two bigger sized matrix multiplications are better than several small sized ones
 . Fixed-point optimization is used to reduce the memory and computational requirements of
deep networks .
Another contribution of the proposed work is the use of particle filter to locate pruning
candidates. We search for the most likely connection combinations and prune the rest. Each
particle simulates one such set of connections or masks. We also apply fixed point optimization
to reduce the word length of network parameters. We represent weights and signals with 4 or 5
bits precision while maintaining the same level of performance. This further reduces the
storage requirement and is advantageous for on-chip based implementation of deep learning
algorithms.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly introduces CNN in the context
of pruning. The pruning criterion is outlined in Section 3. This section also discusses pruning
granularities, particle filter, genetic algorithm and the hybrid evolutionary particle filter.
Section 4 explains the iterative pruning process and fixed point optimization. Experimental
results and discussions are provided in Section 5. Finally Section 6 introduces the future
work and concludes.
Convolutional Neural Network
This section briefly introduces CNN in the context of pruning. CNN was first proposed and
applied to handwritten digit recognition by Lecun et.al. . CNN has more diverse layer
types than deep neural network (DNN). It has convolution, pooling and fully connected layers.
The convolution and pooling layers act as feature extractors. At the rear end, near the output
layer, CNN employs fully connected layers for classification. A sample CNN network is shown
in Fig. 1. In CNN, the most computationally expensive layers are the convolution layers. The
fully connected layers are implemented as matrix multiplications. Convolution layer
convolves the k×k kernels with n feature maps of previous layer. If the next layer has m feature
maps, then n × m convolutions are performed and n × m × (H ×W × k × k) MAC operations are
performed, where W and H represents the feature map width and height of the next layer.
Further the convolution layers default memory access pattern is not cache friendly. It is
therefore highly desirable to reduce the complexity of convolution layers. In the literature,
there have been various attempts to reduce the computational complexity of convolution
layers. The work of and converts convolutions into matrix-matrix multiplication. This
avoids the usage of 4 to 6 levels of nested loops and speeds up the computation by 3 times .
However redundant data and kernels storage has its own cost of extra memory usage. Our work
proposes to reduce this complexity with structured pruning and fixed point optimization. We
show that strided sparsity is helpful in reducing the size of matrices in convolution lowering
 . The next section discusses this in detail.
Neural Networks Pruning
Pruning permanently drops less important connections from a network for computational
benefits. Unstructured pruning requires sparse representation schemes for reducing
computations, which however demands addressing overhead for computing addresses of
non-zero elements. Structured pruning has no or little extra cost and can be easily exploited for
efficient implementation. We introduce structured pruning at various granularities. In this
section, we present these granularities and the selection of pruning candidates with an
evolutionary particle filter (EPF).
Figure 1 Convolutional neural network with eight layers. Layers C1, C2 and C3 are the
convolution layers while S2 and S4 constitute the two pooling layers. F6 and F7 are the two fully
connected layers. This network can be represented with a string of 1-2-2-4-4-5-4-2 where each
number denotes the count of feature maps in that layer .
Pruning Granularities
Taking computational advantages using randomly scattered unstructured sparsity in a network
is very difficult. It demands many conditional operations and extra representation to denote the
location of zero or non-zero parameters. Generally, the convolution layers in the non-pruned
network have fully connected convolution connections. In Fig. 2, the layer L1, L2 and L3
contain 2, 3, and 3 feature maps, respectively. As channel and feature map are similar
concepts, we therefore used them interchangeably throughout this article. The number of
convolution connections between L1 and L2 is 6 (=2×3) and that between the L2 and L3 are 9.
Each feature map in L2 has a K×K convolution connection from each channel in L1. Thus, the
pruning exploiting the largest granularity is deleting a feature map or feature maps. If a
feature map in a layer is removed, all the incoming and outgoing kernels are pruned. Fig. 2
shows 5 pruned kernels with a red dashed line. Considering the configuration in Fig. 2, the
2-3-3 architecture is reduced to 2-2-3.
The next level pruning is deleting kernels where each kernel represents one whole convolution.
The kernel level sparsity is depicted with blue dotted lines in Fig.2.
The lowest level pruning is using the intra-kernel sparsity, which forces some weights into zero
valued ones. In the previous works, the intra-kernel level pruning is usually conducted by
zeroing small valued weights . We particularly explore the intra-kernel level pruning
using the sparsity at well-defined locations, which is called the intra kernel strided sparsity.
Fig. 2(b) depicts this idea. The starting index for the first non-zero element is randomly
assigned. Therefore the strided sparsity associates an offset as the starting index and the stride
size with each kernel. Figure 3 shows how the strided sparsity and a simple constraint can
reduce the size of feature and kernel matrices. The intra kernel strided pruning has the potential
to bridge the gap between pruning and its computational advantages. Combined with
convolution lowering, it can significantly reduce the computational cost.
Figure 2 (a) shows channel and filter wise pruning. The red dashed line shows channel level pruning.
When we prune all the incoming filters to a feature map, all the outgoing kernels are also pruned.
The blue dotted line depicts pruning kxk kernels. (b) Shows intra kernel level sparsity for both
structured and unstructured cases. Kernel level pruning (blue dotted) is a special case of
intra-kernel pruning, when the sparsity rate is 100%.
(a) Channel and kernel level pruning
Sparsity = 50%
Sparsity = 75%
Stride = 4
Stride = 2
(b) Intra-kernel strided pruning
Figure 3 The top figure provides an example of convolution lowering idea introduced in . (b) Our
proposed idea constrains each outgoing convolution connection for a source feature map to have
similar stride and offset. The offset shows the index of first pruned weight. The constraint is shown
with the similar colored background squares. This significantly reduces the size of both features matrix
and kernel matrix. The first 9 columns in row 1 of the input feature matrix changes from 2 2 1 1 0 1 1 0
2 to 2 1 0 1 2 with the underlined elements pruned. Only the red colored elements in the feature maps
and kernels survive and the rest are pruned. For this example, the size of feature matrix is reduced
from 9×27 to 9×15 and the kernel matrix size is reduced from 27×2 to 15×2. (Better seen in color)
Input features
Convolution
Output features
Kernel Matrix
Traditional
convolution
Matrix Product
Version of
Convolution
Stride = 2
Offset = 1
Stride = 3
Offset = 3
Stride = 2
Offset = 0
Stride = 2
Offset = 1
Stride = 3
Offset = 3
Stride = 2
Offset = 0
Kernel Matrix
Output features
Input features
Convolution
Traditional
convolution
Matrix Product
Version of
Convolution
Particle Filter and Evolutionary Particle Filter
The pruning process needs to select less important connection combinations as pruning
candidates. These connections, when pruned, have least adversary on the network performance
which can be compensated with re-training. Further the highly likely connections survive
through iterative pruning. In this work, we propose to locate pruning candidate connections
with the sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) method also known as particle filters . Particle
(PF) filters finds its applications in several fields - .With a set of weighted particles, the
PF represents the filtering distribution . Particle filter is usually applied to the system model
shown in equation (1) and (2). The state vector is represented by x, k shows the time step, zk is the
observation vector, vk is observation noise and µk is the process noise. The observation function is
represented by h(.) whereas f(.) represents the transition function. When pruning n connections, the
possible combinations are on the order of O(2n) which means that exhaustive search is not feasible.
With N particles, we simulate several possible connection combinations. Fig. 4. shows an example
of particle’s state vector. The trained network is used as the observation function which is noisy as
the classification error rate is greater than 0%. We evaluate the misclassification rate (MCR) on the
evaluation set for each particle. This way importance weight is computed by 1 – MCR. Connections
with high importance survive through several iterations while the rest are pruned. MCR compares
the network assigned label with the true label which guides the network learn the true labels. Once
all particles are assigned there probabilities, then we construct the cumulative distribution function
(CDF) and resample with the sequential importance resampling (SIR) . The transition function
is simulated by perturbing the pruning mask.
PF with finite number of samples suffer from degeneracy and impoverishment problems when less
likely particles are replaced by highly likely particles . The evolutionary particle filter (EPF)
proposes a hybrid approach where genetic algorithm (GA) is combined with PF . Particles
are similar to chromosomes and survival of the fittest has equivalence to the resampling
algorithm. With the hybrid approach, the aim is to increase the fitness of the whole population.
The GA augmented approach re-supplies or re-defines particles in less likely regions while
maintaining the highly likely genes in its chromosome. EPF reduces computational cost as it
requires fewer particles than conventional particle filters . To help reducing the cost of
finding pruning candidates, the importance weight assignment uses the small sized evaluation
set. We also consider that SMC techniques have more potential usages in exploring the
network parameters space.
Figure 4 (a) shows the dotted matrices as the pruning masks for weights between two layers. The x
state vector represents this mask. In (b), one example of the state vector is provided. The circles
represent the neurons while wij shows the weight going from neuron i to j.
xk = f(xk-1) + µk
zk = h(xk) + vk
inp-h1 = {w13,w14,w15,w24}
h1-out = {w36,w46,w47,w57}
(a) Example of pruning candidates paths
PrevLayerUnits
PrevLayerUnits
NextLayerUnits
NextLayerUnits
Network Retraining and Fixed Point Optimization
The proposed work first trains a network to the baseline. This is followed by pruning which
reduces the effective number of network parameters. Pruning degrades the network
performance which is compensated by re-training the pruned network. We set the pruning limit
for each layer depending on its parameter count and learning capacity. Usually, the first
convolution layer has fewer parameters than the following layers. Secondly it directly
performs on the input layer and is therefore more sensitive to pruning . We therefore set a
lower limit for the first convolution layer. During the whole process, we set aside validation set
for network convergence. We particularly show a plot where sparsities at various levels are
applied with different combinations.
In this work we further reduce the memory requirement by quantizing the pruned network with
fixed-point optimization. Quantization techniques are orthogonal to network pruning
techniques and hence can supplement each other . The fixed-point optimization algorithm is
outlined in . During fixed-point optimization, the network keeps both high (32-bit)
and low precision weights. The algorithm obtains quantized weights from floating points using
L2 error minimization. When grouping weights for quantization, each convolution kernel has
one quantization step size. The quantized weights are used in the feed forward path whereas
the corresponding floating point weights are updated in the backward path. The algorithm in
 also evaluates layer wise sensitivity analysis and signal quantization. We apply these
techniques to the pruned network to further squeeze the memory and computational
requirements. The next section provides the initial experimental results and discussions.
Experimental Results
We first show that pruning enables a network to learn better with fewer parameters and
resources. Fig. 6 shows the results of our first experiment. We experiment with two CNN
architectures: NW1 = 3-32-32-32-32-64-10 and NW2 = 3-32-32-21-21-38-10. NW2 has about
half convolution connection of NW1 (1566/3168). We train NW1 on CIFAR10 dataset and
achieve the baseline result shown as black solid line in Fig. 6. This trained network is then
pruned to obtain NW2 which is shown as green line in Fig. 6. We can find that the performance
is quite close to the baseline. In the second case, we randomly initialize NW2 and train it on
CIFAR-10. This is shown as red dashed line in Fig. 6. We can observe that this network
cannot reach close to the baseline or the performance of the pruned network. This indicates that
pruning helps the network learn better. Further transfer learning enables the lightweight
network to inherit useful knowledge from the bigger sized predecessor. For this experiment,
we only conduct channel and kernel level pruning in the second (32 – 32) and the third (32 –
64) convolution layers. Fig. 8 shows a mask matrix at an intermediate stage of pruning.
Vertical black lines show the pruning of feature maps in the destination layer while the
horizontal black lines show pruning of source feature maps. Also kernel level pruning appears
as black squares in Fig. 8 (c). It can be observed that the sparsity is well structured. We present
experimental results on two datasets: MNIST and CIFAR-10 . We observe that pruned
networks show better performance than the non-pruned one because of generalization.
However when we drop too many parameters, the network capability is reduced and that’s
where the error rate starts rising up.
The strided pruning is useful as it introduces intra kernel structured sparsity. We are
conducting experiments on evaluating its effectiveness for convolution lowering .The
proposed work is unique in the sense that it is friendlier for computational benefits. During
training and pruning, we use stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with a mini-batch size of 128
and RMSProp .
The CIFAR-10 dataset consists of a ten class classification problem . The dataset includes
samples from ten classes: airplane, automobile, bird, cat, deer, dog, frog, horse, ship and truck.
The training set consists of 50,000 RGB samples. Test set contains 10,000 samples. Each
sample has 32x32 resolution. We first conduct the experiment with a CNN network having
3-32-32-32-32-64-10 architecture. We divide the training set into the validation set (5000) and
training set (45000). We train the network with rectified linear units and SGD. The network has
a total of 79978 parameters. The channel wise sparsity reduces the network size to
3-32-32-21-21-38-10. The first convolution layer is not pruned. For the 2nd convolution layer,
the numbers of convolution connections are reduced to 672/1024 while the 3rd one is reduced
to 798/2048. As a result 35% and 62% of the convolution connections are dropped with less
than 1 % increase in MCR. The first stage had a total of 50% sparsity. Increasing channel
level sparsity beyond this point causes an increase in the MCR by more than 1%.
In the next set of experiments, we evaluated sparsities in various combinations. Fig.7.
summarizes the results. We can find that channel level pruning is very destructive as it affects
a large number of parameters. Intra kernel sparsities can be induced in various proportions. For
example in a kxk kernel, weights can be pruned with a ratio of 1/2 or 2/3 etc. Our experimental
results show that we can reduce the size of the network by 75% with minimum loss in accuracy.
This is achieved with macro pruning (46%) followed by intra-kernel strided sparsity (shown in
Fig. 7 with a black solid line extending from the red solid line). We further emphasize that this
kind of sparsity is well structured and can be directly encoded in representing convolutions as
matrix-matrix multiplication.
We also apply fixed point optimization to the finally pruned network. The results are shown in
Table 1. We observe that the pruned network can be represented with 3 or 4 bit precision. Here,
the precision of 31-levels denotes 5 bit representation. This further reduces the network size by
a significant amount for on-chip memory based VLSI implementations.
Figure 6 This plot shows that directly training a small sized network cannot reach the
performance level of a similar sized network obtained through pruning.
Figure 8 shows channel and kernel level sparsity. Each entry in the matrix represents a kernel (a)
shows channel level sparsity of 32-32 layer. In this layer we have a total of 1K convolutions. The
figure shows that this number is reduced to 32×24. This also causes kernel level pruning in the next
convolution layer, which is shown in (b) as horizontal black lines. (c) The black squares show kernel
level pruning.
Figure 7. The plot shows pruning applied in various combinations. It is observed that feature
map/channel level pruning followed by intra kernel pruning provides the best result.
Table 1 CIFAR-10 fixed point optimization of pruned NW
Convolution Layers
(M Levels)
Rear Layers
(M Levels)
MNIST is a handwritten digit recognition dataset consisting of 70,000 grey scale images of
28x28 resolutions . These images are divided into training (60,000) and test (10,000) sets.
We first evaluate the effectiveness of structured sparsity for the network architecture
1-20-20-50-50-500-10 . This architecture has two convolution and two pooling layers.
The first convolution layer has 1x20x5x5 weights, whereas the second convolution layer has
20x50x5x5 weights. We first train the network using 50,000 training samples and 10,000
validation samples with SGD. We obtain 0.80% test error rate after training. This is followed
by pruning the network. We do not prune the first layer as it has only twenty convolution
connections. Feature map/channel level pruning is applied to the second convolution layer. At
10th pruning iteration, the network size is reduced to 1-20-20-20-20-500-10 with 0.93% MCR
on the test set. The number of convolution connections in the 2nd layer has been reduced to
400/1000. This is a reduction by 60% in the second convolution layer. This has an indirect
impact on the first fully connected layer which reduces to 20(4x4)-500 from 50(4x4)-500. It is
important to recall that this kind of sparsity does not demand extra representational efforts and
the sparsity is well structured and directly reduces computational cost.
Conclusion
In this work we explored structured sparsity in deep convolutional neural networks. The
sparsity in channel and kernel level is explained along with the intra-kernel strided one. We
found that channel level sparsity cannot be applied in higher proportion as beyond some limit
it affects the network’s representational capacity. Further we found that intra-kernel strided
sparsity along with convolution lowering can significantly reduce the computational
complexity of convolutions. Quantization and pruning are orthogonal techniques and can
augment the savings. In our future work, we are exploring other related aspects of this work
and profiling the execution time effects due to reduced size convolution lowering.