Monte-Carlo Tree Search: A New Framework for Game AI
Guillaume Chaslot, Sander Bakkes, Istvan Szita and Pieter Spronck∗
Universiteit Maastricht / MICC
P.O. Box 616, NL-6200 MD Maastricht, The Netherlands
{g.chaslot, s.bakkes, i.szita, p.spronck}@micc.unimaas.nl
Classic approaches to game AI require either a high
quality of domain knowledge, or a long time to generate effective AI behaviour. These two characteristics
hamper the goal of establishing challenging game AI.
In this paper, we put forward Monte-Carlo Tree Search
as a novel, uniﬁed framework to game AI. In the framework, randomized explorations of the search space are
used to predict the most promising game actions. We
will demonstrate that Monte-Carlo Tree Search can be
applied effectively to (1) classic board-games, (2) modern board-games, and (3) video games.
Introduction
When implementing AI for computer games, the most important factor is the evaluation function that estimates the
quality of a game state. The classic approach is to use heuristic domain knowledge to establish such estimates. However,
building an adequate evaluation function based on heuristic knowledge for a non-terminal game state is a domaindependant and complex task. It probably is one of the main
reasons why game AI in complex game-environments did
not achieve a strong level, despite intensive research and additional use of knowledge-based methods.
In the last few years, several Monte-Carlo based techniques emerged in the ﬁeld of computer games. They have
already been applied successfully to many games, including POKER and SCRABBLE . Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), a Monte-Carlo
based technique that was ﬁrst established in 2006, is implemented in top-rated GO programs. These programs defeated
for the ﬁrst time professional GO players on the 9×9 board.
However, the technique is not speciﬁc to GO or classicalboard games, but can be generalized easily to modern boardgames or video games. Furthermore, its implementation is
quite straightforward. In the proposed demonstration, we
will illustrate that MCTS can be applied effectively to (1)
classic board-games (such as GO), (2) modern board-games
(such as SETTLERS OF CATAN), and (3) video games (such
as the SPRING RTS game).
∗This research was funded by a grant from the Netherlands Organization for Scientiﬁc Research (NWO grant No 612.066.406
and grant No 612.006.409).
Simulation
Backpropagation
The selection function is applied
recursively until a leaf node is
One or more nodes
are created
The result of this game is
backpropagated in the tree
One simulated
game is played
Simulation
Backpropagation
The selection function is
applied recursively until
a leaf node is reached
One or more nodes
are created
The result of this game is
backpropagated in the tree
One simulated
game is played
Repeated X times
Figure 1: Outline of a Monte-Carlo Tree Search.
Monte-Carlo Tree Search
Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), illustrated in Figure 1, is
a best-ﬁrst search technique which uses stochastic simulations. MCTS can be applied to any game of ﬁnite length.
Its basis is the simulation of games where both the AIcontrolled player and its opponents play random moves, or,
better, pseudo-random moves. From a single random game
(where every player selects his actions randomly), very little can be learnt. But from simulating a multitude of random
games, a good strategy can be inferred. The algorithm builds
and uses a tree of possible future game states, according to
the following mechanism:
Selection While the state is found in the tree, the next action
is chosen according to the statistics stored, in a way that
balances between exploitation and exploration. On the
one hand, the task is often to select the game action that
leads to the best results so far (exploitation). On the other
hand, less promising actions still have to be explored, due
to the uncertainty of the evaluation (exploration). Several
effective strategies can be found in Chaslot et al. 
and Kocsis and Szepesv´ari .
Expansion When the game reaches the ﬁrst state that cannot be found in the tree, the state is added as a new node.
This way, the tree is expanded by one node for each simulated game.
Simulation For the rest of the game, actions are selected at
random until the end of the game. Naturally, the adequate
weighting of action selection probabilities has a signiﬁcant effect on the level of play. If all legal actions are
selected with equal probability, then the strategy played
Copyright c
⃝2008, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Proceedings of the Fourth Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment Conference
is often weak, and the level of the Monte-Carlo program
is suboptimal. We can use heuristic knowledge to give
larger weights to actions that look more promising.
Backpropagation After reaching the end of the simulated
game, we update each tree node that was traversed during
that game. The visit counts are increased and the win/loss
ratio is modiﬁed according to the outcome.
The game action ﬁnally executed by the program in the
actual game, is the one corresponding to the child which was
explored the most.
Application to Classic Board-Games
Classic board-games, i.e., two-player deterministic games
with perfect information, have been submitted to intensive
AI researched.
Using the alpha-beta framework, excellent results have been achieved in the game of CHESS and
CHECKERS. However, alpha-beta only works well under
two conditions: (1) an adequate evaluation function exists,
and (2) the game has a low branching factor. These two conditions are lacking in numerous classical board-games (such
as GO), modern board-games and video games. As an alternative to alpha-beta, researchers opted the use of MCTS.
Initially, the use of randomised simulations in classic boardgames was criticised by researchers. However, it was later
shown that MCTS is able to use highly randomised and
weakly simulated games in order to build the most powerful
GO-programs to date. It is noticeable that the best programs
were built by people who only knew the rules of GO, and
were not able to play the game at a strong level themselves.
In our demonstration, we will present our program
MANGO, which is a top-rated GO program. We will use
graphical tools to demonstrate how MANGO focuses its
search on the most promising moves. We will emphasise
that MCTS without any expert knowledge can still achieve a
reasonable level of play.
Application to Modern Board-Games
Modern board-games (also called ‘Eurogames’) are becoming more and more popular since their (re)birth in the 1990’s.
The game SETTLERS OF CATAN can be considered an
archetypical member of the genre. Modern board-games are
of particular interest to AI researchers because they provide
a direct link between classic (two-player, perfect information) board-games and video games. On the one hand, state
variables of most modern board-games are discrete, and decision making is turn-based. On the other hand, the gameplay in modern board-games often incorporates randomness,
hidden information, multiple players, and a variable initial
setup that makes it impossible to use opening books.
SETTLERS OF CATAN has several computer implementations, which typically feature a hand-designed, rule-based
AI. The strength of these AI’s varies, but an experienced
player can defeat them easily. Few research papers are available on autonomous learning in SETTLERS OF CATAN, and
according to the results reported therein, they are far from
reaching human-level play yet. In our demonstration, we
will show that MCTS outperforms previous heuristic game
AI’s in SETTLERS OF CATAN, and provides a challenging
opponent for humans.
Application to Video Games
Video games present a complex and realistic environment
in which game AI is expected to behave realistically (i.e.,
‘human-like’). When implementing AI in video games, arguably the most important factor is the evaluation function
that rates the quality of newly generated game AI. Due to the
complex nature of video games, the determination of an adequate evaluation function is often a difﬁcult task. Still, experiments performed in the SPRING RTS game have shown
that is is possible to generate an evaluation function that
rates the quality of game AI accurately before half of the
game is played . However, it
is desirable that accurate ratings are established even more
early, when adaptations to game AI can inﬂuence the outcome of a game more effectively.
Monte-Carlo simulations provide a powerful means to accurately rate the quality of newly generated game AI, even
early in the game. In our demonstration, we will show how
we abstract the SPRING RTS game for use of MCTS simulation. The abstraction contains, among others, the position
of each unit in the game, and the game strategy employed
by all players. In the Monte-Carlo simulations, simulation
data is incorporated from a case-base of previously played
games. We will emphasise that in complex video-games, effective game AI may be established by using MCTS, even
with highly randomised and weakly simulated games.
Conclusions
In this paper, we put forward Monte-Carlo Tree Search
(MCTS) as a novel, uniﬁed framework to game AI. In the
framework, randomized explorations of the search space are
used to predict the most promising game actions. We state
that MCTS is able to use highly randomised and weakly simulated games in order to established effective game AI. In
demonstrations, we will show that MCTS can be applied
effectively to (1) classic board-games, (2) modern boardgames, and (3) video games.