The statistics of natural hand movements
James N. Ingram,
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 1PZ,
Konrad P. Körding,
Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA
Ian S. Howard, and
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 1PZ,
Daniel M. Wolpert
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 1PZ,
Humans constantly use their hands to interact with the environment and they engage
spontaneously in a wide variety of manual activities during everyday life. In contrast, laboratorybased studies of hand function have used a limited range of predefined tasks. The natural
movements made by the hand during everyday life have thus received little attention. Here, we
developed a portable recording device that can be worn by subjects to track movements of their
right hand as they go about their daily routine outside of a laboratory setting. We analyse the
kinematic data using various statistical methods. Principal component analysis of the joint angular
velocities showed that the first two components were highly conserved across subjects, explained
60% of the variance and were qualitatively similar to those reported in previous studies of reachto-grasp movements. To examine the independence of the digits, we developed a measure based
on the degree to which the movements of each digit could be linearly predicted from the
movements of the other four digits. Our independence measure was highly correlated with results
from previous studies of the hand, including the estimated size of the digit representations in
primary motor cortex and other laboratory measures of digit individuation. Specifically, the thumb
was found to be the most independent of the digits and the index finger was the most independent
of the fingers. These results support and extend laboratory-based studies of the human hand.
Human hand; Digit independence; Dimensionality of hand movements; Movement statistics
Introduction
One important characterization of the human hand is the number of degrees of freedom
(DOF) spanned by its movements. This defines the dimensionality of the control problem
solved by the motor system. Anatomically, the five digits of the hand comprise a total of 15
© Springer-Verlag 2008
Correspondence to: James N. Ingram.
e-mail: .
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Exp Brain Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 February 06.
 
Exp Brain Res. 2008 June ; 188(2): 223–236. doi:10.1007/s00221-008-1355-3.
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
joints, which afford approximately 20 DOFs . However, the
extent to which each of these DOFs is independently controlled during movement is
unknown and has been the subject of a number of laboratory-based studies . It is known, for example, that the mechanical architecture of the
hand places constraints on the independent control of the digits . The neural and neuromuscular architecture of the hand
appears also to limit the degree of independent control . Moreover, it is thought that the motor system may
employ synergies to reduce the dimensionality of the hand and thus simplify the control
problem . The
existence of such synergies has been characterized by applying statistical techniques, such as
principal component analysis (PCA) and non-negative matrix factorization (NMF), to
kinematic and EMG data collected from human subjects
performing laboratory-based tasks . In
other studies the degree to which humans are capable of making individuated movements of
each digit has been examined . The general conclusion of
these studies is that the effective dimensionality of the human hand is much less than the 20
DOFs, which are theoretically available for movement.
Many studies have analysed reach-to-grasp movements and characterized hand kinematics
 .
These studies report high correlations between the angles of the major joints of the fingers.
For example, PCA of joint angles reveals that the first two to three components explained
the vast majority of the variance in hand posture. These results suggest dimensionality
reduction and may be evidence for the existence of motor synergies in the control of the
hand. This idea is strengthened by the finding that it is difficult for human subjects to move
one digit without some degree of involuntary movement at one or more of the other digits.
In a kinematic study of digit independence Häger-Ross and Schieber developed an
Individuation Index to quantify the ability of each digit to move without associated
movements of the other digits. The thumb scored highest on the individuation scale,
followed closely by the index finger, with the little finger third in the ranking, followed by
the middle finger and finally the ring finger with the lowest score. Digit independence has
also been examined using force production tasks with similar findings. Zatsiorsky et al.
 asked subjects to produce force at a single finger and examined the involuntary
production of forces (enslaving) at the other fingers. They report large enslaving effects for
all fingers indicating an inability of subjects to individuate force production. The effects
were always largest for the immediate neighbours of the task finger with more distant
fingers exhibiting smaller enslaving effects. Reilly and Hammond also measured
force production by digits when subjects where instructed to produce force at a single digit
and similarly reported involuntary forces at non-instructed digits. These were smallest when
the instructed digit was the thumb, increasing, respectively, for the index, middle and little
fingers and were largest for the ring finger.
The above conclusions about the reduced dimensionality of the hand and limited
individuation of the digits are based on data collected during laboratory-based experiments
using fixed tasks. These necessarily impose constraints on the variety of hand movements
permitted. Here, we address this issue by analysing a natural movement dataset collected
from the right hand of subjects by way of a wearable motion tracking system. This allowed
our subjects to engage spontaneously in normal everyday tasks outside of a laboratory
setting. Just as many properties of sensory systems can be understood in terms of the
statistics of their natural stimuli , we suggest that statistical analyses of the range
Ingram et al.
Exp Brain Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 February 06.
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
of natural movements made during everyday life can contribute to our understanding of the
motor system.
Six healthy male subjects, aged 31-43 gave informed consent and participated in this study.
Three of the subjects were authors and three were volunteers who were naive to the purpose
of the experiment. No qualitative differences were observed between these groups. The
experimental protocol was approved by the local ethics committee.
Data acquisition
Movements of the right hand were measured using resistive sensors embedded in a cloth
glove (CyberGlove, Virtual Technologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA). The sensors were
associated with 19 DOF of the hand (Fig. 1a) and consisted of the metacarpal-phalangeal
(MCP), proximal interphalangeal (PIP) and distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint angles for the
four fingers (Index: I, Middle: M, Ring: R, Little: L), the three relative abduction angles
between the four fingers (I/M-ABD, M/R-ABD, R/L-ABD), the carpo-metacarpal (T-CMC),
metacarpal-phalangeal (T-MCP) and interphalangeal (T-IP) joint angles for the thumb (T)
and the abduction angle (T-ABD) between the thumb and the palm of the hand. Sensors
were sampled continuously at 84 Hz at a resolution of 8 bits per sensor. This gave an
effective sensor resolution between 0.3° and 0.9° depending on the sensor and calibration
for each subject (mean ± SD over all sensors and all subjects 0.6° ± 0.2°). The palmer
surface of the CyberGlove is a flexible fishnet material permitting free movement and a
degree of cutaneous sensation, which would be impaired by a traditional cloth glove.
Although wearing a glove may alter tactile feedback, on questioning, subjects did not
complain of any specific restriction of their movements.
Subjects wore a small backpack that weighed approximately 5 kg and contained a laptop
computer, the digitizing control unit for the glove, a 12-V battery pack and DC power
regulator. The backpack was a standard off-the-shelf item, which was unmodified and
secured to the subject by its shoulder straps. The glove was connected by a cable to the
digitizing controller in the backpack, which was read via the serial interface on the laptop.
The glove’s cable was secured to the forearm and upper arm using adjustable Velcro straps.
The backpack contained all the hardware required for the data acquisition and allowed the
subject full mobility. Subjects wore the backpack and glove for one or two recording
sessions, which (depending on battery life) could last up to 2 h. A flashing LED on the base
of the glove indicated that the recording session was in progress. Subjects were instructed to
go about their normal routine and return to the lab when the LED stopped flashing. The only
restriction was to avoid doing anything, which might soil the glove or get it wet.
Calibration
The glove was calibrated for each subject using a three-step procedure. In step one, a simple
two-point calibration was performed for each joint using a mechanical splint. This was
performed only once for each subject and provided an approximate linear calibration
between sensor output and joint angle. In step two, which was performed before every
recording session, the linear calibration was further refined using an online visualization
system. This used a realistic computer-generated OpenGL rendering to create an image of a
virtual human hand. The virtual hand was displayed on a stereoscopic 3D graphics system
and by using a semisilvered mirror, the image was overlaid on the subject’s own hand. The
virtual hand was animated in real-time by data from the glove. The calibration for each
sensor was manually adjusted until the movements of the virtual hand closely matched those
Ingram et al.
Exp Brain Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 February 06.
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
of subject’s hand. In step three, a zero point for all sensors was set using a standard posture
as follows. Subjects were instructed to place their hand palmdown against a flat surface with
the four fingers parallel and the thumb aligned against the side of the palm. A reading was
then taken from the glove and this served as the zero point for joint angles in the subsequent
recording session. The visualization system used in step two allowed the calibration of the
glove to be verified. An offline figure animation package (Poser, Curious Labs Inc., Santa
Cruz, CA, USA) was used to visualize and illustrate hand postures.
Data analysis
Joint angle data for the 19 sensors and a time-stamp for each sample were stored to disk for
offline analysis using MatLab (Release 14, The MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA). The
quantization of the 8-bit sensor data was smoothed using a linear phase FIR filter designed
in MatLab using the Generalized Remez FIR filter design function. The filter length was 151
samples and its frequency response yielded zero attenuation at or below 4.2 Hz and 90 dB
attenuation at or above 6.4 Hz. Angular velocities were calculated from the first difference
of the filtered joint angle data divided by the time step. Datasets from the multiple recording
sessions for each subject were concatenated and the analyses were performed on the
complete datasets for each subject. Subject means are reported in all cases. Basic statistics
for individual joints were calculated for both joint angles and angular velocities. During the
analysis of joint angles we found occasional outliers in the data, which we attributed to
sensor deformations caused by contact of the sensor-surface of the glove with objects in the
environment. Such outliers were very rare and were removed from the statistical analysis of
joint angles by excluding values outside the 99.8% percentiles.
The dimensionality of hand movements was examined by means of a PCA of the angular
velocities. Angular velocities were also used to calculate correlation coefficients between
the flexion/extension joints (MCP, PIP and DIP) of the four fingers. Whereas previous
studies have performed such analyses on angular positions, angular velocities were chosen
in this case because they are more closely related to the motor commands driving movement
 .
Inspired by previous studies, which have characterized the degree of independence of the
digits we developed new
measures of digit independence based on the linear predictability of the movements of each
digit. A velocity matrix was created for each digit using the instantaneous angular velocities
calculated from the filtered joint angle data as described above. The matrix for each digit
consisted of a time series (rows) of angular velocities (columns) for the four joints of each
digit. The columns of the velocity matrix for the thumb came directly from the angular
velocities derived from its four sensors. For the fingers, three columns of the velocity matrix
came directly from the angular velocities derived from the three flexion/extension sensors. It
was necessary to estimate the fourth (abduction) column of the velocity matrix from angular
velocities derived from the three sensors, which measured the relative abduction angle
between the four fingers (see Fig. 1a). Half the angular velocity associated with each sensor
was assigned equally to the two adjacent fingers. This method would be expected to slightly
under-estimate measures of finger individuation. However, these effects will be minimal due
to the much greater contribution from the flexion/extension joints relative to abduction.
The velocity matrices were used to calculate three measures to quantify the movements of
the digits. The first measure quantified the total amount of movement associated with each
digit and was calculated by taking the unsigned sum of the four elements in the velocity
matrix across time and across joints. The resulting value expressed the total angular path
length for each digit and was normalized across the five digits.
Ingram et al.
Exp Brain Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 February 06.
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
The second measure quantified digit independence. We used linear regression to fit each
component of the velocity matrix of a given digit as a function of the velocity matrices of
the other four digits collectively. We then calculated the percentage of the digit’s
movements that were unexplained by this linear fit. More Specifically, we calculated the
ratio of the variance of the residual of the linear reconstruction to the total variance for that
digit. This yielded a single value expressed as a percentage for each digit of the hand.
Because this measure was designed to quantify the independence of each digit’s movements,
it was expressed as percent unexplained variance. As such, a value of 0% would indicate
that the movements of a particular digit could be completely predicted by linear
reconstruction using the movements of the other four digits. Conversely, a value of 100%
would indicate that none of the movements of a particular digit could be predicted from the
other four digits.
The third measure quantified the degree of coupling between digit pairs. We used linear
regression to fit the velocity matrix of a given digit as a function of the velocity matrices of
each of the other four digits individually. It thus yielded four values for each digit (one value
for each pairing of the digit with the other four digits) to give a total of 20 values for the
hand. These values were expressed as the percentage of total variance of a digit’s velocity
matrix that could be explained by a linear reconstruction based on its paired regressions with
each of the other four digits. Because this measure was designed to quantify coupling
between the digits, it was expressed as percent explained variance. As such, a value of 100%
for a particular digit pairing would indicate that the movements of one digit could be
completely predicted by linear reconstruction using the movements of the other digit.
Conversely, a value of 0% would indicate that none of the movements of the digit could be
predicted from the movements of the other.
A final analysis was performed in which we determined the percentage time that each digit
was moving. A cut-off velocity was chosen (20 deg/s) to convert the velocity data to binary
flags that indicated the periods of movement for each digit. This binary data was then used
to determine the total time that each digit was moving as well as the percentage of those
movements that occurred while other digits were stationary. We called this measure the
percent exclusive movements because it indicated the percentage of movements that were
exclusive to each digit. We also determined movement time percentages for various
combinations of the digits, including movements of the fingers both with and without
accompanying movements of the thumb.
We obtained datasets of spontaneous everyday hand movements from six subjects during
recording sessions, which lasted an average of 93 ± 7 min each (range 84-108 min). One
subject completed a single recording session and the remaining five subjects completed two
sessions (on different days). A total of 16 h 57 min of data were collected (range 86-206 min
per subject). Each dataset represented the postural configuration of the digits of the hand as
a function of time and consisted of 19 joint angles sampled continuously at 84 Hz (see
“Methods” and Fig. 1a). As an example, we show the angular trajectories obtained while a
subject was reaching for a glass of water (Fig. 1b). The figure shows the angular trajectories
(top) for the 19 joints and 3 static hand postures (bottom) from the sequence as the hand was
opening (time indicated by lines). Post-experimental questioning of subjects showed that
they had engaged in a wide variety of tasks both indoors and outdoors including shopping,
cycling, eating, drinking, typing, food preparation and reading.
Ingram et al.
Exp Brain Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 February 06.
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Basic statistics
As a first step in the analysis we examined the basic statistics of the dataset (Table 1, Fig. 2).
The hand posture representing the mean joint angle is shown in Fig. 2a. The skew of the
angle distributions indicates whether a particular joint is more often extended (negative
skew) or more often flexed (positive skew). It varied for each joint (see Table 1). Generally
the distributions of angles for the PIP and DIP joints of the fingers were positively skewed
as was the distribution of angles for the MCP joint of the little finger (0.8). The distributions
of abduction angles between the fingers were also positively skewed. The distribution of
angles for the IP joint of the thumb was negatively skewed (−1.0). For the remaining joints,
the angular distributions were not greatly skewed. We further quantified the angles and
angular velocities using frequency histograms (shown for the index figure in Fig. 2b and c).
Note that the percent time for the velocity distributions in Fig. 2c is on a log scale and
indicates that the hand spends a considerable proportion of the time not moving. We also
calculated the percentage time that any joint was moving faster than a specific angular speed
(Fig. 2d). For approximately 50% of the time the angular velocity of all joints was less than
10 deg/s. This corresponds to a very slow movement and indicates that the hand was
essentially at rest for approximately half the time. In addition, it was rare to see angular
velocity exceed 100 deg/s.
Principal component analysis
Our dataset potentially spans a 19-dimensional space. However, previous studies have
suggested that hand movements occupy fewer dimensions than the theoretical maximum. To
estimate the dimensionality of the hand movements in our dataset we performed a PCA on
joint angular velocities. The first few principal components (PC) of this PCA explained
much of the variance (Fig. 3a). For example, the first two PCs accounted for more than half
of the variance (60.2 ± 4.1%) and the first ten PCs collectively explained almost all of the
variance (93.5 ± 1.1%). Mean correlations between subject pairs for the first two PCs were r
= 0.89 ± 0.09 for PC 1 and r = 0.96 ± 0.03 for PC 2 showing that they were well conserved
across subjects. The first PC explained 40.5 ± 5.6% of the variance and reflected a
coordinated extension (opening) and flexion (closing) of the MCP, PIP and DIP joints of the
four fingers. The second PC explained an additional 19.7 ± 4.1% of the variance and also
involved the flexion/extension joints of the four fingers. Figure 3b shows how these first two
PCs interact to modulate hand posture. The central panel represents the mean hand posture
and the edge panels represent the mean hand posture ± one standard deviation weighted for
each joint using the cooefficients from the first (horizontal axis) and second (vertical axis)
PC. As can be seen the first two PCs combine to produce a large range of hand postures.
Interestingly, the thumb does not feature prominently in the first two PCs. However, a third
PC was well conserved for four of the six subjects (mean correlation between these four
subject pairs was r = 0.88 ± 0.03) and explained a further 6.8 ± 1.0% of the variance. The
joints of the thumb were prominent in this third PC whereas the joints of the fingers
contributed very little. A subject-by-subject analysis of the first eight PCs revealed eight
additional components, which followed the pattern of large contributions from the joints of
the thumb in conjunction with small contributions from the fingers.
An additional PCA was performed using joint angles for comparison with the PCs obtained
above using angular velocities. The first two PCs obtained from joint angles versus angular
velocities were remarkably similar (Table 2) with mean within subject correlations of r =
0.89 ± 0.12 and r = 0.92 ± 0.05 for PC1 and PC2, respectively. The higher order PCs,
however, were much less strongly correlated (typical r values between 0.4 and 0.5).
Ingram et al.
Exp Brain Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 February 06.
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Comparison with previous studies
A number of previous studies have analysed hand movement datasets collected in a
laboratory setting. An important question arising from the current study is whether there are
differences between the statistics of hand movements made in the laboratory and those made
during everyday life. For example, Santello et al. performed a PCA on joint
angles of the hand collected during a reach-to-grasp task. They used a version of the
CyberGlove, which did not include the most distal finger joint sensors (DIP). To directly
compare our dataset with this previous study, we performed a PCA on joint angles and
omitted the finger DIP joints. In this analysis, the first two PCs from our dataset accounted
for 70% of the variance, compared to 74% in the previous study. These results indicate that,
at least with regards to PCA of joint angles, the hand movements made during a laboratory
reach-to-grasp task are representative of the movements during everyday life.
Correlations between joints of the fingers
To understand the dependencies between the different joints of the fingers we calculated
correlation coefficients between the angular velocities of the three flexion/extension joints
(MCP, PIP, DIP). Correlations for heterogeneous joint pairs of the fingers (Fig. 3c) were
strong between the PIP and DIP joints and weak between the MCP and PIP joins and MCP
and DIP joints. Correlations for homogenous joint pairs of the fingers (Fig. 3d) were highest
between the MCP joints and decreased progressively for the more distal PIP and DIP joints.
Between-finger correlations were highest for immediately neighbouring fingers, falling off
for progressively more distant fingers (Fig. 3e). These patterns of correlations suggest a
topographic scaling of correlations, with strong correlations between proximal joints versus
distal joints and also between immediately neighbouring fingers versus more distant fingers.
Measures of digit independence
The PCA analysis can estimate the dimensionality of the hand’s movements but does not
provide a measure of the complexity or independence of each digit’s movement. To estimate
the independence of the digits, we developed three measures based on angular velocity. The
first measure was calculated as the total angular path length for each digit (normalized
across the five digits) and was designed to quantify the total amount of movement.
According to this measure each digit was associated with approximately the same amount of
movement (Fig. 4a). However, this result does not capture correlations between the digits,
which we addressed by developing a further two measures.
Our second measure was based on the linear predictability of digit angular velocities and
was designed to estimate digit independence. Previous studies have shown that in humans,
digits such as the thumb and index finger are moved relatively independently, whereas other
digits such as the middle and ring fingers are most often moved together with the other
digits . In terms of neural
coding, the amount of information needed to exclusively control the movement of each digit
would be expected to vary depending on the degree to which its movements are related to
the other digits. Figure 4b shows our measure of digit independence. It is expressed as the
percent variance that was unexplained in a linear reconstruction based on the movements of
the other four digits. This measure varies across the digits, with the largest amount of
unexplained variance associated with the thumb, followed by the index finger, then the little
and middle fingers, and was smallest for the ring finger. This pattern of digit independence
was correlated with several previous studies (Fig. 4c, d). The Penfield Size, which is the
number of cortical sites encoding movement for each digit from the classic study of Penfield
 , is shown in Fig. 4c. It is highly correlated with our digit
independence measure (r = 0.96, Fig. 4e). The Individuation Index, which is a measure of
the ability of human subjects to make individuated movements of each digit, from a study by
Ingram et al.
Exp Brain Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 February 06.
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Häger-Ross and Schieber , is shown in Fig. 4d. Similarly, this measure is highly
correlated with our first linear predictability measure (r = 0.84, Fig. 4f). The patterns of digit
independence in everyday life thus correlate well with laboratory-based measures and the
size of the digit representations in the motor system.
Our third measure was also based on the linear predictability of digit angular velocities. It
was designed to quantify coupling between pairs of digits (Fig. 5). This measure is
expressed as the percent variance that was explained in a linear reconstruction based on
pairing the digit with each of the other four digits. The grey 100% bar in these figures shows
the pairing of the digit with itself. The four black bars show pairings with the other digits.
Results for the thumb (Fig. 5a) show that its movements are very difficult to predict by
linear reconstruction from the movements of any of the fingers. Results for the fingers (Fig.
5b-e) show that the best linear reconstructions (highest coupling) are based on the
movements of the immediately neighbouring fingers. In the case of the little finger (Fig. 5e)
we see a progressive decrease in the percent variance explained as distance increases. The
mean values for each of the digits are shown in Fig. 5f (the 100% self-pairing case is
omitted). This analysis shows that while the thumb moves independently of the fingers,
movements of the fingers are related to each other with decreasing strength as distance
increases.
Analysis of digit movement times
The proportion of time during which each digit was moving provided another means of
analysing the dataset (Fig. 6). Total movement time was similar for all digits (Fig. 6a)
indicating that each digit was in motion for approximately the same amount of time. In
contrast, the percentage of movements that were exclusive to each digit varied widely across
the digits (Fig. 6b) and was highly correlated with our first linear predictability measure (r =
0.96; compare Fig. 4b with Fig. 6b). Specifically, percent exclusive movement was largest
for the thumb, followed next by the index finger, then the little and middle fingers, and was
smallest for the ring finger. As with our first linear predictability measure, percent exclusive
movement was highly correlated with the Penfield Size (r = 0.96) and the Individuation
Index (r = 0.85). Figure 6c shows the percentage of movements for each finger that are made
exclusively with the thumb. This is expressed as the percentage of movements, which
involve only the thumb and one finger. Almost half of such movements (48%) consist of
movements of the thumb exclusively paired with the index finger. Figure 6d shows the
results of a movement-time analysis for various combinations of the digits. As can be seen,
one or more of the digits are moving 40% of the time. Of these movements, 88% include
movements of one or more of the fingers, 66% include movements of the thumb, and 57%
include combined movements of both the thumb and one or more of the fingers. The four
fingers move together almost as frequently as do all combinations of fewer than four fingers
(17% compared to 20%, respectively). Of those times when the four fingers are moving
together, 82% of the movements also involve the thumb. In contrast, movements made by
combinations of fewer than four fingers involve the thumb only 47% of the time. It is
relatively rare for one finger to move in isolation (7%) and more than half of such
movements (68%) involve the thumb. Although the thumb makes more isolated movements
than any other digit (see Fig. 6b), most of its movements (86%) are nevertheless combined
with movements of one of more of the fingers. These patterns of movements show that the
hand most frequently moves as a unit and that isolated movements of individual digits are
Discussion
We analysed a natural movement dataset collected from the right hand of human subjects
who were free to behave spontaneously outside of the laboratory setting. The dataset
Ingram et al.
Exp Brain Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 February 06.
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
represents almost 17 h of recording from six subjects and contains over five million hand
postures. We applied a variety of statistical techniques to the dataset in order to characterize
the hand movements made by humans during everyday life.
Dimensionality of the hand
From a PCA we found evidence for two major components in the movements of the hand.
Both components were highly conserved across subjects and involved flexion/extension of
the four fingers. Moreover, they were similar whether angular positions or angular velocities
were analysed. This similarity almost certainly results from the fact that human movements
are discrete with bell-shaped velocity profiles, which would tend to correlate variance in
position with variance in velocity. Together, the two components explained over half of the
variance in joint angular velocities and appeared qualitatively similar to those previously
reported in laboratory-based studies of reach-to-grasp movements . In these previous studies, the existence of PC has
been used to argue for synergistic control of the hand. This would suggest that reach-tograsp movements or the synergies that mediate them may form an important component of
the natural everyday tasks performed by the hand. Moreover, conservation across our six
subjects suggests that these synergies may represent a fixed strategy for control of the hand.
This is in contrast to suggestions by Todorov and Ghahramani who argue against the
existence of fixed synergies in motor control. In their study, the first two PCs of the hand
movement dataset varied between subjects and also between tasks. To account for this, they
propose an optimal control strategy in which synergies are assembled dynamically in
response to the specific requirements of each task. However, their conclusions are based on
data from a limited number of tasks which may not have captured the full range and
frequency of movements made by the hand on a day-to-day basis. We suggest that the
frequency with which different movements occur will greatly influence the control strategies
used by the motor system. This can only be determined from the study of natural,
spontaneously generated movements.
Independence of the digits
Digit independence has previously been studied in a laboratory setting using tasks designed
by the experimenter to measure the upper limits of independent movement. In a kinematic
study of digit independence, Häger-Ross and Schieber asked subjects to move each
digit in turn while keeping the other digits completely still. They developed a measure of
independence for the digits (the Individuation Index), which quantified the ability of each
digit to move without associated movements of the other digits. This measure could not be
applied to our dataset because it requires knowledge of which digit the subject intends to
move. Instead, we developed a measure of digit independence based on linear predictability.
Our measure was highly correlated with Hager-Ross’s Individuation Index and importantly
preserved the ranked order for the digits, with the thumb being the most independent of the
digits, the index finger the most independent of the fingers and the ring finger the least
independent of all. While previous studies have employed artificial tasks Specifically
designed to measure the limits of independent movement, we confirm the pattern of digit
independence in the natural everyday use of the hand.
Neural representation of the digits
The issue of digit independence is related to questions about the allocation of neural
resources in cortical representations of the digits. Hypothetically, if two digits were always
perfectly correlated in their movements (scoring 0% by our independence measure) then it
would be more efficient to have a single neural representation to drive both of them.
Similarly, if the movements of two digits were always completely independent of each other
(scoring 100% by our measure) they would require two separate non-overlapping neural
Ingram et al.
Exp Brain Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 February 06.
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
representations. In our analysis the digits scored between these extremes suggesting that the
neural control may be mediated by both independent and overlapping populations of
neurons. Moreover, it should be possible to predict the extent of these independent and
overlapping populations based on the pattern of digit independence. In monkey, for
example, overlapping representations of the digits are very common; the majority of the
cortico-motoneuronal (CM) cells activate several different hand muscles .
Digit independence is low in these primates. In humans the only comparable
electrophysiology study is that of Penfield and Broldrey , which used surface
stimulation of the cortex to estimate the size of the cortical representations for different parts
of the body. Although some of Penfield’s conclusions have been questioned , we nevertheless found a high correlation
between our measure of digit independence and Penfield’s estimates of the size of each
digit’s representation. If this result can be confirmed using contemporary methods, it would
suggest that the allocation of neural resources for each digit in motor cortex may be
correlated with the capacity for independent movement.
Coupling of the fingers
In previous studies, which rank the relationships between the fingers, it has been reported
that immediately neighbouring fingers are most closely correlated. Zatsiorsky et al. 
asked subjects to produce force at a single instructed finger and report enslaving effects by
which involuntary forces were produced at all non-instructed fingers. The effects were
always largest for the immediate neighbours of the instructed finger with more distant
fingers exhibiting smaller enslaving effects. Similarly, Aoki et al. found that all
fingers produced involuntary movements during a single finger-tapping task. These
involuntary movements were always greatest for the fingers immediately adjacent to the
tapping finger. Santello et al. used the CyberGlove (15 sensor version) to study the
dynamic evolution of hand posture during reach-to-grasp movements. They found positive
correlations between MCP joint pairs and PIP joint pairs for the fingers and these were
highest between adjacent fingers. This topography of finger interactions, with the
movements of immediately neighbouring fingers being most correlated, emerged from our
dataset in a number of analyses. In an analysis of homologous flexion/extension joints of the
fingers (MCP, PIP, DIP), correlations were highest between immediately neighbouring pairs
of fingers, falling off progressively with more distant pairings. In our paired linear
predictability analysis, the topographic relationship between the fingers was also evident,
with the immediate neighbours of each finger explaining most of the variance in that
finger’s movements, falling off progressively for more distant pairings. This is especially
evident for the little finger, although the trend is present for each finger.
The musculoskeletal anatomy of the thumb is unique, relative to the fingers and relative to the thumbs of other primates .
Mechanically, the limitations on the independent movement of the thumb appear to be
negligible compared to the fingers . Moreover, clinical studies of
stroke patients suggest subtle differences in the neural architecture of the thumb compared to
the fingers . Not surprisingly,
the thumb emerged as a special digit in a number of our analyses. In our first linear
predictability measure, which characterized overall digit independence, the thumb ranked
highest, scoring almost twofold higher than the index finger. In our second linear
predictability measure, which characterized the coupling of movements between pairs of
digits, the pattern for the thumb was very different to that of the fingers. In this analysis, the
movements of the thumb were similarly independent of each of the four fingers, whereas the
fingers exhibited a topographically scaled pattern of coupling. In our movement time
Ingram et al.
Exp Brain Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 February 06.
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
analysis, although the thumb did not differ from the fingers with regard to the total time it
was moving, its percentage exclusive movements were twofold more frequent than those of
the index finger. In our PCA, the first two components (which explained over half the
variance of the dataset) involved the four fingers to the exclusion of the thumb. Conversely,
the thumb’s contribution to higher order components was in many cases to the exclusion of
the four fingers. This suggests the existence of synergies involving the fingers, which
exclude the thumb and also the existence of synergies involving the thumb, which exclude
the fingers.
The fingers
In contrast to the unique patterns of movement for the thumb, movements of the four fingers
were shown to be closely related. Correlations between flexion/extension joints across the
fingers were highest proximally at the MCP joints and decreased progressively at the more
distal PIP and DIP joints. Conversely, correlations between the flexion/extension joints
within each finger were low for the MCP joint and very high between the PIP and DIP
joints. These patterns of joint correlations were the same for each finger. The high
correlations between the PIP and DIP joints of the fingers justify assumptions made in
previous studies . The fingers were shown to work together in the first
two components of our PCA. This cooperative behaviour of the fingers was also highlighted
in our movement time analysis. A significant proportion (42%) of the movements of the
hand involved the four fingers moving together. Such movements were almost as frequent as
any combination of three or fewer fingers. Moreover, when the four fingers moved together,
they involved the thumb for a large proportion of the time (82%). This supports the proposal
that the four fingers work together to form a “virtual finger” in opposition to the thumb
 . It also suggests that whole-hand movements, involving all
the digits, form an important part of the behavioural repertoire of the hand. Indeed, 35% of
all movements in the dataset were whole-hand movements. With regard to the fingers, the
index finger emerged as unique in a number of analyses. Its movements were the most
independent among the fingers, scoring twofold higher than its nearest rival in our digit
independence measure. In addition, of the 6% of movements, which involved the thumb and
a single finger, almost half (47%) of such movements involved the index finger. This special
relationship between the thumb and index finger is suggestive of the precision tip pinch grip
by which especially small objects are manipulated .
Factors contributing to the pattern of digit independence
It is likely that both mechanical and neural factors contribute to the pattern of digit
independence reported here . For example,
mechanical factors limiting independence of the fingers may include coupling by the skin,
soft tissues and tendons. This was examined by von Schroeder and Botte using the
hands of cadavers. They measured the angles of the MCP, PIP and DIP joints of the four
fingers while applying traction to the extensor tendons of single fingers. Traction of single
finger tendons resulted in extension of all fingers. The effect was always highest for the
immediate neighbours of the actively extended finger, falling off progressively for more
distantly removed fingers. This suggests that mechanical factors contribute to the pattern of
digit coupling we found for the fingers. In a more recent study, Lang and Schieber 
measured joint angles of the digits during externally applied flexion and extension. They
show negligible coupling between the thumb and the fingers, consistent with our findings.
Moreover, the pattern of mechanical coupling they report for the fingers also matches our
results, again highlighting a role for mechanical factors. Studies, which have used EMG to
examine the activity of the extrinsic finger muscles, have also reported this pattern of
coupling between the fingers. For example, Kilbreath and Gandevia made
Ingram et al.
Exp Brain Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 February 06.
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
intramuscular EMG recordings from the flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) muscle, one of
the four-tendon extrinsic hand muscles, which flex the fingers. Subjects lifted small weights
individually with each of the fingers. Regions of the muscle serving non-lifting fingers were
also active and the level of this activity was scaled based on proximity to the lifting finger.
In a more recent study, Reilly and Schieber also made intramuscular EMG
recordings from FDP and similarly report activity in regions of the muscle serving nontask
fingers. They suggest that incomplete division of the muscle into separate functional
compartments limits the ability of the fingers to move independently.
Neural factors also contribute to the pattern of independence of the digits. Exclusive
movement of a single digit is complicated by the fact that many of the muscles involved act
on multiple joints and multiple digits . The neural control of individuated
digit movements therefore requires activation of the muscles directly involved in moving the
digit as well as muscles required to prevent unwanted movements at the other digits. Moving
of a single digit likely requires a pattern of activation and inhibition of the muscles acting on
every digit and individual neural controllers for each digit would be required to
communicate extensively . In the primary motor cortex of
monkeys, single neurons are active during multiple digit movements and such neurons are
dispersed through the entire representation of the hand . In
humans, fMRI studies suggest partial segregation of digit-specific regions in primary motor
cortex and this may contribute to the
ability of humans to individuate digit movements. Moreover, clinical studies of the effects of
small cortical lesions also suggest some degree of digit specialization in primary motor
cortex .
Conclusion
We have measured the statistical properties of natural movements of the human hand. Our
results generally support those obtained from laboratory-based studies. However, because
such studies necessarily employ a limited set of tasks, it is important to verify their
conclusions using natural movement datasets. Specifically, we have verified the pattern of
digit independence in the everyday use of the hand and shown that many aspects of natural
hand movements have been well characterized by previous studies of the reach-to-grasp
Acknowledgments
We thank Roger Lemon for useful comments on an early version of the manuscript. GRANTS: This work was
supported by the Wellcome Trust and the Human Frontiers Science Program.