Vol.:(0123456789)
AI & SOCIETY 38:411–423
 
OPEN FORUM
Operationalising AI ethics: barriers, enablers and next steps
Jessica Morley1 · Libby Kinsey2 · Anat Elhalal2 · Francesca Garcia2 · Marta Ziosi1 · Luciano Floridi1,3
Received: 31 May 2021 / Accepted: 13 October 2021 / Published online: 15 November 2021
© The Author(s) 2021
By mid-2019 there were more than 80 AI ethics guides available in the public domain. Despite this, 2020 saw numerous news
stories break related to ethically questionable uses of AI. In part, this is because AI ethics theory remains highly abstract,
and of limited practical applicability to those actually responsible for designing algorithms and AI systems. Our previous
research sought to start closing this gap between the ‘what’ and the ‘how’ of AI ethics through the creation of a searchable
typology of tools and methods designed to translate between the five most common AI ethics principles and implementable
design practices. Whilst a useful starting point, that research rested on the assumption that all AI practitioners are aware
of the ethical implications of AI, understand their importance, and are actively seeking to respond to them. In reality, it is
unclear whether this is the case. It is this limitation that we seek to overcome here by conducting a mixed-methods qualitative analysis to answer the following four questions: what do AI practitioners understand about the need to translate ethical
principles into practice? What motivates AI practitioners to embed ethical principles into design practices? What barriers
do AI practitioners face when attempting to translate ethical principles into practice? And finally, what assistance do AI
practitioners want and need when translating ethical principles into practice?
Keywords  AI ethics · Applied ethics · Business ethics · Ethical practices · Ethical principles
* Jessica Morley
 
Libby Kinsey
 
Anat Elhalal
 
Francesca Garcia
 
Marta Ziosi
 
Luciano Floridi
 
Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, 1 St Giles’,
Oxford OX1 3JS, UK
Digital Catapult, 101 Euston Rd, London NW1 2RA, UK
Department of Legal Studies, University of Bologna,
Bologna, Italy
1950; Wiener 1954). In recent years, as uses for AI solutions
have multiplied and have started to impact people’s everyday lives in tangible and significant ways, the conversation
has moved out of its academic enclave and entered the consciousness of the public and policymakers . The
result has been a rapid proliferation of primarily principlebased ethics statements, frameworks, codes of conduct, and
standards (henceforth ethics guides) from industry, academia
and both national and supranational Governing bodies. Initially, the production of such documents was viewed as being
the key to the creation of the right conditions for the ethical
design, development and deployment of AI systems in society. However, over time, it has become increasingly clear
that whilst these documents’ existence might be necessary
for the creation of these much-needed pro-ethical conditions
 , it is far from sufficient .
By mid-2019, there were more than 80 ethics guides
available in the public domain . Despite
this, 2020 saw numerous news stories break related to ethically questionable uses of AI in healthcare ;
education ; law enforcement ;
recruitment ; risk assessment ; and more . In part, the
1  Introduction
Since the very earliest days of Artificial Intelligence (AI)
development researchers have been raising concerns about
the ethical implications of its use in society 38:411–423
limited impact of principle-based ethics guides can be attributed to the fact that there are so many different guides, but
very few systems are in place to check for compliance with
these guides. This has created a scenario in which those producing, purchasing, or using AI systems can ‘ethics shop,’
‘ethics wash,’ and ‘ethics dump’ without fear of facing any
real consequences . However, the impact has
arguably been more significantly restricted by the fact that
ethics guides remain highly abstract, and of limited practical applicability to those actually responsible for designing
algorithms and AI systems. This abstraction tends to encourage a public opinion that there are good and bad algorithms,
rather than well designed or poorly designed algorithms. The
UK Prime Minister, Boris Johnson, for example described
an algorithm used to predict A-level grades in August 2020
as a ‘mutant algorithm’ when it was shown to be highly
discriminatory , rather than commenting on
the design decisions that led its ethically poor performance.
Portraying algorithms and by extension AI-systems as
somehow objectively good or bad, ethical or unethical,
incorrectly implies that AI-systems can act as independent
moral agents over which human agents have little control
 . This undermines the agency of AI developers, engineers, and designers (henceforth collectively
practitioners) and slows progress from the ‘what’ of AI
ethics (principles) to the ‘how’ (concrete design decisions)
 . Challenges to this perspective have
made clear that the impact (negative or positive) of an AI
system is defined by the choices made during the design
process , and practitioners have, therefore, been
encouraged to accept their duty of care to those on the receiving end of actions made
by AI systems .
AI practitioners cannot, however, be expected to take on
this duty without any support. Individuals making seemingly
neutral design decisions need assistance if they are to be
expected to understand how these decisions might result in
grossly different social or environmental outcomes . Such assistance needs to: (i) go beyond general
guidelines for professional and ethical practice; (ii) embody
a tool-set that does not require a deep background in philosophy; (iii) reflect the normative status of ethical reasoning;
(iv) be practically applicable to real-world ethical decisions
 ; (v) enable developers to think through potential future scenarios ; and (vi) ensure all stakeholders are engaged
and involved in design decisions, rather than simply consulted about them . The best way to provide
assistance of this nature, and therefore implement the practice of AI ethics, remains unknown .
Our previous research has attempted to start closing this
knowledge gap through: the development and use of a question-based ethics framework; the creation of a searchable
typology of tools and methods designed to translate between
the five most common AI ethics principles and implementable design practices ; and the
formalisation of the concept ‘Ethics as a Service’ . Whilst the findings from this previous research
have proven useful, for the sake of simplicity we have rested
on the assumption that all AI practitioners are aware of the
ethical implications of AI, understand their importance,
and are actively seeking to respond to them. In reality, that
simplifying hypothesis was useful to develop (and did not
undermine) other parts of our research but was always going
to be challenged. For we do not know for certain that this is
always the case. Nor do we know what the variables are that
might affect awareness, understanding and corresponding
action. In short, when it comes to the operationalisation of
AI ethics, we lack information about the barriers and enablers, therefore we cannot know the best way to encourage
widespread adoption of pro-ethical AI practices. It is this
limitation that we seek to overcome in the following pages
by answering these four questions:
(a) What do AI practitioners understand about the need to
translate ethical principles into practice?
(b) What motivates AI practitioners to embed ethical principles into design practices?
(c) What barriers do AI practitioners face when attempting
to translate ethical principles into practice?
(d) What assistance do AI practitioners want and need
when translating ethical principles into practice?
Specifically, Sect. 2 describes our methodology; Sect. 3
outlines the results; Sect. 4 discusses the implications of the
findings and makes some recommendations for making AI
ethics more practical and implementable; Sect. 5 summarises the limitations of this research; and Sect. 6 concludes
the discussion.
2  Methodology
When designing a programme of research, the choice of
which method to employ is dependent upon the nature of
the research problem  . If our intention was to
develop an in-depth understanding of how one method for
translating ethics principles into practice might become
effective, then a case study approach would be most appropriate, as demonstrated by Vakkuri and Kemell in
their review of the RESOLVEDD strategy for ethical decision-making, or Wong et al. in their evaluation of
mobile Augmented Reality (AR) learning trails—Trails
of Integrity and Ethics—in Hong Kong. Alternatively, a
AI & SOCIETY 38:411–423
scoping or systematic review approach could be appropriate, as Nicholls et al. highlighted with their review of
empirical research assessing the quality and effectiveness of
research ethics reviews. However, in this instance neither the
systematic review nor the case study approach would produce results that were generalisable enough. Therefore, we
employed a mixed-method qualitative approach designed to
produce a high-level general description of the experiences
of AI practitioners attempting to implement AI ethics practices by combining a survey with semi-structured interviews.
2.1  Survey
Survey participants were recruited using a snowball method
 with the link to the survey being distributed
across social media and via relevant mailing lists. In total,
we collected 54 responses to the survey; 15 respondents
were from start-ups, 6 from small-medium enterprises, 9
from large corporations, and 10 from primarily public sector
organisations, covering a range of sectors including healthcare, retail, education, media and entertainment, finance,
academia, life sciences, and Government. Although this is
a relatively small sample size, preventing us from generating statistically significant results, it is a sufficient sample
for generating descriptive results—as was our intention.
Descriptive statistics were, therefore, used to analyse the
2.2  Interviews
Interview participants were recruited using a purposeful
sampling method targeting specific individuals from startups (via the Digital Catapult’s Machine Intelligence Garage),
big-tech companies (via AI for People1), and the public sector. In total, six semi-structured interviews were conducted
online via video conference. Each lasted between 20 and
60 min and covered a range of topics, including: general
awareness of AI ethics; interpretation and understanding of
AI ethics principles; experience of trying to build AI ethics into AI products; potential uses of translational tools
and methods; problems faced when trying to operationalise
the principles of AI ethics; perceived benefits of designing
AI products pro-ethically; and perceived disadvantages of
designing AI products pro-ethically. Thematic analysis was
used to analyse the results.
2.3  Ethics
Ethics approval for this research was granted by the Oxford
Internet Institute’s departmental research ethics committee.
Participants were not paid to be part of the study; interviews
were not recorded; and notes were blinded. Survey data was
collected using the Qualtrics platform which is GDPRcompliant, and no personal details were collected from the
respondents.
3  Results
Responding to questions in the survey, and in the interviews,
about the need for AI ethics, and its operationalisation, participants highlighted a number of common themes. Here
we summarise the key findings from this thematic analysis,
before discussing the implications of these findings for AI
ethics researchers and AI practitioners.
3.1  The theoretical importance of pro‑ethical
design is well recognised, but its definition
remains narrow
When asked directly, 91% of survey respondents believe that
designing AI products ‘ethically’ is very important for a
number of reasons, including the positive impact pro-ethical
design is perceived to have on consumer trust and satisfaction (43%), but mostly because pro-ethical design is perceived to improve social impact (46%) (Fig. 1). However,
it is also clear that for many AI practitioners, this simply
means they recognise the importance of being compliant
with the tenets of data protection with the most commonly
recognised principles being privacy and security (41%), and
the least commonly recognised being autonomy and solidarity (7%) (Fig. 2). This is perhaps to be expected. Both
interview and survey respondents highlighted difficulties
with justifying the additional time and resource costs associated with ‘pro-ethical’ design, especially when there is
no clear return on investment (Fig. 3). With data protection
principles, companies have no choice but to accept these
costs—and perhaps understand the potential reputation boost
that comes from enhanced privacy control—yet this is not
the case for other, more abstract, ethical principles which are
more focused on ‘doing good’ rather than ‘preventing harm.’
It is possible that this will change over time as consumers become more aware of potential ethical issues and use
their purchasing power to persuade AI companies to take a
broader range of ethical concerns seriously. Interviewees,
for example, repeatedly defined ethical AI as ‘AI that isn’t
biased,’ reflecting the impact of media coverage of discriminatory algorithms, and several highlighted the intersection
between bias and consumer trust. 82% of those who believe
pro-ethical design incurs disadvantageous additional costs
also recognise that pro-ethical design improves consumer
trust and satisfaction, and 59% think that it improves customer loyalty (Fig. 4). It makes sense that, eventually,
increased consumer trust leads to increased profit which
1  See for more information.
AI & SOCIETY 38:411–423
Fig. 1   Perceived benefits of proethical AI design
Improves social impact
Improves consumer trust
Improves public reputation
Improves consumer loyatly
Improves overall product quality
Improves competitiveness
Improves staff retention and satisfaction
Improves market opportunities
Improves profit
What do you perceive to be the benefits of developing AI products ethically?
% of survey respondents, n= 54
Fig. 2   Ethical principles used
by companies to guide the
design of AI products
Responsibility
Non-maleficence (avoiding harm)
Explainability
Accountability
Transparency
Beneficence (doing good)
Sustainability
Solidarity
Which, if any, of the following principles does your company claim to abide by when developing AI products?
% of survey respondents, n = 54
Fig. 3   Perceived disadvantages
of pro-ethical design
Incurs additional costs
Slows down rate of innovation
Drains resources
Weakens competitiveness
Increases exposure to criticism
Worsens overall product quality
Lessens market opportunities
What do you perceive to be the disadvantages of developing AI products ethically?
% of survey respondents, n = 54
AI & SOCIETY 38:411–423
would better motivate investment in pro-ethical design. The
challenge is in managing the lag between identifying ethical
concerns and spreading the necessary level of public awareness needed to enact this cascade effect .
3.2  Lack of clarity over roles and responsibilities
Overall, AI practitioners are reasonably confident in their
own abilities to design AI products pro-ethically when decisions sit with them (Fig. 5). On the surface, this is positive,
though it may reflect the narrow understanding of AI ethics
as outlined above. However, it is a lot less clear to practitioners who are ultimately responsible (and who should be held
accountable) for ensuring alignment between product design
and ethical principles (Fig. 6), and therefore who sanctions
AI practitioners’ pro-ethical actions.
Just under a quarter of survey respondents (24%)
expressed a view that the responsibility should sit with all
those involved in designing, developing or deploying AI systems. This is certainly an ideal view from the perspective of
virtue ethics and the idea that all AI
practitioners should be developing responsibility-as-a-virtue
 so as to become conscious of the
ethical implications of all their decisions. Yet caution is necessary. Interviewees also stressed that without the support of
company senior leadership, or appropriate whistleblowing
policies , individual practitioners feeling
responsible does nothing other than leaving these individuals
Fig. 4   Benefits of incurring
additional cost for the purpose
of pro-ethical design
Improves profit
Improves competitiveness
Improves market opportunities
Improves overall product quality/effectiveness
Reassures investors and other stakeholders
Improves staff retention and satisfaction
Improves consumer loyalty
Improves public reputation
Improves consumer trust and satisfaction
Improves social impact
Benefits of incurring additional costs for purposes of pro-ethical design
% of survey respondents who think pro-ethical design incurs additional costs, n=17
I am confident in my ability to design AI products pro-ethically
If I have concerns about the ethical implications of an AI product I
am designing/developing, I feel comfortable raising them
If I raise concerns about the ethical implications an an AI product I
am designing/developing, I feel confident that I will be listened to
If I have concerns about the ethical implications of an AI product I
am designing/developing, I know who to approach and how
I have sufficient time to think through the ethical implications of the
AI product I am designing/developing
If I were uncomfortable about the ethical implications of an AI
product I was designing/developing, I would leave my job
Neither agree nor disagree
Agreement with statements about pro-ethical design behaviour
% of survey respondents, n = 54
Fig. 5   Pro-ethical design behaviours
AI & SOCIETY 38:411–423
vulnerable to retaliation ) and
feeling burnt out. This is concerning as it is clear that these
support mechanisms are frequently not in place. Just 13%
of respondents think that the executive team of a company
should hold a degree of responsibility for pro-ethical design.
This most likely explains why—despite survey respondents
saying that they (even though interview respondents said the
opposite) feel relatively comfortable raising ethical concerns
about products they are involved in designing or developing—less than two-thirds feel confident that they know who
to approach if they had concerns, feel that they would be listened to, or feel as though they have sufficient time to think
through the ethical implications of their decisions (Fig. 5).
Unfortunately, cases like that of Timnit Gebru, show that
individual workers from ethnic minorities are likely to be
at greater risk of the types of retaliation interviewees were
describing.
Unionisation could potentially change this. Although
unions are not necessarily automatically a ‘good’ or proethical force, indeed they can behave problematically, by
giving workers protection in numbers, unionisation could
help those closest to the design and impact-monitoring of
AI products, raise concerns publicly and hold companies
accountable without fear of ramification. The possibility of
this being a lever for change is made especially apparent
by the fact that 50% of survey respondents said they would
leave their current employment if they had significant ethical
concerns (Fig. 5) and 39% believe pro-ethical design practices aid staff satisfaction and retention (Fig. 5). Google’s
recently created workers’ union could represent a watershed
moment from this perspective . Alternative, or additional, potential options to unionisation are
those falling under the umbrella heading of professionalisation, for example requiring AI practitioners to register with
a professional body that holds them accountable for meeting
certain ethical standards as is seen in medicine and other
safety–critical sectors.
3.3  Disconnect between availability and demand
for pro‑ethical design resources
When it comes to the availability of pro-ethical design
resources, or translational tools and methods, there is a clear
disconnect between what is available to AI practitioners, and
what they would find useful. In all instances, the proportion
of survey respondents who have access to a specific type
of resource (e.g., ethical framework) is far smaller than the
proportion who would find that particular resource helpful
when trying to pro-ethically design AI products (Fig. 7).
This gap between ‘supply and demand’ is most noticeable
for the more practical resources .
For instance, 13% of survey respondents indicated that they
have used ethical design specifications, but 28% indicated
they would find such a resource useful—a gap of fifteen
percentage points. In contrast, a fifth of survey respondents
indicated that they had access to a Code of Conduct, and
24% indicated they would find such a resource useful. This
suggests that the AI ethics community is not yet meeting the
needs of AI practitioners, despite the plethora of resources
that have been produced .
Interviewees were particularly keen to stress the limitations of high-level principle-based frameworks, commenting
on the confusion caused by the sheer number of frameworks
to choose from and the lack of clarity provided by principles. One of the interviews discussed how this issue had left
Fig. 6   Individuals responsible
for ensuring pro-ethical design
of AI products
Product manager
Data scientist
Product designer
Data engineer
Executive team
Legal advisor
HR manager
Sales manager
Within your company who do you think should be responsible for ensuring AI products are designed
ethically?
% of survey respondents, n=54
AI & SOCIETY 38:411–423
them feeling as though AI ethics is just ‘tick-boxy’ and ‘buzzwordy’, whilst several others stressed the fact that ethics,
as a whole, as well as the specific principles, mean different
things to different people in different contexts and yet it is
rare for ethics frameworks to provide definitions or guidance
on how to deal with these nuances. For this reason, several
interviewees stated that they would prefer enforceable standards to be developed, provided these standards made ethics
relatable and actionable.
3.4  Increasing need to implement external
accountability mechanisms
The outlined limitations of current resources available
to help AI practitioners translate ethical principles into
design practices and the risk of ethics washing introduced
by these limitations would, perhaps, be less concerning if
there were more external scrutiny of company behaviours.
Currently, the use of external accountability mechanisms
such as ethics-based auditing is
limited. Just 6% of survey respondents indicated that they
have used auditing services for this purpose (Fig. 7). This is
potentially because the idea is relatively new , but uptake is also likely hampered by the fact that,
without standardised approaches to pro-ethical design, it is
not exactly clear what ethical-compliance would look like
from an auditability perspective. (The data might be biased
as 36% of respondents were from startups, less likely to have
the necessary resources to engage in audits).
Insurance is an alternative mechanism for ensuring external scrutiny raised by the interviews. Several interviewees
suggested that AI companies could be required to take out
insurance against ethical harms which, in turn, may prompt
the adoption of impact assessment tools as well as the regular use of ethical verification, validation and evaluation practices . This has been the case with the
introduction of insurance and inspection in other safety–critical areas, such as medical devices. One interviewee even
went so far as to suggest a future in which having insurance
against ethical harms was a prerequisite for operating as an
AI development company. Whether or not this is the best
suggestion, or even a feasible one, is beyond the scope of
this discussion. What the suggestion does highlight is the
growing need for the standardisation of ‘pro-ethical design’
and the development of readily implementable ethical practices. How the AI ethics community can respond to this call
for help is the topic of the next section.
4  Next steps for the operationalisation of AI
The results discussion demonstrates that AI practitioners
have an abstract and relatively narrow understanding of ethical principles and how these can be translated into practice.
There is recognition that pro-ethical design can improve
social impact, particularly from the perspective of avoiding
bias. However, for the most part this is interpreted from a
risk-based approach as meaning avoiding harm—for example avoiding privacy infringement—rather than actively
doing good either for society or for the environment. This
suggests that AI practitioners are primarily motivated to
translate ethical principles into design practices by the law,
which currently seems to provide the only justification for
investing additional resources into AI product design. This
is a systematic issue since in a competitive environment no
Fig. 7   Which of the following resources do you/have
you used to help you develop/
design AI products in an ethical manner? And which of the
same resources would you find
helpful when trying to develop/
design an AI product ethically?
Code of Conduct
Best practice examples
Ethics framework
Ethical principles
Ethical design specificiations
Consultation with ethicisits
Technical toolkit
Case studies
External ethical audits
Would find useful
Availability vs. Demand for Pro-ethical Design Resources
% of survey respondnets, n = 54
Have available
AI & SOCIETY 38:411–423
actor can afford to bear such extra costs individually. This is
problematic, however, as although legislation might make it
easier for AI practitioners to justify additional spend to their
shareholders, its existence would not negate the need for ethics. This is because whilst the law provides AI practitioners
with answers to ‘could’ questions, it does not provide them
with answers to ‘should’ questions. Or, to put it another way,
the law provides AI practitioners with the rules of the game,
it does not provide them with a strategy for ‘winning.’ In
short, AI products that are merely legally compliant will
not necessarily be ethically justifiable or socially acceptable.
Furthermore, as briefly mentioned previously, new laws have
a long lead-time, and they cannot be responsible to changes
in social norms or attitudes, which may happen quite rapidly.
Ethics will always be needed, therefore, to guide practitioners when they are operating in the ‘grey areas.’ Only when
AI practitioners find themselves facing the same ‘grey’ issue
repeatedly, and society finds itself suffering from the consequences of related poor-decisions, is it likely that legislation
will be developed to provide AI practitioners with the reassurance they seek—this is known as the normative cascade
 .
It is, therefore, unrealistic to expect laws to be the ‘solution’ to all ethical dilemmas. It is also, potentially problematic, to treat pro-ethical design as a ‘nice to have’ rather
than an essential—as is implied by AI practitioners waiting
to justify the associated costs on legislation. Yet, other benefits, such as those related to public reputation and consumer
loyalty, seem to motivate public declarations of compliance
with principles, but do not yet provide sufficient motivation
for altering design behaviours or practice in the absence of a
clear return on investment or a request for legal compliance.
At the same time, the motivation of individual AI practitioners who might be willing to effect change from the bottom-up is undermined by a lack of conceptual clarity about
the meaning of ethical principles, and a lack of protection
against retaliation from unsupportive senior stakeholders.
As one interviewee said: ‘we want to do the right thing, we
just don’t know what that is or how to do it.’ This particular
barrier could, perhaps, be lowered by greater use of translational tools and/or methods. However, there appears to still
be limited uptake of those available in the public domain—
or at least limited availability—and, therefore, uptake of the
translational tools that practitioners would find most helpful. It seems that, as convincingly argued by Rességuier and
Rodrigues there is a need to provide a mechanism
other than the law that gives AI ethics ‘teeth’ (or makes proethical design enforceable) to ensure its adoption.
If read from the perspective of ‘what has not yet been
achieved’ these findings could be perceived as being demoralising. However, the findings are a reflection of the state of
the industry/research field and only represent a generalisation from a few stances. They should not be seen as suggesting that no progress has been made in the field of pro-ethical
AI, nor as a denial of the fact that there are examples of
excellent pro-ethical practice. Instead, the findings should
be seen as identifying the foundation from which we, as the
pro-ethical AI community, can now build by taking a series
of both macro actions focused on cultural change and micro
actions focused on further developing existing translational
tools—particularly ethics frameworks.
4.1  Encouraging a cultural shift
At a macro level, there is a need for actions that support a
broader cultural shift in the realm of data-driven innovation. First, all AI practitioners (and indeed technologists in
general) need to be encouraged to develop an understanding
of the ethical implications of the products that they design
by combining ethics theories in
mandatory courses provided to all data science, computer
science, engineering, etc., trainees. Much can be learned
here from the way that medical ethics is taught to all those
in medical school . The focus should
be on practical ethics, such as the use of empathy exercises
 , and the development of critical
thinking skills that will help future AI practitioners develop
the ability to fight against Hume’s guillotine where ‘is’ is
confused with ‘ought’ .
Second, AI ethics researchers, in collaboration with journalists and public engagement specialists, should focus on
making AI ethics relatable—both to AI practitioners and
to the public. As we have discussed, highly abstract principles are potentially hindering rather than helping attempts to
ensure AI products are developed pro-ethically. Bringing the
principles down to a lower level of abstraction and focusing
on more readily understandable questions such as ‘is this
the right solution for the problem?’ ‘is the solution working in the right way?’ ‘is the product having the right kind
of impact?’ can better support discussions about potential
ethical implications .
Third, policymakers and legislators need to push against
the false logic of the Collingridge dilemma . This is the idea that, when trying to govern
emerging technologies, they face a double-bind problem of
information and power whereby impacts cannot be easily
predicted until a specific technology is extensively developed and widely used, but technology cannot be controlled
or changed once it has become entrenched. Believing that
their actions are restricted by this double bind allows policymakers and legislators to take an unjustified laissez-faire attitude to technological development and enables technology
AI & SOCIETY 38:411–423
companies to exert undue influence over both society and
government. It is true that the impacts of technology—
including AI technology—are hard to predict from the outset and that, therefore, inflexible legislation would be inappropriate and potentially even harmful. Nevertheless, some
technological impacts remain foreseeable and when they are
not, they hardly occur suddenly, they become increasingly
visible gradually, and hence can be addressed at an earlier
stage when correcting measures are more easily implementable. The European Commission has already recognised this,
and recently proposed the first-ever legal framework for AI
 . Other nation states or supranational organisations may follow suit. Alternatively, other
governing bodies may make the perfectly reasonable decision to take interim steps that encourage greater reflexivity
throughout the whole accountability chain and thus mitigate risk. Examples
of such interim measures include: requiring AI companies
to have an auditable whistleblowing policy and procedure
in place; developing insurance policies against algorithmic
harms; fostering the development of a more diverse tech
workforce; and adapting copyright legislation appropriately
so that more code can be shared openly for the purposes
of error-checking, reuse and validation, without companies having to be concerned about the loss of intellectual
property rights. Such interim actions can help foster a culture built on what Benrimoh et al. term Meticulous
Transparency where everything about an AI product from
the motivations for its development, its implementation, and
its interaction with people and systems is recorded and made
available for scrutiny.
4.2  Supporting the implementation and use
of ethics frameworks
Macro-level changes will not happen overnight. For now, we
must accept that the majority of AI practitioners do not have
access to ethics frameworks. We cannot let this continue to
be a reason for not being more proactive when it comes to
ethical harms associated with AI. Instead, practical steps
should be taken to enhance the utility of these frameworks,
including our own (see Box 1).
Box 1: The digital catapult ethics framework (DCEF)
The DCEF was developed by the Digital Catapult’s independent Ethics Committee following consultation with a
number of Digital Ethicists and other experts. The framework consists of fourth levels and is intended to help AI
start-ups working with the Digital Catapult to define and translate, transparently and contextually, high-level ethical principles into practice. The first level, therefore, consists of the five unifying high-level principles identified
by Floridi et al. : beneficence, non-maleficence, autonomy, justice, explicability. The second level consists of
seven interpretations (or contextual definitions) of these principles identified through documentary analysis consultation with AI practitioners and those affected by AI systems. The third level operationalises Habermas’s concept of
discourse ethics , i.e. an approach that seeks to establish normative values and ethical truths
through open discourse, and consists of a series of questions that are designed to encourage AI practitioners to conduct ethical foresight analysis . The fourth level provides access to more practical, and less
discursive tools e.g. python libraries designed to identify bias in data. The connections between the levels are shown
below. Companies using the DCEF to translate high-level ethical principles into practice are encouraged to consult
it at validation, verification and evaluation stages of their product development pipeline, to ensure that at each stage
time is dedicated to thinking through the ethical implications of all decisions made. This discussion is supported by
members of the independent AI ethics committee through consultations which also provide a vehicle for reviewing
the efficacy of the Framework itself.
AI & SOCIETY 38:411–423
Beneficence: promoting
well-being, preserving
dignity, and sustaining the
Non-maleficence: privacy,
security and ‘capability
Autonomy: the power
to decide (whether
to decide)
Justice: promoting
prosperity and preserving solidarity
Explicability: enabling
the other principles
through intelligibility
and accountability
Be clear about the benefits
of the product or service
Consider the business
Know and manage the risks
Use data responsibly
Be open and understandable in communications
Promote diversity,
equality and inclusion
Be worthy of trust
For example:
What are the goals, purposes and intended applications of the product or
Who or what might benefit
from the product/service? Consider all potential groups of beneficiaries, whether individual
users, groups or society
and environment as a
For example
Is the training data appropriate for the intended use?
Have potential biases in
the data been examined,
well-understood and documented and is there a plan
to mitigate against them?
For example:
Does the company
communicate
clearly, honestly and
directly about any
potential risks of the
product or service
being provided?
Are the company’s
policies relating to
ethical principles
available publicly
and to employees?
Are the processes
to implement and
update the policies
open and transparent?
For example:
Are there processes
in place to establish
whether the product
or service might
have a negative
impact on the rights
and liberties of individuals or groups?
Does the company
have a diversity and
inclusiveness policy
in relation to recruitment and retention
For example:
Is there a process to
review and assure the
integrity of the AI
system over time and
take remedial action
if it is not operating
as intended?
Does the company have
a clear and easy to
use system for third
party/user or stakeholder concerns to be
raised and handled?
See:  
2  Jira is a software development tool developed by Atlassian
designed to help software developers plan, track and manage agile
software development.
From the perspective of implementation, more should
be done to match the ‘tasks’ associated with ethics frameworks (including discussing answers to open questions
posed by frameworks) to normal stages in the workflow
of software development. As one interviewee described
it, thinking of ethics as ‘something else to do’ increases
the cognitive load and resource burden too much, but if
ethical considerations become standard aspects of software verification, validation of evaluation processes and
prompts to ask ‘x’ question at ‘y’ stage are embedded in
software project management tools such as Jira,2 this will
be less of a barrier. In short, we should move to a development pipeline where ‘ethics review’ becomes as much
a standard part of the workflow as ‘code review’ and the
use of ethics frameworks is perceived to be as essential
as code review checklists. One way to do this is to tie
more closely ethical consideration with user research and
expand the concept of the latter so that the focus of UX
and UI is not simply on user need but user impact. Additionally, tools like the consequence scanner developed
by DotEveryone can help AI practitioners think through
the impacts of the systems they design (DotEveryone).
From the perspective of utility, until AI practitioners have gained more experience considering ethical
implications and translating these considerations into proethical design decisions, they will require more specific
guidance on ‘what good looks like.’ Eventually, this may
come in the form of standards—something which some
AI practitioners are waiting for—but in the meantime,
this guidance can be provided by detailed case studies
of where excellent pro-ethical design has been achieved
 and the impact that this had on
product success. A request for the latter was also made by
one of the interviewees, who voiced the need to be confronted with such excellent cases as a yardstick to judge
one’s own ethical performance. These will be especially
impactful if developed in collaboration with the responsible AI practitioners themselves, and those affected by
the relevant AI system. These may seem like small suggestions, but if acted upon they have the potential to make
a relatively big impact in the near future.
This does not, however, mean to imply that once AI
Ethics Frameworks—and methods for translating the
principles into practice—are unilaterally available, then
the ‘problem’ of AI Ethics is ‘solved.’ To imply this
would be to subsequently imply that it is possible to come
to an unambitious technical solution to any potential area
of ethical controversy. This is simply not possible, ethics, and by extension ethics frameworks, are not hard
rules that, if followed, will always result in the ‘right’
outcome. There is no ‘one’ way to be ethical—even if
AI & SOCIETY 38:411–423
AI practitioners might like this to be the case. Instead,
applying the concepts of pro-ethical design requires
recognition of the fact that the ‘most ethical’ solution
depends entirely on the wider socio-cultural context. To
take the risks associated with discriminatory or ‘biased’
algorithms, demonstrated by the highly popular and oftquoted ProPublica investigation into algorithms used to
calculate recidivism risk . One way
for minimising the potential for algorithms to be discriminatory is to ensure no protected characteristics, for example, race, are included in the datasets used to train the
algorithm. This might work, for example, when designing
algorithms that analyse a person’s creditworthiness but,
in other contexts—notably medical contexts—it might be
essential that such characteristics are included to ensure
the accuracy of the algorithm and so avoid harm. Similarly, there may be instances in which it is necessary to
prioritise the protection of ‘one’ right or ethical principle
above the others. For instance, when protecting public
health, it might be necessary to prioritise justice at a
population level over individual-level autonomy, but in
a different context doing this might be highly unethical.
Finally, in a democratic society different people might
reasonably disagree over the different values that should
be embedded in different algorithms in different contexts—we must allow for value pluralism .
Thus, AI ethics frameworks—no matter how much they
come to be relied upon—must always be seen as guardrails, designed to stop AI practitioners from crossing
social red-lines but not specifying exactly what to do to
do this in each individual instance. Instead, AI practitioners should take an approach, inspired by Habermas’s
discourse ethics where the aim of AI ethics frameworks
is to guide open discussions in which all sides of an argument are listened to and considered until a decision that
is acceptable to all can be reached . It is the discussion, and the process followed to ensure
this discussion is held in an open, transparent, and ‘fair’
way, that is important. Both Whittlestone et al. 
and Terzis discuss the complexities of encountering tensions in AI ethics, in more detail.
5  Limitations
All research has limitations, and this is no exception. The
relatively small number of research participants means that
the results cannot be taken to be statistically significant and
must be assumed to represent only a part of the overall AI
ethics landscape. This is especially true as the interview participants were not representative of all industries in which
AI is being developed, nor of all roles that an AI practitioner
might take on when an AI product is being developed, and
were all UK based so may not represent the experience of
AI practitioners working elsewhere. In addition, as the interviews revealed a much greater lack of clarity regarding the
meaning of ‘AI ethics’—especially ethical principles—than
expected, it is possible that both interviewees and survey
respondents did not fully understand the questions being
asked and therefore provided answers they thought that we
would want. This might undermine the internal validity of
some of the questions. Finally, we did not explicitly recruit
interview or survey participants to ensure they were representative of the diversity of the AI practitioner workforce.
This means that, although we do mention potential issues
surrounding vulnerable minorities, we were unable to delve
into the complexities associated with discrimination in the
workplace and the expectation often placed on individuals
from ethnic minorities to act as the ‘moral conscience’ of
the company that they are working for. This should be a
topic of further research. We have taken steps to minimise
the impact of these limitations on the discussion, augmenting our findings with existing literature and our own experiences as AI practitioners, policymakers and ethicists and
we believe the results are still useful for prompting further
discussion. However, these limitations should not be seen
to undermine the value of this research. Rather, they mean
that the results should be seen as those from a pilot study,
providing a starting point for an important conversation, and
a point from which future research can build by asking similar questions in different settings with a more diverse range
of participants.
6  Conclusion
Identifying the optimum mechanisms for implementing
the tenets of AI ethics will take time and is likely to be an
ongoing task that will require regular reflection as both the
field of AI ethics and AI technology itself develop. In other
words, the implementation of AI ethics should be underpinned by a learning governance model where regular reflection on impact is embedded in the research and decisionmaking cycle and overseen by those most affected by AI
products and yet excluded from the development pipeline—
lay members of the public, especially those from traditionally marginalised groups . If those involved in
aiding the development of pro-ethical AI design know that
‘solutions’ put in place are only for now, they are more likely
to act sooner and more boldly which, ultimately, will ensure
that when it comes to practical AI ethics, ‘perfect’ does not
become the enemy of the good. Embedding this reflexivity
into the AI ecosystem will require the AI ethics community,
policymakers, and AI practitioners to collaboratively consider how best to monitor the progress of pro-ethical design,
AI & SOCIETY 38:411–423
evaluate processes put in place and methods used to enable
pro-ethical design practices, and iterate based on feedback.
We hope that our research can play a small, but significant,
role in this process.
Acknowledgements  We would like to thank the anonymous reviewer
for their incredibly valuable comments, they added significant depth
to the discussion and the paper is much better as a result. LK, AE, and
JM conceived the paper. JM wrote the survey, designed the interviews
and drafted the paper. MZ helped analyse the interview results, and
helped recruit participants for both the survey and the interviews. FG
helped draft the survey questions and helped recruit participants. All
authors edited and reviewed the paper. LF oversaw the research and
contributed to the paper.
Funding  JMs work for this paper was funded by the Digital Catapult.
JM has also received research funding, unrelated to this project from
the Wellcome Trust, Google and Vodafone.
Availability of data and material  Results from the survey may be available upon request from the corresponding author.
Code availability  Not applicable.
Declarations
Conflict of interest  JMs work for this paper was funded by the Digital
Catapult. LK, FG and EA were all employed by the Digital Catapult
at the time of writing. LF was the chair of the Digital Catapult Ethics
Advisory Board.
Ethical approval  Ethics approval was provided by the Departmental
Research Ethics Committee of the Oxford Internet Institute.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
copy of this licence, visit