Nature Inspired Computing: An Overview and Some Future
Directions
Nazmul Siddique1 • Hojjat Adeli2
Published online: 30 November 2015
 The Author(s) 2015. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
This paper presents an overview of signiﬁcant
advances made in the emerging ﬁeld of nature-inspired
computing (NIC) with a focus on the physics- and biologybased approaches and algorithms. A parallel development
in the past two decades has been the emergence of the ﬁeld
of computational intelligence (CI) consisting primarily of
the three ﬁelds of neural networks, evolutionary computing
and fuzzy logic. It is observed that NIC and CI intersect. The authors advocate and foresee more cross-fertilisation of the two emerging ﬁelds.
Nature-inspired computing  Physics-based
algorithms  Biology-based algorithms  Meta-heuristic
algorithms  Search and optimisation
Inspiration from the Nature
Nature does things in an amazing way. Behind the visible
phenomena, there are innumerable invisible causes hidden
at times. Philosophers and scientists have been observing
these phenomena in the nature for centuries and trying to
understand, explain, adapt and replicate the artiﬁcial systems. There are innumerable agents and forces within the
living and non-living world, most of which are unknown
and the underlying complexity is beyond human comprehension as a whole. These agents act in parallel and very
often against each other giving form and feature to nature,
and regulating the harmony, beauty and vigour of life. This
is seen as the dialectics of nature which lies in the concept
of the evolution of the natural world. The evolution of
complexity in nature follows a distinctive order. There is
also information processing in nature performed in a distributed, self-organised and optimal manner without any
central control . This whole series of forms, mechanical,
physical, chemical, biological and social, is distributed
according to complexity from lower to higher. This
sequence expresses its mutual dependence and relationship
in terms of structure and history. The activities change due
to changed circumstances. All these phenomena known or
partially known so far are emerging as new ﬁelds of science and technology, and computing that study problemsolving techniques inspired by nature as well as attempts to
understand the underlying principles and mechanisms of
natural, physical, chemical and biological organisms that
perform complex tasks in a beﬁtting manner with limited
resources and capability.
Science is a dialogue between the scientists and the
nature which has evolved over the centuries enriching
with new concepts, methods and tools and developed into
well-deﬁned disciplines of scientiﬁc endeavour. Mankind
has been trying to understand the nature ever since by
developing new tools and techniques. The ﬁeld of natureinspired computing (NIC) is interdisciplinary in nature
combining computing science with knowledge from different branches of sciences, e.g. physics, chemistry,
This is an Invited paper.
& Nazmul Siddique
 
Hojjat Adeli
 
School of Computing and Intelligent Systems, Ulster
University, Northland Road, Londonderry BT48 7JL, UK
Departments of Biomedical Engineering, Biomedical
Informatics, Civil, Environmental, and Geodetic Engineering,
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Neuroscience, and
Neurology, The Ohio State University, 470 Hitchcock Hall,
2070 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
Cogn Comput 7:706–714
DOI 10.1007/s12559-015-9370-8
biology, mathematics and engineering, that allows development of new computational tools such as algorithms,
hardware, or wetware for problem-solving, synthesis of
patterns, behaviours and organisms . This Keynote
paper presents an overview of signiﬁcant advances made in
the emerging ﬁeld of nature-inspired computing (NIC) with
a focus on the physics- and biology-based approaches and
algorithms.
Search and Optimisation
All the living and non-living world, the planetary, galactic,
stellar system and the heavenly bodies in the universe
belong to nature. One common aspect can be observed in
nature, be it physical, chemical or biological, that the
nature maintains its equilibrium by any means known or
unknown to us. A simpliﬁed explanation of the state of
equilibrium is the idea of optimum seeking in nature. There
is optimum seeking in all spheres of life and nature .
In all optimum seeking, there are goals or objectives to be
achieved and constraints to be satisﬁed within which the
optimum has to be found . This optimum seeking
can be formulated as an optimisation problem .
That is, it is reduced to ﬁnding the best solution measured
by a performance index often known as objective function
in many areas of computing and engineering which varies
from problem to problem .
Many methods have emerged for the solution of optimisation problems which can be divided into two categories based on the produced solutions , namely
deterministic and nondeterministic (stochastic) algorithms
as shown in Fig. 1. Deterministic algorithms in general
follow more rigorous procedures repeating the same path
every time and providing the same solution in different
runs. Most conventional or classic algorithms are deterministic and based on mathematical programming. Many
different mathematical programming methods have been
developed in the past few decades. Examples of deterministic algorithms are linear programming (LP), convex
programming, integer programming, quadratic programming, dynamic programming, nonlinear programming
(NLP), and gradient-based (GB) and gradient-free (GF)
methods. These methods usually provide accurate solutions
for problems in a continuous space. Most of these methods,
however, need the gradient information of the objective
function and constraints and a suitable initial point.
On the other hand, nondeterministic or stochastic
methods exhibit some randomness and produce different
solutions in different runs. The advantage is that these
methods explore several regions of the search space at the
same time and have the ability to escape from local optima
and reach the global optimum. Therefore, these methods
are more capable of handling NP-hard problems (i.e.
problems that have no known solutions in polynomial time)
 . There are a variety of derivative-free stochastic
optimisation algorithms which are of two types: heuristic
algorithms (HA) and meta-heuristic algorithms (MHA)
Heuristic means to ﬁnd or discover by means of trial and
error. Alan Turning was one of the ﬁrst to use heuristic
algorithms during the Second World War and called his
search methods heuristic search. Glover possibly
revived the use of heuristic algorithms in 1970s. The
general problem with heuristic algorithms (e.g. scatter
search) is that there is no guarantee that optimal solutions
are reached though quality solutions are found in a reasonable amount of time. The second generation of the
optimisation methods is meta-heuristic proposed to solve
more complex problems and very often provides better
solutions than heuristic algorithms. The 1980s and 1990s
saw a proliferation of meta-heuristic algorithms. The recent
trends in meta-heuristic algorithms are stochastic algorithms with certain trade-off of random and local search.
Every meta-heuristic method consists of a group of search
agents that explore the feasible region based on both randomisation and some speciﬁed rules. These methods rely
extensively on repeated evaluations of the objective function and use heuristic guidelines for estimating the next
search direction. The guidelines used are often simple, and
the rules are usually inspired by natural phenomena or
laws. Glover and Kochenberger present a review of
the ﬁeld of meta-heuristics up to 2003.
There are different classiﬁcations of meta-heuristic
algorithms reported in the literature . They can be
classiﬁed as population based (PB) and neighbourhood or
trajectory based (TB) (Fig. 1). Neighbourhood-based metaheuristics such as simulated annealing and tabu search
 evaluate only one potential solution at a time and the
solution moves through a trajectory in the solution space.
Optimisation
algorithms
Deterministic
Stochastic
Fig. 1 Classiﬁcation of optimisation algorithms
Cogn Comput 7:706–714
The steps or moves trace a trajectory in the search space,
with nonzero probability that this trajectory can reach the
global optimum. In the population-based meta-heuristics, a
set of potential solutions move towards goals simultaneously. For example, genetic algorithm (GA) and
particle swarm optimisation (PSO) are populationbased algorithms and use a population of solutions.
Nature-Inspired Computing Paradigm
The nature-inspired computing paradigm is fairly vast.
Even though science and engineering have evolved over
many hundred years with many clever tools and methods
available for their solution, there is still a diverse range of
problems to be solved, phenomena to be synthesised and
questions to be answered. In general, natural computing
approaches should be considered when:
The problem is complex and nonlinear and involves a
large number of variables or potential solutions or has
multiple objectives.
The problem to be solved cannot be suitably modelled
using conventional approaches such as complex pattern
recognition and classiﬁcation tasks.
traditional
approaches is not possible, difﬁcult to obtain or cannot
be guaranteed, but a quality measure exists that allows
comparison of various solutions.
The problem lends itself to a diversity of solutions or a
diversity of solutions is desirable.
Nature-inspired computing (NIC) refers to a class of
meta-heuristic algorithms that imitate or are inspired by
some natural phenomena explained by natural sciences
discussed earlier. A common feature shared by all natureinspired meta-heuristic algorithms is that they combine
rules and randomness to imitate some natural phenomena.
Many nature-inspired computing paradigms have emerged
in recent years. They can be grouped into three broad
classes: physics-based algorithms (PBA), chemistry-based
algorithms (CBA) and biology-based algorithms
(BBA) (Fig. 2).
Physics-Based Algorithms
Physics-inspired algorithms employ basic principles of
physics, for example, Newton’s laws of gravitation, laws of
motion and Coulomb’s force law of electrical charge discussed earlier in the paper. They are all based on deterministic physical principles. These algorithms can be
categorised broadly as follows:
Inspired by Newton’s laws of motion, e.g. Colliding
Bodies Optimisation (CBO),
Inspired by Newton’s gravitational force, e.g. Gravitational Search Algorithm (GSA), Central Force
Optimisation (CFO), Space Gravitation Optimisation
(SGO) and Gravitational Interaction Optimisation
Inspired by celestial mechanics and astronomy, e.g.
Big Bang–Big Crunch search (BB–BC), Black Hole
Galaxy-based
Physics-based
Optimisation
(APO) and Integrated Radiation Search (IRS),
by electromagnetism,
Electromagnetism-like Optimisation (EMO), Charged System
Search (CSS) and Hysteretic Optimisation (HO),
Inspired by optics, e.g. Ray Optimisation (RO),
Inspired by acoustics, e.g. Harmony Search Algorithm (HSA),
Inspired by thermodynamics, e.g. Simulated Annealing (SA),
Inspired by hydrology and hydrodynamics, e.g.
Water Drop Algorithm (WDA), River Formation
Dynamics Algorithm (RFDA) and Water Cycle
Algorithm (WCA).
The earliest of all these algorithms was the Simulated
Annealing (SA) algorithm based on the principle of
thermo-dynamics . The algorithm simulates the cooling
process by gradually lowering the temperature of the system until it converges to a steady state. The idea to use
simulated annealing to search for feasible solutions and
converge to an optimal solution was very stimulating and
led researchers to explore other areas of physics.
An idea from the ﬁeld of sound and acoustics led to the
development of HSA inspired by a phenomenon commonly
observed in music. The concept behind the HSA is to ﬁnd a
perfect state of harmony determined by aesthetic estimation . A review of harmony search algorithms and its
variants is provided by Siddique and Adeli . Hybrid
harmony search algorithms are presented by Siddique and
Adeli . Applications of HSA are reviewed in Siddique
and Adeli .
Fig. 2 Broad classiﬁcation of NIC
Cogn Comput 7:706–714
Zara´nd et al. proposed a method of optimisation
inspired by demagnetisation, called hysteretic optimisation
(HO). This is a process similar to simulated annealing
where the material achieves a stable state by slowly
decreasing the temperature. That is, ﬁnding the ground
states of magnetic samples is similar to ﬁnding the optimal
point in the search process. Based on the principles of
electromagnetism, Birbil and Fang introduced the
electromagnetism-based
optimisation.
algorithm imitates the attraction–repulsion mechanism of
the electromagnetism theory in order to solve unconstrained or bound constrained global optimisation problems.
electromagnetism-like
optimisation
(EMO) algorithm. A solution in EMO algorithm is seen as
a charged particle in the search space and its charge relates
to the objective function value.
Motivated by natural physical forces, Spears et al. 
introduced the Artiﬁcial Physics Optimisation (APO)
where particles are seen as solutions sampled from the
feasible region of the problem space. Particles move
towards higher ﬁtness regions and cluster to optimal region
over time. Heavier mass represents higher ﬁtness value and
attracts other masses of lower ﬁtness values. The individual
with the best ﬁtness attracts all other individuals with lower
ﬁtness values. The individuals with lower ﬁtness values
repel each other. That means the individual with best ﬁtness has the biggest mass and move with lower velocity
than others. Thus, the attractive–repulsive rule can be
treated as the search strategy in the optimisation algorithm
which ultimately leads the population to search the better
ﬁtness region of the problem. In the initial state, individuals
are randomly generated within the feasible region. In APO,
mass is deﬁned as the ﬁtness function for the optimisation
problem in question. A suitable deﬁnition of mass of the
individuals is necessary.
Central Force Optimisation (CFO) uses a population of
probes that are distributed across a search space . The
basic concept of the CFO is the search for the biggest mass
that has the strongest force to attract all other masses distributed within a decision space towards it considered as
the global optimum of the problem at hand. A review of
articles on CFO and its applications to various problems is
presented in a recent article by Siddique and Adeli .
Gravitational Search Algorithm (GSA) is a populationbased search algorithm inspired by the law of gravity and
mass interaction . The algorithm considers agents as
objects consisting of different masses. The entire agents
move due to the gravitational attraction force acting
between them, and the progress of the algorithm directs the
movements of all agents globally towards the agents with
heavier masses . Gravitational Interactions Optimisation (GIO) is inspired by Newton’s law . It has some
similarities with GSA and was introduced around the same
time independently of GSA. The gravitational constant
G in GSA decreases linearly with time, whereas GIO uses a
hypothetical gravitational constant G as constant. GSA
uses a set of best individuals to reduce computation time,
while GIO allows all masses to interact with each other.
Based on the simple principle of continuous collision
between bodies, Kaveh and Mahdavi proposed the
Colliding Bodies Optimisation (CBO). Hsiao et al. 
proposed an optimal searching approach, called Space
Gravitational Optimisation (SGO) using the notion of space
gravitational curvature inspired by the concept of Einstein
equivalence principle. SGO is an embryonic form of CFO
 . Based on the notion of Big Bang and shrinking phenomenon of Big Crunch, Erol and Eksin proposed Big
Bang and Big Crunch (BB–BC) algorithm. In the Big Bang
phase, a population of masses is generated with respect to
centre of mass. In the Big Crunch phase, all masses collapse
into one centre of mass. Thus, the Big Bang phase explores
the solution space, while Big Crunch phase performs necessary exploitation as well as convergence. Chuang and
Jiang proposed Integrated Radiation Optimisation
(IRO) inspired by the gravitational radiation in the curvature of space–time. Hosseini proposed Galaxy-based
Search Algorithm (GbSA) inspired by the spiral arm of
spiral galaxies to search its surrounding. GbSA uses a spiral-like movement in each dimension of the search space
with the help of chaotic steps and constant rotation around
the initial solution. The spiral optimisation (SpO) is a
multipoint search for continuous optimisation problems.
The SpO model is composed of plural logarithmic spiral
models and their common centre .
Inspired by the phenomenon of the black hole, Hatamlou proposed the Black Hole (BH) algorithm where
candidate solutions are considered as stars and the solution
is selected to be black hole. At each iteration, the black
hole starts attracting other stars around it. If a star gets too
close to the black hole, it will be swallowed and a new star
(candidate solution) is randomly generated and placed in
the search space to start a new search.
The basic idea of Snell’s law is utilised in Ray Optimisation (RO) proposed by Kaveh and Khayatazad 
where a solution consisting of a vector of variables is
simulated by a ray of light passing through space treated as
media with different refractive indices. Based on the
principles of hydrodynamics and water cycles, Intelligent
Water Drop (IWD) was proposed by Shah-Hosseini .
Considering the natural phenomenon of river formations
through land erosion and sediment deposits, Rabanal et al.
 proposed River Formation Dynamics (RFD). Eskandar
et al. proposed Water Cycle Algorithm (WCA) based
on the principle of water cycle that forms streams and
rivers where all rivers ﬂow to the sea which is the ultimate
destination and optimal solution in terms of optimisation.
Cogn Comput 7:706–714
Biology-Based Algorithms
Biology-based algorithms can be classiﬁed into three
Evolutionary
Algorithms
Bio-inspired
Algorithms (BIA) and Swarm Intelligence-based Algorithms (SIA) (Fig. 3).
The fundamental idea of evolutionary algorithms is
based on Darwin’s theory of evolution, which gained
momentum in the late 1950s nearly a century after publication of the book ‘Origin of Species’. Fraser ﬁrst
conducted a simulation of genetic systems representing
organisms by binary strings. Box proposed an evolutionary operation to optimising industrial production.
Friedberg proposed an approach to evolve computer
programs. The fundamental works of Lowrence Fogel 
in evolutionary programming, John Holland in genetic
algorithms, Ingo Rechenberg and Hans-Paul Schwefel
 in evolution strategies had great inﬂuences on the
development of evolutionary algorithms and computation
as a general concept for problem-solving and as a powerful
tool for optimisation. Since the development years of
1960s, the ﬁeld evolved into three main branches :
evolution strategies , evolutionary programming and
genetic algorithms. In the 1990s there was another set of
development in the evolutionary algorithms such as Koza
 developed
programming,
developed cultural algorithms and Storn and Price 
developed differential evolution. Evolutionary algorithms
have now found wide spread applications in almost all
branches of science and engineering . Different
variants of EAs such as Evolutionary Programming (EP)
 , Evolution Strategies (ES) , Genetic Algorithm
(GA) , Genetic Programming (GP), Differential
Evolution (DE) and Cultural Algorithm (CA) are discussed
in the book by Siddique and Adeli .
The BIA are based on the notion of commonly observed
phenomenon in some animal species and movement of
organisms. Flocks of birds, herds of quadrupeds and
schools of ﬁsh are often shown as fascinating examples of
self-organised coordination . Particle Swarm Optimisation (PSO) simulates social behaviour of swarms such
as birds ﬂocking and ﬁsh schooling in nature .
Particles make use of the best positions encountered and
the best position of their neighbours to position themselves
towards an optimum solution . There are now as many
as about 20 different variants of PSO .
Bird Flocking (BF) is seen as feature of coherent
manoeuvring of a group of individuals due to advantages
for protecting and defending from predators, searching for
food, and social and mating activities . Natural ﬂocks
maintain two balanced behaviours: a desire to stay close to
the ﬂock and a desire to avoid collisions within the ﬂock
 . Reynolds developed a model to mimic the
ﬂocking behaviour of birds using three simple rules: collision avoidance with ﬂockmates, velocity matching with
nearby ﬂockmates and ﬂock centring to stay close to the
ﬂock . Fish School (FS) shows very interesting
features in their behaviour. About half the ﬁsh species are
known to form ﬁsh schools at some stage in their lives. FS
is observed as self-organised systems consisting of individual autonomous agents and come in many
different shapes and sizes .
MacArthur and Wilson developed mathematical
models of biogeography that describe how species migrate
from one island to another, how new species arise and how
species become extinct. Since 1960s biogeography has
Biology-based
algorithms
Fig. 3 Classiﬁcation of
biology-based algorithms
Cogn Comput 7:706–714
become a major area of research that studies the geographical distribution of biological species. Based on the
concept of biogeography, Simon proposed Biogeography Based Optimisation (BBO). Based on the principles
biological
Immune Systems (AIS) were proposed by Farmer et al.
 in the 1980s that stipulated the interaction between
antibodies mathematically. In 1968, Lindenmayer 
introduced formalism for simulating the development of
multi-cellular organisms, initially known as Lindenmayer
systems and subsequently named L-systems which attracted the interest of theoretical computer scientists. Aono and
Kunii and Smith used L-systems to create
realistic-looking images of trees and plants. There are other
bio-inspired search and optimisation algorithms reported in
the literature which haven’t attract much attention in the
research community such as atmosphere clouds model
 , dolphin echolocation, Japanese tree frogs calling,
Egyptian vulture, ﬂower pollination algorithm, great salmon run, invasive weed optimisation, paddy ﬁeld algorithm, roach infestation algorithm and shufﬂe frog leaping
algorithm.
The SIA are based on the idea of collective behaviours
of insects living in colonies such as ants, bees, wasps and
termites. Researchers are interested in the new way of
achieving a form of collective intelligence called swarm
intelligence. SIAs are also advanced as a computational
intelligence technique based around the study of collective
behaviour in decentralised and self-organised systems. The
inspiring source of Ant Colony Optimisation (ACO) is
based on the foraging behaviour of real ant colonies . While moving, ants leave a chemical pheromone trail
on the ground. When choosing their way, they tend to
choose paths marked by strong pheromone concentrations.
The pheromone trails will guide other ants to the food
source. It has been shown that the indirect communication
between the ants via pheromone trails enables them to ﬁnd
the shortest paths between their nest and food sources.
Honey bees search for food sources and collect by foraging in promising ﬂower patches. The simple mechanism
of the honey bees inspired researchers to develop a new
search algorithm, called Bee Algorithm . Similarly, Artiﬁcial Bee Colony (ABC) algorithm was proposed
by Karaboga and virtual bee algorithm was proposed
by Yang . Bat Algorithm (BatA) is based on the
echolocation behaviour of bats. The capability of microbats is fascinating as they use a type of sonar, called
echolocation, to detect prey, avoid obstacles and locate
their roosting crevices in the dark. Yang simulated
echolocation behaviour of bats. Quite a number of cuckoo
species engage the obligate brood parasitism by laying
their eggs in the nests of host birds of different species.
Yang and Deb describe the Cuckoo Search (CS)
algorithm based on the breeding behaviour of certain
cuckoo species. The ﬂashing of ﬁreﬂies in the summer sky
in the tropical regions has been attracting the naturalists
and researchers for many years. The rhythm, the rate and
the duration of ﬂashing form part of the signalling system
that brings two ﬁreﬂies together. Based on some idealised
rules, Yang proposed the Fireﬂy Algorithm (FA).
Individual and groups of bacteria forage for nutrients,
e.g. chemotactic (foraging) behaviour of E. coli bacteria.
Based on this concept, Passino proposed Bacterial
Foraging Optimisation Algorithm (BFOA). There are many
swarm intelligence-based search and optimisation algorithms reported in the literature which haven’t attract much
attention in the research community such as wolf search,
cat swarm optimisation, ﬁsh swarm optimisation, eagle
strategy, krill herd, monkey search and weightless swarm
algorithms.
Conclusion
It is obvious from this review that the ﬁeld of nature-inspired computing is large and expanding. This invited
paper provided a brief summary of signiﬁcant advances
made in this exciting area of research with a focus on the
physics- and biology-based approaches and algorithms.
A parallel development has been the emergence of the
ﬁeld of computational intelligence (CI) mainly consisting of
neural networks , evolutionary computing 
and fuzzy logic in the past twenty years starting
with the seminal book of Adeli and Hung which
demonstrated how a multi-paradigm approach and integration of the three CI computing paradigms can lead to more
effective solutions of complicated and intractable pattern
recognition and learning problems. It is observed that NIC
and CI intersect. Some researchers have argued that swarm
intelligence
computational
intelligence.
authors advocate and foresee more cross-fertilisation of the
two emerging ﬁelds. Evolving neural networks is an example
of such cross-fertilisation of two domains .
Open Access
This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License ( 
tivecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were