Semantic Image Segmentation via Deep Parsing Network∗
Ziwei Liu†
Xiaoxiao Li†
Chen Change Loy
Xiaoou Tang
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{lz013,lx015,pluo,ccloy,xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
This paper addresses semantic image segmentation by
incorporating rich information into Markov Random Field
(MRF), including high-order relations and mixture of label
Unlike previous works that optimized MRFs
using iterative algorithm, we solve MRF by proposing a
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), namely Deep Parsing Network (DPN), which enables deterministic end-toend computation in a single forward pass.
Speciﬁcally,
DPN extends a contemporary CNN architecture to model
unary terms and additional layers are carefully devised to
approximate the mean ﬁeld algorithm (MF) for pairwise
terms. It has several appealing properties. First, different
from the recent works that combined CNN and MRF, where
many iterations of MF were required for each training
image during back-propagation, DPN is able to achieve
high performance by approximating one iteration of MF.
Second, DPN represents various types of pairwise terms,
making many existing works as its special cases. Third,
DPN makes MF easier to be parallelized and speeded up
in Graphical Processing Unit (GPU). DPN is thoroughly
evaluated on the PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset, where a single DPN model yields a new state-of-the-art segmentation
accuracy of 77.5%.
1. Introduction
Markov Random Field (MRF) or Conditional Random
Field (CRF) has achieved great successes in semantic image segmentation, which is one of the most challenging
problems in computer vision.
Existing works such as
 can be generally categorized
into two groups based on their deﬁnitions of the unary and
pairwise terms of MRF.
In the ﬁrst group, researchers improved labeling accuracy by exploring rich information to deﬁne the pairwise functions, including long-range dependencies ,
∗This work has been accepted to appear in ICCV 2015. This is the preprinted version. Content may slightly change prior to the ﬁnal publication.
†indicates shared ﬁrst authorship.
high-order potentials , and semantic label contexts
 . For example, Kr¨ahenb¨uhl et al. attained
accurate segmentation boundary by inferring on a fullyconnected graph.
Vineet et al. extended by
deﬁning both high-order and long-range terms between
pixels. Global or local semantic contexts between labels
were also investigated by . Although they accomplished
promising results, they modeled the unary terms as SVM or
Adaboost, whose learning capacity becomes a bottleneck.
The learning and inference of complex pairwise terms are
often expensive.
In the second group, people learned a strong unary classiﬁer by leveraging the recent advances of deep learning,
such as the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). With
deep models, these works 
demonstrated encouraging results using simple deﬁnition of
the pairwise function or even ignore it. For instance, Long
et al. transformed fully-connected layers of CNN into
convolutional layers, making accurate per-pixel classiﬁcation possible using the contemporary CNN architectures
that were pre-trained on ImageNet .
Chen et al. 
improved by feeding the outputs of CNN into a MRF
with simple pairwise potentials, but it treated CNN and
MRF as separated components.
A recent advance was
obtained by , which jointly trained CNN and MRF by
passing the error of MRF inference backward into CNN, but
iterative inference of MRF such as the mean ﬁeld algorithm
(MF) is required for each training image during backpropagation (BP). Zheng et al. further showed that
the procedure of MF inference can be represented as a
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), but their computational
costs are similar.
We found that directly combing CNN
and MRF as above is inefﬁcient, because CNN typically
has millions of parameters while MRF infers thousands of
latent variables; and even worse, incorporating complex
pairwise terms into MRF becomes impractical, limiting the
performance of the entire system.
This work proposes a novel Deep Parsing Network
(DPN), which is able to jointly train CNN and complex
pairwise terms.
DPN has several appealing properties.
(1) DPN solves MRF with a single feed-forward pass,
 
reducing computational cost and meanwhile maintaining
high performance. Speciﬁcally, DPN models unary terms
by extending the VGG-16 network (VGG16) pretrained on ImageNet, while additional layers are carefully
designed to model complex pairwise terms. Learning of
these terms is transformed into deterministic end-to-end
computation by BP, instead of embedding MF into BP as
 did. Although MF can be represented by RNN ,
it needs to recurrently compute the forward pass so as to
achieve good performance and thus is time-consuming, e.g.
each forward pass contains hundred thousands of weights.
DPN approximates MF by using only one iteration. This
is made possible by joint learning strong unary terms and
rich pairwise information.
(2) Pairwise terms determine
the graphical structure. In previous works, if the former is
changed, so is the latter as well as its inference procedure.
But with DPN, modifying the complexity of pairwise terms,
e.g. range of pixels and contexts, is as simple as modifying
the receptive ﬁelds of convolutions, without varying BP.
DPN is able to represent multiple types of pairwise terms,
making many previous works as its special
cases. (3) DPN approximates MF with convolutional and
pooling operations, which can be speeded up by lowrank approximation and easily parallelized in a
Graphical Processing Unit (GPU).
Our contributions are summarized as below.
novel DPN is proposed to jointly train VGG16 and rich
pairwise information, i.e. mixture of label contexts and
high-order relations. Compared to existing deep models,
DPN can approximate MF with only one iteration, reducing
computational cost but still maintaining high performance.
(2) We disclose that DPN represents multiple types of
MRFs, making many previous works such as RNN and
DeepLab as its special cases. (3) Extensive experiments
investigate which component of DPN is crucial to achieve
high performance. A single DPN model achieves a new
state-of-the-art accuracy of 77.5% on the PASCAL VOC
2012 test set. (4) We analyze the time complexity of
DPN on GPU.
2. Our Approach
DPN learns MRF by extending VGG16 to model unary
terms and additional layers are carefully designed for pairwise terms.
Overview MRF is an undirected graph where each
node represents a pixel in an image I, and each edge represents relation between pixels. Each node is associated with
a binary latent variable, yi
u ∈{0, 1}, indicating whether
a pixel i has label u. We have ∀u ∈L = {1, 2, ..., l},
representing a set of l labels. The energy function of MRF
is written as
where y, V, and E denote a set of latent variables, nodes,
and edges, respectively. Φ(yu
i ) is the unary term, measuring
the cost of assigning label u to the i-th pixel. For instance,
if pixel i belongs to the ﬁrst category other than the second
one, we should have Φ(y1
i ) < Φ(y2
i ). Moreover, Ψ(yu
is the pairwise term that measures the penalty of assigning
labels u, v to pixels i, j respectively.
Intuitively, the unary terms represent per-pixel classiﬁcations, while the pairwise terms represent a set of smoothness
constraints. The unary term in Eqn.(1) is typically deﬁned
i ) = −ln p(yu
where p(yu
i = 1|I) indicates the probability of the presence
of label u at pixel i, modeling by VGG16.
To simplify
discussions, we abbreviate it as pu
i . The smoothness term
can be formulated as
j ) = µ(u, v)d(i, j),
where the ﬁrst term learns the penalty of global cooccurrence between any pair of labels, e.g. the output value
of µ(u, v) is large if u and v should not coexist, while the
second term calculates the distances between pixels, e.g.
d(i, j) = ω1∥Ii −Ij∥2 + ω2∥[xi yi] −[xj yj]∥2. Here,
Ii indicates a feature vector such as RGB values extracted
from the i-th pixel, x, y denote coordinates of pixels’
positions, and ω1, ω2 are the constant weights.
implies that if two pixels are close and look similar, they
are encouraged to have labels that are compatible. It has
been adopted by most of the recent deep models 
for semantic image segmentation.
However, Eqn.(3) has two main drawbacks. First, its
ﬁrst term captures the co-occurrence frequency of two
labels in the training data, but neglects the spatial context
between objects. For example, ‘person’ may appear beside
‘table’, but not at its bottom.
This spatial context is a
mixture of patterns, as different object conﬁgurations may
appear in different images.
Second, it deﬁnes only the
pairwise relations between pixels, missing their high-order
interactions.
To resolve these issues, we deﬁne the smoothness term
by leveraging rich information between pixels, which is one
of the advantages of DPN over existing deep models. We
λkµk(i, u, j, v)
The ﬁrst term in Eqn.(4) learns a mixture of local label
contexts, penalizing label assignment in a local region,
where K is the number of components in mixture and λk
is an indicator, determining which component is activated.
We deﬁne λk ∈{0, 1} and PK
k=1 λk = 1. An intuitive
𝝁𝝁𝒌𝒌𝒊𝒊, 𝒖𝒖, 𝒋𝒋, 𝒗𝒗
𝝁𝝁𝒊𝒊, 𝒖𝒖, 𝒋𝒋, 𝒗𝒗
𝒅𝒅𝒋𝒋, 𝒛𝒛𝒒𝒒𝒗𝒗,
𝒋𝒋 𝒛𝒛∈𝜨𝜨𝒋𝒋
𝝁𝝁𝒌𝒌𝒊𝒊, 𝒖𝒖, 𝒋𝒋, 𝒗𝒗,
Figure 1: (a) Illustration of the pairwise terms in DPN. (b) explains the
label contexts. (c) and (d) show that mean ﬁeld update of DPN corresponds
to convolutions.
illustration is given in Fig.1 (b), where the dots in red and
blue represent a center pixel i and its neighboring pixels j,
i.e. j ∈Ni, and (i, u) indicates assigning label u to pixel i.
Here, µ(i, u, j, v) outputs labeling cost between (i, u) and
(j, v) with respect to their relative positions. For instance,
if u, v represent ‘person’ and ‘table’, the learned penalties
of positions j that are at the bottom of center i should be
large. The second term basically models a triple penalty,
which involves pixels i, j, and j’s neighbors, implying that
if (i, u) and (j, v) are compatible, then (i, u) should be also
compatible with j’s nearby pixels (z, v), ∀z ∈Nj, as shown
in Fig.1 (a).
Learning parameters (i.e. weights of VGG16 and costs
of label contexts) in Eqn.(1) is to minimize the distances
between ground-truth label map and y, which needs to be
inferred subject to the smoothness constraints.
Inference Overview Inference of Eqn.(1) can be
distribution
Z exp{−E(y)},
fully-factorized
proposal distribution, Q(y) = Q
i is a variable we need to estimate, indicating the
predicted probability of assigning label u to pixel i. To
simplify the discussion, we denote Φ(yu
i ) and Ψ(yu
ij , respectively. Q(y) is typically optimized by
minimizing a free energy function of MRF,
Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst term in Eqn.(5) characterizes the cost
of each pixel’s predictions, while the second term characterizes the consistencies of predictions between pixels.
The last term is the entropy, measuring the conﬁdences of
predictions. To estimate qu
i , we differentiate Eqn.(5) with
respect to it and equate the resulting expression to zero. We
then have a closed-form expression,
such that the predictions for each pixel is independently
attained by repeating Eqn.(6), which implies whether pixel i
have label u is proportional to the estimated probabilities of
all its neighboring pixels, weighted by their corresponding
smoothness penalties.
Substituting Eqn.(4) into (6), we
µk(i, u, j, v)
where each qu
i is initialized by the corresponding pu
Eqn.(2), which is the unary prediction of VGG16. Eqn.(7)
satisﬁes the smoothness constraints.
In the following, DPN approximates one iteration of
Eqn.(7) by decomposing it into two steps. Let Qv be a
predicted label map of the v-th category. In the ﬁrst step
as shown in Fig.1 (c), we calculate the triple penalty term
in (7) by applying a m × m ﬁlter on each position j, where
each element of this ﬁlter equals d(j, z)qv
j , resulting in Qv′.
Apparently, this step smoothes the prediction of pixel j with
respect to the distances between it and its neighborhood. In
the second step as illustrated in (d), the labeling contexts
can be obtained by convolving Qv′ with a n × n ﬁlter, each
element of which equals µk(i, u, j, v), penalizing the triple
relations as shown in (a).
3. Deep Parsing Network
This section describes the implementation of Eq.(7) in
a Deep Parsing Network (DPN). DPN extends VGG16 as
unary term and additional layers are designed to approximate one iteration of MF inference as the pairwise term.
The hyper-parameters of VGG16 and DPN are compared in
VGG16 As listed in Table 1 (a), the ﬁrst row represents
the name of layer and ‘x-y’ in the second row represents
the size of the receptive ﬁeld and the stride of convolution,
respectively. For instance, ‘3-1’ in the convolutional layer
implies that the receptive ﬁeld of each ﬁlter is 3×3 and it
is applied on every single pixel of an input feature map,
while ‘2-2’ in the max-pooling layer indicates each feature
map is pooled over every other pixel within a 2×2 local
region. The last three rows show the number of the output
feature maps, activation functions, and the size of output
(a) VGG16: 224×224×3 input image; 1×1000 output labels
ﬁlter–stride
activation
(b) DPN: 512×512×3 input image; 512×512×21 output label maps
ﬁlter–stride
activation
Table 1: The comparisons between the network architectures of VGG16 and DPN, as shown in (a) and (b) respectively. Each table contains ﬁve rows,
representing the ‘name of layer’, ‘receptive ﬁeld of ﬁlter’−‘stride’, ‘number of output feature maps’, ‘activation function’ and ‘size of output feature
maps’, respectively. Furthermore, ‘conv’, ‘lconv’,‘max’, ‘bmin’, ‘fc’, and ‘sum’ represent the convolution, local convolution, max pooling, block min
pooling, fully connection, and summation, respectively. Moreover, ‘relu’, ‘idn’, ‘soft’, ‘sigm’, and ‘lin’ represent the activation functions, including rectiﬁed
linear unit , identity, softmax, sigmoid, and linear, respectively.
feature maps, respectively. As summarized in Table 1 (a),
VGG16 contains thirteen convolutional layers, ﬁve maxpooling layers, and three fully-connected layers.
layers can be partitioned into twelve groups, each of which
covers one or more homogenous layers. For example, the
ﬁrst group comprises two convolutional layers with 3×3
receptive ﬁeld and 64 output feature maps, each of which
is 224×224.
3.1. Modeling Unary Terms
To make full use of VGG16, which is pre-trained by
ImageNet, we adopt all its parameters to initialize the
ﬁlters of the ﬁrst ten groups of DPN. To simplify the
discussions, we take PASCAL VOC 2012 (VOC12) as
an example. Note that DPN can be easily adapted to any
other semantic image segmentation dataset by modifying
its hyper-parameters. VOC12 contains 21 categories and
each image is rescaled to 512×512 in training. Therefore,
DPN needs to predict totally 512×512×21 labels, i.e. one
label for each pixel. To this end, we extends VGG16 in two
In particular, let ai and bi denote the i-th group in Table
1 (a) and (b), respectively. First, we increase resolution of
VGG16 by removing its max pooling layers at a8 and a10,
because most of the information is lost after pooling, e.g.
a10 reduces the input size by 32 times, i.e. from 224×224
to 7×7. As a result, the smallest size of feature map in
DPN is 64×64, keeping much more information compared
with VGG16. Note that the ﬁlters of b8 are initialized as
the ﬁlters of a9, but the 3×3 receptive ﬁeld is padded into
5×5 as shown in Fig.2 (a), where the cells in white are the
original values of the a9’s ﬁlter and the cells in gray are
zeros. This is done because a8 is not presented in DPN, such
that each ﬁlter in a9 should be convolved on every other
pixel of a7. To maintain the convolution with one stride, we
pad the ﬁlters with zeros. Furthermore, the feature maps in
b11 are up-sampled to 512×512 by bilinear interpolation.
21 channels
convolution
Figure 2: (a) and (b) show the padding of the ﬁlters. (c) illustrates local
convolution of b12.
Since DPN is trained with label maps of the entire images,
the missing information in the preceding layers of b11 can
be recovered by BP.
Second, two fully-connected layers at a11 are transformed to two convolutional layers at b9 and b10, respectively. As shown in Table 1 (a), the ﬁrst ‘fc’ layer learns
7×7×512×4096 parameters, which can be altered to 4096
ﬁlters in b9, each of which is 25×25×512. Since a8 and a10
have been removed, the 7×7 receptive ﬁeld is padded into
25×25 similar as above and shown in Fig.2 (b). The second
‘fc’ layer learns a 4096×4096 weight matrix, corresponding
to 4096 ﬁlters in b10. Each ﬁlter is 1×1×4096.
Overall, b11 generates the unary labeling results, producing twenty-one 512×512 feature maps, each of which
represents the probabilistic label map of each category.
3.2. Modeling Smoothness Terms
The last four layers of DPN, i.e. from b12 to b15, are
carefully designed to smooth the unary labeling results.
• b12 As listed in Table 1 (b), ‘lconv’ in b12 indicates
a locally convolutional layer, which is widely used in
face recognition to capture different information
from different facial positions. Similarly, distinct spatial
positions of b12 have different ﬁlters, and each ﬁlter is
shared across 21 input channels, as shown in Fig.2 (c). It
can be formulated as
(j,v) = lin(k(j,v) ∗o11
(a) Convolution of b13
. (𝒊𝒊, 𝒖𝒖= 𝟏𝟏)
(b) Pooling in b14
21 channels
𝒖𝒖∈{𝟏𝟏, … , 𝟐𝟐𝟐𝟐}
Figure 3: (a) and (b) illustrates the convolutions of b13 and the poolings
where lin(x) = ax + b representing the linear activation
function, ‘∗’ is the convolutional operator, and k(j,v) is
a 50×50×1 ﬁlter at position j of channel v.
k(j,1) = k(j,2) = ... = k(j,21) shared across 21 channels.
(j,v) indicates a local patch in b11, while o12
(j,v) is the
corresponding output of b12.
Since b12 has stride one,
the result of kj ∗o11
(j,v) is a scalar. In summary, b12 has
512×512 different ﬁlters and produces 21 output feature
Eqn.(8) implements the triple penalty of Eqn.(7). Recall
that each output feature map of b11 indicates a probabilistic
label map of a speciﬁc object appearing in the image. As
a result, Eqn.(8) suggests that the probability of object v
presented at position j is updated by weighted averaging
over the probabilities at its nearby positions. Thus, as shown
in Fig.1 (c), o11
(j,v) corresponds to a patch of Qv centered at
j, which has values pv
z, ∀z ∈N 50×50
. Similarly, k(j,v)
is initialized by d(j, z)pv
j, implying each ﬁlter captures
dissimilarities between positions. These ﬁlters remain ﬁxed
during BP, other than learned as in conventional CNN1.
• b13 As shown in Table 1 (b) and Fig.3 (a), b13 is
a convolutional layer that generates 105 feature maps by
using 105 ﬁlters of size 9×9×21. For example, the value
of (i, u = 1) is attained by applying a 9×9×21 ﬁlter at
positions {(j, v = 1, ..., 21)}. In other words, b13 learns
a ﬁlter for each category to penalize the probabilistic label
maps of b12, corresponding to the local label contexts in
Eqn.(7) by assuming K = 5 and n = 9, as shown in Fig.1
• b14 As illustrated in Table 1 and Fig.3 (b), b14 is a
block min pooling layer that pools over every 1×1 region
with one stride across every 5 input channels, leading to
21 output channels, i.e. 105÷5=21.
b14 activates the
contextual pattern with the smallest penalty.
• b15 This layer combines both the unary and smoothness terms by summing the outputs of b11 and b14 in an
1Each ﬁlter in b12 actually represents a distance metric between pixels
in a speciﬁc region. In VOC12, the patterns of all the training images
in a speciﬁc region are heterogenous, because of various object shapes.
Therefore, we initialize each ﬁlter with Euclidean distance. Nevertheless,
Eqn.(8) is a more general form than the triple penalty in Eqn.(7), i.e. ﬁlters
in (8) can be automatically learned from data, if the patterns in a speciﬁc
region are homogenous, such as face or human images, which have more
regular shapes than images in VOC12.
element-wise manner similar to Eqn.(7),
(i,u)) −o14
(i,u)) −o14
where probability of assigning label u to pixel i is normalized over all the labels.
Relation to Previous Deep Models Many existing deep
models such as employed Eqn.(3) as the pairwise
terms, which are the special cases of Eqn.(7). To see this,
let K=1 and j=i, the right hand side of (7) reduces to
λ1µ1(i, u, i, v)
where µ(u, v) and d(i, z) represent the global label cooccurrence and pairwise pixel similarity of Eqn.(3), respectively. This is because λ1 is a constant, d(i, i) = 0, and
µ(i, u, i, v) = µ(u, v). Eqn.(10) is the corresponding MF
update equation of (3).
3.3. Learning Algorithms
Learning The ﬁrst ten groups of DPN are initialized
by VGG162, while the last four groups can be initialized
randomly. DPN is then ﬁne-tuned in an incremental manner
with four stages. During ﬁne-tuning, all these stages solve
the pixelwise softmax loss , but updating different sets
of parameters.
First, we add a loss function to b11 and ﬁne-tune the
weights from b1 to b11 without the last four groups, in
order to learn the unary terms.
Second, to learn the
triple relations, we stack b12 on top of b11 and update its
parameters (i.e. ω1, ω2 in the distance measure), but the
weights of the preceding groups (i.e. b1∼b11) are ﬁxed.
Third, b13 and b14 are stacked onto b12 and similarly,
their weights are updated with all the preceding parameters
ﬁxed, so as to learn the local label contexts. Finally, all the
parameters are jointly ﬁne-tuned.
Implementation DPN transforms Eqn.(7) into convolutions and poolings in the groups from b12 to b15, such
that ﬁltering at each pixel can be performed in a parallel
manner. Assume we have f input and f ′ output feature
maps, N × N pixels, ﬁlters with s × s receptive ﬁeld, and a
mini-batch with M samples. b12 takes a total f ·N 2 ·s2 ·M
operations, b13 takes f · f ′ · N 2 · s2 · M operations,
while both b14 and b15 require f · N 2 · M operations.
For example, when M=10 as in our experiment, we have
21×5122×502×10=1.3×1011 operations in b12, which
2We use the released VGG16 model, which is public available at
 
has the highest complexity in DPN. We parallelize these
operations using matrix multiplication on GPU as did,
b12 can be computed within 30ms. The total runtime of the
last four layers of DPN is 75ms. Note that convolutions in
DPN can be further speeded up by low-rank decompositions
 of the ﬁlters and model compressions .
However, direct calculation of Eqn.(7) is accelerated by
fast Gaussian ﬁltering . For a mini-batch of ten 512×512
images, a recently optimized implementation takes 12
seconds on CPU to compute one iteration of (7). Therefore,
DPN makes (7) easier to be parallelized and speeded up.
4. Experiments
Dataset We evaluate the proposed approach on the PAS-
CAL VOC 2012 (VOC12) dataset, which contains 20
object categories and one background category. Following
previous works such as , we employ 10, 582
images for training, 1, 449 images for validation, and 1, 456
images for testing.
Evaluation Metrics All existing works employed mean
pixelwise intersection-over-union (denoted as mIoU) 
to evaluate their performance. To fully examine the effectiveness of DPN, we introduce another three metrics, including tagging accuracy (TA), localization accuracy (LA),
and boundary accuracy (BA). (1) TA compares the predicted image-level tags with the ground truth tags, calculating the accuracy of multi-class image classiﬁcation. (2) LA
evaluates the IoU between the predicted object bounding
boxes3 and the ground truth bounding boxes (denoted as
bIoU), measuring the precision of object localization. (3)
For those objects that have been correctly localized, we
compare the predicted object boundary with the ground
truth boundary, measuring the precision of semantic boundary similar to .
Comparisons
bestperforming methods on VOC12, including FCN ,
Zoom-out , DeepLab , WSSL , BoxSup ,
Piecewise , and RNN .
All these methods are
based on CNNs and MRFs, and trained on VOC12 data
following . They can be grouped according to different
(1) joint-train:
Piecewise and RNN; (2) w/o
joint-train: DeepLab, WSSL, FCN, and BoxSup; (3) pretrain on COCO: RNN, WSSL, and BoxSup.
and the second groups are the methods with and without
joint training CNNs and MRFs, respectively. Methods in
the last group also employed MS-COCO to pre-train
deep models. To conduct a comprehensive comparison, the
performance of DPN are reported on both settings, i.e., with
and without pre-training on COCO.
In the following, Sec.4.1 investigates the effectiveness of
different components of DPN on the VOC12 validation set.
3They are the bounding boxes of the predicted segmentation regions.
Receptive Field
(a) Comparisons between different receptive ﬁelds of b12.
Receptive Field
9×9 mixtures
(b) Comparisons between different receptive ﬁelds of b13.
Pairwise Terms
DeepLab 
improvement (%)
(c) Comparing pairwise terms of different methods.
Table 2: Ablation study of hyper-parameters.
Sec.4.2 compares DPN with the state-of-the-art methods on
the VOC12 test set.
4.1. Effectiveness of DPN
All the models evaluated in this section are trained and
tested on VOC12.
Triple Penalty
The receptive ﬁeld of b12 indicates
the range of triple relations for each pixel. We examine
different settings of the receptive ﬁelds, including ‘10×10’,
‘50×50’, and ‘100×100’, as shown in Table 2 (a), where
‘50×50’ achieves the best mIoU, which is sightly better
than ‘100×100’. For a 512×512 image, this result implies
that 50×50 neighborhood is sufﬁcient to capture relations
between pixels, while smaller or larger regions tend to
under-ﬁt or over-ﬁt the training data. Moreover, all models
of triple relations outperform the ‘baseline’ method that
models dense pairwise relations, i.e. VGG16+denseCRF
Label Contexts
Receptive ﬁeld of b13 indicates the
range of local label context. To evaluate its effectiveness,
we ﬁx the receptive ﬁeld of b12 as 50×50. As summarized
in Table 2 (b), ‘9×9 mixtures’ improves preceding settings
by 1.7, 0.5, and 0.2 percent respectively. We observe large
gaps exist between ‘1×1’ and ‘5×5’. Note that the 1×1
receptive ﬁeld of b13 corresponds to learning a global label
co-occurrence without considering local spatial contexts.
Table 2 (c) shows that the pairwise terms of DPN are more
effective than DSN and DeepLab4.
More importantly, mIoU of all the categories can be
improved when increasing the size of receptive ﬁeld and
learning a mixture. Speciﬁcally, for each category, the improvements of the last three settings in Table 2 (b) over the
ﬁrst one are 1.2±0.2, 1.5±0.2, and 1.7±0.3, respectively.
We also visualize the learned label compatibilities and
contexts in Fig.4 (a) and (b), respectively. (a) is obtained
by summing each ﬁlter in b13 over 9×9 region, indicating
how likely a column object would present when a row
object is presented. Blue represents high possibility. (a)
4The other deep models such as RNN and Piecewise did not report the
exact imrprovements after combining unary and pairwise terms.
train : bkg
person : mbike
bottle : bottle
chair : person
Figure 4: Visualization of (a) learned label compatibility (b) learned
contextual information. (Best viewed in color)
(a) Original Image
(d) +Triple Penalty
(c) Unary Term
(e) +Label Contexts
(f) +Joint Tuning
(b) Ground Truth
Figure 5: Step-by-step visualization of DPN. (Best viewed in color)
is non-symmetry. For example, when ‘horse’ is presented,
‘person’ is more likely to present than the other objects.
Also, ‘chair’ is compatible with ‘table’ and ‘bkg’ is compatible with all the objects. (b) visualizes some contextual
patterns, where ‘A:B’ indicates that when ‘A’ is presented,
where ‘B’ is more likely to present. For example, ‘bkg’ is
around ‘train’, ‘motor bike’ is below ‘person’, and ‘person’
is sitting on ‘chair’.
Incremental Learning As discussed in Sec.3.3, DPN is
trained in an incremental manner. The right hand side of Table 3 (a) demonstrates that each stage leads to performance
gain compared to its previous stage. For instance, ‘triple
penalty’ improves ‘unary term’ by 2.3 percent, while ‘label
contexts’ improves ‘triple penalty’ by 1.8 percent. More
importantly, joint ﬁne-tuning all the components (i.e. unary
terms and pairwise terms) in DPN achieves another gain
of 1.3 percent. A step-by-step visualization is provided in
We also compare ‘incremental learning’ with ‘joint
learning’, which ﬁne-tunes all the components of DPN at
the same time. The training curves of them are plotted in
Fig.6 (a), showing that the former leads to higher and more
stable accuracies with respect to different iterations, while
the latter may get stuck at local minima. This difference
is easy to understand, because incremental learning only
introduces new parameters until all existing parameters
Number of Training Iterations
Incremental Learning
Joint Learning
Number of MF Iterations
DPN pairwise terms
denseCRF 
Ablation study of (a) training strategy (b) required MF
iterations. (Best viewed in color)
mean BBox IoU
mean Pixel Acc
mean Tag Acc
Unary Term
Triple Penalty
Label Contexts
Joint Tuning
69.5%70.1%
93.1%93.1%
Figure 7: Stage-wise analysis of (a) mean tagging accuracy (b) mean
localization accuracy (c) mean boundary accuracy.
have been ﬁne-tuned.
One-iteration MF DPN approximates one iteration of
MF. Fig.6 (b) illustrates that DPN reaches a good accuracy
with one MF iteration. A CRF with dense pairwise
edges needs more than 5 iterations to converge.
has a large gap compared to DPN. Note that the existing
deep models such as required 5∼10 iterations to
converge as well.
Different Components Modeling Different Information We further evaluate DPN using three metrics. The
results are given in Fig.7. For example, (a) illustrates that
the tagging accuracy can be improved in the third stage, as
it captures label co-occurrence with a mixture of contextual
patterns. However, TA is decreased a little after the ﬁnal
Since joint tuning maximizes segmentation accuracies by optimizing all components together, extremely
small objects, which rarely occur in VOC training set,
are discarded.
As shown in (b), accuracies of object
localization are signiﬁcantly improved in the second and the
ﬁnal stages. This is intuitive because the unary prediction
can be reﬁned by long-range and high-order pixel relations,
and joint training further improves results.
(c) discloses
that the second stage also captures object boundary, since
it measures dissimilarities between pixels.
Per-class Analysis
Table 3 (a) reports the per-class
accuracies of four evaluation metrics, where the ﬁrst four
rows represent the mIoU of four stages, while the last
three rows represent TA, LA, and BA, respectively.
have several valuable observations, which motivate future
researches. (1) Joint training beneﬁts most of the categories,
except animals such as ‘bird’, ‘cat’, and ‘cow’.
instances of these categories are extremely small so that
bottle bus
horse mbike person plant
sheep sofa
Unary Term (mIoU)
+ Triple Penalty
+ Label Contexts
+ Joint Tuning
TA (tagging Acc.)
BA (boundary Acc.)
(a) Per-class results on VOC12 val.
bottle bus
horse mbike person plant
sheep sofa
Zoom-out 
Piecewise 
DeepLab 
WSSL† 
BoxSup† 
(b) Per-class results on VOC12 test. The approaches pre-trained on COCO are marked with †.
Table 3: Per-class results on VOC12.
joint training discards them for smoother results.
Training DPN with pixelwise label maps implicitly models
image-level tags, since it achieves a high averaged TA of
(3) Object localization always helps.
for the object with complex boundary such as ‘bike’, its
mIoU is low even it can be localized, e.g. ‘bike’ has
high LA but low BA and mIoU. (4) Failures of different
categories have different factors. With these three metrics,
they can be easily identiﬁed. For example, the failures of
‘chair’, ‘table’, and ‘plant’ are caused by the difﬁculties
to accurately capture their bounding boxes and boundaries.
Although ‘bottle’ and ‘tv’ are also difﬁcult to localize, they
achieve moderate mIoU because of their regular shapes. In
other words, mIoU of ‘bottle’ and ‘tv’ can be signiﬁcantly
improved if they can be accurately localized.
4.2. Overall Performance
As shown in Table 3 (b), we compare DPN with the
best-performing methods5 on VOC12 test set based on two
settings, i.e. with and without pre-training on COCO. The
approaches pre-trained on COCO are marked with ‘†’. We
evaluate DPN on several scales of the images and then
average the results following .
DPN outperforms all the existing methods that were
trained on VOC12, but DPN needs only one MF iteration
to solve MRF, other than 10 iterations of RNN, DeepLab,
and Piecewise. By averaging the results of two DPNs, we
achieve 74.1% accuracy on VOC12 without outside training
As discussed in Sec.3.3, MF iteration is the most
complex step even when it is implemented as convolutions.
Therefore, DPN at least reduces 10× runtime compared to
5The results of these methods were presented in either the published
papers or arXiv pre-prints.
previous works.
Following , we pre-train DPN with COCO, where
20 object categories that are also presented in VOC12 are
selected for training. A single DPN† has achieved 77.5%
mIoU on VOC12 test set. As shown in Table 3 (b), we
observe that DPN† achieves best performances on more
than half of the object classes. Please refer to the appendices
for visual quality comparisons.
5. Conclusion
We proposed Deep Parsing Network (DPN) to address
semantic image segmentation, which has several appealing
properties. First, DPN uniﬁes the inference and learning
of unary term and pairwise terms in a single convolutional
network. No iterative inference are required during backpropagation.
Second, high-order relations and mixtures
of label contexts are incorporated to its pairwise terms
modeling, making existing works serve as special cases.
Third, DPN is built upon conventional operations of CNN,
thus easy to be parallelized and speeded up.
DPN achieves state-of-the-art performance on VOC12,
and multiple valuable facts about semantic image segmention are revealed through extensive experiments.
directions include investigating the generalizability of DPN
to more challenging scenarios, e.g. large number of object
classes and substantial appearance/scale variations.