Meta-Learning for Low-resource Natural Language Generation in Task-oriented
Dialogue Systems
Fei Mi1∗, Minlie Huang2∗, Jiyong Zhang3 and Boi Faltings1
1Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory, ´Ecole Polytechnique F´ed´erale de Lausanne (EPFL)
2Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and
Technology, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
3Depart of Automation, Hangzhou Dianzi University
 , , , 
Natural language generation (NLG) is an essential
component of task-oriented dialogue systems. Despite the recent success of neural approaches for
NLG, they are typically developed for particular
domains with rich annotated training examples. In
this paper, we study NLG in a low-resource setting
to generate sentences in new scenarios with handful
training examples. We formulate the problem from
a meta-learning perspective, and propose a generalized optimization-based approach (Meta-NLG)
based on the well-recognized model-agnostic metalearning (MAML) algorithm. Meta-NLG deﬁnes a
set of meta tasks, and directly incorporates the objective of adapting to new low-resource NLG tasks
into the meta-learning optimization process. Extensive experiments are conducted on a large multidomain dataset (MultiWoz) with diverse linguistic
variations. We show that Meta-NLG signiﬁcantly
outperforms other training procedures in various
low-resource conﬁgurations.
We analyze the results, and demonstrate that Meta-NLG adapts extremely fast and well to low-resource situations.
Introduction
As an essential part of a task-oriented dialogue system [Wen
et al., 2016b], the task of natural language generation (NLG)
is to produce a natural language utterance containing the
desired information given a semantic representation consisting of dialogue act types with a set of slot-value pairs.
Conventional methods using hand-crafted rules often generates monotonic utterances and it requires substantial amount
of human engineering work.
Recently, various neural approaches [Wen et al., 2015c; Tran and Nguyen, 2017; Tseng
et al., 2018] have been proposed to generate accurate, natural
and diverse utterances. However, these methods are typically
developed for particular domains. Moreover, they are often
data-intensive to train. The high annotation cost prevents developers to build their own NLG component from scratch.
Therefore, it is extremely useful to train a NLG model that
∗Contact author; this work was done when Fei Mi was a visiting
scholar at Tsinghua University
can be generalized to other NLG domains or tasks with a reasonable amount of annotated data. This is referred to lowresource NLG task in this paper.
Recently, some methods have been proposed for lowresource NLG tasks.
Apart from the simple data augmentation trick [Wen et al., 2016a], specialized model architectures, including conditional variational auto-encoders
 and adversarial domain adaptation critics [Tran and Nguyen, 2018a], have been proposed
to learn domain-invariant representations. Although promising results were reported, we found that datasets used by
these methods are simple which tend to enumerate many slots
and values in an utterance without much linguistic variations.
As a consequence, over-ﬁtting the slots and values in the
low-resource target domain could even outperform those versions trained with rich source domain examples [Tran and
Nguyen, 2018b]. Fortunately, there is a new large-scale dialog dataset that contains a great variety of domains and linguistic patterns that
allows us to conduct extensive and meaningful experimental
analysis for low-resource NLG tasks.
In this paper, instead of casting the problem as modelbased approaches, we propose a generalized optimizationbased meta-learning approach to directly enhance the optimization procedure for the low-resource NLG task. We start
by arguing that a recently proposed model-agnostic metalearning algorithm is a nice ﬁt to
the low-resource NLG task. Then, we proposed a generalized
NLG algorithm called Meta-NLG based on MAML by viewing languages in different domains or dialog act types as separate Meta NLG tasks. Following the essence of MAML, the
goal of Meta-NLG is to learn a better initialization of model
parameters that facilitates fast adaptation to new low-resource
NLG scenarios. As Meta-NLG is model-agnostic as long as
the model can be optimized by gradient descent, we could apply it to any existing NLG models to optimize them in a way
that adapt better and faster to new low-resource tasks.
The main contribution of this paper is two-fold:
• We propose a meta-learning algorithm Meta-NLG based
on MAML for low-resource NLG tasks. Since Meta-
NLG is model-agnostic, it is applicable to many other
NLG models. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)
ﬁrst study of applying meta-learning to NLG tasks.
• We extensively evaluate Meta-NLG on the largest multidomain dataset (MultiWoz) with various low-resource
NLG scenarios. Results show that Meta-NLG signiﬁcantly outperforms other optimization methods in various conﬁgurations. We further analyze the superior performance of Meta-NLG, and show that it indeed adapts
much faster and better.
Background
Natural Language Generation (NLG)
Neural models have recently shown promising results in tackling NLG tasks for task-oriented dialog systems. Conditioned
on some semantic representation called dialog act (DA), a
NLG model decodes an utterance word by word, and the
probability of generating an output sentence of length T is
factorized as below:
fθ = P(Y|d; θ) =
P(yt|y0, ..., yt−1, d; θ)
fθ is the NLG model parameterized by θ, and d is the DA
of sentence Y = (y0, y1, ..., yT ). For example, d is a onehot representation of a DA “Inform(name=The Oak Bistro,
food=British)”.
“Inform” (DA type) controls the sentence
functionality, and “name” and “food” are two involved slots.
A realization utterance Y could be “There is a restaurant
called [The Oak Bistro] that serves [British] food.”. Each
sentence might contain multiple DA types. A series of neural
methods have been proposed, including HLSTM [Wen et al.,
2015a], SCLSTM [Wen et al., 2015c], Enc-Dec [Wen et al.,
2015b] and RALSTM [Tran and Nguyen, 2017].
Low-resource NLG
The goal of low-resource NLG is to ﬁne-tune a pre-trained
NLG model on new NLG tasks (e.g., new domains) with a
small amount of training examples. [Wen et al., 2016a] proposed a “data counterfeiting” method to augment the lowresource training data in the new task without modifying the
model or training procedure. [Tseng et al., 2018] proposed
a semantically-conditioned variational autoencoder (SCVAE)
learn domain-invariant representations feeding to SCLSTM.
They shown that it improves SCLSTM in low-resource settings. [Tran and Nguyen, 2018b] adopted the same idea as in
[Tseng et al., 2018]. They used two conditional variational
autoencoders to encode the sentence and the DA into two
separate latent vectors, which are fed together to the decoder
RALSTM [Tran and Nguyen, 2017]. They later designed two
domain adaptation critics with an adversarial training algorithm [Tran and Nguyen, 2018a] to learn an indistinguishable
latent representation of the source and the target domain to
better generalize to the target domain. Different from these
model-based approaches, we directly tackle the optimization
issue from a meta-learning perspective.
Meta-Learning
Meta-learning or learning-to-learn, which can date back to
some early works [Naik and Mammone, 1992], has recently
attracted extensive attentions. A fundamental problem is “fast
adaptation to new and limited observation data”. In pursuing this problem, there are three categories of meta-learning
Metric-based.
The idea is to learn a metric space and then
use it to compare low-resource testing samples to rich training samples. The representative works in this category include Siamese Network [Koch et al., 2015], Matching Network [Vinyals et al., 2016], Memory-augmented Neural Network , Prototype Net [Snell et
al., 2017], and Relation Network [Sung et al., 2018].
Model-based.
The idea is to use an additional meta-learner
to learn to update the original learner with a few training
examples. [Andrychowicz et al., 2016] developed a metalearner based on LSTMs. Hypernetwork [Ha et al., 2016],
MetaNet [Munkhdalai and Yu, 2017], and TCML [Mishra
et al., 2017] also learn a separate set of representations for
fast model adaptation. [Ravi and Larochelle, 2017] proposed
an LSTM-based meta-learner to learn the optimization algorithm (gradients) used to train the original network.
Optimization-based.
The optimization algorithm itself can
be designed in a way that favors fast adaption.
Modelagnostic meta-learning achieved state-of-the-art performance by directly optimizing the gradient towards a good
parameter initialization for easy ﬁne-tuning on low-resource
scenarios. It introduces no additional architectures nor parameters. Reptile [Nichol and Schulman, 2018] is similar
to MAML with only ﬁrst-order gradient. In this paper, we
propose a generalized meta optimization method based on
MAML to directly solve the intrinsic learning issues of lowresource NLG tasks.
Meta-Learning for Low-resource NLG
In this section, we describe the objective of ﬁne-tuning a NLG
model on a low-resource NLG task in Section 3.1. Then, we
describe how our Meta-NLG algorithm encapsulates this objective into Meta NLG tasks and into the meta optimization
algorithm to learn better low-resource NLG models.
Fine-tune a NLG Model
Suppose fθ is the base NLG model parameterized by θ, and
we have an initial θs pre-trained with DA-utterance pairs
Ds = {(dj, Yj)}j∈s from a set s of high-resource source
tasks. When we adapt fθ to some low-resource task t with
DA-utterance pairs Dt = (dt, Yt), the ﬁne-tuning process
on Dt can be formulated as follows:
θ∗= Adapt(Dt, θ = θs) = arg max
(dt,Yt)∈Dt
logP(Yt|dt; θ)
The parameter θs will be used for initialization, and the
model is further updated by new observations Dt. The size
of Dt in low-resource NLG tasks is very small due to the
high annotation cost, therefore, a good initialization parameter θs learned from high-resource source tasks is crucial for
the adaptation performance on new low-resource NLG tasks.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)
Meta NLG Tasks
To learn a θs that can be easily ﬁne-tuned on new lowresource NLG tasks, the idea of our Meta-NLG algorithm is
to repeatedly simulate auxiliary Meta NLG tasks from Ds to
mimic the ﬁne-tuning process in Eq.(2). Then, we treat each
Meta NLG task as a single meta training sample/episode, and
utilize the meta optimization objective in the next section to
directly learn from them.
Therefore, the ﬁrst step is to construct a set of auxiliary
Meta NLG tasks (T1, ..., TK) to simulate the low-resource
ﬁne-tuning process. We construct a Meta NLG task Ti by:
Ti = (DTi, D
Ti of each Ti are two independent subsets of DAutterance pairs from high-resource source data Ds. DTi and
Ti correspond to meta-train (support) and meta-test (query)
sets of a typical meta-learning or few-shot learning setup, and
Ti is often referred to as a training episode. This meta setup
with both DTi and D
Ti in one Meta NLG task allows our
Meta-NLG algorithm to directly learn from different Meta
NLG tasks. The usage of them will be elaborated later. Meta
NLG tasks are constructed with two additional principles:
Task Generalization.
To generalize to new NLG tasks,
Meta NLG tasks follow the same modality as the target task.
For example, if our target task is to adapt to DA-utterance
pairs in a new domain, then DA-utterance pairs in each Ti
are sampled from the same source domain. We also consider
adapting to new DA types in later experiments. In this case,
DA-utterance pairs in each Ti have the same DA type. This
setting merges the goal of task generalization.
Low-resource Adaptation.
To simulate the process of
adapting to a low-resource NLG task, the sizes of both subsets DTi and D
Ti, especially DTi, are set small. Therefore,
when the model is updated on DTi as a part of the later metalearning steps, it only sees a small amount of samples in that
task. This setup embeds the goal of low-resource adaptation.
Meta Training Objective
With the Meta NLG tasks deﬁned above, we formulate the
meta-learning objective of Meta-NLG as below:
θMeta = MetaLearn(T1, ..., TK)
EiEDTi ,D′
i = Adapt(DTi, θ) = θ −α∇θLDTi (fθ)
The optimization for each Meta NLG task Ti is computed
Ti referring to DTi. Firstly, the model parameter θ to be
optimized is updated on DTi by Eq.(5). This step mimics the
process when fθ is adapted to a new low-resource NLG task
Ti with low-resource observations DTi. We need to note that
Eq.(5) is an intermediate step, and it only provides an adapted
parameter (θ
i) to our base model f to be optimized in each iteration. Afterwards, the base model parameterized by the
updated parameter (θ
i) is optimized on D
Ti using the meta
objective in Eq.(4). This meta-learning optimization objective directly optimizes the model towards generalizing to new
Figure 1: Comparing Meta-Learning to Multi-task Learning: θMeta
meta-learned from auxiliary Meta NLG tasks can be ﬁne-tuned easier than θMT L to some new low-resource tasks, e.g, t1 and t2.
low-resource NLG tasks by simulating the process repeatedly
with Meta NLG tasks in Eq.(4).
The optimization of Eq.(4) can be derived in Eq.(6). It involves a standard ﬁrst-order gradient ∇θ′
i) as well
as a gradient through another gradient ∇θ as we do not encounter any computation difﬁculties
even on the largest NLG dataset so far. The second-order gradient is computed by a Hessian matrix H.
i) · ∇θ(θ −α∇θLDTi (fθ))
i) · (I −αHθ(LDTi (fθ)))
To better understand the meta objective, we compare a
standard multi-task learning (MTL) objective θMT L
arg maxθ EjLDsj (fθ) that learns from high-resource NLG
tasks sj without explicitly learning to adapt to low-resource
NLG tasks. Figure 1 visually illustrates the differences with
three high-resource source tasks {s1, s2, s3} with optimal
parameters {θs1, θs2, θs3} for each task. θMT L is learned
from individual DA-utterance pairs in {Ds1, Ds2, Ds3}, while
Meta-NLG repeatedly constructs auxiliary Meta NLG tasks
{T1, ..., T7} from {Ds1, Ds2, Ds3} and learns θMeta from
them. As a result, θMeta is closer to θt1 and θt2 (the optimal parameters of some new low-resource tasks, e.g, t1 and
t2) than θMT L. Algorithm 1 illustrates the process to learn
θMeta from Ds.
We note that batches are at the level of
Meta NLG tasks, not DA-utterances pairs. Fine-tuning Meta-
NLG on a new low-resource NLG task with annotated DAutterance pairs Dt uses the same algorithm parameterized by
(fθ, θMeta, Dt, α, β).
Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)
Algorithm 1 Meta-NLG(fθ, θ0, Ds, α, β)
Input: fθ, θ0, Ds, α, β
Output: θMeta
1: Initialize θ = θ0
2: while θ not converge do
Simulate a batch of Meta NLG tasks {Ti = (DTi, D
for i = 1...K do
i = θ −α∇θLDTi (fθ) in Eq.(5)
Meta update θ ←θ −β PK
i) in Eq.(6)
8: end while
9: Return θMeta = θ
Experiment
Baselines and Model Settings
We utilized the well-recognized semantically conditioned
LSTM as the base model fθ.
We used the default setting of hyperparameters 
with source task data, then directly test on a target task
without a ﬁne-tuning step. This corresponds to a zeroshot learning scenario.
• Supervised-NLG: Train fθ using MTL with full access
to high-resource data from both source and target tasks.
Its performance serves an upper bound using multi-task
learning without the low-resource restriction.
• Meta-NLG (proposed): Train fθ using Algorithm 1 on
source task data, then ﬁne-tune on the low-resource target task.
For Meta-NLG, we set batch size to 50, and α = 0.1 and
β = 0.001. A single inner gradient update is used per meta
update with Adam [Kingma and Ba, 2014]. The size of a
Meta NLG task is set to 400 with 200 samples assigned to
Ti. The maximum number of epoches is set to 100
during training and ﬁne-tuning, and early-stop is conducted
on a small validation set with size 200. The model is then
evaluated on other DA-utterance pairs in the target task.
As in earlier NLG researches, we use the BLEU-4
score [Papineni et al., 2002] and the slot error rate (ERR)
as evaluation metrics. ERR is computed by the ratio of the
sum of the number of missing and redundant slots in a generated utterance divided by the total number of slots in the DA.
We randomly sampled target low-resource task ﬁve times for
each experiment and reported the average score.
Figure 2: DA type visualization in different domains. Number of
utterances in each domain is indicated in bracket.
Attraction
Addr, Area , Choice, Fee, Name, Open,
Phone, Post , Price, Type
Addr, Area, Choice, Internet, Name, Parking,
Phone, Post, Price, Ref, Stars, Type
Restaurant
Addr, Area, Choice, Food, Name, Phone,
Post, Price, Ref
Arrive, Choice, Day, Depart, Dest, Id,
Leave, People, Ref, Ticket, Time
Day, Name, People, Ref, Stay, Time
Arrive, Car, Depart, Dest, Leave, Phone
Table 1: Slots in each domain, with domain-speciﬁc slots in bold.
MultiWoz Dataset for NLG
We used a recently released large-scale multi-domain dialog dataset . It is
a proper benchmark for evaluating NLG components due to
its domain complexity and rich linguistic variations. A visualization of DA types in different domains are given in Figure 2, and slots in different domains are summarized in Table 1. The average utterance length is 15.12, and almost 60%
of utterances have more than one dialogue act types or domains. 69,607 annotated utterances are used, with 55,026,
7,291, 7,290 for training, validation, and testing respectively.
Domain Adaptation
In this section, we tested when a NLG model is adapted to
various low-resource language domains. Experiment follows
a leave-one-out setup by leaving one target domain for adaptation, while using the remainder domains for training. A
target domain is a near-domain if it only contains domainspeciﬁc slots compared to the remainder domains. In contrast, a target domain containing both domain-speciﬁc DA
types and slots is considered as a far-domain.
to Figure 2 and Table 1, “Attraction”, “Hotel”, “Restaurant”,
and “Taxi”, are near-domains, while “Booking” and “Train”
are far-domains. Adapting to near-domains requires to capture unseen slots, while adapting to far-domains additionally
requires to learn new language patterns. Adaptation size is
the number of DA-utterance pairs in the target domain to ﬁnetune the NLG model. To test different low-resource degrees,
we considered different adaptation sizes (1,000, 500, 200).
Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)
Target Domain = Attraction
Target Domain = Hotel
Supervised-NLG
Supervised-NLG
Adapt 1000
Adapt 1000
Scratch-NLG
Table 2: Results for near-domain adaption with different adaptation sizes. Bold numbers highlight the best results except Supervised-NLG.
Target Domain = Booking
Target Domain = Train
Supervised-NLG
Supervised-NLG
Adapt 1000
Adapt 1000
Scratch-NLG
Table 3: Results for far-domain adaption with different adaptation sizes. Bold numbers highlight the best results except Supervised-NLG.
Near-domain Adaptation.
Results of adapting to two neardomains (“Attraction” and “Hotel”) are presented in Table 2.
Other two near-domains (“Restaurant”, and “Taxi”) are simpler, therefore, they are not included due to page limit. Several observations can be noted. First, Using only source or
target domain samples does not produce competitive performance. Using only source domain samples (Zero-NLG) performs the worst. It obtains very low BLEU-4 scores, indicating that the sentences generated do not match the linguistic
patterns in the target domain. Using only low-resource target
domain samples (Scratch-NLG) performs slightly better, yet
still much worse than MTL-NLG and Meta-NLG. Second,
Meta-NLG shows a very strong performance for this neardomain adaptation setting. It consistently outperforms MTL-
NLG and other methods with very remarkable margins in different metrics and adaptation sizes. More importantly, it even
works better than Supervised-NLG which is trained on highresource samples in the target domain. Third, Meta-NLG is
particularly strong in performance when the adaptation size is
small. As the adaptation size decreases from 1,000 to 200, the
performance of Scratch-NLG and MTL-NLG drops quickly,
while Meta-NLG performs stably well. Both BLEU-4 and
ERR even increase in “Hotel” domain when the adaptation
size decreases from 500 to 200.
Far-domain Adaptation.
Results of adapting to two fardomains (“Booking” and “Train”) are presented in Table 3.
Again, we can see that Meta-NLG shows very strong performance on both far-domains with different adaptation sizes.
Similar observations can be made as in the previous neardomain adaptation experiments. Because far-domain adaptation is more challenging, Meta-NLG does not outperform
Supervised-NLG, and the performance of Meta-NLG drops
more obviously as the adaptation size decreases. Noticeably,
“Train” is more difﬁcult than “Booking” as the former contains more slots, some of which can only be inferred from the
smallest “Taxi” domain. The improvement margin of Meta-
NLG over MTL-NLG and other methods is larger on the more
difﬁcult “Train” domain than on the “Booking” domain.
Scratch-NLG
Table 4: Results for adapting to new DA type “Book” and “Recommend” with adaptation size 500.
Figure 3: ERRs (red) and BLEU-4 (purple) scores of Meta-NLG
and MTL-NLG on the validation set during model ﬁne-tuning on
the target low-resource domain (Train) with adaptation size 1000.
Dialog Act (DA) Type Adaptation
It is also important for a task-oriented dialog system to adapt
to new functions, namely, supporting new dialog acts that the
system has never observed before. To test this ability, we left
certain DA types out for adaptation in a low-resource setting.
We chose “Recommend”, “Book” as target DA types, and we
mimic the situation that a dialog system needs to add a new
function to make recommendations or bookings for customers
with a few number of annotated DA-utterance pairs. As presented in Table 4, results show that Meta-NLG signiﬁcantly
outperforms other baselines.
Adaptation Curve Analysis
To further investigate the adaptation process, we presented
in Figure 3 the performance curves of MTL-NLG and Meta-
Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)
Inform (Ticket†=17.60 pounds, Time=79 minutes); Offer book⋆(None)
The travel time is [79 minutes] and the cost is [17.60 pounds], shall I book for you?
there is a train that leaves at [slot-train-leave] and arrives at [slot-train-arrive]. would you like me to book it for you?
[missed: Ticket†, Time; redundant: Leave, Arrive]
the travel time is [79 minutes] and the price is [17.60 pounds]. would you like me to book it for you? [correct]
Inform(Arrive=7:52, Id†=TR9641, Dest‡=cambridge, Depart‡=the airport, Leave =7:24)
[TR9641] leaves [the airport] at [7:24] and arrives in [cambridge] at [7:52].
i have a train that leaves [the airport] at [7:24] and arrives by [7:52]. [missed: Id†, Dest‡]
[TR9641] leaves [the airport] at [7:24] and arrives in [cambridge] at [7:52]. [correct]
Table 5: Sampled generated sentences when considering “Train” as the target domain with adaptation size 500. ⋆indicates a domain-speciﬁc
DA type, † indicates a domain-speciﬁc slot, and ‡ indicates a rare slot that can only be inferred from the smallest “Taxi” domain.
NLG as ﬁne-tuning epoch proceeds on the most challenging
“Train” domain. The effect of meta-learning for low-resource
NLG can be observed by comparing the two solid curves
against the corresponding dashed curves. First, Meta-NLG
adapts faster than MTL-NLG. We can see that the ERR of
Meta-NLG (red-solid) decreases much more rapidly than that
of MTL-NLG (red-dashed) , and the BLEU-4 score of Meta-
NLG (purple-solid) also increases more quickly. The optimal
BLEU-4 and ERR that MTL-NLG converges to can be obtained by Meta-NLG within 10 epochs. Second, Meta-NLG
adapts better than MTL-NLG. As it can be seen, Meta-NLG
achieves a much lower ERR and a higher BLEU-4 score when
it converges, indicating that it found a better θ of the base
NLG model to generalize to the low-resource target domain.
Manual Evaluation
To better evaluate the quality of the generated utterances, we
performed manual evaluation.
Given a DA and a reference utterance in a lowresource target domain with adaptation size 500, two responses generated by Meta-NLG and MTL-NLG were presented to three human annotators to score each of them in
terms of informativeness and naturalness (rating out of 3),
and also indicate their pairwise preferences (Win-Tie-Lose)
on Meta-NLG against MTL-NLG. Informativeness is deﬁned
as whether the generated utterance captures all the information, including multiple slots and probably multiple DA types,
speciﬁed in the DA. Naturalness measures whether the utterance is plausibly generated by a human.
Annotation Statistics.
Cases with identical utterances generated by two models were ﬁltered out. We obtained in total
600 annotations on each individual metric for each target domain. We calculated the Fleiss’ kappa [Fleiss, 1971] to measure inter-rater consistency. The overall Fleiss’ kappa values
for informativeness and naturalness are 0.475 and 0.562, indicating “Moderate Agreement”, and 0.637 for pairwise preferences, indicating “Substantial Agreement”.
Scores of informativeness and naturalness are presented in Table 6. Meta-NLG outscores MTL-NLG in terms
of both metrics on all four domains.
Overall, Meta-NLG
received signiﬁcantly (two-tailed t-test, p < 0.0005) higher
scores than MTL-NLG. Results for pairwise preferences are
summarized in Table 7. Even though there are certain amount
of cases where the utterances generated by different models
Attraction
Table 6: Manual evaluation scores of informativeness (inf.), and naturalness (nat.) on four target low-resource domains.
Attraction
Table 7: Pairwise preferences (Meta-NLG vs. MTL-NLG) on four
target low-resource domains.
are nearly the same (Tie) to annotators, Meta-NLG is overall signiﬁcantly preferred over MTL-NLG (two-tailed t-test,
p < 0.0001) across different target domains.
Case Study
Table 5 shows two examples in the “Train” domain. The ﬁrst
sample shows that MTL-NLG fails to generate the domainspeciﬁc slot “Ticket”, instead, it mistakenly generates slots
(“Leave” and “Arrive”) that are frequently observed in the
low-resource adaptation set. In the second example, MTL-
NLG failed to generate the domain-speciﬁc slot ‘Id” and another rare slot “Dest”, while Meta-NLG succeeded both.
Conclusion
We propose a generalized optimization-based meta-learning
approach Meta-NLG for low-resource NLG tasks.
NLG utilizes Meta NLG tasks and a meta-learning optimization procedure based on MAML. Extensive experiments on
a new benchmark dataset (MultiWoz) show that Meta-NLG
signiﬁcantly outperforms other training procedures, indicating that it adapts fast and well to new low-resource settings.
Our work may inspire researchers to use similar optimization
techniques for building more robust and scalable NLG components in task-oriented dialog systems.
Acknowledgments
This work was jointly supported by the National Key
R&D Program of China (Grant No.
2018YFC0830200)
and the National Science Foundation of China (Grant
No.61876096/61332007). We would also like to thank Prof.
Xiaoyan Zhu for her unreserved support.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)