Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 718–731
July 5 - 10, 2020. c⃝2020 Association for Computational Linguistics
Improved Natural Language Generation via Loss Truncation
Daniel Kang
Stanford University
 
Tatsunori B. Hashimoto
Stanford University
 
Neural language models are usually trained
to match the distributional properties of largescale corpora by minimizing the log loss.
While straightforward to optimize, this approach forces the model to reproduce all variations in the dataset, including noisy and invalid references (e.g., misannotations and hallucinated facts). Even a small fraction of noisy
data can degrade the performance of log loss.
As an alternative, prior work has shown that
minimizing the distinguishability of generated
samples is a principled and robust loss that
can handle invalid references. However, distinguishability has not been used in practice due
to challenges in optimization and estimation.
We propose loss truncation: a simple and scalable procedure which adaptively removes high
log loss examples as a way to optimize for distinguishability. Empirically, we demonstrate
that loss truncation outperforms existing baselines on distinguishability on a summarization
task. Furthermore, we show that samples generated by the loss truncation model have factual accuracy ratings that exceed those of baselines and match human references.
Introduction
Learning to generate text is a core part of many
NLP tasks, including summarization , image captioning ,
and story generation . A common challenge to all these tasks is that references
from the training distribution are not unique and
contain substantial variations in phrasing and content .
Learning to generate under a set of diverse and
noisy references is challenging as some variations
ought to be learned (e.g., paraphrasing) while others should not . Existing work has primarily addressed these issues
by constructing decoders that implicitly remove
unwanted variation when generating (see §6 for a
detailed discussion of task-speciﬁc losses).
In this work, we argue that this phenomenon is
not model speciﬁc, but is due to the widely-used
log loss: we demonstrate that log loss is not robust
to noisy and invalid references (§2). In particular,
log loss requires that models assign probabilities to
all potential test reference sequences. As a result,
log loss is sensitive to outliers: invalid or noisy
references with small probability mass can cause
large changes in model behavior. We show that
the brittleness of log loss, together with the noise
in existing generation datasets, lead to low-quality
and unfaithful generated text.
Instead of optimizing log loss, which has little correlation with model output quality , recent work on diverse generation models
has proposed optimizing for the distinguishability of samples from the model and the reference.
Distinguishability provides a natural and appealing guarantee: samples that are indistinguishable
from human generated text will be as high quality
as human generated text. Furthermore, we show
that optimizing for distinguishability is robust in
the face of noisy and even invalid data. Despite its
appeal, distinguishability has not been widely used
due to statistical and computational challenges. For
example, existing methods that directly optimize
for distinguishability have yet to match even naive
log loss based baselines .
We propose a modiﬁcation to the log loss, loss
truncation, that has the beneﬁts of distinguishability while being efﬁcient to train. Loss truncation
is as efﬁcient to train as log loss, nearly as robust
as distinguishability, and provides distinguishability guarantees via an upper bound. It achieves
these properties by modifying the standard log
loss to adaptively remove examples with high log
loss. We additionally extend loss truncation with
a sequence-level rejection sampling scheme that
generates higher quality sequences by restricting
the outputs to be high probability sequences.
We show that loss truncation with direct and
rejection sampling outperforms standard log loss
based generation methods (beam search, full sampling, top-k, and top-p sampling) on distinguishability, as measured by the HUSE score . We additionally study the factual accuracy of a summarization system trained on loss
truncation and show that our proposed approach
produces summaries which improve upon all baselines (including beam searched models) and match
references on factual accuracy.
Motivation and Problem Statement
Task and Background. We consider a natural language generation task with a conditional language
model, where we are given a context x drawn from
p(x) and our probabilistic model ˆp(y | x) produces
an output y by approximating a (usually human)
reference distribution pref(y|x).
In order to achieve this, many existing models
are trained to minimize the Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence,
KL(pref||ˆp) = −Epref[log ˆp]
+ Epref[log pref]
negentropy
We refer to the ﬁrst term of this divergence as the
log loss of a model. The second term is commonly
ignored as it is a constant with respect to the model.
Minimizing the log loss has several practical bene-
ﬁts: 1) it is written as an expected loss (and is thus
straightforward to optimize via stochastic gradient
descent), 2) it factorizes across tokens in autoregressive modeling, and 3) it provides a guarantee
on a model’s goodness of ﬁt (Eq (1)).
Unfortunately, log loss also suffers from several
drawbacks. It is known to have little correlation
with a model’s sample quality and it can be brittle
to invalid references in the training data.
Min distinguishability
Min log-loss
Figure 1: Fitting a mixture of Gaussians with a single Gaussian using distinguishability (TV) and log loss
(KL). As shown, log loss is extremely sensitive to outliers, resulting in poor estimation.
Log loss is not robust to noise.
The KL divergence has intuitively correct behavior when each
input x has a single correct reference y: it will maximize the probability of the single correct reference.
However, log loss can be problematic when there
are multiple correct references, of which some are
invalid or difﬁcult to model.
In particular, log loss is sensitive to invalid or
noisy data because it requires that the model assign
high probabilities to all potential references. Log
loss is unbounded above: a model assigning zero
probability to even a single reference makes the
model incur an inﬁnite overall loss.
We show a well-known example of this behavior
with synthetic data. We consider ﬁtting a single
Gaussian to a mixture of two Gaussian in Figure 1.
The reference distribution (blue) has a valid set
of references at zero as well as variation that the
model does not expect (e.g., invalid or noisy references) on the right. Minimizing the log loss results in a suboptimal model that is forced to span
both groups. Furthermore, post-hoc processing the
model does not help, as even the most likely output under the log loss trained model (~3) has low
probability under the reference distribution.
In natural language generation, training sets
can contain invalid or poor quality references.
As such, these types of problems manifest themselves in tasks such as summarization (hallucinating facts), story generation (ignoring prompts and
constraints), and captioning (ignoring parts of the
Much of the existing literature on faithful generation has focused on designing better models
for valid references (via copying or attention constraints), but the example in Figure 1 shows that this
alone may not be sufﬁcient. The Gaussian ‘model’
in this case perfectly ﬁts the mixture component
Context: For the ﬁrst time in ﬁve years, Microsoft corp. is ﬁnally unveiling a new system
for operating personal computers.
Title: Microsoft Makes Long-Awaited Software Upgrade Available to Businesses Thursday.
Figure 2: Example of an article title from the Gigaword dataset that requires hallucinating new facts such
as ‘Thursday’ (colored red).
at zero but is still brittle because it cannot simultaneously ﬁt the other group of (invalid) samples.
Resolving this will require either a model which is
designed explicitly to capture invalid references or
a loss function that can ignore them.
Case Study: Hallucination in Summarization
We show that low-probability reference sequences
(e.g., Figure 1) are pervasive by examining the Gigaword summarization dataset .
We manually classiﬁed 300 titles into two categories: 1) requires hallucinating new facts and 2)
directly entailed from the context. We show an example of a reference that requires hallucination in
Figure 2. In this example, a model that assigns high
probability to the new fact (Thursday) must also
frequently hallucinate dates on other examples.
We show the fraction of examples in each category in Table 1.
As shown, 35% of titles require hallucinating new facts. Others have found
this phenomenon to be pervasive in other datasets
 , including the CNN/DM
dataset .
Studying the log loss of these examples1, we
note that the average log loss of titles that require
new facts is over 1.7× the average loss of the titles
that are directly entailed (Table 1) and the high-loss
examples are clearly dominated by examples which
require hallucination (Figure 3). In fact, we ﬁnd
that over 80% of examples with greater than 40 log
loss requires some form of hallucination.
These statistics are similar to the toy example we
presented earlier in Figure 1. A small but nontrivial
fraction of invalid and unexpected data force the
model to incur high losses. Much like in the earlier
example, we can see that a model which aims to
have low log loss on this dataset must spend a
substantial amount of effort learning to hallucinate.
Distinguishability.
Given that large-scale data
1The log loss was computed from a standard language
model, see §5 for details.
Directly entailed
Avg. log loss
Table 1: Fraction of the data and log loss of titles that
require hallucinating new facts (left column) and titles
that are entailed from the context (right column). As
shown, 35% of titles require hallucinating new facts
and the average log loss of titles requiring new facts
is over 1.7× the loss of the directly entailed sequences.
Directly entailed
Figure 3: Normalized histogram of log losses for titles
that require hallucinating new facts compared to those
that can be directly entailed. As shown, titles requiring
new facts incur signiﬁcantly higher loss and more than
80% of examples with greater than 40 log loss require
hallucinating new facts.
will inevitably contain annotation errors and noise,
we might ask whether there are effective alternatives to the KL divergence for training models. The
distinguishability of samples from a model compared to the reference is one such objective. Distinguishability has recently gained attention as a way
to learn and evaluate models based on both sample
quality and diversity . We show that this objective also serves as a
naturally robust alternative to the KL divergence for
learning language models. Unfortunately, directly
optimizing for distinguishability (e.g., via generative adversarial networks) is challenging and we show this works poorly in
practice (§5).
Distinguishability is deﬁned as the error rate of
an optimal classiﬁer which seeks to distinguish
samples from both the model and reference, and
we will formally deﬁne this via the mixture
where z ∼Bernoulli
. We can now deﬁne L∗
to be twice the optimal error in identifying samples
from the model
f∈X×Y→ P[f(x, y) ̸= z]
Our measure of distinguishability, the total variation (TV) distance, is a linear function of this error
|ˆp −pref|TV = 1 −L∗
where ˆp and pref refer to the joint distributions
ˆp(y|x)p(x) and pref(y|x)p(x) for brevity. Note
that distinguishability is inherently robust to the addition of any small fraction of noisy data . Unlike the log loss, the model’s loss
on an example for TV is upper bounded by 1 (Eq 2).
We show an example of TV’s robustness in Figure 1, where a small amount of noise does not
substantially affect the learned distribution.
Log loss as a surrogate for distinguishability.
Distinguishability is both robust and provides sample quality guarantees, but is challenging to optimize . One approach to optimize for distinguishability is to ﬁnd an appropriate
surrogate loss which serves as an upper bound.
This is analogous to the use of logistic or hinge
losses as a way to optimize for classiﬁcation accuracy. For log loss, Pinsker’s inequality relates the KL divergence and
distinguishability as
|ˆp −pref|2
2 · KL(pref||ˆp).
This explains the empirical success of log loss in
low-uncertainty situations, where KL is sufﬁciently
small and this bound becomes tight.
Our approach will be to modify the log loss
slightly by truncating the distribution. This truncated loss will be as easy to optimize as log loss,
while being more robust and providing a tighter
variant of Pinsker’s inequality.
Loss Truncation
Intuition. We would like the model to ignore data
that would force it to unnecessarily hallucinate at
test time. Concretely, recall the toy example (Figure 1); there is a set of invalid references that force
the model to be degenerate. If we could remove
these these invalid references by truncating the distribution, the resulting model would be high quality.
We can show that this intuition is theoretically justiﬁed, and that truncating (i.e., removing) an appropriate c-fraction of the data provides tighter bounds
on the distinguishability of the model.
Improved log losses for distinguishability.
will demonstrate that log loss with an appropriate
c-fraction of the data removed provides guarantees
on distinguishability. We will deﬁne the set of
truncated distributions as the set of distributions
with any c-fraction of data removed
Pc,p := {q0 : p = (1 −c)q0 + cq1 for some q1} .
A simple lemma shows that that all elements in
Pc,p are c-close to p in TV (Appendix B).
Now we state our main result,
Proposition 1. For any c ∈ and pt ∈Pc,pref,
|ˆp −pref|2
2KL(pt||ˆp) + 2c + c2
See Appendix B for the proof. Namely, distinguishability is bounded by the log loss with respect
to the truncated distribution and a small constant.
Furthermore, this upper bound is valid for any c,
although different c will change the tightness of the
bound and produce different models.
This truncated bound can be substantially tighter
than Pinsker’s inequality. Consider for example a
model that can perfectly capture (1 −c) fraction
of the data, but c-fraction of the reference outputs
cannot be generated by the model and receive probability zero. In this case, the distinguishability
(TV) is c, the KL divergence is inﬁnite, while our
truncated bound is
c2 + 2c. This suggests that
appropriately truncating high-loss examples makes
log loss robust and allows us to use log loss as a surrogate for distinguishability, even in the presence
of invalid and noisy references.
Loss truncation. Given that the log loss on any
c-fraction of the data is a surrogate loss for distinguishability (Eq (6)), a key parameter to optimize
is the truncated distribution pt. An oracle solution
would exhaustively search over pt and which data
to drop. However, exhaustively searching through
Pc,pref is a combinatorial optimization problem and
infeasible. Our approach will be to optimize pt
with a heuristic. The truncated objective takes the
form of a log loss and negative entropy term,
−Ept[log ˆp(y | x)] + Ept[log pt(y | x)]
and we will select pt by dropping the examples
with the highest log loss, treating the negative entropy term as being upper bounded by zero.
This heuristic is straightforward to compute, provides an upper bound on distinguishability, and
Loss-truncated (ours)
Figure 4: Pinsker’s inequality, our bound, and the total
variation squared of parameter estimates for different
parameter estimates (c = 0.2). As shown, loss truncation can signiﬁcantly improve bounds over Pinsker’s
inequality and, in this case, has a nearly identical minimizer to directly minimizing total variation.
matches our earlier observation that high-loss examples are correlated with invalid examples we
would like the model to ignore (see Table 1).
As an example of how our heuristic can improve
estimation and tightness in bounds, consider the
earlier toy example in Figure 1. In this example, we
ﬁnd the optimal mean for a single Gaussian with
ﬁxed variance which ﬁts mixture of two Gaussians.
Figure 4 shows the objective function value implied
by the TV loss, log loss (Pinsker’s bound), and our
c-truncated bound as a function of the Gaussian
mean. We ﬁnd that log loss provides an upper
bound on distinguishability (via Pinsker’s inequality) but is loose and results in a low quality estimate.
In contrast, c-truncation results in a nearly identical
minimizer as directly minimizing TV.
Implementing Truncation
Our algorithm has three components at training
time. First, it trains a model on all the data using
standard hyperparameters, which we refer to as
“hotstarting” the model. Second, it tracks a running
estimate of the 1 −c quantile of the losses during
training. Third, it performs gradient updates on examples that are below the current 1 −c quantile estimate. We present the pseudocode in Algorithm 1
and describe each step in detail below.2
Hotstarting.
First, our algorithm hotstarts the
model (hotstart(M) in Alg. 1) by training with
the standard log loss. Hotstarting address two challenges in optimizing the truncated loss. First, losses
are uninformative at the start of training so trun-
2Our code is available at 
ddkang/loss_dropper.
cating examples based on these losses will result
in dropping valid examples. We have empirically
found that truncating after hotstarting primarily
drops invalid references, which avoids this problem. Second, hotstarting allows the model to transfer information from the entire dataset to the clean
1 −c fraction of the data. Examples that cause
a model to hallucinate may still contain valid information about the ﬂuency of a sentence, which
hotstarting can capture. This is effectively pretraining our model on the entire data before learning to
generate on the clean subset. We have found this
procedure to be effective in practice.
Quantile estimation.
Second, our algorithm
keeps track of the 1 −c quantile over the distribution of losses. For each new minibatch B, we
update an online estimate of the 1 −c quantile
(estimateQuantile(M, B) in Alg. 1). To estimate this quantile, our algorithm constructs a histogram over the last 10,000 examples seen during
training and estimates the empirical 1 −c quantile
every 10,000 examples.3
Loss dropping.
Third, our algorithm will
perform minibatch stochastic gradient descent
while excluding examples that have losses above
the current top 1 −c quantile estimate q
(truncatedUpdate(M, B, q) in Alg. 1). Dropping can be accomplished in automatic differentiation packages (e.g., Tensorﬂow and PyTorch) by
setting the loss on the given example to zero.
Generating High-Probability Samples
Thus far, our goal has been to robustly learn the
underlying distribution. However, in some cases,
a user may wish to only generate high conﬁdence
sequences, which will ideally correspond to high
quality sequences.
To generate such samples, we propose sequencelevel rejection sampling.
Recall that our truncation heuristic selects for
the 1 −c quantile of the distribution. For a userdeﬁned level α, our rejection sampling scheme will
aim to generate samples from the 1 −c · α quantile.
To perform rejection sampling, given a model
and a user-deﬁned rejection level α, we ﬁrst sample
N sequences (e.g., titles in a summarization task).
Then, we sample a random sequence from the α·N
smallest samples as measured by log loss. Ideally,
3For datasets with fewer than 10,000 examples, we can
perform this procedure over the entire dataset.
Data: Model M, c fraction to drop, T
iterations
M ←hotstart(M) ;
for i ←0 to T do
B ←minibatch() ;
q = estimateQuantile(M, B) ;
M = truncatedUpdate(M, B, q);
Algorithm 1: The proposed loss truncation procedure with three components (see main text
for details for each component).
this procedure will return a sample in the 1 −c · α
quantile of pref.
We show that rejection sampling can outperform
baselines in generating factual summaries (§5). We
further show examples of selected and rejected samples in Appendix A.
Evaluation
Experimental Setup
Dataset and Task.
We primarily evaluate loss
truncation on abstractive summarization in the form
of generating news headlines from an article. We
selected this task to highlight that loss truncation
can improve sample quality and factual accuracy,
while also achieving the secondary goal of diversity
for abstractive systems .
We evaluated on the Gigaword summarization
task as in Gehrmann et al.
While there are other summarization
datasets, we chose Gigaword for the following reasons. First, it is large enough that sample quality
defects are not caused by a lack of data. Second, the
dataset is structured so that neither model nor computation is the bottleneck in performance: the standard sequence-to-sequence models are competitive
on the Gigaword dataset. Third, while Gigaword
dataset is known to have noise, this matches the behavior of existing annotation errors 
and uncertainty .
To show that loss truncation is applicable beyond
summarization, we also performed a preliminary
evaluation of our approach on the E2E NLG task.
In E2E, the goal is to generate restaurant reviews
from meaning representations .
Model and Baselines. We used a standard LSTM
architecture with global attention for summarization that has been used for the Gigaword summarization task in the past .
The learning rate and hyperparameters are given in
Appendix C. For the E2E task, we use a standard
model with the exact settings as in Puzikov and
Gurevych .
For loss truncation on Gigaword, we used c =
0.6. We matched the total number of training steps
when training via loss truncation (including the
hotstart) and standard log loss. We sampled from
the full model distribution for loss truncated models
except when rejection sampling.
As baselines on Gigaword, we generate from
the log loss trained language model using several
decoders that have been reported to mitigate lowquality outputs such as beam search, top-k sampling , and top-p sampling . We also evaluate directly sampling from the probabilistic model in order to estimate overall distinguishability and understand the
diversity-quality trade-offs of each model.
Finally, on Gigaword, we also compared against
a recent generative adversarial network (GAN)
model with a publicly available implementation
 .
Human-evaluation metrics.
We evaluate
whether loss truncation improves model distinguishability on summarization by measuring the
HUSE estimator for TV .
HUSE measures distinguishability by learning a
classiﬁer over the log-probabilities and human evaluation scores over both samples from the model
and references. We also use HUSE to evaluate the
quality-diversity tradeoffs of the models by estimating both HUSE-Q (which measures quality via
human judgement) and HUSE-D (which measures
diversity via statistical evaluation).
In order to assess whether this leads to improvements in the faithfulness of samples, we measure
whether loss truncation reduces the number of factually inaccurate outputs from the model via a
crowdsourced survey. We designed our prompt
based on earlier factual accuracy human evaluation and measured whether
the original article contained all of the information
given in the generated title.
We describe the crowd worker setup in Appendix D.
Automated metrics.
While human evaluation
is our primary metric of evaluation as it is considered gold-standard, we additionally evaluate on
Loss trunc.
Trunc+reject (α = 0.1)
Full samp.
top-k (k = 100)
top-p (p = 0.9)
Table 2: HUSE, HUSE-D, and HUSE-Q scores for loss truncation and baselines. As shown, loss truncation
outperforms all baselines on HUSE score.
automated metrics to contextualize our human evaluation results. We measure ROUGE-L for summarization and BLEU score
 for E2E.
Loss Truncation Outperforms Baselines
Using the HUSE score to measure the TV distance,
we assessed whether loss truncation successfully
improved our model in terms of distinguishability compared to log loss. As shown in Table 2,
loss truncation outperforms all baselines on HUSE
score (including the original log loss model Full
samp), suggesting the truncated model is a better
language model than the log loss model as measured by distinguishability.
We ﬁnd that that loss truncation improves over
the log loss by increasing the generation quality
(HUSE-Q) by 12% without substantially lowering diversity (e.g., memorizing examples from the
training set). These results afﬁrmatively answers
an open question posed by Hashimoto et al. 
on whether it is possible to obtain models that improve the quality while maintaining overall distinguishability compared to log loss trained models.
Post-hoc modiﬁcation of the log loss model’s distribution by removing unlikely words using either
top-k or top-p sampling result in substantial losses
in HUSE due to losses in diversity.
We further considered matching the entropy of
the loss truncation model with top-k = 100 and
top-p = 0.9 (Appendix C). At a ﬁxed entropy, loss
truncation can outperform on HUSE by up to 26%.
Comparing models with high sample quality,
loss truncation with rejection sampling improves
upon all baselines (including beam search) in terms
of raw human quality evaluation (HUSE-Q), and
we see that the Pareto frontier of truncation and rejection sampling (which can be achieved via ensembling) dominates the baselines on both quality and
diversity (Figure 5). Rejection sampling decreases
overall HUSE score because it is designed to only
return high quality samples (i.e., high HUSE-Q):
this comes at the cost of reduced diversity, so overall HUSE score suffers.
Trunc+reject
Figure 5: HUSE-D vs HUSE-Q for loss truncation,
truncation + rejection sampling, and baselines. The red
line shows the best achievable frontier via ensembling.
Truncation and rejection outperform all baselines.
The results amongst our baselines recapitulate
known results for the quality-diversity tradeoffs of
existing methods. Beam search has high sample
quality, but low diversity; top-k and top-p samplers provide diversity gains over beam search; and
GANs generally underperform well-tuned log loss
based models on both diversity and quality.
Loss Truncation with Rejection Sampling
Produces High Quality Outputs
We now ask whether improvements in distinguishability (as measured by HUSE) for the loss truncation model translate to practical improvements in
sample quality, such as the factual accuracy of generated outputs in summarization. We evaluate this
through a crowdsourced study on factual accuracy.
Since we are interested in studying whether our
model can produce high quality samples, we used
rejection sampling with α = 0.1 to obtain highquality samples from the model.
We compare
this to the log loss model with baseline decoders.
For the top-p and top-k sampling decoders that
have quality-diversity tradeoffs, we select k and
p such that the entropy of the sampling distribution matches our rejection sampling approach (see
Appendix C for details).
To measure factual accuracy, we asked crowd
workers how much information in the generated
titles was contained in the article in a similar fashion to Novikova et al. . Table 3 shows the
Mean score
3.63 ± 0.05
Truncation + Rejection (α = 0.1)
3.79 ± 0.06
3.51 ± 0.05
top-p (p = 0.4)
3.42 ± 0.05
top-k (k = 2)
3.29 ± 0.05
2.96 ± 0.05
Table 3: Mean scores and standard errors of factuality
in generated news titles given articles. As shown, rejection sampling outperforms all baselines and matches
the human reference score.
average factual accuracy rating for each model. We
ﬁnd that rejection sampling outperforms all baselines, including the current gold standard of beam
search, and matches the human reference level of
factual accuracy.
Although it may seem surprising that loss truncation and rejection sampling together can achieve
the same factual accuracy score as humans, recall
that over 34% of the dataset consists of titles which
have facts that are not contained in the article. The
loss truncation approach biases the model towards
learning only the easily predicted (and likely factually accurate) titles.
Loss Truncation Produces Diverse
Finally, one of the beneﬁts of optimizing for distinguishability is that it naturally optimizes for both
diversity and quality. Manually examining outputs
from the models, we ﬁnd that directly sampling
from the loss truncated model often produces high
quality and diverse outputs. We show examples
of generated outputs for baselines and loss truncation in Table 4. Loss truncation uses different
phrasings (‘at least # killed’, and ‘ﬂoods sweep’)
while top-k follows a nearly templated pattern with
a few changes to the words which appear. Top-p
and direct sampling both have diverse phrasings,
but also hallucinate facts (‘earthquake’ in sampling
and ‘torrential rains’ in top-p sampling).
Loss Truncation can Outperform on
Automated Metrics
While our primary evaluation metrics are human
evaluations (HUSE and factuality), we additionally
investigate automated metrics to further contextualize our results. For summarization, we used
ROUGE-L and for E2E we use BLEU score for the
automated metrics.
For summarization, the ROUGE-L scores for
loss truncation and entropy-matched top-k and topp decoding were 23.2, 22.8, and 22.8 respectively.
While loss truncation does not substantially improve ROUGE-L, we see that it still outperforms
baselines. We do not expect reference-based evaluations to fully capture the beneﬁts of loss truncation, as these metrics encourage the models to fully
imitate the data distribution – including invalid and
hallucinated examples.
For E2E, the BLEU scores for loss truncation
and the baseline were 0.72 and 0.64 respectively.
We conﬁrmed that the baseline model for the E2E
task achieves a similar score as reported by Balakrishnan et al. . Perhaps surprisingly, improving BLEU score to 0.72 almost closes the gap
to using complex tree-structured semantic representations, which achieves a BLEU score of 0.74
 .
We further show that loss truncation is not sensitive to the hyperparameter c on automated metrics
in Appendix E.1 and provide a preliminary investigation of combining loss truncation and alternative
decoders in Appendix E.2.
Related Work
Decoder-based diversity. Researchers have proposed a variety of models for text generation . These models generate text using decoding methods such as beam search. While beam
search is generally thought of as the gold standard
 , it can produce generic
and repetitive outputs . To
achieve diversity, top-k and top-p
 sampling stochastically decodes the outputs after restricting the output space
to avoid low-quality outputs.
While these techniques can improve generation
quality, they rely on models trained via log loss,
which we show can result in undesired behavior
that cannot be ﬁxed post-hoc. Our work is complementary to existing work on decoders by proposing
a loss that can improve the probabilistic models
which these decoders operate on.
Loss modiﬁcations.
Prior work has identiﬁed
speciﬁc issues in generative models, such as repetitiveness, and proposed loss modiﬁcations to address these speciﬁc issues in the context of long text
generation . In contrast, we identify an issue with the
widely used log loss, and propose loss truncation,
which does not require a task- and issue-speciﬁc
at least ## people have been killed and more than ##,### made homeless by ﬂoods that swept across
southern africa in the past week , striking a region already grappling with severe food shortages .
ﬂoods kill ## in famine-hit southern africa
Loss truncation
at least ## people killed ##,### evacuated in ﬂoods in southern african region
ﬂoods that sweep parts of africa kill at least ##
ﬂooding hits southern africa as deaths rise
Full sampling
child farming stalls in southern africa
earthquake kills ## in southern africa
top-p (p = 0.9)
torrential rains prompt warnings in southern africa
toll nears ## in southern africa
top-k (k = 2)
at least ## killed ##,### homeless in southern africa ﬂoods
at least ## dead ##,### homeless as ﬂoods hit southern africa
Table 4: Examples of generations for various baselines and loss truncation (two replicates shown for sampled
outputs). As shown, loss truncation can achieve diverse and high quality outputs. In contrast, baselines either are
not diverse (beam, top-k) or poor quality (full sampling, top-p). We color incorrect facts in red.
modiﬁcation. Many of the penalties and decoding
techniques proposed in these earlier works can be
combined with truncated log loss to obtain models
that are more robust to noisy references.
Contemporaneous with our work, Tian et al.
 propose an attention weight approach to
improving generation faithfulness via decoder and
loss modiﬁcations. Our work complements this by
providing a conceptual basis for improving faithfulness by ignoring examples (i.e., optimizing distinguishability), and providing a simple and general
loss. We consider complex, model dependent loss
truncation methods for optimizing distinguishability to be exciting future work.
Other generation methods optimize for taskspeciﬁc losses . Task
speciﬁc losses are not known in many cases and
thus we require an effective task-agnostic loss, e.g.,
log loss or TV. We show that TV acts as a useful task-agnostic goodness of ﬁt measure, and we
provide an improved alternative to log loss.
GANs. GANs have been proposed to learn models
that minimize distinguishability . While GANs
have been successful in generating images , GANs remaining challenging to optimize for text due to the
discrete nature of text. Our ﬁndings match earlier
reports that GANs underperform log loss trained
sequence-to-sequence models .
In this work, we show that better training methods
for distinguishability can arise from modifying the
standard log loss via truncation.
Robust learning.
Robust learning is the study
of learning in the face of outliers . Our work is related
to the ϵ-contamination model, in which an ϵ fraction of the data has been modiﬁed, potentially by
an adversary . Our work
shows that robust learning under log loss can result
in improved empirical performance and bounds on
distinguishability.
While there are a number of effective approaches
to robust learning , we focus on a simple truncation procedure as it is one of the only procedures
scaleable enough to apply on large-scale generation
datasets. Our work shows that more effective, scalable robust learning procedures can help improve
natural language generation methods.
Conclusion
In this work, we show that log loss is not robust
to noise, which can in turn cause undesired behavior, such as hallucinating facts in summarization.
In response, we propose loss truncation, a robust
training method that optimizes for distinguishability of generated samples. We additionally propose
a sequence-level rejection sampling scheme to generate high quality sequences. We show that loss
truncation outperforms a range of baselines (including beam search, top-p, top-k, and full sampling)
on distinguishability. We additionally show that rejection sampling outperforms all baselines, including beam search, on generating factual summaries.
These results suggest that robust learning in the
form of truncating the log loss can complement
model-based approaches to faithful generation by
ignoring invalid and undesired references.