Social LSTM:
Human Trajectory Prediction in Crowded Spaces
Alexandre Alahi∗, Kratarth Goel∗, Vignesh Ramanathan, Alexandre Robicquet, Li Fei-Fei, Silvio Savarese
Stanford University
{alahi,kratarth,vigneshr,arobicqu,feifeili,ssilvio}@cs.stanford.edu
Pedestrians follow different trajectories to avoid obstacles and accommodate fellow pedestrians. Any autonomous
vehicle navigating such a scene should be able to foresee
the future positions of pedestrians and accordingly adjust
its path to avoid collisions. This problem of trajectory prediction can be viewed as a sequence generation task, where
we are interested in predicting the future trajectory of people based on their past positions. Following the recent success of Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) models for sequence prediction tasks, we propose an LSTM model which
can learn general human movement and predict their future
trajectories. This is in contrast to traditional approaches
which use hand-crafted functions such as Social forces. We
demonstrate the performance of our method on several public datasets. Our model outperforms state-of-the-art methods on some of these datasets . We also analyze the trajectories predicted by our model to demonstrate the motion
behaviour learned by our model.
1. Introduction
Humans have the innate ability to “read” one another.
When people walk in a crowed public space such as a sidewalk, an airport terminal, or a shopping mall, they obey a
large number of (unwritten) common sense rules and comply with social conventions. For instance, as they consider
where to move next, they respect personal space and yield
right-of-way. The ability to model these rules and use them
to understand and predict human motion in complex real
world environments is extremely valuable for a wide range
of applications - from the deployment of socially-aware
robots to the design of intelligent tracking systems 
in smart environments.
Predicting the motion of human targets while taking into
account such common sense behavior, however, is an extremely challenging problem. This requires understanding
∗indicates equal contribution
Figure 1. The goal of this paper is to predict the motion dynamics in crowded scenes - This is, however, a challenging task as
the motion of each person is typically affected by their neighbors.
We propose a new model which we call ”Social” LSTM (Social-
LSTM) which can jointly predict the paths of all the people in
a scene by taking into account the common sense rules and social conventions that humans typically utilize as they navigate in
shared environments. The predicted distribution of their future trajectories is shown in the heat-map.
the complex and often subtle interactions that take place between people in crowded spaces. Recent research in computer vision has successfully addressed some of these challenges. Kitani et. al. have demonstrated that the inferred knowledge about the semantics of the static environment (e.g., location of sidewalks, extension of grass areas,
etc) helps predict the trajectory of pedestrians in future instants more accurately than a model which ignores the scene
information. Pioneering works by have also
proposed ways to model human-human interactions (often
called ”social forces”) to increase robustness and accuracy
in multi-target tracking problems.
However, most of these works are limited by the following two assumptions. i) They use hand-crafted functions
to model ”interactions” for speciﬁc settings rather than inferring them in a data-driven fashion. This results in fa-
voring models that capture simple interactions (e.g. repulsion/attractions) and might fail to generalize for more complex crowded settings. ii) They focus on modeling interactions among people in close proximity to each other (to
avoid immediate collisions). However, they do not anticipate interactions that could occur in the more distant future.
In this work, we propose an approach that can address
both challenges through a novel data-driven architecture for
predicting human trajectories in future instants. Inspired
by the recent success of Long-Short Term Memory networks (LSTM) for different sequence prediction tasks such
as handwriting and speech generation, we extend
them for human trajectory prediction as well. While LSTMs
have the ability to learn and reproduce long sequences, they
do not capture dependencies between multiple correlated
sequences.
We address this issue through a novel architecture which
connects the LSTMs corresponding to nearby sequences. In
particular, we introduce a “Social” pooling layer which allows the LSTMs of spatially proximal sequences to share
their hidden-states with each other. This architecture, which
we refer to as the “Social-LSTM”, can automatically learn
typical interactions that take place among trajectories which
coincide in time. This model leverages existing human trajectory datasets without the need for any additional annotations to learn common sense rules and conventions that
humans observe in social spaces.
Finally, we demonstrate that our Social-LSTM is capable
of predicting trajectories of pedestrians much more accurately than state-of-the-art methods on two publicly available datasets: ETH , and UCY . We also analyze
the trajectory patterns generated by our model to understand
the social constraints learned from the trajectory datasets.
2. Related work
Human-human interactions
Pioneering work from Helbing and Molnar presented a pedestrian motion model
with attractive and repulsive forces referred to as the Social
Force model. This has been shown to achieve competitive
results even on modern pedestrian datasets . This
method was later extended to robotics and activitiy understanding .
Similar approaches have been used to model humanhuman interactions with strong priors for the model.
Treuille et. al. use continuum dynamics, Antonini et.
al. propose a Discrete Choice framework and Wang et.
al. , Tay et. al. use Gaussian processes. Such
functions have alse been used to study stationary groups
 . These works target smooth motion paths and do
not handle the problems associated with discretization.
Another line of work uses well-engineered features and
attributes to improve tracking and forecasting. Alahi et. al.
 presented a social afﬁnity feature by learning from human trajectories in crowd their relative positions, while Yu
et. al. proposed the use of human-attributes to improve
forecasting in dense crowds. They also use an agent-based
model similar to . Rodriguez et al. analyze videos
with high-density crowds to track and count people.
Most of these models provide hand-crafted energy potentials based on relative distances and rules for speciﬁc
scenes. In contrast, we propose a method to learn humanhuman interactions in a more generic data-driven fashion.
Activity forecasting
Activity forecasting models try to
predict the motion and/or action to be carried out by people in a video. A large body of work learns motion patterns
through clustering trajectories . More approaches can be found in . Kitani et.
al. in use Inverse Reinforcement Learning to predict
human paths in static scenes. They infer walkable paths in
a scene by modeling human-space interactions. Walker et
al. in predict the behavior of generic agents (e.g., a vehicle) in a visual scene given a large collection of videos.
Ziebart et al. presented a planning based approach.
Turek et al. used a similar idea to identify
the functional map of a scene.
Other approaches like
 showed the use of scene semantics to predict goals and paths for human navigation. Scene semantics has also been used to predict multiple object dynamics
 . These works are mostly restricted to the
use of static scene information to predict human motion or
activity. In our work, we focus on modeling dynamic crowd
interactions for path prediction.
More recent works have also attempted to predict future
human actions. In particular, Ryoo et. al. forecast actions in streaming videos. More relevant
to our work, is the idea of using a RNN mdoel to predict
future events in videos . Along similar
lines, we predict future trajectories in scenes.
RNN models for sequence prediction
Recently Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) and their variants including
Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) and Gated Recurrent Units have proven to be very successful for sequence prediction tasks: speech recognition ,
caption generation , machine translation
 , image/video classiﬁcation , human dynamics to name a few. RNN models have also proven
to be effective for tasks with densely connected data such
as semantic segmentation , scene parsing and even
as an alternative to Convolutional Neural Networks .
These works show that RNN models are capable of learning the dependencies between spatially correlated data such
as image pixels. This motivates us to extend the sequence
generation model from Graves et al. to our setting. In
particular, Graves et al. predict isolated handwriting
sequences; while in our work we jointly predict multiple
correlated sequences corresponding to human trajectories.
3. Our model
Humans moving in crowded scenes adapt their motion
based on the behaviour of other people in their vicinity.
For instance, a person could completely alter his/her path or
stop momentarily to accommodate a group of people moving towards him. Such deviation in trajectory cannot be predicted by observing the person in isolation. Neither, can it
be predicted with simple ”repulsion” or ”attraction” functions (the traditional social forces models )
This motivates us to build a model which can account for
the behavior of other people within a large neighborhood,
while predicting a person’s path. In this section, we describe
our pooling based LSTM model (Fig. 2) which jointly predicts the trajectories of all the people in a scene. We refer
to this as the “Social” LSTM model.
Problem formulation
We assume that each scene is ﬁrst
preprocessed to obtain the spatial coordinates of the all people at different time-instants.
Previous work follow this
convention as well . At any time-instant t, the ith
person in the scene is represented by his/her xy-coordinates
t). We observe the positions of all the people from
time 1 to Tobs, and predict their positions for time instants
Tobs+1 to Tpred. This task can also be viewed as a sequence
generation problem , where the input sequence corresponds to the observed positions of a person and we are interested in generating an output sequence denoting his/her
future positions at different time-instants.
3.1. Social LSTM
Every person has a different motion pattern: they move
with different velocities, acceleration and have different
gaits. We need a model which can understand and learn
such person-speciﬁc motion properties from a limited set of
initial observations corresponding to the person.
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks have been
shown to successfully learn and generalize the properties of
isolated sequences like handwriting and speech .
Inspired by this, we develop a LSTM based model for our
trajectory prediction problem as well. In particular, we have
one LSTM for each person in a scene. This LSTM learns
the state of the person and predicts their future positions as
shown in Fig. 2. The LSTM weights are shared across all
the sequences.
However, the naive use of one LSTM model per person
does not capture the interaction of people in a neighborhood. The vanilla LSTM is agnostic to the behaviour of
other sequences. We address this limitation by connecting
neighboring LSTMs through a new pooling strategy visualized in Fig. 3,2.
Figure 2. Overview of our Social-LSTM method. We use a separate LSTM network for each trajectory in a scene. The LSTMs are
then connected to each other through a Social pooling (S-pooling)
layer. Unlike the traditional LSTM, this pooling layer allows spatially proximal LSTMs to share information with each other. The
variables in the ﬁgure are explained in Eq. 2. The bottom row
shows the S-pooling for one person in the scene. The hidden-states
of all LSTMs within a certain radius are pooled together and used
as an input at the next time-step.
Social pooling of hidden states
Individuals adjust their
paths by implicitly reasoning about the motion of neighboring people. These neighbors in-turn are inﬂuenced by others in their immediate surroundings and could alter their behaviour over time. We expect the hidden states of an LSTM
to capture these time varying motion-properties. In order
to jointly reason across multiple people, we share the states
between neighboring LSTMS. This introduces a new challenge: every person has a different number of neighbors and
in very dense crowds , this number could be prohibitively
Hence, we need a compact representation which combines the information from all neighboring states. We handle this by introducing “Social” pooling layers as shown in
Fig. 2. At every time-step, the LSTM cell receives pooled
hidden-state information from the LSTM cells of neighbors.
While pooling the information, we try to preserve the spatial
information through grid based pooling as explained below.
The hidden state ht
i of the LSTM at time t captures the
latent representation of the ith person in the scene at that instant. We share this representation with neighbors by building a “Social” hidden-state tensor Hi
t. Given a hidden-state
dimension D, and neighborhood size No, we construct a
No × No × D tensor Hi
t for the ith trajectory:
t(m, n, :) =
t−1 is the hidden state of the LSTM corresponding
to the jth person at t −1, 1mn[x, y] is an indicator function
to check if (x, y) is in the (m, n) cell of the grid, and Ni is
the set of neighbors corresponding to person i. This pooling
operation is visualized in Fig. 3.
We embed the pooled Social hidden-state tensor into a
i and the co-ordinates into et
i.These embeddings are
concatenated and used as the input to the LSTM cell of the
corresponding trajectory at time t. This introduces the following recurrence:
where φ(.) is an embedding function with ReLU nonlinearlity, We and Wa are embedding weights. The LSTM
weights are denoted by Wl.
Position estimation
The hidden-state at time t is used to
predict the distribution of the trajectory position (ˆx, ˆy)i
at the next time-step t + 1. Similar to Graves et al. , we
assume a bivariate Gaussian distribution parametrized by
the mean µi
t+1 = (µx, µy)i
t+1, standard deviation σi
t+1 and correlation coefﬁcient ρi
t+1. These parameters are predicted by a linear layer with a 5 × D weight
matrix Wp. The predicted coordinates (ˆxi
t) at time t are
The parameters of the LSTM model are learned by minimizing the negative log-Likelihood loss (Li for the ith trajectory):
Li(We, Wl, Wp)
Figure 3. We show the Social pooling for the person represented
by a black-dot. We pool the hidden states of the neighbors (shown
in yellow, blue and orange) within a certain spatial distance. The
pooling partially preserves the spatial information of neighbors as
shown in the last two steps.
We train the model by minimizing this loss for all the trajectories in a training dataset. Note that our “Social” pooling layer does not introduce any additional parameters.
An important distinction from the traditional LSTM is
that the hidden states of multiple LSTMs are coupled by
our “Social” pooling layer and we jointly back-propagate
through multiple LSTMs in a scene at every time-step.
Occupancy map pooling
The ”Social” LSTM model can
be used to pool any set of features from neighboring trajectories. As a simpliﬁcation, we also experiment with a
model which only pools the co-ordinates of the neighbors
(referred to as O-LSTM in the experiments Sect. 4). This
is a reduction of the original model and does not require
joint back-propagation across all trajectories during training. This model can still learn to reposition a trajectory to
avoid immediate collision with neighbors. However, in the
absence of more information from neighboring people, this
model would be unable to smoothly change paths to avoid
future collisions.
For a person i, we modify the deﬁnition of the tensor
t, as a No × No matrix at time t centered at the person’s
position, and call it the occupancy map Oi
t . The positions of
all the neighbors are pooled in this map. The m, n element
of the map is simply given by:
where 1mn[.] is an indicator function as deﬁned previously. This can also be viewed as a simpliﬁcation of the social tensor in Eq. 1 where the hidden state vector is replaced
by a constant value indicating the presence or absence of
neighbors in the corresponding cell.
The vectorized occupancy map is used in place of Hi
Eq. 2 while learning this simpler model.
Inference for path prediction
During test time, we use
the trained Social-LSTM models to predict the future position (ˆxi
t) of the ith person. From time Tobs+1 to Tpred,
we use the predicted position (ˆxi
t) from the previous
Social-LSTM cell in place of the true coordinates (xi
in Eq. 2. The predicted positions are also used to replace
the actual coordinates while constructing the Social hiddenstate tensor Hi
t in Eq. 1 or the occupancy map Oi
3.2. Implementation details
We use an embedding dimension of 64 for the spatial coordinates before using them as input to the LSTM. We set
the spatial pooling size No to be 32 and use a 8x8 sum pooling window size without overlaps. We used a ﬁxed hidden
state dimension of 128 for all the LSTM models. Additionally, we also use an embedding layer with ReLU (recti-
ﬁed Linear Units) non-linearity on top of the pooled hiddenstate features, before using them for calculating the hidden
state tensor Hi
t. The hyper-parameters were chosen based
on cross-validation on a synthetic dataset. This synthetic
was generated using a simulation that implemented the social forces model. This synthetic data contained trajectories
for hundreds of scenes with an average crowd density of 30
per frame. We used a learning rate of 0.003 and RMS-prop
 for training the model. The Social-LSTM model was
trained on a single GPU with a Theano implementation.
4. Experiments
In this section, we present experiments on two publicly
available human-trajectory datasets: ETH and UCY
 . The ETH dataset contains two scenes each with 750
different pedestrians and is split into two sets (ETH and
The UCY dataset contains two scenes with 786
people. This dataset has 3-components: ZARA-01, ZARA-
02 and UCY. In total, we evaluate our model on 5 sets of
data. These datasets represent real world crowded settings
with thousands of non-linear trajectories. As shown in ,
these datasets also cover challenging group behaviours such
as couples walking together, groups crossing each other and
groups forming and dispersing in some scenes.
We report the prediction error with three different metrics. Similar to Pellegrini et al. we use:
1. Average displacement error - The mean square error
(MSE) over all estimated points of a trajectory and the
true points. This was introduced in Pellegirini et al.
2. Final displacement error - The distance between the
predicted ﬁnal destination and the true ﬁnal destination
at end of the prediction period Tpred.
3. Average non-linear displacement error - The is the
MSE at the non-linear regions of a trajectory. Since
most errors in trajectory-prediction occur during nonlinear turns arising from human-human interactions,
we explicitly evaluate the errors around these regions.
We set a heuristic threshold on the norm of the second
derivative to identify non-linear regions.
In order to make full use of the datasets while training
our models, we use a leave-one-out approach. We train and
validate our model on 4 sets and test on the remaining set.
We repeat this for all the 5 sets. We also use the same training and testing procedure for other baseline methods used
for comparison.
During test time, we observe a trajectory for 3.2secs and
predict their paths for the next 4.8secs. At a frame rate of
0.4, this corresponds to observing 8 frames and predicting
for the next 12 frames. This is similar to the setting used
by . In Tab. 4, we compare the performance of our
model with state-of-the-art methods as well as multiple control settings:
• Linear model (Lin.) We use an off-the-shelf Kalman
ﬁlter to extrapolate trajectories with assumption of linear acceleration.
• Collision avoidance (LTA). We report the results of
a simpliﬁed version of the Social Force model
which only uses the collision avoidance energy, commonly referred to as linear trajectory avoidance.
• Social force (SF). We use the implementation of the
Social Force model from where several factors
such as group afﬁnity and predicted destinations have
been modeled.
• Iterative Gaussian Process (IGP). We use the implementation of the IGP from . Unlike the other baselines, IGP also uses additional information about the
ﬁnal destination of a person.
• Our Vanilla LSTM (LSTM). This is a simpliﬁed setting
of our model where we remove the “Social” pooling
layers and treat all the trajectories to be independent of
each other.
• Our LSTM with occupancy maps (O-LSTM). We show
the performance of a simpliﬁed version of our model
(presented in Sec. 3.1). As a reminder, the model only
pools the coordinates of the neighbors at every timeinstance.
The naive linear model produces high prediction errors,
which are more pronounced around non-linear regions as
seen from the average non-linear displacement error. The
vanilla LSTM outperforms this linear baseline since it can
extrapolate non-linear curves as shown in Graves et al.
 . However, this simple LSTM is noticeably worse than
the Social Force and IGP models which explicitly model
our O-LSTM
our Social-LSTM
Avg. disp.
HOTEL 
ZARA 1 
ZARA 2 
Avg. non-linear
disp. error
HOTEL 
ZARA 1 
ZARA 2 
Final disp.
HOTEL 
ZARA 1 
ZARA 2 
Table 1. Quantitative results of all the methods on all the datasets. We present the performance metrics as follows: First 6 rows are the
Average displacement error, row 7 to 12 are the Average displacement error for non-linear regions, and the ﬁnal 6 rows are the Final
displacement error. All methods forecast trajectories for a ﬁxed period of 4.8 seconds. (*) Note that IGP uses the intended ground truth
destination of a person during test time unlike other methods.
human-human interactions. This shows the need to account
for such interactions.
Our Social pooling based LSTM and O-LSTM outperform the heavily engineered Social Force and IGP models
in almost all datasets. In particular, the error reduction is
more signiﬁcant in the case of the UCY datasets as compared to ETH. This can be explained by the different crowd
densities in the two datasets: UCY contains more crowded
regions with a total of 32K non-linearities as opposed to the
more sparsely populated ETH scenes with only 15K nonlinear regions.
In the more crowded UCY scenes, the deviation from linear paths is more dominated by human-human interactions.
Hence, our model which captures neighborhood interactions achieves a higher gain in UCY datasets. The pedestrians’ intention to reach a certain destination plays a more
dominant role in the ETH datasets. Consequently, the IGP
model which knows the true ﬁnal destination during testing
achieves lower errors in parts of this dataset.
In the case of ETH, we also observe that the occupancy
and Social LSTM errors are at par with each other and
in general better than the Social force model. Again, our
Social-LSTM outperforms O-LSTM in the more crowded
UCY datasets. This shows the advantage of pooling the entire hidden state to capture complex interactions in dense
4.1. Analyzing the predicted paths
Our quantitative evaluation in the Sec. 4 shows that the
learned Social-LSTM model outperforms state-of-the-art
methods on standard datasets. In this section, we try to gain
more insights on the actual behaviour of our model in different crowd settings. We qualitatively study the performance
of our Social-LSTM method on social scenes where individuals interact with each others in a speciﬁc pattern.
We present an example scene occupied by four individuals in Figure 4. We visualize the distribution of the paths
predicted by our model at different time-instants. The ﬁrst
and third rows in Figure 4 show the current position of each
person as well as their true trajectory (solid line for the future path and dashed line for the past). The second and
fourth rows show our Social-LSTM prediction for the next
12.4 secs. In these scenes, we observe three people(2,3,4)
walking close to each other and a fourth person(1) walking
farther away from them.
Our model predicts a linear path for person(1) at all
times. The distribution for person (1) is similar across time
indicating that the speed of the person is constant.
We can observe more interesting patterns in the predicted
trajectories for the 3-person group. In particular, our model
makes intelligent route choices to yield for others and preempt future collisions. For instance, at time-steps 2, 4, and 5
our model predicts a deviation from the linear paths for person(3) and person(4), even before the start of the actual turn.
Prediction
Current time
Prediction
Current time
- 1 will go straight, and
- 2,3,4 will interact
- 3 will turn to avoid 1,
- 4 is turning around 3
- 3 will stop in front 1,
- 4 updated the turn
- 1,2,3 and 4 will have
linear path
- 3 will turn towards
his/her destination
- 4 will decelerate and
turn around 3
Figure 4. We visualize the probability distribution of the predicted paths for 4 people moving in a scene across 6 time steps. The sub-caption
describes what our model is predicting. At each time-step: the solid lines in rows 1,3 represents the ground-truth future trajectories, the
dashed lines refer to the observed positions till that time-step and the dots denote the position at that time-step. We notice that our model
often correctly predicts the future paths in challenging settings with non-linear motions. We analyze these ﬁgures in more details in Sec. 4.1.
Note that T stands for time and the id (1 to 4) denote person ids. More examples are provided in the supplementary material.
At time-step 3 and 4, we notice that the Social-LSTM predicts a “halt” for person(3) in order to yield for person(1).
Interestingly at time-step 4, the location of the haling point
is updated to match the true turning-point in the path. At the
next time-step, with more observations, the model is able to
correctly predict the full turn anchored at that point.
In Figure 5, we illustrate the prediction results of our
Social-LSTM, the SF model and the linear baseline on
one of the ETH datasets. When people walk in a group or as
e.g. a couple, our model is able to jointly predict their trajectories. It is interesting to note that unlike Social Forces 
we do not explicitly model group behavior. However, our
model is better at predicting grouped trajectories in a holistic fashion. In the last row of Figure 5, we show some failure cases, i.e., when our predictions are worse than previous
works. We either predict a a linear path (2nd column) or de-
Social-LSTM!
Figure 5. Illustration of our Social-LSTM method predicting trajectories. On the ﬁrst 3 rows, we show examples where our model successfully predicts the trajectories with small errors (in terms of position and speed). We also show other methods such as Social Forces 
and linear method. The last row represents failure cases, e.g., person slowed down or took a linear path. Nevertheless, our Social-LSTM
method predicts a plausible path. The results are shown on ETH dataset .
celerate earlier (1st and 3rd column) than needed. Although
the trajectories do not match the ground-truth in these cases,
our Social-LSTM still outputs ”plausible” trajectories, i.e.
trajectories that humans could have taken. For instance, in
the ﬁrst and third columns, our model slows down to avoid
a potential collision with the person ahead.
5. Conclusions
We have presented a LSTM-based model that can jointly
reason across multiple individuals to predict human trajectories in a scene. We use one LSTM for each trajectory and
share the information between the LSTMs through the introduction of a new Social pooling layer. We refer to the resulting model as the “Social” LSTM. Our proposed method
outperforms state-of-the-art methods on two publicly available datasets. In addition, we qualitatively show that our
Social-LSTM successfully predicts various non-linear behaviors arising from social interactions, such as a group of
individuals moving together. Future work will extend our
model to multi-class settings where several objects such as
bicycles, skateboards, carts, and pedestrians share the same
space. Each object will have its own label in the occupancy
map. In addition, human-space interaction can be modeled
in our framework by including the local static-scene image
as an additional input to the LSTM. This could allow jointly
modeling of human-human and human-space interactions in
the same framework.
6. Acknowledgement
publication
Intelligence
Intel ISTC-PC grant,
and the ONR sparse
(N00014-13-1-0761
N00014-15-1-2615).