Reinforcement Learning Trees
Ruoqing Zhu*, Donglin Zeng†, and Michael R. Kosorok‡
Department of Biostatistics, CB#7420, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7420
In this paper, we introduce a new type of tree-based method, reinforcement learning trees (RLT),
which exhibits significantly improved performance over traditional methods such as random
forests under high-dimensional settings. The innovations are three-fold. First, the
new method implements reinforcement learning at each selection of a splitting variable during the
tree construction processes. By splitting on the variable that brings the greatest future
improvement in later splits, rather than choosing the one with largest marginal effect from the
immediate split, the constructed tree utilizes the available samples in a more efficient way.
Moreover, such an approach enables linear combination cuts at little extra computational cost.
Second, we propose a variable muting procedure that progressively eliminates noise variables
during the construction of each individual tree. The muting procedure also takes advantage of
reinforcement learning and prevents noise variables from being considered in the search for
splitting rules, so that towards terminal nodes, where the sample size is small, the splitting rules
are still constructed from only strong variables. Last, we investigate asymptotic properties of the
proposed method under basic assumptions and discuss rationale in general settings.
Reinforcement Learning; Trees; Random Forests; Consistency; Error Bound
1. INTRODUCTION
In high-dimensional settings, the concept of sparsity—that there is a relatively small set of
variables which completely convey the true signal—is both intuitive and useful. Many
methods have been proposed to identify this set of true signal variables. Penalized
estimation for linear models and its variations are among the most
popular methods for this purpose. Machine learning tools such as tree-based approaches
 have also drawn much attention in the literature
due to their flexible non-parametric structure and the capacity for handling high-dimensional
data. However, there is little attention on sparsity for tree-based methods, both theoretically
and practically. In this paper, we propose to use reinforcement learning in combination with
a variable muting strategy to pursue nonparametric signals in a sparse setting by forcing a
*R. Zhu ( ) is a student
†D. Zeng ( ) is Professor
‡M. R. Kosorok ( ) is W. R. Kenan, Jr. Distinguished Professor and Chair
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
J Am Stat Assoc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 16.
 
J Am Stat Assoc. 2015 ; 110(512): 1770–1784. doi:10.1080/01621459.2015.1036994.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
certain level of sparsity in the constructed trees. Before giving details of the proposed
method, we briefly review previous work to lay the needed foundation.
A series of works including led to the introduction of random forests , a state-of-the-art
machine learning tool. A Random forest is essentially an ensemble unpruned classification
and regression tree model ) with random feature selection.
Many versions of random forests have been proposed since, such as perfect random forests
by Cutler and Zhao , which have exactly one observation in each terminal node;
extremely randomized trees (ET) by Geurts et al. , which use random cut points rather
than searching for the best cut point; and Bayesian additive regression trees (BART) by
Chipman et al. , which integrate tree-based methods into a Bayesian framework.
Ishwaran et al. and Zhu and Kosorok further extend random forests to right
censored survival data.
The asymptotic behavior of random forests has also drawn significant interest. Lin and Jeon
 established the connection between random forests and nearest neighborhood
estimation. Biau et al. proved consistency for a variety of types of random forests,
including purely random forests (PRF). However, they also provide an example which
demonstrates inconsistency of trees under certain greedy construction rules. One important
fact to point out is that consistency and convergence rates for random forests ) rely heavily on the
particular implemented splitting rule. For example, purely random forests, where splitting
rules are random and independent from training samples, provide a much more friendly
framework for analysis. However, such a model is extremely inefficient because most of the
splits are likely to select noise variables, especially when the underlying model is sparse. Up
to now, there appears to be no tree-based method possessing both established theoretical
validity and excellent practical performance.
As the most popular tree-based method, random forests shows great
potential in cancer studies where a large number of variables (genes or SNPs) are present and complex
genetic diseases may not be captured by parametric models. However, some studies also
show unsatisfactory performance of random forests compared to
other machine learning tools. One of the drawbacks of random forests in the large p small n
problem is caused by random feature selection, which is the most important “random”
component of random forests and the driving force behind the improvement from a bagging
predictor . Consider the aforementioned high-dimensional sparse setting,
where we have p variables, among which there are p1 ≪ p strong variables that carry the
signal and p2 = p − p1 noise variables. Using only a small number of randomly sampled
features would provide little opportunity to consider a strong variable as the splitting rule
and would also lead to bias in the variable importance measures , while
using a large number of predictors causes overfitting towards terminal nodes where the
sample size is small and prevents the effect of strong variables from being fully explored.
Zhu et al.
J Am Stat Assoc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Due to these reasons, a solution is much needed to improve the performance of random
forests in high-dimensional sparse settings. Intuitively, in a high-dimensional setup, a treebased model with good performance should split only on the p1 strong variables, where p1
follows our previous notation. Biau establishes consistency of a special type of
purely random forest model where strong variables have a larger probability of selection as a
splitting variable. This model essentially forces all or most splits to concentrate on only the
strong variables. Biau also shows that if this probability can be properly chosen, the
convergence rate of the model should only depend on p1. However, behind this celebrated
result, two key components require careful further investigation. First, the probability of
using a strong variable to split at an internal node depends on the within-node data ). With rapidly reducing
sample sizes toward terminal nodes, this probability, even with an independent set of
samples, is unlikely to behave well for the entire tree. This fact can be seen in one of the
simulation studies in Biau where the sample size is small (less than 25): the
probability of using a strong variable as the splitting rule can be very low. Second, the
marginal comparisons of splitting variables, especially in high-dimensional settings, can
potentially fail to identify strong variables. For example, the checker-board structure in Kim
and Loh and Biau et al. is a model having little or no marginal effect but
having a strong joint effect.
In this paper, we introduce a new strategy—reinforcement learning—into the tree-based
model framework. For a comprehensive review of reinforcement learning within the
artificial intelligence field in computer science and statistical learning, we refer to Sutton
and Barto . An important characteristic of reinforcement learning is the “lookahead”
notion which benefits the long-term performance rather than short-term performance. The
main features we will employ in the proposed method are: first, to choose variable(s) for
each split which will bring the largest return from future branching splits rather than only
focusing on the immediate consequences of the split via marginal effects. Such a splitting
mechanism can break any hidden structure and avoid inconsistency by forcing splits on
strong variables even if they do not show any marginal effect; second, progressively muting
noise variables as we go deeper down a tree so that even as the sample size decreases rapidly
towards a terminal node, the strong variable(s) can still be properly identified from the
reduced space; third, the proposed method enables linear combination splitting rules at very
little extra computational cost. The linear combination split constructed from the strong
variables gains efficiency when there is a local linear structure and helps preserve
randomness under this somewhat greedy approach to splitting variable selection.
One consequence of the new approach, which we call reinforcement learning trees (RLT), is
that it forces the splits to concentrate only on the p1 strong variables at the early stage of the
tree construction while also reducing the number of candidate variables gradually towards
terminal nodes. This results in a more sparse tree structure (see Section 5 for further
discussion of this property) in the sense that the splitting rule search process focuses on a
much smaller set of variables than a traditional tree-based model, especially towards
terminal nodes. We shall show that, under certain assumptions, the convergence rate of the
proposed method does not depend on p, but instead, it depends on the size of a much smaller
Zhu et al.
J Am Stat Assoc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
set of variables that contains all the p1 strong variables. This is a valuable result in its own
right, especially in contrast to alternative greedy tree construction approaches whose
statistical properties are largely unknown.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives details of the methodology for the
proposed approach. Theoretical results and accompanying interpretations are given in
Section 3. Details of the proofs will be deferred to the appendix. In Sections 4 we compare
RLT with popular statistical learning tools using simulation studies and real data examples.
Section 5 contains some discussion and rationale for both the method and its asymptotic
2. PROPOSED METHOD
2.1 Statistical model
We consider a regression or classification problem from which we observe a sample of i.i.d.
training observations
= {(X1, Y1), (X2, Y2), …, (Xn, Yn)}, where each
denotes a set of p variables from a feature space
regression problem, Y is a real valued outcome with E(Y2) < ∞; and for the classification
problem, Y is a binary outcome that takes values of 0 or 1. To facilitate later arguments, we
use to denote the set {1, 2, …, p}. We also assume that the expected value E(Y|X) is
completely determined by a set of p1 < p variables. As discussed in the previous section, we
refer to these p1 variable as “strong variables”, and refer to the remaining p2 = p − p1
variables as “noise variables”. For the sake of organizing the discussion, we assume without
loss of generality, that the strong variables are the first p1 variables, which means E(Y|X) =
E(Y|X(1), X(2), …, X(p1)). The goal is to consistently estimate the function f(x) = E(Y|X = x)
and derive asymptotic properties for the estimator.
2.2 Motivation
In short, the proposed reinforcement learning trees (RLT) model is a traditional random
forests model with a special type of splitting variable selection and noise variable muting.
These features are made available by implementing a reinforcement learning mechanism at
each internal node. Let us first consider a checkerboard example which demonstrates the
impact of reinforcement learning: Assume that X ~ uni f p, and E(Y|X) =
I{I(X(1)0.5)=I(X(2)>0.5)}, so that p1 = 2 and p2 = p−2. The difficulty in estimating this structure
with conventional random forests is that neither of the two strong variables show marginal
effects. The immediate reward, i.e. reduction in prediction errors, from splitting on these two
variables is asymptotically identical to the reward obtained by splitting on any of the noise
variables. Hence, when p is relatively large, it unlikely that either X(1) or X(2) would be
chosen as the splitting variable. However, if we know in advance that splitting on either X(1)
or X(2) would yield significant rewards down the road for later splits, we could confidently
force a split on either variable regardless of the immediate rewards.
To identify the most important variable at any internal node, we fit a pilot model (which is
embedded at each internal node, and thus will be called an embedded model throughout the
paper) and evaluate the potential contribution of each variable. Then we proceed to split the
Zhu et al.
J Am Stat Assoc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
node using the identified most important variable(s). When doing this recursively for each
daughter node, we can focus the splits on the variables which will very likely lead to a tree
yielding the smallest prediction error in the long run. The concept of this “embedded model”
can be broad enough so that any model fitted to the internal node data can be called an
embedded model. Even the marginal search, although with poor performance in the above
example, can be viewed as an over-simplified embedded model. However, it is of interest to
use a flexible, yet fast embedded model so that the evaluation of each variable is accurate.
Two problems arise when we greedily select the splitting variable. First, since the sample
size shrinks as we move towards a terminal node, it becomes increasingly difficult to
identify the important variables regardless of what embedded model we are using. Second,
the extreme concentration on the strong variables could lead to highly correlated trees even
when bootstrapping is employed. Hence we propose a variable muting procedure to counter
the first drawback and use linear combination splits to introduce extra randomness. Details
and rationale for these two procedures will be given in their corresponding sections below.
In the following sections, we first give a higher level algorithm outlining the main features
of the RLT method (Section 2.3) and then specify the definition of each component: the
embedded model (Section 2.4), variable importance (Sections 2.5), variable muting (Section
2.6), and linear combination split (Section 2.7).
2.3 Reinforcement learning trees
RLT construction follows the general framework for an ensemble of binary trees. The key
ingredient of RLT is the selection of splitting variables (using the embedded model),
eliminating noise variables (variable muting) and constructing daughter nodes (using, for
example, a linear combination split). Table 1 summarizes the RLT algorithm. The definition
of the variable importance measure
is given in Section 2.5, and the definition of the
is given in Section 2.6.
2.4 Embedded model
At an internal node A, an embedded model
is a model fitted to the internal node data DA
= {(Xi, Yi) : Xi ∈ A}. The embedded model provides information on the variable importance
for each variable j so that the split variable can be chosen. At the root
node, where the set of muted variables
, all variables in the set = {1, 2, …, p} are
considered in the embedded model. However, as we move further down the tree, some
variables will be muted so that
, and then the embedded model will be fit using only
the non-muted variables, i.e., the variables {
In practice, we use a slight modification of extremely randomized trees )
as the embedded model by fitting each tree with a bootstrapped sample. Extremely
randomized trees can achieve a similar performance to random forests at a reduced
computational cost due to the random splitting value generation. Noting that the embedded
model will be called many times during an RLT fitting, a fast approach has a great
Zhu et al.
J Am Stat Assoc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
advantage. However, any other learning method can be an alternative, such as random
forests or purely random forests.
2.5 Variable importance
Since the purpose of fitting the embedded random forests is to determine the most important
variable, we need to properly define a variable importance measure VIA(j) for each variable j
∈ at an internal node A and use the embedded model to calculate the estimate
The variable importance defined in Breiman seems to be a natural choice here since
we use a tree-based method as the embedded model. We give the formal definition of the
variable importance measure in the following. In Section 3 and in the Appendix, we will
carefully investigate the properties of VIA and the asymptotic properties of its estimate
Definition 2.1—At any internal node A, denoting X̃(j) as an independent copy generated
from the marginal distribution of X(j) within A, the variable importance of the j-th variable
within A, namely VIA(j), is defined by:
where E[·|A] is a conditional expectation defined by E[g(Y, X)|A] = E[g(Y, X)|I(X ∈ A)], for
any function g.
Following the procedure in Breiman to calculate
for each fitted embedded
tree, we randomly permute the values of variable j in the out-of-bag data (the within-node
observations which are not sampled by bootstrapping when fitting the embedded tree model)
to mimic the independent and identical copy X̃(j), drop these permuted observations down
the fitted tree, and then calculate the resulting mean squared error (MSE) increase.
Intuitively, when j is a strong variable, randomly permuting the values of X(j) will result in a
, while randomly permuting the values of a noise variable should result in little
or no increase in MSE, so
should be small. Hence
calculated from the
embedded model can identify the variable with greatest need-to-be-split in the sense that it
explains the most variation in the outcome variable Y in the current node (see Section 3).
Also note that any strong variable j should have nonzero VI regardless of its marginal effect
as long as f changes, as a function of the remaining p−1 arguments on some nonzero
subspace, over its jth argument. For example, consider the checkerboard example we
provided in Section 2.2. The VI for both strong variables are 2/3 although there is no
marginal effect. Another important property that we observe is that for all the variables in
the muted set
, which will be introduced in the next section, since they are not involved
in the embedded model
, randomly permuting their values will not increase MSE. Hence,
, we must have
. Table 2 gives details on how to assess the variable
importance measure based on the embedded extremely randomized trees estimator
Zhu et al.
J Am Stat Assoc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Remark 2.2—In practice, the embedded model is estimated using a small number of
observations (within node data), which may give an inaccurate model fitting. However, the
prediction accuracy of an embedded model is not the major concern here since we only need
the ranks of variable importance measures to be reliable, i.e., variables with large VI are
ranked at the top by the embedded model. Moreover, as the within node sample size gets
even smaller when approaching terminal nodes, the variable muting procedure we introduce
below helps to constrain the splits within the set of strong variables.
2.6 Variable muting
As we discussed previously, with sample size reducing rapidly towards a terminal node
during the tree construction, searching for a strong variable becomes increasingly difficult.
The lack of signal from strong variables (since they are mostly explained by previous splits)
can eventually cause the splitting variable selection to behave completely randomly, and
then the constructed model is similar to purely random forests. Hence, the muting procedure
we introduce here is to prevent some noise variables from being considered as the splitting
variable. We call this set of variables the muted set. At each given internal node, we force pd
variables into the muted set, and we remove them from consideration as splitting variable at
any branch of the given internal node. On the other hand, to prevent strong variables from
being removed from the model, we have a set of variables that we always keep in the model,
which we call the protected set. When a variable is used as a splitting rule, it is included in
the protected set, hence will be considered in all subsequent nodes. We also set a minimal
number p0 of variables beyond which we won’t remove any further variables from
consideration at any node. Note that both the muted set and protected set will be updated for
each daughter nodes after a split is done. We first take a look at the muting procedure at the
root node, then generalize the procedure to any internal node.
At the root node: Assume that after selecting the splitting variable at the root node A, the
two resulting daughter nodes are AL and AR. Then we sort the variable importance measures
calculated from the embedded model
and find the pd-th smallest value within the
variable set denoted by
and the p0-th largest value denoted by
The muted set for the two daughter nodes:
the set of variables with the smallest pd variable importance measures.
The protected set
, i.e., the set of variables
with largest p0 variable importance measures. Note that the variables in the
protected set will not be muted in any of the subsequent internal nodes.
At internal nodes: After the muted set and protected set have been initialized at the root
split, we update the two sets in subsequent splits. Suppose at an internal node A, the muted
, the protected set is
and the two daughter nodes are AL and AR. We first update
the protected set for the two daughter nodes by adding the splitting variable(s) into the set:
Zhu et al.
J Am Stat Assoc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Note that when a single variable split is used, the splitting variable is simply
, and when a linear combination split is used, multiple variables could be
To update the muted set, after sorting the variable importance measures
, we find the
pd-th smallest value within the restricted variable set
, which value is denoted
. Then we define the muted set for the two daughter nodes as
Remark 2.3—The muting rate pd is an important tuning parameter in RLT, as it controls
the “sparsity” towards terminal nodes. pd dose not need to be a fixed number. It can vary
depending on
, which is the number of nonmuted variables at each internal node. In
Section 4 we will evaluate different choices for pd such as 0 (no muting),
(moderate muting, which is suitable for most situations), and
aggressive muting). Moreover, in practice, pd can be adjusted according to the sample size n
and dimension p. In our R package “RLT”, several ad-hoc choice of pd are available.
Remark 2.4—The splitting rules at the top levels of a tree are all constructed using the
strong variables, hence these variables will be protected. This property will be demonstrated
in the theoretical result. Ideally, after a finite number of splits, all strong variables are
protected, all noise variables are muted, and the remaining splits should concentrate on the
strong variables. But this may not be the case asymptotically when extremely complicated
interactions are involved. Hence choosing a proper p0 ≥ p1 to cover all strong variables at
early splits is theoretically meaningful. However, in practice, tuning p0 is unnecessary. We
found that even setting p0 = 0 achieves good performance when the model is sparse.
2.7 Splitting a node
We introduce a linear combination split in this section. Note that when only one variable is
involved, a linear combination splitting rule reduces to the traditional split used in other treebased methods. Using a linear combination of several variables to construct a splitting rule
was considered in Breiman and Lin and Jeon . However, exhaustively
searching for a good linear combination of variables is computationally intensive especially
under the high-dimensional sparse setting, hence the idea never achieved much popularity.
The proposed embedded model and variable importance measure at each internal node
provides a convenient formulation for a linear combination split. By using variables with
Zhu et al.
J Am Stat Assoc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
, the splitting rule is likely to involve strong variables. However, we do not
exhaustively search for the loadings in the combination. This introduces an extra level of
randomness within the set of strong variables duo to the complex neighborhood structure of
each target point regarding the potential neighborhood). In our
proposed procedure, two parameters are used to control the complexity of a linear
combination split:
k: The maximum number of variables considered in the linear combination. Note
that when k = 1, this simplifies to the usual one variable split.
α: The minimal variable importance, taking values in (0, 1), of each variable in this
linear combination in terms of the percentage of maximum
at the current node.
For example, if α = 0.5 and
at the current node, then any variable
less than 0.5 will not be considered for the linear combination.
We first create a linear combination of the form Xβ̂ > 0, where β̂ is a coefficient vector with
dimension p × 1. Then we project each observation onto this axis to provide a scalar ranking
for splitting. Define β̂j(A) for each j ∈ {1, …p} at node A as follows:
is Pearson’s correlation coefficient between X(j) and Y within node A,
the kth largest variable importance estimate at node A. The components in the above
definition ensure that the variables involve in the linear combination are the top k variables
with positive importance measure, and are above the α threshold in terms of the maximum
variable importance at the current node.
We then calculate Xiβ̂(A) for each observation Xi in the current node. This is precisely the
scalar projection of each observation onto the vector β̂(A). The splitting point can be
generated by searching for the best (as in random forests) or by comparing multiple random
splits (as in extremely randomized trees). Biau et al. showed that an exhaustive
search for the splitting point could cause inconsistency of a tree-based model, hence we
generate one or multiple random splitting points (1 is the default number) and choose the
best among them. Moreover, the splitting points are generated from quantiles of the
observed samples to avoid redundant splits.
Remark 2.5—The construction of a linear combination requires specification of both k and
α. We consider k as the decisive tuning parameter, while α is used to prevent extra noise
variables from entering the linear combination when k is set too large. However, when α is
set to its extreme value 1, it is essentially setting k = 1. In our simulation studies, we found
that α only affects large k values, and setting α = 0.25 achieves good performance.
Zhu et al.
J Am Stat Assoc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
3. THEORETICAL RESULTS
In this section, we develop large sample theory for the proposed RLT model. We show that
under basic assumptions, the proposed RLT is consistent, with convergence rate depending
only on the number of strong variables, p1, if the tuning parameters are optimally chosen.
We only focus on a simplified version of RLT with a single variable split (RLT1) and a
fixed muting number parameter pd in the regression setting. Moreover, we assume that the
number of variables p is fixed with p1 strong variables, and the number p0 of protected
variables is chosen to be larger than p1. We assume, for technical convenience, that the
covariates X are generated uniformly from the feature space
= p, which was also
used in Lin and Jeon and Biau . Although the independence assumption seems
restrictive, the consequent theoretical results serve as a starting point for understanding the
“greedy” tree method, whose theoretical results are largely unknown. A possible approach to
address correlated variables is discussed in Section 5. Note that under the uniform
distribution assumption, any internal node can now be viewed as a hypercube in the feature
, i.e., any internal node A ⊆ p has the form
Throughout the rest of this paper, we will use the terms “internal node” and “hypercube”
inter-changeably provided that the context is clear.
The main results are Theorem 3.6 which bounds below the probability of using strong
variables as the splitting rule, and Theorem 3.7 which establishes consistency and derives an
error bound for RLT1. Several key assumptions are given below for the underlying true
function f and the embedded model.
Assumption 3.1—There exist a set of strong variables = (1, …, p1) such that f(X) = E[Y
|X] = E[Y |X(j), j ∈ ] and
for j ∈ . The set of noise variables is
= (p1 + 1, …, p). The true function f is Lipschitz continuous with Lipschitz constant
The assumption
for j ∈ guarantees that with probability 1, a
target point {(X(1), …,X(p))} is a point where all strong variables carry a signal. It is satisfied
for most parametric models, such as linear, additive, single index and multiple index models,
hence is not restrictive. Since our embedded model only fits the “local” (within node) data,
this assumption is needed to correctly identify the strong variables at an internal node.
Further, we need to precisely define how “strong” a strong variable is. Definition 2.1 of the
variable importance measure suggests that V IA(j) relies on the true underlying function f
restricted to a hypercube A. To avoid explicitly defining the true function f, we give the
following lower bound on the variable importance, followed by a remark that makes the
connection between this definition and the true functional form of f.
Zhu et al.
J Am Stat Assoc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Assumption 3.2—Let hypercube A be defined in the form of Equation (1). If for any
strong variable j, the interval length of all other strong variables at A is at least δ, i.e.,
, then there exist positive valued monotone functions ψ1(·) and
ψ2(·), such that the variable importance of this strong variable j can be bounded below by
where V IA(j) is as defined in Definition 2.1.
Remark 3.3—This assumption can be understood in the following way. It basically
requires that the surface of f cannot be extremely flat, which helps to guarantee that at any
internal node A with nonzero measure, a strong variable can be identified. However, this
does not require a lower bound on |∂f/∂X(j)|, which is a much stronger assumption. Further,
the two functions ψ1(·) and ψ2(·) help separate (locally at A) the effects of variable j and all
other strong variables. We make two observations here to show that if f is a polynomial
function, the condition is satisfied: (1) If f is a linear function, then the variable importance
of j is independent of the interval length (or value) of other strong variables. Then ψ1(δ) ≡
satisfy the criteria, where σ2 is the variance of the random
error (see Assumption 3.5). (2) When f is a polynomial function with interactions up to a
power of k ≥ 2, the variable importance of j is entangled with the within node value of other
strong variables. However, for small values of δ and bj − aj (or equivalently, for a small
hypercube A),
satisfy the criteria.
Another assumption is on the embedded model. Although we use extremely randomized
trees as the embedded model in practice, we do not rule out the possibility of using other
kinds of embedded models. Hence we make the following assumption for the embedded
model, which is at least satisfied for purely random forests:
Assumption 3.4—The embedded model f̂* fitted at any internal node A with internal
sample size nA is uniformly consistent with an error bound: there exists a fixed constant 0 <
K < ∞ such that for any δ > 0,
, where 0 < η(p) ≤ 1 is a
function of the dimension p, and the conditional probability on A means that the expectation
is taken within the internal node A. Note that it is reasonable to assume that η(p) is a nonincreasing function of p since larger dimensions should result in poorer fitting. Furthermore,
the embedded model f̂* lies in a class of functions with finite entropy integral under the
L2(P) norm .
Finally, we assume the moment condition on the random error terms εi.
Assumption 3.5—With f(X) being the true underlying function, the observed values are Yi
= f(Xi) + εi, where εis are i.i.d. with mean 0 and variance σ2. Moreover, the following
Bernstein condition on the moments of ε is satisfied:
Zhu et al.
J Am Stat Assoc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
for some constant 1 ≤ K < ∞.
Now we present two key results, Theorem 3.6 and Theorem 3.7, followed by a sketch of the
proof for each. Details of the proofs are given in the Appendix and the supplementary file.
Theorem 3.6 analyzes the asymptotic behavior of the variable importance measure and
establishes the probability for selecting the true strong variables and muting the noise
variables. Theorem 3.7 bounds the total variation by the variable importance measures at
each terminal node and shows consistency and an error bound for RLT1. For simplicity, we
only consider the case where one RLT1 tree is fitted to the entire dataset, i.e, M = 1 and the
bootstrap ratio is 100%. For the embedded model, we fit only one tree using half of the
within node data and calculate the variable importance using the other half. To ensure the
minimum node sample size, the splitting point c is chosen uniformly between the q-th and (1
− q)-th quintile with respect to the internal node interval length of each variable, where q ∈
(0, 0.5]. The smaller q is, the more diversity it induces. When q = 0.5, this degenerates into a
model where each internal node is always split into two equally sized daughter nodes.
Theorem 3.6—For any internal node A ∈
with sample size nA, where
is the set of all
internal nodes in the constructed RLT, define ĵA to be the selected splitting variable at A and
let pA denote the number of non-muted variables at A. Then, under Assumptions 3.1, 3.2,
3.4, and 3.5, we have,
, i.e., with probability close to 1, we always select a strong variable as the splitting
, i.e., for any
internal node in the constructed RLT model, the true variable importance measure
for the selected splitting variable is at least half of the true maximum variable
importance with probability close to 1.
The protected set
contains all strong variables, i.e.,
Note that in the above three results, ψ1(·), ψ2(·), and the constants Ck and Kk, k = 1,…, 3, do
not depend on pA or the particular choice of A.
The proof of Theorem 3.6 is provided in the supplementary file. There are three major
components involved in the probabilities of Theorem 3.6: node sample size nA; local signal
; and local embedded model error rate
. The proof is in fact
very intuitive. We first show the consistency and convergence rate of the variable
importance measure
, which is related to the local embedded model error rate. Then
Zhu et al.
J Am Stat Assoc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
with the lower bound on the true local variable importance (Assumption 3.2), we establish
result (a), the probability of choosing a strong variable as the splitting rule. Result (b)
follows via the same logic by looking at the the variable importance of the chosen splitting
variable. Result (c) utilizes the facts that the variable importance measure of a strong
variable is larger than that of a noise variable and that we choose p0 larger than p1.
The probabilities in Theorem 3.6 rely on the fact that the node sample size nA is large
enough to make
. As we discussed earlier in Remark 3.3, the
functions ψ1(·) and ψ2(·) can be chosen as power functions when f is a polynomial. Hence,
for any specific function f and embedded model, we precisely know ψ1(·), ψ2(·), and η(·).
We can then separate all the internal nodes in a fitted RLT tree into three groups with
different levels of sample sizes by defining nγ* and nγ in the following, and analyze the
different groups separately:
: Internal nodes with sample size larger than nγ*, where γ* ∈ (0, 1) is chosen
such that ψ1(nγ*−1) · ψ2(nγ*−1) · nγ*η(p) → ∞.
: Internal nodes with sample size smaller than nγ*, but larger than nγ, where γ
∈ (0, 1) is chosen such that ψ1(nγ−1) · ψ2(nγ−1) · nγη(p0) → ∞. Note the change
from η(p) to η(p0) and the fact that γ is supposed to be smaller than γ*.
: Internal nodes with sample size smaller than nγ.
We shall show in Theorem 3.7 that during the tree splits of
, the noise variables are muted
and the remaining protected p0 variables contain all the strong variables. During the tree
, all the splitting variables are within the set of strong variables. The proof
does not depend on the particular function f or embedded model. The set
is then less
interesting since the sample size is too small and the remaining splits (up through the
terminal nodes) are likely to behave like random choices. However, we know that there are
only p0 variables for any node in
, and these p0 variables contain all the strong variables.
To facilitate our argument here, we use a toy example (provided in the Appendix) to
demonstrate the probability of selecting a strong variable as the splitting rule under different
n, p, and levels of model complexity. This again confirms that splits at the top levels of a
tree have larger impact.
To better understand the proposed RLT method, we focus on the set
in Theorem 3.7,
where the reinforcement learning is having the greatest effect, and show a convergence
result for this setting. Note that this part of the fitted tree has node sample size larger than nγ,
thus forcing the minimal node sample size to be nγ. However, nγ is by no means a tuning
parameter, and a tree should continue to split until the pre-defined nmin is reached. We will
discuss the behavior of the set
after the theorem.
Theorem 3.7—Under Assumptions 3.1, 3.2, 3.4, and 3.5, with probability close to 1,
Zhu et al.
J Am Stat Assoc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
where r is a constant such that r > 1 and 2(1 − q)2r/q2 ≤ 1, γ defines the minimum node
sample size nγ, q is the lower quintile to generate a random splitting point, and p1 is the
number of strong variables.
At first glance, the rate seems slow, however, this is to compensate for the fact that we do
not want to make strong assumptions on the functional form of f. The rate is essentially the
convergence rate of the worst node of the entire tree (if using nmin = nγ), where some strong
variables receive few splits. Since we allow arbitrary interactions in f, the signal in the worst
node can be extremely weak. Apparently, with stronger assumptions on f, the rate can be
greatly improved. However, the key point here is that the convergence rate does not depend
on the original number of variables p since all the splits (in
) are constructed using
strong variables. We also note that the rate does not depend on the number of protected
variables p0 for the same reason. Unfortunately, this second statement is not true if we
consider the entire fitted tree, which further splits the nodes in
into smaller hypercubes
that belong to
. For the scope of this paper, we do not investigate further the asymptotic
behavior of
, which leads to the true convergence rate. This is because the nodes in
not be affected by reinforcement learning and the splits are more likely to behave like
random choices. However, we want to make a couple of observations here to further justify
the superior performance of RLT:
The convergence rate of RLT depends at worst on the number p0. If nmin = nγ, then
Theorem 3.7 gives the convergence rate of RLT1, which only depends on p1.
However, in practice, nmin should be a much smaller number, which leads to further
splits among the remaining p0 variables.
Without variable muting, convergence of a tree-based model should depend on p
for small values of nmin. We can view the traditional marginal search in a treebased model (such as random forests) as a simplified version of reinforcement
learning which only evaluates the marginal variable importance. In that case, there
still exists a threshold of node sample size such that for smaller nodes, the splitting
rule behaves like a random choice. Although choosing a large nmin could limit this
effect, variable muting, on the other hand, provides a convenient way to control the
splits near terminal nodes.
4. NUMERICAL STUDIES
4.1 Competing methods and parameter settings
We compare our method with several major competitors, including the linear model with
lasso, as implemented in the R package “glmnet” ; random forests
 , as implemented in the R package “randomforest”; gradient Boosting
 , as implemented in the R package “gbm”; Bayesian Additive Regression
Trees , as implemented in the R package “BayesTree”; Extremely
randomized trees , as implemented in the R package “extraTrees”. The
proposed method is implemented using the R package “RLT” which is currently available at
the first author’s personal webpage. We also include two interesting versions of random
forests (RF-log(p) and
), and a naive version of the RLT method (RLT-naive).
These three methods implement a simplified variable muting mechanism in a certain way.
Zhu et al.
J Am Stat Assoc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
The two random forests adaptations, as their names suggest, first fit the RF model, select a
set of log(p) (or
) most important variables, and then refit using only these variables. The
RLT-naive method compares marginal signals for all variables at each split based on
variance/misclassification reduction of multiple random splitting points. Then variables with
low marginal signals, as opposed to global signals in RLT, are muted.
The details for all tuning parameter settings are given in the following Table 3. Noting that
machine learning tools are always sensitive to tuning parameters, for all competing methods,
we report the prediction error of the best tuning in each setting. For the proposed RLT
model, we report the average test error for each of the 9 tunings. Note that this will benefit
the competing methods and can only be done in a simulation study where the true model
generator is known. However, by doing this, we eliminate as much as possible the impact of
tuning for the competing methods. The reported prediction errors for competing methods
thus fairly represents the best possible performance for them.
Remark 4.1—The purpose of reporting the test error for all RLT tunings is to compare and
analyze the effect of the three different components: splitting variable selection, linear
combination splitting and variable muting. Hence only the parameters involved in these
components are tuned in our simulation study. Some other key parameters such as ntrees
and nmin are not tuned for RLT in this simulation study since they are common to all treebased methods. These parameters are irrelevant to the proposed new mechanism, and we
want to eliminate their impact on our comparisons within RLT. In practice, we recommend
that these parameters are always tuned as is done for other treebased methods.
4.2 Simulation scenarios
We create four simulation scenarios that represent different aspects which usually arise in
machine learning. Such aspects include, training sample size, correlation between variables,
and non-linear structure. For each scenario, we further consider three settings of the
dimension p = 200, 500, 1000. We generate 1000 independent test samples to calculate the
prediction mean squared error (MSE) or misclassification error. Each simulation is repeated
200 times, and the averaged prediction error (mean squared error or classification error) is
presented in the way that we described previously. The simulation settings are as follows:
Scenario 1: Classification with independent covariances. N = 100,
, where Φ denotes a normal c.d.f. Draw Yi
independently from Bernoulli(μi). Scenario 2: Non-linear model with independent
covariances. N = 100,
, where (·)+
represents the positive part. Scenario 3: Checkerboard-like model with Strong
correlation. N = 300,
, where Σi,j = 0.9|i−j|.
. Scenario 4: Linear model. N = 200,
. We set Σi,j = 0.5|i−j| + 0.2 · I(i≠j), and
. For Scenario 2 – 4, we assume that εi are i.i.d. N(0, 1).
Zhu et al.
J Am Stat Assoc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
4.3 Simulation results
Tables 4, 5, and 6 summarize testing sample prediction error and corresponding standard
error for each simulation setting. The best RLT method and competing method are bolded,
with the best overall method underlined. There is clear evidence that the proposed RLT
model outperforms existing methods under these settings. The proposed splitting variable
selection, linear combination split, and variable muting procedure all work individually and
also work in combination. In general, the results show preference towards RLT methods
with aggressive muting and linear combination splits using 2 variables. Although the method
falls behind the Lasso under the linear model setting (scenarios 4), which is expected, it
outperforms all tree-based methods. RLT shows greater advantages for capturing the nonlinear effects in scenarios 1, 2 and 3. In these scenarios across all different settings of p, the
best RLT method reduces the prediction error by 31.9% – 41.5%, 23.7% – 36.4% and 16.7%
– 28.8%, respectively, from the best competing method. To further understand each of the
three components in RLT, we analyze them separately.
Variable muting is the most effective component of RLT and this can be seen by comparing
different muting rates of RLT. Across all scenarios and settings, aggressive muting versions
of RLT outperform non-muting versions if not combined with linear combination. When we
restrict the comparison between no muting and aggressive muting within RLT1, the
improvement ranges from 10.3% to 31.8% when p = 200, ranges from 11.8% to 31.4%
when p = 500, and ranges from 7.8% to 33.8% when p = 1000. Comparing the three random
forest methods also reflects the benefits of limiting the splits to the strong variables.
However, both
and RF-log(p) can be a “hit-or-miss” approach, especially when
there are strong correlations between covariates (this is observed in scenario 3 where RFlog(p) performs worse than
and has large standard error). RLT, on the other hand,
achieves a similar purpose in a robust way by adaptively choosing the protected variables
for different nodes and different trees.
The embedded model is the foundation for our splitting variable selection, variable muting,
and linear combination split. We first look at the solo effect of using the embedded model to
select the splitting variable. This can be seem by comparing non-muting RLT1 with RF and
ET, where the prediction error is reduced by up to 50.1% (vs. RF in Scenario 2) and 34.2%
(vs. ET in Scenario 3) when p = 200. However, this solo effect reduces slightly as p
increases. This is because the embedded model (a random forest model) becomes less
accurate and the variable importance measure less trustworthy, especially when approaching
the terminal nodes. Hence the embedded model works best when equipped with the variable
muting mechanism, which can be seen by comparing aggressive RLT1 with RLT-naive,
which is a model with variable muting, but not the embedded model. The performance
difference of these two demonstrates the benefit of searching for global effects (RLT) and
marginal effects (RLT-naive), while both perform variable muting. The improvement ranges
from 29.6% to 45.9% for p = 200, ranges from 29.6% to 43.2% for p = 500, and ranges from
20.8% to 40.1% for p = 1000.
The improvement obtained from linear combination splits is also profound, especially in
linear models (scenario 4). When the underlying model is linear, utilizing linear combination
Zhu et al.
J Am Stat Assoc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
splits can yield huge improvements over RLT1 regardless of whether muting is
implemented. The MSE reduction obtained by going from RLT1 to RLT5 is at least 33.3%
under no muting and at least 43.2% under aggressive muting. The reason is that under such a
structure, linear combination splits cut the feature space more efficiently. These results also
demonstrate the effect of variable muting. However, this may not always be beneficial when
the linear combination is not concentrated on strong variables. One cause of this is the lack
of muting. Small sample size and a weak signal near terminal nodes create extra noise in the
linear combination if a large number of variables need to be considered in the embedded
model. The non-muting version of RLT in scenarios 1 and 2 are typical examples of this.
However, as we mentioned before, the linear combination split also creates a more complex
neighborhood structure within the set of strong variables when muting is implemented.
Hence, RLT2 with aggressive muting can be considered the overall best method regardless
of the presence of linear structure.
Our separate analysis of α in the Appendix shows that large linear combinations are likely to
be affected by this tuning parameter, especially RLT5. This is because many of the noise
variables are forced to enter the linear combination (such as in Scenarios 1 and 2) and to be
protected. However, for RLT2, the performance is very stable, with or without muting. Also
note that α does not affect RLT1 in any circumstances. In general, it is reasonable to use α =
0.25 as the default choice (implemented in the “RLT” package). And we shall use this value
in the data analysis section.
4.4 Data analysis example
We analyze 10 datasets (Boston housing, parkinson, sonar, white wine, red wine, parkinson-
Oxford, ozone, concrete, breast cancer, and auto MPG) from the UC Irvine Machine
Learning Repository ( a complete list of all datasets and their
background information is provided in the Appendix. These datasets represent a wide range
of research questions with the major purpose of either classification or regression with a
single outcome variable. In this data analysis, we want to evaluate the performance of all
previously mentioned methods and provide an overall comparison.
For each dataset, we standardized all continuous variables to have mean 0 and variance 1.
We then randomly sample 150 observations without replacement as the training data, and
use the remaining observations as a testing sample to compute the misclassification rate or
mean squared error. We also add an extra set of covariates to increase the total number of
covariates p to 500. Each of these extra covariates is created by combining a randomly
sampled original covariate and a randomly generated noise, with a signal-to-noise ratio 1 to
2. Note that each of these extra covariates contain a small amount of signal hence they still
preserve predictive values. We keep the same parameter settings as given in Table 3 for all
competing methods. For RLT, considering the smaller sample size, the tuning parameter
nmin is included with values 2 or n1/3.
To compare results across all datasets, we plot the relative prediction errors in Figure 4.4.
The relative prediction errors are calculated by comparing the performances of each method
(misclassification error or mean squared error) with the best performance within the analysis
of each dataset, and the best performance is always scaled to 1. RLT performs the best in 7
Zhu et al.
J Am Stat Assoc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Out of the 10 datasets. The two largest improvement of RLT can be seen in the concrete and
parkinson-Oxford datasets, where the performance of the second best methods are 29%
(BART) and 25% (RF-log(p)) worse respectively. For the three datasets where RLT does
not perform the best (Boston housing, sonar, and breast cancer), it remains among the top
three methods with relative performance 1.01, 1.13, and 1.07 respectively. Further details of
the analysis results are provided in the Appendix.
4.5 Numerical study conclusion and computational cost
In this numerical study section, we compared the performance of the proposed RLT method
with several popular learning tools. Under both simulated scenarios and some benchmark
machine learning Datasets, the results favor RLT methods. There is a significant
improvement over competing methods in most situations, however, the results vary some
depending on the choice of tuning parameters. RLT methods with moderate to aggressive
muting generally perform the best and most stably across different settings, and
incorporating linear combination splits seems almost always beneficial.
The proposed RLT model requires significantly larger computational cost. In a worst case
scenario, RLT will fit as many as n1−γ, 0 < γ < 1 embedded models if we require the
terminal sample size to be at least nγ. Hence the speed of the embedded model is crucial to
the overall computational cost of RLT. In our current R package “RLT”, the default setting
for an embedded model is extremely randomized trees with 100 trees and 85% resampling
rate (sampled from the within-node data). Parallel computing with openMP is implemented
to further improve the performance. The average computation times for Scenario 1 under
different settings of n and p are summarized in Table 7. For RF and BART, the default
setting is used. All simulations are done on a 4 core (8 threads) i7-4770 CPU.
5. DISCUSSION
We proposed reinforcement learning trees in this paper. By fitting an embedded random
forest model at each internal node, and calculating the variable importance measures, we can
increase the chance of selecting the most important variables to cut and thus utilize the
available training samples in an efficient way. This shares the same view as the “lookahead” procedures in the machine learning literature . The
variable muting procedure further concentrates the splits on the strong variables at deep
nodes in the tree where the node sample size is small. The proposed linear combination
splitting strategy extends the use of variable importance measures and creates splitting rules
based on a linear combination of variables. However the linear combination is not
exclusively searched , hence no further computational burden is
introduced. All of these procedures take advantage of Reinforcement Learning and yield
significant improvement over existing methods especially when the dimension is high and
the true model structure is sparse. There are several remaining issues we want to discuss in
this section.
The number of trees M in RLT does not need to be very large to achieve good performance.
In all simulations, we used M = 100. In fact, the first several splits of the trees are likely to
be constructed using the same variables, which makes them highly correlated . However, using linear combination splits (k > 1) introduces a significant amount of
randomness into the fitted trees since the coefficients of the linear combinations vary
according to the embedded model. In practice, the embedded model is estimated using a
small number of observations, however, the prediction accuracy of an embedded model is
not the major concern here since we only need the ranks of variable importance measures to
be reliable, i.e., variables with large V I are ranked at the top by the embedded model. This
allows many alternative methods to be used as the embedded model as long as they provide
reliable variable rankings, however, exploring them is beyond the scope of this paper. For
the muting parameter pd, we considered only three values and the performance is
satisfactory. However, ideally the muting parameter pd can account for the different
combinations of n and p. In our “RLT” package, an ad-hoc formula is proposed:
for moderate muting, and 1 − (log(p)/p)1/log2(n/40) for aggressive
muting. The choice is motivated by the simulation results in Biau , which shows that
when n = 25 and p = 20, the search for a splitting rule behaves almost like a random pick.
However, our toy example in the Appendix shows that this may depend heavily on the
underlying data generator. While our aggressive muting procedure achieves satisfactory
performance, optimal tuning may require further experiments. We found that tuning the
number of the protected variables p0 is less important in our simulations, and in practice,
setting a slightly larger k value achieves the same purpose as p0. We suggested to use nm in
= n1/3 based on our theoretical developments. However, in practice, tuning this parameter is
always encouraged. When p is extremely large, the number of trees in the embedded model
should be increased accordingly to ensure reliable variable importance measure estimation.
The “RLT” package provides tunings for the embedded model. A summary of all tuning
parameters in the current version of “RLT” is provided in the supplementary file.
As we discussed in the introduction, a desirable property of RLT is the “sparsity” of the
fitted model, although this is not directly equated with “sparsity” as used in the penalization
literature. Figure 2 demonstrates this property of RLT as compared to a random forests
model. We take Scenario 3 in the simulation section as our demonstration setting. The upper
panel compares the variable importance measures of a single run, and the lower panel
compares the averaged variable importance measures over 100 runs. In an RLT model, noise
variables have very little involvement (with V I = 0) in tree construction. This is due to the
fact that most of them are muted during early splits, engendering the “sparsity”. The average
plot shows a similar pattern while RLT has a much larger separation between the strong and
the noise variables compared to Random forests. On the other hand, random forests tend to
have spikes at noise variables. This also shows that RLT is potentially a better nonparametric variable selection tool under the sparsity assumption. However, this sparsity
comes at the expense of sacrificing some correlated variables, as shown in the plots. The
chance of selecting the highly correlated variables (located at the neighborhood of 50, 100,
150 and 200) is reduced. In situations where correlated variables are also of interest, special
techniques may be needed.
Our theoretical results analyze tree-based methods from a new perspective, and the
framework can be applied to many tree-based models, including many “greedy” versions.
We showed that a tree splitting process involves different phases. In the early phase
Zhu et al.
J Am Stat Assoc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
(corresponding to
in Section 3), when the sample size is large, the search for
splitting rules has good theoretical properties, while in the later phase, the search for
splitting variables is likely to be essentially random. This causes the convergence rates for
most tree-based methods to depend on p if nmin is not large enough. Variable muting is a
convenient way to solve this problem.
There are several other key issues that require further investigation. First, we assume
independent covariates, which is a very strong assumption. In general, correlated covariates
pose a great challenge for non-parametric model fitting and variable selection properties
theoretically. To the best of our knowledge, there is no developed theoretical framework for
greedy tree-based methods under this setting. One of the possible solutions is to borrow the
irrepresentable condition concept into our theoretical framework. The
irrepresentable condition, given that the true model is indeed sparse, essentially prevents
correlated variables from fully explaining the effect of a strong variable. Hence a strong
variable will still have a large importance measure with high probability. This part of the
work is currently under investigation but is beyond the scope of this paper. Second, splitting
rules using linear combinations of variables results in non-hypercube shaped internal nodes,
which introduces more complexity into the fitted trees. Moreover, the linear combinations
involve correlated variables which adds yet further complications. Third, it is not clear how
ensembles of trees further improve the performance of RLT in large samples. However, due
to the feature selection approach in RLT, there is a possible connection with adaptive nearest
neighborhood methods and adaptive kernel smoothers . These and other
related issues are currently under investigation.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank the editors and reviewers for their careful review and thoughtful suggestions which led to a
significantly improved paper. The authors were funded in part by grant CA142538 from the National Cancer
Institute.