Multivariate dynamical systems models for estimating causal
interactions in fMRI
Srikanth Ryali1, Kaustubh Supekar2,3, Tianwen Chen1, and Vinod Menon1,4,5
1 Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305
2 Graduate Program in Biomedical Informatics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
3 Center for Biomedical Informatics Research, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
4 Program in Neuroscience, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305
5 Department of Neurology & Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305
Analysis of dynamical interactions between distributed brain areas is of fundamental importance
for understanding cognitive information processing. However, estimating dynamic causal
interactions between brain regions using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) poses
several unique challenges. For one, fMRI measures Blood Oxygenation Level Dependent (BOLD)
signals, rather than the underlying latent neuronal activity. Second, regional variations in the
hemodynamic response function (HRF) can significantly influence estimation of casual
interactions between them. Third, causal interactions between brain regions can change with
experimental context over time. To overcome these problems, we developed a novel state-space
Multivariate Dynamical Systems (MDS) model to estimate intrinsic and experimentally-induced
modulatory causal interactions between multiple brain regions. A probabilistic graphical
framework is then used to estimate the parameters of MDS as applied to fMRI data. We show that
MDS accurately takes into account regional variations in the HRF and estimates dynamic causal
interactions at the level of latent signals. We develop and compare two estimation procedures
using maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) and variational Bayesian (VB) approaches for
inferring model parameters. Using extensive computer simulations, we demonstrate that,
compared to Granger causal analysis (GCA), MDS exhibits superior performance for a wide range
of signal to noise ratios (SNRs), sample length and network size. Our simulations also suggest that
GCA fails to uncover causal interactions when there is a conflict between the direction of intrinsic
and modulatory influences. Furthermore, we show that MDS estimation using VB methods is
more robust and performs significantly better at low SNRs and shorter time series than MDS with
MLE. Our study suggests that VB estimation of MDS provides a robust method for estimating and
interpreting causal network interactions in fMRI data.
Address for Correspondence: Srikanth Ryali, Ph.D. and Vinod Menon, Ph.D., Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, 780
Welch Rd, Room 201, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305-5778, and
 , Tel no: 1-650-736-0128, Fax no: 1-650-736-7200.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 15.
 
Neuroimage. 2011 January 15; 54(2): 807–823. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.09.052.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Causality; Dynamical Systems; Variational Bayes; Bilinear; Expectation Maximization; Kalman
Smoother; Deconvolution
Introduction
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has emerged as a powerful tool for
investigating human brain function and dysfunction. fMRI studies of brain function have
primarily focused on identifying brain regions that are activated during performance of
perceptual or cognitive tasks. There is growing consensus, however, that localization of
activations provides a limited view of how the brain processes information and that it is
important to understand functional interactions between brain regions that form part of a
neurocognitive network involved in information processing . Furthermore, evidence is now accumulating that the key to
understanding the functions of any specific brain region lies in disentangling how its
connectivity differs from the pattern of connections of other functionally related brain areas
 . A critical aspect of this effort is to better understand how causal
interactions between specific brain areas and networks change dynamically with cognitive
demands . These and other related
studies in the literature highlight the importance of dynamic causal interactions for
understanding brain function at the systems level.
In recent years, several methods have been developed to estimate causal interactions in
fMRI data . Of these, Granger causal analysis (GCA)
 and dynamic causal modeling (DCM) are among the more commonly used approaches thus far. There is a growing debate
about the relative merits and demerits of these approaches for estimating causal interactions
using fMRI data . The main limitations of GCA
highlighted by this debate are that: (1) GCA estimates causal interactions in the observed
Blood-Oxygenation-Level-Dependent (BOLD) signals, rather than in the underlying
neuronal responses; (2) GCA may not be able to accurately recover causal interactions
because of regional variations in hemodynamic response; and (3) GCA does not take into
account the experimentally induced modulatory effects while estimating causal interactions
 . The main limitations of DCM highlighted in this debate are that: (1)
DCM is a confirmatory method wherein several causal models are tested and the model with
the highest evidence is chosen. This is problematic if the number of regions under
investigation is large since a large number of models need to be tested increases
exponentially with the increase in the number of regions; (2) conventional DCM uses a
deterministic model to describe the dynamics of the latent neuronal signals which may not
be adequate to capture the dynamics of the underlying neuronal processes ); and (3) the assumptions used by
DCM for deconvolution of hemodynamic response have not yet been adequately verified
 . Here, we develop a new method that incorporates the relative
merits of both GCA and DCM while attempting to overcome their limitations.
We propose a novel multivariate dynamical systems (MDS) approach for
modeling causal interactions in fMRI data. MDS is based on a state-space approach which
can be used to overcome many of the aforementioned problems associated with estimating
Ryali et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 15.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
causal interactions in fMRI data. State-space models have been successfully used in
engineering applications of control systems and machine learning but their
use in neuroscience has been limited. Notable examples of state-space models include
Hidden Markov models (HMM) which are widely used in speech recognition applications
 and Kalman filters for object tracking .
Critically, state-space models can be represented as probabilistic graphical models , which as we show below (Figure 1), greatly facilitate representation
and inference for causal modeling of fMRI data.
Critically, MDS estimates causal interactions in the underlying latent signals, rather than the
observed BOLD-fMRI signals. In order to estimate causal interactions from the observed
fMRI data, it is important to take into account variations in hemodynamic response function
(HRF) across different brain regions . MDS is a state-space model in
which a “state equation” is used to model the unobserved states of the system and an
“observation equation” is used to model the observed data as a function of latent state
signals (Figure 1). The state equation is a vector autoregressive model incorporating both
intrinsic and modulatory causal interactions. Intrinsic interactions reflect causal influences
independent of external stimuli and task conditions, while modulatory interactions reflect
context dependent influences. The observation models produce BOLD-fMRI signals as a
linear convolution of latent signals and basis functions spanning the space of variations in
The latent signals and unknown parameters that characterize causal interactions between
brain regions are estimated using two different approaches. In the first approach, we use
expectation maximization (EM) to obtain maximum likelihood estimates (MLE) of the
parameters and test the statistical significance of the estimated causal relationships between
brain regions using a nonparametric approach. We refer to this approach as MDS-MLE. In
the second approach, we use a Variational Bayes (VB) approach to compute the posterior
distribution of latent variables and parameters which cannot be computed analytically using
a fully Bayesian approach. We refer to this approach as MDS-VB. By representing MDS as
probabilistic graphical network (Figure 1), we show that MDS-VB provides an elegant
analytical solution for computing the posterior distributions and deriving causal connectivity
estimates which are sparse and more readily interpretable.
We first describe our MDS model and discuss MLE and VB approaches for estimating
intrinsic and modulatory causal interactions between multiple brain regions. We test the
performance of MDS using computer-simulated datasets as a function of network size, fMRI
time points and signal to noise ratio (SNR). We evaluate performance of our MDS models
with extensive computer simulations and examine several metrics, including sensitivity,
false positive rate and accuracy, in terms of correctly identifying both intrinsic and
modulatory causal interactions. Finally, we contrast our results with those obtained with
In the following sections, we represent matrices by upper case letters and scalars and vectors
by lower-case letters. Random matrices are represented by bold face letters whereas random
vectors and scalars are represented by bold face lower-case letters.
MDS Model—Consider the following state-space model to represent the multivariate fMRI
time series
Ryali et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 15.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
In Equation (1), s(t) is a M × 1 vector of latent signals at time t of M regions, A is an M × M
connection matrix wherein A(m, n) denotes the strength of intrinsic causal connection
(which is independent of external stimuli or task condition) from n-th region to m-th region.
Cj is an M × M connection matrix ensued by modulatory input vj(t), J is the number of
modulatory inputs. The non-diagonal elements of Cj represent the coupling of brain regions
in the presence of modulatory input vj(t). Therefore, latent signals s(t) in M regions at time t
is a bilinear function of modulatory inputs vj(t) and its previous state s(t−1). D is an M × M
diagonal matrix wherein D(i, i) denotes external stimuli strength to i-th region. u(t) is an M ×
1 binary vector whose elements represent the external stimuli to m-th region under
investigation. w(t) is an M × 1 state noise vector whose distribution is assumed to be
Gaussian distributed with covariance matrix Q(w(t) ~ N(0, Q)). Additionally, state noise
vector at time instances 1,2,...., T (w(1), w(2) … w(T)) are assumed to be identical and
independently distributed (iid). Equation (1) represents the time evolution of latent signals in
M brain regions. More specifically, the latent signals at time t, s(t) is expressed as a linear
combination of latent signals at time t−1, external stimulus at time t (u(t)), bilinear
combination of modulatory inputs vj(t), j = 1,2..J and its previous state, and state noise w(t)
The latent dynamics modeled in Equation (1) gives rise to observed fMRI time series
represented by Equations (2) and (3).
We model the fMRI time series in region “m” as a linear convolution of HRF and latent
signal sm(t) in that region. To represent this linear convolution model as an inner product of
two vectors, the past L values of sm(t) are stored as a vector. xm(t) in equation (2) represents
an L × 1 vector with L past values of latent signal at m-th region.
In Equation (3), ym(t) is the observed BOLD signal at t of m-th region. Φ is a p × L matrix
whose rows contain bases for HRF. bm is a 1×p coefficient vector representing the weights
for each basis function in explaining the observed BOLD signal ym(t). Therefore, the HRF in
m-th region is represented by the product bmΦ. The BOLD response in this region is
obtained by convolving HRF (bmΦ) with the L past values of the region’s latent signal
(xm(t)) and is represented mathematically by the vector inner product bmΦxm(t).
Uncorrelated observation noise em(t) with zero mean and variance
is then added to
generate the observed signal ym(t). em(t) is also assumed to be uncorrelated with w(τ) at all t
and τ. Equation (3) represents the linear convolution between the embedded latent signal
xm(t) and the basis vectors for HRF. Here, we use the canonical HRF and its time derivative
as bases, as is common in most fMRI studies .
Equations (1–3) together represent a state-space model for estimating the causal interactions
in latent signals based on observed multivariate fMRI time series. This model can be seen
both as a multivariate extension of univariate time series models , and also as an extension of GCA wherein vector autoregressive model for
latent, rather than BOLD-fMRI, signals are used to model the causal interactions among
Ryali et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 15.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
brain regions. Furthermore, our MDS model also takes into account variations in HRF as
well as the influences of modulatory and external stimuli in estimating causal interactions
between the brain regions.
Estimating causal interactions between M regions specified in the model is equivalent to
estimating the unknown parameters A and Cj, j = 1,2..J. In order to estimate A and Cj’s, the
other unknown parameters D, Q,
and the latent signal
the observations
, t = 1,2..T, where T is the total number of time samples, needs to
be estimated. We use the following MLE and VB methods for estimating the parameters of
the MDS model.
Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE)
Estimation: Maximum likelihood estimates of MDS model parameters and latent signals
are obtained by maximizing the log-likelihood of the observed fMRI data. We use EM
algorithm to estimate the unknown parameters and latent variables of the model. EM
algorithm is an iterative method consisting of two steps viz., E-step and M-step. In the Estep, the posterior distribution of latent variables is computed given the current estimates of
parameters. In the M-step, given the current posterior distribution of latent variables, the
parameters of the model are estimated by maximizing the conditional expectation of log of
complete likelihood given the data. The E and M steps are repeated until convergence. The
log-likelihood of the data is guaranteed to increase or remain the same for every iteration of
E and M steps. Also, the application of EM algorithm asymptotically gives maximum
likelihood estimates of the parameters. In the E step, the posterior distributions are obtained
by using Kalman filtering and smoothing algorithms . The detailed equations
for E and M steps are given in Appendix A. We refer this solution to MDS using MLE as
Inference: The statistical significance of intrinsic (A(m, n)) and modulatory (Cj(m, n), j =
1,2..J) causal connections estimated using the EM approach was tested using a Bootstrap
method. In this approach, the distribution of connection strengths, under the null hypothesis
that there are no connections between the regions, was generated by estimating A and C
from 100 surrogate datasets constructed from the observed data. A surrogate dataset was
obtained by applying a Fourier transform to observed signal at the m-th region and then
randomizing its phase response by adding a random phase shift at every frequency. The
phase shifts were obtained by randomly sampling in the interval [0, 2π]. Inverse Fourier
transform was then applied to generate one instance of surrogate data . Randomization of the phase response destroys the causal interactions between the
brain regions while preserving their power spectra. EM algorithm was then run on this
surrogate data to obtain A and C under the null hypothesis. This procedure was repeated on
100 surrogate datasets and the empirical distributions under null hypothesis were obtained
for elements of A and C. The statistical significance of each connection was then estimated
using these distributions at p value of 0.01. with Bonferroni correction to account for
multiple comparisons.
Variational Bayes (VB)
Estimation of Posterior Distributions: In this approach, we use a VB framework to obtain
the posterior distributions of the unknown parameters and latent variables. Let Θ = {A,
C1,..CJ, D, Q, R, B} represent the unknown parameters and S = {s(t), t = 1,2, … T} be the
latent variables of the model. Given the observations Y = {y(t), t = 1,2, … T} and the
probabilistic model, the Bayesian approach aims to find the joint posterior p(S, Θ|Y).
However, obtaining this posterior distribution using a fully Bayesian approach is
Ryali et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 15.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
analytically not possible for most models including MDS. In the VB approach, we make
analytical approximation to p(S, Θ|Y). Let q(S, Θ|Y) be any arbitrary probability
distribution then the log of the marginal distribution of observations can be written as
 
KL(q||p) is the Kullback-Leibler divergence between q(S, Θ|Y) and p(S, Θ|Y). KL(q||p) ≥ 0,
with equality, if and only if, q(S, Θ|Y) = p(S, Θ|Y). Therefore, L(q) serves as a lower bound
on the log of the evidence (log P(Y)). The maximum of this lower bound occurs when KL
divergence is zero for which the optimal choice of q(S, Θ|Y) is p(S, Θ|Y). Since p(S, Θ|Y) is
not tractable, certain assumptions on the form of q(S, Θ|Y) are made and then the optimal
distribution is found by maximizing the lower bound L(q). In this work, we assume that the
posterior distribution q(S, Θ|Y) factorizes over S and Θ, i.e.,
We note that no further assumptions are made on the functional form of these distributions
qs(S|Y) and qΘ(Θ|Y). These quantities are obtained by taking functional derivatives of L(q)
with respect to qs(S|Y) and qΘ(Θ|Y). It can be shown that
Equations (8) and (9) are respectively VB-E and VB-M steps. Expectations are computed
with respect to qΘ(Θ|Y)in equation (8) and with respect to qs(S|Y) in Equation (9). In the
VB-E step, the distribution of latent signal s(t), for each t, is updated given the current
distribution of the parameters Θ. For reasons described below, s(t) has a Gaussian
distribution and in this step updating the distribution amounts to updating the mean and
variance of the Gaussian distribution. Therefore, in the VB-E step, estimating means of s(t)
at every t is equivalent to estimating the latent signals. In the VB-M step, the distributions
for model parameters are updated given the update distributions for latent signal s(t). These
VB-E and VB-M steps are repeated until convergence. Note that we do not make any
assumptions about the factorization of Θ and S. Any further conditional independencies in
these sets are derived from the probabilistic graphical model of MDS shown in Figure (1).
The details of the derivation of the posterior probabilities using the graphical model are
Ryali et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 15.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
given in Appendix-B. Figure 2 shows a flow chart of various steps involved in both MDS-
VB and MDS-MLE methods.
Choice of Priors and Inference: The Bayesian approach allows the specification of both
informative and non-informative priors on the model parameters. The specification of these
priors helps in regularizing the solution and avoids over fitting in the case where number of
parameters to be estimated is large compared to the number of observations. This is
generally the case where the number of brain regions to be modeled is large. Since we do
not have a priori information on these parameters, we specify non-informative conjugate
priors on these parameters. Here, we briefly explain the notion of non-informative conjugate
priors . Let z be a Gaussian random variable with mean μ and variance σ2. If
σ2 → ∞ or 1/σ2 → 0 (precision), the distribution becomes flat and the random variable z can
take any value between −∞ and ∞ with equal probability. Here, we refer to such
distributions as non-informative. Let x and y be two random variables with probabilities p(x)
and p(y) respectively. p(y) is said to be a conjugate prior for p(x) if the functional form of
the posterior p(x|y) is same as that of p(y). Specifying conjugate priors leads to elegant
analytical solutions, and it also allows us to specify priors in such a way that we get sparse
and interpretable solutions. For example, one can specify the Gaussian priors, on the
elements of connection matrices A and C. If the prior on each element of A (or Cj) is
where, λi,j is the prior precision for Ai,j. Such a specification of priors helps in automatic
relevance determination (ARD) of the connections Ai,j between the regions .
During the learning process of A and λ’s, a significant proportion of λi,j’s go towards infinity
and the corresponding connections λi,j’s have posterior distributions whose mean values
shrink towards its prior mean which is zero. The elements of the matrix A which do not have
significant values become very small and only the elements which are significant survive.
Therefore, adopting this procedure helps in automatically identifying the relevant entries of
the matrix A and hence the name “Automatic relevance determination”. This is very
important because unlike the MLE approach, inference on connection weights (A and Cj’s)
is now straightforward. The details of prior specification for various parameters are given in
Appendix-B. We test the significance of parameters by thresholding the corresponding
posterior probabilities at a p-value of 0.01 with Bonferroni correction to account for multiple
comparisons.
Simulated Datasets
(A) Datasets with modulatory effects and external stimuli: We assess the performance of
MDS using a number of computer-simulated datasets generated at various SNRs (10, 5 and 0
dB), for different number of brain regions or nodes (M = 2, 3 and 5) and for different
number of time samples (T = 200, 300 and 500).
Figure 3 shows the intrinsic and modulatory connectivity of three networks with 2, 3 and 5
nodes. For example, in the two nodes network (Figure 3A), node 1 receives an external input
and there is an intrinsic causal connection from node 1 to node 2 with a weight of −0.3
(A(2,1) = −0.3. A modulatory input induces a connection from node 1 to node 2 with weight
of 0.5 (C(2,1) = 0.5) and whose sign is opposite to that of intrinsic connection. Similarly in
the five-node structure (Figure 3C), node 1 receives the external input and has causal
influences on nodes 2, 3 and 4 (matrix elements A). Nodes 4 and 5 have bidirectional
influences. Modulatory inputs induce causal influences from node 1 to 2 and from node 3 to
Ryali et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 15.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
2 (matrix C). Note that all three networks have intrinsic and modulatory connections from
node 1 to 2 with weights −0.3 and 0.5 respectively. We simulated networks with these
weights to explicitly test whether MDS could recover these interactions which could be
missed by GCA because of opposing signs of the weights of intrinsic and modulatory
connections. We set the autocorrelations of the time series (diagonal elements of matrix A)
to 0.7 . Our simulations also modeled variations in
HRFs across regions. Figure 4 shows the simulated HRFs at each of the network nodes in
the structure. The HRFs were constructed in such a way that the direction of hemodynamic
delays is confounded with the direction of latent signal delay, making the task of recovering
network parameters more challenging. For example in the 5-node network, node 1 drives
nodes 2, 3 and 4 at the level of latent signals. But the HRF at node 1 peaks later than that in
the nodes 2, 3 and 4. These HRFs were simulated using a linear combination of canonical
HRF and its temporal derivative. Analogous to most fMRI data acquisition paradigms, we
assume that the sampling interval, also referred to as repetition time (TR), is 2 seconds. This
corresponds to an embedding dimension of L = 16, which is also the length of the HRF.
Note that the duration of the canonical HRF is approximately about 32 seconds.
Figure 5 shows the experimental and modulatory inputs applied to the nodes shown in
Figure 3. The external input was simulated to reflect an event-related fMRI design with
stimuli occurring at random instances with the constraint that the time difference between
two consecutive events is at least 2 TR (Figure 5A). This input can also be a slow event or
block design. In the MDS framework, there is no restriction on the nature of the experiment
design. The modulatory input is assumed to be a boxcar function (Figure 5B). The
modulatory inputs indicate the time periods wherein the network configuration could change
because of context specific influences such as changes in attention, alertness and explicit
experimental manipulations.
The simulated datasets were generated using the model described in the equations (1)–(3).
The latent noise covariance was fixed at Q = 0.1IM, where IM is identity matrix of size M.
The observed noise variance at m-th region for a given SNR was computed as
We assume that the canonical HRF and its temporal derivative span the space of HRFs.
Therefore, they constitute the rows of Θ which would be a 2×16 matrix. The coefficients of
the matrices A and C for each network structure are shown in Figure 3.
We generated 25 datasets for each SNR, network structure and time samples. The
performance of the method was assessed using the performance metrics described in the
next section.
(B) Datasets without modulatory effects and external stimuli: To examine the
performance of the methods when there are no modulatory or external stimulus effects, we
simulated 25 datasets for a 3-node network shown in Figure 3(B) at 5 dB SNR. We set the
weights to the same values as in the previous case except that there are no causal
interactions from modulatory inputs. The weights corresponding to external stimuli were all
set to zero. The diagonal elements (autocorrelations) in matrix A were set to 0.8, 0.7 and 0.6
respectively. These datasets were created to provide a more appropriate, albeit less general,
comparison of MDS with GCA.
Ryali et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 15.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
(C) Effects of fMRI down-sampling: Interactions between brain regions occur at finer time
scales compared to the sampling intervals of fMRI signals. fMRI signals are typically
sampled at TR = 1 or 2 seconds while neuronal processes occur at millisecond resolution. To
investigate the effects of fMRI down sampling on MDS performance, we adopted the
approach described by Deshpande and colleagues .We generated
datasets with 1 millisecond sampling interval at 0 dB network shown in Figure 3A. We
obtained neuronal signals in node 1 and node 2 with a delay of dn milliseconds between
them. In this case, node 1 drives node 2 under both intrinsic and modulatory conditions with
weights shown in Figure 3A. The autocorrelations in node1 and 2 were set to 0.8 and 0.7
respectively. We then convolved neuronal signal at node 1 with a canonical HRF generated
again at 1 KHz sampling rate and then re-sampled to sampling interval of TR = 2 seconds to
obtain fMRI signal. In node 2, we convolved the “neuronal” signal with the HRF which was
delayed by dh milliseconds with respect to the HRF in node 1, and again re-sampled to TR =
2 seconds to obtain fMRI signal. We obtained simulated datasets at various neuronal delays
dn = {0,200,400,600,800,1000} and HRF delays dh = {0,500,2500,} milliseconds
 . We also examined two cases for HRF delays: (1) HRF delay is in
the same direction of neuronal delay and (2) HRF delay is in the opposite direction of
neuronal delay. The second case represents the scenario where HRF confounds the causal
interactions at neuronal level. We generated 25 simulated datasets for each combination of
dn and dh Supplementary Table S1 summarizes the characteristics of each dataset used for
evaluating the performance of MDS.
Performance Metrics—The performance of MDS in discovering the intrinsic and
modulatory causal interactions in simulated datasets was assessed using various
performance metrics such as sensitivity, false positive rate and accuracy in correctly
identifying causal intrinsic and modulatory interactions, where:
where, TP is the number of true positives, TN is the number of true negatives, FN is the
number of false negatives and FP is the number of false positives. These performance
metrics are computed for each of the 25 datasets and then are averaged to obtain the overall
performance.
Applying MDS – An example
We first illustrate the performance of MDS-MLE and MDS-VB by computing the estimated
intrinsic and modulatory connections and the deconvolved (or estimated) latent signals of a
five node network simulated at 5 dB noise shown in Figure 3C. The MDS approach, using
either MLE or VB, simultaneously estimates both latent signals and unknown parameters in
the model using E and M steps respectively. The left and right panels in Figure 6
Ryali et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 15.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
respectively show the actual and estimated latent signals and the actual and estimated BOLD
signal at the five nodes in the network using MDS-MLE and MDS-VB. The estimated
BOLD signal
at m-th node using these methods was computed as follows
are the estimated coefficients (using MLE or VB) corresponding to the basis
functions spanning the subspace of HRFs and
(using MLE or VB) is the estimated latent
signal at the m-th node. As shown in this figure, both MDS-MLE and MDS-VB were able to
recover the latent and BOLD signals at this SNR. Table-1 shows the mean square error
(MSE) between the estimated and latent signals and estimated and actual BOLD-fMRI
responses in each node using these two methods. The MSE in estimating these signals is
very low by both methods. Figures 7A and B respectively show the estimated intrinsic and
modulatory causal interactions by MDS-MLE and MDS-VB in the simulated five node
network. MDS-VB correctly identified both intrinsic (solid lines) and modulatory
connections (dotted lines) in this network as shown in Figure 7B. MDS-MLE also correctly
recovered both intrinsic and modulatory networks but it introduced an additional false
modulatory connection from node 3 to node 1 as shown in Figure 7A.
We next compare the performance of MDS with that of GCA using the same simulated data.
This analysis was performed using the multivariate GCA toolbox developed by Seth . We applied GCA on the same dataset to verify whether it can recover the causal
connections (either intrinsic or modulatory). As shown in Figure 7C, GCA likely missed
both the intrinsic and modulatory interactions from node 1 to 2 but it was able to recover
modulatory interactions from node 3 to 4 in addition to other connections. However, unlike
MDS, GCA cannot distinguish between intrinsic and modulatory interactions. GCA missed
the connection from node 1 to 2 because these nodes have both intrinsic and modulatory
interactions with opposing actions. Since GCA does not model these interactions separately,
the net connection strength between these nodes is not significant. On the other hand, MDS
models these interactions explicitly and therefore is able to recover both types of
connections. This example demonstrates that GCA cannot recover all the connections under
these conditions while both MDS methods could recover all the connections and at the same
time differentiate between the different types of interactions.
Performance of MDS on simulated data with modulatory effects and external stimuli
We evaluated the performance of MDS-MLE and MDS-VB on simulated datasets by
computing sensitivity, false positive rate and accuracy in finding intrinsic and modulatory
causal interactions as a function of SNR, network size and the number of time samples.
Figures 8, 9 and 10 respectively show the performance of MDS-MLE and MDS-VB for time
samples T = 500, 300, 200. For each T and network size, the performance of MDS-MLE and
MDS-VB is evaluated for SNR = 0, 5 and 10 dB. In each of these figures panels A, B and C
show the performance of MDS-MLE and MDS-VB with respect to sensitivity, false positive
rate and accuracy in identifying the intrinsic and modulatory interactions for 2, 3 and 5 node
networks respectively. The performance of these methods improved with the increase in
SNR and time samples (T).
Between the two MDS methods, MDS-VB showed superior performance compared to
MDS-MLE across all the SNRs, time samples and network size. MDS-VB showed
significantly greater performance at low SNR and for shorter time series. For example, for
SNR= 0dB, T = 200 time points and number of nodes = 5 (Figure 10C), the sensitivity of
Ryali et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 15.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
MDS-VB in recovering intrinsic and modulatory interactions was about 0.75 and 0.6
respectively while MDS-MLE has sensitivity of only about 0.3 and 0.5 respectively. The
accuracy of MDS-VB is also high (>0.8) under all conditions (panel (C) in Figures 8, 9 and
10) because the sensitivities are high and false positive rates of this method is very low
(panels A and B in Figures 8, 9 and 10). More generally, in cases with high noise, lower
sample length, and larger network size MDS-VB consistently outperforms MDS-MLE.
Comparison of MDS and GCA on simulated data with modulatory effects and external
Finally, we compared the performance of GCA with MDS methods on the same datasets and
performance metrics. Figures 8, 9 and 10 respectively show the comparative performance of
GCA with MDS-VB and MDS-MLE for T = 500, 300 and 200 at various SNRs and
network sizes. The results suggest that performance of GCA is poor compared to both MDS
methods with respect to sensitivity and accuracy in indentifying causal interactions between
brain nodes. Since GCA cannot distinguish between intrinsic and modulatory interactions,
we computed the performance metrics by considering both the connection types. The
performance of GCA declined with the decrease in SNR for networks of size 3 and 5
(Figures 8–10). The performance of GCA is worse even for a 2-node network as shown in
Figures 8A, 9A and 10A. The sensitivity of GCA for this network is less than 10% because
intrinsic and modulatory interactions have weights with opposite signs. Since GCA does not
model these interactions explicitly, it does not detect the interactions between the two nodes.
On the other hand, both MDS methods showed better sensitivity and accuracy in identifying
both types of interactions at all SNRs for this network.
Comparison of MDS and GCA on simulated data in the absence of modulatory effects and
external stimuli
Table 2 shows the relative performance of MDS-VB, MDS-MLE and GCA on 25 datasets
simulated for a 3-node network at 5 dB SNR without any modulatory effects and external
stimuli. The performance of GCA improved and recovered the causal network with
sensitivity of 0.9, FPR of 0 and accuracy of 0.98. In this case, the performance of GCA is
comparable to MDS, suggesting that in the absence of modulatory effects and external
stimuli GCA can perform as well as MDS even in the presence of HRF variations.
Effects of fMRI down-sampling on MDS performance
We examined the performance of MDS-VB on simulated data in which latent signals were
generated at various delays using a sampling interval of 1 millisecond and convolved with
various delays in the HRF. Causal interactions were then estimated based on the observed
time series obtained at sampling interval of 2 seconds. We examined the performance of
MDS-VB under four different cases:
(a) No latent signal delay but HRF is delayed by 500 and 2500 milliseconds—In
this case, there are no causal interactions between the two nodes with respect to the latent
signals but the observed fMRI time series are delayed with respect to each other because of
delays in their respective HRFs. In this case, MDS-VB was accurate in that it did not
recover any causal interactions (both intrinsic and modulatory) despite variations in HRF.
(b) No HRF delays—In this case, HRFs in both nodes are identical. As shown in Figure
S1(A), the sensitivity of MDS-VB in recovering both intrinsic and modulatory interactions
is above 0.9 (left panel) with FPRs below 0.1 (middle panel) and therefore with accuracies
of above 0.9 (right panel) at all the latent signal delays. The performance of MDS-VB
improved with the increase in latent signal delays.
Ryali et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 15.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
(c) Latent and HRF delays both in the same direction—In this scenario, HRF
delays do not confound the causal interactions between the nodes at the latent signal level.
For HRF delay of 500 and 2500 milliseconds, the performance metrics shown in Figures S1
(B) and S1(C) suggest that MDS-VB is able to recover both intrinsic and modulatory causal
interactions reliably. For the HRF delay of 2500 milliseconds, there is a small drop in
sensitivity for latent signal delays of 800 and 1000 milliseconds.
(d) HRF delays oppose the delays in latent signals—This is the most difficult
situation for any method because HRF delays confound the causal interactions at latent
signal level. Figure S2 (B) shows the performance of MDS-VB when HRF in node 2 peaks
500 milliseconds before the HRF in node 1 while node1 drives node 2 at latent signal level.
The performance of MDS-VB improved with the increase in latent signal delay. Figure
S2(C) shows the performance of MDS-VB for HRF delay of 2500 milliseconds. Although
the sensitivities for latent signal delays from 200 to 600 milliseconds are higher (left panel)
but are accompanied by greater false positives (middle panel) and therefore have poor
accuracies (right panel). The performance of MDS-VB improved for latent signal delays of
800 and 1000 milliseconds in recovering causal interactions.
Discussion
We have developed a novel dynamical systems method to model intrinsic and modulatory
interactions in fMRI data. MDS uses a vector autoregressive state-space model
incorporating both intrinsic and modulatory causal interactions. Intrinsic interactions reflect
causal influences independent of external stimuli and task conditions, while modulatory
interactions reflect context dependent influences. Our proposed MDS method overcomes
key limitations of commonly used methods for estimating the causal relations using fMRI
Critically, causal interactions in MDS are modeled at the level of latent signals, rather than
at the level of the observed BOLD-fMRI signals. Our simulations clearly demonstrate that
this has the added effect of eliminating the confounding effects of regional variability in
HRF. The parameters and latent variables of the state-space model were estimated using two
different methods. In the MDS-MLE method, the statistical significance of the parameters of
the state equation, which represent the causal interactions between multiple brain nodes, was
tested using a Bootstrap method. In the MDS-VB method, we used non-informative priors to
facilitate automatic relevance detection. We first discuss findings from our simulations, and
show that MDS-VB provides the robust and accurate solutions even at low SNRs and
smaller number of observed samples (time points). We then contrast the performance of
MDS with the widely used GCA method. In this context, we highlight instances where GCA
works reasonably well and where it fails. Finally, we discuss several important conceptual
issues concerning the investigation of dynamic causal interactions in fMRI, contrasting
MDS with other recently developed methods.
Performance of MDS on simulated datasets – contrasting MLE and VB approaches
In the following sections, we evaluate and discuss the performance of MDS under various
scenarios. Importantly, we demonstrate, for the first time, that VB approaches provide better
estimates of model parameters than MLE based approaches. We investigated the
performance of MDS-MLE and MDS-VB on simulated datasets generated at SNRs of 0, 5
and 10 dB for network structures of sizes 2, 3 and 5 and time samples of 200, 300 and 500.
We simulated regional HRF variations in such a way that the directions of hemodynamic
response delays were in opposite direction to the delays in the latent signals (Figure 4). HRF
delays could therefore influence the estimation of causal interactions when applied directly
Ryali et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 15.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
on the observed BOLD-fMRI signals. This makes the problem of estimating causal
interactions particularly challenging and provides novel insights into strengths and
weaknesses of multiple approaches used here.
The performance of MDS was found to be robust when tested under various simulated
conditions. Specifically, MDS was able to reliably recover both intrinsic and modulatory
causal interactions from the simulated datasets and its performance was found to be superior
to the conventional approaches such as GCA. Among MDS methods, the performance of
MDS-VB was found to be superior to MDS-MLE with respect to performance metrics such
as sensitivity, false positive rate and accuracy in identifying intrinsic and modulatory causal
interactions (Figures 7–10). MDS-VB showed significantly improved performance over
MDS-MLE, especially at adverse conditions such as low SNRs, large network size and for
less number of observed samples (Figure 10C).
The superior performance of MDS-VB can be attributed to the regularization imposed by
priors in this method. Our priors not only regularized the solution but also helped in
achieving sparse solutions. By using sparsity promoting priors, the weights corresponding to
insignificant links are driven towards zero and therefore enable automatic relevance
detection . This approach is not only useful for regularizing solutions when
the number of unknown parameters is high, but also for providing sparse and interpretable
solutions. This feature of VB can be especially important in analyzing networks with large
number of nodes, an aspect often overlooked in most analyses of causality in complex
Another advantage of Bayesian analysis lies in computing the statistical significance of the
network connections estimated by MDS methods. In the MLE approach, we need to resort to
a Bootstrap approach, which can be computationally expensive. MDS-VB, on the other
hand, provides posterior probabilities of each model parameter, as opposed to point
estimates in MLE, which can be used to compute their statistical significance. From a
computational perspective, MDS-VB is several orders of magnitude faster than MLE-MLE
because it does not require nonparametric tests for statistical significance testing. Taken
together, these findings suggest that MDS-VB is a superior and more powerful method than
Comparison with GCA
We demonstrated the importance of modeling the influence of both external and modulatory
stimuli for estimating the causal networks by applying GCA on a five-node network. On this
dataset, GCA failed to detect both the modulatory and intrinsic connections between nodes 1
and 2 (Figure 7C). As mentioned earlier, GCA missed this connection because the network
has both intrinsic and modulatory connections between these nodes but with weights of
opposite signs. Therefore, in GCA the net strength of this connection is very small and it did
not survive a conservative test of statistical significance. Our MDS methods, on the other
hand, uncovered both these connections. This phenomenon is most obvious in our
simulations of the 2-node network wherein GCA could not find causal interactions between
the nodes (Figures 8A, 9A and 10A). In this network also both intrinsic and modulatory
connections have weights with opposite signs. These results demonstrate the importance of
explicitly modeling the influence of external and modulatory stimuli. Overall, the
performance of GCA, when applied on the datasets generated at various SNR, networks and
for different number of observations, was found to be inferior when compared to both MDS
methods. This was true with respect to both sensitivity and accuracy in indentifying causal
interactions between multiple brain nodes (Figures 8, 9 and 10). When compared to MDS,
the performance of GCA drops significantly at lower SNRs. These results suggest that MDS
is more robust against observation noise than GCA. Therefore, our simulations suggest that
Ryali et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 15.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
MDS-VB outperforms GCA for networks consisting of less than 6 nodes. More extensive
simulations however are needed to compare the performance of MDS with GCA, for larger
Conventional GCA methods do not take into account dynamic changes in modulatory inputs
and their effect on context dependent causal interactions. In order to compare GCA more
directly with MDS, we examined causal interactions in the absence of modulatory
influences. As expected, in this case, the performance of GCA was comparable to that of
MDS. Together, these findings suggest that GCA can accurately recover causal interactions
in the absence of modulatory effects. Although newer dynamic GCA methods have been
proposed, they appear to be designed more for improving estimations of causal interactions
rather than examining context dependent dynamic changes in causal interactions . Further
simulation studies are needed to assess how well dynamic GCA can estimate context
specific modulatory effects.
We next contrast our findings using GCA and MDS in the context of the equivalence of
ARIMA and structural time series models. GCA is based on autoregressive integrated
moving average (ARIMA) models proposed by Box and Jenkins whereas MDS is a
structural time series model . In the econometrics literature, it is well
known that the linear structural time series models have equivalent ARIMA model
representations . This equivalence has been under-appreciated in the
neuroimaging literature, as demonstrated by the recent discussion regarding the relative
merits of GCA and DCM . Our detailed
simulations suggest that, under certain conditions, GCA is able to recover much of the
causal network structure in spite of the presence of HRF delay confounds. This is most
clearly illustrated using the simulations shown in Figure 7C, where we found that GCA
could recover the network structure except for the intrinsic/modulatory connection from
node 1 to 2. Our simulations also suggest that GCA may not be able to uncover causal
connections when there is a conflict between intrinsic and modulatory connections (Figure
7C, 8, 9 and 10) but for other cases it is able to recover the underlying networks. In
estimating the causal interactions, the estimated model order for GCA using the Akaike
information criterion (AIC) was more than 3. Note that in our simulations, the causal
interactions at the latent signal level were generated using VAR with model order 1
(Equation 1). It is plausible that in GCA, the higher model order is used to compensate for
variations in HRF delay and experimental effects such as context specific modulatory
connections . Our simulations suggest that this is indeed that case
and that optimal model order selection in GCA results in improved estimation of causal
interactions between nodes. Nevertheless, structural time series based models like MDS and
DCM can provide better interpretation of network structure since they can distinguish
between intrinsic and context specific modulatory causal interactions in latent signals.
Effects of down-sampling on MDS performance
In most fMRI studies, data are typically acquired at sampling rates of about 2 seconds (or
TR = 2seconds). However, dynamical interactions between brain regions occur at faster time
scales of 10–100 milliseconds. To examine the effects of downsampling fMRI data on the
performance of MDS, we first simulated interactions between nodes at a sampling rates of
1KHz and then re-sampled the time series to 0.5 Hz after convolving with region-specific
HRFs. MDS-VB was then applied on these datasets to estimate causal interactions between
nodes. We also examined the influence of HRF delays on the estimation of causal
interactions under four scenarios (Figures S1 and S2), similar to the strategy used by
Deshpande and colleagues to study the effect of HRF variability on
GCA. In the first scenario, there were no causal interactions between nodes but HRFs were
Ryali et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 15.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
delayed between the nodes. In this case, MDS-VB performed accurately and did not infer
any false causal interactions. This shows that MDS-VB can model and remove the effects
HRF variation while estimating causal interactions at latent signal level. In the second
scenario, we introduced causal interactions between nodes, but without HRF variations.
MDS reliably estimated causal interactions for various delays in latent signals (Figure S1A).
In the third scenario, we introduced causal interactions between nodes and also varied HRFs
such that delays in latent signals and HRFs were in the same direction. In this case, MDS
was able to recover both intrinsic and modulatory causal interactions accurately (Figure
S1B, S1C). In the fourth scenario, when delays in latent signal and HRF opposed each other
performance dropped significantly, just as with GCA . Further
research is needed to examine whether causal interactions under this scenario are inherently
unresolvable by MDS and other techniques such as DCM.
Comparison of MDS with other approaches
As noted above, like GCA, MDS can be used to estimate causal interactions between a large
numbers of brain nodes. Unlike GCA, however, causal interactions are estimated on the
underlying latent signals while simultaneously accounting for regional variations in the
HRF. Furthermore, unlike GCA, MDS can differentiate between intrinsic and stimulusinduced modulatory interactions. Like DCM, MDS takes into account regional variations in
HRF while estimating the causal interactions between brain regions. And like DCM, MDS
also explicitly models external and modulatory inputs, allowing us to simultaneously
estimate intrinsic and modulatory causal interactions between brain regions. Unlike DCM,
however, MDS does not require the investigator to test multiple models and choose one with
the highest model evidence. This overcomes an important limitation of DCM - as the
number of brain regions of interest increases, an exponentially large number of models
needs to be examined; as a result, the computational burden in evaluating these models and
identifying the appropriate model can become prohibitively high. MDS overcomes such
problems and as our study illustrates, MDS incorporates the relative merits of both GCA and
DCM while attempting to overcome their limitations.
Both DCM and MDS are state-space modes but DCM uses a deterministic state model,
 )
whereas MDS employs a stochastic model. Modeling latent interactions as a stochastic
process is important for taking into account intrinsic variations in latent signals that are not
induced by experimental stimuli. Another important difference is that MDS uses empirical
basis functions to model variations in HRF whereas DCM uses a biophysical Balloon model
 . Since the Balloon model is a nonlinear model, several approximations
are required to solve it. In contrast, empirical HRF basis functions allow MDS to use a linear
dynamical systems framework. The relative accuracy of these approaches is currently not
One important advantage of MDS is that it does not assume that the fMRI time series is
stationary unlike methods based on vector autoregressive modeling such as GCA. This is
important because the dynamics of the latent signals can be altered significantly by
experimental stimuli, leading to highly non-stationary signals. In GCA, the time series is
tested for stationarity by either examining the autocorrelation of the time series or by
investigating the presence of unit roots. If the time series is found to be nonstationary then
one commonly used approach to remove non-stationarity is to replace the original time
series with a difference of the current and previous time points . A problem with
the use of such a manipulation is it acts as a high-pass filter that can significantly distort the
estimated causal interactions .
Ryali et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 15.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Two methods based on dynamical systems based approach for modeling fMRI data have
been proposed recently . Smith and colleagues used a
switching linear dynamical systems model wherein modulatory inputs were treated as
random variables . In contrast, MDS models them as deterministic
quantities which are known for a given fMRI experiment. Modeling modulatory inputs as
unknown random variables is useful for fMRI experiments in which the occurrence of
modulatory inputs is unknown. However, for most fMRI studies modulatory inputs are
known and modeling them as unknown quantities unnecessarily increases the number of
parameters to be estimated. Also, the switching dynamical systems model makes additional
assumptions in computing the probability distributions of the state variables . Further, Smith and colleagues used an MLE approach to estimate latent signals and
model parameters. As we show in this study, compared to MLE, a VB approach yields more
robust, computationally efficient and accurate model estimation even when the SNR and the
number of time points are low, as is generally the case with fMRI data. Another difference is
that Smith and colleagues combine intrinsic and modulatory matrices i.e., for every j-th
modulatory input, the connection matrix (Aj = A + Cj) is estimated from the data. In MDS,
we estimate intrinsic and modulatory matrices Cj separately which explicitly dissociates
intrinsic and modulatory effects on causal interactions between brain regions. Another
difference lies in testing the statistical significance of the estimated causal connections. In
MLE- MDS, we use a non-parametric approach and in MDS-VB, posterior probabilities of
the model parameters are used for testing the significance of the causal interactions. Finally,
it should be noted that the performance of this method under varying SNRs and sample sizes
is not known since no simulations were performed.
Ge and colleagues used a different state-space approach to estimate causal
interactions in the presence of external stimuli. They used vector autoregressive modeling
for the state equation to model causal interactions among brain regions, whereas the
observation model was nonlinear. They used an extended Kalman filtering approach to
estimate the state variables and model parameters. This method was applied on local field
potential data, so its usefulness for fMRI data is unclear. However, there are several
differences between MDS and this approach. MDS has been developed explicitly for fMRI
data to account for HRF variations in brain regions while simultaneously estimating causal
interactions. In the work of Ge and colleagues, both state variables and unknown model
parameters were treated as state variables and extended Kalman filtering is used to obtain
maximum likelihood estimates of these variables . In MDS, we have taken a
different approach - state variables are separated from model parameters. This allowed us to
use sparsification promoting priors in the MDS-VB approach. Our results on simulated data
suggest that MDS-VB outperforms MDS-MLE especially at low SNRs and smaller number
of temporal observations. Finally, Ge and colleagues used Kalman filtering to estimate state
variables while in MDS we used Kalman smoothing for estimating the latent signals . In Kalman smoothing, both past and future data is used to estimate latent signals
whereas filtering uses only past values to estimate the current values. In general, smoothing
provides better estimates of latent signal than the filtering approach . Finally,
although Ge and colleagues validated their approach on two three-node toy models, the
performance of this method is not known under varying conditions such as different SNRs,
network sizes and number of data samples.
Conclusions
The Bayesian multivariate dynamical system framework we have developed here provides a
robust method for estimating and interpreting causal network interactions in simulated
BOLD-fMRI data. Extensive computer simulations demonstrate that this MDS method is
more accurate and robust than GCA and among the MDS methods developed here MDS-VB
Ryali et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 15.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
exhibits superior performance over MDS-MLE. Critically, MDS estimates both intrinsic and
experimentally induced modulatory interactions in the latent signals, rather than the
observed BOLD-fMRI signals. Unlike DCM, our proposed MDS framework does not
require testing multiple models and may therefore be more useful for analyzing networks
with a large number of nodes and connections. One limitation of this work is that our
simulations were based on datasets created using the same model as the one used to estimate
causal interactions. In this vein, preliminary analysis using simulations with delayed latent
signals at millisecond temporal resolution suggests that MDS can accurately recover
intrinsic and modulatory causal interactions in the presence of confounding delays in HRF.
Future studies will examine the performance of MDS using more realistic simulations in
which causal influences are generated independently of any one particular model, as well as
the application of MDS real experimental fMRI data (Menon et al. In Preparation).
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (HD047520, HD059205, HD057610)
and the National Science Foundation (BCS-0449927).