Machine Learning, 53, 71–109, 2003
c⃝2003 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Manufactured in The Netherlands.
Online Ensemble Learning: An Empirical Study
 
ROBERT GIVAN
 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
Editor: Robert E. Schapire
We study resource-limited online learning, motivated by the problem of conditional-branch outcome
prediction in computer architecture. In particular, we consider (parallel) time and space-efﬁcient ensemble learners
for online settings, empirically demonstrating beneﬁts similar to those shown previously for ofﬂine ensembles.
Our learning algorithms are inspired by the previously published “boosting by ﬁltering” framework as well as
the ofﬂine Arc-x4 boosting-style algorithm. We train ensembles of online decision trees using a novel variant
of the ID4 online decision-tree algorithm as the base learner, and show empirical results for both boosting and
bagging-style online ensemble methods. Our results evaluate these methods on both our branch prediction domain
and online variants of three familiar machine-learning benchmarks. Our data justiﬁes three key claims. First, we
show empirically that our extensions to ID4 signiﬁcantly improve performance for single trees and additionally are
critical to achieving performance gains in tree ensembles. Second, our results indicate signiﬁcant improvements in
predictive accuracy with ensemble size for the boosting-style algorithm. The bagging algorithms we tried showed
poor performance relative to the boosting-style algorithm (but still improve upon individual base learners). Third,
we show that ensembles of small trees are often able to outperform large single trees with the same number of
nodes (and similarly outperform smaller ensembles of larger trees that use the same total number of nodes). This
makes online boosting particularly useful in domains such as branch prediction with tight space restrictions (i.e.,
the available real-estate on a microprocessor chip).
online learning, ensemble learning, boosting, bagging, decision trees, branch prediction
Introduction
Ensemble methods such as boosting and bagging have been shown to provide signiﬁcant
advantages in ofﬂine learning settings—however, little work has been done exploring these
methods in online settings. Here we consider an online setting, motivated by the problem
of predicting conditional branch outcomes in microprocessors. Like many online learning
problems, branch prediction places tight time and space constraints on a learning algorithm
(i.e., the space is limited by the available microprocessor chip real-estate and the time is
limited by the frequency the processor encounters conditional branches, typically every few
nanoseconds). Thus, time and space efﬁciency are crucial factors in the design of our online
ensemble methods. Our application does offer the beneﬁt of cheap natural parallelism (at
the silicon level) to assist in meeting the time constraint.
Ensemble learning algorithms provide methods for invoking a base learning algorithm
multiple times and combining the results into an ensemble hypothesis. Many empirical investigations have shown that ensemble learning methods often lead to signiﬁcant
A. FERN AND R. GIVAN
improvements across a wide range of learning problems . To our knowledge, however, all of these investigations have taken place
in an ofﬂine learning setting, though give an algorithm that
can be adapted to the online setting but do not evaluate their method online (see Section 3.2
for a comparison with our techniques). The main goal of this research is to demonstrate that
performance gains similar to those observed in ofﬂine settings can be obtained in online
learning settings by using time and space efﬁcient online ensemble algorithms. Secondary
goals include designing and evaluating appropriate online base learners for use in ensembles, and measuring the cost/value of ensembles in reducing the space requirement needed
to achieve a given classiﬁcation accuracy.
We consider the simpliﬁed problem of online binary-concept learning with binary
features—however, it is likely that the methods presented here can be extended to nonbinary problems in familiar ways. For this work, we use decision-tree base learners, partly
because our hardware-oriented application requires nanosecond prediction delays. Due to
our resource constraints, we prefer an online decision-tree method that does not store a
large number of training instances, and so as our base learner we use a novel variant of ID4
 ofﬂine
decision-tree algorithm). We present empirical evidence that our extensions to ID4 improve
performance in single trees and are critical to good performance in tree ensembles—our
results support the suggestion that the original ID4 warms up too erratically and slowly for
use in online ensembles.
We note that our time and space constraints also rule out the direct application of ofﬂine
ensemble algorithms by storing the training instances and invoking the ofﬂine algorithm
when each new instance arrives. When a training instance arrives we update our ensemble
immediately and the instance is then discarded.
Freund describes a version of the boost-by-majority (BBM) boosting algorithm
for the “boosting by ﬁltering” ensemble learning framework. In the “boosting by ﬁltering”
framework ensembles are generated online and without storing previous instances, as in our
methods.TheBBMalgorithmimplementsasequentialensemblegenerationapproachwhere
the ensemble members are generated one at a time. In practice, to use a sequential generation
approach such as BBM for online problems we must address at least two challenging issues.
First, we must select some method for the learner to determine when to stop generating one
ensemble member and to begin generating the next. BBM provides a theoretical method in
terms of parameters of the base learner that are generally not known in practice. Second,
we must provide a means for the ensembles to adapt to drifting target concepts, since BBM
itself does not update ensemble members once they are created. In light of these issues we
consider a variation of the ‘boosting by ﬁltering’ approach that generates ensemble members
in parallel—that is when a training instance arrives, more than one (and potentially every)
ensemble member may be updated rather than a single member as is done by sequential
approaches such as BBM. Because these updates occur in parallel in our application, there
is no additional time cost to our parallel approach. In addition to being simpler to specify
(for the reasons above), we also expect parallel-generation approaches to yield learners
that warm up more quickly (in parallel time) because each training instance is potentially
ONLINE ENSEMBLE LEARNING: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY
used to update many ensemble members rather than just one (we discuss empirical results
supporting this expectation in Section 7). Unlike BBM, however, the online boosting-style
algorithm we present has not been proven to be a boosting algorithm in the theoretical sense
(hence the term boosting-style rather than boosting)—the results we give are empirical in
We describe two such “parallel-generation” online ensemble algorithms: one inspired by
the ofﬂine ensemble method of bagging, and one inspired by the ofﬂine boosting-style algorithm Arc-x4. These methods have an efﬁcient parallel hardware implementation where the
time complexities of updating and making predictions with the ensemble grow only logarithmically with the number T of ensemble members. The space complexity of this implementation grows linearly with T and is typically dominated by the space occupied by the ensemble
members. This efﬁcient parallel implementation is extremely important in the branch prediction domain where the implementation platform (VLSI circuits) invites parallelism.
We note that ensemble learning methods generally lend themselves to parallel implementation, and thus are natural for use under tight time constraints. We also note that
online learning domains are naturally likely to present such time constraints. These facts
suggest that ensemble methods may be particularly useful in online settings. In addition,
parallel-generation approaches incur no extra time cost in parallel implementations and so
may also be particularly well-suited to online settings. However, our results also indicate
that online ensembles improve classiﬁcation error over single base learners in sequential
implementations—in this case the ensemble will take much more time than the base learner,
and other time-consuming approaches may be competitive.
Using our ID4-variant as the base learner, we empirically evaluate our online ensemble methods against instances of the branch prediction problem drawn from widely-used
computer-architecture benchmarks, as well as against online variants of several familiar
machine-learning benchmarks. Our results indicate that our boosting-style algorithm online Arc-x4 consistently outperforms our online bagging methods. Online Arc-x4 is also
shown to signiﬁcantly improve the error rate compared to single base learners in most of
our experiments. In addition, we show that ensembles of small trees often outperform large
single trees that use the same total number of tree nodes—similarly, large ensembles of
small trees often outperform smaller ensembles of larger trees that use the same number of
nodes. These results are important to domains with tight space constraints such as branch
prediction. Finally, we give results indicating that our base-learner extensions are critical
to obtaining these effective ensembles.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we brieﬂy describe our
motivating application of branch prediction. In Section 3 we brieﬂy discuss the problem of
online concept learning and then present our novel online boosting-style algorithm, online
Arc-x4. Section 4 discusses the parallel time and space complexity of online Arc-x4. In
Section 5 we give and discuss empirical results for online Arc-x4. In Sections 6 and 7,
we describe our extensions to ID4 (used as the base learner) and give results evaluating
their effect on single tree and ensemble performance. Finally, Appendix describes our
online ensemble algorithms based on bagging and gives empirical results showing poor
performance for online bagging in our domains relative to online Arc-x4 (however, online
bagging still improves upon individual base learners).
A. FERN AND R. GIVAN
Branch prediction
This research is motivated by the problem of dynamic conditional-branch outcome prediction in computer architecture. It is not our primary goal here to beat current state-of-the-art
branch predictors but rather to open a promising new avenue of branch-predictor research,
as well as to explore empirically an online setting for boosting (which is of interest independently of branch prediction).
Problem description.
Critical to the performance of nearly all modern out-of-order processors is their ability to predict the outcomes (taken or not-taken) of conditional branch
instructions—this problem is known as branch prediction. During out-of-order execution
if a branch instruction is encountered whose condition is unresolved (i.e., the condition
depends on instructions that have not yet ﬁnished execution) the prediction of its outcome
guides the processor in speculatively executing additional instructions (down the path the
branch is predicted to take). Finding accurate branch prediction techniques is a central
research goal in modern microprocessor architecture.
Typical programs contain conditional branches about every ﬁfth instruction, and individual branches are encountered hundreds of thousands of times. For each encounter, the branch
predictor predicts the outcome (i.e., taken or not-taken) using a feature vector composed
of a subset of the processor state during prefetch. After the true branch outcome is known
the feature vector and outcome are used by the branch predictor as a training example leading to an updated predictive model. Branch prediction is thus a two-class concept-learning
problem with a binary feature space in an online setting.
Machine learning ideas have previously been applied to the different but related problem
of static branch prediction . Static branch prediction involves predicting
the most likely outcomes of branches before program execution (i.e., at compile time) rather
than predicting the outcome of actual branch instances as they are encountered during program execution which is the goal of dynamic branch prediction. Machine learning/artiﬁcial
intelligence ideas have also been used statically to design dynamic branch prediction structures that are tuned to sets of program traces and more recently tuned
to individual program branches .
Qualitative domain characteristics.
Branch prediction is a bounded time/space problem—
predictions must be made quickly, typically in a few nanoseconds. Additionally, a hardware
implementation is required, so the resource constraints are much tighter and qualitatively
different than those usually encountered in software machine-learning applications. Generally, giving a well-designed predictor more time/space results in a corresponding increase
in prediction accuracy (e.g., allowing deeper trees). Using a larger predictor, however, implies less chip space for other beneﬁcial microprocessor machinery. Thus when applying
machine learning ideas to this problem it is important to carefully consider the time/space
complexity of the approach—exploiting the VLSI parallel implementation platform to meet
these time and space constraints.
Additional domain characteristics of interest from a machine learning perspective include: branch prediction requires an online rather than ofﬂine learning setting—conditional
branches must be predicted as they are encountered; the number of encountered instances
ONLINE ENSEMBLE LEARNING: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY
of a given branch is unknown ahead of time; context switching creates concept drift; branch
prediction provides a fertile source for large automatically-labelled machine-learning problems; and ﬁnally, branch prediction is a domain where signiﬁcant progress could have a
large impact ).
Contribution to branch prediction.
Virtually all proposed branch predictors are tablebased (i.e., they maintaining predictive information for each possible combination of feature
values) causing their sizes to grow exponentially with the number of features considered.
Thus,state-of-the-artpredictorscanonlyuseasmallsubsetoftheavailableprocessorstateas
features for prediction.1 The methods we describe avoid exponential growth—our predictors
(ensembles of depth-bounded decision trees) grow linearly with the number of features
considered. This approach is able to ﬂexibly incorporate large amounts of processor state
into the feature space while remaining within architecturally-realistic space constraints. The
ability of our predictors to incorporate substantial additional processor-state information
should lead to substantial improvements in the prediction accuracy available for a ﬁxed
space usage.2 The most common features used by current branch predictors are global
and local history bits. Global history bits store the outcomes of the most recently resolved
branches. In contrast, local history bits store the most recent previous outcomes of the
branch whose outcome is being predicted. Examples of additional processor state (beyond
local and global history) that are known to contain predictive information include register
bits and branch target address bits; however, current methods for utilizing this information
are table-based, e.g. . Our intended contribution to
branch prediction (and to the design of other architecture-enhancing predictors) is to open
up the possibility of using much larger feature spaces in prediction.
Online ensembles
This research addresses the problem of online concept learning using ensembles. For our
purposes, a concept is a mapping from some domain to either zero or one. In concept
learning problems we are provided with training instances: tuples comprised of a domain
element and the class (zero or one) assigned to that element by the target concept. Based
on the training instances we are asked to ﬁnd a hypothesis concept that accurately models
the target concept. Ofﬂine learning algorithms take as input a set of training instances and
output a hypothesis. In contrast, online learning algorithms take as input a single labelled
training instance as well as a hypothesis and output an updated hypothesis. Thus, given a
sequence of training instances an online algorithm will produce a sequence of hypotheses.
Online learning algorithms are designed to reuse the previous hypothesis in various ways,
allowing them to reduce update times to meet the constraints of online learning problems—
these constraints are typically much tighter than for ofﬂine problems. The advantages of
this hypothesis reuse are even more signiﬁcant in an ensemble learning algorithm, since
ofﬂine ensemble construction can be very expensive.
In recent years ensemble learning algorithms have been the topic of much theoretical and
experimental research. These algorithms provide methods for invoking a learning algorithm
A. FERN AND R. GIVAN
(the base learning algorithm) multiple times and for combining the resulting hypotheses
into an ensemble hypothesis (e.g., via a majority vote). The goal in using an ensemble of
hypotheses is to be superior in some sense to the individual hypothesis generated by the
base algorithm on the training instances. In this work we consider two popular ensemble
methods, boosting and bagging.
To our knowledge, all previous empirical evaluations of ensemble methods have taken
place in ofﬂine learning settings. In this research we investigate online variants of ensemble
learning algorithms and demonstrate online performance gains similar to those seen in
the previous ofﬂine evaluations. We also ensure that our online variants have efﬁcient
implementations that might be applied to online learning problems with signiﬁcant resource
constraints—without this restriction an ofﬂine algorithm can be used directly in the online
setting at substantial resource cost.3
Intheremainderofthissectionwewillﬁrstbrieﬂydescribe(forcompleteness)thepopular
ofﬂine ensemble method, boosting, that inspired our most successful online algorithm. Next,
wedistinguishbetweensequential-generationandparallel-generationensembleapproaches,
and give reasons to focus on parallel generation in this research. We then describe a generic
online ensemble algorithm that allows for parallel generation. We show a boosting-style
instantiationofthisalgorithmthatwehaveimplementedcalledonlineArc-x4.Ourresultsfor
an online bagging instantiation of the generic algorithm were not favorable when compared
to online Arc-x4 (but still improve on individual base learners). Hence, we postpone our
discussion of online bagging until Appendix—noting that in domains where online bagging
is competitive with online Arc-x4, bagging is preferable with respect to complexity.
Ofﬂine ensemble generation via boosting
Boosting is an ensemble method that has received much attention and has been shown in
several studies to outperform another popular ensemble method, bagging, in a number of of-
ﬂine domains4 . We assume here that the base learning algorithms take into account a weight associated with each training instance, and attempts to return a learned hypothesis that minimizes
the weighted classiﬁcation error. Some of the most commonly used boosting algorithms
for ofﬂine problems generate hypotheses sequentially as follows. The ﬁrst hypothesis is the
result of presenting the set of training instances, all with weights of one, to the base learning
algorithm. Now assume the algorithm has already generated t −1 hypotheses. Weights are
then assigned to the training instances such that larger weights are associated with instances
that the previous hypotheses performed poorly on (the “hard” instances). These weighted
instances are then given to the base learning algorithm which outputs the t’th hypothesis.
Boosting algorithms differ mainly in the ways weights are assigned to instances and the
ways hypotheses are combined. The AdaBoost algorithm and
the boost by majority algorithm have been proven to be boosting algorithm
in the theoretical sense.5 Arc-x4 is another ensemble method inspired
by boosting and is the basis for our online boosting-style method. AdaBoost and Arc-x4
have been empirically compared and exhibit similar performance .
ONLINE ENSEMBLE LEARNING: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY
Online approaches
There are several avenues that could be explored when designing an online ensemble algorithm. A naive approach is to maintain a dataset of all observed instances and to invoke an
ofﬂine algorithm to produce an ensemble from scratch when a new instance arrives. This
approach is often impractical both in terms of space and update time for online settings
with resource constraints. To help alleviate the space problem we could limit the size of the
dataset by only storing and utilizing the most recent or most important instances. However,
the resulting update time is still often impractical, particularly for boosting methods—when
the training set used by a boosting algorithm is altered we potentially need to recalculate
weights and invoke the base learning algorithm for each of the T hypotheses from scratch. It
is unclear whether there is a time-efﬁcient online boosting variant that stores the set of previous instances in order to duplicate the ofﬂine algorithm performance. In part because of the
tight resource constraints in our application domain of branch outcome prediction, for this
research we chose to consider only methods that do not store previous instances—other approaches may also be feasible. Below we discuss two possible online ensemble approaches
that do not require previous instances to be stored; we call these the sequential-generation
and parallel-generation approaches—we then argue for and focus on the parallel-generation
We say that an online ensemble algorithm takes a sequential-generation approach if it
generates the ensemble members one at a time, ceasing to update each member once the next
one is started (otherwise, we say the approach is parallel-generation). We say the algorithm
takes a single-update approach if it updates only one ensemble member for each training
instanceencountered(otherwise,wesaymultiple-update).Wenotethatanyalgorithmtaking
a sequential-generation approach will generally also take a single-update approach.6 The
boosting by ﬁltering framework described by Freund can be viewed as taking the
sequential-generation single-update approach—two algorithms for the ﬁltering framework
are the boost-by-majority (BBM) algorithm and MadaBoost . Note that these algorithms are boosting algorithms in the theoretical
sense5 while the parallel-generation boosting-style algorithm we investigate here has not
been shown to possess this property. The online boosting-style algorithm of Fan, Stolfo,
and Zhang also takes a single-update approach—each ensemble member is trained
in sequence on a user-speciﬁed fraction of the data (the amount of training is a parameter
to the algorithm).
We wish to avoid the single-update approach (and thus the sequential approach). One
reason for this is that the ofﬂine methods of boosting and bagging both have the property
that a single training instance can contribute to the training of many ensemble members—
we believe that achieving this property in the online setting is essential to obtaining rapid
convergence to the desired target concept; this is particularly important in the presence of
concept drift. Our empirical results described on page 102 provide evidence that our parallelgeneration multiple-update ensembles converge more quickly than a sequential approach
would. Sequential-generation algorithms also suffer additionally in the presence of concept
drift because at any time most ensemble members are never going to be updated again—this
patently requires adapting such algorithms with some kind of restart mechanism. Sequential
A. FERN AND R. GIVAN
methods also require a difﬁcult-to-design method for determining when to stop updating
an ensemble member in favor of starting on another member.
To address these problems, we considered in this work only algorithms taking the parallelgeneration multiple-update approach. We note that this approach interacts well with our
motivating application in that multiple updates can easily be carried out simultaneously on
a highly parallel implementation platform such as VLSI.
Generic multiple-update algorithm.
Here we formally present a generic online ensemble
algorithm that allows for multiple updates. Two instances of this algorithm are described
(one here and one in Appendix) and will be used in our experiments. An ensemble is a 2-tuple
consisting of a sequence of T hypotheses h1, . . . , hT and a corresponding set of T scalar
voting weights v1, . . . , vT . A hypothesis hi is a mapping from the target concept domain to
zero or one (i.e., hi(x) ∈{0, 1} for each domain element x). Given a domain element x the
prediction returned by an ensemble H = ⟨(h1, . . . , hT ), (v1, . . . , vT )⟩is simply a weighted
vote of the hypotheses, i.e., one if (v1[2h1(x) −1] + · · · + vT [2hT (x) −1]) > 0 and zero
otherwise. A training instance is a tuple ⟨x, c⟩where x is a domain element and c is the
classiﬁcation in {0, 1} assigned to x by the target concept (assuming no noise). We assume
Learn is our base learning algorithm: an online learning algorithm that takes as input a
hypothesis, a training instance, and a weight; the output of Learn is an updated hypothesis.
Figure 1 shows the generic multiple-update algorithm we will use. The algorithm outputs
an updated ensemble, taking as input an ensemble, a training instance, an online learning
algorithm, and two functions Update-Vote() and Weight(). The function Update-Vote() is
used to update the (v1, . . . , vT ) vector of ensemble member voting weights (typically based
on how each member performs on the new instance). The function Weight() is used for each
ensemble member ht to assign a weight wt to the new instance for use in updating ht.
For each hypothesis ht the algorithm performs the following steps. First, in line 2 a
new scalar voting weight vt is computed by the function Update-Vote(). For example, if
Update-Vote() always returns the number one, the ensemble prediction will simply be the
majority vote. Next, in line 3 a scalar instance weight wt is computed by Weight(). For
example, in boosting Weight() would typically be a function of the number of mistakes
made by previous hypotheses on the current instance, whereas in bagging Weight() would
not depend on the ensemble members. Finally, in line 4, ht is updated by Learn() using the
training instance with the computed weight wt. After each hypothesis and voting weight
in the ensemble is updated in this manner (possibly in parallel), the resulting ensemble is
The immediate research goal is to ﬁnd (parallel) time and space efﬁcient functions
Update-Vote() and Weight() that produce ensembles that outperform single hypotheses
in classiﬁcation accuracy. In this paper we consider two very simple memoryless instances
of this algorithm that are inspired by bagging and Arc-x4.
Online Arc-x4
Online Arc-x4 uses the same instance weight function Weight() as that used by the ofﬂine
ensemble algorithm Arc-x4 . The instance weight function is computed
ONLINE ENSEMBLE LEARNING: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY
Generic multiple-update online ensemble learning algorithm. Above is the pseudo-code and graphical
depiction of the online ensemble update procedure. The graphical depiction illustrates the following sequence
of update events: (1) The training instance I is given to the base learners h1, . . . , hT and to the instance weight
calculation unit. (2) The base learners provide their prediction h1(x), . . . , hT (x) of the class of the training instance
to the instance weight calculation unit. (3) The instance weight calculation unit gives each base-learner an instance
weight. (4) Finally, the base learners update their models according to the weight.
in two steps:
Weight (H, I, t) = 1 + m4
|hi(x) −c|
The weight for the t’th hypothesis wt is calculated by ﬁrst counting the number mt of
previous hypotheses that incorrectly classify the new instance. The weight used is then one
more than mt to the fourth power, resulting in a boosting-style weighting that emphasize
instances that many previous hypotheses get wrong. This function was arrived at (partly)
empiricallyinthedesignofofﬂineArc-x4.Neverthelessithasperformedwellinpracticeand
its simplicity (compared to AdaBoost for example where we would need to consider ways
to avoid the ﬂoating-point computations) made it an attractive choice for this application.
For online Arc-x4 the function Update-Vote() computes the new hypothesis voting-weight
simply by counting the number of correct predictions made by the hypothesis on the training
A. FERN AND R. GIVAN
instances seen so far,
Update-Vote(H, I, t) = vt + 1 −|ht(x) −c|,
where vt is the previous voting weight (in this case the previous count of correct predictions)
as shown in ﬁgure 1. Thus, hypotheses that are more accurate will tend to have larger voting
weights. Note that the ofﬂine version of Arc-x4 uses a majority rather than a weighted vote.
We found, however, an empirical advantage to using weighted voting for small ensemble
sizes. For large ensemble sizes the two methods gave nearly identical results.
We now brieﬂy compare our parallel-generation approach to sequential-generation methods in cases where the two variations encounter the same stationary target concept and
stationary distribution of instances. We assume that the online base learner is convergent in
the following sense; for sequences of training instances drawn from a given stationary distribution and target concept the learner produces hypothesis sequences that all converge to
the same hypothesis regardless of the initial hypothesis in the sequence. We also assume that
both methods use the same instance-weighting and vote-weighting functions. We consider
only sequential-generation methods that allow each base learner to converge before moving
on to the next.7 In parallel-generation methods, this corresponds roughly to using a weighting scheme where the instance weights for each hypothesis depend only on the results from
previous hypotheses in the ensemble—we call such weighting schemes “ordered”, and note
that Arc-x4 uses a ordered weighting scheme. Under these assumptions, parallel-generation
methods based on the generic algorithm in ﬁgure 1 using a ordered weighting scheme converge to the same learned hypothesis that sequential methods converge to. This can be
seen by noting that in the parallel method, the ordered weighting scheme implies that the
ﬁrst ensemble member converges independently of what is happening with later members
(thus exactly as quickly as the ﬁrst member in a sequential method); once the ﬁrst member
converges, the second member then converges independently of what is happening to other
members since its weighted distribution depends only on the (now converged) ﬁrst member.
Extending this reasoning by induction, each ensemble member will converge to the same
hypothesis under either sequential or parallel ensemble generation.
Complexity and implementation of online Arc-x4
An efﬁcient parallel implementation is particularly signiﬁcant to our target domain of
conditional-branch outcome prediction where the implementation platform of VLSI invites and requires parallelism (see Section 5.2 for details of our target domain). In this
section we show that the time complexity of a parallel implementation of online Arc-x4 is
better than O(log2 T ) plus the prediction time used by an individual base learner; and that
the space complexity of the same implementation is O(T · log T ) plus the space used by the
T individual base learners. The detailed bounds are slightly tighter, and are derived below.
All the results in this section are estimates in that they ignore specialized VLSI issues such
as the space cost of high fan-out.
We note that our focus here is on a direct, specialized VLSI implementation like that
needed for branch prediction. However, these calculations also shed some light on the
ONLINE ENSEMBLE LEARNING: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY
complexity of a shared-memory multiprocessor ensemble implementation, such as might
be used for other online learning applications. A detailed discussion concerning the VLSI
issues involved in a hardware implementation of online Arc-x4 is beyond the intended
scope of this paper. Our estimates here, however, suggest that Arc-x4 has a space/time
efﬁcient hardware implementation provided that the base learners have a space/time efﬁcient
hardware implementation. Our work targeted to the computer architecture community proposes a parallel hardware design of the decision tree base learner we use in
this paper (the base learner is described in Section 6.1).
The space and time complexity results are based mainly on the fact that the sum of T n-bit
integers can be calculated in O(log T · log(n + log T )) time and O(T · (n + log T )) space,
using a tree of 2-addend additions of at most n+log T bits. First we show that the prediction
and update time complexities in terms of ensemble size T are both O(log T · log log T ).
Next, we show that the space complexity in terms of T for both the prediction and update
mechanisms is O(T · log T ). Below tp is the worst-case time complexity for making a
prediction using any base-learner hypothesis generated by Learn(), tu is the worst-case
time complexity for updating a base-learner hypothesis, and Sh is the worst-case space
complexity of a base-learner hypothesis. The voting weights v1, . . . , vT as seen in ﬁgure 1
are taken to have a precision of n bits (this deﬁnes n, which we treat here as a constant8).
Prediction time.
A prediction can be made by having all of the individual hypotheses
make predictions in parallel and then summing the T voting weights v1 through vT (where
the prediction of hypothesis ht determines the sign associated with vt). The sign of this sum
determines the ensemble prediction. Therefore, the worst case time complexity of returning
an ensemble prediction is the time to get the ensemble member predictions in parallel plus
the time to calculate the sum of the vote weights which is O(tp + log T · log(n + log T )),
which is O(log T · log(n + log T )) if we take tp to be constant.
Update time.
To update the predictor we ﬁrst obtain the predictions of all hypotheses in
parallel and update the voting weights. Next, for each hypothesis the number of mistakes
made by previous hypotheses is stored and the update weights are calculated in parallel
(see Eq. (1)). Finally the hypotheses are updated in parallel by Learn(). The worst-case
time complexity9 of calculating wt in Eq. (1) given the number of previous mistakes mt is
O(log log T ).
We now consider the worst-case time complexity of calculating mt. To calculate mt we
ﬁrst calculate the sum st of all h j(x) for j ranging from 1 to t −1. Given this sum we know
the value of mt is one of two values depending on the class of x; if the class is one then mt
is t −st otherwise mt is just st. The worst case time complexity for calculating st occurs
when t = T and is the time to sum T −1 bits which has complexity O(log T · log log T ).
Notice that we can calculate st and hence the two possible values for mi without knowing
the class of x (this is the reason we introduce st)—this feature of Arc-x4’s weight function
is useful in domains (such as branch prediction) where a prediction is made for a domain
element before its class is known. In such domains we can calculate all the st in parallel
(typically during the prediction voting calculation) and use these values later when the class
is known to generate the instance weights used in updating the hypotheses.
A. FERN AND R. GIVAN
Adding the base-learner prediction and update times, the time to update the voting
weights, the time to calculate st, and the time to calculate wt together, the worst-case
complexity for the update time of online Arc-x4 is given by O(tp + log n + log T · log log
Space complexity.
Since making a prediction amounts to calculating the sum of T n-bit
integers the space complexity of the prediction circuit is O(T · (n + log T )). The space
needed to update all voting weights in parallel is O(T · n). It can also be shown that a
circuit for calculating all of the st values has space complexity O(T · log T ), by combining redundant computations. Also, the space required to compute the two multiplications10
needed to compute wt given mt is O(log2 T ) and since we will perform the T computations
of wt for different t in parallel the total space complexity of the wt computations will be
O(T · (log T )2). The total space required by online Arc-x4 is the sum of the space for the update and prediction circuits as well as the T hypotheses, which is O(T · (Sh + n + log2 T )).
Detailed empirical results for Arc-x4
From here on we refer to our online variant of Arc-x4 as simply “Arc-x4”. In this section
we present empirical results using Arc-x4 to generate decision-tree ensembles for several
online problems, using our online decision-tree base learner (described later in Section 6).
We focus on Arc-x4 because our preliminary results (presented in Appendix) indicate that
our online bagging variants perform poorly in comparison to online Arc-x4. First, we
perform online learning experiments that use ML benchmarks as the data source. Second,
we describe the problem of branch prediction and show results of our experiments in that
domain. Arc-x4 is shown to signiﬁcantly improve prediction accuracy over single trees in
most of our experiments. In addition, we show that boosting produces ensembles of small
trees that are often able to outperform large single trees with the same number of nodes (and
similarly out-perform smaller ensembles of larger trees that use the same total number of
nodes). This is particularly useful in the branch prediction domain where space is a central
Machine learning datasets
One of our goals in this research is to evaluate online ensemble methods—this motivates
our inclusion of results on familiar ML data sets.
5.1.1.Experimentalprocedure.
TheMLbenchmarkdatasets11 westudiedareusuallyused
for ofﬂine learning experiments, but we convert them to an online setting as follows. First, we
randomly divide a dataset into testing and training sets of equal size, twenty different times.
This gives twenty different training/testing set pairs. We repeat the following procedure
for each of these pairs and average the results of the twenty trials. Given a particular
training/testing-set pair, for Nmax iterations an example from the training set is randomly
selected with replacement and used to update the online ensemble. After every S (sampling
interval) updates of the ensemble, the testing and training error rates are calculated; the
ONLINE ENSEMBLE LEARNING: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY
training/testing error is calculated by using the current ensemble to predict the class of
each example in the training/testing set and recording the error rate. Thus, for a particular
training/testing set pair we obtain Nmax/S time sampled measurements of both training and
testing error. After obtaining results from all twenty training/testing set pairs we calculate
the mean and standard deviation of these error measurements. This results in training and
testing plots of an ensembles mean error vs. time and standard deviation of error vs. time.
Most of our plots use only the average testing error at the ﬁnal sampling, in order to compare
across varying ensemble sizes or space allocations.
5.1.2. Description of datasets
Eleven-bit multiplexor (multiplexor).
The eleven-bit multiplexor concept uses eleven binary features. The feature vector bits are divided into three address bits and eight data bits
for a total of 2048 distinct examples. The class assigned to a feature vector is simply the
binary value of the data bit speciﬁed by the address bits. ID3 has been shown to perform
poorly on this concept with respect to induced tree size . Utgoff 
showed that the online methods ID4 and ID5R can learn this concept (again with large
Tic-Tac-Toe (TTT1 and TTT2).
This problem is taken from the Tic-Tac-Toe endgame
database at the UCI ML repository . There are 958 instances each
described by nine three-valued features that indicate the content of each square (x, o,
or blank). The class of an instance is positive if the position is a ‘win for x’ and negative
otherwise. The two versions of this problem we use correspond to different binary encodings
of the features. TTT1 uses two binary features to represent the contents of each square for
a total of 18 features. TTT2 is included as a more difﬁcult version of this problem and uses
eight bits to (ASCII) encode the contents of each square for a total of 72 binary features.
This is a highly disjunctive concept and has been used as a testbed for ofﬂine constructive
induction of decision trees in Matheus and Rendell .
Vowel (vowel).
This problem is taken from the letter recognition database at the UCI ML
repository. There are 19976 instances each labelled by the letter it represents and described
by sixteen four-bit integer features. We use a naive binary feature representation that simply
views each of the four relevant bits from the integers as a feature for a total of 64 features.
We deﬁne the class of an instance to be positive if it is a vowel and negative otherwise.
5.1.3. Results for ML benchmarks.
We vary the number of trees T in an ensemble from
1 to 100, and the maximum allowable depth d of any tree12 from one to ten. By varying d
we change the representational strength of the trees. Figures 2 and 3 show the mean ensemble training and testing errors (respectively) versus T for the four benchmarks (averaged
over different test/training divisions and different random online presentation sequences,
as described above). We show results for T ranging from 1 to 25; the errors do not change
signiﬁcantly as T increases further. We used 100,000 training instances (Nmax = 100,000)
for the vowel dataset and 50,000 instances for the other datasets. The standard deviations are
A. FERN AND R. GIVAN
Final training error vs. Ensemble size for the machine-learning benchmarks. (Note that the x-axis is
not time). Results after ensembles encounter 50,000 training instances for multiplexor, TTT1, and TTT2 and 100,000
for vowel. The ensembles corresponding to a particular curve all have the same depth limit, as indicated on the
graph. The stars indicate T = 1 performance for unbounded depth (i.e., single trees).
not shown, but were small relative to the differences in means. Each ﬁgure has six curves
with each curve corresponding to ensembles that use a particular value of d.
Basic Arc-x4 performance.
In ﬁgure 2 we see that, in all four problems, increasing ensemble size generally reduces training error effectively, and, as expected, ﬁgure 3 shows that
the testing error is generally larger than the corresponding training error, but with the same
trends. This indicates that Arc-x4 is producing ensembles that generalize the four concepts
well. Also, note that larger ensembles can yield improved testing error even when a small
ensemble achieves zero training error—consider the d = 10 curve for the TTT1 problem.
This observation has been made in many empirical studies of ofﬂine boosting methods and
is a counterexample to the Occam’s razor principle. The reason(s) for this phenomenon are
still not fully understood .
It is also interesting to note that the weaker learners (low d values) are generally less
able to exploit ensemble size. For instance, large ensembles of depth one trees perform
ONLINE ENSEMBLE LEARNING: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY
Final testing error vs. Ensemble size for the machine-learning benchmarks. (Note that the x-axis is not
time). Results after ensembles encounter 50,000 training instances for multiplexor, TTT1, and TTT2 and 100,000
for vowel. The ensembles corresponding to a particular curve all have the same depth limit, as indicated on the
graph. The stars indicate T = 1 performance for unbounded depth (i.e., single trees).
very similarly to single trees on the vowel problem. This phenomenon is also observable in
less extreme instances by comparing the slopes of the plots for varying depth bounds—we
ﬁnd a steeper error reduction with ensemble size for deeper trees. This observation indicates that ensemble learning is exploiting different leverage on the problem than increased
depth. However, the ability of learners to exploit ensembles must also eventually fall off
as we consider “stronger” base learners—once the individual learner approaches the Bayes
optimal error it clearly will not beneﬁt from ensembles.
Comparing to ensemble size one.
It is particularly interesting to compare the performances of unbounded-depth single trees (shown by stars on the graphs) with ensembles
of bounded-depth trees. Unbounded-depth single tree and ensembles (of adequately strong
base learners) show similar performance with respect to training error. Ensembles, however, are able to signiﬁcantly outperform single trees with respect to testing error. For all
problems except vowel we see that the testing error for single trees is improved very little
A. FERN AND R. GIVAN
Performance versus time. Testing error vs. Number of instances (time) for two benchmarks. Each curve
corresponds to a single ensemble and shows how its performance changes as more training instances are observed.
when going from a depth bound of 10 to unbounded depth—on the other hand, increasing
the number of depth 10 trees signiﬁcantly improves the testing error. Here the ensemble approach is of crucial value as we have hit an apparent performance limit for single
Warmup behavior.
Figure 4(a) and (b) show how the error rate relates to the number of
instances N used to update the ensembles (our measure of time) for the TTT1 and vowel
problems. We show graphs for d ∈{4, 10} and T ∈{1, 25, 100}. We observe that larger ensembles warm up more slowly than small ensembles—conﬁrming the intuition that ensembles are particularly useful when many training instances are available and we are willing to
wait for a slower warmup. However, we note that the smaller 25-member ensemble achieves
nearly identical warmup performance to the single base learner (T = 1) if we assume a
parallel implementation (so that number of instances encountered is a fair measure of parallel time), but the 25-member ensemble achieves a strikingly lower error after warmup.
These comments rely heavily on the assumption of efﬁcient parallel implementation—the
25-member ensemble is nearly 25 times cheaper to train when implemented in parallel
due to the highly parallel nature of ensembles. These results suggest that a 25-member
ensemble is equal or superior to a single tree for any but the very smallest anticipated
number N of training examples as long as the implementation is parallel. This comparison
is useful in domains (such as branch prediction) where the number of training instances is
The warmup comparison between T = 25 and T = 100 indicates that there is a warmup
price to pay for large ensembles—this price may be worth paying when large numbers
of training instances are expected. It may be possible to exploit the warmup properties
of smaller ensembles along with the increased accuracy of larger ensembles by providing a dynamic mechanism for selecting how many ensemble members to use for each
prediction.
ONLINE ENSEMBLE LEARNING: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY
Branch prediction results
Our empirical work in this section has the immediate goal of exploring the utility of online
ensemblemethodstoimproveperformanceundertimeandspaceconstraintswhencompared
to single-learner methods. With this goal in mind, we limit our current exploration of the
branch prediction problem to the same feature space used by most current state-of-the-art
predictors, i.e., local and global branch history13 (rather than exploit our linear growth in
feature space dimension to consider additional processor state). Future work will explore
the use of additional processor state to exceed the state of the art in branch prediction—
this work will require an expensive empirical comparison to current techniques14 over
large benchmarks containing thousands of different branches (with millions of dynamic
instances) to be considered convincing in the architecture community, and will be targeted
to the architecture rather than machine learning community.
5.2.1. Experimental procedure & description of datasets.
Our branch prediction experiments were carried out by interfacing our tree-ensemble predictor to the trace-driven microprocessor simulator provided by the SimpleScalar 2.0 suite .
We focused our study on eight branches from three different benchmark programs in the
SPEC95 benchmark suite —the branches were selected because previous experiments indicated that single tree learners were performing signiﬁcantly worse than Bayes
optimally on these branches. Table 1 provides information about the benchmark programs
used and the branches selected from these benchmarks. The experiments we present are
“interference-free”, meaning that each predictor is only updated by and used to predict
the outcomes of a single branch. In the “interference-free” setting the highly specialized
“hybrid” predictor from computer architecture is arguably among the
best proposed predictors that restricts itself to using only local and global history bits as
features—this predictor is often used in the branch prediction literature to evaluate new
designs and a variant has been implemented in the Alpha 21264 microprocessor , making it arguably the state-of-the-art implemented branch predictor. It is not
our immediate goal to exceed the performance of the hybrid predictor with our generalpurpose approach—rather, because the hybrid predictor scales exponentially in space with
Information about branches used in our experiments.
Hybrid(10,12)
Ideal-hybrid
Branch name
No. of instances
Benchmark program
go: Plays the game of go.
li: A lisp interpreter.
com: The unix compress program
A. FERN AND R. GIVAN
the number of features considered, we expect that our general-purpose approach will open
new avenues of leverage on the problem in the long term. Many newer branch prediction
architectures have been proposed, but almost all of these aim at extending table-based methods to better deal with branch aliasing15 
and references therein) which is orthogonal to the focus of our current work.
A hybrid branch predictor is composed of a local-history table-based predictor (LHP) and
a global-history table-based predictor (GHP) along with a mechanism for selecting which
predictor to use when queried for a prediction. We denote a hybrid predictor that uses L
local and G global history bits as hybrid(L, G) and measure its error for a particular branch
(optimistically) by taking the minimum of the error rates achieved by an L-bit LHP and a
G-bit GHP measured on that branch. The hybrid(10, 12) percent-error column in Table 1
represents the percent error for a hybrid predictor that uses the same number of localand global-history bits as the Alpha 21264. The percent errors given in the ideal-hybrid
column of Table 1 were arrived at as follows: ﬁrst, for a particular branch we simulated all
hybrid(L, G) predictors where L and G both ranged from 0 to 25 (which was the maximum
size we could simulate due to memory limitations). We then recorded the error rate for each
of these predictors and reported the smallest of these rates as the ideal-hybrid error rate. This
results in an optimistic estimate of how well any particular hybrid predictor would perform
when encountering these branches. The ideal-hybrid results are substantially better than the
hybrid(10, 12) results and give us a better indication of how much predictive information
is carried by the global- and local-history bits.
In the tree ensemble experiments, we assigned each selected branch its own tree ensemble
predictor. We then simulated the benchmark programs to completion, arranging that when a
selected branch was encountered (during prefetch) its ensemble was queried for a prediction
(using the current state to determine the branch features), and then later updated with the
true branch outcome when the branch is resolved.16 We counted the number of errors made
by each ensemble and computed a ﬁnal percent error by dividing by the total number of occurrences of the branch. In all tree ensemble experiments the features used by the predictors
included the most recent 32 global and 32 local history bits for a total of 64 binary features.
5.2.2. Results for online Arc-x4.
We varied ensemble size (T ) and tree depth (d) from 1
to 100 and from one to twelve, respectively.
Basic Arc-x4 performance.
Figure 5(a)–(f) give the percent error versus ensemble size for
six branches, with curves plotted for six different depth bounds (d). Each graph also shows
(with a star) the percent error achieved by a single online tree of unbounded depth and the
error achieved by the ideal-hybrid predictor (with a dotted line). The curves in these graphs
exhibit some of the same trends as the results above for the machine learning benchmarks.
In general as T increases the errors tend to signiﬁcantly decrease with respect to the error
of single trees.
Particularly interesting are branches such as go-A and go-B where there is very little
improvement for single trees when d is increased from 12 to ∞. By increasing the ensemble
size, however, we are able to further decrease the error. As was the case for the vowel and
TTT2 benchmarks, the extra dimension of ensemble size appears to be crucial to improving
the error rate by exploiting additional space when using an online decision tree algorithm.
ONLINE ENSEMBLE LEARNING: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY
Percent error vs. Ensemble size for six hard branches. Each curve corresponds to ensembles of varying
size with the same depth limit. The stars on each graph show the error achieved by a single tree with unbounded
Small ensemble effects.
When compared to the curves from the ML benchmarks the branch
prediction error curves exhibit more erratic behavior particularly for small d and T values.
One conjectured explanation for this erratic behavior is that trees that are close to each other
will see similar weighted input sequences and hence may form similar hypotheses. Some
A. FERN AND R. GIVAN
of these weighted sequences may be particularly hard for the trees and therefore we may
get several trees that are similarly bad. When T is small these trees are more likely to be
able to incorrectly determine the prediction. We note that when unweighted voting is used
(not shown) the erratic behavior for small T becomes worse. As T increases, however, the
performance of unweighted voting and weighted voting are nearly identical.
Large ensemble effects.
We note that in many cases there is a slight increase in error rate as
we approach large ensemble sizes. We attribute this increase to the fact that later ensemble
members generally take a longer time to warm-up than earlier members. For a ﬁxed number
oftraininginstancesitispossiblethatthelatermembersoflargeensemblesdonotadequately
warm-up. Despite this lack of warm-up, our scheme still uses the later members to make
predictions—degrading the error rate for ensembles too large for the training set size. This
hypothesis is based on experience with the ML-dataset experiments which showed the error
increased for the larger ensemble sizes when the number of training instances was small,
but the increase disappeared for a large enough training set (this information can be inferred
from ﬁgure 4). These observations suggest future study of dynamic ensemble size selection.
Comparing to ensemble size one.
The graphs in ﬁgure 5 all exhibit a similar trend with
respect to increasing d. For small d, large ensembles are needed to see much beneﬁt, but
the eventual beneﬁts are larger (than when d is large). However, every curve shows peak
performance at an ensemble size larger than one. The stars on the graphs showing the best
single tree performance indicate that bounded-depth ensembles can be used to outperform
single trees of any depth for every branch tried except li-B.
Moreover, even if there were no such advantage, our examination below of the performance obtained for a ﬁxed space usage indicates that ensembles of smaller trees outperform
single deep trees with the same space requirement.
Achieving same error using less space.
Note that in the branch prediction domain we are
assuming a hardware implementation. For such implementations, it is not easy to dynamically allocate tree nodes17—thus, we must provide space for full bounded-depth decision
trees. Therefore, our predictors necessarily grow exponentially with the tree-depth bound.
This implies that doubling the number of trees in an ensemble is roughly size-equivalent to
increasing the depth bound of the trees in the ensemble by one. Using ensembles allows us
to more effectively use the limited space by trading off depth for more trees.
The graphs in ﬁgure 6(a)–(f) show the percent error versus the logarithm of the ensemble
tree-node count, giving a basis for selecting d and T to optimize accuracy when facing
space constraints. Each curve corresponds to ensembles with a particular depth-bound d.
An ensemble of T base learners of bounded-depth d has T ·(2d+1 −1) non-leaf nodes. Here
we assume the number of nodes is linearly related to the physical size of an ensemble when
implemented in hardware (e.g., on a silicon microchip).
Note that as d increases the ensemble curves shift to the right. Generally for a ﬁxed
number of nodes the best percent error is achieved by an ensemble with T greater than
one. This observation is strongest for the go branches and weakest for the li-A branch. For
example on each graph consider ensembles with approximately 1000 nodes, and determine
which depth-bound d gives the lowest error—the smaller d values correspond to larger
ONLINE ENSEMBLE LEARNING: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY
Percent error vs. Tree nodes allocated for six hard branches. Each curve corresponds to ensembles of
varying size made up of trees with the same depth on every path (our hardware implementation requires static tree
node allocation).
ensembles (to get to 1000 nodes). It is clear that for ﬁve of the six branches, ensembles with
depth four (and thus T = 66) achieve the best percent error when we are constrained to
1000 nodes. The graphs indicate that in many cases when facing size constraints, ensembles
are preferable to single trees—given any space constraint larger than 400 nodes (and often
A. FERN AND R. GIVAN
much less), all of our branches show the best performance for an ensemble size larger than
Now suppose that instead of a size constraint we are given a maximum percent error
constraint. From these graphs we can see that using ensembles often allows us to achieve a
particular percent error using a much smaller number of nodes by using large ensembles of
small trees rather than smaller ensembles of larger trees (in many cases, a single tree cannot
achieve the desired error at any depth). All of these observations suggest that online boosting
may be particularly advantageous in online domains that place tight space constraints on
the predictors.
Poor performance on com benchmark branches.
Two of the eight branches we studied
showed relatively poor performance for Arc-x4 ensembles. Figure 7(a) and (b) show the
error rate versus T plots for the com-A and com-B branches. The error rates for com-A tend
to increase for the smaller values of T and then begin to decrease as T becomes larger.
The error reduction achieved for these large values of T is relatively small compared with
the other six branches. These results are particularly interesting because we know a much
better error rate is possible since the table-driven “hybrid” branch predictor used in computer
architecture today achieves a much better error rate as indicated on the graph. Currently we
do not have an adequate explanation for the poor performance on the com-A branch, however
the poor performance for the unbounded-depth single base learner (shown by the star on
the graph) suggests that this concept is not well captured by the online decision trees used
as base learners here (the same explanation applies as well for com-B). The com-B branch
shows the opposite trend: the error rate exhibits a bowl shaped trend and for large values
of T is actually larger than the error rates of single trees. Again we know a much better
error rate is possible as demonstrated by the ideal-hybrid predictor results. The com-B error
curve suggests that the larger ensembles have not had enough training data to warm up (see
% error vs. Ensemble size for two branches where performance was poor. Each line on a curve
corresponds to ensembles that all use the same depth limit, as labelled.
ONLINE ENSEMBLE LEARNING: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY
ﬁgure 4). Table 1 shows that the number of occurrences of com-B is an order of magnitude
less than the other branches suggesting the ensembles have not observed enough examples
to stabilize. Further training data on the concept would likely improve the larger-ensemble
performance; however, it appears that the ideal-hybrid performance is again out of reach of
this approach.
Comparison to ideal-hybrid branch predictor.
We wish to emphasize that the branches
used in these experiments were selected because of the poor performance of single base
learners in our previous experiments (not shown here), as compared to the “hybrid” branch
predictor. On many branches not shown, single decision-tree base learners can equal or
exceed the performance of the hybrid predictor. Considering branch predictor performance
averaged over entire benchmark programs with millions of different branches (one target
concept for each), the single base-learner is only slightly inferior to the hybrid predictor.
It is our expectation that incorporation of ensemble methods into branch prediction can
lead to better performance than the hybrid predictor. It is not our goal here to demonstrate
this improved performance, but rather to explicate the methods and effects of ensembles in
online settings. Clearly evaluating branch predictors across large benchmarks is extremely
compute-intensive.18
We also note again that the hybrid predictor scales exponentially in space usage with
the number of branch features considered. As a result, practical instances of this predictor
typically use a very small number of features (less than sixteen bits out of thousands of
bits of processor state), and are highly specialized to using those features well. Because our
ensemble/decision-tree approaches avoid exponential scaling in space usage, we hope to
dramatically improve branch prediction performance in future studies by cheaply incorporating a larger portion of processor state in learning and making predictions (our approach
scales linearly in the number of features considered).
Online decision-tree induction
In this section we describe the novel online decision-tree learning algorithm (a variant of
ID4) that we used as the base learner in our ensemble experiments—our extensions to ID4
prove important to single-tree accuracy and more importantly critical to ensemble accuracy.
Empirical results shown in Section 7 suggest that smooth and rapid warmup behavior is
important for the base learners in our ensembles, and that ID4 without our extensions often
lacks smooth rapid warmup.
Most decision-tree algorithms are designed for ofﬂine settings, as in the well-known
ID3 algorithm ; however, there has also been previous research into online
decision tree algorithms, with two key proposed methods being ID5R and
ID4 . ID5R is an online algorithm that is guaranteed to produce
the same tree as ofﬂine ID3 when applied to the same training instances. To guarantee ID3equivalence ID5R must store all of the previous examples, and restructure the tree as new
examples arrive. Empirical work has demonstrated that the ID3-equivalent tree produced
by ID5R often outperforms the ID4-generated trees that avoid storing instances, given a
limited amount of training data . In this sense, ID5R online learners “warm
A. FERN AND R. GIVAN
up” more quickly than ID4 learners. In online domains where it is not practical to store all
of the training instances, some mechanism must be used to select what instances to store
for ID5R, and ID3-equivalence is lost—in such domains it is not clear if the advantages
relative to ID4 persist.
While ID5R avoids the full cost of running the ofﬂine ID3 algorithm as every instance
arrives, the tree restructuring operations that must be supported can be expensive and somewhat complex for use in resourcebounded online settings. In addition, although the recursive
restructuring operation is straightforward to implement in software, our motivating domain
requires a hardware implementation that appears quite difﬁcult for ID5R—the same can be
said for the related and more recent ITI algorithm . For
this reason we chose to use a variant of the simpler online decision tree algorithm ID4, described below. ID4 does not store training instances and does not perform any complicated
tree restructuring. Below we describe ID4 and our extensions to it.
The ID4 online decision-tree induction method
We assume familiarity with the ofﬂine top-down-tree-induction approach of ID3 . A key difference between ID3 and ID4 is that ID4 incrementally maintains an
estimate of the split criterion19 of each feature at each tree node as it observes new training
instances. ID3 on the other hand calculates the split criterion for each feature at each node
once, based on a ﬁxed ofﬂine set of training examples. Of the commonly used split criteria,
accuracy is by far the simplest to compute incrementally (particularly from a hardware
perspective). Because our motivating application requires a hardware implementation, we
use accuracy as the split criterion in this research.
In order to dynamically monitor the usefulness of each candidate split feature at each tree
node and dynamically select the best feature over time, ID4 maintains certain data structures
at each tree node (in addition to child-node pointers). For each node N, these data structures
include the observed split criterion values for each feature i, denoted N.SC[i], the currently
selected split feature index N.SplitFeature (an element of {1, . . . , m} where m is the number
of features), and a leaf indicator N.leaf? which is true if the node is a tree leaf. Given values
for these data structures and a particular unlabeled query, the prediction returned is the
majority class of the leaf reached by starting at the root node and following a path down
the tree determined by the currently selected split features at each node encountered in
combination with the features of the query.
Figure 8 shows pseudocode for a weighted version of the original ID4 online decisiontree update algorithm. A decision tree is updated by invoking this procedure with the root
node of the tree, a training instance I, a weight for the training instance w, and a depth limit
d. Unbounded-depth trees can be induced by setting the depth limit equal to the number of
features. The procedure recurses through the tree, updating the split criterion information
stored at each node and selecting new split features and/or pruning when indicated. The
algorithm proceeds as follows.
• (lines 1–2) First, the split criterion information stored at the root node is updated based on
the new training instance and the weight. The function UpdateSplitCriterion(N, I, w, i)
ONLINE ENSEMBLE LEARNING: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY
Weighted ID4 online decision tree update procedure (without extensions).
incrementally maintains the value N.SC[i] based on instance I and weight w—for accuracy, this amounts to updating a weighted count of the number of correct predictions made
by feature i at node N over time (as well as the total weight of instances encountered at
• (line 3) Next, the function LeafTest determines whether the node should be treated as a leaf
or a decision node. In the original version of ID4 LeafTest
returns true if the feature with the best split criterion passes an χ2-test of independence
and false otherwise—this is the pre-pruning mechanism used by ID3. In Utgoff’s 
version of ID4 there is no pruning and LeafTest is true when all of the instances observed
at the node have the same class and false otherwise. In comparing the original ID4 to our
extended ID4 (for the results shown in Section 7), we used Utgoff’s version of ID4.20 In
bounded-depth settings, a node is also determined to be a leaf if its depth is equal to the
speciﬁed depth limit.
• (line 4) Next, if the root node was determined to be a leaf then the update procedure is
• (line 5) Otherwise, the procedure ﬁnds the feature (newSplit) with the best split criterion
value root.SC[newSplit]. The function indexOfMax() accepts a sequence of split criterion
values and returns the index of the best one.
• (lines 6–8) If the best feature is different from the current split feature then the split
feature is changed and the subtrees are pruned. The function PruneSubtrees(root) deletes
both subtrees (if any) of node root.
• (line 9) Finally, if the node is not a leaf then the update routine is recursively called to
update either the left or right subtree of the root based on the value of the split feature
in the training instance. The function SelectChild(root, I) selects the appropriate child,
creating and initializing that child if it does not already exist.
A critical feature of the ID4 algorithm is its pruning of subtrees whenever a split feature
changes. The reason for this pruning is that the split criterion information maintained in
A. FERN AND R. GIVAN
the subtree nodes is conditioned on the value of the current root split feature. When the
root split feature changes, the subtree split criterion data is no longer conditioned on the
correct feature. The ID4 algorithm prunes the subtrees rather than use the incorrect split
criterion data. In domains where two or more features at a particular node have similar
split criterion values, the split feature is likely to frequently switch between the competing
features—as a result the subtrees will be repeatedly pruned. Generally we expect such split
feature switching to occur most frequently when a node has observed a “small” number of
examples. This is due to the high variance in the split criterion estimates at that point. As
more examples are observed the variance decreases and if there is a unique best feature it
will eventually prevail over the others. But until that point the subtrees of a node may be
pruned at anytime by ID4 and the information from all previous training examples will be
lost. This is one reason ID4 often takes a longer time to “warmup” than ID5R.
Extensions to ID4
Here we describe three extensions to ID4 that improved its performance signiﬁcantly in both
single tree and ensemble experiments (see Section 7). The pseudocode for our extended
ID4 is shown in ﬁgure 9 and described below.
Advanced warmup (AW).
In the ID4 algorithm when a node is a leaf, the node has no
children and hence no data is sent below it during a tree update. This means that after a
node selects a split feature (i.e., becomes a non-leaf) its children must begin learning from
scratch. One way we extend ID4 is to allow for advanced warmup—we allow nodes that
behave as leaves during prediction to have descendents that are continually learning from
examples (even though they are not used for predictions). Thus, when a leaf node becomes
a non-leaf node its subtrees have already had the opportunity to “warmup”.
Extended version of the weighted ID4 online decision tree update procedure.
ONLINE ENSEMBLE LEARNING: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY
To implement advanced warmup we make a couple of changes to ID4. First, leaf nodes
will have split features—simply the feature with the best split criterion value. These split
features are used only during tree updates and not when making predictions. Additionally,
we assume bounded-depth trees, and will always store a full tree of the maximum speciﬁed
depth.21 To make a prediction with the tree a path from the root is followed based on the
split features at each node until a node marked as a leaf is reached—at this point a prediction
is made. To update the tree a training instance is sent down a single path (based on the split
feature at each node) from the root to a node at the maximum tree depth. The pseudocode in
ﬁgure 9 reﬂects this change in the absence of the conditional statement in line 4 (compare
ﬁgure 8), so that the extended ID4 is called recursively until the maximum depth is reached.
For each node along the path the split criterion data is updated (line 2), the leaf bit indicator
is set as appropriate (line 3), and the split feature is selected (line 5). Note that when the
selected split feature at a node changes, the subtrees of the node are pruned—the function
SelectChild will automatically create those subtrees again as needed.
Post-pruning by subtree monitoring (PP).
Recall that the decision to make a node a
leaf in the original ID4 is determined by a χ2-test on a potential split feature. This form
of pruning is known as pre-pruning since it makes a pruning decision before subtrees
are constructed. When using advanced warmup, however, it is possible to monitor the
performance of subtrees and to use that information to decide whether to prune or not. In
the decision tree literature this is known as post-pruning. To implement post-pruning, we
maintain at each node an estimate of the split criterion value that would be obtained making
predictions with the subtrees. For notation uniformity, we introduce the notion of a subtree
monitoring “feature”—this is an additional instance “feature” (with index m + 1) given by
the prediction of the subtrees when selected according to the current split feature. The split
criterion value of this feature is then denoted by root.SC[m + 1], and is set in line 2 by
treating the prediction returned by the selected subtree as feature m + 1.
Unlike the other instance features, the value of the subtree monitoring “feature” is dependent on the tree node (and the tree itself)—hence the scare quotes on “feature”. Speciﬁcally
the value of a node’s subtree monitoring feature is found by selecting the appropriate subtree
of the node based on the current split feature value (even nodes marked as leaves have split
features) and then querying that subtree for a prediction—i.e., the subtree monitoring feature
is set equal to the prediction of the ﬁrst leaf node encountered in the selected subtree. The
function UpdateSplitCriterion must compute the subtree monitoring feature when called
with index m + 1. The function LeafTest2(node, d) implements post-pruning by subtree
monitoring—this function returns true if and only if the subtree-monitored criterion value
node.SC[m + 1] is worse than the criterion value obtained by treating the node as a leaf
that uses the majority class to make a prediction,22 otherwise it returns false and the node
is a decision node. This pruning mechanism is considerably less expensive to implement
than the χ2-test when accuracy is used as the criterion. Post-pruning by subtree monitoring
is similar in spirit to the virtual pruning mechanism used in the ITI incremental decision
tree induction algorithm . In ITI, previous training instances are stored and used to compute a pruning heuristic based on minimum description
length—when a node is made a leaf its subtrees are not destroyed and hence it is referred
A. FERN AND R. GIVAN
to as a virtual leaf, subsequent pruning decisions may take these virtually pruned subtrees
into account.
Feature-switch suppression by subtree monitoring (FS).
Our third extension attempts to
reduce the detrimental effect that subtree pruning has in the original ID4 algorithm. Recall
that ID4 prunes the subtrees of a node whenever the current split feature at the node changes.
It is possible that the pruned subtrees are performing well and that the leaf node resulting
from pruning will have much lower accuracy—nevertheless these subtrees are discarded
because the current split feature is slightly worse than the newly selected feature (using the
splitcriterion).Ifanodehasseveralfeatureswithsimilarsplitcriterionstatistics,thispruning
can occur repeatedly, preventing the use of deeper and more accurate subtrees. We address
this problem by refusing to change the split feature of a node unless the candidate new
split feature i is better than the subtree-monitoring feature, comparing split criterion values
(i.e., comparing root.SC[i] and root.SC[m + 1]). In other words, we refuse to adopt a new
split feature if the predictions given by the current subtrees are preferable to the predictions
of the candidate feature as a leaf—this extension suppresses some feature switching that
would otherwise occur. This extension to ID4 is shown in the more restrictive conditional
test in line 5 of ﬁgure 9 (compare ﬁgure 8). With the stronger condition the split feature
is changed and the subtrees are pruned only when the new split feature has a higher split
criterion value than that of the subtree-monitoring feature.23
Empirical results evaluating our ID4 extensions
Here we show empirical results comparing the performance of different ID4-based base
learners when training online ensembles using Arc-x4—these results show a signiﬁcant improvement in accuracy for all ensemble sizes (including single trees) when ID4 is modiﬁed
with our suggested extensions, and indicate that our extensions are particularly important
for ensemble performance. We include results that suggest that Arcx4-ensemble performance critically relies on smooth and rapid warmup behavior in the base learners. The ID4
variants we consider include different combinations of the extensions described above in
Section 6. The experimental protocols used here, as well as many details of the experimental
benchmarks and methods, are all the same as those in Section 5.
In the following we will refer to the ID4 algorithm described by Utgoff as simply
ID4 by replacing the forward pruning χ2-test with a test for class purity). The algorithm
is described in Section 6.1, and accuracy is used as the split criterion. We will abbreviate
the three ID4 extensions by: AW for advanced warmup, PP for post-pruning by subtree
monitoring,andFSforfeature-switchsuppressionbysubtreemonitoring.Inourexperiments
we will distinguish between different combinations of these extensions by showing the
abbreviations for the included extensions (e.g., the version of ID4 that includes all three
extensions as given by the pseudocode in Section 6.2, ﬁgure 9 will be referred to as ID4(AW,
PP, FS)). The experimental results we show are for pure ID4, ID4(AW, PP), ID4(AW,
FS), and ID4(AW, PP, FS). We found that the performance of ID4 and ID4(AW) were not
ONLINE ENSEMBLE LEARNING: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY
signiﬁcantly different and likewise for ID4(FS) and ID4(AW, FS); also note that no ID4(PP)
experiments were run since the PP extension requires AW.
Figure 10(a)–(i) show the percent error versus ensemble size (T ) curves for nine of
our benchmarks. The go-D benchmark results are not included but are similar to the go-C
results. Each graph has four curves that correspond to ensembles trained with the online
Arc-x4 algorithm using ID4 as the base learner with four different combinations of the
extensions as labelled on the graph. A depth limit of twelve was used for all of these
Single-tree performance.
The leftmost point on each curve shows that the single-tree
performance with our extensions is moderately but signiﬁcantly better than the unextended
algorithm, and indicates that the feature-switch suppression (FS) extension is particularly
Figure 10.
Final testing percent error vs. ensemble size for Arc-x4 using different ID4-variants as base learners.
Each graph is labelled by the particular benchmark problem generating the curves. Each curve corresponds to
ensembles ranging in size from 1 to 50 trained using Arc-x4 and the indicated ID4-variant. Abbreviations (AW,
PP, and FS) are deﬁned in the text.
A. FERN AND R. GIVAN
important in single tree learners. In all of the single-tree experiments ID4 is outperformed
by ID4(AW, PP, FS)—typically the extensions reduce the single tree percent-error by a
ﬁfth. Also, in most cases the single tree performance of ID4(AW, FS) is very near to
that of ID4(AW, PP, FS) and is always better than ID4(AW, PP). This supports our claim
that feature-switch suppression (FS) is crucial to improving the single-tree performance—
much more so than the post-pruning (PP) extension. Apparently discarding subtrees due
to changing split features (the issue addressed by the FS extension) signiﬁcantly degrades
single-tree performance.
Performance in online Arc-x4 ensembles.
When considering ensembles of ID4 base learners, the curves in ﬁgure 10 show a substantial beneﬁt for the combination of all three extensions, revealing that the post-pruning PP extension yields beneﬁts in ensembles that are
not seen in single base learners. Compare the ID4 and ID4(AW, PP, FS) curves—in many
cases when ID4 is used as the base learning algorithm very little beneﬁt is observed by
increasing the ensemble size and in some cases the performance degrades with ensemble
size even for small sizes. In contrast, ID4(AW, PP, FS) nearly always yields substantial
improvements in accuracy with ensemble size. Also observe that in most cases for small
ensembles feature-switch suppression (FS) is more important than post-pruning (PP), but as
the ensemble size is increased ID4(AW, PP) usually outperforms ID4(AW, FS). Not only is
the fully extended ID4 usually the best curve shown, we note that often a single ID4(AW, FS,
PP) tree outperforms substantial ensembles of the other variants. In other cases (e.g. TTT1,
TTT2), the extensions are of relatively little value to single trees, but prove critical to achieving low percent error with ensembles—often these beneﬁts are seen only with post-pruning
Why do the extensions help?
We hypothesize that one way the PP and FS extensions
improve ensemble performance is that they combine to produce trees that warmup more
quickly and more smoothly. Warmup performance is particularly important in ensembles
because later ensemble members already pay a warmup-rate penalty because they do not
see a stable weighted distribution of training instances until the earlier members converge.
We note that online settings often naturally include concept drift, since a dynamic process is
typically generating the training data—warmup is also naturally important in online settings,
as queries are typically interleaved with training data so that poor warmup performance
directly translates to poor performance on those interleaved queries.
Clearly we expect that if individual ensemble members warmup faster, then the ensemble as a whole will also warmup faster (particularly for ordered-weighting schemes
such as Arc-x4). The smoothness of ensemble member warmup is also likely to impact
the ensemble performance. Note that when subtrees are discarded by ID4 the tree performance may abruptly jump. Such jumps in accuracy directly translate to “jumps” in the
weighted distribution of examples seen by subsequent ensemble members (whose instance
weights depend on the performance of previous members), and hence may prevent or delay convergence of these subsequent members. Our extensions are speciﬁcally designed to
reduce the frequency of such subtree pruning. Next, we provide evidence to support these
ONLINE ENSEMBLE LEARNING: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY
Figure 11.
Comparing base learners—% test error for individual ensemble members versus time. Graphs are
labelled at the top with benchmark and the position in the ensemble of the member being measured.The curves
show the testing percent error for the indicated ensemble tree trained using Arc-x4 with the indicated ID4-variant
as the base learner versus the number of training instances. Abbreviations (AW, PP, and FS) are deﬁned in the
text. The graphs for multiplexor (not shown) resemble those for TTT1. Note: our interest here is in the qualitative
behavior—to best show this we have varied the axis scales across the graphs to optimally display the qualitative
behavior (each row uses a common x-axis scale, however).
To provide such evidence, we show in ﬁgure 11 the unweighted error rate of selected
individual ensemble members over time. Note that we are not concerned here with the
absolute error of these trees (a tree may have a large absolute error even though the
tree contributes well to the ensemble) but rather with the rates and qualitative smoothness of their convergence to stable hypotheses—a ﬂuctuating absolute error rate suggests
failure to converge either due to a ﬂuctuating local concept or to a poorly converging
base learner, thus the absolute error rate gives some indication of ensemble member
convergence.
The results in ﬁgure 11 show, ﬁrst, that ID4 without all of our extensions gives a percent error that often varies sharply as instances are encountered. More signiﬁcantly, the
A. FERN AND R. GIVAN
results show a strong correlation between erratic (high variance) error rate and poor rate of
convergence (relative to other variants). In other words, on different benchmarks, different
base learner variants show this erratic error rate and poor convergence (generally together).
All variants show slower convergence in later ensemble members—in erratic variants this
results in error rates that do not appear to converge, or converge so slowly that the error at the
end of the experiment is similar to that at the beginning. The variant with our extensions is
generally much smoother than the other variants and never much more erratic, leading to the
expectation that it will perform better in ensembles than the other variants. In particular, we
note that for TTT1, the variants including FS both perform well in ensembles (see ﬁgure 9)
and give individual members that perform smoothly and warmup quickly—in contrast, the
variants without FS perform poorly in ensembles and give individual members that perform
erratically and converge poorly, particularly as position in the ensemble increases. Similar
trends appear for the other two benchmarks, except that in those cases both the PP and
FS extensions appear necessary for smooth warmup and consequent convergence in later
ensemble members. The vowel benchmark is the least clear, and further study will be needed
to fully understand the trends manifested for vowel—nevertheless, the extensions appear to
increase the smoothness of the error rate curve and the rate of convergence for ensemble
members in this benchmark too. The plots (not shown) for multiplexor strongly resemble
those for TTT1.
From the above observations we see there is a correlation between the qualitative warmup
characteristics of the individual ensemble members and the overall ensemble performance,
and that our extensions appear to provide the desired qualitative characteristics (smooth,
rapid convergence). It is likely that the inclusion of the feature-switch suppression (FS)
extension improves smoothness over time by reducing feature switching and hence subtree
pruning. We also suspect that the inclusion of the post-pruning by subtree monitoring (PP)
extension improves the effectiveness of the FS extension in suppressing feature switching
as follows. Recall that the FS extension monitors the performance of the subtrees at a node
and only changes the split feature if the accuracy of some other feature is better than that of
making predictions with the subtrees. When the PP extension is not included it is likely that
during early stages of learning the subtree performance will look bad (since the subtrees
are being used before they are fully warmed up) resulting in a feature switch in spite of
the FS extension. The PP extension can correct this problem by only using the portions
of the subtrees that have warmed up enough to give a predictive advantage—dynamically
extending these portions as the subtrees warm up. It is unclear why in many cases only the
FS extension is needed for single trees (see the discussion of ﬁgure 10), while the PP and
FS extensions are both crucial to improving ensemble performance—we hypothesize that
the beneﬁts of PP are emphasized in the presence of drifting distributions over instances.
Because we are generating our ensembles in parallel, later ensemble members see a drifting
weighted instance distribution as the earlier members converge, and so can be said to be
facing concept drift even when the domain itself has none.
Evidence favoring parallel-generation multiple-update ensemble creation.
Our central
purpose for showing the results in this section is to demonstrate the advantages of using our
three extensions to the original ID4 online decision-tree algorithm. However, the results in
ONLINE ENSEMBLE LEARNING: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY
ﬁgure 11 also provide evidence to support our expectation that parallel-generation multipleupdate ensembles warm up with fewer training examples than sequential-generation ensembles. There are many ways to design sequential generation approaches, so the approach we
discuss here could be in some sense a “straw man”; however, it is perhaps the most obvious
method. We consider a sequential method that trains each tree until the error reduction
with new training instances is negligible—the graphs in ﬁgure 11 then allow us to estimate how many training instances would be required to train the ﬁrst ensemble member (in
three different benchmarks). For example, in ﬁgure 11(a) we might conclude that a simple sequential-generation approach would require at least 5000 examples to train the ﬁrst
ensemble member to convergence. If we assume later ensemble members take this same
number of examples (each) to train, we can estimate that 100,000 examples will be required
to train 20 ensemble members to convergence during sequential generation. In contrast,
the parallel-generation approach shown in ﬁgure 11(c) achieves convergence in ensemble
member 20 after about 40,000 examples.
Future work
Parallel versus sequential generation.
Above we distinguished between parallelgeneration and sequential-generation ensemble approaches—we suggested that by taking a parallel approach it may be possible to improve ensemble warmup times, which is a
practical concern in many online problems. In this work, however, we evaluated only the
parallel-generation approach, and thus did not attempt to compare the approaches empirically. A related issue we would like to investigate in the future is the use of parallel update
methods designed to take into account the fact that the ensemble members are continually
learning—in parallel-generation methods the early ensemble members are still changing
while the later members are being generated. The methods explored here all use ordered
weighting schemes (where the instance weights used for each ensemble member depend
only on the previous ensemble members). We would like also to study unordered weighting
schemes for parallel update (sequential update methods cannot use such weighting schemes)
and to compare the asymptotic and warmup properties to ordered weighting schemes.
Dynamic ensemble size selection.
Recall that our results show that the ideal ensemble
size varies during warmup (see ﬁgure 4). This fact suggests that we investigate methods
for dynamically selecting the best ensemble size to use when making a prediction—such
methods are likely to be particularly beneﬁcial during warmup and/or in the presence of
concept drift. This approach could provide some of the robustness of sequential generation
during warmup while retaining the (possibly) more rapid warmup of parallel generation
(much like our “advanced warmup” extension to ID4 in that some ensemble members
might be learning without being used for prediction, during warmup).
Varying tree-depth bound across the ensemble.
In this work we used the same depth bound
for every tree in an ensemble. Is there a better way of distributing the space used by an
ensemble? Methods for distributing the depth dynamically may allow better utilization of
A. FERN AND R. GIVAN
available memory. To explore this issue, it is possible to collect data on the depths at which
predictions are actually being made—this may reveal that parts of the ensemble are simply
not using the full depth available (note that the space for the full depth is in use due to our
advanced-warmup extension to ID4).
Base learners.
Our results showed that the extensions to ID4 are crucial to ensemble
performance for most of the problems considered here. This suggests that we try to gain
a better understanding of what base-learner properties interact well with our online ensemble methods. In addition, it will be useful to consider online base-learning algorithms
other than ID4—for instance, in our branch prediction domain we could consider base
learners resembling state-of-the-art traditional-style branch predictors such as the “hybrid”
predictor described in Fern and Givan . An additional base-learner issue that must
be explored is the extension to features that are not binary or even ﬁnite domain, such
as numerical features (e.g. exploring incremental methods for selecting numeric threshold
Other online domains.
We would like to ﬁnd other naturally occurring online learning
domains. Some possibilities are: problems like branch prediction in which a system (perhaps
anetwork?acar?)canimproveitsperformanceviaprediction,datacompression(e.g.,online
ensembles can be used to give probability estimates that are fed into an arithmetic coder), and
problems where training data are distributed across a network where the network bandwidth
limits the ability to consider all the data at once.
Conclusions
In this work we empirically investigated two online ensemble learning algorithms. The
algorithms take bagging and boosting-style ensemble approaches and do not require the
storage of online training instances. The algorithms have efﬁcient parallel hardware implementations which are crucial to solving online problems with tight time and space constraints such as our target problem of conditional branch outcome prediction. The online
boosting-style algorithm (online Arc-x4) is based on previous online boosting research in
the “boosting by ﬁltering” framework and on the ofﬂine boosting-style algorithm Arc-x4.
In this work we generated decision-tree ensembles using these new algorithms with an
online decision-tree base learning algorithm that extends ID4. Our extensions to ID4 led
to signiﬁcant performance gains for both single trees and ensemble learners in most of
our experiments. Empirical results were given for instances of the conditional branch outcome prediction problem from computer architecture and online variants of several familiar
machine-learning benchmarks. The results indicate that online Arc-x4 signiﬁcantly outperforms our online bagging method in almost all of the experiments. In addition, the ensembles
produced by online Arc-x4 are shown to achieve signiﬁcantly higher accuracies than single
trees in most of our experiments. Finally, it was shown that ensembles of small trees were
often able to outperform single large trees that use the same number of total nodes. Similarly
large ensembles of small trees were often able to outperform small ensembles of large trees
ONLINE ENSEMBLE LEARNING: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY
that use the same number of total nodes. This observation suggests that ensembles may be
particularly useful in domains such as branch prediction that have tight space constraints.
We hope this research motivates future theoretical and empirical investigations into online
ensembles.
Appendix: Results for online bagging
In this work we also considered two online ensemble algorithms inspired by bagging—
but our empirical results showed these methods to be inferior to online Arc-x4 in our
domains, although online bagging still showed improvement over individual base learners.
In this appendix we brieﬂy describe bagging and our two online variants as well as show
empirical results comparing them to Arc-x4. In application domains where online bagging
is competitive with online Arc-x4 one might choose to implement online bagging since it
is somewhat less complicated.
Bootstrap aggregrating (abbreviated “bagging”) is an ensemble learning algorithm introduced by Breiman . In an ofﬂine setting bagging ﬁrst generates T bootstrap datasets where each set is created by randomly drawing with replacement N instances
from the size N training set. Then the base learner is used to produce a hypothesis for each
dataset giving us an ensemble with T members. The ensemble prediction is the majority
vote of the members.
Online bagging.
The bagging ensemble method has a natural parallel implementation
since it does not require any interaction among the T hypotheses. This was the reason we
ﬁrst investigated bagging for creating online ensembles. In this work we considered two
online bagging variants—both variants simply ensure that each of the T hypotheses are
the result of applying the base learner Learn() to different sequences of weighted training
instances.
Our ﬁrst bagging variant is called BagB (“B” stands for “Bernoulli” because the training
instance weights are determined by a coin ﬂip). BagB follows the generic algorithm in
ﬁgure 1 with the instance weight function given by
Weight(H, I, t) = ﬂip(Pu),
0 < Pu < 1
where ﬂip(Pu) returns one with probability Pu and zero with probability 1−Pu. The update
probability Pu is a user speciﬁed parameter. The parameter Pu dictates a trade-off between
the diversity of the training sequences used to update different hypotheses and the fraction
of the training data ignored by each hypothesis.
Our second online bagging variant is called BagP (“P” because the training instance
weightshaveaPoissondistribution).TheBagPmethodisdesignedtoselectinstanceweights
from approximately the same distribution as the weights produced by ofﬂine bagging24 for
large datasets. Given a training data set of size N, ofﬂine bagging selects any instance
exactly w times with a probability given by the binomial distribution. For moderately large
A. FERN AND R. GIVAN
Figure 12.
Bagging versus Arc-x4 (note that the x-axis is not time). Percent error versus the ensemble size T
for three problems (as indicated above each graph). Three curves per graph show the performance of BagB for
Pu = 0.1, 0.7, 0.9, one curve shows the performance of BagP, and one curve shows the performance of Arc-x4.
The trees in all of the ensembles have a depth bound of twelve. Graph (a) strongly resembles the same plot for our
other branch prediction problems as well as the ML benchmarks TT2 and vowel. For the multiplexor benchmark
bagging was able to reduce the testing error to zero percent as was the case for Arc-x4.
values of N the binomial distribution is closely approximated by the Poisson distribution
with a parameter of one. For this reason, the BagP algorithm draws weights from the Poisson
distribution, taking Weight(H, I, t) to be w with probability e−1
w! for each w ∈ℵBoth BagB
and BagP used the voting weight update function of online Arc-x4 (i.e., accuracy).25
Empirical results.
Our BagB, BagP, and Arc-x4 methods were used to train size T ensembles of online decision trees bounded to depth twelve. Figure 12(a)–(c) compare the
performance of bagging and Arc-x4 on three online learning problems—in each ﬁgure we
plot percent error versus ensemble size for each method. The experimental protocols used
in each benchmark are the same as those described for evaluating Arc-x4 in Section 5,
except that the plots for branch prediction are now averaged over ten runs due to the random
choices made in the bagging algorithm—results for the other branch prediction problems
and the ML benchmarks TTT2 and vowel exhibit the same trends as ﬁgure 12(a), and results for the multiplexor ML benchmark resemble those for Arc-x4 depth ten in ﬁgure 3(a)
(except that BagB(Pu = 0.1) performed poorly as expected, no better than an accuracy of
Neither BagP nor BagB seems to dominate the other. We show in ﬁgure 12(b) the most
signiﬁcant improvement over Arc-x4 achieved by bagging in any of our bagging experiments. In the problems not shown (except for multiplexor) the bagging methods led to
relatively little improvement in accuracy (compared to online Arc-x4) as the ensemble size
grew (ﬁgure 12(a) is a typical example). Generally the bagging curves ﬂatten out as T
increases much sooner than the Arc-x4 curves do, indicating that bagging is not as successfully exploiting ensemble size to reduce error. Overall, Arc-x4 signiﬁcantly outperforms
bagging for small ensembles (usually) and large ensembles (all experiments except multiplexor where bagging and Arc-x4 tie at zero error). We note however that online bagging
is still generating signiﬁcant error reductions compared to single base learners for some of
the domains.
ONLINE ENSEMBLE LEARNING: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a National Science Foundation Graduate Fellowship and NSF
Award No. 9977981-IIS. We would like to thank the referees for helping to improve this
1. One approach to easing the exponential growth problem is to use a ﬁxed hash function that combines the
feature vector bits into a smaller number of hashing bits used to access the prediction table (e.g., XOR’ing
bit sets together). Such methods lose information but reduce the exponent of the space complexity. To avoid
exponential dependence on the number of features the number of hashing bits must be logarithmic in the
number of features—therefore exponentially many different branch instances are mapped to the same hash
location. It seems unlikely that a single ﬁxed hash function can be found giving logarithmic compression that
avoids loss in accuracy for most branches (each branch represents a distinct prediction problem but encounters
the same hash function) relative to the accuracy attained without compression. Current methods do not achieve
logarithmic compression, rather they reduce the exponent by a linear factor and are still exponential in the
number of features.
2. After the original publication of this work others have considered substantially different online perceptronbased branch predictors that also grow linearly in the number of features .
3. An ofﬂine algorithm can be used in an online setting by simply storing the training examples as they arrive
and invoking the ofﬂine algorithm on the stored example set whenever a new example arrives. This naive
method can have a substantial cost in terms of space and update time.
4. The advantages of boosting have been shown to degrade as noise levels increase and boosting may actually
hurt performance in some of these domains .
5. Technically a boosting algorithm is one that ‘transforms’ a weak learning algorithm into a strong learning
algorithm .
6. The reader is advised that we use the terms “parallel generation” and “parallel implementation” for very
different meanings herein (likewise for “sequential . . .”). “Parallel generation” refers to a method for training
ensembles which can be implemented either serially or in parallel. “Parallel implementation” refers to an
implementation technique in which more than one computation is carried out simultaneously.
7. Of course practical sequential methods need a way of moving on to the next hypothesis should the current
hypothesis take a long time or even fail to converge. Similar practical adaptations can be added to a parallelgeneration method, preserving our claim in practice.
8. We note that n must be bounded in a practical hardware implementation. A common way of dealing with
counter saturation is to divide all the counters by 2 whenever one of the counters saturate—this operation
maintains the ordering among the counters approximately.
9. The computation requires two multiplications. The time complexity of multiplying two n-bit numbers is
O(log n) . Since the maximum number of bits needed to represent mt is
log T the time complexity to perform the multiplications is O(log log T ).
10. The space complexity of multiplying two n-bit numbers is O(n2) .
11. These four benchmarks were selected to offer the relatively large quantities of labelled data needed for online
learning as well as a natural encoding as binary feature space two-class learning problems. We have not run
these algorithms on any other machine learning benchmarks.
12. The depth of a tree-node is the number of arcs on the path from the tree root to the node. The depth of a tree
is the depth of its deepest node.
13. Recall that global history bits store the outcomes of recently resolved program branches and local history bits
store the outcomes of the most recent occurrences of the branch being predicted.
14. Since simulations are carried out on serial machines the cost of running large simulations is proportional to
the ensemble size and will take months on current high-performance multiprocessors.
15. Branch aliasing is when a predictor is used to predict the outcomes and learn from branch instances from two
different branch instructions.
A. FERN AND R. GIVAN
16. In an out-of-order processor an instruction is referred to as resolved (committed) when the processor state has
been updated with the result of its execution. Otherwise the instruction is unresolved.
17. Note that a software implementation need only allocate space for nodes that are actually encountered during
learning. This technique would be very difﬁcult to implement in hardware. A similar space-equivalence study
could be conducted for the software implementation, but we have not done so here.
18. Since simulations are carried out on serial machines the cost of running these simulations is proportional to
the ensemble size and will take months on current high-performance multiprocessors.
19. The split criterion of a feature at a tree node assigns a numerical value to the feature based on some estimate
of the desirability of splitting based on that feature at that tree node—e.g. information gain, gini index, or
prediction accuracy.
20. Preliminary experiments did indicate that the χ2-test pruning mechanism performed similarly to the pruning
at class purity in Utgoff’s version; however, a full comparative evaluation of χ2 pruning was beyond our means
because it requires careful study of the ideal conﬁdence parameter setting as well as storing a larger amount of
data at each tree node and additional ﬂoating point calculations (this data storage and calculation is repeated
millions of times over in our experiments—essentially once per feature per treenode per ensemble-member
per parameter setting per experiment).
21. Actually, we only create a given node when there is some training instance that will need to update that
node—this has allowed us to conduct experiments up to a depth bounds of 64. However, this approach is
difﬁcult to implement in silicon for our branch prediction application.
22. This requires tracking the criterion value of the majority class prediction at each node. We omit these straightforward details for clarity.
23. There may be cost to adopting the FS extension in that it is possible to select a feature that does not optimize
the split criterion before the split criteria statistics being collected have converged, and then refuse to later
switch to a locally better feature because the subtrees have developed enough to add enough accuracy that
the locally optimal feature cannot beat them. We expect that this variant of ID4 is signiﬁcantly less likely to
converge to the tree produced by ID3 on the same data in the inﬁnite limit. Our empirical data indicate that
the advantages of FS outweigh this possible disadvantage in our domains.
24. The weight distribution in the ofﬂine setting is a distribution over the number of times a training instance is
included in a bootstrap dataset.
25. We have also implemented online bagging using straight majority vote and the empirical results are not
substantially different.