Jurnal Iqra’ : Kajian Ilmu Pendidikan 5(1): 58-70
Teachers’ Elementary School in Online Learning of COVID-19
Pandemic Conditions
Irfan Fauzi1*, Iman Hermawan Sastra Khusuma2
1 Universitas Pendidikan Indonesia, Indonesia
2 Universitas Negeri Jakarta, Indonesia
Corresponding Author: Irfan Fauzi, *
ARTICLE INFO
Article history:
May 02, 2020
May 07, 2020
June 06, 2020
The article aimed to explain in detail the perspectives of elementary
school teachers about online learning in a COVID-19 pandemic condition.
This study used a quantitative approach. The subjects in this study were
45 teachers in Banten and West Java. The results of this study indicated
that teachers understand the context of online learning, but in
implementation there are various problems found, including 1)
availability of facilities, 2) network and internet usage, 3) planning,
implementation, and evaluation of learning, and 4) collaboration with
parents. Online learning help teachers in the COVID-19 pandemic period,
but felt to be ineffective, even 80% of teachers feel dissatisfied thorough
online learning. This research was expected to be an evaluation material
for various parties including education policy makers in conducting
online learning, besides this research can also facilitate other researchers
to develop research on online learning, especially in elementary schools.
Keywords: Online Learning, COVID-19 Pandemic, COVID-19
How to cite
Fauzi, I., & Khusuma, I. . Teachers’ Elementary School in Online
Learning of COVID-19 Pandemic Condition. Jurnal Iqra’ : Kajian Ilmu Pendidikan,
5(1). 58-70. 
Journal Homepage
 
This is an open access article under the CC BY SA license
 
Published by
Institut Agama Islam Ma’arif NU (IAIMNU) Metro Lampung
INTRODUCTION
The shifting of live continues change quickly. It can be analysed from the
industrial revolution 4.0 which is marked by advances in information
technology such as the internet, big data, and artificial intelligence, even new
terms emanating from Japan, namely the industrial revolution 5.0 or society era
5.0 that combine a very important element in the 21st century, namely humans
and technology or it can be referred to as a concept of a human-centered and
technology-based society . The development of
information technology in the 21st century has caused everyone not to be
separated from technology . In
these conditions, education is required to respond positively and more
adaptively to changes that occur . As a result it can answer the
challenges of the 21st century that are very complex. A study conducted by
Janssen & van der Voort explained that one of the strategies that must be
carried out by every government in dealing with the disruptive era in the 21st
century is to provide education and training that provides convenience to
E-ISSN: 2548-7892 & P-ISSN: 2527-4449
Volume 5, Number 1, June 2020
Teachers’ Elementary School on Online Learning of COVID-19 Pandemic Conditions
increase competence, adaptation and provide more ability to do things, and also
educate them to become IT experts..
The use of technology in education is often discussed in various events.
Selwyn was disagrees that this is often exaggerated, despite all that the
use of information technology has a positive or negative impact on its users
 . When
looking at a survey conducted by the Indonesian Internet Network Providers
Association (APJII) in 2016 APJII explained that 132.7 million
Indonesians were connected to the internet, and at the age of children and
adolescents (10-24 years) internet users in Indonesia totaled 24.4 million of the
total 132.7 million people, this shows that the use of information technology by
children and adolescents in Indonesia are very high. Thus, this potential should
be utilized by education by involving information technology in aspects of
learning activities. Information technology can be used in improving the quality
of learning as well as making information technology as a medium in
delivering learning material, as a means of distributing teaching materials by
utilizing the internet network, and as a life skills education .
Candra reported that the use of technology in Indonesia is still
rarely carried out in learning activities, fear of the adverse effects caused by
technology becomes the main thing teachers reject the use of technology in
children. However, everything changed when the COVID-19 pandemic
occurred, the corona virus which initially occurred in Wuhan, China in
December 2019, has spread to various countries in the world so that this results
in abnormal life activities, all activities both work and study carried out at home
and this also applies in Indonesia. So the learning system which was originally
directly face to face has changed to distance learning that utilizes information
technology or it is called online learning.
The term online learning model was originally used to describe learning
systems that utilize computer-based internet technology . Initially a lot of research on online learning was used at the level of
secondary education and higher education , but recently there has been a lot of research on online learning
conducted in elementary schools, for instance using zoom, Google classroom
 . From various studies that have been
conducted on online learning many conclude that it is effective and can be
applied in education, it is evident from various studies & Wei & Chou, , even according to Delen & Liew
 that the development of online learning will greatly assist students in
considering ways to use self-regulation strategies that are personal, behavioral
and environmental. Online learning is a way to be effective to be applied in
education, because most of its implementations are at the level of secondary
education and higher education who already understand the use of technology.
In addition, the implementation of online learning that is carried out is only a
trial in a short period of time. It is clear that online learning will greatly affect its
effectiveness. Conditions in emergencies (COVID-19 pandemic) as now result in
Teachers’ Elementary School on Online Learning of COVID-19 Pandemic Conditions
all having to do online learning, including in elementary schools. The current
study was very different because the age of elementary school children is at 6-
12 years that not all children can use and access information technology. Then,
online learning is not done in a very short time, but this has been done several
months ago since the existence of COVID-19 pandemic and will continue to be
done until the pandemic period is over. From issues above, it is necessary to
investigate in detail how the implementation of online learning in elementary
schools during the COVID-19 pandemic. Hence, it can help in providing
solutions to online learning that will be carried out in elementary school in the
According to Rusman the key to the success of an education is that
one is held by the teacher, because the teacher directly touches students in
educating. Then, the teacher must also ensure that the learning process runs
well because their responsibility and professionalism as a teacher. However, in
such conditions becomes very dilemmatic in conducting teaching and learning
activities. As a result, it requires the teacher to implement online learning
activities, be the reason it is important for educational researchers to examine in
detail about how the implementation of online learning is carried out including
by the teacher. This article explained in detail how the teacher's perspective on
online learning is carried out in elementary schools in the COVID-19 pandemic.
The aspects examined in this study are related to the aspects of knowledge,
benefits and effectiveness, constraints, and level of satisfaction in implementing
online learning conducted by the teacher. It was expected to be able to give an
idea of the objective conditions experienced by elementary school teachers in
applying online learning. Hence, it becomes an evaluation material for various
parties including education policy makers in conducting online learning
especially in elementary schools.
This study used a quantitative approach. Creswell explained that
the quantitative approach is a measurement of data carried out in quantitative
and objective statistics through scientific calculations derived from a sample of
people or residents who are asked to answer questions about the survey to
determine the frequency and percentage of their responses. The method used is
the survey method. According to Yuliansyah the survey is one method
used to gather information about a group of people or phenomena that occur in
the social environment. Survey research is very suitable to be used by
researchers in uncovering perspectives related to online learning conducted by
teachers in a COVID-19 pandemic. The subjects in this study were 45
elementary school teachers from various regions in Banten and West Java. The
instrument used in this study was a survey. As for the survey in the form of
open and closed questionnaires, the questionnaire was made in a google form
so that it was easily accessed by the teacher.
Data analysis in this study was conducted as follows, 1) open
questionnaire analyzed based on inductive content analysis, according to
Teachers’ Elementary School on Online Learning of COVID-19 Pandemic Conditions
 that this content analysis produce response categories based on
the coding process of free answers that have been submitted to respondents,
this content analysis includes (a) open coding, at this stage the researcher
provides notes of the various responses that arise from the respondent, (b)
make categorization, researchers do grouping by making categorization based
on the themes that emerge, and (c) make an abstraction, at this stage the
researcher makes a general description based on the categories that have been
obtained. After the content analysis process is done, the response is calculated
using descriptive statistics (percentage), then the results are analyzed in detail,
and 2) closed questionnaire is calculated using descriptive statistics
(percentage) and the results are analyzed in detail.
RESULT AND DISCUSSION
The survey was given to elementary school teachers in the Banten and
West Java regions, and 45 elementary school teachers were obtained who
completed the survey with details of 17 male teachers and 28 female teachers.
The length of teaching for each teacher varies, from the earliest one, which is 1
year to the longest, 24 years.
Table 1. Long Teaching Teacher
Ages (years)
Percentage
In a simple context, teachers understand the essence of an online learning
that is learning done by utilizing internet facilities with the help of various
technologies or learning that is done online. However, it is not enough to
illustrate how online learning is happening in the field, especially in elementary
The COVID-19 pandemic condition requires all teachers to change
learning patterns. There are no choices regarding the learning system used and
the only learning system that can be applied is to use online learning. It is the
reason that online learning is very helpful in conveying learning to students in
an emergency. It is evident from the results of a survey conducted that 82.6% of
teachers admitted that this helped them greatly, as can be seen from the picture
Teachers’ Elementary School on Online Learning of COVID-19 Pandemic Conditions
Figure 1. Teachers’ Responses to the Impacts or Benefits of Online Learning
The same statement was said by Sanjaya that in an emergency
situation, online learning will help in implementing learning, because
technology can be a bridge for teaching staff in the transfer of knowledge to
students. However, It is not directly proportional to the effectiveness of online
learning, 73.9% of teachers consider that online learning is not very effective to
be applied in the learning process. The ineffectiveness is caused by several
things, including the constraints of the teacher in implementing online learning,
while the constraints are presented in the table below.
Table 2. Teachers’ Obstacles in Implementing Online Learning
Percentage
Poor facilities availability
Internet Connection
Expensive internet quota fees
Difficulty giving an objective assessment
Making teaching materials takes a lot of
Difficulty measuring student
understanding
Difficulty teaching in low class because
many children still cannot read
Parents who are less cooperative
Difficulty explaining the material in
Giving awards is not very memorable
Difficulties in conditioning students
Based on the table above shows that the problems found in online learning
that have been done can be grouped into 4 namely 1) availability of facilities, 2)
network and internet usage, 3) planning, implementation, and evaluation of
Teachers’ Elementary School on Online Learning of COVID-19 Pandemic Conditions
learning, 4) collaboration with parents. Online learning must be supported by
adequate facilities. The fact that 25% of teachers think that not all students have
the communication tools to do online learning. It is the main obstacle found in
implementing online learning in elementary schools, besides that adequate
internet network access also very influential on the implementation of online
learning. Husamah reported if the network is inadequate, it will affect
the learning that is carried out. So that it will be ineffective, 22% of teachers say
that when learning takes place the network is very weak, and influences the
ongoing learning process. It can be seen from the pictures in below.
Figure 2. Teachers’ Response Regarding Access in Online Learning
From the picture above 51.1% of teachers mentioned that online learning
is difficult to access by students. It is the reason that network factors are crucial
in online learning activities. In addition, teachers who normally plan,
implement, and evaluate learning with a system that is directly face to face are
forced to apply it in the online system. It is the obstacle for teachers in
implementing online learning. Teachers are also very difficult to collaborate
with parents, at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic period for 1-2 weeks.
The role of parents is very visible and involved in implementing online
learning, but after that many parents who ask the teacher to only send
assignments to be done by children, because often clashes with other parents'
tasks/work.
It is also necessary to analyze the content of the teaching materials created
and the applications used in carrying out online learning. The content of the
teaching materials made by the teacher is explained in the figure below.
Teachers’ Elementary School on Online Learning of COVID-19 Pandemic Conditions
Figure 3. Teachers’ Response Related to the Use of Teaching Material Content
The results showed that 66.7% of teachers modified teaching materials
from various sources to give to students. The remaining 26.7% of teachers made
their own teaching materials, 4.4% of teachers directly took from the internet
and 2.2% answered from the others . Because the context is online learning. The
content of teaching materials created does not use objects in a concrete way, but
uses a variety of teaching materials using e-learning platforms. So that they are
easily accessed by students to study at home.
Table 3. The form of Teaching Materials Made by the Teacher
Teaching Materials Percentage
Audio visual
simulations
From the table above shows that 44.4% of teachers often create media in
the form of audio visual, it is caused because according to him audio visual is a
very interesting form of content to be taught to students in this COVID-19
pandemic. this is also in accordance with the opinion of Foutsitzi that the
use of audio visual media can provide change and experience in the learning
process because the images in audio visual media are not static images but
animated images so that audio visual media has more graphic advantages and
is seen as a media that is attractive. In addition, in implementing online
learning, there are several main applications that are often used by teachers.
The use of the application can be seen from the table below.
Teachers’ Elementary School on Online Learning of COVID-19 Pandemic Conditions
Table 4. The Applications Used by Teachers in Online Learning
Applications
Percentage
Google Form
Google Clasroom
Rumah Belajar
Ruang Guru
Data above shows that the application used by the teacher is very diverse,
is in order to build interactive learning so that the learning process can be
meaningful. But the use of Whatsapp media is seen as inappropriate media,
because whatsapp is made only as a communication medium and is not set to
distance learning class or online learning, thus, in whatsapp application there
are many shortcomings to be able to apply online learning, and makes learning
less meaningful.
Overall online learning continues to be carried out during the COVID-19
pandemic period, not much can be done to create a meaningful learning system
amidst conditions like this, and a system that can only be used so that students
continue to learn is to use online learning, while the satisfaction response the
teacher is presented in the image below.
Figure 4. Response of Teacher Satisfaction to Online Learning
Teachers’ Elementary School on Online Learning of COVID-19 Pandemic Conditions
Online leaning
perception
Online course
satisfaction
Online leaning
Computer/internet
self-efficacy (CIS)
Self-directed learning
Learner control (LC)
Motivation for
learning (MF)
Online communication
self-efficacy (OCS)
Online leaning
performance
Online discussion
Midterm exam/final exam
score (exam score)
Group project score
Data above shows that 80% of teachers feel dissatisfied with online
learning, and 20% of teachers feel satisfied. This dissatisfaction is not without
reason, because of the many problems or limitations found in conducting online
The results of this study indicate that the COVID-19 pandemic has had a
major impact and change in the educational process. According to Purwanto et
al., that the impact was also greatly felt by students, parents and
teachers. In this case, unpreparedness to do online learning is the reason for
learning to be ineffective, it is based because online learning is seen as
something that is difficult to implement, need some components to be able to
do it like facilities, internet access, readiness to learn (teacher, students and
material) and parent collaboration, it is also explained by Wicaksono &
Rachmadyanti that the ineffectiveness of online learning can occur
because 1) the media needed is very large and varied, 2) the unequal facilities
owned by students, and 3) Lack of teacher, student and parent knowledge on
the use of technology.
Figure 5. Online Learning Perception
The picture above shows that online learning readiness would greatly
affect student performance and satisfaction. So it can be said that the teacher's
role in building online learning readiness is the key to learning success. This
research is an evaluation material for various parties in implementing online
learning, especially in elementary schools. While the obstacles found that must
be anticipated. In addition, this research can be used as material in developing
Teachers’ Elementary School on Online Learning of COVID-19 Pandemic Conditions
online learning. Thus, it can be applied in education, especially in elementary
The results of this study clearly show different from previous studies, if in
previous studies explained how online learning is very effective to be
implemented, but under different conditions, the implementation of online
learning that has been done in elementary schools during emergencies (COVID-
19 pandemic) become ineffective because of various obstacles experienced
when doing online learning. These obstacles must be anticipated and find
solutions. So that online learning in elementary schools during emergencies
becomes effective and can still be applied. The readiness of teachers, students
and parents is the key to the success of online learning during this emergency;
teachers and parents must be able to work well together. Because the majority
of students, especially in elementary schools, can not be used and accessed
technology. So, the role of parents is needed to be able to guide their children in
using technology, during online learning. In addition, the use of interactive
teaching materials and learning applications is very important for the learning
process. In the learning activities, there are some things that must be considered
by the teacher, including learning readiness, learning performance, and
learning satisfaction . In detail, these three things are
explained in the figure below.
CONCLUSIONS
Online learning was as a system that can help teachers to carry out the
learning process in he COVID-19 pandemic, but this is not directly proportional
to its effectiveness. 73.9% of teachers consider that online learning is not
effective. Because many problems are found, for instance 1) availability of
facilities, 2) network and internet usage, 3) planning, implementation, and
evaluation of learning, and 4) collaboration with parents. In addition in making
teaching materials, most teachers modify material from various sources and the
content that is often created is audio visual. As many as 37% of teachers use the
whatsapp application as a medium for online learning. During these online
learning activities 80% of the teachers were dissatisfied. This research is
expected to make a real contribution in Indonesian education, especially in
evaluating online learning that has been done. In addition, this research is
expected to facilitate various parties to study and develop online learning so
that it can be applied in emergencies as it is today.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author would like thank to the various parties who have helped in
completing this research, especially to teachers in Banten and West Java who
have taken the time to fill out the questionnaire that researchers made.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION STATEMENTS
This research is a collaborative study based on anxiety towards online
learning during the COVID-19 pandemic. IF and IHSK jointly design research,
Teachers’ Elementary School on Online Learning of COVID-19 Pandemic Conditions
collect data, and conduct analysis of the data obtained. Furthermore, this
research can be completed properly.