Contextual Modulation in Primary Visual Cortex
Karl Zipser,1 Victor A. F. Lamme,2 and Peter H. Schiller1
1The Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts
02139, and 2Graduate School of Neurosciences, Department of Medical Physics, AMC, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, and The Netherlands Ophthalmic Research Institute, 1100 AC Amsterdam, The
Netherlands
We studied extra-receptive ﬁeld contextual modulation in area
V1 of awake, behaving macaque monkeys. Contextual modulation was studied using texture displays in which texture covering the receptive ﬁeld (RF) was the same in all trials, but the
perceptual context of this texture could vary depending on the
conﬁguration of extra-RF texture elements. We found robust
contextual modulation when disparity, color, luminance, and
orientation cues variously deﬁned a textured ﬁgure centered on
the RF of V1 neurons. We found contextual modulation to have
a spatial extent of ;8 to 10° diameter parafoveally. Contextual
modulation correlated with perceptual experience of both binocularly rivalrous texture displays and of displays with a simple
example of surface occlusion. We found contextual modulation
in V1 to have a characteristic latency of 80–100 msec after
stimulus onset, potentially allowing feedback from extrastriate
areas to underlie to this effect.
Key words: ﬁgure-ground segregation; surface perception;
primary visual cortex; awake macaque monkey; single-unit activity; texture; visual perception; context modulation; nonclassical receptive ﬁeld
Neurophysiological research in primary visual cortex (area V1)
has focused primarily on elucidating the characteristics of the
receptive ﬁelds (RFs) of the neurons in this brain area. The RF of
a visual neuron is the restricted region of the visual ﬁeld in which
an appropriate stimulus, such as an oriented bar or a patch of
texture, may drive the cell to evoke action-potential responses.
Yet the activity of V1 neurons evoked in this manner may be
modulated by stimuli placed entirely outside the RF . We call this general phenomenon extra-RF
contextual modulation. Presumably extra-RF contextual modulation allows neurons to signal some form of comparison between
the patterns inside and outside the RF . But
the essential characteristics of extra-RF modulation, and the type
of comparison that it may support, remain largely a mystery.
Although not well characterized, the modulatory inﬂuence of
stimuli placed outside the RF of the V1 neuron constitutes a
powerful force in primary visual cortex. A dramatic demonstration
of this comes from Lamme , who recorded activity of V1
neurons in awake, behaving monkeys during viewing of textured
displays. Lamme used textured stimuli conﬁgured such that the
RF of a V1 neuron under study received an identical pattern of
stimulation from trial to trial. Despite this identical RF stimulation, V1 cells almost always responded more vigorously in trials in
which the orientation, or motion, of the texture pattern on the RF
belonged to a circumscribed “ﬁgure” (such as the square in Fig.
1a), as compared with trials in which texture was of a homogeneous type across the entire display (Fig. 1b).
Lamme’s experiments suggest that extra-RF contextual modulation constitutes as robust a feature of V1 neural function as the
long-studied RF properties of cells in this area, such as orientation
tuning . Yet before we may integrate
contextual modulation into a comprehensive model of the function of area V1, we must have a better understanding of the basic
characteristics of this phenomenon and of the goals that it is
designed to accomplish. A key question is whether contextual
modulation in area V1 reﬂects a sophisticated neural correlate of
perception or, rather, whether it merely reﬂects low-level image
processing only distantly related to visual awareness. If extra-RF
contextual modulation in area V1 closely relates to perception,
then this modulation should correlate with perceptual experience
under a wide range of stimulus conditions. On the other hand, to
the extent that contextual modulation is a low-level phenomenon,
it should be relatively easy to dissociate from perceptual experience. We report here results of neurophysiological experiments
that we conducted on area V1 of awake, behaving monkeys to
attempt to distinguish between these possible functions of contextual modulation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Experiments were performed on four male Macaca mulatta, each weighing 8–10 kg. Before surgery, monkeys were trained to jump into their
primate chairs and were habituated to the laboratory environment. Subsequently, each animal underwent surgical procedures for implantation of
a stainless steel cranial post for ﬁxing the position of the head. In the
same operation, we implanted the given animal with a scleral coil for
monitoring eye position. All surgical procedures were performed using
sterile techniques, with monkeys under deep pentobarbital anesthesia; all
experimental procedures were performed in accordance with National
Institutes of Health guidelines.
After recovery from surgery, monkeys were water-deprived and
brought to the laboratory for training. We used a PDP-11/37 computer to
Received Oct. 16, 1995; revised Aug. 28, 1996; accepted Sept. 3, 1996.
This research was supported by a grant from the National Eye Institute to P.H.S.,
a grant from The Netherlands Organization for Scientiﬁc Research to V.A.F.L., and
an Ofﬁce of Naval Research graduate fellowship and a McDonnell-Pew Center for
Cognitive Neuroscience at MIT postdoctoral fellowship to K.Z. We thank D. Zipser
and numerous other colleagues for valuable discussion. We thank C. J. Doane-
Palafox and T. S. Lee for help with some of these experiments, W. M. Slocum for
assistance with computer programming, and C. Conner and J. Mendola for reading
this manuscript.
Correspondence should be addressed to Dr. Karl Zipser, The Netherlands Ophthalmic Research Institute, P.O. Box 12141, 1100 AC Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Copyright q 1996 Society for Neuroscience
0270-6474/96/167376-14$05.00/0
The Journal of Neuroscience, November 15, 1996, 16(22):7376–7389
regulate and monitor the monkey’s behavioral tasks, to collect behavioral
and neurophysiological data, and to signal an IBM PC for control of
visual stimulation. With its head restrained in the primate chair facing a
computer graphics monitor, each monkey was trained to ﬁxate a small
luminous spot on the screen and then to make a saccadic eye movement
to a luminous target stimulus that appeared in a random position when
the ﬁxation spot was extinguished. Analog x and y eye position signals,
measured using the scleral coil , were collected at 200
Hz and digitized with a precision of 0.018 of visual angle. For maintaining
ﬁxation and then making the correct saccades, the monkey was rewarded
automatically with a drop of apple juice. During training and recording,
animals drank a total of 300–500 ml of juice (during 1500 or more trials)
per session. Additional rewards of peanuts and fresh fruit were provided
once the animals returned to their home cages at the end of the day.
Stimuli were presented on an NEC multisync XL color video display
unit, driven by a Number Nine Corporation graphics board with 640 3
480 pixel resolution and a frame rate of 60 Hz. The screen was 32 cm wide
and 24 cm high and was viewed at either a 57 or 63 cm distance. In
experiments that did not require stereoscopic stimuli, various texture
displays covered the entire screen. In experiments that required stereoscopic stimuli, stereo images were displayed side by side on the screen. In
this case, all stimuli in each image appeared within a 9 3 98 thin white
frame, which remained visible at all times to facilitate fusion of the
stimuli. In these experiments, monkeys viewed the screen through a prism
haptoscope that allowed the horizontally displaced stereo images to be
fused at a comfortable vergence angle.
For human observers (with a separate prism haptoscope for human
use), our disparity-deﬁned texture stimuli produced a rich percept of
surfaces in depth. Monkey binocular vision is very similar to that of
human beings , and we
presume that with appropriate presentation, the display should have the
same richness for monkeys as it does for human observers. A characteristic of binocular image fusion is that sensitivity to binocular disparity is
best at the fusion depth (i.e., on the horoptor) and declines approximately
symmetrically for near and far disparities . In psychophysical
tests of our monkeys’ ability to detect targets deﬁned through binocular
disparity, we found exactly this pattern. Monkeys could effortlessly detect
a 0.098 horizontal binocular disparity offset of a textured target from a
similarly textured background near the horoptor but had decreasing
sensitivity to this same offset if target and background appeared at
increasingly near or far disparities. This pattern of behavior would not be
expected if monkeys failed to fuse the stereo images.
Monkeys initially trained to detect salient orientation-deﬁned texture
targets mastered the easier levels of the horizontal disparity texturetarget-detection task with no special training. In contrast, when targets
were made visible by vertical disparity, monkeys did not transfer easily to
this task. Monkeys also could not detect the target deﬁned by binocular
disparity when presented with a monocular image. From the combination
of these results, it is reasonable to deduce that the monkey’s perception
of disparity-deﬁned textures in our experiments is similar to that of
human observers.
Neurophysiological recording techniques. Neural recordings in awake
monkeys were made through a surgically implanted cylindrical stainless
steel electrode chamber (16 mm diameter) overlaying the operculum of
area 17. Recording began at least 3 d after surgical implantation of the
recording well. Microelectrodes were inserted via the oil-ﬁlled, hydraulically closed electrode chamber, through the intact dura, and into occipital cortex. Activity from single cells or clusters of cells was recorded
extracellularly with glass-coated platinum–iridium microelectrodes of
0.5–2.0 MV impedance (measured at 1000 Hz). The RFs of V1 neurons
thus studied were in the lower contralateral visual ﬁeld with eccentricities
between 2 and 68. To help ensure that our microelectrodes remained in
area V1, the RF positions of neurons recorded in each experiment were
represented on a graph (maintained for each monkey) that allowed us to
observe the orderly retinotopic mapping of the visual ﬁeld onto striate
cortex. Neural recording was principally conducted in superﬁcial cortical
layers 2 and 3, judging by microelectrode depth and the characteristic
features of deeper input layer 4 (e.g., high spontaneous activity, brisk on
and off responses, high degree of monocularity).
Within 3 weeks of insertion of the electrode chamber, the dura mater
hardened and became covered with an epithelium up to 6 mm thick. Such
tissue barriers caused difﬁculty with recording, because microelectrodes
tended to break before entering the cortex and, more importantly, because moving the microelectrode through these tissues could cause displacement of the brain. We found the latter effect to be highly deleterious
to the expression of extra-RF contextual modulation, perhaps because
the physical displacement generally depressed neural activity or perhaps
because it speciﬁcally compressed feedback ﬁbers in layer 1. We took
three measures to counter this problem. First, the supra-dural epithelium
was thinned through gentle aspiration (performed with the monkey under
ketamine anesthesia). Second, we interspersed week-long breaks from
recording between each week of experimentation, because we found that
this kept the dura from hardening to such an extent that recording
became difﬁcult. Third, to avoid brain displacement, we moved the
microelectrode through the supra-dural epithelium and the dura with the
following pattern: a quick advance of about 10 mm, followed by a brief
pause, followed by another advance, etc. In this way, we avoided building
mechanical pressure on the brain. The average rate at which we lowered
the microelectrodes was ;1 cm per hour.
Plotting of RFs. To plot the extent of the RF of a V1 neuron under
study, we moved computer graphics-generated bars of variable size and
orientation over the neighborhood of the RF as the monkey ﬁxated. We
initially drew RF boundaries by hand with felt-tip markers on an auxiliary
stimulus monitor while we simultaneously watched the moving bar stimulus and monitored the evoked neural activity with an audio ampliﬁer.
After this, we tested our estimate of RF dimensions by ﬂashing bars and
textures inside and outside this area. We conﬁrmed the reliability of our
RF plotting techniques by ﬂashing texture stimuli in a region surrounding
the measured RF while leaving the RF unstimulated. Whereas neurons
responded vigorously to direct RF stimulation, stimulation with surrounding texture evoked at best an extremely weak response (see Results,
Fig. 2d). Our RF plotting techniques thus were adequate to allow us to
isolate extra-RF stimulation from direct RF stimulation.
Texture experiments. We studied each V1 neuron with static, ﬂashed
texture displays that contained the same stimulus pattern in the region
over the RF from trial to trial. Texture over the RF consisted of black
bars on a gray background; the gray between texture bars was the same as
Example texture displays. a, Illustration of an orientation-deﬁned ﬁgure. b, Illustration of a homogeneous texture display. Texture
in the center of the orientation-deﬁned ﬁgure is
identical to texture at the corresponding position
in the homogeneous texture display. Typically,
the luminance of the gray background was 24
cd/m2 and that of the black bars was 6 cd/m2,
although we saw no evidence that a particular
contrast was critical. Furthermore, our results do
not seem to depend on the exact texture distribution. Nonetheless, we generally used texture
bars 0.58 in length with the pattern illustrated in
this ﬁgure. The gray between texture bars was
the same as the gray that covered the screen in
the intertrial period.
Zipser et al. • Contextual Modulation in V1
J. Neurosci., November 15, 1996, 16(22):7376–7389 7377
the gray that covered the screen in the intertrial period. In some trials, the
display appeared as a homogeneously textured ﬁeld (e.g., Fig. 1b). In
other randomly interleaved trials, the display appeared to have a textured
ﬁgure (e.g., Fig. 1a) centered on and completely covering the RF. Although various visual cues were used in our experiments to segment the
texture ﬁgures from their backgrounds, texture within the ﬁgure was
identical to that in the corresponding region of the homogeneous texture
display. Details concerning particular texture displays are presented in
the accompanying ﬁgure legends.
We used two types of homogeneous texture display in our experiments.
The ﬁrst type was a true homogeneously texture display, as illustrated in
Figure 1b. We also used a pseudo-homogeneous texture display constructed, for example, by pairing a textured ﬁgure with a background
texture of the same orientation. The line terminations formed by the
ﬁgure contour in the pseudo-homogeneous display served as a control
against the possibility that similar line terminations in other displays
could be the source of the extra-RF contextual modulation that we
investigated. In practice, differences between these two types of texture
display are only visible under careful foveal inspection. With control
experiments on 53 multiunit recording sites, we found that V1 neurons
generally produced indistinguishable responses to the two types of homogeneous texture display when the RF is placed well within the “ﬁgure”
contour. The median ratio of response to true- and pseudo-homogeneous
texture displays was 1.01. Furthermore, responses to the two display types
were signiﬁcantly different in only 13% of the 53 sites ( p , 0.05,
two-sided t test), and these differences were small. For simplicity, we will
ignore the distinction between the true- and the pseudo-homogeneous
texture displays in the remainder of this report.
The temporal progression of a behavioral trial for most of our texture
experiments was as follows. At the beginning of a trial, a ﬁxation spot
appeared on the gray monitor screen, and the monkey foveated this spot.
Approximately 200 msec after foveation of the spot occurred, a texture
display appeared on the screen for a ﬁxed interval (e.g., 250 msec in some
experiments), after which the screen returned to the prestimulus gray.
Approximately 200 msec after the texture offset, the ﬁxation spot was
extinguished, and a target spot appeared in a random position around the
ﬁxation spot. The monkey was rewarded with a drop of apple juice for
maintaining stable ﬁxation throughout the trial and then making a saccade to this target. In an alternative experimental paradigm, the monkey
was required to saccade to a texture-deﬁned stimulus (either over the RF
or in the opposite hemiﬁeld) after the extinguishing of the ﬁxation spot.
Operationally, stable ﬁxation meant that the monkey’s eye position remained within a ﬁxation window (not visible in the stimulus display) that
was centered on the ﬁxation spot. The ﬁxation window size varied from
18 3 18 to 0.38 3 0.38; the typical value was 0.58 3 0.58.
Given that the results in this study are based on comparison of neural
responses in trials in which the texture display was either homogeneous or
contained a salient textured ﬁgure, it is of considerable importance to
determine whether the presence of the ﬁgure in the ﬂashed texture
display could subtly inﬂuence eye movements that might, in turn, alter
neural responses. We addressed this topic quantitatively by selecting
recordings in which neural responses showed strong modulation depending on whether the texture display was of the homogeneous type or
contained a texture-deﬁned ﬁgure in randomly interleaved trials. For
each trial, the mean and variance in both x and y eye position was
measured during the texture display interval. The distributions of these
mean and variance measures were indistinguishable for the homogeneous
and nonhomogeneous texture displays; separate x2 tests for x and y values
fail to reject the null hypothesis that the content of the texture display has
no inﬂuence on mean or variance of eye position during ﬁxation. From
these results [which agree with an analysis by Lamme ], we conclude that our observations of modulation of neural activity described
here are not an artifact of eye movements.
Data collection and analysis. Neural spike data were collected using
either hardware and software from a Brainwave Systems Corporation
data collection setup or a simple two-level spike amplitude discriminator.
Data ﬁles containing spike, event, and eye position information were
saved on an IBM PC (486) in binary form and converted to ASCII for
analysis on UNIX and Macintosh computer systems. Data analysis was
conducted using a combination of our own C11 analysis routines and
commercially available software (i.e., Mathematica and MATLAB).
Here, we present the results of neural recordings in area V1 in six
hemispheres of four awake, behaving rhesus monkeys. Our quan-
Extra-RF contextual modulation for orientation-deﬁned texture ﬁgures. a, Conﬁguration of the ﬁxation spot, ﬁgure, and RF. The RF
is completely enclosed by the ﬁgure contour. b, Illustration of the response
of a multiunit site to stimulation with the homogeneously textured display
ﬂashed on a gray background for 267 msec. c, Illustration of the response
of the same site when a 3.68 wide orientation-deﬁned ﬁgure was ﬂashed on
in randomly interleaved trials. The initial response is nearly identical, but
the tonic phase of the response is elevated in this condition compared with
b. The response proﬁle for the homogeneous texture display is shown in
composite for comparison ( ﬁne-line waveform), and gray shading highlights the positive difference in response. d, Comparison of the average
responses of all 75 recording sites for which we have quantitative data for
stimulation both with RF texture and with extra-RF texture alone.
Extra-RF texture alone gave at best an extremely weak response. e,
Histogram of extra-RF contextual modulation ratios for the orientation
display. This ratio is deﬁned by the average response to the ﬁgure display
divided by average response to the homogeneous texture display. Average
response rates were measured in the interval of 100–250 msec after
stimulus onset (thereby ignoring the initial transient response). Ratio
values . 1.0 indicate larger responses to ﬁgure displays. Single- and
multiunit sites were qualitatively and quantitatively similar :7376–7389
Zipser et al. • Contextual Modulation in V1
titative data consist of ﬁndings from experiments on 118 isolated
V1 neurons and 228 multiunit sites (in which inseparable signals
from two or more cells were recorded simultaneously). As we will
describe in reference to Figure 2, single- and multiunit sites
behaved similarly in our experiments. Thus, we will not generally
be concerned with the distinction between single- and multiunit
sites except where the cue receptivity of individual neurons is of
interest. We recorded principally in superﬁcial layers 2 and 3. The
V1 cells that we studied had RFs in the lower, contralateral visual
ﬁeld with eccentricities ranging from 2 to 68 of visual angle.
We use the expression extra-RF contextual modulation (or “contextual modulation” for short) to describe how a neuron’s response to direct RF stimulation may be inﬂuenced by patterns
appearing entirely outside the RF. The technique common to our
experiments on V1 contextual modulation consists of measuring
the response of a given V1 neuron or multiunit site to a homogeneous texture display (e.g., Fig. 1b) and using this as a standard
against which to compare the responses of the same cell or
multisite to various test displays containing an identical texture
pattern over the RF and different patterns outside the RF area.
For example, Figure 1a shows a textured display containing a
square “ﬁgure” region that segments from the background
through the 908 difference in orientation of texture elements
between these two regions. In our experiments, we positioned the
ﬁgure so that it was centered on and completely covered the RF
of V1 neurons under study (e.g., Fig. 2a). In the absence of any
sort of extra-RF contextual modulation, V1 neurons would respond identically to these displays.
Figure 2, b and c, compares the response activity of one V1
multiunit site to the homogeneous texture and to the orientationdeﬁned ﬁgure displays. As a monkey foveated the ﬁxation spot on
a gray computer monitor screen, a given texture display appeared
for 267 msec. The V1 multiunit site showed little activity for the
uniform gray display but responded to the appearance of the
homogeneous texture display with a vigorous burst of action
potentials (Fig. 2b). After this initial burst, the cells’ responses
declined to a lower maintained discharge rate. When we stimulated this site with the orientation-deﬁned texture ﬁgure (width
3.68) in randomly interleaved trials, we recorded different results
(Fig. 2c). Although the neurons responded to the onset of the
ﬁgure display with nearly the same burst of activity as to the
homogeneous texture display, the response rates diverged ;80
msec subsequent to texture onset. Despite the fact that texture
within the RF was identical to that for the homogeneous texture
display, the orientation-deﬁned ﬁgure display thereafter caused
the cells of the multiunit site to maintain a signiﬁcantly ( p , 0.05,
one-sided t test) more vigorous response rate than did the homogeneous texture display (as is indicated by the gray shading of
response proﬁle in Fig. 2c). Extra-RF texture alone did not
appreciably activate the V1 neurons (Fig. 2d).
The difference in responses of the V1 multiunit site for the
homogeneous texture display and the orientation-deﬁned ﬁgure
display is an example of extra-RF contextual modulation. We
quantify this contextual modulation by calculating a ratio, the
the orientation-deﬁned ﬁgure) divided by the average response to
the homogeneous texture display. Because contextual modulation
typically evolves only after the initial transient response, throughout this study we will only consider activity 100–250 msec after
stimulus onset in our ratio metric. Applying this ratio measure to
a large sample of V1 recordings (n 5 92 single-unit and 48
multiunit sites) with RFs centered in either a square or discshaped orientation-deﬁned ﬁgure of width 2.7–48, we arrive at the
histogram in Figure 2e. For each cell or multiunit site, we chose
the orientation of RF texture best suited for the cell. These data
replicate the observation by Lamme that V1 neurons with
remarkable consistency respond more vigorously when their RFs
are within an orientation-deﬁned ﬁgure than when over a homogeneously textured background (i.e., most entries in the histogram
are above the ratio value 1.0). Single-unit and multiunit sites were
qualitatively and quantitatively similar in behavior. The median
contextual modulation ratio for the 92 single-unit sites was 1.61,
whereas for the 48 multiunit sites it was 1.53. Furthermore, the
hypothesis of independence between the distributions of contextual modulation ratios for single- and multiunit sites was rejected
by a x2 test. Forty-ﬁve percent of the single units and 57% of the
multiunit sites showed signiﬁcantly greater response rates to the
orientation-deﬁned display as compared with the homogeneous
texture display ( p , 0.05, one-sided t test).
The basic pattern of neural response that we have described
above was observed whether the experimental subjects were required merely to passively ﬁxate (the normal condition) or to
make saccades to texture ﬁgures; thus, we replicated Lamme’s
result . It is therefore unlikely that the results we report are
merely an indirect result of modulation by visual attention, because the effects do not appear to depend on the behavioral task
being performed by the monkey subjects.
Do diverse visual cues evoke extra-RF modulation?
experiments
orientation- and motion-deﬁned ﬁgures may evoke contextual
modulation in V1. If extra-RF contextual modulation is closely
related to our perception of ﬁgure/ground segregation, then this
modulation should indeed be evoked by the same broad range of
cues that support image segmentation. In this section, we specifically address the question: what is the range of static visual cues
that evoke extra-RF contextual modulation in V1 neurons? The
different cues that we use to delineate a texture ﬁgure from the
background texture are illustrated in the left column of Figure 3.
Binocular disparity
We illustrate a rendition of a textured disc segmented from the
background through binocular disparity cues in Figure 3b. The
disc appears to ﬂoat above a textured background. The disc
texture over the RF duplicates that in the corresponding region of
the homogeneous texture ﬁeld. No previous study has investigated
the potential for binocular disparity cues to evoke extra-RF contextual modulation.
Color, luminance
In Figure 3, c and d, we illustrate disc displays in which either
color or luminance act as cues for segmenting the disc from
background texture. Although previous studies have investigated
effects of color on extra-RF contextual modulation in primate
extrastriate cortex , pure
color and luminance cues have not been tested previously in this
manner in primate area V1.
Orientation
We also included an orientation-deﬁned disc in the set of stimuli
(Fig. 3e).
Combination of cues
Figure 3f illustrates a rendition of the combination disc display, in
which orientation, disparity, color, and luminance all serve to
offset the disc from the texture background.
Zipser et al. • Contextual Modulation in V1
J. Neurosci., November 15, 1996, 16(22):7376–7389 7379
Disc alone
Another way to visualize the texture disc is through the complete
lack of background texture. In Figure 3g, we illustrate a display of
this type, called the “disc-alone” condition. The texture disc in this
case is identical to that in other displays. In trials in which the
disc-alone condition appeared, the area around the disc remained
a uniform gray.
We show the response activity of one isolated V1 neuron (cell
a) to these displays in the right column of Figure 3. For each of the
disc displays, this cell gave essentially the same response: after a
burst of activity at texture onset, the cell exhibited a robust rate of
activity for each disc, well above the response level for the homogeneous texture display. The magnitude of the contextual modulation for the cell in Figure 3 was very similar for the various
disc-deﬁning cues (a topic to be addressed below).
We studied a total of 64 V1 neurons using the textured displays
described in Figures 3, the disc in each case being centered on the
RF. We focused exclusively on single-unit responses for this
experiment, because the response selectivity of individual neurons
for the various cues is of interest, and multiunit data would cloud
this issue. For most isolated cells, we used discs 3.68 in diameter
(n 5 40). For the remaining isolated cells, we used smaller discs,
although never discs , 2.78 in diameter (which is well above RF
size). For each cell, we chose the orientation of RF texture best
suited for the cell. Aside from these manipulations, the same
texture displays were used for each experiment. Thus, beyond
varying orientation, we did not attempt to “optimize” the RF
texture for each cell. Indeed, optimizing RF texture does not
appear critical for evoking contextual modulation .
The criterion for selecting a cell for experimentation was that it
gave clear responses to at least one of the texture displays; this was
the case with approximately one-third of the neurons that we
isolated. In general, we did not attempt to classify cells as simple
or complex, although it is likely that most cells in the sample are
of the complex type, because these are more responsive to the
ﬂashed random texture patterns .
For each of the 64 isolated V1 neurons thus tested, we calculated extra-RF modulation ratios for each disc display (i.e., disc
Extra-RF contextual modulation for diverse ﬁgure-deﬁning
cues. The responses of one isolated parafoveal V1 neuron (cell a) are
illustrated in this ﬁgure; quantitative description of this cell’s responses
appears in Figure 5. a, Illustration of the responses to the homogeneous
texture display. In each of the following conditions (b–f), the pattern and
disparity of RF texture were identical to that in the corresponding region
of the homogeneous texture display. b, Illustration of the response when
the RF is centered in a texture ﬁgure 3.68 wide, deﬁned by binocular
disparity. The disc ﬁgure appeared at zero disparity, the background
texture at 0.148 far disparity. The neuron’s initial response to this display
was nearly the same as to the homogeneous texture display. Yet after the
initial response, the disparity-deﬁned disc evoked signiﬁcantly more vigorous responses. c, Illustration of the response when the disc ﬁgure was
deﬁned by chrominance cues; in this condition, the space between texture
elements in the background was a green [CIE coordinates (x,y) 5 (0.344,
0.486)] equiluminant to the gray between texture elements in the disc [gray
CIE coordinates (x,y) 5 (0.333, 0.333)], as conﬁrmed with measurement
by chrominance and luminance meters. We chose green (as opposed to,
say, red or blue) solely to minimize chromatic aberration. The colordeﬁned disc evoked a response very similar to the disparity-deﬁned disc. d,
Illustration of the response when the disc ﬁgure was deﬁned by luminance
cues; luminance of bars outside the disc was 43 cd/m2, with the gray background the normal 24 cd/m2 and the black bars the normal 6 cd/m2. Again, the
response of the V1 neuron was very similar to that for the disparity-deﬁned
disc. e, Illustration of the response to an orientation-deﬁned disc. The cell
here also showed elevated activity after the initial response as compared with
the homogeneous texture display. f, Illustration of the response to a disc
deﬁned by each of the four preceding cues. The response magnitude for this
“combination” display is not signiﬁcantly different from that for discs deﬁned
by the four constituent cues. g, Illustration of the response for the disc-alone
condition, in which the region outside the disc remained a constant gray
throughout the trial. The response magnitude for this condition was not
signiﬁcantly different from the preceding ﬁve conditions.
7380 J. Neurosci., November 15, 1996, 16(22):7376–7389
Zipser et al. • Contextual Modulation in V1
response/homogeneous display response). The ratio measure is
independent of absolute neural response rate. In Figure 4, we
show histograms of these modulation ratios pooled by disc type.
The data show that for the great majority of neurons, each of
these disc displays evoked greater responses than did the homogeneous display, (i.e., most values in the histogram fall above the
extra-RF modulation ratio value 1.0). The median modulation
ratios and the percentage of cells signiﬁcantly modulated for each
disc display are as follows: for disparity-deﬁned discs, the median
modulation ratio was 1.67, and 50% of cells responded signiﬁcantly more vigorously to the ﬁgure than to the homogeneous
texture display ( p , 0.05, one-sided t test); for color, the values
were 1.74 and 52%; for luminance, 1.44 and 34%; for orientation,
1.69 and 52%. The extra-RF contextual modulation ratio values
for the combination display (1.73 median modulation ratio and
48% of cells showing signiﬁcant modulation) were similar to those
for the other disc displays. This is an interesting result, because we
might expect that extra-RF modulation arising in response to a
display in which a number of potent cues segment the disc would
reﬂect a summation of effects from individual cues and thus be
substantially greater than extra-RF modulation evoked by any
individual cue. Our data show that this is not the case. Finally, for
the disc-alone condition, the median modulation ratio was 1.45,
with 37% of cells signiﬁcantly modulated.
We show examples of isolated V1 cells with a range of cue
receptivity in Figure 5. In this ﬁgure, we only consider the ﬁve disc
types used on all 64 cells (i.e., we exclude the disc-alone condition). In the top of the ﬁgure, we show responses rates for two
cells (including cell a from Fig. 3) that each had very similarly
positively modulated response rates for each of ﬁve disc displays
(i.e., disparity-, color-, luminance-, orientation-, and combinationdeﬁned discs). In the bottom of the ﬁgure, we show responses
rates from two other cells that displayed cue-dependent contextual modulation (i.e., discs deﬁned by different cues yielded highly
dissimilar responses). To quantify the cue-dependence of contextual modulation for a given cell, we deﬁned a cue-variance index
(CVI), which is simply the SD of average disc responses in excess
of the homogeneous display response, divided by the homogeneous display response. A large value of CVI for a given cell
cue-dependence
contextual
modulation,
whereas a cell with a CVI of zero would have the same response
to each disc display.
To classify cells according to the cue selectivity of their contextual modulation, we adopted conservative criteria for describing
“cue-invariant” behavior. These were (1) that a given cell had
signiﬁcantly greater responses ( p , 0.05, one-sided t test) to each
of the ﬁve common disc displays compared with the homogeneous
texture display; and (2) that the cell’s CVI was #0.25. This
deﬁnition is necessarily somewhat arbitrary, because the distribution of CVI values is essentially continuous, with no clearly separate modes that could be used to segregate cells. Nonetheless, the
cutoff value we chose serves to select only those cells that intuitively appear to respond equivalently to the various cues, and the
additional criteria of multiple signiﬁcance tests ensure that this
appearance is unlikely to be by chance. Twelve percent (n 5 8) of
the 64 isolated cells tested thus were classiﬁed as cue-invariant,
whereas 27% of the cells (n 5 17) were not signiﬁcantly modulated by any disc display, and the remaining 61% of cells (n 5 39)
showed some signiﬁcant contextual modulation without meeting
the full criteria for “cue-invariance.”
One simple explanation for the invariance in response to disc
displays is that the neurons reach some saturating level of activa-
Single-unit extra-RF modulation ratios for diverse cues. Activity measures, as always, are from 100 to 250 msec after stimulus onset. The
ﬁrst ﬁve histograms compile modulation ratios for various ﬁgure-deﬁning
cues for all 64 cells tested with each of the following: the disparity-, color-,
luminance-, orientation-, and combination-deﬁned ﬁgures. The last histogram compiles modulation ratios for the 43 neurons tested with the
disc-alone condition that were also tested with the preceding ﬁve disc
displays. The form of each distribution is similar (i.e., most cells have ratio
values . 1.0). See text for details.
Zipser et al. • Contextual Modulation in V1
J. Neurosci., November 15, 1996, 16(22):7376–7389 7381
tion that causes the response for each disc display to converge at
the same activity level. We can counter this argument by simply
noting that the neurons in fact did not reach saturating levels of
activity during stimulation with the normal texture displays. For
example, the most cue-invariant isolated V1 neurons in our sample (cell b in Fig. 5) had an overall vigorous response for disc
displays but could be driven to a response level 63% larger by
using a different RF stimulus (for this cell, monocular texture
stimulation in the right eye) (data not shown). Observations such
as these make it very unlikely that the cue-invariance of extra-RF
contextual modulation arises from simple saturation in the response of cells from which we recorded.
In summary, in this section, we showed that within the population of V1 neurons, robust extra-RF modulation exists for each of
the diverse cues that we tested. These results suggest that
extra-RF modulation serves a function that generalizes across
visual cues. If widespread extra-RF modulation had existed for
only a subset of the disc displays (say, those deﬁned by orientation
and luminance but not those deﬁned by color or disparity), this
phenomenon could at best serve only a restricted role tied to
particular visual cues (such as orientation or luminance analysis).
Instead, our results suggest that contextual modulation serves an
integrative function across diverse cues. This means that cues
traditionally considered separate subjects of study, such as color
and binocular disparity, are linked in the sense that extra-RF
contextual modulation in V1 commonly uses both. Although it has
been suggested that different visual cues (such as color and
binocular disparity) are processed independently by separate anatomical modules in the visual system , our results show that many V1 neurons treat these
cues interchangeably, at least in terms of contextual modulation.
Spatial extent of extra-RF modulation
Complementary to the question of what cues evoke contextual
modulation is the question: how large is the spatial extent of this
phenomenon? We measured this by varying disc diameter from
trial to trial, while keeping the RF centered. Figure 6a shows
sample responses from one V1 multiunit site tested with
the homogeneous texture display, whereas Figure 6b illustrates
the entire diameter-tuning curve for the same multiunit site. The
magnitude of contextual modulation declines with increasing disc
diameter and vanishes at ;108 diameter.
We studied 33 single- and 51 multiunit sites in experiments with
variable sized discs. We used only orientation (n 5 65), color (n 5
5), or luminance (n 5 14) cues for this part of the study, so that
the entire monitor screen (32 3 248 in dimensions) could be
covered with texture. Single and multiunit sites had similar characteristics. Figure 6c illustrates the median contextual modulation
ratio for all 84 sites, measured at each disc diameter. This smooth,
monotonically falling spatial tuning function reaches the level of
the homogeneous texture background at ;108 diameter. Only at
the smallest disc diameter (1.88) did we occasionally ﬁnd signiﬁcant deviations from this pattern (perhaps reﬂecting an interaction between the disc contour and the RFs of neurons in these
cases). In Figure 6d, we graph the fraction of sites with signiﬁcant
contextual modulation ( p , 0.05 for one-sided t test) as a function
of disc diameter. For discs with diameter up to ;88, the proportion of sites showing signiﬁcant modulation is greater than that
expected by chance.
Contextual modulation with binocularly
rivalrous displays
Up to this point, we have dealt with displays in which inhomogeneity in texture outside the RF is correlated with the expression of
contextual modulation. In this and the following section, we treat
Variation of cue receptivity among single units for diverse cues.
This ﬁgure deals with the 64 isolated V1 neurons tested with the homogeneous texture display (H) and the ﬁve common disc displays: disparity
(D), color (C), luminance (L), orientation (O), and combination (Cb). We
deﬁne a cue average variance index (CVI) as the standard deviation of a
cell’s responses to disc displays in excess of the response to the homogeneous texture display, normalized by the response to the homogeneous
texture display. For cell a (the same cell as in Fig. 3), with activity levels
shown as a bar chart in the upper left of the ﬁgure, this corresponds to the
SD of the heights of the gray portions of the response bars divided by the
height of the leftmost bar (the homogeneous display response). We conservatively deﬁne a neuron to be cue-invariant in extra-RF contextual
modulation if it has a CVI , 0.25 and shows signiﬁcantly greater response
to each of the ﬁve disc displays as compared with the homogeneous
texture display ( p , 0.05 for one-sided t test for each disc). The center of
the ﬁgure shows a pie chart that divides the cells into three classes: cells
not signiﬁcantly modulated by any of the ﬁve disc displays, cells that are
cue-invariant, and cells with signiﬁcant modulation that fall short of the
cue-invariant classiﬁcation. At the top and bottom of the ﬁgure are example cells.
7382 J. Neurosci., November 15, 1996, 16(22):7376–7389
Zipser et al. • Contextual Modulation in V1
displays where this simple link is broken; in other words, we study
test texture displays that are not homogeneous but nonetheless
fail to evoke contextual modulation or, equivalently in our terminology, evoke the same response as a homogeneously textured
display. The ﬁrst such texture displays that we will describe involves the use of binocular rivalry. Examples of rivalrous texture
displays used in our study are illustrated in Figure 7a. Each row of
this ﬁgure shows the images presented to left and right eyes and
an approximate representation of the cyclopean percept obtained
when these images are fused. In our experiments, monkeys viewed
pairs of texture displays through a haptoscope.
The ﬁrst row of Figure 7a illustrates the case in which homogeneous texture is presented to each eye, but the texture orientation differs by 908 between eyes (case 1). The cyclopean percept
is of a fairly homogeneous texture ﬁeld combining texture elements from both eyes. The second row illustrates the case in which
one eye views a homogeneous texture ﬁeld while the other views
a ﬁeld containing an orientation-deﬁned ﬁgure (case 2). The
stable cyclopean percept here is of a clearly delineated square
texture surface with rivalrous texture patterns surrounded by a
nonrivalrous background. The third row shows the case in which
an orientation-deﬁned ﬁgure appears to both eyes, but the orientation of texture at corresponding points in the display differs by
908 between the eyes (case 3). As has been observed previously
with closely related displays , the cyclopean percept in this case is surprisingly homogeneous. Some pieces
of contour are visible in the fused display, but the overall sense of
ﬁgure/ground segregation seen in the monocular images is clearly
lost. Note that the texture in the central region of the displays is
the same in all three cases. (One consequence of maintaining the
same rivalrous texture over the RF from trial to trial is that in the
cases in which no ﬁgure is perceived, the background texture is
also rivalrous. Although it seems unlikely that this fact in itself is
the basis for the results we describe below, future experiments
should test this explicitly.)
We recorded from 40 multiunit and 6 single-unit sites in area
V1 while presenting displays like those in Figure 7a to awake,
ﬁxating monkeys. Displays were conﬁgured such that the RF of a
V1 neuron under study (or the aggregate RF of a group of cells)
fell completely within the square region of the display that sometimes appeared as a ﬁgure. In this manner, the RF was stimulated
with exactly the same texture pattern from trial to trial, whereas
texture entirely outside the RF could vary, as seen in Figure 7a.
The responses recorded with rivalrous displays for one V1
multiunit site are illustrated in Figure 7b. Texture was ﬂashed on
a gray background for 200 msec as a monkey foveated the ﬁxation
spot. Cells at this site showed almost no activity for the uniform
gray display but responded to the appearance of the case 1 texture
display with a vigorous burst of action potentials. After the initial
response, activity decayed to a reduced level for the remainder of
the texture display interval. Using case 2 texture displays in
randomly interleaved trials, we recorded dramatically different
results. Although the cells initially responded to the onset of the
case 2 display in the same way as in the previous case, the
subsequent sustained activity level was far greater. This extra-RF
contextual modulation occurred whether the orientation-deﬁned
ﬁgure appeared in the left or the right eye. However, when the
orientation-deﬁned ﬁgure appeared in both eyes (case 3), the
response proﬁle was virtually identical to that for case 1.
Figure 7c illustrates results from a separate multiunit site. This
site showed strong ocular dominance for the right eye. Contextual
modulation in case 2 displays occurred predominantly for the
condition with the ﬁgure in the right eye. Still, when rivalrous
ﬁgures appeared in both eyes (case 3), the response again was the
same as for case 1, despite the fact that the right eye stimulus was
Spatial extent of extra-RF contextual modulation tested with discs of variable diameter. a, Illustration of some sample responses from one
multiunit site tested with variable diameter discs deﬁned by luminance. b, Illustration of the entire diameter-response function for the same multiunit site.
Response rates fall off essentially monotonically with disc diameter. c, Illustration of the median extra-RF modulation ratio as a function of disc diameter
for all 84 sites tested (n 5 65 tested with orientation-deﬁned discs, 14 with luminance-deﬁned discs, and 5 with color-deﬁned discs). Extra-RF modulation
declines monotonically with disc diameter, reaching the value 1.0 at ;108 diameter. d, Illustration of the fraction of sites with signiﬁcant modulation ( p ,
0.05, one-sided t test) as a function of disc diameter. The fraction of modulated sites reaches chance level at ;88 diameter.
Zipser et al. • Contextual Modulation in V1
J. Neurosci., November 15, 1996, 16(22):7376–7389 7383
identical to that in the case 2 condition that produced strong
modulation.
The results across our sample of 46 V1 sites were remarkably
consistent with those shown in Figure 7, b and c. We again
quantify the results by calculating a ratio, the response rate to case
2 or case 3 displays divided by the response rate to the case 1
display. The top of Figure 7d illustrates a histogram of extra-RF
context modulation ratios for case 2, with the conditions of the
ﬁgure in either the left or the right eye averaged. As with the
examples above, the average responses to case 2 were typically
greater than to case 1; ratio values fall consistently above 1.0 (the
median value is 1.45; 76% of sites had signiﬁcantly greater responses to at least one of the case 2 displays as compared with the
case 1 display, p , 0.025 in one-sided t test for ﬁgure in each eye).
The bottom of Figure 7d illustrates a histogram of extra-RF
context modulation ratios for case 3. As with the examples above,
responses to case 3 were typically the same as to case 1; ratio
values cluster tightly about 1.0 (the median value is 1.01; only 2%
of sites showed activity signiﬁcantly greater than for the case 1
display, p , 0.05 in one-sided t test). Thus, displays that generate
a cyclopean percept of a homogeneously textured ﬁeld evoke the
same level of neural activity (given identical RF stimulation) as a
truly homogeneous texture ﬁeld, even though the monocular images may contain clearly deﬁned ﬁgures.
An important question is, how do neural responses correlated
with perception of rivalrous displays relate to the ocular dominance characteristics of individual V1 cells? The data in our
rivalry experiment (predominantly recordings of multiple-unit activity in superﬁcial layers of striate cortex) do not contain a
sufﬁciently large proportion of sites with strong ocular bias to
Extra-RF contextual modulation and binocular rivalry. a, Illustration representing examples of three types of binocularly rivalrous
displays (case 1, case 2, and case 3) for each illustrating left- and right-eye images and an approximate representation of the cyclopean percept.
See text for complete description. b, Illustration of the response of one multiunit site to these displays. c, Illustration of another multiunit example.
d, Histograms of extra-RF modulation ratios for case 2/case 1 and case 3/case 1, with case 1 ﬁlling the role of the homogeneously textured display.
See text for details.
7384 J. Neurosci., November 15, 1996, 16(22):7376–7389
Zipser et al. • Contextual Modulation in V1
establish quantitative relationships on this point. Nonetheless, it is
noteworthy that in the examples that we do have of sites whose
receptive ﬁelds were predominantly activated by stimulation in
one eye (e.g., Fig. 7c), there is a clear interaction of contextual
stimuli across the eyes.
In summary, we have seen with the results in Figures 2–6 that
a change in the global perceptual nature of an image can substantially alter the ﬁring rate of V1 neurons the RFs for which cannot
detect the change in stimulus. However, with our experiments
using binocularly rivalrous stimuli in Figure 7, case 3, we demonstrate that a large change in the image stimulus that has little or no
perceptual consequence (because of rivalry) does not alter the
ﬁring rate of V1 neurons.
Contextual modulation and perceived distal structure
One possible interpretation of the results thus far is that contextual modulation better reﬂects the perceived structure of the
stimulus (e.g., ﬁgure vs ground or ﬁgure size) than it reﬂects the
particular cues (such as disparity or color) that delineate this
structure. Our purpose for this section lies in studying more
directly how extra-RF modulation relates to the perceived distal
structure of our stimulus displays. Our approach is to vary the
perceived distal structure of the display region containing the RF,
while at the same time keeping RF texture stimulation the same
from trial to trial. A key display that allows us to do this is
illustrated in Figure 8a. The display appears as a homogeneously
textured ﬁeld, with the modiﬁcation that we can manipulate the
perceived depth of a band of texture surrounding the RF by
varying binocular disparity cues (i.e., the band of texture between
the white dashed lines in Fig. 8a; dashed lines are not in the actual
display). It is in our opinion a reasonable assumption that our
monkeys perceived the various manipulations of this display as do
human (see Materials and Methods); however, we cannot offer
proof here of this assumption.
In the case in which we cause the texture band surrounding the
RF to have the same binocular disparity as the other regions of
the display, we simply generate a standard homogeneous texture
display. In the top of Figure 8b, we illustrate this display. In Figure
8, c (top) and d (top), we illustrate the average response proﬁles of
two V1 multiunit sites to stimulation with this display. Each
showed an initial vigorous burst of activity in response to texture
onset, followed by a much diminished response rate for the
remainder of the texture display interval.
We could alter the perceived distal structure of the display by
causing the band of texture surrounding the RF to appear farther
away in depth from the remaining area of texture (typically
through 0.148 uncrossed horizontal disparity). We refer to this
receded region as a “moat,” illustrated in the center of Figure 8b.
As seen from the illustration, with establishment of the moat, the
RF no longer appears positioned on a large textured ﬁeld but
rather appears to be positioned on a small square surface isolated
from the textured background by the moat. In the experiment,
moat depth was only apparent through binocular disparity cues,
although we provide some shading cues to depth in Figure 8b for
schematic purposes.
In Figure 8, c (center) and d (center), we illustrate the resulting
average response proﬁles of the two multiunit sites. The initial
response of the multiunit sites to the moat display was nearly
identical to the response to the homogeneous texture display.
However, for both sites the response rates diverged ;100 msec
after texture onset, with the moat display causing the cells at each
site to maintain a more vigorous response rate than did the
homogeneous texture display (gray shading of the response pro-
ﬁles.) Thus, we see that the moat display evoked extra-RF modulation of the same nature as we have seen with the various tests
that we have already described in previous sections of this paper.
We could also modify the display in Figure 8b in a different way by
having the texture band surrounding the RF appear nearer in
depth than the remaining area of texture (through 0.148 crossed
horizontal disparity). In this case, the perceived distal structure
(Fig. 8b, bottom) is completely different from the moat display. In
the frame display, the RF appears positioned not on a small
textured surface but on a large textured surface continuous with
the textured background, as though a narrow textured “frame”
were merely ﬂoating above and partially occluding the homogeneous texture display. In Figure 8, c (bottom) and d (bottom), we
illustrate the average responses rates of each multiunit site to the
frame display. The results stand in strong contrast to the response
to the moat display, because the multiunit responses to the frame
display either closely follow those to the homogeneous texture
display or are even less vigorous.
Remarkably, this asymmetry of effect for the moat display
compared with the frame display was highly consistent among the
14 single- and 132 multiunit sites that we studied with these
stimuli. We demonstrate this in Figure 8e, which illustrates histograms of extra-RF contextual modulation ratios for these recording sites. In the top of the histogram, we show the values for moat
response/homogeneous response. Extra-RF modulation ratio values in this case fall consistently above 1.0, indicating that neural
responses for the moat display generally exceeded those for the
homogeneous texture display (the median value is 1.68; 63% of
sites showed responses for the moat display signiﬁcantly greater
than to the homogeneous texture display, p , 0.05 in one-sided t
test). In the bottom, we show the ratio values for frame response/
homogeneous response. In contrast to the moat case, here the
extra-RF modulation ratio values cluster near or below 1.0, indicating that for the frame display, neurons responded in a manner
similar to or weaker than that to the homogeneous texture display
(the median value being 0.75; 37% of sites showed responses to
the frame display signiﬁcantly less than to the homogeneous
texture display, whereas only 2% of sites showed signiﬁcantly
greater activity, p , 0.05 in one-sided t tests). The square region
inside the moat or frame was between 2 and 3.68 for different
recording sites. Control experiments at each recording site
showed that cells did not respond to the extra-RF texture band
alone, or gave at best extremely weak responses, regardless of
whether it appeared at near (frame), far (moat), or zero disparities (data not shown).
Perturbations in moat and frame displays that retained the
essential character of their perceived distal structure evoked qualitatively similar results to those just described. For example, the
asymmetry in effect of moat and frame displays for evocation of
extra-RF modulation did not depend on having the displays centered at zero disparity (the standard case, e.g., multiple-unit site 5
in Fig. 8c) but was equally evident when we moved texture displays
back in depth relative to the ﬁxation spot (e.g., multiple-unit site
6 in Fig. 8d). Furthermore, we could vary the magnitude of the
moat and frame disparities to larger or smaller values than our
60.148 standard without qualitatively altering the basic moat/
frame modulation asymmetry (data not shown).
Zipser et al. • Contextual Modulation in V1
J. Neurosci., November 15, 1996, 16(22):7376–7389 7385
In summary, when the RFs of V1 neurons appear to rest on a
large ﬂat textured surface (i.e., the homogeneous texture display),
cells consistently give a small response, even when this surface is
partially occluded by a frame. However, when the RFs of V1
neurons appear within a smaller “ﬁgure” surface surrounded by a
moat, consistent contextual modulation is evoked.
It seems natural to ask whether the moat/frame asymmetry
stems from some asymmetry in the RF disparity tuning of cells in
our sample. In fact, we did not ﬁnd any overall bias of single- or
multiunit sites for a particular RF disparity tuning. In other words,
the normal results for presentation of moat and frame displays
may be elicited from cells that prefer either near or far disparity
stimuli (data not shown). Analogous dissociations have been
observed by Lamme , wherein extra-RF contextual modulation evoked by orientation cues has no correlation with the
sharpness of orientation tuning of individual V1 RFs; further-
Extra-RF contextual modulation and perceived distal structure. a, Conﬁguration of a texture display in which a band of texture surrounding
the RF may vary in apparent depth through binocular disparity cues. The default texture was typically at zero disparity, although we used far background
disparity as the default in some experiments. b, Illustration of how this display may be conﬁgured to appear as a homogenous texture display, moat display,
or frame display. Typically, the disparity offset of moat and frame was 60.148, although this value was not critical. Monkey binocular vision is similar to
that of man (see Materials and Methods), and we assume that our monkey subjects perceive these displays as do human observers. c, Illustration of the
responses of a multiunit site to the displays in b. For this experiment, RF texture was always at zero disparity. d, Illustration of responses of another
multiunit site. For the data shown, RF texture was at 0.148 far disparity (with moat and frame moved back accordingly to preserve the relative depth
arrangements). The contextual modulation pattern is the same as in c. The site in d also gave the same pattern of response when RF texture was at zero
disparity (data not shown). e, Extra-RF contextual modulation ratios for 146 sites for moat (top) and frame (bottom) displays. See text for details.
7386 J. Neurosci., November 15, 1996, 16(22):7376–7389
Zipser et al. • Contextual Modulation in V1
more, Lamme also found that direction selectivity of V1 RFs was
uncorrelated with contextual modulation evoked by motion cues.
Taken together, these data suggest an overall dissociation between speciﬁc types of RF tuning and the extra-RF contextual
modulation received by V1 neurons.
Temporal characteristics of V1 contextual modulation
A striking trend in the results that we have collected is the delay
in the expression of extra-RF contextual modulation in V1. This
delay is important in the discussion of whether contextual modulation reﬂects perceptual experience, because the delay could
allow complex and lengthy neural computations to contribute to
the expression of this phenomenon. But is this delay indeed a
characteristic of contextual modulation, or is it an artifact tied in
some trivial way to the recent history of RF stimulation? For
example, is the delay of contextual modulation a mere artifact of
saturation in neural response at texture onset?
To show that the delay in the onset of extra-RF modulation is
a characteristic feature of the phenomenon itself and not merely
a simple side effect of the recent history of RF stimulation, we
need to show that this delay is independent of the time at which
the RF itself was ﬁrst stimulated. We test this by using a two-step
procedure in which we ﬁrst present a homogeneous texture display (thereby generating the initial burst of neural activity) and
then subsequently modifying only the extra-RF stimulus. We can
contrast these results to the response recorded when the homogeneous texture display remains unchanged throughout the entire
period. In Figure 9a, we illustrate results of an experiment of this
type performed on 53 V1 multiunit sites. In the ﬁrst step of texture
presentation, the homogeneous display appears for 150 msec. In
the second step, a narrow band of texture surrounding but outside
the RF is replaced with texture of farther binocular disparity. The
result is that the display in this second step contains a ﬁgure
region surrounded by a gap or moat. The average neural response
for this two-step condition is illustrated by trace M and is compared with the response to a long-duration homogeneous display
(trace H). We see that after the initial burst of activity, the
response rate settles into a steady state of activity. However,
between 80 and 100 msec after the display changed to the moatdeﬁned ﬁgure conﬁguration, the response rate rebounds to a more
elevated level of activity (indicated by the gray shading of the
response proﬁle). The vertical arrow indicates the time at which
the cells would have started to respond had the texture within the
RF itself been modiﬁed in the second step of the two-step condition. Note that the average response at this point in time is in
fact identical to the average response to the static homogeneous
texture display. Interestingly, the delay of modulation in the
two-step presentation (highlighted in gray) is the same as for the
modulation evoked by a normal one-step presentation of moat
versus homogeneous displays (Fig. 9b, showing average data from
the same sites collected in randomly interleaved trials).
Also in interleaved trials, we included a two-step presentation
similar to that in Figure 9a, except that the texture band added in
the second step was of the same disparity as the homogeneous
texture; thus, despite a texture change between steps one and two
as the band was added, both steps had the same steady-state
appearance of a homogeneous surface. Unlike the two-step presentation in which the moat was added in the second step, this
procedure yielded no consistent effect: responses were statistically
indistinguishable from those for the static homogeneous texture
presentation in 87% of recording sites ( p . 0.05 for two-sided t
test), and for the remaining sites, there was no bias toward
increased or decreased response (data not shown).
The results in this section are important, because they indicate
that extra-RF modulation need not be triggered by an initial burst
of activity. Rather, the results show that extra-RF modulation may
be triggered even when neurons have achieved a steady state of
ﬁring from constant RF stimulation. They suggest that extra-RF
contextual modulation is a neural process distinct from the normal RF functioning of a V1 neuron, because in contrast to the
delay in expressing extra-RF modulation, V1 neurons display their
tuning speciﬁcity for visual stimuli with their ﬁrst action potential
responses to visual stimulation .
It has been suggested that the delay in expression of contextual
modulation in our texture experiments is a phenomenon related
to the delay in neural response that can be observed with lowluminance contrast stimuli . This
speculation is based on the assumption that our texture ﬁgures in
some sense have low “effective” contrast analogous to the lowluminance contrast. However, this assumption ﬁts neither with
phenomenological observations of our actual displays (i.e., ﬁgures
do not appear to be “low contrast” on the monitor screen) nor
with behavioral data (i.e., monkeys consistently are able to initiate
eye movements to texture ﬁgures with short latencies in the range
of 120–150 msec), but for true low-contrast luminance stimuli, the
latency may be twice as long .
DISCUSSION
Given the images impinging on the retinae, the visual system must
model the three-dimensional structures of the distal world. Distal
world structure cannot be found through image-ﬁltering alone,
however, because the structures of the distal world modeled so
Characteristic delay of extra-RF contextual modulation. In a
two-step texture presentation procedure, we initially present the homogeneous texture display and then 150 msec later, change to the moat display
by manipulating only extra-RF texture. As the RF is entirely within the
moat-deﬁned ﬁgure, it receives static RF texture stimulation whether or
not the moat appears. In a, we compare average response proﬁles of 53
sites for the two-step moat presentation (trace M) and simple longduration homogeneous texture (trace H). The responses are identical until
;80 msec after the moat appears, after which the neural response rebounds for the moat condition. In b, we show the results of the analogous
one-step moat experiment performed on the same 53 sites in randomly
interleaved trials. Despite the different time course of RF stimulation, the
timing of extra-RF contextual modulation is the same.
Zipser et al. • Contextual Modulation in V1
J. Neurosci., November 15, 1996, 16(22):7376–7389 7387
richly through our perception do not in fact exist in the retinal
images . Rather, distal structure must
be inferred from their reﬂected traces of contour and texture in the
retinal images . Moreover, because we have a relatively ﬁxed vantage point on any scene at any given moment, the
visual system must also make inferences about forms not directly
visible, such as the manner in which surfaces continue beneath
occluding structures . For the visual system to accomplish these tasks, it must employ sophisticated mechanisms for
translating retinal images into models of the three-dimensional
structures in the distal world.
The function of area V1 has long appeared far removed from
these concerns. The RFs of V1 neurons are well described as
spatially localized ﬁlters, jointly tuned for orientation and spatial
frequency . The “lines” or “edges” that may stimulate
these cells do so not because they form
the contours of surfaces or objects in any perceptual context.
Rather, they do so merely because the cells are tuned for the
speciﬁc two-dimensional spatial frequency content of these stimuli, regardless of their perceptual context .
The tuning characteristics of V1 RFs for color and binocular
disparity are likewise well described as simple ﬁlters that have no
direct connection to the perceptual interpretation of distal world
structure .
The problem of synthesizing, from V1 RF ﬁlter information, a
perceptual model of distal world structure (as, for example, in
reconstructing the three-dimensional form of physical surfaces)
has traditionally been assumed to occur only at later stages of
visual processing than striate cortex. This view has appeared
sensible both because the ﬁlter description of V1 seemed conceptually complete , and because
there was little compelling evidence that V1 neurons could be
doing anything qualitatively different from simple image ﬁltering.
The extra-RF contextual modulation recently described by
Lamme and in the present paper stands in strong contrast
to the ﬁlter properties of the V1 RFs themselves, however. We
have seen that contextual modulation is a phenomenon of broad
spatial scope (Fig. 6), which is nonetheless sensitive to fairly
small-scale perturbations of the stimulus display (Fig. 8). It may
be evoked by a wide variety of visual cues (Fig. 4), and under
certain stimulus conditions, can respond invariantly to individual
cues or to cues in combination (Fig. 5). Yet under other conditions, strong image features will fail to evoke extra-RF modulation
and may even block its effects (Fig. 7). Although these observations in no way challenge theories of the functional role of the RF
itself, the complexity and apparent ﬂexibility of extra-RF contextual modulation in V1 clearly does challenge the view that the role
of the V1 neuron is solely to ﬁlter local regions of images in a
cue-speciﬁc manner.
There is, of course, a great difference between saying on the one
hand that V1 neurons do more than simple RF ﬁltering, and on
the other that V1 in fact participates in perceptual modeling of
distal world structure. Although the former point is now indisputable, the latter calls for debate. Our approach has been to observe
whether contextual modulation recorded in monkey V1 consistently follows our perception of textured displays. To an astounding degree, this has been the case. The results on binocular rivalry,
cue combination and invariance, and moat and frame, considered
together with Lamme’s previous data , in our opinion call
for serious consideration of the hypothesis that area V1 has access
to and participates in formation of perceptual interpretation of
the visual scene.
As is illustrated in Figure 10, the various primate extrastriate
cortical areas are all activated before the appearance of contextual modulation that we observed in V1 . The large
spatial scope and the complex RFs of extrastriate neurons , coupled with the delay in expression of
modulation in V1, should allow feedback signals from extrastriate
areas to support the neural events that we have observed. In
contrast, it is not clear from our current understanding of circuitry
within V1 that lateral connections in striate
cortex could underlie our results. One possible interpretation of
our data is that visual processing involves a series of temporally
discrete steps in which information is initially fed forward through
V1, is further processed in extrastriate cortex, and then returns to
V1 after an interval of ;50 msec. Such delayed feedback would
permit V1 access to perceptual interpretations of the visual scene,
such as surface or ﬁgure/ground representations of the distal
world, ascribed previously only to extrastriate cortical areas.