Fully Convolutional Networks for Semantic Segmentation
Jonathan Long∗
Evan Shelhamer∗
Trevor Darrell
UC Berkeley
{jonlong,shelhamer,trevor}@cs.berkeley.edu
Convolutional networks are powerful visual models that
yield hierarchies of features.
We show that convolutional networks by themselves, trained end-to-end, pixelsto-pixels, exceed the state-of-the-art in semantic segmentation. Our key insight is to build “fully convolutional”
networks that take input of arbitrary size and produce
correspondingly-sized output with efﬁcient inference and
learning. We deﬁne and detail the space of fully convolutional networks, explain their application to spatially dense
prediction tasks, and draw connections to prior models. We
adapt contemporary classiﬁcation networks (AlexNet ,
the VGG net , and GoogLeNet ) into fully convolutional networks and transfer their learned representations
by ﬁne-tuning to the segmentation task. We then de-
ﬁne a novel architecture that combines semantic information from a deep, coarse layer with appearance information
from a shallow, ﬁne layer to produce accurate and detailed
segmentations. Our fully convolutional network achieves
state-of-the-art segmentation of PASCAL VOC , NYUDv2,
and SIFT Flow, while inference takes less than one ﬁfth of a
second for a typical image.
1. Introduction
Convolutional networks are driving advances in recognition. Convnets are not only improving for whole-image
classiﬁcation , but also making progress on local tasks with structured output. These include advances in
bounding box object detection , part and keypoint prediction , and local correspondence .
The natural next step in the progression from coarse to
ﬁne inference is to make a prediction at every pixel. Prior
approaches have used convnets for semantic segmentation
 , in which each pixel is labeled with
the class of its enclosing object or region, but with shortcomings that this work addresses.
∗Authors contributed equally
backward/learning
forward/inference
pixelwise prediction
segmentation g.t.
Fully convolutional networks can efﬁciently learn to
make dense predictions for per-pixel tasks like semantic segmentation.
We show that a fully convolutional network (FCN),
trained end-to-end, pixels-to-pixels on semantic segmentation exceeds the state-of-the-art without further machinery. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work to train FCNs
end-to-end (1) for pixelwise prediction and (2) from supervised pre-training. Fully convolutional versions of existing
networks predict dense outputs from arbitrary-sized inputs.
Both learning and inference are performed whole-image-ata-time by dense feedforward computation and backpropagation. In-network upsampling layers enable pixelwise prediction and learning in nets with subsampled pooling.
This method is efﬁcient, both asymptotically and absolutely, and precludes the need for the complications in other
works. Patchwise training is common , but
lacks the efﬁciency of fully convolutional training. Our approach does not make use of pre- and post-processing complications, including superpixels , proposals ,
or post-hoc reﬁnement by random ﬁelds or local classiﬁers
 . Our model transfers recent success in classiﬁcation to dense prediction by reinterpreting classiﬁcation nets as fully convolutional and ﬁne-tuning from
their learned representations. In contrast, previous works
have applied small convnets without supervised pre-training
 .
Semantic segmentation faces an inherent tension between semantics and location: global information resolves
what while local information resolves where. Deep feature
 
hierarchies jointly encode location and semantics in a localto-global pyramid. We deﬁne a novel “skip” architecture
to combine deep, coarse, semantic information and shallow,
ﬁne, appearance information in Section 4.2 (see Figure 3).
In the next section, we review related work on deep classiﬁcation nets, FCNs, and recent approaches to semantic
segmentation using convnets. The following sections explain FCN design and dense prediction tradeoffs, introduce
our architecture with in-network upsampling and multilayer combinations, and describe our experimental framework. Finally, we demonstrate state-of-the-art results on
PASCAL VOC 2011-2, NYUDv2, and SIFT Flow.
2. Related work
Our approach draws on recent successes of deep nets
for image classiﬁcation and transfer learning
 . Transfer was ﬁrst demonstrated on various visual
recognition tasks , then on detection, and on both
instance and semantic segmentation in hybrid proposalclassiﬁer models . We now re-architect and ﬁnetune classiﬁcation nets to direct, dense prediction of semantic segmentation. We chart the space of FCNs and situate
prior models, both historical and recent, in this framework.
Fully convolutional networks To our knowledge, the
idea of extending a convnet to arbitrary-sized inputs ﬁrst
appeared in Matan et al. , which extended the classic
LeNet to recognize strings of digits. Because their net
was limited to one-dimensional input strings, Matan et al.
used Viterbi decoding to obtain their outputs. Wolf and Platt
 expand convnet outputs to 2-dimensional maps of detection scores for the four corners of postal address blocks.
Both of these historical works do inference and learning
fully convolutionally for detection. Ning et al. deﬁne
a convnet for coarse multiclass segmentation of C. elegans
tissues with fully convolutional inference.
Fully convolutional computation has also been exploited
in the present era of many-layered nets. Sliding window
detection by Sermanet et al. , semantic segmentation
by Pinheiro and Collobert , and image restoration by
Eigen et al. do fully convolutional inference. Fully convolutional training is rare, but used effectively by Tompson
et al. to learn an end-to-end part detector and spatial
model for pose estimation, although they do not exposit on
or analyze this method.
Alternatively,
nonconvolutional portion of classiﬁcation nets to make a
feature extractor.
They combine proposals and spatial
pyramid pooling to yield a localized, ﬁxed-length feature
for classiﬁcation.
While fast and effective, this hybrid
model cannot be learned end-to-end.
Dense prediction with convnets Several recent works
have applied convnets to dense prediction problems, including semantic segmentation by Ning et al. , Farabet et al.
 , and Pinheiro and Collobert ; boundary prediction
for electron microscopy by Ciresan et al. and for natural
images by a hybrid neural net/nearest neighbor model by
Ganin and Lempitsky ; and image restoration and depth
estimation by Eigen et al. . Common elements of these
approaches include
• small models restricting capacity and receptive ﬁelds;
• patchwise training ;
• post-processing by superpixel projection, random ﬁeld
regularization, ﬁltering, or local classiﬁcation [8, 2,
• input shifting and output interlacing for dense output
 as introduced by OverFeat ;
• multi-scale pyramid processing ;
• saturating tanh nonlinearities ; and
• ensembles ,
whereas our method does without this machinery. However,
we do study patchwise training 3.4 and “shift-and-stitch”
dense output 3.2 from the perspective of FCNs. We also
discuss in-network upsampling 3.3, of which the fully connected prediction by Eigen et al. is a special case.
Unlike these existing methods, we adapt and extend deep
classiﬁcation architectures, using image classiﬁcation as supervised pre-training, and ﬁne-tune fully convolutionally to
learn simply and efﬁciently from whole image inputs and
whole image ground thruths.
Hariharan et al. and Gupta et al. likewise adapt
deep classiﬁcation nets to semantic segmentation, but do
so in hybrid proposal-classiﬁer models. These approaches
ﬁne-tune an R-CNN system by sampling bounding
boxes and/or region proposals for detection, semantic segmentation, and instance segmentation. Neither method is
learned end-to-end.
They achieve state-of-the-art results on PASCAL VOC
segmentation and NYUDv2 segmentation respectively, so
we directly compare our standalone, end-to-end FCN to
their semantic segmentation results in Section 5.
3. Fully convolutional networks
Each layer of data in a convnet is a three-dimensional
array of size h × w × d, where h and w are spatial dimensions, and d is the feature or channel dimension. The ﬁrst
layer is the image, with pixel size h × w, and d color channels. Locations in higher layers correspond to the locations
in the image they are path-connected to, which are called
their receptive ﬁelds.
Convnets are built on translation invariance. Their basic components (convolution, pooling, and activation functions) operate on local input regions, and depend only on
relative spatial coordinates. Writing xij for the data vector
at location (i, j) in a particular layer, and yij for the following layer, these functions compute outputs yij by
yij = fks ({xsi+δi,sj+δj}0≤δi,δj≤k)
where k is called the kernel size, s is the stride or subsampling factor, and fks determines the layer type: a matrix
multiplication for convolution or average pooling, a spatial
max for max pooling, or an elementwise nonlinearity for an
activation function, and so on for other types of layers.
This functional form is maintained under composition,
with kernel size and stride obeying the transformation rule
fks ◦gk′s′ = (f ◦g)k′+(k−1)s′,ss′.
While a general deep net computes a general nonlinear
function, a net with only layers of this form computes a
nonlinear ﬁlter, which we call a deep ﬁlter or fully convolutional network. An FCN naturally operates on an input of
any size, and produces an output of corresponding (possibly
resampled) spatial dimensions.
A real-valued loss function composed with an FCN de-
ﬁnes a task. If the loss function is a sum over the spatial
dimensions of the ﬁnal layer, ℓ(x; θ) = P
ij ℓ′(xij; θ), its
gradient will be a sum over the gradients of each of its spatial components. Thus stochastic gradient descent on ℓcomputed on whole images will be the same as stochastic gradient descent on ℓ′, taking all of the ﬁnal layer receptive ﬁelds
as a minibatch.
When these receptive ﬁelds overlap signiﬁcantly, both
feedforward computation and backpropagation are much
more efﬁcient when computed layer-by-layer over an entire
image instead of independently patch-by-patch.
We next explain how to convert classiﬁcation nets into
fully convolutional nets that produce coarse output maps.
For pixelwise prediction, we need to connect these coarse
outputs back to the pixels. Section 3.2 describes a trick that
OverFeat introduced for this purpose. We gain insight
into this trick by reinterpreting it as an equivalent network
modiﬁcation. As an efﬁcient, effective alternative, we introduce deconvolution layers for upsampling in Section 3.3.
In Section 3.4 we consider training by patchwise sampling,
and give evidence in Section 4.3 that our whole image training is faster and equally effective.
3.1. Adapting classiﬁers for dense prediction
Typical recognition nets, including LeNet , AlexNet
 , and its deeper successors , ostensibly take
ﬁxed-sized inputs and produce nonspatial outputs. The fully
connected layers of these nets have ﬁxed dimensions and
throw away spatial coordinates. However, these fully connected layers can also be viewed as convolutions with kernels that cover their entire input regions. Doing so casts
them into fully convolutional networks that take input of
any size and output classiﬁcation maps. This transformation
`tabby cat"
96 256 384
tabby cat heatmap
convolutionalization
Transforming fully connected layers into convolution
layers enables a classiﬁcation net to output a heatmap. Adding
layers and a spatial loss (as in Figure 1) produces an efﬁcient machine for end-to-end dense learning.
is illustrated in Figure 2. (By contrast, nonconvolutional
nets, such as the one by Le et al. , lack this capability.)
Furthermore, while the resulting maps are equivalent to
the evaluation of the original net on particular input patches,
the computation is highly amortized over the overlapping
regions of those patches. For example, while AlexNet takes
1.2 ms (on a typical GPU) to produce the classiﬁcation
scores of a 227 × 227 image, the fully convolutional version takes 22 ms to produce a 10 × 10 grid of outputs from
a 500 × 500 image, which is more than 5 times faster than
the na¨ıve approach1.
The spatial output maps of these convolutionalized models make them a natural choice for dense problems like semantic segmentation. With ground truth available at every output cell, both the forward and backward passes are
straightforward, and both take advantage of the inherent
computational efﬁciency (and aggressive optimization) of
convolution.
The corresponding backward times for the AlexNet example are 2.4 ms for a single image and 37 ms for a fully
convolutional 10 × 10 output map, resulting in a speedup
similar to that of the forward pass. This dense backpropagation is illustrated in Figure 1.
While our reinterpretation of classiﬁcation nets as fully
convolutional yields output maps for inputs of any size, the
output dimensions are typically reduced by subsampling.
The classiﬁcation nets subsample to keep ﬁlters small and
computational requirements reasonable. This coarsens the
output of a fully convolutional version of these nets, reducing it from the size of the input by a factor equal to the pixel
stride of the receptive ﬁelds of the output units.
1Assuming efﬁcient batching of single image inputs. The classiﬁcation
scores for a single image by itself take 5.4 ms to produce, which is nearly
25 times slower than the fully convolutional version.
3.2. Shift-and-stitch is ﬁlter rarefaction
Input shifting and output interlacing is a trick that yields
dense predictions from coarse outputs without interpolation, introduced by OverFeat . If the outputs are downsampled by a factor of f, the input is shifted (by left and top
padding) x pixels to the right and y pixels down, once for
every value of (x, y) ∈{0, . . . , f −1} × {0, . . . , f −1}.
These f 2 inputs are each run through the convnet, and the
outputs are interlaced so that the predictions correspond to
the pixels at the centers of their receptive ﬁelds.
Changing only the ﬁlters and layer strides of a convnet
can produce the same output as this shift-and-stitch trick.
Consider a layer (convolution or pooling) with input stride
s, and a following convolution layer with ﬁlter weights fij
(eliding the feature dimensions, irrelevant here). Setting the
lower layer’s input stride to 1 upsamples its output by a factor of s, just like shift-and-stitch. However, convolving the
original ﬁlter with the upsampled output does not produce
the same result as the trick, because the original ﬁlter only
sees a reduced portion of its (now upsampled) input. To
reproduce the trick, rarefy the ﬁlter by enlarging it as
 fi/s,j/s
if s divides both i and j;
otherwise,
(with i and j zero-based). Reproducing the full net output
of the trick involves repeating this ﬁlter enlargement layerby-layer until all subsampling is removed.
Simply decreasing subsampling within a net is a tradeoff:
the ﬁlters see ﬁner information, but have smaller receptive
ﬁelds and take longer to compute. We have seen that the
shift-and-stitch trick is another kind of tradeoff: the output
is made denser without decreasing the receptive ﬁeld sizes
of the ﬁlters, but the ﬁlters are prohibited from accessing
information at a ﬁner scale than their original design.
Although we have done preliminary experiments with
shift-and-stitch, we do not use it in our model. We ﬁnd
learning through upsampling, as described in the next section, to be more effective and efﬁcient, especially when
combined with the skip layer fusion described later on.
3.3. Upsampling is backwards strided convolution
Another way to connect coarse outputs to dense pixels
is interpolation. For instance, simple bilinear interpolation
computes each output yij from the nearest four inputs by a
linear map that depends only on the relative positions of the
input and output cells.
In a sense, upsampling with factor f is convolution with
a fractional input stride of 1/f. So long as f is integral, a
natural way to upsample is therefore backwards convolution
(sometimes called deconvolution) with an output stride of
f. Such an operation is trivial to implement, since it simply
reverses the forward and backward passes of convolution.
Thus upsampling is performed in-network for end-to-end
learning by backpropagation from the pixelwise loss.
Note that the deconvolution ﬁlter in such a layer need not
be ﬁxed (e.g., to bilinear upsampling), but can be learned.
A stack of deconvolution layers and activation functions can
even learn a nonlinear upsampling.
In our experiments, we ﬁnd that in-network upsampling
is fast and effective for learning dense prediction. Our best
segmentation architecture uses these layers to learn to upsample for reﬁned prediction in Section 4.2.
3.4. Patchwise training is loss sampling
In stochastic optimization, gradient computation is
driven by the training distribution. Both patchwise training and fully-convolutional training can be made to produce any distribution, although their relative computational
efﬁciency depends on overlap and minibatch size. Whole
image fully convolutional training is identical to patchwise
training where each batch consists of all the receptive ﬁelds
of the units below the loss for an image (or collection of
images). While this is more efﬁcient than uniform sampling
of patches, it reduces the number of possible batches. However, random selection of patches within an image may be
recovered simply. Restricting the loss to a randomly sampled subset of its spatial terms (or, equivalently applying a
DropConnect mask between the output and the loss)
excludes patches from the gradient computation.
If the kept patches still have signiﬁcant overlap, fully
convolutional computation will still speed up training. If
gradients are accumulated over multiple backward passes,
batches can include patches from several images.2
Sampling in patchwise training can correct class imbalance and mitigate the spatial correlation of dense
patches . In fully convolutional training, class balance can also be achieved by weighting the loss, and loss
sampling can be used to address spatial correlation.
We explore training with sampling in Section 4.3, and do
not ﬁnd that it yields faster or better convergence for dense
prediction. Whole image training is effective and efﬁcient.
4. Segmentation Architecture
We cast ILSVRC classiﬁers into FCNs and augment
them for dense prediction with in-network upsampling and
a pixelwise loss. We train for segmentation by ﬁne-tuning.
Next, we build a novel skip architecture that combines
coarse, semantic and local, appearance information to re-
ﬁne prediction.
For this investigation, we train and validate on the PAS-
CAL VOC 2011 segmentation challenge . We train with
2Note that not every possible patch is included this way, since the receptive ﬁelds of the ﬁnal layer units lie on a ﬁxed, strided grid. However,
by shifting the image left and down by a random value up to the stride,
random selection from all possible patches may be recovered.
a per-pixel multinomial logistic loss and validate with the
standard metric of mean pixel intersection over union, with
the mean taken over all classes, including background. The
training ignores pixels that are masked out (as ambiguous
or difﬁcult) in the ground truth.
4.1. From classiﬁer to dense FCN
We begin by convolutionalizing proven classiﬁcation architectures as in Section 3. We consider the AlexNet3 architecture that won ILSVRC12, as well as the VGG
nets and the GoogLeNet4 which did exceptionally well in ILSVRC14. We pick the VGG 16-layer net5,
which we found to be equivalent to the 19-layer net on this
task. For GoogLeNet, we use only the ﬁnal loss layer, and
improve performance by discarding the ﬁnal average pooling layer. We decapitate each net by discarding the ﬁnal
classiﬁer layer, and convert all fully connected layers to
convolutions. We append a 1 × 1 convolution with channel dimension 21 to predict scores for each of the PAS-
CAL classes (including background) at each of the coarse
output locations, followed by a deconvolution layer to bilinearly upsample the coarse outputs to pixel-dense outputs
as described in Section 3.3. Table 1 compares the preliminary validation results along with the basic characteristics
of each net. We report the best results achieved after convergence at a ﬁxed learning rate (at least 175 epochs).
Fine-tuning from classiﬁcation to segmentation gave reasonable predictions for each net.
Even the worst model
achieved ∼75% of state-of-the-art performance.
segmentation-equippped VGG net (FCN-VGG16) already
appears to be state-of-the-art at 56.0 mean IU on val, compared to 52.6 on test . Training on extra data raises
performance to 59.4 mean IU on a subset of val7. Training
details are given in Section 4.3.
Despite similar classiﬁcation accuracy, our implementation of GoogLeNet did not match this segmentation result.
4.2. Combining what and where
We deﬁne a new fully convolutional net (FCN) for segmentation that combines layers of the feature hierarchy and
reﬁnes the spatial precision of the output. See Figure 3.
While fully convolutionalized classiﬁers can be ﬁnetuned to segmentation as shown in 4.1, and even score
highly on the standard metric, their output is dissatisfyingly
coarse (see Figure 4). The 32 pixel stride at the ﬁnal prediction layer limits the scale of detail in the upsampled output.
We address this by adding links that combine the ﬁnal
prediction layer with lower layers with ﬁner strides. This
3Using the publicly available CaffeNet reference model.
4Since there is no publicly available version of GoogLeNet, we use
our own reimplementation. Our version is trained with less extensive data
augmentation, and gets 68.5% top-1 and 88.4% top-5 ILSVRC accuracy.
5Using the publicly available version from the Caffe model zoo.
Table 1. We adapt and extend three classiﬁcation convnets to segmentation. We compare performance by mean intersection over
union on the validation set of PASCAL VOC 2011 and by inference time (averaged over 20 trials for a 500 × 500 input on an
NVIDIA Tesla K40c). We detail the architecture of the adapted
nets as regards dense prediction: number of parameter layers, receptive ﬁeld size of output units, and the coarsest stride within the
net. (These numbers give the best performance obtained at a ﬁxed
learning rate, not best performance possible.)
GoogLeNet4
forward time
conv. layers
parameters
max stride
turns a line topology into a DAG, with edges that skip ahead
from lower layers to higher ones (Figure 3). As they see
fewer pixels, the ﬁner scale predictions should need fewer
layers, so it makes sense to make them from shallower net
outputs. Combining ﬁne layers and coarse layers lets the
model make local predictions that respect global structure.
By analogy to the multiscale local jet of Florack et al. ,
we call our nonlinear local feature hierarchy the deep jet.
We ﬁrst divide the output stride in half by predicting
from a 16 pixel stride layer. We add a 1 × 1 convolution
layer on top of pool4 to produce additional class predictions. We fuse this output with the predictions computed
on top of conv7 (convolutionalized fc7) at stride 32 by
adding a 2× upsampling layer and summing6 both predictions. (See Figure 3). We initialize the 2× upsampling to
bilinear interpolation, but allow the parameters to be learned
as described in Section 3.3. Finally, the stride 16 predictions
are upsampled back to the image. We call this net FCN-16s.
FCN-16s is learned end-to-end, initialized with the parameters of the last, coarser net, which we now call FCN-32s.
The new parameters acting on pool4 are zero-initialized so
that the net starts with unmodiﬁed predictions. The learning
rate is decreased by a factor of 100.
Learning this skip net improves performance on the validation set by 3.0 mean IU to 62.4. Figure 4 shows improvement in the ﬁne structure of the output. We compared
this fusion with learning only from the pool4 layer (which
resulted in poor performance), and simply decreasing the
learning rate without adding the extra link (which results
in an insigniﬁcant performance improvement, without improving the quality of the output).
We continue in this fashion by fusing predictions from
pool3 with a 2× upsampling of predictions fused from
pool4 and conv7, building the net FCN-8s. We obtain
6Max fusion made learning difﬁcult due to gradient switching.
Ground truth
Figure 4. Reﬁning fully convolutional nets by fusing information
from layers with different strides improves segmentation detail.
The ﬁrst three images show the output from our 32, 16, and 8
pixel stride nets (see Figure 3).
Comparison of skip FCNs on a subset of PASCAL
VOC2011 validation7. Learning is end-to-end, except for FCN-
32s-ﬁxed, where only the last layer is ﬁne-tuned. Note that FCN-
32s is FCN-VGG16, renamed to highlight stride.
FCN-32s-ﬁxed
a minor additional improvement to 62.7 mean IU, and ﬁnd
a slight improvement in the smoothness and detail of our
output. At this point our fusion improvements have met diminishing returns, both with respect to the IU metric which
emphasizes large-scale correctness, and also in terms of the
improvement visible e.g. in Figure 4, so we do not continue
fusing even lower layers.
Reﬁnement by other means Decreasing the stride of
pooling layers is the most straightforward way to obtain
ﬁner predictions. However, doing so is problematic for our
VGG16-based net. Setting the pool5 layer to have stride 1
requires our convolutionalized fc6 to have a kernel size of
14 × 14 in order to maintain its receptive ﬁeld size. In addition to their computational cost, we had difﬁculty learning
such large ﬁlters. We made an attempt to re-architect the
layers above pool5 with smaller ﬁlters, but were not successful in achieving comparable performance; one possible
explanation is that the initialization from ImageNet-trained
weights in the upper layers is important.
Another way to obtain ﬁner predictions is to use the shiftand-stitch trick described in Section 3.2. In limited experiments, we found the cost to improvement ratio from this
method to be worse than layer fusion.
4.3. Experimental framework
Optimization We train by SGD with momentum. We
use a minibatch size of 20 images and ﬁxed learning rates of
10−3, 10−4, and 5−5 for FCN-AlexNet, FCN-VGG16, and
FCN-GoogLeNet, respectively, chosen by line search. We
use momentum 0.9, weight decay of 5−4 or 2−4, and doubled the learning rate for biases, although we found training
to be insensitive to these parameters (but sensitive to the
learning rate). We zero-initialize the class scoring convolution layer, ﬁnding random initialization to yield neither
better performance nor faster convergence. Dropout was included where used in the original classiﬁer nets.
Fine-tuning
backpropagation through the whole net.
Fine-tuning the
output classiﬁer alone yields only 70% of the full ﬁnetuning performance as compared in Table 2. Training from
scratch is not feasible considering the time required to
learn the base classiﬁcation nets. (Note that the VGG net is
trained in stages, while we initialize from the full 16-layer
version.) Fine-tuning takes three days on a single GPU for
the coarse FCN-32s version, and about one day each to
upgrade to the FCN-16s and FCN-8s versions.
Patch Sampling As explained in Section 3.4, our full
image training effectively batches each image into a reguimage
32x upsampled
prediction (FCN-32s)
2x upsampled
prediction
16x upsampled
prediction (FCN-16s)
8x upsampled
prediction (FCN-8s)
prediction
2x upsampled
prediction
prediction
Figure 3. Our DAG nets learn to combine coarse, high layer information with ﬁne, low layer information. Layers are shown as grids that
reveal relative spatial coarseness. Only pooling and prediction layers are shown; intermediate convolution layers (including our converted
fully connected layers) are omitted. Solid line (FCN-32s): Our single-stream net, described in Section 4.1, upsamples stride 32 predictions
back to pixels in a single step. Dashed line (FCN-16s): Combining predictions from both the ﬁnal layer and the pool4 layer, at stride
16, lets our net predict ﬁner details, while retaining high-level semantic information. Dotted line (FCN-8s): Additional predictions from
pool3, at stride 8, provide further precision.
iteration number
full images
50% sampling
25% sampling
relative time (num. images processed)
Figure 5. Training on whole images is just as effective as sampling
patches, but results in faster (wall time) convergence by making
more efﬁcient use of data. Left shows the effect of sampling on
convergence rate for a ﬁxed expected batch size, while right plots
the same by relative wall time.
lar grid of large, overlapping patches. By contrast, prior
work randomly samples patches over a full dataset , potentially resulting in higher variance batches
that may accelerate convergence . We study this tradeoff by spatially sampling the loss in the manner described
earlier, making an independent choice to ignore each ﬁnal
layer cell with some probability 1−p. To avoid changing the
effective batch size, we simultaneously increase the number
of images per batch by a factor 1/p. Note that due to the ef-
ﬁciency of convolution, this form of rejection sampling is
still faster than patchwise training for large enough values
of p (e.g., at least for p > 0.2 according to the numbers
in Section 3.1). Figure 5 shows the effect of this form of
sampling on convergence. We ﬁnd that sampling does not
have a signiﬁcant effect on convergence rate compared to
whole image training, but takes signiﬁcantly more time due
to the larger number of images that need to be considered
per batch. We therefore choose unsampled, whole image
training in our other experiments.
Class Balancing Fully convolutional training can balance classes by weighting or sampling the loss. Although
our labels are mildly unbalanced (about 3/4 are background), we ﬁnd class balancing unnecessary.
Dense Prediction The scores are upsampled to the input dimensions by deconvolution layers within the net. Final layer deconvolutional ﬁlters are ﬁxed to bilinear interpolation, while intermediate upsampling layers are initialized to bilinear upsampling, and then learned. Shift-andstitch (Section 3.2), or the ﬁlter rarefaction equivalent, are
Augmentation We tried augmenting the training data
by randomly mirroring and “jittering” the images by translating them up to 32 pixels (the coarsest scale of prediction)
in each direction. This yielded no noticeable improvement.
More Training Data The PASCAL VOC 2011 segmentation challenge training set, which we used for Table 1,
labels 1112 images. Hariharan et al. have collected
labels for a much larger set of 8498 PASCAL training images, which was used to train the previous state-of-the-art
system, SDS . This training data improves the FCN-
VGG16 validation score7 by 3.4 points to 59.4 mean IU.
Implementation All models are trained and tested with
Caffe on a single NVIDIA Tesla K40c. The models
and code will be released open-source on publication.
5. Results
We test our FCN on semantic segmentation and scene
parsing, exploring PASCAL VOC, NYUDv2, and SIFT
Flow. Although these tasks have historically distinguished
between objects and regions, we treat both uniformly as
pixel prediction. We evaluate our FCN skip architecture8
on each of these datasets, and then extend it to multi-modal
input for NYUDv2 and multi-task prediction for the semantic and geometric labels of SIFT Flow.
Metrics We report four metrics from common semantic
segmentation and scene parsing evaluations that are variations on pixel accuracy and region intersection over union
(IU). Let nij be the number of pixels of class i predicted to
belong to class j, where there are ncl different classes, and
let ti = P
j nij be the total number of pixels of class i. We
• pixel accuracy: P
• mean accuraccy: (1/ncl) P
• mean IU: (1/ncl) P
j nji −nii
• frequency weighted IU:
j nji −nii
PASCAL VOC Table 3 gives the performance of our
FCN-8s on the test sets of PASCAL VOC 2011 and 2012,
and compares it to the previous state-of-the-art, SDS ,
and the well-known R-CNN . We achieve the best results on mean IU9 by a relative margin of 20%. Inference
time is reduced 114× (convnet only, ignoring proposals and
reﬁnement) or 286× (overall).
Table 3. Our fully convolutional net gives a 20% relative improvement over the state-of-the-art on the PASCAL VOC 2011 and 2012
test sets, and reduces inference time.
VOC2011 test
VOC2012 test
R-CNN 
NYUDv2 is an RGB-D dataset collected using the
7There are training images from included in the PASCAL VOC
2011 val set, so we validate on the non-intersecting set of 736 images. An
earlier version of this paper mistakenly evaluated on the entire val set.
 
9This is the only metric provided by the test server.
Results on NYUDv2. RGBD is early-fusion of the
RGB and depth channels at the input. HHA is the depth embedding of as horizontal disparity, height above ground, and
the angle of the local surface normal with the inferred gravity
direction. RGB-HHA is the jointly trained late fusion model
that sums RGB and HHA predictions.
Gupta et al. 
FCN-32s RGB
FCN-32s RGBD
FCN-32s HHA
FCN-32s RGB-HHA
FCN-16s RGB-HHA
Microsoft Kinect. It has 1449 RGB-D images, with pixelwise labels that have been coalesced into a 40 class semantic segmentation task by Gupta et al. . We report results
on the standard split of 795 training images and 654 testing
images. Table 4 gives the performance of our model
in several variations. First we train our unmodiﬁed coarse
model (FCN-32s) on RGB images. To add depth information, we train on a model upgraded to take four-channel
RGB-D input (early fusion). This provides little beneﬁt,
perhaps due to the difﬁcultly of propagating meaningful
gradients all the way through the model. Following the success of Gupta et al. , we try the three-dimensional HHA
encoding of depth, training nets on just this information, as
well as a “late fusion” of RGB and HHA where the predictions from both nets are summed at the ﬁnal layer, and the
resulting two-stream net is learned end-to-end. Finally we
upgrade this late fusion net to a 16-stride version.
SIFT Flow is a dataset of 2,688 images with pixel labels
for 33 semantic categories (“bridge”, “mountain”, “sun”),
as well as three geometric categories (“horizontal”, “vertical”, and “sky”). An FCN can naturally learn a joint representation that simultaneously predicts both types of labels.
We learn a two-headed version of FCN-16s with semantic and geometric prediction layers and losses. The learned
model performs as well on both tasks as two independently
trained models, while learning and inference are essentially
as fast as each independent model by itself. The results in
Table 5, computed on the standard split into 2,488 training
and 200 test images,10 show state-of-the-art performance on
both tasks.
10Three of the SIFT Flow categories are not present in the test set. We
made predictions across all 33 categories, but only included categories actually present in the test set in our evaluation. (An earlier version of this paper reported a lower mean IU, which included all categories either present
or predicted in the evaluation.)
Results on SIFT Flow10 with class segmentation
(center) and geometric segmentation (right).
Tighe is
a non-parametric transfer method.
Tighe 1 is an exemplar
SVM while 2 is SVM + MRF. Farabet is a multi-scale convnet trained on class-balanced samples (1) or natural frequency
samples (2). Pinheiro is a multi-scale, recurrent convnet, denoted RCNN3 (◦3). The metric for geometry is pixel accuracy.
Liu et al. 
Tighe et al. 
Tighe et al. 1
Tighe et al. 2
Farabet et al. 1
Farabet et al. 2
Pinheiro et al. 
Ground Truth
Fully convolutional segmentation nets produce stateof-the-art performance on PASCAL. The left column shows the
output of our highest performing net, FCN-8s. The second shows
the segmentations produced by the previous state-of-the-art system
by Hariharan et al. . Notice the ﬁne structures recovered (ﬁrst
row), ability to separate closely interacting objects (second row),
and robustness to occluders (third row). The fourth row shows a
failure case: the net sees lifejackets in a boat as people.
6. Conclusion
Fully convolutional networks are a rich class of models, of which modern classiﬁcation convnets are a special case. Recognizing this, extending these classiﬁcation
nets to segmentation, and improving the architecture with
multi-resolution layer combinations dramatically improves
the state-of-the-art, while simultaneously simplifying and
speeding up learning and inference.
Acknowledgements This work was supported in part
by DARPA’s MSEE and SMISC programs, NSF awards IIS-
1427425, IIS-1212798, IIS-1116411, and the NSF GRFP,
Toyota, and the Berkeley Vision and Learning Center. We
gratefully acknowledge NVIDIA for GPU donation. We
thank Bharath Hariharan and Saurabh Gupta for their advice and dataset tools. We thank Sergio Guadarrama for
reproducing GoogLeNet in Caffe. We thank Jitendra Malik
for his helpful comments. Thanks to Wei Liu for pointing
out an issue wth our SIFT Flow mean IU computation and
an error in our frequency weighted mean IU formula.
A. Upper Bounds on IU
In this paper, we have achieved good performance on
the mean IU segmentation metric even with coarse semantic
prediction. To better understand this metric and the limits
of this approach with respect to it, we compute approximate
upper bounds on performance with prediction at various
scales. We do this by downsampling ground truth images
and then upsampling them again to simulate the best results
obtainable with a particular downsampling factor. The following table gives the mean IU on a subset of PASCAL
2011 val for various downsampling factors.
Pixel-perfect prediction is clearly not necessary to
achieve mean IU well above state-of-the-art, and, conversely, mean IU is a not a good measure of ﬁne-scale accuracy.
B. More Results
We further evaluate our FCN for semantic segmentation.
PASCAL-Context provides whole scene annotations of PASCAL VOC 2010. While there are over 400 distinct classes, we follow the 59 class task deﬁned by that
picks the most frequent classes. We train and evaluate on
the training and val sets respectively. In Table 6, we compare to the joint object + stuff variation of Convolutional
Feature Masking which is the previous state-of-the-art
on this task. FCN-8s scores 35.1 mean IU for an 11% relative improvement.
The arXiv version of this paper is kept up-to-date with
corrections and additional relevant material. The following
gives a brief history of changes.
Table 6. Results on PASCAL-Context. CFM is the best result of
 by convolutional feature masking and segment pursuit with the
VGG net. O2P is the second order pooling method as reported
in the errata of . The 59 class task includes the 59 most frequent classes while the 33 class task consists of an easier subset
identiﬁed by .
v2 Add Appendix A giving upper bounds on mean IU and
Appendix B with PASCAL-Context results. Correct PAS-
CAL validation numbers (previously, some val images were
included in train), SIFT Flow mean IU (which used an inappropriately strict metric), and an error in the frequency
weighted mean IU formula. Add link to models and update
timing numbers to reﬂect improved implementation (which
is publicly available).