UvA-DARE is a service provided by the library of the University of Amsterdam ( 
UvA-DARE (Digital Academic Repository)
Three insights from a Bayesian interpretation of the one-sided P value
Marsman, M.; Wagenmakers, E.-J.
10.1177/0013164416669201
Publication date
Document Version
Final published version
 
Educational and Psychological Measurement
Article 25fa Dutch Copyright Act ( 
Link to publication
Citation for published version (APA):
Marsman, M., & Wagenmakers, E.-J. . Three insights from a Bayesian interpretation of
the one-sided P value. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 77(3), 529-539.
 
General rights
It is not permitted to download or to forward/distribute the text or part of it without the consent of the author(s)
and/or copyright holder(s), other than for strictly personal, individual use, unless the work is under an open
content license (like Creative Commons).
Disclaimer/Complaints regulations
If you believe that digital publication of certain material infringes any of your rights or (privacy) interests, please
let the Library know, stating your reasons. In case of a legitimate complaint, the Library will make the material
inaccessible and/or remove it from the website. Please Ask the Library: or a letter
to: Library of the University of Amsterdam, Secretariat, Singel 425, 1012 WP Amsterdam, The Netherlands. You
will be contacted as soon as possible.
Download date:26 Mar 2025
Educational and Psychological
Measurement
2017, Vol. 77(3) 529–539
 The Author(s) 2016
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0013164416669201
journals.sagepub.com/home/epm
Three Insights from a
Bayesian Interpretation of
the One-Sided P Value
Maarten Marsman1 and Eric-Jan Wagenmakers1
P values have been critiqued on several grounds but remain entrenched as the dominant inferential method in the empirical sciences. In this article, we elaborate on the
fact that in many statistical models, the one-sided P value has a direct Bayesian interpretation as the approximate posterior mass for values lower than zero. The connection between the one-sided P value and posterior probability mass reveals three
insights: (1) P values can be interpreted as Bayesian tests of direction, to be used only
when the null hypothesis is known from the outset to be false; (2) as a measure of
evidence, P values are biased against a point null hypothesis; and (3) with N fixed and
effect size variable, there is an approximately linear relation between P values and
Bayesian point null hypothesis tests.
hypothesis testing, Bayesian inference, null hypothesis, estimation
Across the empirical sciences—be it in medicine, biology, neuroscience, economics,
sociology, or psychology—the classical P value is arguably the single most influential concept for statistical inference. Scientific claims about the presence of hypothesized effects are judged fit for publication only when the associated statistical tests
yield P\:05, in which case researchers feel sanctioned to ‘‘reject the null hypothesis’’ and consequently embrace the alternative hypothesis. Despite its stranglehold
on statistical reporting, however, the P value has been subject to intense scrutiny and
numerous critiques; accessible overviews are provided by D. H. Johnson ,
1University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Corresponding Author:
Maarten Marsman, Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Nieuwe Achtergracht 130, 1018
VZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Email: 
Morrison and Henkel , Mulaik and Steiger , Nickerson , and
Wagenmakers .
The P value detractors usually do not mince words. For instance, Edwards argued that ‘‘classical significance tests are violently biased against the null
hypothesis.’’ Berger and Delampady stated that ‘‘when testing precise
hypotheses, formal use of P-values should be abandoned. Almost anything will give
a better indication of the evidence provided by the data against H0.’’ Meehl 
claimed that
the almost universal reliance on merely refuting the null hypothesis as the standard method
for corroborating substantive theories in the soft areas is a terrible mistake, is basically
unsound, poor scientific strategy, and one of the worst things that ever happened in the history of psychology. (p. 817)
Rozeboom echoed this statement when he called P value significance
testing ‘‘surely the most bone-headedly misguided procedure ever institutionalized in
the rote training of science students.’’
Undeterred by such verbal onslaughts, some researchers believe that the critiques
against P values are overstated or misplaced. For instance, Wainer 
feels ‘‘a little at a loss to understand fully the vehemence and vindictiveness’’ of the
P value critiques; Hagen praises the logic of P value hypothesis testing,
calling it ‘‘elegant’’ and ‘‘extraordinarily creative’’; and Leek and Peng point out that ‘‘arguing about the p value is like focusing on a single misspelling, rather than on the faulty logic of a sentence,’’ and recommend that statisticians
‘‘need to stop arguing about P values.’’
In this article, we continue to argue over P values. We depart by outlining a wellknown Bayesian interpretation of the one-sided P value, and then sketch three immediate consequences. By doing so we hope to increase the field’s awareness of what P
values are and what they are not .
Point of Departure: A Bayesian Interpretation of the
One-Sided P Value
The Bayesian interpretation of the one-sided P value has a long and ongoing history
 .
The main result may be summarized as follows. Consider Bayesian parameter estimation for the location parameter m in a statistical model from the exponential family, assume the prior on m is uniform on the real line, and denote the observed data
by y: Then the proportion of the posterior distribution with mass lower than zero
equals the one-sided classical P value, that is ,
Educational and Psychological Measurement 77(3)
p(mjy)dm = P1:
Thus, for the classical statistician the one-sided P value represents the outcome of a
significance test that assumes the null hypothesis is true, whereas for the Bayesian
statistician the one-sided P value can be obtained from an estimation procedure (i.e.,
posterior updating of m) that assumes the null hypothesis is false.
Furthermore, in this specific case the Bayesian estimation outcome is directly
related to a Bayesian test for direction, one in which we contrast Hþ : m . 0 (i.e., the
effect is positive) against H : m\0 (i.e., the effect is negative). When the prior is
symmetric around m = 0, the Bayes factor hypothesis test simplifies to
BF +  = p(yjHþ)
0 p(mjy)dm
‘ p(mjy)dm
where P1 denotes the classical one-sided P value. Hence, there is a direct and exact
relation between the Bayes factor for a test of direction and the one-sided P value
such that log(BF + ) = logit(P1):
As mentioned above, the relationship is exact for location parameters in models
from the exponential family when these parameters are assigned uniform priors; for
other parameters and prior distributions the relationship is approximate . In what
follows we explore three consequences and insights afforded by the Bayesian interpretation of the one-sided P value.
First Consequence: P Values Are Meaningful Only When the
Null Hypothesis Is False
The Bayesian interpretation of the one-sided P value is that it is a test for direction,
as the logit of the one-sided P value equals the log of the Bayes factor that contrasts
Hþ : m . 0 (i.e., the effect is positive) against H : m\0 (i.e., the effect is negative).
Consequently, from this Bayesian perspective, the one-sided P value is appropriate
only when H0 : m = 0 is known from the outset to be false or uninteresting .
The interpretation of a one-sided P value as a test for direction—not as a test for
the null hypothesis—is relevant because a common critique against the use of P values is that the null hypothesis is nearly always false. For instance, D. H. Johnson
 complains,
Marsman and Wagenmakers
P is calculated under the assumption that the null hypothesis is true. Most null hypotheses
tested, however, state that some parameter equals zero, or that some set of parameters are
all equal. These hypotheses, called point null hypotheses, are almost invariably known to
be false before any data are collected. (p. 764)
The same sentiment was expressed by Cohen :
A little thought reveals a fact widely understood among statisticians: The null hypothesis,
taken literally (and that’s the only way you can take it in formal hypothesis testing), is
always false in the real world. It can only be true in the bowels of a computer processor
running a Monte Carlo study (and even then a stray electron may make it false). If it is
false, even to a tiny degree, it must be the case that a large enough sample will produce a
significant result and lead to its rejection. So if the null hypothesis is always false, what’s
the big deal about rejecting it? (p. 1308)
From a Bayesian perspective, however, the one-sided P value is not a test that
involves the null hypothesis at all—instead, it is a test for the direction of an effect,
suitable exactly for those scenarios where D. H. Johnson and Cohen 
argued it is meaningless. Note that in the Bayesian interpretation, collecting a large
enough sample does not confirm the obvious; instead, what will be confirmed is the
true direction of the effect. Paradoxically, the threat to the validity of the Bayesian
interpretation of the one-sided P value is not that the null hypothesis is false, but that
the null hypothesis is true. For when the null is exactly true, the test is between two
directional models that are both equally wrong: The truth is literally in the middle
 .
In sum, from a Bayesian perspective the one-sided P value represents a test for
direction, a test that is valid only when the null hypothesis is false. For readers familiar with the popular argument against P values (i.e., ‘‘the null is never true’’) this line
of argumentation may come as a surprise.
Second Consequence: P Values Are Biased Against H0
As alluded to earlier, several statisticians have remarked that P values overestimate
the evidence against a point null hypothesis . The relation expressed in Equation 2 allows us to bypass
mathematical details and present an intuitive argument: the one-sided P value corresponds to a Bayesian test for direction, in which Hþ is pitted against H; for the
same data, such a test for direction generally yields a more diagnostic outcome than
a test for existence, for instance, one that compares H1 (i.e., ‘‘there is an effect’’)
against H0 (i.e., ‘‘there is no effect’’). The reason why tests for direction are relatively diagnostic is because the models involved make opposite predictions: under
one model the effect is predicted to be negative, whereas under the other model the
Educational and Psychological Measurement 77(3)
effect is predicted to be positive. In contrast, for a test of existence, H0 is often a
reduced case of H1, which means that the models can make similar predictions.
For example, consider a match between two avid Rummikub players. After six
games, Player A is leading Player B by 4-2. If the choice is between Hþ: ‘‘Player A
is better than player B’’ versus H: ‘‘Player B is better than Player A,’’ one might
have a strong intuitive preference in favor of Hþ: After all, Player B is unlikely to
be losing by 4-2 when she is in reality the better player. However, if the choice is
between H1: ‘‘Player A and Player B are not equally good’’ versus H0: ‘‘Player A
and Player B are equally good,’’ one’s preference is certainly less pronounced: A
score of 4-2 is not that unlikely to occur when the players are equally skilled.
In sum, tests for direction are easier than tests for existence: when applied to the
same data, tests for direction are more diagnostic than tests for existence. From a
Bayesian perspective, the one-sided P value is a test for direction; when this test is
misinterpreted as a test for existence—as classical statisticians are wont to do—this
overstates the true evidence that the data provide against a point null hypothesis.
Third Consequence: With N Fixed, the Relation
Between P Values and Bayesian Point Null Hypothesis
Tests Is Approximately Linear
Several authors have explored the lawlike relationship between the classical P value
and the Bayes factor against a point null hypothesis . Specifically, when sample size N is relatively
stable and only effect size varies, lower P values will be accompanied by higher
Bayes factors against the point null hypothesis. Figure 1 shows the empirical relation
for 440 t tests reported by Wetzels et al. and reanalyzed by Rouder et al.
We now formalize the relation between P values and Bayes factors for point null
hypotheses by exploiting two facts. The first fact is that the one-sided P value is the
posterior mass to the left of zero (i.e., Equation 1). The second fact is that the Bayes
factor hypothesis test for a point null hypothesis H0 versus an unrestricted alternative
H1 is given by the Savage–Dickey density ratio :
BF01 = p(yjH0)
p(yjH1) = p(m = 0jy, H1)
p(m = 0jH1) :
In words, the Bayes factor in favor of the null hypothesis H0 equals the ratio of the
posterior ordinate to the prior ordinate, evaluated under the alternative hypothesis H1
and for the point of interest .
Marsman and Wagenmakers
We examine the following simplified scenario. The prior for the location parameter m is a standard normal under H1 : p(mjH1) = N (0, 1). Data points yi,
i = 1, . . . , N, arrive and yield a posterior for m that is a normal distribution with mean
N + 1y and variance s2
N + 1: p(mjy, H1) = N (mm, s2
m). We investigate the case
where sample size N is fixed but y varies, that is, we keep s2
m constant but vary mm
such that the posterior distribution is shifted to the right. Figure 2 shows the prior
distribution and one example of a posterior distribution. The shaded area indicates
p(m\0jy, H1), the posterior mass lower than zero, and it is approximately equal to
the one-sided P value; the ratio between the posterior and prior ordinate at m = 0
equals BF01, the Bayes factor for the point null hypothesis (i.e., Equation 3). When
the posterior distribution is shifted to the right this will simultaneously decrease both
p(m\0jy, H1) and BF01:
The nature of these simultaneous changes is shown in Figure 3 for values of
P1  :05 and N = 10: The left panel of Figure 3 shows the relation between the
Bayes factor for the point null hypothesis and the posterior mass lower than zero on
the untransformed scale, and the right panel shows the same relation on the log-scale.
Comparison against the straight grey line segments confirms that the relation on the
log-scale is approximately linear.
Figure 1. The highly regular relationship between one-sided P values and point null Bayes
factor hypothesis tests for 440 t test results reported by Wetzels et al. and reanalyzed
by Rouder et al. .
Educational and Psychological Measurement 77(3)
In this demonstration, the lower end-point corresponds to a value of mm for which
the point of interest (m = 0) is five standard deviations away from the mean (i.e., the
five s rule commonly used in physics), whereas the upper end-point corresponds to
a value of mm for which P1 = :05 (i.e., the threshold level of significance used in most
scientific disciplines).
An interesting observation about the relations shown in Figure 3 is that they are
invariant across different choices of N and the choice of prior variance for the location parameter m. That is, we can define a prior p(mjH1) = N (0, t2) for the location
parameter m with t2 6¼ 1, or we can use a different value for N, and—except for a
change of values on the y-axis—the same two panels would result. This means that
the lawlike relation between the approximate one-sided P value and the Bayes factor
is relatively general.
In sum, for a fixed value of N there exists a lawlike relation between the (approximate) one-sided P value and the Bayes factor for a point-null hypothesis. This relation implies that one can traverse from the one-sided P value to the Bayes factor and
vice versa. Assuming that the relation between log (P1) and log (BF01) is
log (P1)’a + b log (BF01), then we can compute P1 as exp (a)BFb
01, approximately.
Figure 2. Prior and posterior distribution for a hypothetical data set. The shaded area of
the posterior distribution indicates the mass that is lower than zero, whereas the two dots
visualize the Savage–Dickey density ratio. As the posterior distribution shifts to the right, the
shaded area and the posterior ordinate at m = 0 decrease simultaneously.
Marsman and Wagenmakers
This also implies that when two equal-N studies have been done yielding one-sided
P values Pa and Pb = 2Pa, we have that Pb = 2Pa’ exp (a)2BF01(a)b’ exp (a)
BF01(b)b, such that BF01(b)’BF01(a)
Concluding Comments
We have demonstrated that one-sided P values can be given a Bayesian interpretation
as an approximate test of direction, that is, a test of whether a latent effect is negative
or positive. From a Bayesian perspective, this means that P values may be used when
the null hypothesis is false or when its veracity is not at issue (and when a diffuse,
symmetric prior on the location parameter is acceptable). When misinterpreted as
tests of existence, P values overestimate the evidence against the null hypothesis, as a
test for direction is generally easier than a test for existence. Finally, with N fixed and
effect size variable, P values and point null Bayesian hypothesis tests are approximately linearly related on the log-scale. This latter finding may falsely suggest that
tests for direction and tests for existence are closely related. Although we have
demonstrated this to be the case for N fixed, the situation changes if N is variable
 .
With N variable, sharp conflicts between test of direction and tests of existence are
unavoidable, a phenomenon known as Lindley’s paradox . Consider
the scenario shown in Figure 2 and imagine that more data are collected, causing the
posterior distribution to become more peaked. At the same time, imagine that the posterior mean moves toward zero such that the posterior area lower than zero remains
constant; when this happens the posterior ordinate will increase and this strengthens
Figure 3. Lawlike relation between the one-sided P value and the point null Bayes factor
BF01 for values of P1\:05 and N = 10: The left panel shows the relation on the untransformed
scale, and the right panel shows the relation after a logarithmic transformation. In grey are
straight line segments that connect the endpoints of the scale.
Educational and Psychological Measurement 77(3)
the evidence in favor of the point null hypothesis. Thus, as N increases and the posterior area lower than zero remains constant, the evidence in favor of the point null
hypothesis increases indefinitely. This means that in a test for direction, one may be
relatively certain that the effect is positive rather than negative; for the same data, a
test for existence may reveal that the null hypothesis is much stronger supported than
the alternative hypothesis. Of course, the paradox seizes to feel like a paradox as soon
as it is properly understood. In the foreword to his monograph Theory of Probability,
Jeffreys already underscores the main point:
The most beneficial result that I can hope for as a consequence of this work is that more
attention will be paid to the precise statement of the alternatives involved in the questions
asked. It is sometimes considered a paradox that the answer depends not only on the observations but on the question; it should be a platitude. (p. x)
The Bayesian interpretation of the one-sided P value presents a double-edged
sword. On the one hand, researchers can feel more confident in their use of the onesided P value; after all, it has a Bayesian interpretation and it is valid when the null
hypothesis is false (and when a diffuse, symmetric prior on the location parameter is
acceptable). On the other hand, it is clear that the Bayesian interpretation of the onesided P value presents a test of direction, not a test of existence. Despite the fact that
many statisticians and methodologists have argued that tests of direction are more
meaningful than tests of existence, we are not convinced that their arguments resonate with medical researchers, geneticists, experimental psychologists, and researchers in similar fields where general laws and invariances are regularly tested by means
of empirical investigations.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship,
and/or publication of this article.
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship,
and/or publication of this article: This work was supported by the ERC Grant ‘‘Bayes or
Bust!’’ from the European Research Council.