Low Temperature Lanczos Method
Markus Aichhorn, Maria Daghofer, Hans Gerd Evertz, and Wolfgang von der Linden
Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, Technische Universit¨at Graz, Petersgasse 16, A-8010 Graz, Austria
 
We present a modiﬁed ﬁnite temperature Lanczos method for the evaluation of dynamical and
static quantities of strongly correlated electron systems that complements the ﬁnite temperature
method (FTLM) introduced by Jakliˇc and Prelovˇsek for low temperatures. Together they allow
accurate calculations at any temperature with moderate eﬀort. As an example we calculate the
static spin correlation function and the regular part of the optical conductivity σreg(ω) of the one
dimensional Hubbard model at half-ﬁlling and show in detail the connection between the ground
state and ﬁnite temperature method.
By using Cluster Perturbation Theory (CPT), the ﬁnite
temperature spectral function is extended to the inﬁnite system, clearly exhibiting the eﬀects of
spin-charge separation.
PACS numbers: 78.20.Bh, 71.10.Fd, 75.25.+z
The Finite Temperature Lanczos Method (FTLM), introduced by Jakliˇc and Prelovˇsek , has in recent years
allowed the precise calculation of thermodynamic quantities of strongly correlated systems. It has been applied
to the t-J model for the cuprates and
vanadates , orbital t-J model , Kondo lattice
model , Heisenberg model and static properties
of the Hubbard model . In principle this method
can be applied at all temperatures, but at low temperatures the required number of random samples is very
large. FTLM is restricted to small systems and particularly at low temperatures, ﬁnite size eﬀects become important. They can be overcome, at least for properties
derived from the single particle Green’s function, by using Cluster Perturbation Theory (CPT) , which
provides inﬁnite system results with remarkable accuracy
 . However, CPT requires ﬁnite cluster Greens functions Gab(ω) for all sites a, b, increasing the number of
required Lanczos runs and matrix elements by a factor
equal to the number of lattice sites. It therefore requires
a suﬃciently fast low temperature method.
In this paper we present a modiﬁed ﬁnite temperature
Lanczos method which allows to calculate properties for
large Hilbert spaces at low temperatures that are not accessible by the existing method. We show that a combination of our low temperature Lanczos method (LTLM)
with the FTLM allows an accurate calculation of thermodynamic properties at any temperature with moderate
Let us ﬁrst present the existing FTLM. For the case of
a static expectation value of an operator O
⟨n|Oe−βH|n⟩,
⟨n|e−βH|n⟩,
with β = 1/T (kB = ¯h = 1) and a sum over a complete
orthonormal basis set |n⟩, the FTLM approximation is
m ⟩|2e−βε(r)
with a sum over symmetry sectors s of dimension Ns,
and R random vectors |r⟩in each sector . M is the
number of Lanczos steps. For each random vector |r⟩,
a Lanczos procedure is performed, yielding M eigenenergies ε(r)
m and corresponding eigenvectors |Ψ(r)
m ⟩. The trace
in (1) requires Ns states, while very accurate results can
be obtained via (2) even for a drastically reduced number
of Lanczos steps M ≪Ns and a partial random sampling
of the Hilbert subspaces R ≪Ns.
For dynamical correlation functions C(t) = ⟨A(t)B⟩,
FTLM calculates
i e−i(˜ε(r)
i |A|˜Ψ(r)
Here, an initial vector
0 ⟩= B|r⟩/
⟨r|B†B|r⟩.
is used to generate additional eigenenergies ˜ε(r)
eigenvectors |˜Ψ(r)
j ⟩from that part of the Hilbert space
onto which the operator B projects.
Hence the term
j |B|r⟩in (3) becomes suﬃciently large.
Let us now consider the behavior of (2) and (3) in the
limit T →0.
In this case only the ground state |Ψ0⟩
contributes and we get
⟨Ψ0|O|r⟩⟨r|Ψ0⟩/
⟨Ψ0|r⟩⟨r|Ψ0⟩
and similarly for (3).
Thus the ground state result will
suﬀer from severe statistical ﬂuctuations, although the
exact (Lanczos) eigenvector |Ψ0⟩is reached with every |r⟩
and one random vector should be suﬃcient. Yet, FTLM
gets worse with decreasing temperature T .
The modiﬁcations we present in this paper are designed
to overcome this limitation. Let us introduce the method
for a static expectation value (1). We use a symmetric
As before, we approximate the trace by random sampling, but now we insert the approximate eigenbasis obtained by the Lanczos procedure twice, initially obtaining
The partition function Z is calculated in the same way as
in standard FTLM. The behavior in the limit T →0 is
now diﬀerent. If only the ground state |Ψ0⟩contributes,
(7) becomes
⟨Ψ0|r⟩⟨r|Ψ0⟩⟨Ψ0|O|Ψ0⟩/
⟨Ψ0|r⟩⟨r|Ψ0⟩
= ⟨Ψ0|O|Ψ0⟩.
In agreement with ground state Lanczos, one random
vector suﬃces for the ground state expectation value.
If we compute the numerator in (7) and Z separately, both suﬀer from pronounced statistical ﬂuctuations, which however cancel exactly at T = 0 as shown
in (8). For ﬁnite T the ﬂuctuations in numerator and
denominator do not cancel exactly but they are still
strongly correlated.
Separate error analysis for both
terms would overestimate the statistical noise. These correlations are taken into account by employing a Jackknife
technique .
For dynamical correlation functions, a straight-forward
variant of (3) suitable for low temperatures is
)e−i(˜ε(r)
In order to span the relevant subspace of the Hilbert
space, we now choose initial vectors |˜Φ(r,i)
the second Lanczos run. With M such second Lanczos
runs, the numerical eﬀort would be much higher than for
FTLM. For low temperatures, it can be reduced, since
only the low lying states contribute to the expectation
We consider only states below a cutoﬀenergy
Ec, deﬁned by
e−βc(Ec−E0) < εc,
where εc deﬁnes the accuracy of the approximation, βc is
the minimal inverse temperature considered and the calculation will be accurate for all β > βc. We thus proceed
as follows: For each random start vector |r⟩, we perform
an initial Lanczos run with M iterations. For each of
the Mc states |ψ(r)
⟩with energies below Ec, we then calculate an initial vector |˜Φ(r,i)
i ⟩and perform a
second run with M Lanczos iterations, obtaining an approximate eigenbasis |˜Ψ(r,i)
⟩. Using these basis sets, the
ﬁnal form of LTLM is the same as (7) and (9), with PM
replaced by PMc
i,l and ˜Ψ(r,i)
, respectively.
Memory requirements of our method are the same as
for standard FTLM, but the CPU time requirements differ signiﬁcantly. CPU time is mainly determined by the
number of matrix elements that have to be calculated.
In the case of static expectation values these are M for
FTLM and M 2
c for LTLM for each random vector. Therefore both methods reach equivalent CPU time requirements per random vector when Mc ≈
For dynamical correlation functions, the number of
matrix elements to be calculated in the second Lanczos
run is M 2 for FTLM and M 2
c for LTLM. For LTLM we
have to perform Mc second Lanczos runs, but only one
for FTLM. Thus we have similar CPU time requirements
per random vector for both methods when Mc ≈M
the limit T →0 we have Mc = 1, and for R = 1, LTLM
is comparable to the ground state Lanczos technique.
For both methods, CPU-time is proportional to R, the
number of random vectors. But, by design, far less random vectors are needed for the LTLM than for the FTLM
at low temperatures for a given accuracy.
All considerations so far have been done without regarding reorthogonalization of Lanczos vectors. This procedure becomes important for M >∼150, where numerical
round oﬀerrors become signiﬁcant, and signiﬁcantly increases CPU requirements.
Let us now demonstrate the method for the calculation
of static and dynamical properties of the one dimensional
Hubbard model, with hamiltonian
iσci+1,σ + h.c.) + U
We specify energies in units of t. As an example we cal-
culate the static spin correlation function C1 = ⟨Sz
on a 12 site chain with periodic boundary conditions
at half ﬁlling (n = 1).
The number of basis states is
N = 2 704 156. Symmetry sectors are speciﬁed by momentum k and total spin Sz. The largest sector Sz = ±1
has 52 272 basis states. The sector Sz = 0 is further
reduced due to spin up/down symmetry.
FIG. 1: Spin correlation function C1 = ⟨Sz
i+1⟩for the 1D
Hubbard model on a 12 site chain with periodic boundary
conditions at U=8t and n=1.
Solid: LTLM with βc = 1,
εc = 0.01, M = 100, and R = 25. Dashed: Two independent
runs of FTLM with M = 100 and R = 25. Inset: Deviation
of C1 in the high temperature region beyond βc. Here R = 50
in both cases.
FIG. 2: Relative statistical errors ∆C1
of LTLM (solid) and
FTLM (dashed) with R = 25 in both cases. Other parameters
as in ﬁg. 1. The error of LTLM at T = 0.01t is ∆rel = 10−8.
In ﬁgs. 1 and 2 the convergence and statistical errors
of LTLM and FTLM are compared at equal computational eﬀort, with R = 25 random samples per symmetry
sector each, corresponding to sampling of
of the largest Hilbert subspace.
At low temperatures,
our method provides results which are orders of magnitude more precise than from standard FTLM, and which
connect smoothly to the ground state properties.
checked that for larger R, there is no systematic drift for
either method, and the FTLM results converge towards
those of LTLM. At intermediate temperatures, the statistical errors of LTLM increase and become similar to
those of FTLM. Finally, considerably beyond the chosen
cutoﬀ-temperature 1/βc, LTLM is no longer applicable,
and begins to show a systematic deviation.
Both FTLM and LTLM provide results for a range
of temperatures from a single calculation.
FIG. 3: Regular part of the optical conductivity of the 1d
Hubbard model on a 12 site chain with periodic boundary
conditions at U=6t and n=1. Left panel: LTLM calculations
with βc = 3, εc = 0.01, and R = 40. Right panel: FTLM
calculations with R = 50. Number of Lanczos steps M = 100
and additional broadening of σ = 0.1. Dots mark the zero
line. Only selected errorbars are shown. For curves without
errorbars, the errors are smaller than the line width.
this range is limited towards low temperatures by statistical errors.
For LTLM, it is limited by the chosen
cutoﬀ-temperature 1/βc.
Therefore a combination of
both methods provides precise results for all temperatures with moderate eﬀort.
As an example of dynamical correlation functions we
calculate the regular part of the optical conductivity,
given by the current-current correlation function
σreg = 1 −e−βω
dt eiωt⟨j(t)j⟩,
with the current operator j = it P
iσci+1,σ −h.c.). In
ﬁg. 3, we show results with approximately the same CPU
time for both methods. Slightly above the ground state,
at β = 40, LTLM approaches the exact ground state result . For intermediate temperatures β = 10, 5, 3,
slight statistical ﬂuctuations occur.
By comparison to
FTLM we see that β = 1 < βc is indeed beyond the validity of this calculation. We also checked the accuracy
of the results by using M = 200 Lanczos steps instead of
M = 100 yielding the same LTLM spectra within statistical errors.
In contrast, FTLM suﬀers from strong statistical ﬂuctuations at small temperatures. Errorbars are very large
and regions occur where σreg(ω) becomes negative, a
clear indicator that we did not use enough random vectors for FTLM. As expected from our consideration of
static expectation values, errorbars of FTLM get smaller
for higher temperatures. As for LTLM we did calculations with M = 200, yielding the same curves within
errorbars but leading to a better convergence at the high
frequency side of the spectrum.
FIG. 4: Spectral function A(k, ω) obtained by LTLM for the
1D Hubbard model at U = 8t, n = 1, and β = 10. Parameters: R = 30, βc = 3, εc = 0.01. Upper panel: 8 site chain
with periodic boundary conditions. Lower panel: CPT result
based on 8 site clusters.
As mentioned in the beginning, at low temperature
ﬁnite size eﬀects become important. At least for properties derivable from the single particle Green’s function,
these eﬀects can be overcome by using CPT .
In ﬁg. 4 we show the ﬁnite temperature spectral function A(k, ω) obtained on a ﬁnite size lattice with periodic boundary conditions, and the inﬁnite lattice result
obtained by CPT, which makes use of all Greens functions on the ﬁnite lattice as calculated by LTLM. In the
latter a smooth structure consisting of several branches
can clearly be seen with spin-charge separation at k = 0
visible in the lower part of the spectrum . On the
ﬁnite size cluster, however, this structure is not evident
as it exhibits more discrete excitations. Further work on
ﬁnite temperature CPT is in progress .
In conclusion, the method presented in this paper gives
an accurate connection of the exact ground state Lanczos method and the established FTLM. Using LTLM at
low and FTLM at higher temperatures makes it possible
to calculate static and dynamical properties of strongly
correlated systems from T = 0 up to T = ∞with very
good accuracy and rather small numerical eﬀort.
This work has been supported by the Austrian Science
Fund (FWF) projects P15834 and P15520. M. Aichhorn
is supported by DOC [Doctoral Scholarship Program of
the Austrian Academy of Sciences].
 J. Jakliˇc and P. Prelovˇsek, Phys. Rev. B 49, 5065 ;
for a review see Adv. Phys. 49, 1 .
 J. Jakliˇc and P. Prelovˇsek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 3411
 J. Jakliˇc and P. Prelovˇsek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1340
 J. Jakliˇc and P. Prelovˇsek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 892
 P. Prelovˇsek and A. Ramˇsak, Physica C 341, 893 .
 D Veberiˇc, P. Prelovˇsek, and H.G. Evertz, Phys. Rev. B
62, 6745 .
 Y. Shibata, T. Tohyana, and S. Maekawa, Phys. Rev. B
64, 054519 .
 D. Veberiˇc and P. Prelovˇsek, Phys. Rev. B 66, 020408
 M. Cuoco, P. Horsch, and F. Mack, Phys. Rev. B 60,
R8438, .
 M. Aichhorn, P. Horsch, W. von der Linden, and M.
Cuoco, Phys. Rev. B 65, 201101(R) .
 P. Horsch, J. Jakliˇc, and F. Mack, Phys. Rev. B 59, 6217
 K. Haule, J. Bonˇca, and P. Prelovˇsek, Phys. Rev. B 61,
2482 .
 B. Schmidt et al., cond-mat/0210204.
 C. S. Hellberg, J. Appl. Phys. 89, 6627 .
 J. Bonˇca and P. Prelovˇsek, cond-mat/0206037.
 D. S´en´echal, D. P´erez, and M. Pioro-Ladri`ere, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 84, 522 .
 D. S´en´echal, D. P´erez, and D. Plouﬀe, Phys. Rev. B 66,
075129 .
 M. Aichhorn, M. Daghofer, H.G. Evertz, and W. von der
Linden, in preparation.
 In standard FTLM, R ∼Ns in each sector. Since the
computational eﬀort per random vector is largest in the
biggest symmetry sector, (2) provides a better sampling
of smaller sectors at negligible additional cost.
 A.C. Davidson and D.V. Hinkley, Bootstrap Methods and
their Application, Cambridge University Press .
 R.M. Fye et al., Phys. Rev. B 44, 6909 .
 E. Jeckelmann, F. Gebhard, and F.H.L. Essler, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 85, 3910 .
 M.G. Zacher, E. Arrigoni, W. Hanke, and J.R. Schrieﬀer,
Phys. Rev. B 57, 6370 .