Replacing Lecture with Peer-led Workshops Improves
Student Learning
Ralph W. Preszler
Department of Biology, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM 88003-8001
Submitted January 9, 2009; Revised April 20, 2009; Accepted April 22, 2009
Monitoring Editor: Laura L. Mays Hoopes
Peer-facilitated workshops enhanced interactivity in our introductory biology course, which led to
increased student engagement and learning. A majority of students preferred attending two lectures
and a workshop each week over attending three weekly lectures. In the workshops, students worked
in small cooperative groups as they solved challenging problems, evaluated case studies, and
participated in activities designed to improve their general learning skills. Students in the workshop
version of the course scored higher on exam questions recycled from preworkshop semesters. Grades
were higher over three workshop semesters in comparison with the seven preworkshop semesters.
Although males and females benefited from workshops, there was a larger improvement of grades
and increased retention by female students; although underrepresented minority (URM) and non-
URM students benefited from workshops, there was a larger improvement of grades by URM
students. As well as improving student performance and retention, the addition of interactive
workshops also improved the quality of student learning: Student scores on exam questions that
required higher-level thinking increased from preworkshop to workshop semesters.
INTRODUCTION
Learning activities designed to include peer and instructor
discussion increase interactive student engagement and
learning . This interactive engagement can occur within the constraints of large
lecture sessions through the use of creative teaching strategies as well as technologies . Alternatively, breaking large lectures into smaller
workshop sections in which peer instructors facilitate cooperative group work dramatically increases the interactive
engagement of students; however, this change in course
structure is associated with an equally dramatic loss of
lecture. In this study, we assess the net change in student
learning associated with sacrificing one-third of our lectures
to add weekly peer-facilitated workshops. Although faculty
lecturers are best positioned to describe the course information in the context of a larger knowledge base, they may not
provide the most accessible entry points to the discipline for
many students. The large content-specific cognitive gaps
between instructors and students limit students’ abilities to
assimilate information presented by their instructors and as
a result, limit the students’ abilities to generate knowledge.
Undergraduates leading workshop sessions are closer to the
students’ zone of proximal development, the region of students’ potential knowledge gain, and can therefore communicate and facilitate learning through channels not available
to faculty . In addition to the exchange of
ideas between peer leaders and their students about coursespecific knowledge and general learning strategies, peer
leaders also enrich the overall flow of information within the
course as they interpret the instructor’s expectations and
presentations to students and as they explain student’s responses and potential misconceptions to instructors. Peer
leaders are typically upper-division undergraduates who
have successfully completed the course . Some programs are
effectively facilitated by postbaccalaureate students who
may not have been students in the course in its current
form but who have been trained to facilitate cooperative
learning .
This suggests that perhaps the most important benefit of
peer-facilitated workshops is that they provide a learning
environment that promotes communication and coopera-
DOI: 10.1187/cbe.09–01–0002
Address correspondence to: Ralph W. Preszler ( ).
CBE—Life Sciences Education
Vol. 8, 182–192, Fall 2009
© 2009 by The American Society for Cell Biology
Springer et al., 1999).
The Department of Biology at New Mexico State University (NMSU), with support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s (HHMI) Undergraduate Science Education
Program, transformed our introductory biology lecture
course into a course with required peer-facilitated workshops beginning in the spring 2007 semester. In the workshops, peer facilitators help cooperative groups of students
work through challenging problems, case studies, and activities that promote the development of general learning skills.
Our goals in developing this new course structure were to
increase students’ general learning and critical-thinking
skills, increase course-specific content acquisition, and facilitate more meaningful student learning. We also hoped that
peer-facilitated cooperative workshops, while benefitting all
students, would be especially effective at improving the
performance of underrepresented minority (URM) students.
The Department of Education considers NMSU a minority
institution that significantly serves Hispanic and Native-
American student groups. Across all campuses, 50% of our
students are members of ethnic minorities that are underrepresented in the sciences; across all semesters used in this
study, 56.6% of the population in our Natural History of Life
course are URM students. The development of our goals to
improve students’ content and general learning skill development, and the use of peer facilitators to do so, was
strongly influenced by the Supplemental Instruction (SI)
program developed at the University of Missouri–Kansas
City. However, our desire to develop a program that impacts all the students, rather than the subset of students
electing to participate in supplemental workshops, led to the
development of a workshop structure that has more in common with the Peer-Led Team Learning (PLTL) program
developed at City College of the City University of New
York . In
addition to requiring the participation of all students, our
program and most PLTL programs differ from typical SI
programs in that faculty are more involved in coordinating
our workshops and our workshop sessions are built around
challenging problems and case studies written by the faculty
course instructors. Although our program shares the critical
components of PLTL programs described in Gafney and
Varma-Nelson , we did not set out to replicate the
PLTL program and our structure does significantly differ
from the PLTL model in three respects: 1) our workshops
contain an average of 19 students, whereas the PLTL
program recommends six to eight students in each session; 2) our weekly workshop sessions last 65 min,
whereas PLTL recommends 90- to 120-min sessions; and
3) we chose to have our peer leaders grade students’
workshop reports in order to encourage students to take
the workshops and their peer leaders seriously, whereas
the PLTL program recommends not having peer leaders
grade student work to reinforce their role as role models
rather than instructors.
Arendale identified six peer-facilitated cooperative
learning programs that have been successfully replicated
and evaluated across universities. All of these programs
focus on course-specific knowledge acquisition, as well as
more general learning skill development. He found that the
programs fit into two categories: 1) those that offer activities
adjunct to the primary course (accelerated learning groups,
structured learning assistance, and supplemental instruction); and 2) programs that are fully integrated into the
course structure (Emerging Scholars, PLTL, and video-based
Supplemental Instruction). The elective or voluntary nature
of adjunct programs reduces the number of students who
participate and limits the ability of instructors to refer to and
reinforce programmatic activities in lecture. A pilot study at
our institution demonstrated that although
elective workshops promoted student learning, a majority of
students did not enroll in and so did not benefit from the
workshops. Arendale reports that only one-third of
students typically participate in Supplemental Instruction
programs. He concluded that programs that are fully integrated into the course structure have the highest likelihood
of improving student performance and retention. Although
these programs may have the highest potential, their success
depends on a high level of sustained institutional support.
The institution must be willing to modify course policies
and expectations. Also, faculty need to develop the curriculum and keep the course components well integrated. Training and supervision of peer facilitators also is essential in
both adjunct and fully integrated programs (Supplemental
Instruction training is widely available from the International Center for Supplemental Instruction at The University
of Missouri–Kansas City; PLTL training workshops are supported by the PLTL Workshop program at City College of
the City University of New York). Although national and
institutional programs can contribute to coordinator, faculty,
and peer facilitator training, our experience and descriptions
of particularly successful programs 
have convinced us that faculty involvement in the training
and supervision of peer facilitators maximizes communication across all levels and maximizes integration of course
content and pedagogy between workshops and lectures.
External support from HHMI through the Undergraduate
Science Education Program, as well as our College of Arts
and Sciences at NMSU, was critical for the development and
implementation of our workshops that are fully integrated
into our course structure. The detailed assessments of the
project included in this study will play a critical role in
supporting the transition from external to internal support
of this course structure, which admittedly requires more
resources than a standard lecture format.
Many successful adjunct as well as required peer-led
workshops represent an addition to the original course
structure . It is
not surprising that when students are required to, or elect to,
participate in additional learning activities their performance increases. There are fewer studies that demonstrate
that peer-led workshops are more beneficial than a reasonable alternative approach. Tien et al. compared required recitation sessions with required PLTL sessions and
found that PLTL resulted in improved grades, retention, and
attitude. Although we would have liked to add required
workshops to our existing course structure, many students
from a variety of majors rely on our course. We could not
expect all of these programs to accept additional credit
hours for the biology course required by their majors. These
interdepartmental considerations made it necessary to reduce the number of weekly lectures so that we could add
Peer-led Workshops
Vol. 8, Fall 2009
workshops without increasing the total course credits. This
reduction of lectures with the addition of workshops has
allowed us to evaluate student learning in two versions of
the course that require a similar level of commitment from
students. We suspect that many departments with a desire
to reform their courses with required workshops face this
same dilemma of choosing between course structures rather
than adding to a course. Tien et al. demonstrated that
replacing tutoring sessions with PLTL workshops increased
student exam scores by 17%. They also reported significant
improvements in retention and in student attitudes toward
the course. Our analyses rely primarily on longitudinal comparisons of student performance in preworkshop semesters
to student performance after the replacement of one of our
weekly lectures with a peer-led workshop.
Course Design
The Natural History of Life (Biology 111) is the first biology course
taken by biology majors. All students at NMSU are required to
successfully complete at least two General Education Core Curriculum Laboratory Science courses, such as The Natural History of
Life. Thus, in addition to being the introductory course for biology
majors, this course serves other science majors, majors from the
School of Agriculture, Secondary Education majors, and a variety of
students who choose to take a nonterminal biology course to satisfy
part of their general education requirements. We do offer an alternative, terminal course for students who are confident they do not
need a course that will serve as a prerequisite for subsequent
biology courses. Natural History of Life introduces students to
scientific process, classical and population genetics (molecular genetics is primary covered in a subsequent course), evolution, and
ecology (Supplemental Material lists concepts covered in the preworkshop and workshop versions of the course). Throughout the
seven preworkshop semesters of the course, as well as the three
workshop semesters, the course was composed of a three-credit
lecture course (three lectures or two lectures and a workshop) and
a one-credit laboratory course that met for 21⁄2 h each week. Most
students, 90–95%, were concurrently enrolled in the lecture and
laboratory courses. Most of the laboratory activities are studentcentered inquiry-based experiments .
Preworkshop Course. In this study, we have used student performance in the fall 2003 through fall 2006 semesters, excluding summer sessions, of the Natural History of Life as a baseline preworkshop control; student performance in these control semesters are
compared with student performance in three workshop semesters
(Table 1 describes the characteristics of each preworkshop and
workshop semester of the course used in this study). During these
preworkshop semesters, the lecture course met for 50 min three
times each week. In the spring 2004 semester, I conducted a pilot
workshop project in which I taught four sections of a one-credit
Learning Strategies for Biology course that ran concurrently with
the lecture course. This Learning Strategies for Biology course included teacher-centered and student-centered review activities
 . Only 36 of the 248 students enrolled in the lecture
course also enrolled in Learning Strategies for Biology. Student
response system “clickers” were introduced to the course in fall
2004 semester and were used in every semester from fall 2005 to the
present , and they have been
used in every subsequent semester. In the spring 2006 semester,
additional weekly discussion sections were led by the course instructors. Students were given a choice of completing short essay
assignments or participating in discussion sessions. Again, student
participation was low with approximately 30 students/wk (of the
263 students enrolled in the lecture course) attending the discussion
Workshop Course. In the spring 2007 semester, with support from a
grant to NMSU from HHMI and from the NMSU College of Arts
and Sciences, required peer-facilitated workshops were added to
the Natural History of Life lecture course in place of one weekly
50-min lecture. This study reports on student evaluations and performance in the first three semesters of the workshop version of the lecture component of
the Natural History of Life. In this new version of the lecture course,
students are required to attend two 50-min lectures each week and
one 65-min workshop; as in the preworkshop semesters, most also
attend one 21⁄2-h weekly laboratory course. The workshops are not
supplemental to the course nor are they an associated elective
course. They are a required component of the lecture course. In the
spring 2007 semester, assignments completed in the workshop contributed to 25% of students’ grades; in the fall 2007 semester, quizzes on preworkshop readings and workshop assignments contributed to 28% of the course grades; and in the spring 2008 semester,
quizzes on preworkshop readings and workshop assignments contributed to 19% of the course grades. The number of points derived
from preworkshop readings and workshop assignments was reduced in the spring 2008 semester because the instructor felt that the
Table 1. Semester course characteristics; the characteristics of the preworkshop and the workshop lecture courses are shown for each
Preworkshop
Students in lecture
Clickers in lecture
WebCT quizzes
No. of 50-min
lectures/wk
Required 65-min
workshop/wk
a In spring 2004, instructor B offered four elective workshops that met each week. In total, 36 students enrolled in these elective supplemental
workshops.
b In spring 2006, course instructors led four workshops each week. Students could attend the workshops or complete a homework
assignment. Approximately 30 students/wk participated in these voluntary workshops.
R. W. Preszler
CBE—Life Sciences Education
scores derived from workshops, WebCT quizzes, and clickers were
overweighted, and due to the lack of variation among students in
these scores, were dampening the relationship between total course
scores and the students’ understanding of biology. In all three
workshop semesters, lecture exams included questions associated
with workshop activities.
The workshop peer facilitators, biology learning catalysts (Bio-
Cats), were chosen based on their transcripts (students who had
earned high grades in the Natural History of Life and subsequent
science courses were preferred), written statement of their teaching
and learning philosophy, and two interviews. Eight BioCats were
hired for the larger fall semester course; six BioCats were hired for
each of the spring semester courses. BioCats are hired as juniors or
seniors, so they are often rehired for two or three semesters. BioCats
were paid $1500/semester for 10 h of work per week to attend
preparation meetings and lectures, prepare individually for their
workshops, lead their two workshop sessions, and grade workshop
reports. The lecture sessions met in a large lecture hall; the workshop sessions were held in a much smaller room with six tables
sitting up to four students at each table. Before each semester,
BioCats were required to attend 1- or 2-d training sessions where
they were introduced to procedures and responsibilities associated
with their position, overall course structure, details of the first
workshops, and the purpose and philosophy of the workshops.
BioCats were required to attend lectures and to attend one meeting
each week to prepare for the next workshop. Each BioCat taught the
same two sections throughout the semester. The weekly meetings
were led by the lecture instructor with the help of a graduate
teaching assistant. One teaching assistant, working up to 20 h/wk,
was assigned to the course each semester. They helped with administering the course, tutoring students, and mentoring the BioCats.
Lecture instructors were responsible for designing the workshop
activities along with keys for the workshop activities, although the
activities and keys were often refined in response to input from
BioCats. The discussion of the grading keys ensured that all the
BioCats graded the workshops consistently. The students were not
provided with the workshop keys, although they were provided
with written comments from their BioCats on each of their reports.
During both the presemester training sessions and the weekly meetings it was emphasized to BioCats that they were responsible for
keeping cooperative learning groups on task as they worked
through case studies, problem sets, and review activities. BioCats
were encouraged to use prompts rather than direct answers or
mini-lectures in response to student questions. It was repeatedly
emphasized that their primary task was to facilitate cooperativelearning activities, rather than lecture or tutor their workshop students.
Workshop activities (see boxed material below) ranged from
learning-skill sessions to case studies. Biological concepts were first
introduced in the lecture and the textbook. A subset of these concepts was explored in more depth in the workshops; the workshops
were not designed to introduce students to new biological concepts.
In case-study activities, students analyzed data and applied the
results to topical issues, such as bacterial resistance to antibiotics,
pandemics, endangered species, human population growth, climate
change, and pollution. In other cases, students used data to evaluate
hypotheses that were not directly tied to topical issues, such as
species interactions and speciation. If there was time left over at the
end of a case-study session, it was used to conduct short learningskill activities. The majority of the sessions, and a majority of the
time within each session, focused on working through case studies.
In the most recent workshop semester, a majority of workshop
sessions (eight of 13) were devoted to investigative cases, two
sessions were focused entirely on learning-skill development, and
three sessions were a mix of problem sets and review activities. All
sessions emphasized cooperative learning within teams of three or
four students.
Learning-Skill Activity. An example of a learning-skill activity is the first workshop session in spring 2008, which
focused on note-taking skills. Note-taking strategies had
been identified as a strong predictor of student success in the
course (Preszler, unpublished). The lecture instructor or the
graduate student lecture assistant visited each workshop and
asked students to take notes as they presented a short, fastpaced lecture. The lecturer then left and the BioCat took over
the workshop session. Students processed their notes; compared and discussed the information within their cooperative
teams; and to simulate the relationship between lectures and
lecture exams, answered a series of multiple-choice questions
about the mini-lecture material. The BioCats led workshop
discussions of problems students had taking notes and
studying from their notes and they helped the class arrive at
solutions to these problems.
Case-Study Activity. An example of a case study in which
students explore a current research topic is our use of evolutionary and behavioral studies of the side-blotched lizard,
Uta stansburiana .
This case study allows students to discover a sequence of
concepts: 1) the utility of a biological application of a mathematical null model (Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium [HWE]);
2) frequency-dependent selection is a form of balancing selection that maintains the frequencies of two alternative alleles in a population; and 3) behavioral observations can
illuminate the selection pressures associated with balancing
selection. In the first step, students are given estimates of the
numbers of orange-, blue-, and yellow-throated U. stansburiana (morphs) based on surveys of Arizona and California
populations. The genetic model is simplified from a threeallele to a two-allele system. Students convert the counted
phenotypes to counts of genotypes and alleles. They use
HWE, starting with the observed allele frequencies, to predict
genotype frequencies. When they compare the genotype frequencies predicted by HWE to the observed genotype frequencies, they find that the genotype frequencies are more
evenly distributed than predicted by HWE. This suggests
that an evolutionary process is tending to equalize the frequencies of the three genotypes. In the second step of the
workshop, students consider behavioral descriptions of interactions between the three lizard morphs. Students use
conclusions they construct from the behavioral observations
to predict and explain the results of an experiment that
measured the mating success of males of the three lizard
morphs in populations that were manipulated to have a high
proportion of orange-, yellow-, or blue-throated lizards. Each
cooperative group of students then draws a figure on their
group’s whiteboard that illustrates the interactions between
the three U. stansburiana morphs and explains how these
behavioral interactions result in frequency-dependent balancing selection.
Assessment. The success of our workshop course structure was
assessed with student evaluations, longitudinal demographic analyses of course grades, a comparison of student performance on
paired exam questions given in preworkshop semesters and workshop semesters, and an analysis of the quality of exam questions in
preworkshop and workshop semesters. The protocol for using students as human subjects in our assessment of our workshop course
structure was approved by the NMSU Institutional Review Board
(NMSU Institutional Review Board 6463).
Student Evaluations. In each of the three semesters of workshops,
students used a Likert scale (strongly agree, agree, neither agree nor
disagree, disagree, and strongly disagree) to respond to statements
Peer-led Workshops
Vol. 8, Fall 2009
about the workshops. These questions were included in anonymous
lecture course evaluations that were filled out by students in class
during the last week of the semester. Student responses to the
following statements were averaged across the three workshop
semesters: 1) In general, the workshops made me more interested in
the material/content of the course; 2) In general, the workshops
helped me better understand the material/content in this course;
and 3) Attending the two lectures and one workshop each week is
more valuable than attending three lectures and no workshops.
Demographic Analyses of Course Grades. Two-way contingency
table analyses were used to evaluate the relationships between
course grades and course structure, gender, ethnicity, and academic
discipline. For each two-way contingency table analysis, as well as
the three-way analyses described below, if the probability associated with the Pearson 2 was 0.01, the null hypothesis of no effect
of the variable (two-way) or variables (three-way) on student grades
was rejected. The two-way contingency table analyses were used to
address the following four questions.
1. Course structure. Does the distribution of “A,” “B,” “C,” “D,”
“F,” and “W” (withdrawal from course by midsemester) grades
differ between students in the preworkshop version of the
course and students in workshop semesters
 ?
2. Gender. Do grade distributions differ between males and females?
3. Ethnicity. Do grade distributions differ between students who
have self-identified as being a member of an URM (African
American, Latino, or Native American) and students who have
self-identified as being a member of an ethnic group that is not
underrepresented (non-URM: Asian American or Caucasian)?
Students who selected “other” or did not select a category in
response to the ethnicity question during the university application process were excluded from the ethnicity analyses. Only
students who indicated they were U.S. citizens were included in
the ethnicity analyses.
4. Academic discipline. Do grade distributions differ among students with majors in the School of Agriculture, majors in biological sciences (biology, microbiology, and biochemistry), majors in
the School of Education, other declared majors, and students who
have not declared a major?
Three-way contingency table analyses were used to evaluate the effects
of our change in course structure on the relationships between gender
and grades, ethnicity and grades, and academic discipline and grades.
They were used to evaluate the following questions:
1. Was the shift in grade distributions from preworkshop to workshop semesters the same for female students as it was for male
2. Was the change in grade distribution from preworkshop to workshop semesters the same for URM students and non-URM students?
3. Did the grade distributions of various academic disciplines (described above) shift in the same way from preworkshop to workshop semesters?
Pre- and Postworkshop Exam Questions
To determine whether student learning, as reflected by performance
on lecture exam questions, improved with the onset of workshops,
a subset of exam questions in spring 2007 and in spring 2008
semesters were derived from preworkshop exams used in the
spring 2006 semester. These paired exam questions were used to
determine whether student performance in workshop biology in the
spring 2007 semester was higher than in the preworkshop in the
spring 2006 semester, and also to determine whether student performance was higher in the spring 2008 semester than in the spring
2006 semester. The significance of the difference in scores was
determined using one-tailed paired t tests with an  level of 0.05.
Both analyses included questions from the genetics, evolution, and
ecology exams. Most of the questions addressed single concepts;
11% of the questions challenged students to draw conclusions from
the synthesis of multiple concepts; the questions used in these
analyses did not address novel problems or examples. The recycled
questions used in 2007 were a different set of questions from those
recycled in 2008, so that if any students in 2008 had access to the
previous year’s exams they would not have an unfair advantage
and they would not be encouraged to study at a simple recognition
level of understanding.
Quality of Exam Questions
By the end of the third workshop semester the current course
instructor (R. Preszler) had the impression that improved student
performance had allowed him to ask more higher-level questions
(questions that asked students to apply concepts learned in the
course to novel problems or examples) on exams. He also had the
impression that students were better prepared to answer such questions as a result of improved critical-thinking skills. These post hoc
hypotheses were evaluated by counting the proportion of exam
questions that asked students to address novel examples or problems in the most recent version of the workshop course in comparison with when the same instructor taught the
course in the preworkshop format ; the
hypothesis that workshop students perform better on higher-level
questions was tested by comparing student scores on higher-level
exam question in the most recent workshop semester 
with their performance on this type of question in preworkshop
semesters . The last comparison was
evaluated with a one-tailed two-sample t test (  0.05).
Quantity of Concepts Covered in Lecture
Before the implementation of workshops , the author
constructed a hierarchical concept list describing the concepts he felt
students should learn in the Natural History of Life lecture course.
This list of concepts was approved by the NMSU Department of
Biology’s Undergraduate Curriculum and Teaching Committee and
was presented to and approved by the biology faculty. In this study,
to determine whether the loss of one weekly lecture has reduced the
quantity of concepts covered in the course, the number of concepts
at each level in the hierarchy (primary through quaternary) covered
in the preworkshop semesters has been counted and compared with
the number at each level covered in the most recent 
workshop semester. The complete concept hierarchy indicating
which versions of the course covered each concept is included in
Supplemental Material.
Student Evaluations
Clear majorities of students either strongly agreed or agreed
that workshops improved their understanding of biology
(Table 2, first row) and that workshops improved their
interest in biology (Table 2, middle row). A very strong
majority of students strongly agreed or agreed that attending two lectures and one workshop is more valuable than
attending three lectures each week (Table 2, bottom row).
Main Effect of Course Structure. There was a significant
change in the distributions of student grades from the seven
preworkshop semesters to the three workshop semesters
(Table 3). This change was due to large percent increases in
R. W. Preszler
CBE—Life Sciences Education
students earning “A’s” and “B’s” and large percent decreases in students earning “F’s” and “W’s.” There was a
45% increase in the proportion of students earning an “A” or
“B” with the advent of workshops. There was little overall
percent change in “D’s” and “C’s” with the advent of the
workshops due to the shift of students from lower grades
into “D’s” and “C’s” and the concordant shift of students out
of “C’s” and “D’s” into higher grades.
Gender. Averaged across all 10 semesters, the differences in
grade distributions between females and males are so small
as to be statistically inconclusive (Table 4, significance of
gender over all semesters). The grade distributions of both
females and males improved in response to the introduction
of workshops (Table 4, significance of course structure, females only; significance of course structure, males only).
However, the responses of females to the change in course
structure are clearly different from the responses of males
(Table 4, significance of different effects of course structure
on males and females). Male students showed a sharper
increase in “A’s,” nearly bringing them up to the same
percent “A’s” as for females. Females and males had similar
percent “B’s” before the introduction of workshops, but
during the workshop semesters 29.89% of females earned
“B’s,” whereas males only increased up to 22.48%. The increase in the proportion of females earning “A’s” or “B’s”
with the advent of workshops was 49%; the increase in the
proportion of males earning “A’s” or “B’s” was 37%. Although course withdrawals of both females and males went
down with the implementation of workshops, this increased
retention of students in the workshop semesters was a
particularly strong effect on female students (52.8% reduction in “W’s”) in comparison with males (20.8% reduction in “W’s”).
Ethnicity. Overall, there was a significant performance gap
(Table 5, significance of URM in comparison with non-URM
grades across all semesters) between URM (combined African Americans, Latinos, and Native Americans) and students who have self-identified as being a member of an
ethnic group that is not underrepresented (non-URM combined Asian Americans and Caucasians). The difference in
the percentage of URM in comparison with non-URM students earning “A’s” was 7.5%; the difference in the percentage of URM in comparison with non-URM students
earning “B’s” also was 7.5% (Table 5). Both groups of
students benefited from the introduction of workshops (Table 5, significance of course structure URM students only;
significance of course structure non-URM students only).
This positive shift in the distribution of grades differed
between the two groups (Table 5, significance of different
effects of course structure on URM and non-URM students).
Underrepresented minority students experienced a 47% increase in the proportion of students earning “A’s” or “B’s,”
whereas non-URM students showed a 36% increase. However,
non-URM students experienced a larger reduction in “F’s” and
in course withdrawals (“W’s”) than URM students.
Academic Discipline. There was a difference in the distributions of student grades across academic disciplines (Table 6).
Much of the difference was due to the higher grades of
students with majors in the biological sciences. In general,
students with the lowest grades were those who had not
declared a major. These students had the lowest percent
“A’s” and “B’s” and a higher percentage of these undeclared
students received “F’s” than did students who had declared
a major—regardless of the field of their declared major.
There was a significant difference among academic disciplines in the response of students, as indicated by their
course grades, to the introduction of workshops (Table 6,
significance of different effects of course structure among
Combined student responses over three semesters of
workshops to three questions about the workshop
Student response category
The first row lists the percentage of students choosing each response
to the statement The workshops made me more interested in the
material/content of the course (n  514 students). The middle row
lists the percentage of students choosing each response to the statement The workshops helped me better understand the material/
content of the course (n  512 students). The bottom row lists the
percentage of students choosing each response to the statement
Attending the two lectures and one workshop each week is more
valuable than attending three lectures and no workshops (n 
509 students).
Course structure
Course structure
Preworkshop (% each grade)
Workshop (% each grade)
Difference
Significance
Two-way Pearson 2  61.85, df 5, p  0.001
Grade distributions of students in preworkshop and workshop semesters are shown followed by the difference in percentages, and the
percentage of change. The significance of a two-way contingency table analysis of grades  course structure is reported in the last row.
Peer-led Workshops
Vol. 8, Fall 2009
disciplines). The grade distributions of students with declared majors in the School of Agriculture, the biological
sciences within the School of Arts and Sciences, the School of
Education, and any other declared major not in the abovementioned categories all improved with the onset of workshops. In contrast, students without a declared major
showed no significant change in their grades with the onset
of workshops (Table 6).
Pre- and Postexam Question Scores
There was no significant change in student scores on recycled exam questions from the spring 2006 preworkshop
semester and spring 2007, the first workshop semester
(paired t test  1.35, df  65, one-tailed p  0.090). However,
there was a significant 6.19% increase in scores on exams
questions used in both spring 2006 (preworkshops) and the
most recent workshop semester included in this study, spring
2008 (paired t test  2.44, df  44, one-tailed p  0.009).
Quality of Exam Questions
There was a threefold increase in the proportion of exam
questions that asked students to solve problems or explain
examples that had not been presented in lecture, workshop,
or the textbook. In the spring 2008 semester, 15.8% of exam
questions fell into this category, whereas only 5.1% of the
exam questions presented novel problems or examples in
spring 2006 and fall 2005 preworkshop semesters. Students
in the spring 2008 semester also performed better on these
questions, which required a higher level of understanding
(65.9% correct), than students in the spring 2006 and fall
2005 preworkshop semesters (56.6% correct). This was a
significant improvement in student performance on these
higher-level learning questions (t test  1.67, df  32,
one-tailed p  0.052).
Quantity of Concepts Covered in Lecture
As indicated in Table 7, there was a slight reduction in the
number of targeted concepts covered in the workshop version
of the course in comparison with the preworkshop course.
DISCUSSION
Our comparison of student performance in pre- and postworkshop semesters indicates that the replacement of one
weekly lecture with a weekly peer-led workshop has dramatically improved student learning. This effect was strongest for females and for URM students. Ideally, longitudinal
analyses of student grades across semesters would be based
on iterations of the course with identical grading schemes.
Because we are continually refining our course, our grading
schemes varied between preworkshop semesters and also
varied between workshop semesters. Also, the addition of
workshops added points associated with workshop activities. Males and females experienced the same sequence of
changes in grading schemes from one semester to the next.
Therefore, these changes do not bias comparisons of grades
by gender or the analysis of the effects of the interaction
between course structure and gender on student grades. The
same reasoning suggests that changes in grading schemes
do not bias comparisons of grades of URM and non-URM
students and of students by academic discipline. The addition of workshop points to the course with the onset of
Female (% each grade)
Male (% each grade)
Difference
Significance of gender over all semesters
Two-way Pearson 2  10.93, df  5, p  0.053
Preworkshop
Differences
Significance of course structure, females only
Two-way Pearson 2  50.28, df 5, p  0.001
Preworkshop
Differences
Significance of course structure, males only
Two-way Pearson 2  17.04, df  5, p  0.004
Course structure by gender
Significance of different effects of course
structure on males and females
Three-way Pearson 2  81.36, df  16, p  0.001
Two-way contingency table analyses of gender  grades across all semesters is shown in the first section followed by analyses of the effects
of course structure on females and on males. The last row describes the results of a three-way contingency table analysis of the differences
in the effects of the change in course structure on the grades of females in contrast to males.
R. W. Preszler
CBE—Life Sciences Education
workshops does bias our comparison of the overall effect of
course structure on student grades. However, our analyses
of student scores on matched exam questions indicate that
there has been a significant improvement in students’ learning of basic course content. This analysis did not show
significant improvement in comparison with preworkshop
exams in the spring 2007 semester, the first semester of the
workshop program; it did show significant improvement
over preworkshop performance in spring 2008, the third
semester of the workshop program. This indicates that refinements of the workshop activities that occurred from the
first to third workshop semesters increased the impact of the
workshops on student learning, bringing the learning up
beyond the levels seen in the preworkshop semesters. It is
unlikely that this is due to a reduction in the total course
content because a comparison of concept inventories from
pre- and postworkshop semesters shows a very modest
decline in total concepts covered. One of the most gratifying
results of the transition to a workshop approach is the
improvement in the quality of learning; students are performing significantly better on exam questions that require
higher-level thinking and instructors are now able to ask
more of these questions on lecture exams. Improved student
performance on exam questions that require higher-level
thinking is consistent with the development and exercise of
these skills as case studies are explored in the workshop.
A variety of programs offer students adjunct workshops
that are either completely voluntary or are offered as elective
courses. These adjunct workshop programs have demonstrated positive impacts on student’s grades . In a 15-yr
study of 39,439 students, in 375 courses at the University of
Missouri–Kansas City, Arendale reported that 37.2%
of students in the targeted courses attended voluntary SI
sessions, and 14.6% more of the SI participants earned a
grade of “C” or better in the at-risk courses in comparison
with students who chose not to attend SI . In a meta-analysis of students from 270
institutions, Arendale documented a similar improvement in performance associated with participation in SI.
Students enrolled in SI also had higher retention and grad-
African American
Native American
Combined URM
Asian American
Combined non-URM
Ethnicity  grades
Differences URM  non-URM
Significance of URM in comparison to non-URM
grades across all semesters
Two-way Pearson 2  99.34, df  5, p  0.001
URM  course structure
Preworkshop
Differences
Significance of course structure, URM students
Two-way Pearson 2  25.16, df  5, p  0.001
Non-URM  course structure
Preworkshop
Differences
Significance of course structure, non-URM students
Two-way Pearson 2  25.76, df  5, p  0.001
Ethnicity  course structure
Significance of different effects of course structure
on URM and non-URM students
Three-way Pearson 2  161.97, df  16, p  0.001
Descriptive statistics for each ethnic group are followed by two-way contingency table analyses of ethnicity (URM vs. non-URM)  grades
across all semesters, effects of course structure on grades of URM students, and then of non-URM students. The last row shows results of
a three-way contingency table analysis of the effects of course structure on the grades of URM in contrast to non-URM students.
a The far-right column indicates overall percent of students in each ethnic group in the URM and non-URM rows. In the URM  course
structure and non-URM  course structure rows, the far-right column indicates the number of students in each category.
Peer-led Workshops
Vol. 8, Fall 2009
uation rates. An alternative explanation for the higher performance of students who have chosen to participate in SI is
that these students were more motivated to learn and so
would have outperformed other students even if SI were not
available. Students who claim to have wanted to attend SI,
but were prevented from doing so by scheduling conflicts,
have been used as a motivational control by Arendale 
and by Ramirez . In both studies, SI student performance exceeded that of students in the motivational control
group. The results of Arendale indicate that approximately one-third of the improvement in performance of SI
students is associated with initial motivational differences,
rather than the effects of SI. In a discussion of improved
success of students who have elected to enroll in a Treisman
Model Math Excel program, Duncan and Dick suggest increased motivation and increased study time does not
necessarily translate into increased performance if students
do not know how to study effectively. Our results, and those
of Tien et al. , indicate that improved student performance as a result of participation in peer-led cooperative
learning workshops is not limited to students (approximately one-third of a typical course) with enough motivation to participate in voluntary, or enroll in elective, workshops. Required workshops improved overall performance
Academic discipline
Academic discipline
Agriculture
Biological sciences
Other declared majors
Other undeclared
Significance of academic discipline across all semesters
Two-way Pearson 2  79.59, df  20, p  0.001
Agriculture
Preworkshop
Differences
Significance of course structure, agriculture students
Two-way Pearson 2  18.35, df  5, p  0.003
Biological sciences
Preworkshop
Differences
Significance of course structure, biological sciences
students only
Two-way Pearson 2  20.28, df  5, p  0.001
Preworkshop
Differences
Significance of course structure, education students
Two-way Pearson 2  17.57, df  5, p  0.004
Other declared majors
Preworkshop
Differences
Significance of course structure, other declared majors
Two-way Pearson 2  19.29, df  5, p  0.002
Other undeclared
Significance of course structure, undeclared students
Two-way Pearson 2  5.60, df  5, p  0.347
Course structure by discipline
Significance of different effects of course structure
among majors
Three-way Pearson 2  231.43, df  49, p  0.001
The first section shows the percentage of students earning each grade by academic discipline and results of a two-way contingency table
analysis of academic discipline  grades. The next four sections show the analyses of the effects of course structure on each academic
discipline individually. The last row reports the three-way interaction of course structure  grades  academic discipline.
a The far-right column shows the overall percent of students in each group in the Academic discipline rows. It indicates the number of
students in each category in subsequent rows.
R. W. Preszler
CBE—Life Sciences Education
of the entire lecture course. However, we did find that a
minimal level of motivation may be necessary to benefit
from the workshop experience. Although there were absolute differences in grade distributions between academic
majors, all majors benefited from the workshops. However,
the grades of students who had not declared a major did not
improve from preworkshop to workshop semesters. This
suggests that students’ motivation and performance may
benefit if they are encouraged to develop career goals and
academic majors, even at a freshman level, and even though
we know that in many cases these goals and majors will
change in the coming years.
Although the grades of both males and females benefited
from the workshops, females’ grades and retention improved
significantly more than that of males. Qualitative analyses of
student interviews led Seymour and Hewitt to conclude
that retention of female undergraduate science, mathematics,
and engineering (SME) majors is enhanced if they are able to
develop an individualized dialogue with their instructors that
provides them with personal encouragement; they concluded
that this was less important in the retention of male SME
majors. Peer instructors in a small workshop setting are more
likely to individually encourage students than are instructors
in a large lecture hall. This may help explain the dramatic
increase in retention of female students with the introduction
of workshops (12.5% withdrawal rate of female students in
preworkshop semesters, 5.9% withdrawal rate during workshop semesters) in comparison with the much more modest
improvement in retention of males (12.0% preworkshop withdrawal rate, 9.5% workshop withdrawal rate). This more personalized dialogue between peer facilitators and students also
may have contributed to the improved performance of female
Although the grades of both URM and non-URM students
benefitted from the workshops, the grades of URM students
improved more dramatically than those of non-URM students. Fullilove and Treisman found that African-
American students who chose to enroll in a mathematics
workshop program supplementing a first-year calculus
course had dramatically improved grades and graduation at
the university compared with a historical control group and
with students in the calculus course who did not enroll in
the workshop; these effects were stronger for African-American males than they were for African-American females.
The design of this approach was based on observational
studies of the study strategies of historically successful Chinese-American students in comparison with African-American students who historically had low success rates in the
course. The underlying philosophy of the workshops was to
create a more positive social context for learning mathematics that encouraged groups of students to cooperatively
study challenging problems. The PLTL program was developed in part in response to the success of Fullilove and
Treisman workshops. URM students’ grades have improved
when PLTL workshops are added to courses . Born et al. compared lecture
exam performance of URM students participating in a workshop associated with a biology course with the performance
of URM students in a previous version of the course that did
not have associated workshops. Interestingly, the workshop
URM students sharply improved from exam 2 to exam 3,
whereas the performance of the historic control URM students sharply declined between exams 2 and 3. Non-URM
student volunteers assigned to the workshops benefitted
more rapidly than the workshop URM students. The non-
URM workshop students showed a sharp improvement between exams 1 and 2 and maintained this success through
exam 3. Although the reasons for this more delayed benefit
for URM students are unclear, it may be that the workshop
learning environment is more similar to previous educational experiences of non-URM students than it is to URM
students . Subsequent research has documented positive effects of SI on the performance of African-
American students in a large number of courses associated
with SI at the University of Missouri–Kansas City , of SI on URM students in Biology I at San Francisco
University , and of an elective variant of
PLTL in general chemistry at Washington University . Formal analyses of the interaction between
the effects of workshops and ethnicity or gender on student
performance have produced mixed results. Our analysis and
those of Rath et al. revealed a greater effect on URM
students, and our results also showed that females benefited
more from the workshops; in contrast, Hockings et al. 
found that the benefits of PLTL did not differ between males
and females, URM and non-URM, low income and non–lowincome, or first-year and upper-level students. As Rath et al.
 discuss, ethnicity-based performance gaps are a result of
many factors, only some of which may be impacted by changes
in teaching strategies. Our results suggest the workshops not
only helped ameliorate problems associated with performance
gaps between URM and non-URM students but also were
more beneficial to female students. Contrasting conclusions
from studies of differential impacts of peer-led workshops
could be due to variation in the structure of the workshops, the
student populations, or the nature of the course content. We
eagerly await development of further understanding of the
relative importance of peer instruction in comparison to cooperative learning; and of understanding of the relative importance of case studies in comparison to challenging problems or
learning skill development activities. Although the relative
importance of each of these components is unknown, it is clear
that our introductory biology students benefited from peer-led
cooperative learning in a workshop setting.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The success of the workshops was a direct result of the dedication of
three semesters of BioCats. Dr. Avis James and Bethany Cook helped
Number of concepts from the hierarchical list of targeted
concepts covered, at each of the four levels of the hierarchy in
preworkshop and workshop semesters
Hierarchical level of concepts
Version of course
Preworkshop
Quaternary
Peer-led Workshops
Vol. 8, Fall 2009
write workshop activities and implement the program. Drs. Michele
Shuster and Amy Marion helped develop and implement the
project. Tonia Lane was instrumental in hiring BioCats and
coordinating the NMSU–Howard HHMI program. Dr. M. Shuster
kindly reviewed an early draft of this manuscript. The NMSU
biology workshop program was supported in part by a grant to
Undergraduate
Education Program; it also was supported by the College of Arts
and Sciences at NMSU.