Communications of the IIMA
Communications of the IIMA
Naive Bayes Classification of Public Health Data with Greedy
Naive Bayes Classification of Public Health Data with Greedy
Feature Selection
Feature Selection
Stephanie J. Hickey
Iona College
Follow this and additional works at: 
Recommended Citation
Recommended Citation
Hickey, Stephanie J. "Naive Bayes Classification of Public Health Data with Greedy Feature
Selection," Communications of the IIMA: Vol. 13: Iss. 2, Article 7.
DOI: 
Available at: 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by CSUSB ScholarWorks. It has been accepted for inclusion
in Communications of the IIMA by an authorized editor of CSUSB ScholarWorks. For more information, please
contact .
Naive Bayes Classification of Public Health Data with Greedy Feature Selection
Communications of the IIMA ©2013
2013 Volume 13 Issue 2
Naive Bayes Classification of Public
Health Data with Greedy Feature Selection
Stephanie J. Hickey
Iona College, USA
 
Public health issues feature prominently in popular awareness, political debate, and in data
mining literature. Data mining has the potential to influence public health in a myriad of ways,
from personalized, genetic medicine to studies of environmental health and epidemiology, and
many applications in between. Authors have asserted the importance of medical data as the basis
for any conclusions applied to the public health domain, the promise of naive Bayes
classification for prediction in the public health domain, and the impact of feature selection on
classification accuracy. In keeping with this perspective, this study explored the combination of a
naive Bayes classifier with greedy feature selection, applied to a robust public health dataset,
with the goal of efficiently identifying the one or several attributes, which best predict a selected
target attribute. This approach did consistently identify the most-predictive attributes for a given
target attribute and produced modest increases in classification accuracy. For each choice of
target attribute, the most predictive attributes were those relating to diagnosis or procedure
codes, a result, which points to several opportunities for future work.
Keywords: Data mining, feature selection, health care, naive Bayes
INTRODUCTION
Public health issues feature prominently in popular awareness, political debate, and in data
mining literature. Data mining, the work of discovering patterns in data, has the potential to
influence public health in a myriad of ways, from personalized, genetic medicine to studies of
environmental health and epidemiology, and many applications in between. Classification of
new data based on patterns previously observed holds promise for applying specific advances to
public health more generally. Classification algorithms that take advantage of Bayes’ Theorem
and prevalence statistics, dubbed naive Bayes classifiers, aim to accomplish this with readily
available data.
For this study, we applied a naive Bayes classifier to a robust public health dataset, with greedy
feature selection, with the objective of efficiently identifying that the n attributes which best
predict a selected target attribute, without searching the input space exhaustively. For example, is
length of hospital stay impacted by insurance type, by region, by type of hospital, or by
something else? Do diagnoses and procedures drive outcomes (discharge status) or does
something else?
Naive Bayes Classification of Public Health Data with Greedy Feature Selection
Communications of the IIMA ©2013
2013 Volume 13 Issue 2
This study may contribute toward applying data mining approaches to public health data,
specifically, to predicting attributes that represent a measure of treatment outcome or a proxy for
cost, for patients receiving health care services in U.S. hospitals, based on readily accessible
patient data.
PUBLIC HEALTH CARE IN THE U. S.
The U.S. health care system has had no shortage of attention recently. According to the World
Health Organization, health care spending amounted to $7,146 per capita and 15.2% of the gross
domestic product in 2008, the highest of any nation. In its World Health Report 2000, its most
recent survey of population health and health systems financing, however, the U.S. ranked 38th.
As recently as 2010, 49.9 million residents had neither public nor private insurance to help allay
the cost of health care1. The debate surrounding the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010, designed to extend insurance
options to more residents and curtail further increases in health-care spending, was a major issue
in the 2012 elections. Yet, despite the attention, apparent tradeoffs between the costs of health
care, both to individuals and institutions, the quality of care received by most patients, and the
efficiency of the system as a whole persist.
The recent explosion in data available for analysis is as evident in health care as anywhere else.
Private and public insurers, health care providers, particularly hospitals, physician groups and
laboratories, and government agencies are able to generate far more digital information than ever
before. This data presents an opportunity; clues to the varied challenges faced by the health care
system may lie in this data. The insights gained from effectively mining public health data have
implications for several types of stakeholders in the current health care system: planning
implications for hospital administrators, treatment protocol implications for physician groups,
public health implications for legislators, government agencies, and think tanks.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Not surprisingly, a great deal of data mining analysis is being done in the public health domain,
particularly predictive data mining in clinical medicine , and the
potential influence of such work is broad and compelling . Further, data
mining in the public health domain presents unique challenges :
heterogeneity of medical data, ethical, legal, and social constraints on use of that data, statistical
approaches that address heterogeneity and these constraints, and the special status of medicine as
a revered and scrutinized field responsible for life-and-death decisions that may affect all of us.
Naive Bayes classification has been demonstrated to be superior to several other classification
methods when applied specifically to medical data . The
authors evaluate naive Bayes and five other methods on fifteen medical datasets from the UCI
1 Statistics were obtained from multiple sources .
Naive Bayes Classification of Public Health Data with Greedy Feature Selection
Communications of the IIMA ©2013
2013 Volume 13 Issue 2
machine-learning repository. They favor naive Bayes both for its predictive performance and for
its transparency and interpretability; both would be key for any results to be embraced by health
care practitioners. They identify naive Bayes’ independence assumption as the most pressing
area for future work and suggest that hybrid methods might help.
An earlier study compared naive Bayes and seven other methods, plus four hybrid methods, in
predicting pneumonia mortality . The eight methods had absolute error rates
within 1% or each other; the four hybrid methods were deemed promising but not statistically
Hassan and Verma suggest that several methods be combined; in their case, the output of
three different classifiers was the input for a neural network, all used to classify mammography
data. While this may have scored well on their test data, we would be concerned that such a
model was unintuitive for real-world decision-making.
The importance of preprocessing is frequently cited in studies based on medical data, as well as
more generally. Popescu and Khalilia use the hierarchy implicit in ICD-9 codes as a
measure of similarity among patients; including so-designated similar patients during
classification improved the predictive performance of random forest and support vector machine
methods on three prevalent diseases. See more on ICD-9 codes below. The authors’ future work
involves extending their work to more diseases, still using the Nationwide Inpatient Sample data
from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality’s Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project.
We would like to see their approach paired with other classification methods, as well as to health
care data more broadly.
Several studies focus on feature selection as a key preprocessing step. Feature selection has been
used to identify the most salient attributes in a dataset and thereby improve the accuracy and
efficiency of classification under several methods: naive Bayes, IB1, and C4.5 . In this study, features were selected based on their alignment
with the target attribute. The authors focused on predicting diabetes control status for patients
with type 2 diabetes; however, feature selection based on likely strength of prediction could be
considered for health care data more broadly.
One series of articles describes the combination of several preprocessing steps to boost naive
Bayes’ classification accuracy on medical data : entropy-based discretization and feature selection that involves filtering features with low
chi-squared statistics and greedy selection among the remaining features. The authors based their
work on medical datasets from the UCI machine-learning repository. Greedy feature selection
using other measures of likely strength of prediction would be worth investigating.
Association rules, specifically itemset discovery using supervised beam search, have been used
to investigate co-morbidity among diagnoses reflected in the 2005-2009 National Hospital
Discharge Survey ; see more on this survey below. The author identifies
visualization as suitable for future work. We find two other aspects of this study interesting,
however: using 3-digit ICD-9 codes to consolidate the input space, and using similarity, in their
case three separate co-morbidity measures, in feature selection.
Naive Bayes Classification of Public Health Data with Greedy Feature Selection
Communications of the IIMA ©2013
2013 Volume 13 Issue 2
HYPOTHESIS
Several threads emerge from the literature review: the importance of medical data as the basis for
any conclusions applied to the public health domain, the promise of naive Bayes classification
for prediction in the public health domain, and the impact of feature selection on classification
accuracy. We applied a naive Bayes classifier to a robust public health dataset, with greedy
feature selection, such that the n attributes which best predict a selected target attribute might be
efficiently identified. Our hypothesis was that this approach, detailed below, would assist
prediction in the public health domain.
METHODOLOGY
The methodology we used follows and is divided into the components identified by Domingos
We used data2 published in the Hospital Discharge Survey . This annual survey includes demographic information, admission and
discharge information, diagnoses, and procedures; the 2010 study included 151,551 patients in
203 short-stay hospitals. Weights are included in each patient’s record, which allow for
extrapolation of statistics to national or regional levels. For simplicity, we excluded children
younger than one year of age (leaving 135,418 patients).
Diagnoses and procedures captured by the NHDS reflect The International Classification of
Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM), published by the NCHS ,
i.e., the World Health Organization's Ninth Revision, International Classification of Diseases
(ICD-9). ICD-9-CM is the official system of assigning codes to diagnoses and procedures
associated with hospital utilization in the United States.
DRGs—diagnosis related groups—are also captured (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services [CMS], n.d.); these are developed and used by the CMS to determine payment for
inpatient hospital care of Medicare patients, and represent types of hospital cases that are
expected to be similar in terms of resource use. For the 2010 NHDS, used the
CMS MS-DRG Grouper software Version 27.0 to assign the MS- DRG.
Representation
We chose a naive Bayes classifier for predicting any one of the dataset’s attributes, all of which
are discrete or could be easily discretized.
2 Data may be downloaded from ftp://ftp.cdc.gov/pub/Health_Statistics/NCHS/Datasets/NHDS/
Naive Bayes Classification of Public Health Data with Greedy Feature Selection
Communications of the IIMA ©2013
2013 Volume 13 Issue 2
Naive Bayes’ assumption of attributes’ independence is frequently criticized. While
independence almost certainly isn’t the case between attributes in health care data, numerous
studies have shown this approach to be accurate and efficient nonetheless. Theoreticians Rish,
Hellerstein, and Thathachar consider naive Bayes classification to be most accurate when
attributes are either independent or most-closely correlated. The latter seems likely for many
attributes concerning health care data.
Evaluation
We used classification accuracy as a simple, effective evaluation metric that is consistent with a
naive Bayes approach. Most of the dataset’s attributes could be selected as the target attribute;
we focused on length of hospital stay, as a potential proxy for both health care quality and cost,
and discharge status, for its obvious humanitarian implications. We also considered the number
of diagnostic codes, as another potential proxy for cost and severity of illness. We divided the
dataset into training and testing data, using 10-fold cross-validation. Cross-validation is a method
by which the data is randomly subdivided into subsets, in this case, ten. One subset is isolated for
use as testing data and the remaining serve as training data. In successive iterations, the model is
run with each subset serving as testing data, and the results averaged. In this way, actual data
values are available to calculate classification accuracy but bias is minimized.
Optimization
We implemented greedy feature selection, such that the n attributes which best predict a selected
target attribute might be efficiently identified, without searching the input space exhaustively.
The classification accuracy of the target attribute with each one other attribute was calculated
and ranked. It is possible that an attribute is effective in combination with another but not alone,
however. So as not to preclude this possibility from surfacing, we used random selection of
attributes with the above rankings as weights, such that highly ranked attributes had a greater
probability of selection, reminiscent of a simulated annealing approach.
Predictive data mining is primarily a mathematical exercise, the application of algorithms to data
and the resulting computation, as opposed to one in which the behavior of objects in the real
world is modeled. For this reason, we chose to use a functional programming language, namely
Clojure, a Lisp that runs on the JVM and permits access to any Java libraries.
To improve performance, we accessed the naive Bayes model in Weka 3.7.7 by using Weka’s
Java API from Clojure, as well as methods for 10-fold cross-validation. This improved
calculation speed dramatically over our beginner’s implementation of the same model.
FEASIBILITY STUDY
At the outset, we implemented a naive Bayes classifier in Clojure and applied it to the 2010
NHDS. We focused on patients’ age, discretized into completed decades, Diagnosis Related
Naive Bayes Classification of Public Health Data with Greedy Feature Selection
Communications of the IIMA ©2013
2013 Volume 13 Issue 2
Group, which has 730 distinct values, and length of hospital stay, discretized into six categories.
The prevalence of each length of stay category in the full dataset, alone and for each combination
of age and diagnosis, was used to predict the length of stay for each patient. For a sample of
50,000 patients drawn from regular intervals of the full (unordered) dataset, 53% were predicted
correctly. These results were duplicated using Weka 3.6.6 Explorer.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
This combination of a naive Bayes classifier with greedy feature selection did identify the mostpredictive n attributes for a given target attribute. Both the level of classification accuracy and
the increase in classification accuracy achieved varied by target attribute, however. In some
cases that increase was modest; in others, it alluded to the (disappointing) reality that such
predictive relationships may not be hiding in the data after all.
Because our greedy feature selection algorithm has an element of randomness to it, the attributes
selected as most-predictive after 100 iterations (or some number of iterations smaller than the
input space) are generally consistent, but not exactly the same, from run to run. Classification
accuracy varied little from run to run, however.
To explore this approach, we chose as the target attribute length of hospital stay, discharge
status, and number of diagnostic codes, in turn.
Length of Hospital Stay
For length of hospital stay, we discretized the data into the following six categories: one day, two
days, one week, one month, two months, and long term (the range was 0 to 497 days). A worstcase, blind guess, therefore, might be 1/6, or 17%, classification accuracy. An estimate based on
the data and the starting point for a naive Bayes approach, would be to predict whichever is the
most prevalent value (here, two days); in this case that would achieve 46% classification
accuracy. Using naive Bayes model, the best single attribute achieved 61%; the best two, three,
and four attributes selected in 100 iterations achieved 67%-70% classification accuracy. In all
iterations, the most successful attributes, alone or in combination, were those relating to
diagnosis or procedure codes. More details are included in Table 1.
Attributes Selected in 100 Iterations
Classification
Primary diagnosis
Primary diagnosis, primary procedure
Primary diagnosis, primary procedure, admitting diagnosis
Primary diagnosis, primary procedure, admitting diagnosis, DRG
Table 1: Length of Hospital Stay.
Naive Bayes Classification of Public Health Data with Greedy Feature Selection
Communications of the IIMA ©2013
2013 Volume 13 Issue 2
We did explore other categories besides these six, as well as investigated whether misclassifications were “close,” meaning one category removed from the correct one. Neither
proved to be significant.
Discharge Status
We were optimistic that successfully predicting discharge status would have worthwhile
implications, but the data was uncooperative. The 2010 NHDS uses seven
discharge statuses: routine, unadvised, transfer to short-term facility, transfer to long-term
facility, alive otherwise unknown, dead, and status unknown. The most prevalent value was
present in 76% of the patients (thankfully, routine discharge), making that a potent predictor.
Using naive Bayes model, the best single, two, three, and four attributes selected in 100
iterations were only able to improve that to 80-83% classification accuracy. The same set of
diagnosis code- and procedure code-related attributes were the better predictors. More details are
included in Table 2.
Attributes Selected in 100 Iterations
Classification
Primary diagnosis
Primary diagnosis plus either primary procedure or admitting
Primary diagnosis, primary procedure, and either admitting
diagnosis or admission source
Primary diagnosis, primary procedure, admitting diagnosis,
admission source
Table 2: Discharge Status.
Number of Diagnostic Codes
The 2010 NHDS captures up to fifteen diagnosis codes and up to eight procedure
codes for each patient; the first of each is designated to be primary, but following that, they are
generally unranked. Two of the attributes we included, throughout, were calculations of the
number of each present in the data. Possible values for the number of diagnosis codes were 1-15.
The distribution was fairly flat, with the most prevalent value present in 17% of the patients.
Using naive Bayes model, the best single attribute improved classification accuracy to 40%. The
best two, three, and four attributes selected in 100 iterations improved that to 49%-56%. The
same set of diagnosis code- and procedure code-related attributes were the better predictors.
More details are included in Table 3.
Naive Bayes Classification of Public Health Data with Greedy Feature Selection
Communications of the IIMA ©2013
2013 Volume 13 Issue 2
Attributes Selected in 100 Iterations
Classification
Primary diagnosis
Primary diagnosis, admitting diagnosis
Primary diagnosis, primary procedure, admitting diagnosis
Primary diagnosis, primary procedure, admitting diagnosis, DRG
Table 3: Number of Diagnostic Codes.
The possibility that predictive relationships are not supported by the data or, on the other hand,
that predictive relationships inferred from the data are somehow unique to that data and have no
applicability beyond it (over-fitting), must be considered.
The curse of dimensionality may be a factor, that is, the possible combinations of all the values
of all the attributes may create an input space large enough that available data is insufficient to
assess confidently any predictive relationships therein. Even a dataset of 150,000 patients covers
a small subset of the input space created by this dataset’s attributes; we hope that data is not
uniformly distributed in input space, but sufficiently clumped to enable the calculation of useful
classifiers.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This study had two objectives, to aid stakeholders in the current health care system and to aid
researchers applying data mining techniques to the public health domain.
The combinations of attributes selected as the best predictors of the selected target attributes,
which themselves represent a measure of treatment outcome or a proxy for cost, might have
utility for stakeholders in the current health care system. Several types of stakeholders make
decisions based on this type of information. The best combinations of attributes might have
planning implications for hospital administrators, treatment protocol implications for physician
groups, and public health implications for legislators, government agencies, and think tanks.
In addition, the impact of feature selection on classification accuracy has been reiterated
throughout the literature. The best combinations of attributes identified here might prove useful
to researchers looking for dimensionality reduction for their own studies. These combinations of
attributes might be the input to more refined models, tailored to the specific attributes.
The combination of a naive Bayes classifier with greedy feature selection did consistently
identify the most-predictive n attributes for a given target attribute, although greater than modest
increases in classification accuracy would have been gratifying. For each choice of target
attribute, the most-predictive attributes, alone or in combination, were those relating to diagnosis
Naive Bayes Classification of Public Health Data with Greedy Feature Selection
Communications of the IIMA ©2013
2013 Volume 13 Issue 2
or procedure codes. This result points to some refinements or expansions that we think might be
worthwhile.
One aspect of the 2010 NHDS that we have not fully explored is the specific diagnosis and
procedure codes. Because they are generally unranked after the first of each, their positions in
each patient’s record are not informative. They might be represented as an array of binary
attributes, each representing an individual code and its inclusion, or not, in each patient’s record.
It might be interesting to consider whether certain codes are stronger predictors than either the
primary code or the set of codes is; this effort might be hampered, however, by the input space it
implies. Using 3-digit ICD-9 codes, in the style of Stiglic , or the hierarchy implicit in
ICD-9 codes, in the style of Popescu and Khalilia , might moderate that concern.
The NHDS has been conducted annually since 1965 and captures a fairly
consistent set of data elements; changes in scope and methodology have been well-documented.
Expanding this effort to include more years’ data might impart greater confidence that the input
space was well-covered.
The NHDS data are sampled at both the hospital level and the patient level, and
is meant to be representative of hospital utilization nationally. In this dawning era of Big Data,
however, were there another, direct source of de-identified patient data that might permit more
nuanced analysis. It would be exciting to participate in the discovery of any predictive
relationships that may have been masked by sampling that was necessary until now.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The author thanks Dr. Smiljana Petrovic, Department of Computer Science, Iona College, for
guidance and technical review, and Rich Hickey, for technical review.
This research satisfies the thesis requirements for an M.S. in Computer Science.