Workshop track - ICLR 2016
ACTION RECOGNITION USING VISUAL ATTENTION
Shikhar Sharma, Ryan Kiros & Ruslan Salakhutdinov
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON M5S 3G4, Canada
{shikhar,rkiros,rsalakhu}@cs.toronto.edu
We propose a soft attention based model for the task of action recognition in
videos. We use multi-layered Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) with Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) units which are deep both spatially and temporally.
Our model learns to focus selectively on parts of the video frames and classiﬁes
videos after taking a few glimpses. The model essentially learns which parts in
the frames are relevant for the task at hand and attaches higher importance to
them. We evaluate the model on UCF-11 (YouTube Action), HMDB-51 and Hollywood2 datasets and analyze how the model focuses its attention depending on
the scene and the action being performed.
INTRODUCTION
It has been noted in visual cognition literature that humans do not focus their attention on an entire
scene at once . Instead, they focus sequentially on different parts of the scene to
extract relevant information. Most traditional computer vision algorithms do not employ attention
mechanisms and are indifferent to various parts of the image/video. With the recent surge of interest
in deep neural networks, attention based models have been shown to achieve promising results
on several challenging tasks, including caption generation , machine translation
 , game-playing and tracking , as well as image recognition
 ). Many of these models have employed
LSTM based RNNs and have shown good results in learning
sequences.
Attention models can be classiﬁed into soft attention and hard attention models. Soft attention
models are deterministic and can be trained using backpropagation, whereas hard attention models
are stochastic and can be trained by the REINFORCE algorithm ,
or by maximizing a variational lower bound or using importance sampling .
Learning hard attention models can become computationally expensive as it requires sampling. In
soft attention approaches, on the other hand, a differentiable mapping can be used from all the
locations output to the next input. Attention based models can also potentially infer the action
happening in videos by focusing only on the relevant places in each frame. For example, Fig. 1a
shows four frames from the UCF-11 video sequence belonging to the “golf swinging” category. The
model tends to focus on the ball, the club, and the human, which allows the model to correctly
recognize the activity as “golf swinging”. In Fig. 1b, our model attends to the trampoline, while
correctly identifying the activity as “trampoline jumping”.
In this paper we propose a soft attention based recurrent model for action recognition. We describe
how our model dynamically pools convolutional features and show that using these features for
action recognition gives better results compared to average or max pooling which is used by many
of the existing models . We further demonstrate that our model tends to recognize
important elements in video frames based on the activities it detects.
RELATED WORK
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been highly successful in image classiﬁcation and
object recognition tasks . Classifying videos instead of images
 
Workshop track - ICLR 2016
(a) Correctly classiﬁed as “golf swinging”
(b) Correctly classiﬁed as “trampoline jumping”
Figure 1: Attention over time: The white regions show what the model is attending to and the brightness
indicates the strength of focus. Best viewed in color.
adds a temporal dimension to the problem of image classiﬁcation. Learning temporal dynamics is a
difﬁcult problem and earlier approaches have used optical ﬂow, HOG and hand-crafted features to
generate descriptors with both appearance and dynamics information encoded. LSTMs have been
recently shown to perform well in the domain of speech recognition , machine
translation , image description and
video description . They have also started picking up
momentum in action recognition .
Most of the existing approaches also tend to have CNNs underlying the LSTMs and classify sequences directly or do temporal pooling of features prior to classiﬁcation . LSTMs have also been used to learn an effective representation of videos in unsupervised settings by using them in an encoder-decoder framework. More
recently, Yao et al. have proposed to use 3-D CNN features and an LSTM decoder in an
encoder-decoder framework to generate video descriptions. Their model incorporates attention on
a video level by deﬁning a probability distribution over frames used to generate individual words.
They, however, do not employ an attention mechanism on a frame level (i.e. within a single frame).
In general, it is rather difﬁcult to interpret internal representations learned by deep neural networks.
Attention models add a dimension of interpretability by capturing where the model is focusing its
attention when performing a particular task. Karpathy et al. used a multi-resolution CNN
architecture to perform action recognition in videos. They mention the concept of fovea but they ﬁx
attention to the center of the frame. A recent work of Xu et al. used both soft attention and
hard attention mechanisms to generate image descriptions. Their model actually looks at the respective objects when generating their description. Our work directly builds upon this work. However,
while Xu et al. primarily worked on caption generation in static images, in this paper, we
focus on using a soft attention mechanism for activity recognition in videos. More recently, Jaderberg et al. have proposed a soft-attention mechanism called the Spatial Transformer module
which they add between the layers of CNNs. Instead of weighting locations using a softmax layer
which we do, they apply afﬁne transformations to multiple layers of their CNN to attend to the relevant part and get state-of-the-art results on the Street View House Numbers dataset . Yeung et al. do dense action labelling using a temporal attention based model on the
input-output context and report higher accuracy and better understanding of temporal relationships
in action videos.
THE MODEL AND THE ATTENTION MECHANISM
CONVOLUTIONAL FEATURES
We extract the last convolutional layer obtained by pushing the video frames through GoogLeNet
model trained on the ImageNet dataset . This last convolutional layer has D convolutional maps and is a feature cube of shape K × K × D (7 × 7 × 1024
in our experiments). Thus, at each time-step t, we extract K2 D-dimensional vectors. We refer to
these vectors as feature slices in a feature cube:
Xt = [Xt,1, . . . , Xt,K2],
Each of these K2 vertical feature slices maps to different overlapping regions in the input space and
our model chooses to focus its attention on these K2 regions.
Workshop track - ICLR 2016
(a) The soft attention mechanism
(b) Our recurrent model
Figure 2: (2a) The CNN takes the video frame as its input and produces a feature cube. The model computes
the current input xt as an average of the feature slices weighted according to the location softmax lt (2b) At each
time-step t, our recurrent network takes a feature slice xt, generated as in (2a), as the input. It then propagates
xt through three layers of LSTMs and predicts the next location probabilities lt+1 and the class label yt.
THE LSTM AND THE ATTENTION MECHANISM
We use the LSTM implementation discussed in Zaremba et al. and Xu et al. :
ct = ft ⊙ct−1 + it ⊙gt,
ht = ot ⊙tanh(ct),
where it is the input gate, ft is the forget gate, ot is the output gate, and gt is calculated as shown
in Eq. 1. ct is the cell state, ht is the hidden state, and xt (see Eqs. 4, 5) represents the input to the
LSTM at time-step t. M : Ra →Rb is an afﬁne transformation consisting of trainable parameters
with a = d + D and b = 4d, where d is the dimensionality of all of it, ft, ot, gt, ct, and ht.
At each time-step t, our model predicts lt+1, a softmax over K×K locations, and yt, a softmax over
the label classes with an additional hidden layer with tanh activations (see Fig. 2b). The location
softmax is deﬁned as follows:
lt,i = p(Lt = i|ht−1) =
i ∈1 . . . K2,
where Wi are the weights mapping to the ith element of the location softmax and Lt is a random
variable which can take 1-of-K2 values. This softmax can be thought of as the probability with
which our model believes the corresponding region in the input frame is important. After calculating
these probabilities, the soft attention mechanism computes the expected
value of the input at the next time-step xt by taking expectation over the feature slices at different
regions (see Fig. 2a):
xt = Ep(Lt|ht−1)[Xt] =
where Xt is the feature cube and Xt,i is the ith slice of the feature cube at time-step t. Note that
in the hard attention based models, we would sample Lt from a softmax distribution of Eq. 4. The
input xt would then be the feature slice at the sampled location instead of taking expectation over
all the slices. Thus, hard attention based models are not differentiable and have to resort to some
form of sampling.
Workshop track - ICLR 2016
We use the following initialization strategy ) for the cell state and the hidden
state of the LSTM for faster convergence:
c0 = finit,c
h0 = finit,h
where finit,c and finit,h are two multilayer perceptrons and T is the number of time-steps in the model.
These values are used to calculate the ﬁrst location softmax l1 which determines the initial input x1.
In our experiments, we use multi-layered deep LSTMs, as shown in Fig. 2b.
LOSS FUNCTION AND THE ATTENTION PENALTY
We use cross-entropy loss coupled with the doubly stochastic penalty introduced in Xu et al. .
We impose an additional constraint over the location softmax, so that PT
t=1 lt,i ≈1. This is the
attention regularization which forces the model to look at each region of the frame at some point in
time. The loss function is deﬁned as follows:
yt,i log ˆyt,i + λ
lt,i)2 + γ
where yt is the one hot label vector, ˆyt is the vector of class probabilities at time-step t, T is the
total number of time-steps, C is the number of output classes, λ is the attention penalty coefﬁcient,
γ is the weight decay coefﬁcient, and θ represents all the model parameters. Details about the
architecture and hyper-parameters are given in Section 4.2.
EXPERIMENTS
We have used UCF-11, HMDB-51 and Hollywood2 datasets in our experiments.
the YouTube Action dataset consisting of 1600 videos and 11 actions - basketball shooting, biking/cycling, diving, golf swinging, horse back riding, soccer juggling, swinging, tennis swinging,
trampoline jumping, volleyball spiking, and walking with a dog. The clips have a frame rate of
29.97 fps and each video has only one action associated with it. We use 975 videos for training and
625 videos for testing.
HMDB-51 Human Motion Database dataset provides three train-test splits each consisting of 5100
videos. These clips are labeled with 51 classes of human actions like Clap, Drink, Hug, Jump,
Somersault, Throw and many others. Each video has only one action associated with it. The training
set for each split has 3570 videos (70 per category) and the test set has 1530 videos (30 per category).
The clips have a frame rate of 30 fps.
Hollywood2 Human Actions dataset consists of 1707 video clips collected from movies. These
clips are labeled with 12 classes of human actions - AnswerPhone, DriveCar, Eat, FightPerson,
GetOutCar, HandShake, HugPerson, Kiss, Run, SitUp, SitDown and StandUp. Some videos have
multiple actions associated with them. The training set has 823 videos and the testing set has 884
All the videos in the datasets were resized to 224 × 224 resolution and fed to a GoogLeNet model
trained on the ImageNet dataset. The last convolutional layer of size 7 × 7 × 1024 was used as an
input to our model.
TRAINING DETAILS AND EVALUATION
In all of our experiments, model architecture and various other hyper-parameters were set using
cross-validation. In particular, for all datasets we trained 3-layer LSTM models, where the dimensionality of the LSTM hidden state, cell state, and the hidden layer were set to 512 for both
UCF-11 and Hollywood2 and 1024 for HMDB-51. We also experimented with models having
one LSTM layer to ﬁve LSTM layers, but did not observe any signiﬁcant improvements in model
performance. For the attention penalty coefﬁcient we experimented with values 0, 1, 10. While reporting results, we have set the weight decay penalty to 10−5 and use dropout , HMDB-51 (acc %) and Hollywood2 (mAP %)
Hollywood2
Softmax Regression (full CNN feature cube)
Avg pooled LSTM (@ 30 fps)
Max pooled LSTM (@ 30 fps)
Soft attention model (@ 30 fps, λ = 0)
Soft attention model (@ 30 fps, λ = 1)
Soft attention model (@ 30 fps, λ = 10)
(c) λ = 10
Figure 3: Variation in the model’s attention depending on the value of attention penalty λ. The white regions
are where the model is looking and the brightness indicates the strength of focus. Setting λ = 0 corresponds to
the model that tends to select a few locations and stay ﬁxed on them. Setting λ = 10 forces the model to gaze
everywhere, which resembles average pooling over slices.
2014) of 0.5 at all non-recurrent connections.
All models were trained using Adam optimization algorithm for 15 epochs over the entire datasets. However, we found
that Adam usually converged after 3 epochs. Our implementation is based in Theano which also handles the gradient computation and our code is available at https:
//github.com/kracwarlock/action-recognition-visual-attention.
For both training and testing our model takes 30 frames at a time sampled at ﬁxed fps rates. We
split each video into groups of 30 frames starting with the ﬁrst frame, selecting 30 frames according
to the fps rate, and then moving ahead with a stride of 1. Each video thus gets split into multiple
30-length samples. At test time, we compute class predictions for each time step and then average
those predictions over 30 frames. To obtain a prediction for the entire video clip, we average the
predictions from all 30 frame blocks in the video.
The softmax regression model uses the complete 7×7×1024 feature cube as its input to predict the
label at each time-step t, while all other models use only a 1024-dimensional feature slice as their
input. The average pooled and max pooled LSTM models use the same architecture as our model
except that they do not have any attention mechanism and thus do not produce a location softmax.
The inputs at each time-step for these models are obtained by doing average or max pooling over
the 7 × 7 × 1024 cube to get 1024 dimensional slices, whereas our soft attention model dynamically
weights the slices by the location softmax (see Eq. 5).
QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS
Table 1 reports accuracies on both UCF-11 and HMDB-51 datasets and mean average precision
(mAP) on Hollywood2. Even though the softmax regression baseline is given the complete 7 × 7 ×
1024 cube as its input, it performs worse than our model for all three datasets and worse than all
Workshop track - ICLR 2016
Table 2: Comparison of performance on HMDB-51 and Hollywood2 with state-of-the-art models
Hollywood2
Spatial stream ConvNet
 
Soft attention model
(Our model)
Composite LSTM Model
 
 
Two-stream ConvNet
 
VideoDarwin
 
Multi-skIp Feature Stacking
 
Traditional+Stacked Fisher Vectors
 
Objects+Traditional+Stacked Fisher Vectors 
(a) Correctly classiﬁed as “cycling”
(b) Correctly classiﬁed as “walking with a dog”
Figure 4: Attention over time. The model learns to look at the relevant parts - the cycle frame in (a) and the
human and the dogs in (b)
(a) Incorrectly classiﬁed as “diving”
(b) Incorrectly classiﬁed as “volleyball”
Figure 5: Video frames for a few time-steps for an example of soccer played on a basketball court. Different
glimpses can result in different predictions. Best viewed in color.
models in the case of HMDB-51 and Hollywood2. The results from Table 1 demonstrate that our
attention model performs better than both average and max pooled LSTMs.
We next experimented with doubly stochastic penalty term λ (see Eq. 7). Figure 3a shows that with
no attention regularization term, λ = 0, the model tends to vary its attention less. Setting λ = 1
encourages the model to further explore different gaze locations. The model with λ = 10 looks
everywhere (see Fig. 3c), in which case its behavior tends to become similar to the average pooling
case. Values in between these correspond to dynamic weighted averaging of the slices. The models
with λ = 0 and λ = 1 perform better than the models with λ = 10.
In Table 2, we compare the performance of our model with other state-of-the-art action recognition
models. We do not include UCF-11 here due to the lack of standard train-test splits. We have
divided the table into three sections. Models in the ﬁrst section use only RGB data while models
in the second section use both RGB and optical ﬂow data. The model in the third section uses
both RGB, optical ﬂow, as well as object responses of the videos on some ImageNet categories.
Our model performs competitively against deep learning models in its category (models using RGB
features only), while providing some insight into where the neural network is looking.
QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS
Figure 4 shows some test examples of where our model attends to on UCF-11 dataset. In Fig. 4a, we
see that the model was able to focus on parts of the cycle, while correctly recognizing the activity as
Workshop track - ICLR 2016
(a) Correctly classiﬁed as “swinging”
(b) Correctly classiﬁed as “horse back riding”
Figure 6: Video frames where the model pays more attention to the background compared to the foreground
and still classiﬁes them correctly
(a) “golf swinging” (@ 6fps, λ = 1)
(b) “golf swinging” (@ 30 fps, λ = 1)
Figure 7: The model’s focus of attention visualized over four equally spaced timesteps at different fps rates.
(a) plays faster and when the ball is hit and the club disappears, the model searches around to ﬁnd them. (b)
plays slower and the model stays focused on the ball and the club.
(a) Correctly classiﬁed as “Pushup”
(b) Correctly classiﬁed as “Kiss”
(c) Inorrectly classiﬁed as “Somersault”
(d) Incorrectly classiﬁed as “Hit”
Figure 8: Visualization of the focus of attention for four videos from HMDB-51 and Hollywood2 datasets
over time. The white regions are where the model is looking and the brightness indicates the strength of focus.
“cycling”. Similarly, in Fig. 4b, the model attends to the dogs and classiﬁes the activity as “walking
with a dog”.
We can also better understand failures of the model using the attention mechanism. For example,
Fig. 5a shows that the model mostly attends to the background like the light blue ﬂoor of the court.
The model incorrectly classiﬁes the example as “diving”. However, using a different manually
speciﬁed glimpse, as shown in Fig. 5b, the model classiﬁes the same example as “volleyball spiking”.
It is quite interesting to see that we can better understand the success and failure cases of this deep
attention model by visualizing where it attends to.1
The model does not always need to attend to the foreground. In many cases the camera is far away
and it may be difﬁcult to make out what the humans are doing or what the objects in the frames
are. In these cases the model tends to look at the background and tries to infer the activity from
the information in the background. For example, the model can look at the basketball court in the
1All the ﬁgures are from our best performing models with λ = 0 unless otherwise mentioned.
Workshop track - ICLR 2016
Figure 9: (First) The original video
frames for a “soccer juggling” example from UCF-11 (Second) Glimpse
of model with λ
1 overlayed
on the frames; predicted incorrectly
as “tennis swinging” (Third) Randomly initialized glimpse overlayed on
the frames; predicted incorrectly as
“tennis swinging” (Fourth) The ﬁrst
glimpse at which the action is correctly
predicted as “soccer juggling”, overlayed on the frames
background and predict the action being performed. Thus, depending on the video both foreground
and background might be important for activity recognition. Some examples are shown in Fig. 6,
where the model appears to look everywhere.
It is also interesting to observe that in some cases, the model is able to attend to important objects
in the video frames and attempts to track them to some extent in order to correctly identify the
performed activity. In Fig. 7b, the video is sampled at 30fps and subsequent frames are almost
identical. In this case the model stays focused on the golf ball, club, and the human. However,
when we change the sampling rate to 6fps, as shown in Fig. 7a, we ﬁnd that the video frames change
quickly. The model now remains focused on the ball before it disappears. After the person hits the
ball, we see that the model tries to look at other places, possibly to track the ball and the golf club.
We next examined the model’s performance on the HMDB-51 dataset.2 In Fig. 8a the model attempts
to focus on the person performing push-ups to recognize “Pushup” activity. In Fig. 8c the model
classiﬁes the example of “KickBall” incorrectly as “Somersault” despite attending to the location
where the action is happening. In some cases, however, the model fails to even attend to the relevant
location (see Fig. 8d). For Hollywood2, Fig. 8b shows an example of a short clip belonging to the
“Kiss” action. It appears that the model correctly anticipates that a kiss is going to take place and
attempts to focus on the region between the man and the woman.
In our ﬁnal set of experiments, we have tried to examine some failure cases of our attention mechanism. As an example, Fig. 9 shows a test video clip of “soccer juggling” (top row). Our model
focuses on the white boundaries of the ﬁeld (second row), while incorrectly recognizing the activity
as “tennis swinging”. To see whether we can potentially correct the model’s mistake by forcing it to
look at the relevant locations, we took a trained model and initialized the location softmax weights to
uniform random numbers between the minimum and maximum in the original model. The model’s
glimpse in this case is shown in the third row of Fig. 9. We next optimized only the softmax weights,
or the location variables, for this speciﬁc example of “soccer juggling” to ﬁnd the glimpse for which
the model would predict it correctly. All the other model parameters were kept ﬁxed. Note that this
only changes the sequences of glimpses, or where the model attends to, and not the model itself. It
is interesting to see that in order to classify this video clip correctly, the glimpse the model learns
(the fourth row of Fig. 9) tends to focus on the soccer player’s legs.
CONCLUSION
In this paper we developed recurrent soft attention based models for action recognition and analyzed
where they focus their attention. Our proposed model tends to recognize important elements in
video frames based on the action that is being performed. We also showed that our model performs
better than baselines which do not use any attention mechanism. Soft attention models, though
impressive, are still computationally expensive since they still require all the features to perform
dynamic pooling. In the future, we plan to explore hard attention models as well as hybrid soft and
hard attention approaches which can reduce the computational cost of our model, so that we can
potentially scale to larger datasets like UCF-101 and the Sports-1M dataset. These models can also
be extended to the multi-resolution setting, in which the attention mechanism could also choose to
focus on the earlier convolutional layers in order to attend to the lower-level features in the video
2More examples of our model’s attention are available in Appendix A and at
 
Workshop track - ICLR 2016
Acknowledgments: This work was supported by IARPA and Raytheon BBN Contract No. D11PC20071. We
would like to thank Nitish Srivastava for valuable discussions and Yukun Zhu for his assistance with the CNN