Attention Branch Network:
Learning of Attention Mechanism for Visual Explanation
Hiroshi Fukui, Tsubasa Hirakawa, Takayoshi Yamashita, Hironobu Fujiyoshi
Chubu University
1200 Matsumotocho, Kasugai, Aichi, Japan
{ , , yamashita@isc, fujiyoshi@isc}.chubu.ac.jp
Visual explanation enables humans to understand the decision making of deep convolutional neural network (CNN),
but it is insufﬁcient to contribute to improving CNN performance. In this paper, we focus on the attention map for visual explanation, which represents a high response value as
the attention location in image recognition. This attention
region signiﬁcantly improves the performance of CNN by
introducing an attention mechanism that focuses on a speciﬁc region in an image. In this work, we propose Attention
Branch Network (ABN), which extends a response-based visual explanation model by introducing a branch structure
with an attention mechanism. ABN can be applicable to
several image recognition tasks by introducing a branch for
the attention mechanism and is trainable for visual explanation and image recognition in an end-to-end manner. We
evaluate ABN on several image recognition tasks such as
image classiﬁcation, ﬁne-grained recognition, and multiple
facial attribute recognition. Experimental results indicate
that ABN outperforms the baseline models on these image
recognition tasks while generating an attention map for visual explanation. Our code is available 1.
1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural network (CNN) models have been achieved the great performance on various
image recognition tasks .
However, despite CNN models performing well on such tasks,
it is difﬁcult to interpret the decision making of CNN in
the inference process.
To understand the decision making of CNN, methods of interpreting CNN have been proposed .
“Visual explanation” has been used to interpret the decision making of CNN by highlighting the attention loca-
1 
-group/attention_branch_network
Attention map
Attention map
Great grey owl
Ruﬀed grouse
(a) Class Activation Mapping
(b) Attention Branch Network
Attention branch
Perception branch
Input image
Input image
Feature map
Figure 1. Network structures of class activation mapping and proposed attention branch network.
tion in a top-down manner during the inference process.
Visual explanation can be categorized into gradient-based
or response-based. Gradient-based visual explanation typically use gradients with auxiliary data, such as noise 
and class index . Although these methods can interpret the decision making of CNN without re-training and
modifying the architecture, they require the backpropagation process to obtain gradients.
In contrast, responsebased visual explanation can interpret the decision making of CNN during the inference process. Class activation
mapping (CAM) , which is a representative responsebased visual explanation, can obtain an attention map in
each category using the response of the convolution layer.
CAM replaces the convolution and global average pooling (GAP) and obtains an attention map that include
high response value positions representing the class, as
shown in Fig. 1(a). However, CAM requires replacing the
fully-connected layer with a convolution layer and GAP,
thus, decreasing the performance of CNN.
To avoid this problem, gradient-based methods are of-
 
ten used for interpreting the CNN. The highlight location
in an attention map for visual explanation is considered an
attention location in image recognition. To use responsebased visual explanation that can visualize an attention map
during a forward pass, we extended a response-based visual
explanation model to an attention mechanism. By using the
attention map for visual explanation as an attention mechanism, our network is trained while focusing on the important location in image recognition. The attention mechanism with a response-based visual explanation model can
simultaneously interpret the decision making of CNN and
improve their performance.
Inspired by response-based visual explanation and attention mechanisms,
we propose Attention Branch
Network (ABN), which extends a response-based visual
explanation model by introducing a branch structure with an
attention mechanism, as shown in Fig 1(b). ABN consists of
three components: feature extractor, attention branch, and
perception branch. The feature extractor contains multiple
convolution layers for extracting feature maps. The attention branch is designed to apply an attention mechanism
by introducing a response-based visual explanation model.
This component is important in ABN because it generates
an attention map for the attention mechanism and visual explanation. The perception branch outputs the probabilities
of class by using the feature and attention maps to the convolution layers. ABN has a simple structure and is trainable in an end-to-end manner using training losses at both
branches. Moreover, by introducing the attention branch to
various baseline model such as ResNet , ResNeXt ,
and multi-task learning , ABN can be applied to several
networks and image recognition tasks.
Our contributions are as follows:
• ABN is designed to extend a response-based visual explanation model by introducing a branch structure with
an attention mechanism. ABN is the ﬁrst attempt to
improve the performance of CNN by including a visual explanation.
• ABN is applicable to various baseline models such as
VGGNet , ResNet , and multi-task learning 
by dividing a baseline model and introducing an attention branch for generalizing an attention map.
• By extending the attention map for visual explanation to attention mechanism, ABN simultaneously improves the performance of CNN and visualizes an attention map during forward propagation.
2. Related work
2.1. Interpreting CNN
Several visual explanation, which highlight the attention
location in the inference process, have been proposed . There two types of visual explanation: gradient-based visual explanation, which uses a gradient and feed forward response to obtain an attention map,
and response-based visual explanation, which only uses the
response of a feed forward propagation.
With gradientbased visual explanation, SmoothGrad obtains sensitivity maps by adding noise to the input image iteratively
and takes the average of these sensitivity maps. Guided
backpropagation and gradient-weighted class activation mapping (Grad-CAM) , which are gradient-based
visual explanation, have been proposed. Guided backpropagation and Grad-CAM visualize an attention map using positive gradients at a speciﬁc class in backpropagation. Grad-
CAM and guided backpropagation have been widely used
because they can interpret various pre-trained models using
the attention map of a speciﬁc class.
Response-based visual explanation visualizes an attention map using the feed forward response value from a
convolution or deconvolution layer.
While such models
require re-training and modifying a network model, they
can directly visualize an attention map during forward pass.
CAM can visualize an attention maps for each class using the response of a convolution layer and the weight at the
last fully-connected layer. CAM performs well on weakly
supervised object localization but not as well in image classiﬁcation due to replacing fully-connected layers with convolution layers and passing through GAP.
We constract ABN by extending the CAM, which can visualize an attention map for visual explanation in feed forward propagation, to an attention mechanism. CAM is easily compatibles with an attention mechanism that directly
weights the feature map. In contrast, gradient-based visual
explanation is not compatible with ABN because it requires
the back propagation process to obtain the gradients. Therefore, we use CAM as the attention mechanism for ABN.
2.2. Attention mechanism
Attention mechanisms have been used in computer vision and natural language processing . They
have been widely used in sequential models with recurrent neural networks and long short term
memory (LSTM) . A typical attention model on sequential data has been proposed by Xu et al. . The
attention mechanism of their model is based on two types
of attention mechanisms: soft and hard. The soft attention
mechanism of Xu et al. model is used as the gate of LSTM,
and image captioning and visual question answering have
been used . Additionally, the non-local neural network , which uses the self-attention approach, and the
recurrent attention model , which controls the attention
location by reinforcement learning, have been proposed.
The recent attention mechanism is also applied to single
image recognition tasks . Typical attention mod-
Attention map
Input image
Attention mechanism
Attention branch
(a) Overview of Attention Branch Network
CNN with Fc. layer model
(ex. VGGNet)
ResNet model
(b) Structure of attention branch
Feature map
Feature map
Perception branch
Convolution
Batch Normalization
Batch Normalization
1x1 Conv., 1
1x1 Conv., K
1x1 Conv., K
Feature extractor
(c) Structure of perception branch
3x3 Conv., 512
3x3 Conv., 512
Feature map
Feature map
Convolution layers
3x3 Conv., 512, /1
3x3 Conv., 512
3x3 Conv., 512
3x3 Conv., 512
3x3 Conv., 512
3x3 Conv., 512
Feature map
Feature map
Convolution layers
Feature map
Feature vector
3x3 Conv., 512, /2
3x3 Conv., 512
3x3 Conv., 512
3x3 Conv., 512
3x3 Conv., 512
3x3 Conv., 512
Feature map
Feature map
(h × w) /2
: Convolution layer
: Activation function
: Batch Normalization
Figure 2. Detailed structure of Attention Branch Network.
els on a single image are residual attention network and
squeeze-and-excitation network (SENet) . The residual attention network includes two attention components,
i.e., a stacked network structure that consists of multiple
attention components, and attention residual learning that
applies residual learning to an attention mechanism.
SENet includes a squeeze-and-excitation block that contains a channel-wise attention mechanism introduced for
each residual block.
ABN is designed to focus on the attention map for visual explanation that represents the important region in image recognition. Previous attention models extract a weight
for an attention mechanism using only the response value
of the convolution layers during feed forward propagation
in an unsupervised learning manner. However, ABN easily extracts the effective weight for an attention mechanism
in image recognition by generating the attention map for
visual explanation on the basis of response-based visual explanation in a supervised learning manner.
3. Attention Branch Network
As mentioned above, ABN consists of three modules:
feature extractor, attention branch, and perception branch,
as shown in Fig. 1. The feature extractor contains multiple
convolution layers and extracts feature maps from an input
image. The attention branch outputs the attention location
based on CAM to an attention map by using an attention
mechanism. The perception branch outputs the probability
of each class by receiving the feature map from the feature
extractor and attention map.
ABN is based on a baseline model such as VGGNet 
and ResNet . The feature extractor and perception branch
are constructed by dividing a baseline model between a speciﬁc layer. The attention branch is constructed after feature
extractor on the basis of the CAM. ABN can be applied to
several image recognition tasks by introducing the attention
branch. We provide ABN for the several image recognition
tasks such as image classiﬁcation, ﬁne-grained recognition,
and multi-task learning.
3.1. Attention branch
CAM has a K × 3 × 3 convolution layer, GAP, and,
fully-connected layer as last the three layers, as shown
in Fig. 1(a).
Here, K is the number of categories, and
“K ×3×3 convolution layer” means a 3×3 kernel with K
channels at the convolution layer. The K×3×3 convolution
layer outputs a K × h × w feature map, which represents
the attention location for each class. The K × h × w feature map is down-sampled to a 1 × 1 feature map by GAP
and outputs the probability of each class by passing through
the fully-connected layer with the softmax function. When
CAM visualizes the attention map of each class, an attention map is generated by multiplying the weighted sum of
the K × h × w feature map by the weight at the last fullyconnected layer.
CAM replaces fully-connected layers with 3 × 3 convolution layers. This restriction is also introduced into the
attention branch. The fully-connected layer that connects a
unit with all units at the next layer negates the ability to localize the attention area in the convolution layer. Therefore,
if a baseline model contains a fully-connected layer, such as
VGGNet, the attention branch replaces that fully-connected
layer with a 3 × 3 convolution layer, similar with CAM, as
shown at the top of Fig. 2(b) . ResNet models with ABN are
constructed from the residual block at the attention branch,
as shown at the bottom of Fig. 2(b). We set the stride of the
ﬁrst convolution layer at the residual block as 1 to maintain
the resolution of the feature map.
To generate an attention map, the attention branch builds
a top layer based on CAM, which consists of a convolution
layer and GAP. However, CAM cannot generate an attention map in the training process because the attention map
is generated using the feature map and weight at a fullyconnected layer after training. To address this issue, we
replace the fully-connected layer with a K × 1 × 1 convolution layer, as with CAM. This K × 1 × 1 convolution
layer is imitated at the last fully-connected layer of CAM in
a feed forward processing. After the K × 1 × 1 convolution
layer, the attention branch outputs the class probability by
using the response of GAP with the softmax function. Finally, the attention branch generates an attention map from
the K × h × w feature map. Then, to aggregate the K feature maps, these feature maps are convoluted by a 1 × 1 × 1
convolution layer. By convoluting with a 1 × 1 × 1 kernel,
1 × h × w feature map is generated. We use the 1 × h × w
feature map normalized by the sigmoid function as the attention map for the attention mechanism.
3.2. Perception branch
The perception branch outputs the ﬁnal probability of
each class by receiving the attention and feature maps from
the feature extractor. The structure of the perception branch
is the same for conventional top layers from image classiﬁcation models such as VGGNet and ResNet, as shown
in Fig. 2(c). First, the attention map is applied to the feature map by the attention mechanism. We use one of two
types of attention mechanisms, i.e., Eq. 1 and Eq. 2. Here,
gc(xi) is the feature map at the feature extractor, M(xi) is
an attention map, and g′
c(xi) is the output of the attention
Attention branch
Perception branch
Perception branch
Weight sharing
Input image
Attention maps
Feature maps
Figure 3. ABN for multi-task learning.
mechanism, as shown in Fig. 2(a). Note that {c|1, . . . , C}
is the index of the channel.
M(xi) · gc(xi)
(1 + M(xi)) · gc(xi)
Equation 1 is simply a dot-product between the attention
and feature maps at a speciﬁc channel c. In contrast, Eq. 2
can highlight the feature map at the peak of the attention
map while preventing the lower value region of the attention
map from degrading to zero.
3.3. Training
ABN can be trainable in an end-to-end manner using
losses at both branches. Our training loss function L(xi)
is a simple sum of losses at both branches, as expressed by
L(xi) = Latt(xi) + Lper(xi)
Here, Latt(xi) denotes training loss at the attention branch
with an input sample xi, and Lper(xi) denotes training loss
at the perception branch. Training loss for each branch is
calculated by the combination of the softmax function and
cross-entropy in image classiﬁcation task. The feature extractor is optimized by passing through the gradients of the
attention and perception branches during back propagation.
If ABN is applied to other image recognition tasks, our
training loss can adaptively change depending on the baseline model.
3.4. ABN for multi-task learning
ABN with a classiﬁcation model outputs the attention map and ﬁnal class probability by dividing the two
branches. This network design can be applicable to other
image recognition tasks, such as multi-task learning. In this
section, we explain ABN for multi-task learning.
Conventional multi-task learning has units outputting the
recognition scores corresponding to each task . In training, the loss function deﬁnes multiple tasks using a single
network. However, there is a problem with ABN for multitask learning. In image classiﬁcation, the relation between
the numbers of inputs and recognition tasks is one-to-one.
In contrast, the relation between the numbers of inputs and
recognition tasks of multi-task learning is one-to-many. The
one-to-one relation can be focused on the speciﬁc target location using a single attention map, but the one-to-many relation cannot be focused on multiple target locations using
a single attention map. To address this issue, we generate
multiple attention maps for each task by introducing multitask learning to the attention and perception branches. Note
that we use ResNet with multi-task learning as the baseline
To output multiple attention maps, we design the attention branch with multi-task learning, as shown in Fig. 3.
First, a feature map at residual block 4 is convoluted by
the T×1×1 convolution layer, and the T×14×14 feature
map is output. The probability score during a speciﬁc task
{t|1, . . . , T} is output by applying the 14×14 feature map
at speciﬁc task t to GAP and the sigmoid function. In training, we calculated the training loss by combining the sigmoid function and binary cross-entropy loss function. We
apply the 14×14 feature maps to the attention maps.
We introduce the perception branch to multi-task learning. Converting feature map g′t
c (x) is ﬁrst generated using
attention map M t(x) at speciﬁc task t and feature map g(x)
at the feature extractor, as shown in Eq. 4 in Sec. 3.2. After
generating feature map g′t
c (x), the probability score at speciﬁc task t is calculated on perception branch pper(·), which
outputs the probability for each task by inputting feature
map g′t(x).
M t(xi) · gc(xi)
c (xi) ; θ)
This probability matrix of each task O(g′t
c (xi)) on the
perception branch consists of T × 2 components deﬁned
two categories classiﬁcation for each task. The probability Ot(g′t
c (xi)) at speciﬁc task t is used when the perception branch receives the feature map g′t
c (x) that applies the
attention map at speciﬁc task t, as shown in Fig. 3. These
processes are repeated for each task.
4. Experiments
4.1. Experimental details on image classiﬁcation
First, we evaluate ABN for an image classiﬁcation task
using the CIFAR10, CIFAR100, Street View Home Number (SVHN) , and ImageNet datasets. The input
image size of the CIFAR10, CIFAR100, SVHN datasets is
32×32 pixels, and that of ImageNet is 224×224 pixels. The
Table 1. Comparison of the top-1 errors on CIFAR100 with attention mechanism.
g(x) · M(x)
g(x) · (1 + M(x))
number of categories for each dataset is as follows: CI-
FAR10 and SVHN consist of 10 classes, CIFAR100 consists of 100 classes, and ImageNet consists of 1,000 classes.
During training, we applied the standard data augmentation. For CIFAR10, CIFAR100, and SVHN, the images are
ﬁrst zero-padded with 4 pixels for each side then randomly
cropped to again produce 32×32 pixels images, and the images are then horizontally mirrored at random. For ImageNet, the images are resized to 256×256 pixels then randomly cropped to again produce 224×224 pixels images,
and the images are then horizontally mirrored at random.
The numbers of training, validation, and testing images of
each dataset are as follows: CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 consist of 60,000 training images and 10,000 testing images,
SVHN consists of 604,388 training images (train:73,257,
extra:531,131) and 26,032 testing images, and ImageNet
consists of 1,281,167 training images and 50,000 validation
We optimize the networks by stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with momentum.
On CIFAR10 and CI-
FAR100, the total number of iterations to update the parameters is 300 epochs, and the batch size is 256. The total numbers of iterations to update the networks is as follows: CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 are 300 epochs, SVHN is
40 epochs, and ImageNet is 90 epochs. The initial learning
rate is set to 0.1, and is divided by 10 at 50 % and 75 % of
the total number of training epochs.
4.2. Image classiﬁcation
Analysis on attention mechanism We compare the accuracies of attention mechanisms Eq. 1 and Eq. 2. We use
ResNet {20, 33, 44, 56, 110} models on CIFAR100.
Table 1 shows the top-1 errors of attention mechanisms
Eq. 1 and Eq. 2. The g(x) is conventional ResNet. First,
we compare ABN with g(x) · M(x) attention mechanism
at Eq. 1 and conventional ResNet g(x). Attention mechanism g(x) · M(x) has suppressed the top-1 errors than
conventional ResNet.
We also compare the accuracy of
both g(x) · M(x) and g(x) · (1 + M(x)) attention mechanisms. Attention mechanism g(x) · (1 + M(x)) is slightly
more accurate than attention mechanism g(x) · M(x). In
residual attention network, which includes the same attention mechanisms, accuracy decreased with attention mechanism g(x) · M(x) . Therefore, our attention map re-
Table 2. Comparison of top-1 errors on CIFAR10, CIFAR100, SVHN, and ImageNet dataset.
ImageNet 
VGGNet 
ResNet 
VGGNet+CAM 
VGGNet+BN+CAM
ResNet+CAM
WideResNet 
DenseNet 
ResNeXt 
Attention 
AttentionNeXt 
SENet 
VGGNet+BN+ABN
25.55 (−0.69)
ResNet+ABN
4.91 (−1.52)
22.82 (−1.32)
1.86 (−0.32)
21.37 (−0.82)
WideResNet+ABN
3.78 (−0.22)
18.12 (−1.13)
2.24 (−0.18)
DenseNet+ABN
4.17 (−0.34)
21.63 (−0.64)
2.01 (−0.06)
ResNeXt+ABN
3.80 (−0.04)
17.70 (−0.62)
2.01 (−0.15)
20.77 (−0.80)
∗indicates results of re-implementation accuracy
sponds to the effective region in image classiﬁcation. We
use attention mechanism g(x) · (1 + M(x)) at Eq. 2 as default manner.
Accuracy on CIFAR and SVHN
Table 2 shows the
top-1 errors on CIFAR10/100, SVHN, and ImageNet. We
evaluate these top-1 errors using various baseline models,
CAM, and ABN regarding image classiﬁcation. These errors are an original top-1 error at referring paper or top-1 errors of our model,
and the ’∗’ indicates the results of re-implementation accuracy.
The numbers in brackets denote the difference
in the top-1 errors from the conventional models at reimplementation. On CIFAR and SVHN, we evaluate the
top-1 errors by using the following ResNet models as follows: ResNet (depth=110), DenseNet (depth=100, growth
rate=12), Wide ResNet (depth=28, widen factor=4, drop
ratio=0.3), ResNeXt (depth=28, cardinality=8, widen factor=4). Note that ABN is constructed by dividing a ResNet
model at residual block 3.
Accuracies of ResNet, Wide ResNet, DenseNet and
ResNeXt are improved by introducing ABN. On CIFAR10,
ResNet and DenseNet with ABNs decrease the top-1 errors
from 6.43 % to 4.91 % and 4.51 % to 4.17 %, respectively.
Additionally, all ResNet models are decrease the top-1 errors by more 0.6 % on CIFAR100.
Accuracy on ImageNet
We evaluate the image classiﬁcation accuracy on ImageNet as shown in Table 2
in the same manner as for CIFAR10/100 and SVHN.
On ImageNet,
we evaluate the top-1 errors by using the VGGNet (depth=16), ResNet (depth=152), and
SENet (ResNet152 model).
First, we compare the top-
1 errors of CAM. The performance of CAM slightly
decreased with a speciﬁc baseline model because of
the removal of the fully-connected layers and adding
a GAP .
Similarly,
the performance on VG-
GNet+BatchNormalization (BN) with CAM decreases
even in re-implementation. In contrast, the performance of
ResNet with CAM is almost the same as that of baseline
ResNet. The structure of the ResNet model that contains
GAP and a fully-connected layer as the last layer resembles
that in CAM. ResNet with CAM can be easily constructed
by stacking on the K × 1 × 1 convolution layer at the last
residual block, which sets the stride to 1 at the ﬁrst convolution layer. Therefore, it is difﬁcult to decrease the performance of ResNet with CAM due to removal of the fullyconnected layer and adding GAP. On the other hand, ABN
outperforms conventional VGGNet and CAM and performs
better than conventional ResNet and CAM.
We compare the accuracy of a conventional attention
By introducing the SE modules to ResNet152,
SENet reduces the top-1 errors from 22.19% to 21.90%.
However, ABN reduces the top-1 errors from 22.19 %
to 21.37%, indicating that ABN is more accurate than
SENet. Moreover, ABN can introduce the SENet in parallel. SENet with ABN reduces the top-1 errors from 22.19 %
to 20.77 % compared to the ResNet152. Residual attention
network results in the same amount of top-1 errors from
the size of the input image, which is 224 × 224, as fol-
GT : ‘Violin’
GT : ‘Cliﬀ’
‘Violin’ : 0.93
‘Cliﬀ’ : 0.98
‘Violin’ : 0.93
‘Cliﬀ’ : 0.99
Original image
‘Violin’ : 0.97
‘Cliﬀ’ : 0.97
GT : ‘Australian_terrier’
‘Seat_belt’ : 0.66
‘Seat_belt’ : 0.58
‘Australian_terrier’ : 0.99
Figure 4. Visualizing high attention area with CAM, Grad-CAM,
and our ABN. CAM and Grad-CAM are visualized attention maps
at top-1 result.
Table 3. Comparison of car model and maker accuracy on Comp-
Cars dataset
ResNet101+ABN
lows: ResNet is 21.76%, and ResNeXt is 21.20%. Therefore, ResNet152+SENet with ABN indicates more accurate
than these residual attention network models.
Visualizing attention maps
We compare the attention
maps visualized using Grad-CAM, CAM, and ABN. Grad-
CAM generates an attention map by using ResNet152 as
a baseline model. CAM and ABN are constructed using
ResNet152 as a baseline model. Figure. 4 shows the attention maps for each model on ImageNet dataset.
This Fig. 4 shows that Grad-CAM, CAM and ABN highlights a similar region. For example in the ﬁrst column in
Fig. 4, these models classify the “Violin”, and highlight the
“Violin” region on the original image. Similarly, they classify “Cliff” in the second column and highlight the “Cliff”
region. For the third column, this original image is a typical example because multiple objects, such as “Seat belt”
and “Australian terrier”, are included. In this case, Grad-
CAM (conventional ResNet152) and CAM failes, but ABN
performs well. When visualizing the attention maps in the
third column, the attention map of ABN highlights each object. Therefore, this attention map can focus on a speciﬁc
region when multiple objects are in an image.
Original image
Nissan GT-R
Lamborghini
Maker recognition Model recognition
Benz C Class estate
Figure 5. Visualizing attention map on ﬁne-grained recognition.
Original ResNet101
Before applying attention map
After applying attention map
Conventional ResNet101
Before applying attention map
After applying attention map
Figure 6. Comparison of distribution maps at residual block 4 by
t-SNE. Left : distribution of baseline ResNet101 model. Center
and Right : distribution of ABN. Center did not apply the attention map.
4.3. Fine-grained recognition
We evaluate the performance of ABN for the ﬁnegrained recognition on the comprehensive cars (CompCars)
dataset , which has 36,451 training images and 15,626
testing images with 432 car models and 75 makers. We use
VGG16 and ResNet101 as baseline model and optimized
these models by SGD with momentum. The total number
of update iterations is 50 epochs, and the mini-batch size
is 32. The learning rate starts from 0.01 and is multiplied
by 0.1 at 25 and 35 epochs. The input image is resized to
323×224 pixels. The image size is calculated by taking the
average of the bounding box aspect ration from the training
data. This resizing process prevents the collapse of the car
Table 3 shows the car model and maker recognition accuracy on the CompCars dataset. The car model recognition
accuracy of ABN improves by 4.9 and 6.2 % with VGG16
and ResNet101, respectively. Moreover, maker recognition
accuracy improves by 2.0 and 7.5 %, respectively. These
results indicate that ABN is also effective for ﬁne-grained
recognition. We visualize the attention maps for car model
or maker recognition, as shown in Fig. 5. From these visualizing results, training and testing images are the same for
Eyeglasses
Wearing_Hat
Original image
Original image
Wearing_necklace
Wealing_Lipstick
High_cheakbones
Blond_Hair
Wearing_necktie
Figure 7. Visualizing attention maps on multiple facial attributes recognition. These scores are ﬁnal recognition scores at the perception
Table 4. Comparison of multiple facial attribute recognition accuracy on CelebA dataset
Average of accuracy [%]
FaceTracer 
PANDA-l 
LNet+ANet 
car model and maker recognition, however, our attention
maps differ depending on the recognition task.
representations
ResNet101 and ResNet101 with ABN. We visualize
distributions by t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) and analyze the distributions. We use
the comparison feature maps at the ﬁnal layer on residual
block 4. Figure 6 shows the distribution maps of t-SNE.
We use 5,000 testing images on the CompCars dataset.
The feature maps of ResNet101 and the feature extractor
in the attention branch network are clustered by car pose.
However, the feature map applying the attention map is
split distribution by car pose and detail car form.
4.4. Multi-task Learning
For multi-task learning, we evaluate for multiple facial attributes recognition using the CelebA dataset ,
which consists of 202,599 images (182,637 training images and 19,962 testing images) with 40 facial attribute labels. The total number of iterations to update the parameters is 10 epochs, and the learning rate is set to 0.01. We
evaluate the accuracy rate using FaceTracer , PANDAl , LNet+ANet , mixed objective optimization network (MOON) , and ResNet101.
Table 4 shows that ABN outperforms all conventional
methods regarding the average recognition rate and number
of facial attribute tasks. Note that the numbers in the third
column in Table 4 are the numbers of winning tasks when
we compare the conventional models with ABN for each facial attribute. The accuracy of a speciﬁc facial attribute task
is described in the appendix. When we compare ResNet101
and ABN, ABN is 0.38% more accurate. Moreover, the accuracy of 27 facial tasks is improved. ABN also performs
better than conventional facial attribute recognition models,
i.e., FaceTracer, PANDA-l, LNet+ANet, MOON. ABN outperforms these models for difﬁcult tasks such as “arched
eyebrows”, “pointy nose”, “wearing earring”, and “wearing
necklace”. Figure 7 shows the attention map of ABN on
CelebA dataset. These attention maps highlights the speciﬁc locations such as mouth, eyes, beard, and hair. These
highlight locations correspond to the speciﬁc facial task, as
shown in Fig. 7. It is conceivable that these highlight locations contributed to performance improvement of ABN.
5. Conclusion
We propose an Attention Branch Network, which extends a response-based visual explanation model by introducing a branch structure with an attention mechanism.
ABN can be simultaneously trainable for visual explanation
and improving the performance of image recognition with
an attention mechanism in an end-to-end manner. It is also
applicable to several CNN models and image recognition
tasks. We evaluated the accuracy of ABN for image classiﬁcation, ﬁne-grained recognition, and multi-task learning,
and it outperforms conventional models for these tasks. We
plan to apply ABN to reinforcement learning that does not
include labels in the training process.