Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2018, pages 464–468
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 1 - 6, 2018. c⃝2018 Association for Computational Linguistics
Self-Attention with Relative Position Representations
Peter Shaw
 
Jakob Uszkoreit
Google Brain
 
Ashish Vaswani
Google Brain
 
Relying entirely on an attention mechanism,
the Transformer introduced by Vaswani et
al. achieves state-of-the-art results for
machine translation. In contrast to recurrent
and convolutional neural networks, it does
not explicitly model relative or absolute position information in its structure.
it requires adding representations of absolute positions to its inputs.
In this work
we present an alternative approach, extending the self-attention mechanism to efﬁciently
consider representations of the relative positions, or distances between sequence elements.
On the WMT 2014 English-to-German and
English-to-French translation tasks, this approach yields improvements of 1.3 BLEU and
0.3 BLEU over absolute position representations, respectively. Notably, we observe that
combining relative and absolute position representations yields no further improvement in
translation quality.
We describe an efﬁcient
implementation of our method and cast it as an
instance of relation-aware self-attention mechanisms that can generalize to arbitrary graphlabeled inputs.
Introduction
Recent approaches to sequence to sequence learning typically leverage recurrence , convolution , attention
 , or a combination of recurrence and attention as basic building
blocks. These approaches incorporate information
about the sequential position of elements differently.
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) typically
compute a hidden state ht, as a function of their
input at time t and a previous hidden state ht−1,
capturing relative and absolute positions along the
time dimension directly through their sequential
structure. Non-recurrent models do not necessarily consider input elements sequentially and may
hence require explicitly encoding position information to be able to use sequence order.
One common approach is to use position encodings which are combined with input elements to
expose position information to the model. These
position encodings can be a deterministic function of position or learned representations. Convolutional neural networks inherently capture relative
positions within the kernel size of each convolution. They have been shown to still beneﬁt from
position encodings , however.
For the Transformer, which employs neither
convolution nor recurrence, incorporating explicit
representations of position information is an especially important consideration since the model is
otherwise entirely invariant to sequence ordering.
Attention-based models have therefore used position encodings or biased attention weights based
on distance .
In this work we present an efﬁcient way of
incorporating relative position representations in
the self-attention mechanism of the Transformer.
Even when entirely replacing its absolute position
encodings, we demonstrate signiﬁcant improvements in translation quality on two machine translation tasks.
Our approach can be cast as a special case of extending the self-attention mechanism of the Transformer to considering arbitrary relations between
any two elements of the input, a direction we plan
to explore in future work on modeling labeled, directed graphs.
Background
Transformer
The Transformer
 employs an encoder-decoder structure, consisting of
stacked encoder and decoder layers.
layers consist of two sublayers:
self-attention
followed by a position-wise feed-forward layer.
Decoder layers consist of three sublayers: selfattention followed by encoder-decoder attention,
followed by a position-wise feed-forward layer.
It uses residual connections around each of the
sublayers, followed by layer normalization
et al., 2016). The decoder uses masking in its selfattention to prevent a given output position from
incorporating information about future output positions during training.
Position encodings based on sinusoids of varying frequency are added to encoder and decoder
input elements prior to the ﬁrst layer. In contrast
to learned, absolute position representations, the
authors hypothesized that sinusoidal position encodings would help the model to generalize to sequence lengths unseen during training by allowing
it to learn to attend also by relative position. This
property is shared by our relative position representations which, in contrast to absolute position
representations, are invariant to the total sequence
Residual connections help propagate position
information to higher layers.
Self-Attention
Self-attention sublayers employ h attention heads.
To form the sublayer output, results from each
head are concatenated and a parameterized linear
transformation is applied.
Each attention head operates on an input sequence, x = (x1, . . . , xn) of n elements where
xi ∈Rdx, and computes a new sequence z =
(z1, . . . , zn) of the same length where zi ∈Rdz.
Each output element,
is computed as
weighted sum of a linearly transformed input elements:
αij(xjW V )
Each weight coefﬁcient, αij, is computed using
a softmax function:
k=1 exp eik
And eij is computed using a compatibility function that compares two input elements:
eij = (xiW Q)(xjW K)T
Scaled dot product was chosen for the compatibility function, which enables efﬁcient computation. Linear transformations of the inputs add suf-
ﬁcient expressive power.
W Q, W K, W V ∈Rdx×dz are parameter matrices. These parameter matrices are unique per layer
and attention head.
Proposed Architecture
Relation-aware Self-Attention
We propose an extension to self-attention to consider the pairwise relationships between input elements. In this sense, we model the input as a labeled, directed, fully-connected graph.
The edge between input elements xi and xj is
represented by vectors aV
ij ∈Rda. The motivation for learning two distinct edge representations is that aV
ij are suitable for use in
eq. (3) and eq. (4), respectively, without requiring
additional linear transformations. These representations can be shared across attention heads. We
use da = dz.
We modify eq. (1) to propagate edge information to the sublayer output:
αij(xjW V + aV
This extension is presumably important for
tasks where information about the edge types selected by a given attention head is useful to downstream encoder or decoder layers. However, as explored in 4.3, this may not be necessary for machine translation.
We also, importantly, modify eq. (2) to consider
edges when determining compatibility:
xiW Q(xjW K + aK
The primary motivation for using simple addition to incorporate edge representations in eq. (3)
and eq. (4) is to enable an efﬁcient implementation
described in 3.3.
Figure 1: Example edges representing relative positions, or the distance between elements. We learn representations for each relative position within a clipping
distance k. The ﬁgure assumes 2 <= k <= n −4.
Note that not all edges are shown.
Relative Position Representations
For linear sequences, edges can capture information about the relative position differences between input elements. The maximum relative position we consider is clipped to a maximum absolute value of k. We hypothesized that precise relative position information is not useful beyond a
certain distance. Clipping the maximum distance
also enables the model to generalize to sequence
lengths not seen during training. Therefore, we
consider 2k + 1 unique edge labels.
clip(j−i,k)
clip(j−i,k)
clip(x, k) = max(−k, min(k, x))
We then learn relative position representations
−k, . . . , wK
k ) and wV = , which considers unlabeled graph inputs to an attention model.
For a sequence of length n and h attention
heads, we reduce the space complexity of storing
relative position representations from O(hn2da)
to O(n2da) by sharing them across each heads.
Additionally, relative position representations can
be shared across sequences. Therefore, the overall self-attention space complexity increases from
O(bhndz) to O(bhndz + n2da). Given da = dz,
the size of the relative increase depends on n
The Transformer computes self-attention efﬁciently for all sequences, heads, and positions in
a batch using parallel matrix multiplication operations . Without relative position representations, each eij can be computed using bh parallel multiplications of n×dz and dz ×n
matrices. Each matrix multiplication computes eij
for all sequence positions, for a particular head
and sequence. For any sequence and head, this
requires sharing the same representation for each
position across all compatibility function applications (dot products) with other positions.
When we consider relative positions the representations differ with different pairs of positions.
This prevents us from computing all eij for all
pairs of positions in a single matrix multiplication.
We also want to avoid broadcasting relative position representations. However, both issues can
be resolved by splitting the computation of eq. (4)
into two terms:
xiW Q(xjW K)T + xiW Q(aK
The ﬁrst term is identical to eq. (2), and can be
computed as described above. For the second term
involving relative position representations, tensor
reshaping can be used to compute n parallel multiplications of bh×dz and dz×n matrices. Each matrix multiplication computes contributions to eij
for all heads and batches, corresponding to a particular sequence position. Further reshaping allows adding the two terms. The same approach
can be used to efﬁciently compute eq. (3).
For our machine translation experiments, the result was a modest 7% decrease in steps per second, but we were able to maintain the same model
and batch sizes on P100 GPUs as Vaswani et
al. .
Experiments
Experimental Setup
We use the tensor2tensor 1 library for training and
evaluating our model.
We evaluated our model on the WMT 2014
machine translation task, using the WMT 2014
English-German dataset consisting of approximately 4.5M sentence pairs and the 2014 WMT
English-French dataset consisting of approximately 36M sentence pairs.
1The tensor2tensor library is available at https://
github.com/tensorflow/tensor2tensor.
Position Information
EN-DE BLEU
EN-FR BLEU
Transformer (base)
Absolute Position Representations
Transformer (base)
Relative Position Representations
Transformer (big)
Absolute Position Representations
Transformer (big)
Relative Position Representations
Table 1: Experimental results for WMT 2014 English-to-German (EN-DE) and English-to-French (EN-FR) translation tasks, using newstest2014 test set.
For all experiments, we split tokens into a
32,768 word-piece vocabulary .
We batched sentence pairs by approximate length,
and limited input and output tokens per batch to
4096 per GPU. Each resulting training batch contained approximately 25,000 source and 25,000
target tokens.
We used the Adam optimizer with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.98, and ϵ = 10−9.
We used the same warmup and decay strategy for
learning rate as Vaswani et al. , with 4,000
warmup steps. During training, we employed label smoothing of value ϵls = 0.1 . For evaluation, we used beam search with
a beam size of 4 and length penalty α = 0.6 .
For our base model, we used 6 encoder and decoder layers, dx = 512, dz = 64, 8 attention
heads, 1024 feed forward inner-layer dimensions,
and Pdropout = 0.1. When using relative position encodings, we used clipping distance k = 16,
and used unique edge representations per layer and
We trained for 100,000 steps on 8 K40
GPUs, and did not use checkpoint averaging.
For our big model, we used 6 encoder and decoder layers, dx = 1024, dz = 64, 16 attention
heads, 4096 feed forward inner-layer dimensions,
and Pdropout = 0.3 for EN-DE and Pdropout = 0.1
for EN-FR. When using relative position encodings, we used k = 8, and used unique edge representations per layer. We trained for 300,000 steps
on 8 P100 GPUs, and averaged the last 20 checkpoints, saved at 10 minute intervals.
Machine Translation
We compared our model using only relative position representations to the baseline Transformer
 with sinusoidal position encodings.
We generated baseline results to isolate the impact of relative position representations
from any other changes to the underlying library
and experimental conﬁguration.
For English-to-German our approach improved
performance over our baseline by 0.3 and 1.3
BLEU for the base and big conﬁgurations, respectively. For English-to-French it improved by 0.5
and 0.3 BLEU for the base and big conﬁgurations,
respectively. In our experiments we did not observe any beneﬁt from including sinusoidal position encodings in addition to relative position representations. The results are shown in Table 1.
Model Variations
We performed several experiments modifying various aspects of our model.
All of our experiments in this section use the base model conﬁguration without any absolute position representations.
BLEU scores are calculated on the WMT Englishto-German task using the development set, newstest2013.
We evaluated the effect of varying the clipping
distance, k, of the maximum absolute relative position difference. Notably, for k ≥2, there does
not appear to be much variation in BLEU scores.
However, as we use multiple encoder layers, precise relative position information may be able to
propagate beyond the clipping distance. The results are shown in Table 2.
EN-DE BLEU
Table 2: Experimental results for varying the clipping
distance, k.
We also evaluated the impact of ablating each of
the two relative position representations deﬁned in
section 3.1, aV
ij in eq. (3) and aK
ij in eq. (4). Including relative position representations solely when
determining compatibility between elements may
be sufﬁcient, but further work is needed to determine whether this is true for other tasks. The results are shown in Table 3.
EN-DE BLEU
Table 3: Experimental results for ablating relative position representations aV
Conclusions
In this paper we presented an extension to selfattention that can be used to incorporate relative position information for sequences, which improves performance for machine translation.
For future work, we plan to extend this mechanism to consider arbitrary directed, labeled graph
inputs to the Transformer.
We are also interested in nonlinear compatibility functions to combine input representations and edge representations. For both of these extensions, a key consideration will be determining efﬁcient implementations.