Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
APPROXIMATING
BAG-OF-LOCAL-
SURPRISINGLY
ON IMAGENET
Wieland Brendel and Matthias Bethge
Eberhard Karls University of Tübingen, Germany
Werner Reichardt Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, Tübingen, Germany
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Tübingen, Germany
{wieland.brendel, matthias.bethge}@bethgelab.org
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) excel on many complex perceptual tasks but it has
proven notoriously difﬁcult to understand how they reach their decisions. We here
introduce a high-performance DNN architecture on ImageNet whose decisions
are considerably easier to explain. Our model, a simple variant of the ResNet-
50 architecture called BagNet, classiﬁes an image based on the occurrences of
small local image features without taking into account their spatial ordering. This
strategy is closely related to the bag-of-feature (BoF) models popular before the
onset of deep learning and reaches a surprisingly high accuracy on ImageNet
(87.6% top-5 for 33 × 33 px features and Alexnet performance for 17 × 17 px
features). The constraint on local features makes it straight-forward to analyse
how exactly each part of the image inﬂuences the classiﬁcation. Furthermore, the
BagNets behave similar to state-of-the art deep neural networks such as VGG-16,
ResNet-152 or DenseNet-169 in terms of feature sensitivity, error distribution and
interactions between image parts. This suggests that the improvements of DNNs
over previous bag-of-feature classiﬁers in the last few years is mostly achieved by
better ﬁne-tuning rather than by qualitatively different decision strategies.
INTRODUCTION
A big obstacle in understanding the decision-making of DNNs is due to the complex dependencies
between input and hidden activations: for one, the effect of any part of the input on a hidden
activation depends on the state of many other parts of the input. Likewise, the role of a hidden unit on
downstream representations depends on the activity of many other units. This dependency makes it
extremely difﬁcult to understand how DNNs reach their decisions.
To circumvent this problem we here formulate a new DNN architecture that is easier to interpret by
design. Our architecture is inspired by bag-of-feature (BoF) models which — alongside extensions
such as VLAD encoding or Fisher Vectors — have been the most successful approaches to large-scale
object recognition before the advent of deep learning (up to 75% top-5 on ImageNet) and classify
images based on the counts, but not the spatial relationships, of a set of local image features. This
structure makes the decisions of BoF models particularly easy to explain.
To be concise, throughout this manuscript the concept of interpretability refers to the way in which
evidence from small image patches is integrated to reach an image-level decision. While basic BoF
models perform just a simple and transparent spatial aggregate of the patch-wise evidences, DNNs
non-linearly integrate information across the whole image.
In this paper we show that it is possible to combine the performance and ﬂexibility of DNNs with the
interpretability of BoF models, and that the resulting model family (called BagNets) is able to reach
high accuracy on ImageNet even if limited to fairly small image patches. Given the simplicity of
BoF models we imagine many use cases for which it can be desirable to trade a bit of accuracy for
better interpretability, just as this is common e.g. for linear function approximation. This includes
diagnosing failure cases (e.g. adversarial examples) or non-iid. settings (e.g. domain transfer),
 
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
scuba diver
scuba diver
coral reef
coral reef
loggerhead
loggerhead
BagNets extract
class activations
(logits) on each patch
Evaluating all patches
yields one heatmap
Accumulating activations
over space yields total
class evidence
Validation performance
of BagNets
Pearson correlation between
BagNets and VGG=16 class
activations (logits)
Figure 1: Deep bag-of-features models (BagNets). (A) The models extract features from small
image patches which are each fed into a linear classiﬁer yielding one logit heatmap per class. These
heatmaps are averaged across space and passed through a softmax to get the ﬁnal class probabilities.
(B) Top-5 ImageNet performance over patch size. (C) Correlation with logits of VGG-16.
benchmarking diagnostic tools (e.g. attribution methods) or serving as interpretable parts of a
computer vision pipeline (e.g. with a relational network on top of the local features).
In addition, we demonstrate similarities between the decision-making behaviour of BagNets and
popular DNNs in computer vision. These similarities suggest that current network architectures
base their decisions on a large number of relatively weak and local statistical regularities and are not
sufﬁciently encouraged - either through their architecture, training procedure or task speciﬁcation - to
learn more holistic features that can better appreciate causal relationships between different parts of
the image.
NETWORK ARCHITECTURE
We here recount the main elements of a classic bag-of-features model before introducing the simpler
DNN-based BagNets in the next paragraph. Bag-of-feature representations can be described by
analogy to bag-of-words representations. With bag-of-words, one counts the number of occurrences
of words from a vocabulary in a document. This vocabulary contains important words (but not
common ones like "and" or "the") and word clusters (i.e. semantically similar words like "gigantic"
and "enormous" are subsumed). The counts of each word in the vocabulary are assembled as one
long term vector. This is called the bag-of-words document representation because all ordering of the
words is lost. Likewise, bag-of-feature representations are based on a vocabulary of visual words
which represent clusters of local image features. The term vector for an image is then simply the
number of occurrences of each visual word in the vocabulary. This term vector is used as an input to
a classiﬁer (e.g. SVM or MLP). Many successful image classiﬁcation models have been based on
this pipeline ,
see O’Hara & Draper for an up-to-date overview.
BoF models are easy to interpret if the classiﬁer on top of the term vector is linear. In this case the
inﬂuence of a given part of the input on the classiﬁer is independent of the rest of the input.
Based on this insight we construct a linear DNN-based BoF model as follows (see Figure 1): ﬁrst, we
infer a 2048 dimensional feature representation from each image patch of size q × q pixels using
multiple stacked ResNet blocks and apply a linear classiﬁer to infer the class evidence for each patch
(heatmaps). We average the class evidence across all patches to infer the image-level class evidence
(logits). This structure differs from other ResNets only in the replacement of many
3 × 3 by 1 × 1 convolutions, thereby limiting the receptive ﬁeld size of the topmost convolutional
layer to q × q pixels (see Appendix for details). There is no explicit assignment to visual words. This
could be added through a sparse projection into a high-dimensional embedding but we did not see
beneﬁts for interpretability. We denote the resulting architecture as BagNet-q and test q ∈ .
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Figure 2: Heatmaps showing the class evidence extracted from of each part of the image. The spatial
sum over the evidence is the total class evidence.
Note that an important ingredient of our model is the linear classiﬁer on top of the local feature
representation. The word linear here refers to the combination of a linear spatial aggregation (a
simple average) and a linear classiﬁer on top of the aggregated features. The fact that the classiﬁer
and the spatial aggregation are both linear and thus interchangeable allows us to pinpoint exactly how
evidence from local image patches is integrated into one image-level decision.
RELATED LITERATURE
BoF models and DNNs
There are some model architectures that fuse elements from DNNs and
BoF models. Predominantly, DNNs were used to replace the previously hand-tuned feature extraction
stage in BoF models, often using intermediate or higher layer features of pretrained DNNs for tasks such as image retrieval or geographical scene classiﬁcation. Other work has explored
how well insights from DNN training (e.g. data augmentation) transfer to the training of BoF and
Improved Fisher Vector models and how SIFT and CNN feature descriptions
perform . In contrast, our proposed BoF model architecture is simpler
and closer to standard DNNs used for object recognition while still maintaining the interpretability
of linear BoF models with local features. Furthermore, to our knowledge this is the ﬁrst work that
explores the relationship between the decision-making of BoF and DNN models.
Interpretable DNNs
Our work is most closely related to approaches that use DNNs in conjunction
with more interpretable elements. Pinheiro & Collobert adds explicit labelling of single pixels
before the aggregation to an image-level label. The label of each pixel, however, is still inferred from
the whole image, making the pixel assignments difﬁcult to interpret. Xiao et al. proposed a
multi-step approach combining object-, part- and domain-detectors to reach a classiﬁcation decision.
In this process object-relevant patches of variable sizes are extracted. In contrast, our approach is
much simpler, reaches higher accuracy and is easier to interpret. Besides pixel-level attention-based
mechanisms there are several attempts to make the evidence accumulation more interpretable. Hinton
et al. introduced soft decision trees that are trained on the predictions of neural networks.
While this increases performance of decision trees, the gap to neural networks on data sets like
ImageNet is still large. In Li et al. an autoencoder architecture is combined with a shallow
classiﬁer based on prototype representations. Chen et al. uses a similar approach but is based
on a convolutional architecture to extract class-speciﬁc prototype patches. The interpretation of the
prototype-based classiﬁcation, however, is difﬁcult because only the L2 norm between the prototypes
and the extracted latent representations is considered1. Finally, the class activation maps by Zhou et al.
 share similarities to our approach as they also use a CNN with global average pooling and a
linear classiﬁer in order to extract class-speciﬁc heatmaps. However, their latent representations are
1Just because two images have a similar latent representation does not mean that they share any similarities
in terms of human-interpretable features.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
book jacket
Figure 3: Most informative image patches for BagNets. For each class (row) and each model (column)
we plot two subrows: in the top subrow we show patches that caused the highest logit outputs for the
given class across all validation images with that label. Patches in the bottom subrow are selected in
the same way but from all validation images with a different label (highlighting errors).
extracted from the whole image and it is unclear how the heatmaps in the latent space are related to
the pixel space. In our approach the CNN representations are restricted to very small image patches,
making it possible to trace exactly how each image patch contributes the ﬁnal decision.
Scattering networks
Another related work by Oyallon et al. uses a scattering network with
small receptive ﬁelds (14 x 14 pixels) in conjunction with a two-layer Multilayer Perceptron or a
ResNet-10 on top of the scattering network. This approach reduces the overall depth of the model
compared to ResNets (with matched classiﬁcation accuracy) but does not increase interpretability
(because of the non-linear classiﬁer on top of the local scattering features).
A set of superﬁcially similar but unrelated approaches are region proposal models . Such models typically use the whole image to
infer smaller image regions with relevant objects. These regions are then used to extract a spatially
aligned subset of features from the highest DNN layer (so information is still integrated far beyond
the proposed image patch). Our approach does not rely on region proposals and extracts features only
from small local regions.
In the ﬁrst two subsections we investigate the classiﬁcation performance of BagNets for different
patch sizes and demonstrate insights we can derive from its interpretable structure. Thereafter we
compare the behaviour of BagNets with several widely used high-performance DNNs (e.g. VGG-16,
ResNet-50, DenseNet-169) and show evidence that their decision-making shares many similarities.
ACCURACY & RUNTIME OF BAGNETS ON IMAGENET
We train the BagNets directly on ImageNet (see Appendix for details). Surprisingly, patch sizes as
small as 17 × 17 pixels sufﬁce to reach AlexNet performance (80.5% top-5
performance) while patches sizes 33 × 33 pixels sufﬁce to reach close to 87.6%.
We also compare the runtime of BagNet-q (q = 33, 17, 9) in inference mode with images of size
3 × 224 × 224 and batch size 64 against a vanilla ResNet-50. Across all receptive ﬁeld sizes BagNets
reach around 155 images/s for BagNets compared to 570 images/s for ResNet-50. The difference in
runtime can be attributed to the reduced amount of downsampling in BagNets compared to ResNet-50.
EXPLAINING DECISIONS
For each q × q patch the model infers evidence for each ImageNet classes, thus yielding a highresolution and very precise heatmap that shows which parts of the image contributes most to certain
decisions. We display these heatmaps for the predicted class for ten randomly chosen test images in
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Figure 2. Clearly, most evidence lies around the shapes of objects (e.g. the crip or the paddles) or
certain predictive image features like the glowing borders of the pumpkin. Also, for animals eyes or
legs are important. It’s also notable that background features (like the forest in the deer image) are
pretty much ignored by the BagNets.
true class
predicted class
Figure 4: Images misclassiﬁed by BagNet-
33 and VGG-16 with heatmaps for true and
predicted label and the most predictive image patches. Class probability reported for
BagNet-33 (left) and VGG (right).
Next we pick a class and run the BagNets across all
validation images to ﬁnd patches with the most class
evidence. Some of these patches are taken from images of that class (i.e. they carry "correct" evidence)
while other patches are from images of another class
(i.e. these patches can lead to misclassiﬁcations). In
Figure 3 we show the top-7 patches from both correct and incorrect images for several classes (rows)
and different BagNets (columns). This visualisation
yields many insights: for example, book jackets are
identiﬁed mainly by the text on the cover, leading
to confusion with other text on t-shirts or websites.
Similarly, keys of a typewriter are often interpreted
as evidence for handheld computers. The tench class,
a large ﬁsh species, is often identiﬁed by ﬁngers on
front of a greenish background. Closer inspection revealed that tench images typically feature the ﬁsh hold
up like a trophy, thus making the hand and ﬁngers
holding it a very predictive image feature. Flamingos
are detected by their beaks, which makes them easy to
confuse with other birds like storks, while grooms are
primarily identiﬁed by the transition from suit to neck,
an image feature present in many other classes.
In Figure 4 we analyse images misclassiﬁed by
both BagNet-33 and VGG-16. In the ﬁrst example
the ground-truth class "cleaver" was confused with
"granny smith" because of the green cucumber at the
top of the image. Looking at the three most predictive
patches plotted alongside each heatmap, which show
the apple-like edges of the green cucumber pieces, this
choice looks comprehensible. Similarly, the local patches in the "thimble" image resemble a gas
mask if viewed in isolation. The letters in the "miniskirt" image are very salient, thus leading to the
"book jacket" prediction while in the last image the green blanket features a glucamole-like texture.
COMPARING THE DECISION-MAKING OF BAGNETS AND HIGH-PERFORMANCE DNNS
In the next paragraphs we investigate how similar the decision-making of BagNets is to highperformance DNNs like VGG-16, ResNet-50, ResNet-152 and DenseNet-169. There is no single
answer or number, partially because we lack a sensible distance metric between networks. One can
texturised images
texturised images
Figure 5: Examples of original and texturised images. A vanilla VGG-16 still reaches high accuracy
on the texturised images while humans suffer greatly from the loss of global shapes in many images.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Figure 6: Interaction of spatially separated image parts. (A) Changes in class-evidence when single
image patches are masked (centre) versus change when all patches are masked simultaneously (right).
For linear BoF models both terms are the same. (B) Masking regions for different patch sizes. (C)
Correlation between both terms for different DNNs over different patch sizes. Interactions are greatly
depressed for image features larger than 30 × 30 px.
compare the pearson correlation between logits (for VGG-16, BagNet-9/17/33 reach 0.70 / 0.79 /
0.88 respectively, see Figure 1C), but this number can only give a ﬁrst hint as it does not investigate
the speciﬁc process that led to the decision. However, the decision-making of BagNets does feature
certain key characteristics that we can compare to other models.
Image Scrambling
One core component of the bag-of-feature networks is the neglect of the spatial
relationships between image parts. In other words, scrambling the parts across the image while
keeping their counts constant does not change the model decision. Is the same true for current
computer vision models like VGG or ResNets? Unfortunately, due to the overlapping receptive ﬁelds
it is generally not straight-forward to scramble an image in a way that leaves the feature histograms
invariant. For VGG-16 an algorithm that comes close to this objective is the popular texture synthesis
algorithm based on the Gram features of the hidden layer activations , Figure 5.
For humans, the scrambling severely increases the difﬁculty of the task while the performance of
VGG-16 is little affected (90.1% on clean versus 79.4% on texturised image).
This suggests that VGG, in stark contrast to humans, does not rely on global shape integration for
perceptual discrimination but rather on statistical regularities in the histogram of local image features.
It is well known by practioners that the aforementioned texture synthesis algorithm does not work for
ResNet- and DenseNet architectures, the reasons of which are not yet fully understood.
Spatially distinct image manipulations do not interact
For BoF models with a linear (but not
non-linear!) classiﬁer we do not only expect invariance to the spatial arrangement of image parts,
but also that the marginal presence or absence of an image part always has the same effect on the
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
evidence accumulation (i.e. is independent of the rest of the image). In other words, for a BoF model
an image with ﬁve unconnected wheels (and nothing else) would carry more evidence for class "bike"
than a regular photo of a bicycle; a linear BoF model simply ignores whether there is also a frame and
a saddle. More precisely, let ℓmodel(x) be the class evidence (logit) as a function of the input x and let
δi be spatially separated and non-overlapping input modiﬁcations. For a BagNet-q it holds that
ℓmodel(x) −ℓmodel(x +
i (ℓmodel(x) −ℓmodel(x + δi)) ,
as long as the modiﬁcations are separated by more than q pixels. We use the Pearson correlation
between the LHS and RHS of eq. (1) as a measure of non-linear interactions between image parts.
In our experiments we partition the image into a grid of non-overlapping square-sized patches with
patch size q. We then replace every second patch in every second row (see Figure 6B) with its DC
component (the spatial channel average) both in isolation (RHS of eq. (1)) and in combination (LHS
of eq. (1)), see Figure 6A. This ensures that the masked patches are spaced by q pixels and that always
around 1/4 of the image is masked. Since most objects ﬁll much of the image, we can expect that
the masking will remove many class-predictive image features. We measure the Pearson correlation
between the LHS and RHS of eq. 1 for different patch sizes q and DNN models (Figure 6C). The
results (Figure 6C) show that VGG-16 exhibits few interactions between image parts spaced by more
than 30 pixels. The interactions increase for deeper and more performant architectures.
Error distribution
In Figure 7 we plot the top-5 accuracy within each ImageNet class of BagNet-
33 against the accuracy of regular DNNs. For comparison we also plot VGG-11 against VGG-16.
The analysis reveals that the error distribution is fairly consistent between models.
Spatial sensitivity
To see whether BagNets and DNNs use similar image parts for image classi-
ﬁcation we follow Zintgraf et al. and test how the prediction of DNNs is changing when
we mask the most predictive image parts. In Figure 8 (top) we compare the decrease in predicted
class probability for an increasing number of masked 8 × 8 patches. The masking locations are
determined by the heatmaps of BagNets which we compare against random maskings as well as
several popular attribution techniques ) which compute heatmaps directly in the tested models. Notice that these attribution methods
have an advantage because they compute heatmaps knowing everything about the models (white-box
setting). Nonetheless, the heatmaps from BagNets turn out to be more predictive for class-relevant
image parts (see also Table 1). In other words, image parts that are relevant to BagNets are similarly
relevant for the classiﬁcation of normal DNNs. VGG-16 is most affected by the masking of local
patches while deeper and more performant architectures are more robust to the relatively small masks,
which again suggests that deeper architectures take into account larger spatial relationships.
DISCUSSION & OUTLOOK
In this paper we introduced and analysed a novel interpretable DNN architecture — coined BagNets
— that classiﬁes images based on linear bag-of-local-features representations. The results demonstrate
that even complex perceptual tasks like ImageNet can be solved just based on small image features
and without any notion of spatial relationships. In addition we showed that the key properties of
BagNets, in particlar invariance to spatial relationships as well as weak interactions between image
features, are also present to varying degrees in many common computer vision models like ResNet-50
[%, top-5]
VGG-11 [%, top-5]
[%, top-5]
BagNet-33 [%, top-5]
[%, top-5]
ResNet-152
[%, top-5]
DenseNet-169
[%, top-5]
Figure 7: Scatter plots of class-conditional top-5 errors for different models.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Saliency maps
Int. Gradients
Epsilon-LRP
DeepLIFT (rescale)
Figure 8: Similarity of image features used for object classiﬁcation. (Top) Decrease of leading class
probability in VGG-16, ResNet-50, ResNet-152 and DenseNet-169 if increasingly more patches
are masked according to the heatmaps of BagNets and several popular attribution methods. The
faster the decrease the more closely does the heatmap highlight image parts relevant for the model
decisions making. Image parts relevant to the BagNets turn out to be similarly relevant for all models
and outperform post-hoc attribution methods. (Bottom) The ﬁrst four heatmaps show attributions
computed on VGG-16, the other three heatmaps show the class evidence of BagNets.
ResNet-152
DenseNet-169
Table 1: Average probability of leading class after masking the 100 patches (8 × 8 pixels) with the
highest attribution according to different heatmaps (columns).
or VGG-16, suggesting that the decision-making of many DNNs trained on ImageNet follows at
least in part a similar bag-of-feature strategy. In contrast to the perceived “leap” in performance from
bag-of-feature models to deep neural networks, the representations learnt by DNNs may in the end
still be similar to the pre-deep learning era.
VGG-16 is particularly close to bag-of-feature models, as demonstrated by the weak interactions
(Figure 6) and the sensitivity to the same small image patches as BagNets (Figure 8). Deeper networks,
on the other hand, exhibit stronger nonlinear interactions between image parts and are less sensitive
to local maskings. This might explain why texturisation (Figure 5) works well in VGG-16 but fails
for ResNet- and DenseNet-architectures.
Clearly, ImageNet alone is not sufﬁcient to force DNNs to learn more physical and causal representation of the world — simply because such a representation is not necessary to solve the task
(local image features are enough). This might explain why DNNs generalise poorly to distribution
shifts: a DNN trained on natural images has learnt to recognize the textures and local image features
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
associated with different objects (like the fur and eyes of a cat or the keys of a typewriter) and will
inevitably fail if presented with cartoon-like images as they lack the key local image features upon
which it bases its decisions.
One way forward is to deﬁne novel tasks that cannot be solved using local statistical regularities. Here
the BagNets can serve as a way to evaluate a lower-bound on the task performance as a function of the
observable length-scales. Furthermore, BagNets can be an interesting tool in any application in which
it is desirable to trade some accuracy for better interpretability. For example, BagNets can make it
much easier to spot the relevant spatial locations and image features that are predictive of certain
diseases in medical imaging. Likewise, they can serve as diagnostic tools to benchmark feature
attribution techniques since ground-truth attributions are directly available. BagNets can also serve
as interpretable parts of a larger computer vision pipeline (e.g. in autonomous cars) as they make it
easier to understand edge and failure cases. We released the pretrained BagNets (BagNet-9, BagNet-
17 and BagNet-33) for PyTorch and Keras at 
bag-of-local-features-models.
Taken together, DNNs might be more powerful than previous hand-tuned bag-of-feature algorithms in
discovering weak statistical regularities, but that does not necessarily mean that they learn substantially
different representations. We hope that this work will encourage and inspire future work to adapt
tasks, architectures and training algorithms to encourage models to learn more causal models of the
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work has been funded, in part, by the German Research Foundation (DFG CRC 1233 on “Robust
Vision”) as well as by the Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA) via Department
of Interior / Interior Business Center (DoI/IBC) contract number D16PC00003.