Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
REGULARIZING NEURAL NETWORKS BY PENALIZING
CONFIDENT OUTPUT DISTRIBUTIONS
Gabriel Pereyra ∗†
Google Brain
 
George Tucker ∗†
Google Brain
 
Jan Chorowski
Google Brain
 
Łukasz Kaiser
Google Brain
 
Geoffrey Hinton
University of Toronto & Google Brain
 
We systematically explore regularizing neural networks by penalizing low entropy
output distributions. We show that penalizing low entropy output distributions,
which has been shown to improve exploration in reinforcement learning, acts as
a strong regularizer in supervised learning. Furthermore, we connect a maximum
entropy based conﬁdence penalty to label smoothing through the direction of the
KL divergence. We exhaustively evaluate the proposed conﬁdence penalty and
label smoothing on 6 common benchmarks: image classiﬁcation (MNIST and
Cifar-10), language modeling (Penn Treebank), machine translation (WMT’14
English-to-German), and speech recognition (TIMIT and WSJ). We ﬁnd that both
label smoothing and the conﬁdence penalty improve state-of-the-art models across
benchmarks without modifying existing hyperparameters, suggesting the wide applicability of these regularizers.
INTRODUCTION
Large neural networks with millions of parameters achieve strong performance on image classiﬁcation , machine translation , language modeling , and speech recognition . However, despite using large datasets,
neural networks are still prone to overﬁtting. Numerous techniques have been proposed to prevent
overﬁtting, including early stopping, L1/L2 regularization (weight decay), dropout , and batch normalization . These techniques, along with most other
forms of regularization, act on the hidden activations or weights of a neural network. Alternatively,
regularizing the output distribution of large, deep neural networks has largely been unexplored.
To motivate output regularizers, we can view the knowledge of a model as the conditional distribution it produces over outputs given an input as opposed to the learned values
of its parameters. Given this functional view of knowledge, the probabilities assigned to class labels
that are incorrect (according to the training data) are part of the knowledge of the network. For
example, when shown an image of a BMW, a network that assigns a probability of 10−3 to “Audi”
and 10−9 to “carrot” is clearly better than a network that assigns 10−9 to “Audi” and 10−3 to carrot,
all else being equal. One reason it is better is that the probabilities assigned to incorrect classes are
an indication of how the network generalizes. Distillation 
exploits this fact by explicitly training a small network to assign the same probabilities to incorrect
classes as a large network or ensemble of networks that generalizes well. Further, by operating on
the output distribution that has a natural scale rather than on internal weights, whose signiﬁcance
depends on the values of the other weights, output regularization has the property that it is invariant
to the parameterization of the underlying neural network.
∗Work done as part of the Google Brain Residency Program
†Equal Contribution
 
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
In this paper, we systematically evaluated two output regularizers: a maximum entropy based conﬁdence penalty and label smoothing (uniform and unigram) for large, deep neural networks on 6 common benchmarks: image classiﬁcation (MNIST and Cifar-10), language modeling (Penn Treebank),
machine translation (WMT’14 English-to-German), and speech recognition (TIMIT and WSJ). We
ﬁnd that both label smoothing and the conﬁdence penalty improve state-of-the-art models across
benchmarks without modifying existing hyperparameters.
RELATED WORK
The maximum entropy principle has a long history with deep connections to many
areas of machine learning including unsupervised learning, supervised learning, and reinforcement
learning. In supervised learning, we can search for the model with maximum entropy subject to
constraints on empirical statistics, which naturally gives rise to maximum likelihood in log-linear
models for a review). Deterministic annealing Rose is a general
approach for optimization that is widely applicable, avoids local minima, and can minimize discrete
objectives, and it can be derived from the maximum entropy principle. Closely related to our work,
Miller et al. apply deterministic annealing to train multilayer perceptrons, where an entropy
based regularizer is introduced and slowly annealed. However, their focus is avoiding poor initialization and local minima, and while they ﬁnd that deterministic annealing helps, the improvement
diminishes quickly as the number of hidden units exceeds eight.
In reinforcement learning, encouraging the policy to have an output distribution with high entropy
has been used to improve exploration . This prevents the policy from
converging early and leads to improved performance . Penalizing low entropy
has also been used when combining reinforcement learning and supervised learning to train a neural
speech recognition model to learn when to emit tokens . When learning to emit,
the entropy of the emission policy was added to the training objective and was annealed throughout
training. Indeed, in recent work on reward augmented maximum likelihood ,
this entropy augmented reinforcement learning objective played a direct role in linking maximum
likelihood and reinforcement learning objectives.
Penalizing the entropy of a network’s output distribution has not been evaluated for large deep neural
networks in supervised learning, but a closely related idea, label smoothing regularization, has been
shown to improve generalization . Label smoothing regularization estimates
the marginalized effect of label-dropout during training, reducing overﬁtting by preventing a network
from assigning full probability to each training example and maintaining a reasonable ratio between
the logits of the incorrect classes. Simply adding label noise has also been shown to be effective
at regularizing neural networks . Instead of smoothing the labels with a uniform
distribution, as in label smoothing, we can smooth the labels with a teacher model or the model’s own distribution . Distillation and self-distillation both
regularize a network by incorporating information about the ratios between incorrect classes.
Virtual adversarial training (VAT) is another promising smoothing regularizer.
However, we did not compare to VAT because it has multiple hyperparameters and the approximated
gradient of the local distributional smoothness can be computed with no more than three pairs of forward and back propagations, which is signiﬁcantly more computation in grid-searching and training
than the other approaches we compared to.
DIRECTLY PENALIZING CONFIDENCE
Conﬁdent predictions correspond to output distributions that have low entropy. A network is overconﬁdent when it places all probability on a single class in the training set, which is often a symptom
of overﬁtting . The conﬁdence penalty constitutes a regularization term that
prevents these peaked distributions, leading to better generalization.
A neural network produces a conditional distribution pθ(y|x) over classes y given an input x
through a softmax function. The entropy of this conditional distribution is given by
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
Predicted probability
Predicted probability
Label smoothing
Predicted probability
Confidence penalty
Figure 1: Distribution of the magnitude of softmax probabilities on the MNIST validation set. A
fully-connected, 2-layer, 1024-unit neural network was trained with dropout (left), label smoothing
(center), and the conﬁdence penalty (right). Dropout leads to a softmax distribution where probabilities are either 0 or 1. By contrast, both label smoothing and the conﬁdence penalty lead to smoother
output distributions, which results in better generalization.
H(pθ(y|x)) = −
pθ(yi|x) log(pθ(yi|x)).
To penalize conﬁdent output distributions, we add the negative entropy to the negative log-likelihood
during training
log pθ(y|x) −βH(pθ(y|x)),
where β controls the strength of the conﬁdence penalty. Notably, the gradient of the entropy term
with respect to the logits is simple to compute. Denoting the ith logit by zi, then
= pθ(yi|x) (−log pθ(yi|x) −H(pθ)) ,
which is the weighted deviation from the mean.
ANNEALING AND THRESHOLDING THE CONFIDENCE PENALTY
In reinforcement learning, penalizing low entropy distributions prevents a policy network from converging early and encourages exploration. However, in supervised learning, we typically want quick
convergence, while preventing overﬁtting near the end of training, suggesting a conﬁdence penalty
that is weak at the beginning of training and strong near convergence. A simple way to achieve this
is to anneal the conﬁdence penalty.
Another way to strengthen the conﬁdence penalty as training progresses is to only penalize output
distributions when they are below a certain entropy threshold. We can achieve this by adding a hinge
loss to the conﬁdence penalty, leading to an objective of the form
log pθ(y|x) −β max(0, Γ −H(pθ(y|x)),
where Γ is the entropy threshold below which we begin applying the conﬁdence penalty.
Initial experiments suggest that thresholding the conﬁdence penalty leads to faster convergence at
the cost of introducing an extra hyper-parameter. For the majority of our experiments, we were
able to achieve comparable performance without using the thresholded version. For the sake of
simplicity, we focus on the single hyper-parameter version in our experiments.
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
CONNECTION TO LABEL SMOOTHING
Label smoothing estimates the marginalized effect of label noise during training. When the prior
label distribution is uniform, label smoothing is equivalent to adding the KL divergence between the
uniform distribution u and the network’s predicted distribution pθ to the negative log-likelihood
log pθ(y|x) −DKL(u∥pθ(y|x)).
By reversing the direction of the KL divergence, DKL(pθ(y|x)∥u), we recover the conﬁdence
penalty. This interpretation suggests further conﬁdence regularizers that use alternative target distributions instead of the uniform distribution. We leave the exploration of these regularizers to future
EXPERIMENTS
We evaluated the conﬁdence penalty and label smoothing on MNIST and CIFAR-10 for image classiﬁcation, Penn Treebank for language modeling, WMT’14 English-to-German for machine translation, and TIMIT and WSJ for speech recognition. All models were implemented using TensorFlow
 and trained on NVIDIA Tesla K40 or K80 GPUs.
IMAGE CLASSIFICATION
As a preliminary experiment, we evaluated the approaches on the standard MNIST digit recognition
task. We used the standard split into 60k training images and 10k testing images. We use the last 10k
images of the training set as a held-out validation set for hyper-parameter tuning and then retrained
the models on the entire dataset with the best conﬁguration.
We trained fully-connected, ReLu activation neural networks with 1024 units per layer and two
hidden layers. Weights were initialized from a normal distribution with standard deviation 0.01.
Models were optimized with stochastic gradient descent with a constant learning rate 0.05 (except
for dropout where we set the learning rate to 0.001).
For label smoothing, we varied the smoothing parameter in the range [0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5],
and found 0.1 to work best for both methods. For the conﬁdence penalty, we varied the weight
values over [0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 4.0, 8.0] and found a conﬁdence penalty weight of 1.0 to work
We also plotted the norm of the gradient as training progressed in Figure 2. We observed that label
smoothing and conﬁdence penalty had smaller gradient norms and converged more quickly than
models regularized with dropout. If the output distributions is peaked on a misclassiﬁed example,
the model receives a large gradient. This may explain why the regularized models have smaller
gradient norms.
Wan et al. - Unregularized
Srivastava et al. - Dropout
Wan et al. - DropConnect
Srivastava et al. - MaxNorm + Dropout
1.28 ± 0.06%
Label Smoothing
1.23 ± 0.06%
Conﬁdence Penalty
1.17 ± 0.06%
Table 1: Test error (%) for permutation-invariant MNIST.
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
CIFAR-10 is an image classiﬁcation dataset consisting of 32x32x3 RGB images of 10 classes. The
dataset is split into 50k training images and 10k testing images. We use the last 5k images of the
training set as a held-out validation set for hyper-parameter tuning, as is common practice.
For our experiments, we used a densely connected convolutional neural network, which represents
the current state-of-the-art on CIFAR-10 . We use the small conﬁguration from
 , which consists of 40-layers, with a growth rate of 12. All models were trained
for 300 epochs, with a batch-size of 50 and a learning rate 0.1. The learning rate was reduced by
a factor of 10 at 150 and 225 epochs. We present results for training without data-augmentation.
We found that the conﬁdence penalty did not lead to improved performance when training with data
augmentation, however neither did other regularization techniques, including dropout.
For our ﬁnal test scores, we trained on the entire training set. For label smoothing, we tried smoothing parameter values of [0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5], and found 0.1 to work best. For the conﬁdence
penalty, we performed a grid search over conﬁdence penalty weight values of [0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 1.0,
1.5] and found a conﬁdence penalty weight of 0.1 to work best.
Parameters
He et al. - Residual CNN
Huang et al. - Stochastic Depth Residual CNN
Larsson et al. - Fractal CNN
Larsson et al. - Fractal CNN (Dropout)
Huang et al. - Densely Connected CNN
Huang et al. - Densely Connected CNN
Densely Connected CNN (Dropout)
Densely Connected CNN (Dropout + Label Smoothing)
Densely Connected CNN (Dropout + Conﬁdence Penalty)
Table 2: Test error (%) on Cifar-10 without data augmentation.
LANGUAGE MODELING
For language modeling, we found that conﬁdence penalty signiﬁcantly outperforms label noise and
label smoothing. We performed word-level language modeling experiments using the Penn Treebank dataset (PTB) . We used the hyper-parameter settings from the large
conﬁguration in . Brieﬂy, we used a 2-layer, 1500-unit LSTM, with 65%
dropout applied on all non-recurrent connections. We trained using stochastic gradient descent for
55 epochs, decaying the learning rate by 1.15 after 14 epochs, and clipped the norm of the gradients
when they were larger than 10.
For label noise and label smoothing, we performed a grid search over noise and smoothing values of
[0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5]. For label noise, we found 0.1 to work best. For label smoothing,
we found 0.1 to work best. For the conﬁdence penalty, we performed a grid search over conﬁdence
penalty weight values of [0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0]. We found a conﬁdence penalty weight of 2.0 to
work best, which led to an improvement of 3.7 perplexity points over the baseline.
For reference, we also include results of the existing state-of-the-art models for the word-level language modeling task on PTB. Variational dropout applies a ﬁxed dropout mask (stochastic for each sample) at each time-step, instead of resampling at each time-step as in traditional
dropout. Note, that we do not include the variational dropout results that use Monte Carlo (MC)
model averaging, which achieves lower perplexity on the test set but requires 1000 model evaluations, which are then averaged. Recurrent highway networks currently represent
the state-of-the-art performance on PTB.
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
Parameters
Validation
Zaremba et al. - Regularized LSTM
Gal - Variational LSTM
Press & Wolf - Tied Variational LSTM
Merity et al. - Pointer Sentinel LSTM
Zilly et al. - Variational RHN
Zilly et al. - Tied Variational RHN
Regularized LSTM (label noise)
Regularized LSTM (label smoothing)
Regularized LSTM (unigram smoothing)
Regularized LSTM (conﬁdence penalty)
Table 3: Validation and test perplexity for word-level Penn Treebank.
MACHINE TRANSLATION
For machine translation, we evaluated the conﬁdence penalty on the WMT’14 English-to-German
translation task using Google’s production-level translation system Wu et al. . The training set
consists of 5M sentence pairs, and we used newstest2012 and newtests2013 for validation and newstest2014 for testing. We report tokenized BLEU scores as computed by the multi-bleu.perl
script from the Moses translation machine translation package.
Our model was an 8-layer sequence-to-sequence model with attention . The
ﬁrst encoder was a bidirectional LSTM, the remaining encoder and decoder layers were unidirectional LSTMs, and the attention network was a single layer feed-forward network. Each layer had
512 units ). The model was trained using 12 replicas running
concurrently with asynchronous updates. Dropout of 30% was applied as described in . Optimization used a mix of Adam and SGD with gradient clipping. Unlike , we did not use reinforcement learning to ﬁne-tune our model. We used a beam size of 12
during decoding. For more details, see .
For label smoothing, we performed a grid search over values [0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5] and found
0.1 to work best for both uniform and unigram smoothing. For the conﬁdence penalty, we searched
over values of [0.5, 2.5, 4.5] and found a value of 2.5 to work best . For machine translation, we
found label smoothing slightly outperformed conﬁdence penalty. When applied without dropout,
both lead to an improvement of just over 1 BLEU point (dropout leads to an improvement of just
over 2 BLEU points). However, when combined with dropout, the effect of both regularizers was
diminished.
Parameters
Validation
Buck et al. - PBMT
Cho et al. - RNNSearch
Zhou et al. - Deep-Att
Luong et al. - P-Attention
Wu et al. - WPM-16K
Wu et al. - WPM-32K
WPM-32K (without dropout)
WPM-32K (label smoothing)
WPM-32K (conﬁdence penalty)
WPM-32K (dropout)
24.1 ± 0.1
23.41 ± 0.04
WPM-32K (dropout + label smoothing)
24.3 ± 0.1
23.52 ± 0.03
WPM-32K (dropout + unigram smoothing)
24.3 ± 0.1
23.57 ± 0.02
WPM-32K (dropout + conﬁdence penalty)
24.3 ± 0.1
23.4 ± 0.1
Table 4: Validation and test BLEU for WMT’14 English-to-German. For the last four model con-
ﬁgurations, we report the mean and standard error of the mean (SEM) over 5 random initializations.
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
SPEECH RECOGNITION
In the TIMIT corpus, the training set consists of 3512 utterances, the validation set consists of 184
utterances and the test set consists of 192 utterances. All 61 phonemes were used during training
and decoding, and during scoring, these 61 phonemes were reduced to 39 to compute the phoneme
error rate (PER).
As our base model, we used a sequence-to-sequence model with attention. The encoder consisted
of 3 bidirectional LSTM layers, the decoder consisted of a single unidirectional LSTM layer, and
the attention network consisted of a single layer feed-forward network. All layers consisted of 256
units. Dropout of 15% was applied as described in Zaremba et al. . We trained the model
with asynchronous SGD with 5 replicas. We used a batch size of 32, a learning rate of 0.01, and
momentum of 0.9. Gradients were clipped at 5.0. For more details, see Norouzi et al. .
For label smoothing, we performed a grid search over values [0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6,
0.8] and found 0.2 to work best. For the conﬁdence penalty, we performed a grid search over values
of [0.125, 0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 4.0, 8.0] and found a value of 1.0 to work best. Label smoothing led to
an absolute improvement over the dropout baseline of 1.6%, while the conﬁdence penalty led to an
absolute improvement of 1.2%.
Parameters
Validation
Mohamed et al. - DNN-HMM
Norouzi et al. - RML
Graves et al. - CTC
Graves et al. - RNN Transducer
T´oth - CNN
21.0 ± 0.1
23.2 ± 0.4
Dropout + Label Smoothing
19.3 ± 0.1
21.6 ± 0.2
Dropout + Conﬁdence Penalty
19.9 ± 0.2
22.0 ± 0.4
Table 5: Validation and test phoneme error rates (PER) for TIMIT. We report the mean and SEM
over 5 random initializations.
WALL STREET JOURNAL
For the WSJ corpus we used attention-based sequence-to-sequence networks that directly predicted
characters. We used the SI284 subset for training, DEV93 for validation, and EVAL92 for testing. We used 240-dimensional vectors consisting of 80-bin ﬁlterbank features augmented with their
deltas and delta-deltas with per-speaker normalized mean and variances computed with Kaldi Povey
et al. . We did not use text-only data or separate language models during decoding.
Network architecture details were as follows. The encoder of the network consisted of 4 bidirectional
LSTM layers each having 256 units, interleaved with 3 time-subsampling layers, conﬁgured to drop
every second frame . The decoder used a single LSTM
layer with 256 units. The attention vectors were computed with a single layer feedforward network
having 64 hidden units and the convolutional ﬁlters as described in Chorowski et al. . Weights
were initialized from a uniform distribution [−0.075, 0.075]. All models used weight decay of 10−6,
additive Gaussian weight noise with standard deviation 0.075, applied after 20K steps, and were
trained for 650K steps. We used the ADAM optimizer asynchronously over 8 GPUs. We used a
learning rate of 10−3, which was reduced to 10−4 after 400K and 10−5 after 500K steps.
We tested three methods of increasing the entropy of outputs: the conﬁdence penalty and two variants of label smoothing: uniform and unigram. All resulted in improved Word Error Rates (WER),
however the unigram smoothing resulted in the greatest WER reduction, and we found it to be least
sensitive to its hyperparameter (the smoothing value). Furthermore, uniform smoothing and con-
ﬁdence penalty required masking network outputs corresponding to tokens that never appeared as
labels, such as the start-of-sequence token.
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
Table 6 compares the performance of the regularized networks with several recent results. We observe that the beneﬁts of label smoothing (WER reduction from 14.2 to 11) improve over the recently proposed Latent Sequence Decompositions (LSD) method which reduces
the WER from 14.7 to 12.9 by extending the space of output tokens to dynamically chosen character
Parameters
Validation
Graves & Jaitly - CTC
Bahdanau et al. - seq2seq
Chan et al. - Baseline
Chan et al. - LSD
Uniform Label Smoothing
Unigram Label Smoothing
14.0 ± 0.25
11.0 ± 0.35
Conﬁdence Penalty
Table 6: Validation and test word error rates (WER) for WSJ. For Baseline, Uniform Label Smoothing and Conﬁdence Penalty we report the average over two runs. For the best setting (Unigram
Label Smoothing), we report the average over 6 runs together with the standard deviation.
CONCLUSION
Motivated by recent successes of output regularizers , we
conduct a systematic evaluation of two output regularizers: the conﬁdence penalty and label smoothing. We show that this form of regularization, which has been shown to improve exploration in
reinforcement learning, also acts as a strong regularizer in supervised learning. We ﬁnd that both the
conﬁdence penalty and label smoothing improve a wide range of state-of-the-art models, without
the need to modify hyper-parameters.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Sergey Ioffe, Alex Alemi and Navdeep Jaitly for helpful discussions. We
would also like to thank Prajit Ramachandran, Barret Zoph, Mohammad Norouzi, and Yonghui
Wu for technical help with the various models used in our experiments. We thank the anonymous
reviewers for insightful comments.