Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Creating a Live, Public Short Message Service Corpus: The
NUS SMS Corpus
Tao Chen · Min-Yen Kan
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract Short Message Service (SMS) messages are largely sent directly from one person
to another from their mobile phones. They represent a means of personal communication
that is an important communicative artifact in our current digital era. As most existing studies have used private access to SMS corpora, comparative studies using the same raw SMS
data has not been possible up to now.
We describe our efforts to collect a public SMS corpus to address this problem. We use
a battery of methodologies to collect the corpus, paying particular attention to privacy issues
to address contributors’ concerns. Our live project collects new SMS message submissions,
checks their quality and adds the valid messages, releasing the resultant corpus as XML and
as SQL dumps, along with corpus statistics, every month. We opportunistically collect as
much metadata about the messages and their sender as possible, so as to enable different
types of analyses. To date, we have collected about 60,000 messages, focusing on English
and Mandarin Chinese.
Keywords SMS Corpus · Corpus creation · English · Chinese · Crowdsourcing ·
Mechanical Turk · Zhubajie
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the China-Singapore Institute of Digital Media’s support
of this work by the “Co-training NLP systems and Language Learners” grant R 252-002-372-490.
AS6 04-13 Computing 1, 13 Computing Drive National University of Singapore Singapore 117417
Tel.: +65-83988018
E-mail: 
Min-Yen Kan
AS6 05-12 Computing 1, 13 Computing Drive National University of Singapore Singapore 117417
Tel.: +65-65161885
Fax: +65-6779-4580
E-mail: 
Tao Chen, Min-Yen Kan
1 Introduction
1.1 SMS in communication
Short Message Service (SMS) is a simple and ubiquitous modern form of world-wide communication. As mobile handsets increasingly become cheaper to manufacture, and as the
secondhand handset market distributes them more widely downstream, SMS emerges as the
most widely-used form of digital communication next to voice telephony. As of 2010, there
were 5.3 billion active users of SMS, globally sending 6.1 trillion messages as estimated by
the International Telecommunication Union (ITU)1. In the same year, Americans alone sent
1.8 trillion messages 2. Even in China, 98.3% of phone owners use SMS service, averaging
42.6 received messages weekly 3.
The 160 character limit of SMS was designed by Hildebrandt4 to accommodate the
“communication of most thoughts” presumably in English and other Latin languages. The
limits as well as the early difﬁculties with text input pushed users to be inventive and create
shortenings for communication. The resulting genre of communication has its own name:
“texting” , and has been debated as to whether it is a friend or foe of language
creation, use and understanding. With the advent of the smartphone, other informal communications (e.g., tweets, instant messages), which were previously computer mediated, now
are enabled on mobile phones as well, and the length restriction has been circumvented by
standards that allow multiple messages to be concatenated together. They share some characteristics with SMS, such as the frequent use of emoticons, unconventional short forms and
misspelled words. Tweets, for instance, have been dubbed as “SMS of the Internet”5.
SMS messages have been studied since the late 1990s, when SMS communication became widely available among cellular carriers. The ubiquitous, personal and informal nature
of SMS attracted researchers’ attention, resulting in sociographic, linguistic and usability
research topics – e.g., the impact of SMS on social culture, linguistics analysis, text-entry
improvement, name-entity extraction, SMS normalization, authorship detection and spam
messages detection.
With such a clear societal impact, however, SMS are underwhelming studied. It is clear
why – gathering a large corpus to study is difﬁcult and fraught with conﬁdentiality problems, as messages are often personal or contain conﬁdential information. Unsurprisingly,
there are thus few publicly available SMS corpora, discouraging comparative studies. The
unavailability of corpora also becomes an onus on the aspiring researcher, forcing them to
gather messages themselves.
We now discuss three issues related to SMS corpus collection: 1) Why are there so few
public SMS corpora? 2) What factors make collecting SMS so difﬁcult? and 3) Can other
corpora of communication vehicles, such as tweets, replace SMS in studies?
SMS messages are primarily stored in mobile phone carriers’ database; only a small portion of them are stored in users’ phones given limited phone storage. For obvious legal and
privacy reasons, carriers cannot release their SMS databases for research, as users’ messages
are often personal, privileged and private and users would not want them known to others.
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Creating a Live, Public Short Message Service Corpus: The NUS SMS Corpus
Even when SMS corpora are collected by researchers from phone owners, such researchers
have to maintain exclusive access for the same private reasons. Thus, the private nature of
SMS results in the scarcity of public SMS corpora.
In this article, SMS collection in particular refers to gathering messages directly from
phone owners, largely for research purposes. There are two major explanations for the difﬁculty of SMS collection. As researchers want the text and the metadata for study, privacy is a
major concern, as the majority of phone owners are uncomfortable with having their private
messages revealed, even when the purpose is for research and academic pursuits. Additionally, in collecting SMS directly from users, the target messages to be collected are stored
on the users’ mobile phones, which means that the collection of a large corpus requires the
cooperation of many phone owners, and the support of software to ease the collection over
many potential mobile phone platforms.
In recent times, Twitter and social networks such as Facebook have made the genre of
the short message even more ubiquitous. Tweets and status updates are closely related to
SMS, sharing the characteristic terse style of messages. However compared to SMS, tweets
are remarkable easier to gather since Twitter release API for accessing data. So a natural
question arises: can tweets replace SMS for related studies? Perhaps for some purposes, the
answer can be “yes”, but they have fundamental differences which still preserves SMS as
an important medium to study. First, SMS is a private communication between two parties,
which may contain very sensitive topics or information (e.g., bank account, email address),
hence its difﬁculty for collection. In contrast, tweets and a large portion of social network
messages and comments are decidedly broadcast media, and hence far less private and sensitive. Second, though both SMS and tweets have the 140 characters restriction, they still
differs in length. Ayman reported that the bulk of tweets are around 40 characters long6 in
a corpus of 1.5 million tweets, while Tagg mentioned that average words of SMS is
17.2 words in her corpus of 11,067 messages. Bach and Gunnarsson validates this,
pointing out that SMS messages were more likely to be very short – containing only one
word – compared to tweets, due to the more personal and conversational aspects of SMS. If
the understanding of personal informal communication and how it is evolving is important,
then SMS deserves to be collected and studied for the public good.
A public SMS corpus is needed to ﬁll this gap for research material. which will beneﬁt
all the researchers who are interested in SMS studies. In 2004, our former project established a SMS collection project for this aim, gathering and publishing a corpus of 10,117
English SMS, mainly from students in our university . The corpus was
released freely online. It was the largest publicly available English SMS corpus until 2010,
and used in a number of SMS studies. However, mobile technology has undergone a great
development in the past six years, especially with the advent of smartphone, which have featured newer text input technologies and have inﬂuenced people’s texting habits. Moreover,
there is an extreme scarcity of Chinese SMS corpora in the public domain.
Considering this, we resurrected the SMS collection project in October 2010, reviving it
as a live corpus collection project for both English and Mandarin Chinese SMS. The “live”
aspect of our project emphasizes our aim to continually enlarge and publish the corpus for
end users. Our SMS collection makes use of an array of collection methodologies, leveraging
current technology trends, with the aim of making the resultant corpus be more representative of SMS worldwide (rather than a speciﬁc community7), to enable more general studies.
6 
7 In contrast, our 2004 corpus was collected locally within the University in Singapore, not representative
of general worldwide SMS use.
Tao Chen, Min-Yen Kan
Our current corpus also features improved collection methodology, making the collection
process more accurate with fewer transcription errors, and is continuously released publicly
with an effective anonymization process.
As of October 2011, we have collected 28,724 English messages and 29,100 Chinese
messages, resulting in the largest public SMS corpora (to our knowledge), in terms of both
English and Mandarin Chinese languages, independently.
Our article reports on the contributions of our corpus and its collection methods. In
particular, we:
– use a battery of methodologies to collect the corpus, paying particular attention to privacy issues to address contributors’ concerns (section 3);
– create a website to document and disseminate our gradual achievement, enabling direct,
online browsing of the messages. We also release the resultant corpus as XML and as
SQL dumps, along with salient corpus statistics, on a regular monthly schedule (section 4); and
– exploit a good Chinese crowdsourcing website for language data collection and compare
it with its more well-known, U.S. counterpart (section 5).
2 Related Work
2.1 Comparison of SMS Corpora
While the scope of related work to texting in general is vast, for the purposes of this report,
we limit the scope of our review to scholarly publications concerning SMS studies. This
makes the task feasible and allows us to further break the review down into particular facets
of interest. In particular, we pay attention to the size and language of each collection, the
characteristics of its contributors, how the respective authors have collected their corpus,
and the respective corpus’ availability. An important goal of this chapter is to provide a
comprehensive inventory of SMS corpora that have been collected and pointers to their
associated studies.
A survey of the literature shows that publicly-available SMS corpora are scarce. The
resulting scarcity motivates subsequent researchers to collect their own SMS corpora for
their speciﬁc projects, but as these projects are often one-off, the resulting collections are
also not publicly available, creating a vicious cycle. We are interested in the underlying
facets of their contributors’ identity and the collection methods used. For ease of reference,
we have also compiled and listed the existing corpora in Table 1 (publicly available corpora
are indicated by an asterisk).
– The Size of existing corpora is tiny when comparing to the Twitter corpus with 97 million of posts . Even the largest SMS corpus consists of “only”
85,870 messages . 50% of the corpora contain less than 1000
messages, and only ﬁve corpora comprise of more than 10,000 messages. We attribute
the small scale of these corpora to the aforementioned difﬁculty of collecting SMS.
However when the corpus is small, the resultant ﬁndings of the studies are often not
statistically signiﬁcant .
– The Language of the corpora ranges from European languages (English, French, Germany, Italian, Polish, Swedish, etc), Asian languages (Mandarin Chinese), to African
ones (Kiswahili and Xhosa). However, European languages dominate, with only two
Creating a Live, Public Short Message Service Corpus: The NUS SMS Corpus
Chinese corpora and two African corpora being the exceptions. A corpus can be classi-
ﬁed as monolingual and multilingual, describing how many languages are exhibited in
its component messages. Most corpora are monolingual, and to our knowledge, only ﬁve
existing corpora are multilingual .
– Contributors of the SMS collections can be categorized into known and anonymous
contributors. Families and friends are the most common known contributors . Others include colleagues , students in a speciﬁc university , recruited teenagers .
Anonymous contributors are those that the researchers do not personally know or need to
make direct contact with. The methods to carry out the collection are also more varied in
such cases than in known contributor cases. An example is the corpus collected by Ling
 , which involves 2,003 anonymous respondents via a telephone survey. Another
example is the corpus collected by Herring and Zelenkauskaite whose participants are anonymous audience members of an Italian interactive television program.
Perhaps the most important instance is the distributed effort by the sms4science project,
an international collaboration aiming to build an SMS corpus alongside corpus-based
research on the resulting corpus. The sms4science subprojects have been carried out in
nine countries, such as Belgium , Switzerland , France8, Greece, Spain and Italy. Anonymous contributors were recruited from across the subproject’s country or region.
The difference between the known versus anonymous contributor corpora affects the
corpora’ representativeness. Known contributors usually share similar demographic features, such as similar age (teenagers or college students), same career (colleagues),
and/or same geographic location (living in a same city). Hence, the corpora from known
contributors may not be representative of the general landscape of SMS usage. This characteristic may be perfectly acceptable or desired for the particular project for which the
corpus is collected, since the project may be restricted in a particular purpose or study.
For instance, Grinter and Eldridge collected 477 messages from 10 teenagers
for studying how messages have been incorporated into British teenagers’ lives. Corpora from anonymous contributor projects, such as the sms4science project, are more
broad and aim to satisfy general studies. We note that both aims can be achieved in an
anonymous collection process, as when suitable demographics are taken per message
and the corpus is sufﬁciently large, an identiﬁable subset of the corpus can still serve for
specialized studies.
– Collection Methods. The most interesting facet of the studies for our purposes is how
they collect their corpus. We observed three primary methods to collect SMS. The
simplest approach is to simply transcribe messages from the mobile phone, by typing them into a web based submission form ,
into a word processing or other electronic document , or even the simple method of
writing them down on paper .
Transcription can also happen later to facilitate collection speed – Lexander took
8 
Tao Chen, Min-Yen Kan
photos of messages stored on participant’s phone, for later transcription by researchers.
A second method by exporting or uploading SMS messages via software. The corpus
collected by Jonsson et al. is such an example. They implemented a phone widget
for providing location-based SMS trend service and collecting SMS messages as well,
since messages will be uploaded to the server when using the service. Sotillo and
Walkowska gathered messages by collecting SMS exported from contributors
using mobile phone software suites such as Treo desktop and Microsoft’s My Phone.
The third class of methods is to have contributors forward messages to a collection
number. Messages usually are forwarded to researcher’s own mobile phone , which may incur cost for the contributors. They
are typically compensated for their cost, thus the large-scale collection can be costly.
The studies done by , were in
collaboration with mobile phone operators, such that contributors could forward their
messages to the operator-central number for free, further lowering the barrier for potential contributors.
Aside from these common methods, we observed other one-off methods used in particular studies. Ogle collected broadcasted SMS by subscribing to the SMS promotion of several nightclubs; Ling asked respondents to read their SMS aloud
during a telephone survey; Herring and Zelenkauskaite downloaded the audience’s SMS from an SMS archive of an interactive TV program; and ﬁnally, Choudhury
et al. collected SMS from an online SMS backup website.
Which method is best? Each method has its own merits and drawbacks. If the scale
needed is small, transcribing a few messages is easiest, needing virtually no effort in
preparation and cost. However for medium to large corpus projects, this methodology
is not scalable, being time-consuming and prone to both transcription and deliberate
correction errors, despite instructions to transcribe messages exactly as displayed.
Exporting via software support preserves the originality of messages and in certain
cases, gather valuable metadata (sender and receiver’s telephone number and sending
timestamp). Exporting also enables batch submission, easily enabling a stream of valid
and accurate messages to be collected. It also encourages continuous SMS contribution,
especially when the export-and-collection process can be automated and continuous.
The key drawback with this method is that it is tied to the phone model, and thus creates a selection bias in the possible contributors. Exacerbating this problem is that some
phone models do not even have (free) software to export SMSes.
Forwarding messages is also effective to maintain the original message, but may be
costly if the sending cost needs to be recouped by the researcher. Forwarding may be
easy for newly-sent messages as the collection number can be added as a second recipient. However, many phone models allow only forwarding single messages, such that
forwarding lots of individual messages may be tedious. This discourages the collection
of many messages from a single contributor.
– Availability. In terms of availability, the existing corpora range from private, partially
public, to completely public. As displayed in Table 1, most existing SMS corpora are private access. Without a doubt privacy and non-disclosure issues are the underlying cause.
On one hand, it is the responsibility of researchers to protect the contributors’ privacy
and the easiest way to achieve the aim is by not making the corpus public . On the other hand, researchers may not be able to get the consent from
contributors to release the corpus or be restricted by the rules of their university’s IRB
(Institutional Review Board) .
Creating a Live, Public Short Message Service Corpus: The NUS SMS Corpus
We deﬁne partially public corpora as corpora that are not immediately freely accessible, and require some type of initiative on the part of the scholar to secure. The two
partially public corpora are the Belgium Corpus and Swiss
Corpus , collected by two sub-projects of sms4science. The
former was distributed as a Microsoft Access database on a CD-ROM and is purchasable
but restricted to bona ﬁde research purposes only. The latter corpus is browsable online
for researchers and students, but not downloadable as an entire corpus. Online browsing
is very convenient for reading a few SMS without the need to parse the raw data, but
makes it difﬁcult to obtain all the SMS for serious corpus study. We feel that this limits
the potential studies that could employ the corpus.
Completely public corpora are freely, immediately and wholly accessible. Shortis 
published 202 English SMS as a webpage9. Although the corpus is not directly downloadable as a ﬁle, we still consider it as public as all of the messages are displayed on the
single web page. Other public corpora were released as a ﬁle for freely downloading but
vary in the ﬁle format. Both the German Corpus 10 and HKU
Corpus 11 were released in Portable Document Format (.pdf), while the
IIT Corpus 12 and our aforementioned 2004 NUS SMS Corpus13 were released as text and XML ﬁles, respectively. The HKU Corpus is the only
corpus containing about 140 Chinese language messages, but these mix English words,
as may often be the case in Hong Kong. Strictly speaking, there is no pure, Mandarin
Chinese SMS corpus in the public domain.
Another public corpus is 9/11 pager messages released by Wikileaks in 200914 with over
half million messages. The intercepts cover a 24 hours surrounding the September 11th,
2001 attacks, ranging from exchanges among ofﬁce departments, to fault reporting of
computers as the World Trade Center collapsed. A few research studies have been conducted on this 9/11 corpus. Back et al. investigated the emotional timeline of the
messages and analyzed the negative reaction to 9/11 terrorist attacks. Back et al. 
also used automatic algorithms and human judgment to identify 37,606 social messages
from the original corpus, and rated the degree of anger in the timeline. Although 37,606
messages is quite a large corpus, most of the intercepts are limited to people’s reaction
to that terrorism event. Such topically-focused pager messages cannot replace a general
collection SMS messages, thus the corpus is not suitable for most SMS related studies.
– Release Time. For the seven public SMS corpora mentioned above, all of them were released after the completion of data collection. The static release favors protection of contributors’ privacy, since a global and thorough anonymization could be conducted . A live release, in which the corpus
is continually published and updated during the collection process, faces greater challenge and risk in anonymization.
Due to the individual and private nature of SMS, the resulting collected corpora also contain
private details, which may make it easy to discover the identity of the sender or recipient. For
these reasons, such resulting corpora also cannot be made public. As mentioned, this creates
a vicious cycle, erecting a barrier to SMS research, making SMS seem less signiﬁcant than
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
Tao Chen, Min-Yen Kan
it is for understanding our current era of communication. It is clear that a publicly available,
large-scale corpus of SMS could lower this barrier, and make the study of SMS more widely
available to scholars of all disciplines.
2.2 Crowdsourcing SMS collection
From the above summary, we can see that a variety of approaches have been employed to
collect SMS for study. In collecting any large-scale corpora, it is necessary to distribute
the task among a large group. This is aptly illustrated by the sms4science project which
involves thousands of contributors. As we aim to create an authoritative SMS corpus to
enable comparative studies, it is vital that the corpus also be large. Thus our methodology
should also follow this distributive paradigm.
Crowdsourcing, the strategy of distributing a task to a large “crowd” of human workers
via some computer-mediated sources, has emerged as a new driver of computation. In tasks
where raw compute power cannot succeed, but where an aggregate of human judgments
or efforts can, crowdsourcing can be used. It uses the computing medium to connect many
workers to a task necessitating human processing. For our particular instance of SMS collection, we can employ crowdsourcing to connect many potential contributors of SMS to a
collection framework.
The term “crowdsourcing” actually subsumes several forms
 , of which the Mechanized Labor form is most relevant to our project. This form is
deﬁned by its use of a (nominal) monetary to motivate distributed workers do their task. The
most notable example of mechanized labor in practice is embodied in Amazon Mechanical
Turk (hereafter, MTurk)17, an online marketplace for employers (a.k.a. requesters) to publish small tasks, and workers (a.k.a. Turkers) to choose and complete the tasks. MTurk has
become a popular crowdsourcing platform for its low cost and diverse workforce.
Of late, MTurk has been employed for many uses within scholarly work. We only focus
on works concerning data collection, in particular, the collection of language-related data. In
2010, a special workshop was held with the North American Annual meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics (NAACL), entitled Creating Speech and Language Data
With Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. Callison-Burch and Dredze categorized the data
collected in this workshop into six types: Traditional NLP tasks, Speech and Vision, Sentiment, Polarity and Bias, Information Retrieval, Information Extraction, Machine Translation. Though strictly speaking, SMS collection is not subsumed by any of the six types,
the success and variety of the corpora created in the workshop as well as in other studies
convince us that MTurk is a suitable platform for our project.
3 Methodology
We focus on collecting both English and Chinese SMS messages, for expanding our 2004
English SMS corpus and addressing the extreme scarcity of public Chinese SMS corpus.
Our aim is to create a SMS corpus that is: 1) representative for general studies, 2) largely
free of transcription errors, 3) accessible to the general public without cost, and 4) useful to
15 
16 The contributors and collection method are for the 487 messages collected in 2002; later, another 366
messages were collected from 2004-2006 without mentioning the contributors and collection methods.
17 
Creating a Live, Public Short Message Service Corpus: The NUS SMS Corpus
Table 1: Existing Corpora. An asterisk (*) indicates that the corpus is publicly available.
Researcher(s)
Language(s)
Contributors
Collection Method(s)
Pietrini 
15 to 35 years old
Not mentioned
Schlobinski et al.
Not mentioned
Shortis ∗
1 student, his peers and
Transcription
Segerstad 
4 paid and 16 volunteers
Transcription, Forwarding
Kasesniemi
Rautiainen 
Adolescents
years old)
Transcription
Eldridge 
years old)
Transcription
Brown 
135 freshmen
Transcription
Ogle 
Nightclubs
Subscribe SMS promotion of nightclubs
Ling 
Randomly select 23% of
2003 respondents
Transcription
166 university students
Transcription
Fairon and Paumier
3,200 contributors
Forwarding
treasuremytext15
Search the SMS from
the website
Rettie 
32 contributors
Not mentioned
25 undergraduates
Transcription
University
family and friends
Not mentioned
University students and
Not mentioned
Deumert and Oscar
Masinyana 
22 young adults
Transcription, Forwarding
Hutchby and Tanna
30 young professionals
(20-35 years old)
Transcription
Walkowska 
200 contributors
Forwarding, Software
Zelenkauskaite
Audiences of a iTV program
Online SMS archives
Tagg 
16 family and friends
Transcription
Elvis 
French, etc.
university
and lecturers
Forwarding
Barasa 
Kiswahili,
university
and 37 young professionals
Forwarding
Bach and Gunnarsson 
Swedish, English, etc.
11 contributors
Bodomo ∗
English, Chinese
87 youngsters16
Transcription
Real volunteers
Not mentioned
Sotillo 
59 participants
D¨urscheid
Stark ∗
French, etc
2,627 volunteers
Forwarding
Lexander 
15 young people
Transcription
Elizondo 
12 volunteers
Transcription
Tao Chen, Min-Yen Kan
serve as a reference dataset. Several strategies were used in our collection process to achieve
these goals.
First, we did not restrict our collection to any speciﬁc topics, to encourage diversity
among the messages. Also we did not limit to known contributors, but instead tried to diversify contributor backgrounds to fulﬁll the ﬁrst aim of making contributor demographics
similar to the general texting population. We used three different technical methods to collect SMS: 1) simple transcription of an SMS into a collection web site, 2) exporting of SMS
directly from phone to a ﬁle for submission, and 3) uploading lists of SMS as an email draft,
for editing and eventual submission via email initiated by the contributor. The latter two collection strategies also favor the collection of whole SMS streams during an interval, favoring
an unbiased collection of messages. They also collect the messages as-is from the phone’s
memory, minimizing the chance of transcription or entry errors, satisfying the second aim.
To achieve the third aim, we created a program (discussed below) to automatically replace
any identiﬁers and sensitive data with placeholders and to encrypt identiﬁable metadata with
each SMS. With these minor modiﬁcations, contributor’s privacy issues are molliﬁed and allow us to release the corpus to the general public. Finally, to ensure that the corpus satisﬁes
our fourth aim of being a viable reference corpus, we release archived, static versions of our
continually-growing corpus on a monthly basis. In the following, we present these strategies
in more detail.
3.1 SMS Collection Requirements
We did not restrict contributors to send only SMS on certain topics. This helps to keep
the collected messages representative of actual content , and diversify the
corpus in content. Moreover, we required contributors to ﬁll out a demographic survey about
their background (e.g., age, gender, city, country), texting habits (input method, number of
SMS sent daily, years of using SMS) and information about their phones (brand, model and
whether it is a smartphone or not). Such answers form a proﬁle associated with the bulk of
the SMSes collected in our corpus, which we feel can facilitate sociolinguistics studies.
We did, however, require that the submitted messages be personal, sent messages only.
The “sent-message” restriction is required for two important reasons. Ethically speaking,
the submission of received messages is disallowed as the consent of the sender is not guaranteed, and may violate the trust and rights of the original sender. Technically speaking, as
we also aim to have as complete demographics on the SMSes collected, we would also be
unable to contact the senders to have them complete the same demographic survey, which
makes received messages even less appealing to collect. The “personal” restriction means
the messages are typed by the contributors themselves and not of artiﬁcial or commercial nature, or chain messages to be forwarded (e.g., blessings, jokes, quotes) that may be available
on the Internet.
3.2 Source of Contributors
We aim to create a corpus which reﬂects the general characteristics of English and Chinese
SMS messages, to be used for a wide variety of studies. Therefore, contributors are expected
to have diverse backgrounds, of a wide range of ages, and living in various geographic
location. As crowdsourcing methods pull from a variety of sources, we deemed this strategy
as suitable for SMS collection.
Creating a Live, Public Short Message Service Corpus: The NUS SMS Corpus
Probably the most well known crowdsourcing platform is Amazon’s Mechanical Turk
(henceforth, MTurk), which allows users to publish tasks and for the members of the general
public to do the tasks, usually for a nominal fee. The use of MTurk as a crowdsourcing
technique has been widely documented in the computer science literature. It is also an ideal
place for conducting our English SMS collection. We also published a few tasks in another
mechanized labor site, ShortTask18, to diversify the background of contributors. Considering
its similarity to MTurk and the limited usage in our current collection methods, we do not
discuss it further in this paper.
A demographic survey of MTurk workers (known colloquially as Turkers) conducted by
 reveals that the respondents are from 66 countries with a wide distribution
in age and education levels, but that the majority of them are from English-speaking countries (46.8% American and 34.0% Indian). However, the study also suggests the scarcity
of Chinese workers, which has also been validated by researchers – who have pointed out that there are few Chinese speaking Turkers and
thus difﬁcult to recruit. We also performed a pilot study in MTurk, publishing two batches
of tasks to collect Chinese SMS messages, but we received few submissions, validating the
earlier reports of shortage of Chinese workers. So while MTurk is a good platform for collecting English SMS, and we have to ﬁnd a more suitable platform for gathering Chinese
In China, the same crowdsourcing form of mechanized labor goes by the name of
“witkey” (威客, W¯ei K`e in pinyin) , short for “key of wisdom”, described as using the wisdom of the masses to solve problems. Among such Chinese websites, Zhubajie19 currently
stands out for its dominant market share (over 50%) and huge workforce (over 50 million)20.
Zhabajie also categorizes tasks within its own ontology, and one speciﬁc category relates to
SMS (more details in section 5). Therefore, we chose Zhubajie as the crowdsourcing platform for collecting Chinese SMS.
Besides anonymous workers in MTurk, ShortTask and Zhubajie, we also exploit our local potential contributors in Singapore. English and Chinese are two of the ofﬁcial languages
of Singapore, making it an ideal place to recruit contributors for our corpus collection. We recruited contributors by emailing students in our department. They were requested to submit
either English or Chinese SMS. Participants from all three above sources were reimbursed
a small sum of money for their contributions.
Finally, we also wanted to explore whether people would be willing to contribute SMSes
purely for the sake of science (without remuneration). To test this, we sent email invitations
to Internet communities of linguists and mobile phone owners. These communities comprised of the well-known corpora-list21 (an international mailing list on text corpora for
research and commercial study), corpus4u (a Chinese corpora forum), 52nlp22 (a Chinese
collaborative blog in natural language processing23), and two Chinese popular mobile phone
forums – hiapk24 and gfan 25.
18 
19 
20 According to the China Witkey Industrial White Paper conducted by iResearch 
iresearch.com.cn
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
Tao Chen, Min-Yen Kan
3.3 Technical methods
Our collection methods can be categorized into three separate methods of collection. We
want our methods to be simple and convenient for the potential contributor and allow us to
collect SMS accurately without transcription errors.
– Web-based Transcription. The simplest collection method is transcribing messages
from phone. We designed a web page for contributors to input their messages. Contributors were asked to preserve the original spelling, spaces and omissions of SMS, and
standardized emoticons by following a transcription code table of our design (e.g., any
simple smiling emoticon should be rendered as “:)”).
As it is simple to implement, we adopted this transcription method as the collection
method we used in our pilot, when we restarted our collection in 2010. We published a
series of small tasks in MTurk to collect Chinese and English SMS, to test the waters and
reﬁne problems with our instruction set. However, when reviewing the submitted messages before Turker payment, we found a serious problem: a high rate of cheating. Some
of the English Turkers had just typed messages like blessings, jokes, friendship, quote
that were verbatim copies of ones that were publicly available in some SMS websites.
These messages would not be representative of personally-sent messages, as required
in the task’s documentation. For the Chinese SMS, it was apparent that some English
speakers pretended qualify as Chinese speakers, copying Chinese sentences from Internet websites or completing the task without actually submitting any content. For both
languages, we spent a non-trivial amount manpower (about 3.5 hours for 70 English
submissions, and half an hour for 29 Chinese submissions) to inspect such messages, to
validate the submissions as original, checking against identical or very similar messages
publicly available the web. For our pilot tasks, our rejection rate of English and Chinese
messages was 42.9% and 31.0%, respectively – clearly suboptimal considering the time
and effort needed to review submitted SMSes and the potential ill-will generated with
Turkers who performed our tasks but whom we deemed as cheating.
A ﬁnal problem is that transcription is prone to typos and deliberate corrections, and
discourages contributors from inputting a lot of messages, since the re-typing is tedious.
From these pilot tasks, we learned that we needed better collection methods that ensured
message accuracy and demanded less validation.
– SMS Export. With supporting software, some mobile devices can export received or
sent SMS as ﬁles in various formats such as TXT, CSV, XML, HTML. This capability
allows us to deﬁne this second collection method, SMS Exporting. It involves two steps.
First, contributors export SMS from phone as a readable archive, and optionally, censor
and delete SMS that they do not want to contribute. Second, contributors upload the
archive and take a web-based demographic survey. We recruited contributors via both
crowdsourcing websites and by regular, email invitations. Our uniﬁed (for both emailed
invitations and the crowdsourcing tasks) description asked contributors to participate
if they can export messages as a readable ﬁle (e.g., CSV, XLS). While such exporting
capabilities are becoming more prevalent, not all phone models have such software.
Even when available, it is not always free nor easy to use. Noting these difﬁculties, we
thus prepared notes to ease contributors’ potential difﬁculties for popular platforms.
Demographics from our web-based transcription task ﬁelded in MTurk shows that 60%
of English SMS workers and 47% of Chinese SMS workers were Nokia owners. This
phenomenon is in accord with Nokia’s large market share and penetration in China and
India (74% of English SMS workers in the pilot task are from India). Fortunately, Nokia
Creating a Live, Public Short Message Service Corpus: The NUS SMS Corpus
provides the Nokia PC Suite26, a free software package for SMS export and backup via
computer, which works on most Nokia models and meets our requirements. In the task
description, we therefore linked to the download site for Nokia PC Suite and we offered
a webpage-based tutorial on how to export SMS using the software.
Besides the advantage of high accuracy, and ease of batch submissions of SMS as mentioned in Section 2, SMS Export greatly helps us in validation. Since the archive has
a speciﬁed format – which includes the telephone numbers of the sender and receiver,
the send timestamp of the message – it signiﬁcantly lowers the barrier for submitting
valid data and signiﬁcantly raises the barrier for submitting false data. For this reason,
we expend signiﬁcantly less effort in validating SMS submitted by this process.
– SMS Upload. With the growing popularity of smartphones, which have added functionality, we felt it would be a good idea to implement mobile applications (“apps”) that
can contribute SMS directly. At the current juncture, we have implemented an app for
the Android platform. Inspired by another app, SMS Backup, which is an open-source
Android app for backing up SMS to Gmail27, we adapted the code to create a new app,
which we called SMS Collection for Corpus, as a pilot software for smartphones. We
have released it as a free application in Google’s Android Market28. Figure 1 shows a
snapshot of our app.
SMS Collection for Corpus works by uploading sent SMSes from the Android device to
the user’s Gmail29 as a draft email. To allow the user to censor and delete message that
she does not deem suitable for the corpus, the app purposely does not send the messages
directly to our collection web site. We do not receive the SMSes for the corpus until
contributors act to send out the draft email to us. The app also automatically anonymizes
the metadata (telephone numbers) and replaces sensitive identiﬁers with placeholders.
The details of the anonymization process is described later in this section.
As with the SMS Export collection method, it reduces the possibility of cheating and
preserves the originality of messages. One advantage over SMS Export is its convenience; as there is no need to connect to a computer. Most importantly, its automatic
anonymization makes contributors more conﬁdent about our strategy in privacy protection. For SMS collected in the other two methods, we employ a similar anonymization
process, but after receiving the original SMS; in this method the anonymization procedure is run on the client smartphone, even before it reaches our collection server.
To the best of our knowledge, SMS Collection for Corpus was the ﬁrst application designed to collect a corpus from original sources. It is also easy to adapt the software
to support internationalization, so that the user interface can support new languages for
potential submitters in other languages. In July 2011, we did exactly this, we extended
the UI (user interface) to support prompts in Dutch, to facilitate the SoNaR30 project
language corpus project, to assist them to gather SMS in Netherlands.
26 Currently being replaced by Nokia Suite 
27 
28 
29 Hence a Gmail account is a prerequisite to this collection method.
30 
Tao Chen, Min-Yen Kan
Fig. 1: A screen capture of the SMS Collection for Corpus mobile application.
3.4 Anonymization
Since SMS often contains both personal and conﬁdential information, such as telephone
numbers and email addresses, we need to anonymize these data when included in submitted
SMS. We need to do so systematically in order to guarantee privacy when publishing the
corpus, as we want to make the messages publicly available without restriction on access or
For messages collected by SMS Export and SMS Upload, the SMS metadata – telephone
number of sender and receiver, and send time – is also collected. However, for the sender
and recipient SMS metadata, we need to replace the original data with a unique identiﬁer for
each phone number so that privacy can be maintained, while preserving the fact that multiple
messages linked to the original, same source are attributed correctly in the anonymized
versions. To solve this problem, we adopt DES encryption to create a one-way enciphering
of the phone numbers, which replace the originals in the corpus.
For the SMS message body, sensitive data include dates, times, decimal amounts, and
numbers with more than one digit (telephone numbers, bank accounts, street numbers, etc.),
email addresses, URLs, and IP addresses. Privacy for these types of data is paramount, and
as such, we adopt a stricter standard in dealing with sensitive data in the message itself.
Such information is programmatically captured using regular expressions and replaced by
the corresponding semantic placeholders, as shown in Table 2. For example, any detected
email address will be replaced by the code ⟨EMAIL⟩. This process gives a level of protection against publishing sensitive data. While we remove such conﬁdential information, in
general it is impossible to guarantee a contributor’s privacy with only a simple set of textual
regular expressions. In particular, as person names are varied, language-speciﬁc and often
confusable with common words, we do not try to remove or replace personal names.
All contributors were informed about the intended publishing of the resultant corpus,
its public availability and the above anonymization procedure. This process also aided our
internal review board application for exemption, as it was deemed that through this method,
that our collection procedure did not collect personally identiﬁable information and was
granted exemption from full review. However, the contributors may still not be entirely
Creating a Live, Public Short Message Service Corpus: The NUS SMS Corpus
clear about the automatic anonymization procedure after reading the description. To eliminate their uncertainty and skepticism, we need a straightforward and compelling way to
show the anonymization in action. As we mentioned before, our Android app integrates
the anonymization process internally, so potential submissions can be previewed as a draft
email before sending the SMS batch to the collection server. This manner allows the actual
collection data to be previewed, and more likely to convince the contributor of the veracity
of the project and collection process.
Inspired by this, we created and deployed the website for the corpus project in January
2011, at the very beginning of our data collection process. The website allows users to
browse the current version of the corpus. In calls to contributors, we also link to this live
website so that potential contributors can view the scope, volume and content of the current
corpus. We feel this is a strong factor in both lowering the anxiety and reluctance of potential
submitters and raising awareness of the corpus in general.
Table 2: Replacement Codes
Original Content
Replaced Code
Email Address
 
 
IP Address
19/01/2011
Integer over 1 Digit Long
Hyphen-Delimited Number
12-4234-212
Alphanumeric Number
3.5 Live Corpus
A few words about the notion of a live corpus. We feel that a live corpus is a emerging
concept, in which the corpus grows, is maintained and released on regular, short intervals.
A truly live corpus connotes that as soon as a new text is created, it becomes part of the
distributed corpus. Such an interpretation can cause replicability problems, as different researchers may use different versions of corpus. Due to this problem, we have chosen to
release a new version of the corpus on a regular, monthly basis. This strategy of having
regular updates promotes interested parties to stay up to date with the corpus developments,
while allowing the easy identiﬁcation of a particular version, for papers that wish to use the
corpus for comparative benchmarking. The release cycle further helps to demonstrate the
trend of our gradual achievement in SMS collection, which, in turn, also may spur more
contributors to help in our project. It also allows us to batch corpus administrative duties,
such as proofchecking submitted SMS and re-computing demographic statistics, which we
describe later.
Tao Chen, Min-Yen Kan
4 Properties and Statistics
Given the variety of methods in our current corpus collection, and its previous history within
another former project within our group, it is worthwhile to describe some properties of the
resultant SMS collection thus far.
The original corpus, as collected and documented in How and Kan , was collected
by an honors year project student, Yijue How, over the course of her project from the fall
of 2003 to the spring of 2004. The main collection method was by SMS transcription to a
publicly-accessible website, largely from volunteers that authors contacted directly, hence
most volunteers were Singaporeans in the young adult age range. A few contributors gave a
large set of messages directly from the phones, foregoing the transcription process. This led
to a distinctly bimodal message distribution of having a small “head” of few contributors that
submitted many messages that represented depth in the collection, as well as a long “tail” of
many contributors that submitted less than 100 messages (The transcription website allowed
the submission of 10 messages at a go). Each contributor was assigned an identiﬁer such
that the number of messages by each contributor could be tracked. Further details about the
demographics of the collection are available from How’s complete thesis .
We embarked on our current SMS collection project in October 2010. At the time of
writing , we have collected almost 60,000 messages, with the number still
growing. In this remainder of section, we give statistics on the current corpus, the demographics of contributors, furnish a cost comparison of the major three sources we used and
wrap up with a discussion on matters related to the corpus release.
4.1 Speciﬁcation
As of October 2011, our corpus contains 28,724 English messages and 29,100 Chinese messages. In total, 116 contributors contributed English SMS and on average, each individual
submitted 247.6 messages. In comparison, the total number of Chinese contributors is 515,
with an average contribution rate 56.5 messages per person. Detailed histograms showing
the number of messages contributed per contributor are given in Figure 2. Similar to the previous project, both histograms show a peak at the very left side, meaning that only a small
proportion of people contributed the bulk of the messages – “the short head”. Speciﬁcally,
54.3% of English contributors submitted less than 30 messages. This ﬁgure is 75.7% for
Chinese contributors, which explains why the per contributor Chinese SMS ﬁgure is much
less than its English counterpart.
The cause of this difference is related to our collection methods. As discussed previously, due to its simplicity, Web-based Transcription is an effective way to obtain mass
participation but makes it difﬁcult to collect large amounts of SMS from a single contributor, while both the SMS Export and SMS Upload methods have the opposite characteristic.
We ﬁxed the number of SMS per submission in our Web-based Transcription method to 2
or 5 English messages, and 10 or 20 Chinese messages. A small number was used in the
initial experiment for exploring a good ratio between monetary reward and workload (number of messages). Using MTurk, we published two batches of tasks to recruit 40 workers
to follow our Web-based Transcription to collect English SMS. Unfortunately, due to the
resulting high level of cheating and effort expended in veriﬁcation, we felt the utility of this
method was not tenable, so we stopped using this collection method for English SMS. In
contrast, the Web-based Transcription was much more effective in Zhubajie, perhaps due to
the unavailability of sources to cheat on the task. Up to now, we have retained the use of
Creating a Live, Public Short Message Service Corpus: The NUS SMS Corpus
Web-based Transcription in Zhubajie for the resulting high-quality SMS. This leads to the
ascribed difference in demographics in recruiting more Chinese contributors with a resulting
smaller per capita ﬁgure.
Table 3 demonstrates the number of messages collected by each of our methods. We see
that 98.3% (28,244) of English messages and 45.9% (13,347) of Chinese messages were
collected by SMS Export and SMS Upload methods, which are free of typos and contain
metadata (ownerships of sender and receiver, and the timestamp of when it was sent). Table 4 then shows the number of SMS and contributors per source: for the English SMS
39.3% (11,275) were from workers in MTurk, 58.1% (16,701) were from local contributors,
1.0% (280) were from workers in ShortTask and the remaining 1.6% (468) were from the Internet community. For the Chinese SMS, workers from Zhubajie contributed 81.7% (23,789)
of the SMS, local and Internet contributors submitted 12.2% (3,544) and 5.9% (1,712), respectively. Currently, only 55 Chinese SMS were contributed by users from MTurk, about
Fig. 2: Contributors and SMS Distribution
Table 3: Number of SMS by Collection Method
English SMS
Chinese SMS
Web-based Transcription
SMS Export
SMS Upload
Tao Chen, Min-Yen Kan
Table 4: Number of SMS and Contributors by Source
English SMS
English Contributors
Chinese SMS
Chinese Contributors
Internet Community
4.2 Demographics
Aside from submitting SMS, all contributors were required to ﬁll out an online demographic
survey about their background (e.g., age, gender, country, native speaker or not, etc.), texting
habits (input method, number of SMS sent daily, years of experience using SMS) and their
phone (brand, model, smartphone or not). Such answers form a user proﬁle for the contributor which is linked to each of their contributed SMS. We accept and report the data for the
demographic survey as-is, assuming that contributors answered the questions to the best of
their knowledge.
99.5% of English messages and 93.8% of Chinese messages thus have associated user
proﬁles. The incompleteness arises from the separation of submitting SMS and ﬁlling out
the survey in the two collection modes of SMS Export and SMS Upload. Some contributors
submitted the messages but later did not do the survey. The phenomenon was more prevalent
in the Chinese Zhubajie. During our initial usage pilots of Zhubajie, we approved contributors’ SMS immediately, and trusted them to do the survey later on. To stem this problem,
we later changed our protocol to only approve the task after receiving both SMSes and the
demographic survey. We also had updated the survey once, adding some questions to reveal
more detail on some aspects. The user proﬁles formed from the ﬁrst version of the survey
thus lacks answers to a few questions. To make all sets of the demographic data comparable,
we inserted “unknown” values to these missing questions as well as to questions that were
skipped by contributors.
While it is not possible to conclusively say anything about the demographics of SMS
senders in general, our demographic survey allows us limited insight into the characteristics
of our corpus’ contributors. The confounding factor is that our contributors come largely
from crowdsourcing sources, so both the self-selection of participating in crowdsourcing
and of SMS use contribute to the demographic patterns we discuss below.
We report both the country of origin, gender and age of contributors, subdivided by the
English or Chinese portion of the current corpus. Our English SMS contributors are from 15
countries (in decreasing order of number of contributors): India, USA, Singapore, UK, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Malaysia, China, Sri Lanka, Canada, France, Serbia, Spain, Macedonia
and Philippines. 64.7% of them are English native speakers. The top three countries are Singapore (46.9% of SMS), India (28.2%) and USA (13.5%). Our Chinese SMS contributors
are from 4 countries: China, Singapore, Malaysia and Taiwan. However, the messages are
overwhelming from China: China mainlanders contributed 99% of the messages, resulting
in 99.8% of messages originating from native speakers. As for gender, for the English portion of the corpus, 16.1% come from females, 71.1% from males, and the remaining 12.8%
is unknown. For the Chinese portion, 34.3% come from females, 59.4% come from males,
and 6.3% is unknown. The age distribution shows that the majority of contributors in both
portions of the corpus are young adults, as displayed in Figure 3. In particular, contribu-
Creating a Live, Public Short Message Service Corpus: The NUS SMS Corpus
tors aged at 21–25, taking up 39.7% of English and 56.7% of Chinese SMS contributors,
respectively, make the biggest contribution to our corpus, submitting 56.9% of English and
66.0% of Chinese SMS respectively. This may be reﬂective of the demographics of crowdsourcing workers in both MTurk and Zhubajie . There
is an even higher skew towards the 16–20 age group among English contributors than the
Chinese counterpart, largely due to the fact that 58.1% English SMS originate from local
contributors, namely the students in our university.
Fig. 3: Age Distribution by SMS
Our survey also reveals other pertinent details on the texting habits and phone models
of contributors. We display the distribution of contributors’ years of using SMS in Figure 4.
The largest English SMS portion lies in 5–10 years (44.8% of contributors), and the second
largest portion is 3–5 years (31.9%). Similarly, most Chinese contributors have used SMS
for 3–5 years (31.3%) and 5–10 years (30.7%). This phenomenon is in accord with the
age distribution; that young adults represent the majority of the contributors. We may also
posit that more of our Chinese contributors have acquired their SMS–capable phone more
recently than our English contributors, as we see a smaller proportion of users in the 5–10
year range.
The distribution of the frequency of sending SMS is presented in Figure 5. We observe
an interesting phenomenon that there is a gradually increasing trend – from 18.0% (2–5),
18.1% (5–10), to 31.0% (10–50) – for English contributors, while for Chinese contributors it
decreases – from 32.2% (2–5), 26.0% (5–10), to 22.1% (10–50). Moreover, for the English
portion, 17.2% of contributor send more than 50 SMS everyday. We posit that the larger
proportion of English contributors who SMS more than 50 times a day may indicate that
some use it to carry on conversations (thus needing more messages) rather than for sending
one-off messages.
Input method differences were also revealed in our survey. Three common input methods, multi-tap, predictive and full keyboard, account for 41.4%, 30.2% and 17.2% of English
SMS contributors respectively. The remaining 10.3% of contributors used other input methods. Chinese input methods also largely consist of three input methods, pinyin, wubi and
Tao Chen, Min-Yen Kan
bihua; these account for 86.0%, 3.9% and 4.3% of contributors’ usage. As displayed in Figure 6, the majority of contributors own a Nokia phone, which accounts for 48.3% of English
SMS contributors and 49.7% of Chinese SMS contributors. However, these ﬁgures cannot
fairly present the general popularity of phone brands, for the reason that we only provide
links to Nokia utility software for SMS Export collection method. In addition, 37.1% of
English SMS contributors, and 44.9% of Chinese SMS contributors own a smartphone. This
question was not included in the ﬁrst version of survey used in MTurk, which leads to smartphone information is unknown for 48.3% of English SMS contributors and 7.8% of Chinese
SMS contributors.
For more in-depth analysis beyond the scope of our article, we invite you to visit the
corpus website, where the full, per question answers for our demographic data is available.
Fig. 4: Contributors’ Experience in Using SMS
As MTurk, ShortTask and Zhubajie are crowdsourcing sites where participants are motivated
by proﬁt, we compensated contributors monetarily. The same was true for the local collections that we ran. For the calls for participation via the Internet to linguistic, text corpus
and phone manufacturer’s communities, we felt that their self-motivation to see the corpus’
success would be a strong motivator to participate. Thus for these communities, we did not
provide any compensations.
Table 5 shows the reward scheme used in our MTurk collection runs using the SMS
Export and SMS Upload methodologies. For example, 400 messages will be rewarded with
$4.50 in total with $4.00 base payment and $0.50 bonus. In ShortTask, we only published
tasks using Web-based Transcription method, with the reward of $0.08 for 10 messages
per submission. Since Zhubajie was a new venue for crowdsourcing, we tuned our rewards
scheme based on a pilot (as shown in Tables 6 and 7). Our pilot showed that workers were
Creating a Live, Public Short Message Service Corpus: The NUS SMS Corpus
Fig. 5: Contributors’ Frequency of Sending SMS Daily
Fig. 6: Contributors’ Phone Brand
very eager to participate, thus we decreased the reward amount in our subsequent runs,
which did not dampen workers’ enthusiasm for completing the contribution tasks. For the
four batches of English (2 batches) and Chinese (remaining two batches) SMS Web-based
Transcription, we instead aimed for breadth of participants. In each task, we recruited 20
workers with $0.10 as the reward for individual workers. Finally, we also recruited contributors locally, whose reward scheme is displayed in Table 8.
Tao Chen, Min-Yen Kan
Since the labor cost of collecting additional SMS over the ﬁrst few is small (arguably
even negligible in the Upload and Export methodologies), we incentivize additional submitted messages with a bonus reward, which is based on the number of messages that exceed
the base range. For all reward schemes, the bonus amount diminishes with the amount of
additional messages submitted, with a maximum payment capped to allow us a measure
of budgetary control. Table 9 shows the cost comparison between sources. We spent 92.30
US dollars in MTurk, 2.94 US dollars in ShortTask, 868.50 Chinese yuan in Zhubajie (all
inclusive of commission fees) and 340.00 Singapore dollars for our local collection. Standardizing all currency amounts to US dollars31 allows us to compute the cost per message
for a clear comparison. In a nutshell, local collection is the most expensive method, while
crowdsourcing remains an effective and economical method to collect our corpus data. We
also note that Zhubajie is a little cheaper than MTurk, but that it may only be applicable
to certain languages (i.e., Chinese). Due to our very limited usage of ShortTask, it doesn’t
make much sense to compare cost in ShortTask with other sources.
Table 5: Reward Scheme in MTurk
Total Number
Base Reward
Table 6: Reward Scheme 1 in Zhubajie
Total Number
Base Reward
Table 7: Reward Scheme 2 in Zhubajie
Total Number
Base Reward
4.4 Towards a publicly-available live corpus
Our corpus, consisting of both messages and associated user proﬁles, has been released
publicly since February 201132. To achieve our goal of making an accessible dataset, we
31 On 23 October 2011, 1 SGD = 0.7848 USD, 1 CNY = 0.1567 USD.
32 
Creating a Live, Public Short Message Service Corpus: The NUS SMS Corpus
Table 8: Reward Scheme for Local Collection
Total Number
Base Reward
Table 9: Cost Comparison
Total Cost
Cost Per Msg
USD 0.00815
USD 0.0105
CNY 868.50
CNY 0.0365 (∼USD 0.0057)
SGD 0.0168 (∼USD 0.0132)
have pursued an open license, public domain development methodology that involved ﬁrst
the convincing and later the blessing of our university’s intellectual property department.
For the aim of making a general purpose dataset, we have tried to incorporate a balanced
approach for user proﬁling; by requiring contributors to answer a set of demographics and
including them with the dataset. So as to make the corpus as large as possible, we incorporate
all messages that we collected through all of the methodologies used, although this means
varying levels of quality among subportions of the corpus (e.g., some SMS may not have an
associated user proﬁle).
To make the corpus convenient for researchers to access, we also pioneer the distribution
of the corpus both as an XML ﬁle as well as a database dump in MySQL. Potential SMS
researchers or contributors can also browse and download the corpus on the directly on
the corpus website, and access dataset statistics, all without the need to handle the raw
corpus ﬁles or compute the statistics themselves. Website access also shows the effect of
the anonymization processes discussed earlier, so that potential contributors can feel more
secure knowing how their messages will likely appear.
Our statistics help prospective users grasp a general understanding about the demographic and representativeness of our corpora. The corpus as well as statistics will be updated on a monthly basis, since our collection is still in progress. Moreover, the SMS can
be directly browsed on our website, which provides a convenient way to learn about our
corpus without the need to process raw ﬁles and helps potential contributors to understand
our anonymization strategy by viewing other’s messages.
5 Discussion
We now comment on three open questions surrounding the crowdsourcing of our public
corpus of SMS. First, what do workers think about contributing SMS to a public corpus?
Second, how does the Chinese crowdsourcing site of Zhubajie compare with Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk? Third, as some crowdsourcing is motivated by altruism, how possible is
it to collect SMS without offering any monetary reward?
Tao Chen, Min-Yen Kan
5.1 Reactions to our Collection Efforts
The corpus was collected under our university’s institutional review board (IRB) exemption
policy and important identiﬁers in the corpus have been replaced by placeholder tokens for
deidentiﬁcation purposes. However, our experience through on this project over the last year
has shown us that the privacy issues surrounding the collection of SMS is still very much a
concern. Even among our research group, members were largely unwilling to donate SMS
even with the safeguards in place. This may have been partially due to fact that the authors
need to manually review the submitted SMS, and that the review process may identify the
contributor. This fear was further validated in our local collection drive, where potential
contributors worried that their friends may review the corpus and identify their messages,
especially through the mention of certain names in SMS (Personal names are not replaced
by any code as given in 2, as many personal names are also common words as well).
Privacy concerns were also paramount in our crowdsourcing work with Amazon Mechanical Turk, and ultimately caused our account with MTurk to be closed. Amazon sent us
several notices that our tasks violated their terms of service. Though private correspondence
with Panagiotis Ipeirotis, whose research involves detecting spam in MTurk, we found out
our tasks were routinely classiﬁed by turkers as a spam or phishing task, despite our attempts
to give credibility to the project through the creation of the corpus webpage and browsing
interface33. Unfortunately, even with repeated attempts to contact Amazon to clarify the nature of our notice of breach of service, our MTurk account was suspended without further
detail from Amazon.
Similar concerns surfaced on our calls for SMS contribution in the Chinese realm. Notably on the mobile phone forums that we posted our call for participation, we encountered
a few skeptic replies. For these forums, we had advertised our Android SMS uploader application, with the appropriate links to an explanation of the project and our corpus’ web
page. Several posters voiced their concern that the software might be malware looking to
steal private information (especially given the inclusive permissions set that our application
needs access to). These were valid concerns as some previous mobile application recommendations did turn out to be malware, so readers were being cautious before installing any
5.2 Zhubajie compared to MTurk
Zhubajie is one of a growing number of middleware websites in China offering crowdsourced labor. Forecasted online transactions on the site are expected to surpass 500 million
CNY (∼78 million USD) in 2011 alone34.
As discussed, we found Zhubajie to be a good platform to recruit Chinese contributors.
However, unlikely its western counterparts, Zhubajie, as well as other Chinese “witkey”
websites, has not been widely exploited for research data collection in computer science
community. Most exiting academic work focus on the business and economic research,
studying the user behavior ,
analyzing the participation structure , exploring the anti-cheating mechanism , and investigating the business model .
33 In fact, these were some of Ipeirotis’ suggestions to ameliorate the problem, so credit is due to him.
34 
Creating a Live, Public Short Message Service Corpus: The NUS SMS Corpus
For these reasons, we feel it would be useful to give a more comprehensive overview of
Zhubajie, focusing on ﬁve aspects: its conceptualization, characteristics of typical tasks,
cost, completion time and result quality. We compare Zhubajie against the now familiar
Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) when appropriate.
– Concepts. While both Zhubajie and MTurk can be characterized as mechanized labor,
to be more accurate, Zhubajie’s form of crowdsourcing originates from “witkey” – an
abbreviation of the phrase “the key of wisdom”. The concept of Witkey was put forward
by Liu in 2005, and later published in Liu et al. , where its core concept was to
trade knowledge, experience and skill as merchandise.
– Tasks. MTurk focuses on tasks that take a small or moderate amount of time to complete, while most tasks of Zhubajie require expertise and can take longer to complete.
Designing logos, software development and revising resum´e are typical Zhubajie tasks.
Zhubajie also classiﬁes tasks into a detailed hierarchical classiﬁcation system with major 18 top categories, and 6–22 secondary categories per top-level category. It requires
requesters to specify a secondary category for each task. This is unlike MTurk, which
eschews task classiﬁcation altogether. Zhubajie’s detailed browsable task hierarchy re-
ﬂects its Chinese base, as the Chinese population often prefers selection and browsing
over searching (as browsing only requires clicking but searching requires inputting Chinese characters, which is still somewhat difﬁcult)35.
This task classiﬁcation leads to different service characteristics in Zhubajie and MTurk.
MTurk provides keyword search and 12 different sorting options for results display
(newest/oldest tasks, most/fewest available tasks, highest/lowest reward, etc.). The survey results of Chilton et al. shows that the newest and most available tasks are
the most popular sorting strategies employed by workers, and that ﬁrst two pages of
result listings are most important. Ipeirotis pointed out that if a task is not executed quickly enough, it will fall off these two preferred result listings and is likely to
be uncompleted and forgotten.
This is in accord with our experience in trying to recruit workers. In Zhubajie, even 10
days after publishing the task, we still received new submissions from workers. This is
contrary to our experience with MTurk, where we did not receive many new submissions after the ﬁrst two days. Due to the detailed task hierarchy in Zhubajie, potential
workers can easily target speciﬁc tasks matching their expertise and interests, ameliorating the recency-listing concerns prevalent in MTurk. A few outstanding workers, based
on reputation and total earnings, are also featured as top talents for each task category.
Requesters can invite and recruit talents to fulﬁll the task. These properties all help aid
matching workers to tasks in comparison to MTurk.
– Cost. The demand of expertise in Zhubajie also impacts the payment distributions in two
websites. In MTurk, the lowest payment is just USD $0.01 and 90% of tasks pay less
than $0.10 . Compared to the tiny rewards offered in MTurk, the rewards in Zhubajie are signiﬁcantly higher, with about $0.15 (CNY 1.00) as the lowest reward and about $182 (CNY 1181) as the average reward for the year 2010. Also, though
both services make proﬁt by collecting commission fees, they differ as to whom the
commission is charged from: MTurk charges the requester 10%, but Zhubajie charges
the worker 20% commission. Furthermore, In Zhubajie, task rewards come in two ﬂavors: they can be set by requesters or they can be bid on by workers. In Zhubajie, these
are referred to as contract tasks and contest tasks, respectively. In this sense, our task
35 
Tao Chen, Min-Yen Kan
– and MTurk tasks in general – are thus contract tasks. For our SMS collection thus
far, Zhubajie has turned out to be more economical by 30.1%; we spent $0.0057 and
$0.00815 per message in Zhubajie and MTurk, respectively.
– Completion Time. Here we look at the task completion time with respect to collection
methodology. With the SMS Upload method, it took 2 full days to receive 3 English
submissions via MTurk; and worse, there were no submissions at all from Zhubajie.
This may be explained by the current low popularity of Android smartphones among
Chinese SMS contributors. In contrast, under the SMS Export collection method, we
received 16 Chinese submissions from Zhubajie in 40 days, and 27 English submissions
from MTurk in 50 days. The collection in this method was slow in both platforms.
Web-based Transcription offers the most telling demographic difference. Our MTurk
tasks took 2 days to complete, collecting 40 valid English submissions and 20 days
for 20 valid Chinese submissions (each submission having 2 or 5 individual SMSes). In
contrast, the same Chinese SMS task, when published to Zhubajie, usually took less than
30 minutes to complete to collect for 20 submissions. We ascribe the quick completion
in Zhubajie to two reasons. First, Zhubajie has a speciﬁc task category for SMS tasks
– the creative greetings category. This category typically asks workers to compose a
creative SMS and send it to bless a designated recipient (i.e., write a poem to wish
someone to get well soon), as it is uplifting in China to receive lots of blessing from
the general public. It is also a relatively popular category among workers for its short
completion time and low requirements for expertise. Second, compared to other tasks in
the creative blessing category, our task is easier, faster and more proﬁtable. Other tasks
require workers to design or craft a creative blessing and send it to an actual recipient
which incurs cost, but the payment is usually identical to ours.
– Quality has emerged as a key concern with crowdsourcing, and it is clear that this is a
concern for our task as well. MTurk employs several strategies to help requesters control
for quality: a requester can require certain qualiﬁcations based on the worker’s location
and approval rate, publishing a qualiﬁcation test prior to real task and blocking certain
poor workers from a task. To attract the maximal number of potential contributors, we
did not set any qualiﬁcations in MTurk. Zhubajie does not provide built-in quality control system. Tasks, when completed in either MTurk or Zhubajie, can be rejected by
the requester if it does not meet their criteria for a successful task. Table 10 shows our
approval rate of completed tasks for each collection method in the two crowdsourcing
As we have previously described the problems with Web-based Transcription (in that
contributors can enter anything they want, including SMS copied from other SMS sites
on the web), we expected this poorly-performing methodology to have the highest rejection rate. Surprising, in fact, it was quite the opposite: Web-based Transcription tasks
enjoyed a higher approval rate than the other methods, across both sites. We believe the
difference in ﬁnancial incentives of the methodologies explains this. While the payment
for Web-based Transcription was only US $0.10 in MTurk and CNY 1.00 in Zhubajie,
the payment of the other two methods can be as high as US $7.00 in MTurk and CNY
40.00 in Zhubajie. Intrigued by the high reward, some workers attempted to cheat on
these higher-yield methods. This validates ﬁndings by Mason and Watts , who
states that increased ﬁnancial compensation may not improve task quality, and sometimes may even result in poorer quality.
SMS Upload approval rates were also relatively better than those for SMS Export. Workers using SMS Upload needed to type a unique code generated by the mobile application,
which may discourage errant workers from cheating since they would have not known
Creating a Live, Public Short Message Service Corpus: The NUS SMS Corpus
how to generate the correct code without doing the task through the application. In contrast, the SMS Export method allowed contributors to upload any ﬁles (even those not
containing SMS at all), making it easier for potential cheaters to try their luck.
Finally, we judged the overall quality of work done by Zhubajie workers to be much
higher than that of MTurk. We attribute this to the open worker reputation system of
Zhubajie. In MTurk, the worker’s approval rate is the sole ﬁgure to judge whether a
worker’s work is good or bad. Zhubajie stores comments on workers as well as calculating a positive comment rate (similar to MTurk’s approval rate) and a reputation rank
which is based on earned income. In some cases, if many workers compete for one task,
the requester can pick over the potential, qualiﬁed workers based on these positive comment and reputation rank. Finally, Zhubajie’s administrators will warn serious cheaters
and even lock their account. MTurk metes out no ofﬁcial punishment for cheaters (unlike
our experience for requesters), and requesters have to manually blacklist poor workers
in their tasks.
Table 10: Approval Rate Comparison
Collection Method
Web-based Transcription
SMS Export
SMS Upload
No submissions
5.3 Altruism as a Possible Motivator
Mechanized labor is just one possible form of crowdsourcing that can result in workers
performing a task. There have been a number of surveys on crowdsourcing, including a
recent survey on ﬁnding optimal the method for crowdsourcing corpora and annotations
Wang et al. . Are other, non-proﬁt oriented approaches feasible for collecting sensitive
data? Could altruistic motivational factors work?
To answer this question, we emailed calls for participation to the natural language and
corpora community36 for voluntary, non-compensated contributions of SMS. This was a
part of our methodology from the beginning as described earlier. Unfortunately, the results
were not promising. As shown in Table 4 of Section 4, we received only 5 anonymous
contributions, totalling 149 English and 236 Chinese SMS, respectively by these methods37.
Compared to the rest of the for-reward collection methods, this method was a failure, and
we do not recommend this method for collection in its current guise.
Our ﬁndings are contrary to the sms4science project, which succeeded in gathering a
large number of messages through pure voluntary contribution. Though a small portion of
contributors were randomly selected by lottery to win prizes38, we still deem their collection
method as a purely voluntary contribution, as there is no monetary compensation. However,
we note two key differences between our call and theirs. The sms4science project obtained
support from phone operators, to make it free for potential contributors to forward their
36 via the Corpora List, corpus4u forum, and the (Chinese) 52nlp blog.
37 From additional personal contacts, we obtained an additional 319 English and 1476 and Chinese SMS
respectively.
38 
Tao Chen, Min-Yen Kan
SMS to a service number. This lowers the difﬁculty of contributing messages as no software
installation or tedious export is necessary (but note it does destroy some message metadata that we can collect through our other methods). Probably more important was that the
sms4science project conducted large-scale publicity; its call for participation was broadcast
in the main national media including press, radio, television . For example, the Belgium project was reported in ﬁve newspapers and six websites within two weeks 39. For our project, due to the limited publicity
vehicles and technical constraints, attracting people to contribute SMS only for the sake of
science was difﬁcult.
Our appeal to the research community did not yield many SMS for the corpus, but did
give us further convictions that we were performing a necessary and useful task. Several
researchers supported our project by writing words of encouragement and sharing their personal difﬁculties with gathering SMS for research.
6 Conclusion
In order to enlarge our 2004 SMS corpus and keep up with the current technology trends,
we resurrected our SMS collection project in October 2010 as a live corpus for both English
and Mandarin Chinese SMS. Our aim in this revised collection are threefold: to make the
corpus 1) representative for general studies; 2) accurate with fewer transcription errors; 3)
released to the general domain, copyright-free for unlimited use; 4) useful to serve as a
reference dataset. To achieve these four goals, we adopt crowdsourcing strategies to recruit
contributors from a wide spectrum of sources, using a battery of methodologies to collect
the SMS. As SMS often contains sensitive personal data, privacy and anonymization issues
have been paramount and have inﬂuenced the resulting design of the collection methods and
the corpus data itself.
We are very encouraged by the results so far. As of the October 2011 version of the
corpus, we have collected 28,724 English SMS and 29,100 Chinese SMS, with a cost of
497 U.S. dollar equivalent and approximately 300 human hours of time (inclusive of the
Android app implementation, website creation and update). As the project is a live corpus
project, all of these ﬁgures are growing as the collection is a continuing effort. To the best
of our knowledge, our corpus is the largest English and Chinese SMS corpus in the public
domain. We hope our corpus will address the lack of publicly-available SMS corpora, and
enable comparative SMS related studies.
A novel aspect of our collection is the implementation of mobile phone applications for
collection. We adapted an SMS backup software to also serve as a platform for contributing SMS. It is the ﬁrst application for such purpose and is easily adapted for other SMS
collection purposes. We report on the use of the ﬁrst use of Chinese crowdsourcing (also
known as “Witkey”) for collecting corpora and have discussed the signiﬁcant differences
between Chinese and traditional crowdsourcing in the English-speaking world, as embodied by Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. Finally, we explored the possibility of calling for SMS
contribution without compensation, but found that altruistic motivation is not sufﬁcient for
collecting such data. Rather, our lessons learned indicate that large-scale publicity is the key
to success.
We continue to enlarge our SMS collection, as part of our interpretation of what a live
corpus project means. Given the importance of SMS in carrying personal communication in
39 
Creating a Live, Public Short Message Service Corpus: The NUS SMS Corpus
our society, and the low-cost methods we have found to collect message contents (suitably
scrubbed) and demographic data, we are encouraged to continue to fund this work internally,
to encompass more languages and a wider population of users. We also plan to explore other
SMS collection methods, such as an iOS (i.e., iPhone, iPad) application, and benchmark
their efﬁcacy against the methods we have analyzed in this article.
As for downstream use, with further funding, we may annotate the corpus (either automatically or manually) for part-of-speech, translation to other languages, or other semantic
markup. The resulting corpus may then be used in other natural language studies and applications (e.g., machine translation). Other downstream projects that we know of may also
make their annotations and additional collection of SMS available as collaborative or sister
projects to our NUS SMS corpus.
The corpus described in this paper is publicly available at our corpus website (http://
wing.comp.nus.edu.sg/SMSCorpus).
Acknowledgements We would like to thank many of our colleagues who have made valuable suggestions
on the SMS collection, including Jesse Prabawa Gozali, Ziheng Lin, Jun-Ping Ng, Yee Fan Tan, Aobo Wang
and Jin Zhao.