HAL Id: ineris-01863016
 
Submitted on 28 Aug 2018
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
New clues on carcinogenicity-related substructures
derived from mining two large datasets of chemical
Azadi Golbamaki, Emilio Benfenati, Nazanin Golbamaki, Alberto Manganaro,
Erinc Merdivan, Alessandra Roncaglioni, Giuseppina Gini
To cite this version:
Azadi Golbamaki, Emilio Benfenati, Nazanin Golbamaki, Alberto Manganaro, Erinc Merdivan, et
New clues on carcinogenicity-related substructures derived from mining two large datasets of
chemical compounds. Journal of Environmental Science and Health, Part C, 2016, 34 (2), pp.97-113.
￿10.1080/10590501.2016.1166879￿. ￿ineris-01863016￿
 
 
New clues on carcinogenicity-related substructures derived from mining two large datasets of
chemical compounds
Azadi Golbamaki1,*, Emilio Benfenati1, Nazanin Golbamaki2, Alberto Manganaro1, Erinc
Merdivan3, Alessandra Roncaglioni1,Giuseppina Gini4
1IRCCS - Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Milano, Italy
2Institut National de l'Environnement Industriel et des Risques (INERIS) , Verneuil en Halatte ,
3Sabancı University, Tuzla/Istanbul, Turkey; 4 Politecnico di Milano, Italy
*Corresponding author: Azadi Golbamaki, IRCCS - Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario
Negri, Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Laboratory of Environmental Chemistry
and Toxicology. Via Giuseppe La Masa 19, 20156, Milan, Italy. Email address:
 , Phone number: +39 0239014595
In this study, new molecular fragments associated with genotoxic and non-genotoxic carcinogens
are introduced to estimate the carcinogenic potential of compounds. Two rule-based
carcinogenesis models were developed with the aid of SARpy: model R (from rodents
experimental data) and model E (from human carcinogenicity data). Structural alert extraction
method of SARpy uses a completely automated and unbiased manner with statistical
significance. The carcinogenicity models developed in this study are collections of carcinogenic
potential fragments that were extracted from two carcinogenicity databases: the ANTARES
 
 
carcinogenicity dataset with information from bioassay on rats and the combination of ISSCAN
and CGX datasets, which take into accounts human-based assessment. The performance of these
two models was evaluated in terms of cross-validation and external validation using a 258
compound case study dataset. Combining R and H predictions and scoring a positive or negative
result when both models are concordant on a prediction, increased accuracy to 72% and
specificity to 79% on the external test set. The carcinogenic fragments present in the two models
were compared and analysed from the point of view of chemical class. The results of this study
show that the developed rule sets will be a useful tool to identify some new structural alerts of
carcinogenicity and provide effective information on the molecular structures of carcinogenic
chemicals.
 
 
Introduction
Identification, classification and risk assessment of carcinogenic chemicals by international
organizations and national agencies of health and safety have made remarkable progress in
recent years. The European Commission (EC) substantially modified and replaced the Directive
67/548/EEC and 93/101/EEC with Regulation (EC) 1272/2008 on risks and hazards of
carcinogens and mutagens(1). The new regulation introduced the globally harmonised system of
classification and labelling of chemicals (GHS). Under these directives experimental data studies
on chemical carcinogens have been digitally collected with the aim of harmonizing national
measures on classification, packaging and labelling of dangerous substances, to facilitate the
establishment of a single market and to provide protection for public health and the environment.
The new regulation complements the REACH regulation on the registration, evaluation,
authorisation and restriction of chemicals.
Research has provided evidence that chemicals may cause cancer in animals and humans by one
of several general mechanisms of action (MoA), generally classified into genotoxic and nongenotoxic. Genotoxic carcinogens cause damage to DNA, thus, many known mutagens are in
this category, and often mutation is one of the first steps in the development of cancer (2).
Epigenetic or non-genotoxic carcinogens do not bind covalently to DNA, and are usually
negative in the standard mutagenicity assays (3). The unifying feature of all genotoxic
carcinogens is that they are either electrophiles or can be activated to electrophilic reactive
intermediates. On the contrary, non-genotoxic carcinogens act through a large variety of different
and specific mechanisms.
 
 
For over 35 years, many chemicals have been tested by government agencies, private companies
and research institutes using the two-year rodent carcinogenesis bioassay. Most of the chemicals
or processes that have been associated with human carcinogenicity, as studied by
epidemiological investigations, are shown to cause tumours in rats and mice (4-6). However, all
compounds shown to induce cancer in laboratory rats and mice are not necessarily human
carcinogens (7).
In the past ten years, research into the MoA and carcinogenesis has increased and the relevance
of the carcinogenicity findings in rodents to human risk has been investigated in many
publications (8-10). The results of research demonstrated that doses used in the bioassays may do
not develop toxicity in humans exposed to same levels of these chemicals; in addition, rats and
mice tumours occur in a sex, age and strain or stock dependent manner. In consequence of these
points, the regulatory agencies consider that the high occurrence of tumours in the standard twoyear rodent carcinogenesis bioassay is often not relevant to risk evaluation of human
carcinogenesis (11). Variability of the tumours in rodents is another problem of this assay. To
deal with the problems of two-year rodent carcinogenesis bioassay alternative methods are
suggested by scientists and regulatory agencies. These methods include use of the toxicity level
(LD50) in rodents (12), in vitro cell transformation and other assays, in silico methods or
computerized prediction of carcinogenicity based on structure and chemical class (13). Each
method has its own strengths and weaknesses, and analysis of carcinogenicity of a specific
chemical and its MoA in human is better to be assessed based on the weight of evidence.
Among the in silico methods, the use of various computational techniques such as (quantitative)
structure-activity relationship ((Q)SAR) modelling is supported by several legislative authorities
 
 
(14-16). (Q)SAR models consist of mathematical relationships between physicochemical
properties of chemicals and their biological activity, thus being able to calculate a quantitative
value (for the activity) given the structure of a chemical. These mathematical relationships can
be simple linear regression equations, or more complex non-linear algorithms, and can be
developed using several approaches such as neural networks, support vector machines, decision
trees and many others. Conversely, SAR identifies the differences of compounds in two
categories (e.g. active or inactive) and predicts an untested compound as ―toxic‖ in case it has a
toxic potential or ―non-toxic‖ if not. Overall, (Q)SAR models are useful for the prediction of
toxicity of untested chemicals saving costs and the need for testing on animals (17, 18).
Following the theory of eletrophilic reactivity of (many) carcinogens of James and Elizabeth
Millers (19, 20), the advancement of the knowledge of carcinogenic chemicals have received
distinguished contributions from many scientists. The salmonella typhimurium mutagenicity
assay by Bruce Ames (7) and the compilation of the lists of carcinogenic and mutagenic
structural alerts (SA) by John Ashby (21) were two fundamental contributions to this field. SAs
identified and collected by John Ashby‘s are indeed reactive functional groups responsible for
the induction of mutation or cancer, and are so-called genotoxic carcinogens. On the other hand,
the Salmonella assay is the most predictive assay for genotoxic carcinogens and no other nongenotoxic mutagenicity test exists (22). Despite the extensive knowledge of genotoxic SAs, the
use of SAs for identifying non-genotoxic carcinogens is restricted. Non-genotoxic carcinogens
use many different MoA and they lack an apparent unifying mechanism. According to this
diversity, different (Q)SAR models have been developed and made available for analysis and
 
 
identification of SAs. A number of non-genotoxic SAs and their characteristics have been
 
One of the most recent rule sets defined by human expert for mutagenic carcinogenicity has been
developed by Benigni and Bossa (23, 24). The updated version of this rule set (24) is
implemented in Toxtree version 2.6.13 (25), a software application that investigates the presence
of the genotoxic and non-genotoxic SAs in the chemical structures of the compounds. Alongside
the rule-based (Q)SAR software that check the presence of human expert SAs in the chemical
structures, there are statistically-based (Q)SARs which create models by using categorized active
and inactive chemicals in a learning set to identify SAs that are associated with a particular
toxicological activity. The high accuracy of the predictions performed by data mining and
artificial intelligence has made these methods important tools to be used for preliminary research
and for discovery of the mechanism of action that are still unknown. These methods however,
comparing to rule-based models are less transparent to the end user. Historically, the Computer
Automated Structure Evaluation (CASE/MultiCASE) (26) program is a SAR expert system that
identifies two-dimensional structural features or biophores which can be used for the prediction
of unknown compounds as potential toxins. This statistically-based program does not use the
knowledge on the mechanisms of action, but reanalyse the dataset of chemicals trying to link the
structures of chemicals into their toxic activity. On the other hand, SAs developed by human
experts were integrated in software such as OncoLogic (27) and DEREK (28).
In this study we used SARpy (29), a commercially free statistically-based program, for the
extraction of potential carcinogenic SAs from two different learning sets. The approach that we
have taken in developing the two new carcinogenicity models is mainly based on statistical
 
 
evaluation of the chemicals in our learning sets categorized in two groups of carcinogens and
non-carcinogens. The SARpy‘s method of identification of the SAs that are associated with a
particular biological or toxicological activity does not demand a priori knowledge about MoA of
the compounds and performs purely on a statistical basis. Two different carcinogenicity datasets
have been prepared as learning sets and SARpy extracted two different models from these two
datasets. The internal and external evaluation of the models have been assessed thoroughly. The
choice of taking into consideration two substantially different learning sets and developing two
models is due to different characterization of these data. The first dataset contains exclusively
rodent carcinogenicity data based on presence of carcinogenic effects in male or female rats,
while the second dataset takes into account human-based assessments and data retrieved from
different assays. This suggests to obtain two different carcinogenicity models.
Finally, the SAs in the two rule sets are analyzed from the point of view of chemical class and
the same SAs present in both rule sets are revised. The two developed models have been made
available inside VEGA ( (30), an open source platform that already
offers several (Q)SAR models.
Material and Methods
Carcinogenesis data sources
ANTARES carcinogenicity dataset: Rat carcinogenesis learning set
Compounds for the first model‘s learning set were obtained from the carcinogenicity database of
EU-funded project ANTARES (31). The ANTARES‘ carcinogenicity database is a collection of
chemical rat carcinogenesis data (presence of carcinogenic effects in male or female rats)
 
 
obtained from the EU-funded project CAESAR (32) dataset and the ―FDA 2009 SAR
Carcinogenicity - SAR Structures‖ database. The CAESAR toxicity values were originated from
the Distributed Structure-Searchable Toxicity DSSTox database, which was built from the Lois
Gold‘s Carcinogenic Potency Database (CPDB) (33). The compounds with a definite TD50
(which is the dose that produces an increase of 50% of the tumours in animals) value for rat in
this dataset were labeled as carcinogenic, while the remaining were labeled as non-carcinogenic.
Additional 738 chemicals different from the 805 CAESAR compounds were added. The added
chemicals are from the ―FDA 2009 SAR Carcinogenicity - SAR Structures‖ database using the
Leadscope database (34). Here a categorical label for carcinogenicity was already contained in
the original dataset and again the compound was labeled as carcinogenic if a positive outcome
was detected in male or female rats. So a total number of 1543 compounds constituted the
ANTARES dataset.
ISS Carcinogenicity database and Carcinogenicity Genotoxicity eXperience dataset: Different
species carcinogenesis learning set
The ISS Carcinogenicity (ISSCAN) database (35) is provided by the Istituto Superiore di Sanità
(ISS). It is originally aimed at developing predictive models for carcinogenicity of chemicals.
The great part of the chemicals in this database are classified as carcinogens by various
regulatory agencies and scientific bodies. The database has been specifically designed as an
expert decision support tool and contains information on chemicals tested with the long-term
carcinogenicity bioassay on rodents (presence of carcinogenic effects in male or female rats and
mice). This carcinogenicity dataset contains 622 carcinogens, 210 non-carcinogens and 58
equivocals.
 
 
Compounds for the second model‘s learning set were obtained by merging the ISSCAN database
and the Carcinogenicity Genotoxicity eXperience (CGX) database. More information on the
CGX database can be found in (36). In this study, compounds used for development of the new
models had to be either positive or negative, thus, compounds with equivocal results in the
databases have been removed. In particular, from the original ISSCAN dataset with 890
compounds, we removed 58 compounds, while the CGX database did not contain any equivocal
All compounds in the combined dataset have been checked for their consistency between the two
sources. We found 651 compounds in common, 15 of them with inconsistent carcinogenicity
values. These compounds have been removed from the combined dataset.
Comparison with the ANTARES dataset
We compared the final list of compounds with the ANTARES carcinogenicity dataset prepared
for the development of the first model. We found 105 compounds with conflicting values when
compared with the compounds in the ANTARES dataset. In order to develop a more
conservative model, we opted to remove only 15 compounds which had positive result in the
ANTARES dataset and negative results in the combined second dataset, and left as carcinogenic
those that had carcinogenicity result the opposite way. Consequently, there are 90 positive
compounds in the combined database which are negative in the ANTARES dataset. Afterwards,
we checked and cleaned the structures manually, and by the help of the istMolBase (37) and
InstantJChem (38) software formed the final dataset.
 
 
In addition, the compounds have been checked for their molecular structure. We adopted only
the substances with connected molecular structure; those which had unconnected structures have
been removed from the dataset. The overall dataset consisted of 986 compounds with 734
carcinogens and 252 non-carcinogens. Each compound in the list had a chemical name, a CAS
number, a Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry Specification (SMILES) (39), and its
categorical designation (i.e. carcinogen or non-carcinogen). In the present study, this combined
dataset is conventionally called ISSCAN-CGX.
Data for model validation
ECHA database
We prepared an external test set for the validation of the developed models from carcinogenicity
the eChemPortal inventory (40). For this purpose, we made two queries on this database. The
first query contained the following restrictions:
Study result type: experimental result
Reliability: 1 and 2
Species: mouse and rat
Maximum number of studies: 4
The second query consisted of:
i) Study result type: experimental result
ii) Reliability: 1 and 2
 
 
iii) Species: mouse and rat
iv) Sources: any guideline and exposure route
The list resulted from the first query comprised 308 compounds, whereas, the second query
returned a list of 166 compounds, which were mostly in common with the results of the first
query. The studies conducted for the first list of compounds have been manually evaluated.
Afterwards, we looked into the Classification Labelling and Packaging (CLP) inventory (41) for
the positive (i.e. carcinogenic) chemicals collected by the above mentioned queries. Inside the
CLP inventory we found 68 compounds, which were already present in our data collection. The
latter search confirmed the carcinogenic property of these compounds.
The dataset consisted of 64 positive compounds, 169 negative compounds, and 90 equivocal
compounds. The equivocal results are due to the presence of conflicting information in different
sources or different studies in the same source.
It should be noticed that, for already classified compounds (no conflicting information), the level
of uncertainty in the assignment is not homogeneous, because some of the compounds were
classified on the basis of a single study (i.e. data present in one single source).
From the reliability point of view, in the data collected in our dataset, 49 positive compounds
have positive carcinogenic effect in at least two sources. 57 negative compounds are noncarcinogenic in both lists, and they are not present in the list of compounds retrieved from the
CLP inventory. 64 compounds are considered as non-carcinogens because of the presence of
only one single study in the two lists.
 
 
The SARpy (SAR in Python) program is a Python script based on the OpenBabel chemical
library. SARpy creates classification models by using categorized active and inactive chemicals
in a learning set to identify molecular fragments that are associated with a particular biological,
pharmaceutical or toxicological activity. The algorithm generates molecular substructures of
arbitrary complexity, and the fragments candidates to become SAs are automatically selected on
the basis of their prediction performance in a learning set.
The output of SARpy consists in a set of rules in the form:
‗IF contains <SA> THEN <apply label>‘, where the SA is expressed as a SMARTS string, for
use by human experts or other chemical software. SMARTS notations are text representations of
substructures (36) that allow specification of wildcard atoms and bonds, which can be used to
formulate substructure queries for a chemical database. Those rules can be used as a predictive
model simply by calling a SMARTS matching program. For the matching phase, SMILES and
the SMARTS strings are translated into graphs and the two graphs are compared to each other
Extracting active fragments
R (rat) model
To obtain a more comprehensive collection of potential carcinogenic fragments, five learning
sets were randomly created from the ANTARES carcinogenicity dataset with 1543 compounds,
preserving 80% for the learning set and 20% for the evaluation set. In other words, for each
model a random set of 20% of chemicals in the learning set was removed, with the remaining
80% of the compounds a model was developed and the activity of the compounds left out was
 
 
predicted with the same model. We combined the five models and put together the lists of the
potential active fragments, removed the duplicates and eliminated the SAs with likelihood ratio
lower than 2. We opted for the likelihood ratio threshold of 2 in order to retain the SAs which are
statistically more significant. A measure of each fragment‘s association with biological activity
is determined by SARpy as ―training likelihood ratio‖ and it is given along with the list of the
potential fragments or the rule set in the output. The likelihood ratio can be taken into account to
determine the goodness of a SA identified by SARpy. Even if a SA that is associated with
activity (e.i. carcinogenicity) is present in a molecular structure, the molecule may contain other
fragments that make it inactive (e.i. non-carcinogen), thus the specific SA might not be expected
to be found only in active compounds. This evidence is the basis of the determination of the
likelihood ratio.
Using the SARpy software, each chemical in the learning set was fragmented in silico into all
possible fragments meeting user-specified criteria. For this study we extracted only the
―ACTIVE‖ fragments (or SAs) and the default values for the minimum and maximum number of
atoms in a fragment were set for the fragment extractions of each model (minimum=2;
maximum=18). Another configuration to establish by the user is the minimum number of
compounds in the learning set in which an active (or inactive) fragment is found. In our analysis,
the minimum number of compounds that contain a potential active fragment was set to 3.
Conventionally, in this study we call this model R.
E (expert) model
SARpy was used for model development and statistical analysis using the ISSCAN-CGX
 
 
The extraction settings are as follows: the minimum number of atoms in a fragment is equal to 4,
whereas, the maximum number of atoms is equal to 10, and the minimum number of compounds
containing the active fragment is 6. These configurations have been set in favour of a model with
a more balanced sensitivity and specificity values. In order to assess the predicitivity of the
model, statistical analysis have been conducted in terms of accuracy, sensitivity and specificity
using cross-validation routine as an internal evaluation, in addition to an external evaluation
using an external test set. In this paper, we name this model E.
Internal evaluation of the models
Accuracy, sensitivity and specificity have been determined for the internal evaluation of each
model using the SARpy program. For the internal validation, 5-fold cross-validation routine was
conducted for each model. In the 5-fold cross-validation the learning set is randomly partitioned
into five equal sized subsets. For each iteration, a single subset of chemicals was retained as the
validation data for testing the model, and the remaining subsets were used as training data. The
cross-validation process was repeated five times (the folds). The evaluation results of five
iterations were then averaged to produce a single estimation. Accuracy, sensitivity and
specificity of the internal evaluation are assessed in addition to the Matthews correlation
coefficient (MCC).
External evaluation of the models
The predictability of the models has been evaluated on two external test sets: the first external set
is the dataset used as the learning set of the opposite model (e.g. for the R model we used
ISSCAN-CGX dataset and vice versa), and the second dataset is a collection of 258 compounds
 
 
collected from the eChemPortal inventory. Accuracy, sensitivity, specificity and the MCC for the
external evaluation are determined using SARpy. Although the external evaluation is considered
the best mean for the assessment of the predictive ability of a (Q)SAR model (43, 44), the results
of the external evaluation of any model are highly related to the relative similarity of the external
evaluation set in relation to the learning set.
Results and discussions
Each learning set produced its own model, which is a collection of active SAs with their
likelihood ratios. The final model merging all sets of SAs consisted of 127 active SAs. Table 1
shows the predictive performance of five models developed based on five different splits of the
ANTARES database. The performance of each model has been evaluated on its own learning set
using cross-validation analysis. Further, an external evaluation using the corresponding test set is
performed on each model. To have an overview of the statistical analysis of the performance of
the models, we calculated the average of the predictive values of all the five models, and
reported in Table 1 as well. The averages of accuracy, sensitivity and specificity for the 778
compound internal cross-validation using five rule sets extracted from the ANTARES dataset
were 71%, 73% and 69%, respectively. The average of accuracy, sensitivity and specificity for
337 compounds in the test set as an external validation of these models, were 63%, 63% and
62%, respectively.
Using the R model, the results of cross-validation on the whole training set were 66% accuracy,
83% sensitivity, 48% specificity and 0.34 the MCC (Table 2). Analysis of the external validation
 
 
for the R model demonstrated that the concordance between experimental and predicted value on
the ECHA dataset is higher than using the ISSCAN-CGX dataset. The accuracy of the R model
on the ECHA dataset was 67%, compared to 58% of accuracy for the ISSCAN-CGX dataset.
The complete list of these alerts are presented in the VEGA platform.
With the configuration set as mentioned above, SARpy extracted 43 active rules from the
ISSCAN-CGX learning set. Analysis of the cross-validation for the E model demonstrated that
the second model produced an accuracy of 73%, with a sensitivity of 77% and a specificity of
62% (Table 2). The MCC value for this analysis is 0.36. The accuracy values for the external
evaluation of the E model on the ANTARES dataset and the ECHA database were 59% and
64%, respectively. Analysis of the external validations for the E model demonstrated that the
model produced a higher sensitivity (77%) compared with the specificity (41%) of the R model.
On the contrary, the specificity of the external evaluation on the chemicals from the ECHA
database was higher (72%) compared to its sensitivity (48%) (Table 2). The complete list of the
SAs present in this model is accessible through VEGA.
Analysis of the combination of the prediction results of the R and the E models
Another analyses has been done on the prediction results of the R model and the E model. In this
new approach, we considered the final results as correctly predicted only in case both models
have predicted them consistently. Table 3 summarizes the results of combining the R and E
model external validation predictions on the chemicals from the ECHA database.
 
 
The results suggested that when both models are concordant on a negative prediction for a
compound the reliability of the result is much higher than in case a positive prediction is done.
We observe an improvement of the results compared to the use of the individual models, for
accuracy (72%) and specificity (79%). In fact, combining the predictions of the two models the
MCC is increased to 0.37, compared to 0.31 for the R model and 0.20 for the E model. Only
sensitivity is higher using the R model (62%). Thus, users may choose a solution or another
depending if they prefer a conservative or a realistic assessment.
Fragments analysis
Comparison of the SAs in the R and E models
The SAs present in the R and E models have been compared and those that are in common
between the two rule sets categorized into chemical classes and listed as follows. The SAs in the
R model are presented with their ID number and written in order of their correspondence to the
identical SAs in the E model.
1) Aromatic amine (R model: 6, 41, 36, 22, 10 / E model: 27, 31, 33, 38, 104)
2) Aromatic heterocyclic (R model: 12, 19, 2 / E model: 75, 108, 117)
3) Hydrazide (R model: 28, 27 / E model: 2, 50)
4) N-Nitroso (R model: 1 / E model: 8)
5) Phenyl-Hydrazine (R model: 32 / E model: 48)
6) α,β- Haloalkanes (R model: 25 / E model: 56)
7) Sulfite (R model: 8 / E model: 68)
8) Nitrogen Mustard like (R model: 11 / E model: 73)
 
 
9) Phosphonite ( R model: 15 / E model: 98)
Categorization of the SAs in the R and E models
The SAs present in the models R and E are categorized from a chemical class point of view. The
substructures within each category are presented with their ID number in their original rule set
and are as follows:
Nitrogen containing substructures (Azo type):
1) Aromatic amine (R model: 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38,
40, 42, 83, 104, 110, 113 / E model: 6, 10, 22, 31, 35, 36, 41, 42)
2) Aromatic heterocycles containing Nitrogen (R model: 74, 75, 80, 81, 83, 95, 113, 122 / E
model:12, 17, 43)
3) Azine (Hydrazine) (R model:46, 47, 49, 50, 51, 53, 54, 55, 101 / E model: 27, 32)
4) Azide (Hydrazide) (R model: 2, 3, 44, 45, 52 / E model: 3, 28)
5) Nitrosamine (R model:4, 5, 7, 9, 10 / E model: not found (NF))
6) Nitrogen or sulfur mustard (R model: 72, 73, 115 / E model: 11, 34)
7) Aromatic methylamine (R model: 30, 34, 36 / E model: NF)
8) Aliphatic N-Nitroso (R model: 62, 63/ E model: NF)
9) Aromatic Nitro (R model: 90, 123 / E model: NF)
10) 1 aryl 2 monoalkyl hydrazine (R model: 48 / E model: NF)
11) Aziridine (R model:120 / E model: NF)
12) Aromatic hydroxylamine (R model: 32 / E model: NF)
13) Diazo (R model:92 / E model: NF)
 
 
14) Aromatic Azo (R model: 71 / E model: NF)
15) Aromatic Nitroso (R and E models: NF)
Other substructures:
1) (1,2, and 3 membered) Aromatic Heterocycles (R model: 74, 75, 80, 81, 83, 90, 95, 103,
108, 113, 117, 121, 122, 123 / E model: 2, 12, 17, 19, 43)
2) Aliphatic halide (R model: 57, 58, 59, 70, 125 / E model: 18, 25)
3) Heterocyclic Alkane (R model: 84, 105, 109, 120 / E model: 23)
4) Polycyclic aromatic systems (R model: 39, 43, 60, 61 / E model: 30)
5) Sulfonate bonded carbon (R model: 67, 68 / E model: 8)
6) Epoxide (R model: 105 / E model: 23)
7) Β propiolactone (R model: 114 / E model: NF)
Not only SARpy was able to find the already known carcinogen substructures that were
represented by the SAs of Kazius et al. (45), but a number of SAs have been identified for the
first time. Table 4 demonstrates the new identified SAs that have been classified into six
chemical classes. The substructures within each category are listed with their ID number and are
as follows:
1) Nitrosurea (R model: 12, 13, 14, 19 / E model: NF)
2) Nitrogen or sulfur mustard like (R model: 72, 115 / E model: 34)
3) Benzodioxole and Benzendiol (R model: 17, 18 / E model: 9)
4) Teritiary amine substituted by a Sulfur atom (E model: 24)
 
 
5) α,β-oxy and carboxy substitutions (R model: 20, 21, 76 / E model: NF)
6) α,β-haloalkanes (R model: 56, 69 / E model: 25)
7) Oximes (R model: 78 / E model: NF)
For the sake of example, we illustrated the chemicals from which the SA 24 (form the chemical
class teritiary amine substituted by a Sulfur atom) in the E model has been extracted (Table 5).
All the chemicals that contain the above mentioned SA in the ISSCAN-CGX data set are
carcinogenic.
Discussion
Automated extraction of SAs has been implemented by the statistically-based program SARpy
on two learning sets. The ANTARES learning set collects rodent bioassay carcinogenicity data
on 1543 chemicals, while ISSCAN-CGX database containing 986 chemicals takes into account
human-based assessments and data retrieved from different assays. The predictive performance
of the developed models were evaluated internally, as well as using a 258 compound external
validation dataset collected from the ECHA inventory. The two developed models for
carcinogenicity have been implemented in the VEGA platform and are indeed freely available
for end users.
Recent progresses in data mining provide effective competence in the automated discovery of
SAs associated to toxicological endpoints. An important contribution of the statistically-based
methods to the carcinogenicity field is identification of new SAs which help us in refining the
existing rule sets. While the most known carcinogenicity rule sets (23) are composed on the basis
of human expert judgement, the SAs identified in our study are extracted in an unbiased manner
 
 
by SARpy with no a priori knowledge about the MoA of the chemicals. This approach shed light
to the new clues about genotoxic and non-genotoxic SAs. Some primary analyses have been
provided on the SA lists; chemical classes of the identified SAs have been evaluated, however,
further study for the new SAs should be performed considering other collections of alerts (45).
SARpy SAs resulting from the current analysis on the ANTARES and ISSCAN-CGX data sets
follow the SAs presented by Kazius et al. (46).
Furthermore, the models are developed on the basis of two learning sets with different
carcinogenicity data from the point of view of origin and provenance. Concerning the learning
sets with substantially variant carcinogenicity data assessed within different properties, each set
of the extracted SAs constituted a purpose oriented model. The user may consider the results of
the model with more realistic predictions or the one with more conservative assessments.
Generally, the best approach in making a conclusion to estimate the reliability of a prediction is
combining evidence from different information sources such as (Q)SAR model predictions, in
vitro and in vivo test results. This is reflected in the general trend of developing ensemble models
and/or combining the output of different existing models. An example of the latter approach has
been done on a similar endpoint, mutagenicity (Ames test), by the integration of the different
models available on the VEGA platform (47). The advantage of having the two presented models
available on the VEGA platform, where other models for the same endpoint are available, is also
the possibility of performing a similar activity to make a conclusion.
Finally, the results of the presented models will be exploited for the improvement of ToxRead
( a recent platform that uses set of rules for different endpoints to filter
and select similar compounds and assist the user in performing read-across studies (48, 49).
 
 
Also, these rules can be compared and possibly explained considering reasoning about
mechanisms, including adverse outcome pathways (50).
Acknowledgement
The research for this paper was financially supported by the Life PROSIL project and Ministero
della Salute of Italy / Istituto Superiore di Sanità (ISS) within the project ―Messa a punto di
strategie integrate di testing -basate su metodi alternativi- per l‘identificazione di sostanze
cancerogene per il REACH‖.