Opinion Mining in Legal Blogs
Jack G. Conrad
Research & Development
Thomson Legal & Regulatory
St. Paul, Minnesota 55123 USA
 
Frank Schilder
Research & Development
Thomson Legal & Regulatory
St. Paul, Minnesota 55123 USA
 
We perform a survey into the scope and utility of opinion
mining in legal Weblogs (a.k.a. blawgs).
The number of
‘blogs’ in the legal domain is growing at a rapid pace and
many potential applications for opinion detection and monitoring are arising as a result. We summarize current approaches to opinion mining before describing diﬀerent categories of blawgs and their potential impact on the law and
the legal profession. In addition to educating the community on recent developments in the legal blog space, we also
conduct some introductory opinion mining trials. We ﬁrst
construct a Weblog test collection containing blog entries
that discuss legal search tools.
We subsequently examine
the performance of a language modeling approach deployed
for both subjectivity analysis (i.e., is the text subjective or
objective?) and polarity analysis (i.e., is the text aﬃrmative or negative towards its subject?). This work may thus
help establish early baselines for these core opinion mining
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.0.a [Information Storage and Retrieval]: General—
Web Search; I.2.7.i [Information Storage and Retrieval]:
Natural Language Processing—Web Text Analysis; I.2.7.c
[Information Storage and Retrieval]: Natural Language
Processing—Language Models; H.3.m [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Miscellaneous—Test Collections
General Terms
Modeling, Experimentation, Measurement
opinion mining, sentiment analysis, language modeling, legal
blogs, test collections
INTRODUCTION
The mining of opinions in textual materials such as Weblogs
adds another dimension to technologies that facilitate search
and summarization. Opinion mining actually identiﬁes the
author’s viewpoint about a subject, rather than simply identifying the subject itself. Current approaches tend to divide
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
ICAIL ’07, June 4-8, 2007, Palo Alto, California USA
Copyright 2007 ACM 978-1-59593-680-6/07/0006 ...$5.00.
the problem space into sub-problems, for example, creating
a lexicon of useful features that can help classify sentences
(or portions of sentences) into categories of positive, negative or neutral. Existing techniques often try to identify
words, phrases and patterns that indicate viewpoints. This
has proven diﬃcult, however, since it is not just the presence
of a keyword that matters, but its context. For instance,
This is a great decision conveys clear sentiment, but The
announcement of this decision produced a great amount of
media attention is neutral.
Analyzing text regarding its opinions can be extremely
valuable to a legal researcher who is looking for a perspective
on a legal issue or even information about a product or a service. Organizations may also beneﬁt from automatic opinion
mining by obtaining a timely picture of how their products
or services, or more generally their names, are viewed by
their clients. The Web is an expanding environment where
customers go to ﬁnd or submit opinions that may be ripe for
mining. An increasing number of customer viewpoints are
posted on Blogs (short for Weblogs). The content of these
Blogs can range from short product reviews by consumers
to elaborate essays on legal issues by law professors.
This paper provides an overview of recent approaches to
opinion mining that harness advanced techniques such as
language models. Moreover, we view the legal blog domain
as ideal for applying opinion mining techniques and we propose several possible use cases that would leverage this new
technology. We also describe some preliminary results from
our own experiments that apply a sentiment analysis toolkit
to a collection of blawg entries that we constructed.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews relevant work performed in the ﬁeld. Section
3 deﬁnes legal blogs, characterizing the nature and scope of
this application space. Section 4 describes our experimental
framework and the test collection we developed for blawgrelated applications. In Section 5, we draw our conclusions,
assessing the strengths and weaknesses of our approach; we
also discuss future prospects.
APPROACHES TO OPINION MINING
Academic and commercial interest in opinion mining research and applications has been steadily growing since at
least the late 90s. This increase in attention seems to have
culminated in the AAAI’s 2004 Spring Symposium on “Exploring Attitude and Aﬀect in Text: Theories and Applications” ,1 at which some three dozen re-
1 www.clairvoyancecorp.com/research/workshops/
AAAI-EAAT-2004/home.html
search works were presented. An expanded version of these
works was published by Springer last year as a book .
Alternatively known as sentiment analysis or sentiment
classiﬁcation, Opinion Mining focuses not on the topic of
a text, but an author’s attitude towards that topic. In recent years, opinion mining has been applied to movie reviews, reviews of other commercial products and services,
to Weblogs, and to News.
Following the cumulative advances spearheaded by Pang
and Lee , the sub-tasks of opinion mining have
evolved over the course of the last few years. These subtasks presently include:
1. Subjectivity Analysis – involves the determination of
whether a given text is objective (neutral in sentiment)
or subjective (expressing a positive or negative sentiment or opinion); this can be viewed as a binary classiﬁcation task .
2. Polarity Analysis – encompasses the prediction of
whether a text that has been established as subjective
is positive or negative in its polarity .
3. Polarity Degree – measures the degree of polarity, positive or negative, in a subjective text .
Initial work in the ﬁeld has consisted largely of a combination of tasks 2 and 3, namely, NLP-based identiﬁcation
of keywords, their polarity and, as much as possible, their
degree . That is, is a given term a reliable
indicator of opinionated content?
One of the most basic
approaches to Task 2 and also one of the earliest was proposed by Turney, which determined the polarity of a text
by calculating the numeric sum of the “orientations” of the
individual words it contains . Other more advanced approaches have subsequently been developed [25, 2, 18, 30,
Until Pang and Lee’s seminal work on subjectivity, much
less research has focused on task 1 .
The motivation
for this initial step is simple: why invest computational and
linguistic resources in portions of a text that hold no substantive subjective content? Rather, it makes more sense to
apply a binary subjectivity/objectivity classiﬁer to the text
to identify those segments (sentences) that merit exclusion
from further consideration. Few others have researched this
fundamental dimension of opinion mining .
Another branch of subjectivity research that has developed more recently is the summarization of single or multiple consumer reviews .
THE LEGAL BLOGOSPHERE
Deﬁnitions
The deﬁnition for a general blog, as provided by Wikipedia,
captures the basic features:
A blog is a user-generated Website where entries
are made in journal style and displayed in reverse
chronological order.
Starting mainly as personal commentaries written in short
entries, blogs quickly became a phenomenon that gained in-
ﬂuence in political opinion shaping. In addition, specialized
blogging communities, apart from journalistic and political
blogs, have been developing over the last few years.
Today, blogs can be on any possible topic (e.g., entertainment,
education, science & technology, etc.).
Our interest is in legal blogs, and we deﬁne them as follows:
A legal blog (a.k.a. blawg) is any Weblog that
focuses on substantive discussions of the law, the
legal profession, including law schools, and the
process by which judicial decisions are made.
Blawgs can also be further sub-divided into diﬀerent areas. A comprehensive taxonomy covering the diﬀerent topics
found in Blawgs can be accessed at 3L Epiphany,2 which is
a Blawg maintained by a recent law school graduate. The
top-level of his taxonomy shows a variety of topics for this
blogging sub-community:
1. General Legal Blogs
2. Blogs Categorized by Legal Specialty
3. Blogs Categorized by Law or Legal Event
4. Blogs Categorized by Jurisdictional Scope
5. Blogs Categorized by Author/Publisher
6. Blogs Categorized by Number of Contributors
7. Miscellaneous Blogs Categorized by Topic
8. Collections of Legal Blogs
This taxonomy also shows that Blawgs are not only written by law students discussing their daily experiences in law
school but also by legal professionals who can provide indepth analysis of recent court decisions. Scotusblog, for example, provides commentary and analysis of U.S. Supreme
Court decisions.3 Another popular Blawg is the The Volokh
Conspiracy4 which is hosted by a variety of diﬀerent law
professors, including Eugene Volokh and Orin Kerr. A blog
magazine maintained by Stephen Bainbridge, a law professor at UCLA, includes his personal blog on topics such as
non-business law, political correctness and photography as
well as his professional blog which targets lawyers, judges,
law students and legal academics.5
Recent Developments
A good starting point for exploring the ‘Blawgosphere’ is
one of the well-maintained Web portals — there now exist
Web portals exclusively for legal blogs6,7 as well as taxonomies of legal blogs.8
A signiﬁcant indication of how important Blawgs may become for the legal profession is given by the fact that blog
entries have been used in court cases. Entries have either
been cited by the court or used as evidence by one of the parties in a judicial proceeding (Stevens, J., dissenting)).
Moreover, Blawgs are now also maintained by law ﬁrms.2
There are several reasons why law ﬁrms use this new forum.
First of all, they can use it to advertise the ﬁrm’s authority in
diﬀerent areas. Secondly, it may be useful for recruiting law
23lepiphany.typepad.com/3l epiphany/
a taxonomy of legal blogs/index.html
3www.scotusblog.com/movabletype/
4www.volokh.com
5www.professorbainbridge.com
6www.blawg.com
7law-library.rutgers.edu/resources/lawblogs.php
8www.3lepiphany.typepad.com/
school graduates and, ﬁnally, it helps retain younger attorneys, allowing them to continue blogging activities started
in law school.
As a general trend, lawyers seem increasingly to appreciate blogging as a discussion vehicle that can accelerate legal
analysis. This medium can be advantageous for legal topics
on which there have not been any law reports published yet.
Prospective Applications
There exist a number of compelling potential applications
regarding opinion mining of legal blogs. Some of these include:
• proﬁling — reactions to high-level court decisions;
• alerting — subscribers to unfavorable news and disclosures that may impact a ﬁrm’s clients;
• monitoring — e.g., what communities are saying about
commercial legal research services;
• tracking — reputations of law ﬁrms based on client
feedback over time;
• hosting & surveying — blog space for practitioners to
comment on legal topics and decisions that can subsequently
be mined for trends.
The degree to which these will become intrinsic to the ﬁeld
of law will depend on technological, economic, and domainrelated factors, not to mention parallel developments in other
professional ﬁelds.
EXPERIMENTS WITH LEGAL BLOGS
Our experiments were conducted in three distinct phases.
The ﬁrst phase exclusively targets polarity analysis.
second phase emphasizes potential beneﬁts from introducing a subjectivity component as an initial step. Finally, the
third phase is designed to harness larger corpora from outside the legal domain to provide additional training data for
the subjectivity component.
Test Corpus Generation
A principal use case supplied by one of our business units
focused on the views of legal practitioners towards legal research tools such as Westlaw, LexisNexis, or others. In order to perform initial opinion mining trials on such data,
we needed to produce our own working test corpus.
thus proceeded to construct such a collection by running a
set of directed queries against an assortment of Web search
engines that focus on blogs.
We ran these queries against a number of general as well as
blog-speciﬁc search engines, for instance, Technorati, Blog-
Pulse, IceRocket, Blog-Search, and Google’s BlogSearch.9
These queries produced a wide range of entries which had
to be selectively pruned, in our case, by paralegal reviewers.
In the end, this task produced roughly 200 blawg entries
consisting of approximately 1,000 sentences. This collection
focused on the original blawg entries, not on subsequent responses to them. Figure 1 presents a sample entry.
Language Modeling Resources
Alias-i, a text analytics and data mining company, has
implemented its own version of an opinion mining applica-
9www.technorati.com, www.blogpulse.com,
www.icerocket.com, www.blog-search.com,
www.blogsearchengine.com, blogsearch.google.com
lorenzen.blogspot.com
Students Lack Legal Research and Information Literacy 
(original article with same title from T. Kasting appeared in Law.com)
My simple contention is that current law students have good
information technology skills, but are deficient in information literacy skills. Many students seem to equate computer
skills with search skills: I am computer literate equals I have
good research skills.
Technical competence with a program
or search engine is confused with the analytic skill to use the
program effectively and efficiently.
For example, students
learn how to construct a search query but look for New York
state case law in the Allstates database. It works, but is not
efficient. Secondary materials – other than law reviews – are
not considered. Document retrieval, Shepard’s and KeyCite are
specific functions easy to identify and, hence, use. They engage in discrete information seeking acts, but do not identify
the specific question to be answered; if this question relates
to the issue; and how the issue relates to the legal concept.
They have identifiable technical skills, but are not information literate. –M.
Figure 1. Sample Blog Entry from Blawg Corpus
tion within its LingPipe toolkit. It is based upon the Min-
Cut Graph model of Pang and Lee and uses a n-gram
language model (LM) . Such language models have recently been deployed in the legal domain by Moens . We
chose LingPipe for our trials for three reasons. First, because
it was readily available and rapidly deployable; second, because our group has developed a set of productive expertise
with the toolkit; and, third and most signiﬁcantly, because
its Sentiment Analysis module has been shown to produce
polarity analysis results comparable to Pang and Lee.10 Yet
it relies upon a character-based rather than token-based language model. A character-based LM assigns a probability
to a sequence of characters rather than words. The learned
probability is based on the probability distribution of the
characters found in the training corpus.
Some of the parameters associated with the toolkit include
which classiﬁer to use (Language Modeling vs. Naive Bayes
with LM smoothing) and n, the number of characters used
in the n-grams. The basic LingPipe application has both a
subjectivity and polarity analysis component.
Polarity Analysis
We ﬁrst focus on a straight evaluation of the performance
of our positive/negative polarity analysis system.
In order to study the impact that product, service, or
company entity mentions may have on training and overall performance, we created three separate versions of our
1. original – product, service, company mentions left intact.
2. masked – product, service, company mentions replaced
with a ‘[product-company]’ token.
3. removed – product, service, company mentions deleted.
We also consider the impact of a balanced set of training
data, where the number of positive and negative examples
is equal, versus a set of training data based strictly on the
ratios found in the blog acquisition process. It is not uncommon to encounter in these blogs more examples of negative
comments about products or services than positive ones.
We also distinguish initially between two diﬀerent levels
of granularity in our training data, entry-level and sentencelevel, which can be described as follows:
10www.alias-i.com/lingpipe
1. entry-level – the relevant portions of the entire blog
are treated as a composite entry. If applicable, a single
entry is permitted to produce one segment for positive
sentiment and another for negative sentiment.
2. sentence-level – each sentence in the blog is treated as a
separate entity, which may possess positive sentiment,
negative sentiment, or neither.
The entry-level approach, while more straightforward and
less costly, is also less precise in terms of what is input for
training (i.e., while a blog entry may clearly represent an
overall aﬃrmative review, it may also contain appreciable
negative comments as well). The sentence-level approach,
by contrast, is more precise in terms of just what one is able
to tag and submit as positive and negative examples, but
requires the additional overhead of sentence-level assessment
and tagging. After attempting to allow for the existence of
both positive and negative portions of any entry, in the end,
we found that sentence-level training data was more eﬀective
and directly satisﬁed our training needs.
We use accuracy (total correct/total count) and F-score,
the evenly weighted harmonic mean of precision and recall,
to measure our performance.
The initial results for Language Modeling and Naive Bayes classiﬁcation are shown in
Table 1. Results reported are produced by 10-way cross validation and use the top performing n-grams.11
Unbalanced
Table 1: Accuracy, F-score Results for Initial Polarity
Analysis (Sentence-level)
In the case of the balanced trials, where the amount of
positive and negative training examples are the same, our
models outperform a baseline of random assignment (0.666
In the case of the unbalanced trials, by contrast, where the amount of negative training examples exceeds the positive by two-thirds (250 vs. 150 sentences), our
models again surpass this baseline in terms of accuracy and
F-score, but less signiﬁcantly (0.690/0.655 vs. 0.625). Furthermore, the Naive Bayes model slightly outperforms Language Modeling. A key observation about this initial step
is that processing an entry without ﬁrst identifying (and
ignoring) neutral or non-subjective content can only dilute
the eﬀectiveness of a dedicated polarity analyzer. It is also
worth mentioning that Hatzivassiloglou , Turney , and
Pang have all reported precision levels of over 80% for
related polarity analysis tasks. Two of the distinctions to
be made, however, lie in the focus of their measurements
and the nature of their data sets. In the ﬁrst two works,
assessment is essentially based on the semantic orientation
of proximate words, whereas in the third case, the data set
(movie reviews) tends to have limited extraneous material,
and has by its very nature a high subjectivity/sentiment
“quotient.” By contrast, we focus on sentence-level assessment using data that comes from the blogosphere, and, as
11Best performance for balanced corpora is shown in italics and for
unbalanced corpora in boldface.
such, is arguably more heterogeneous. Consequently, direct
head to head comparisons of metrics like precision must be
made with caution, since key underlying experimental parameters and targets are diﬀerent.
Subjectivity Analysis
Our initial results suggest that we might improve our performance if able to add a ﬁltering mechanism that would exclude portions of an entry that possess no opinion.12 For this
reason we introduced an initial subjectivity analysis component, which trained on sentence-level data that was tagged
for subjectivity/objectivity. The results appear in Table 2.
Corpus-type
Entity-type
Unbalanced
Accuracy, F-score Results for Subjectivity
When compared to our initial polarity analysis results,
these subjectivity results, with an accuracy and F-score averaging around ±0.60, remain below practical requirements.
Again we see that our models surpass a random baseline in
the case of the balanced trials, and surpass it marginally
for the unbalanced trials (0.590-0.600 vs 0.444, given 400 of
900 examples being subjective). For subjectivity analysis,
there has been less published work, but these results appear
sub-optimal. For example, Wiebe and Riloﬀreport a 72%-
78% F-score using Naive Bayes . Again one needs to be
cautious in making such a comparison due to the distinct
nature of two content sets examined.
Given the means by which language models learn their
data distributions, the beneﬁts of larger amounts of annotated training data became apparent. For this reason, we
undertook a search for additional data tagged for sentiment.
Supplemental Training Data
We subsequently sought to improve our performance by
increasing the size of our training data set. In order to do
this, we harnessed three larger subjectivity corpora based
on consumer reviews or news.13
Neutral/Subjective
for Training
Sentences Used
Movie Reviews
Customer Reviews
MPQA Database
Table 3: Accuracy and F-score for Supp. Subjectivity
— External Training Data with Blog Test Data
12When Pang and Lee added such a ﬁlter to their polarity analysis
engine, their results increased from 82.8% to 86.4% using the database
described in the next footnote (cf: ).
www.cs.cornell.edu/people/pabo/movie-review-data/ .
addition to containing 1,000 positive and 1,000 negative reviews, it also
contains 5,000 subjective and 5,000 objective sentences originating
in reviews.
The customer review data set was constructed from Amazon data
and reported on in .
The MPQA database was constructed at the 2003 AAAI Spring
Symposium on New Directions in Question Answering and was
subsequently annotated during a corpus enhancement project [26,
Using a 90/10 split between training data and test data,
we used the external data for our training set (90%) and
blawg data for our test set (10%).
Results are shown in
Table 3. The ratios of neutral to subjective sentences were
dependent on their availability in the training data. We note
that the results from the Customer Reviews training set were
signiﬁcantly better than that from the Movie Reviews and
MPQA databases. This makes intuitive sense since the Customer Reviews set included comments on interactions with
customer support as well as with digital technology, both
having analogous discussions in our blawg data set. Furthermore, one can observe that the threshold for subjectivity in
the MPQA if not the Movie Review database is arguably
lower than that for the Customer Reviews set .
The results above raise an important question about the
source of such sub-optimal performance relative to published
results for this task.
Is the cause the experimental techniques and conﬁguration used, or the nature and scope of
the blawg data itself? To help answer this question, we repeated our subjectivity experiment, but using the external
data sets for both training (90%) and testing (10%). The
results can be seen in Table 4. As mentioned in Section 4.2,
LingPipe performs as well against the Movie Review database as Pang and Lee .14 It also performs comparably
to Wiebe and Riloﬀagainst the MPQA database . We
observe, however, that as we apply these LM techniques to
Customer Reviews, the data set arguably closest to our own,
we see an appreciable drop in performance, to levels resembling what we witnessed in Table 3. These results suggest
that our poorer performance on the blawg data is less due
to the classiﬁer and more due to the distinct nature of the
domain and the data itself.
No. Neutral
for Training
/ Subjective
Movie Revs.
Cust. Revs.
Unbalanced
Movie Revs.
Cust. Revs.
Table 4: Accuracy and F-score for Subjectivity Analysis
— External Only Training and Test Data
Sequential Subjectivity – Polarity Analysis
LingPipe also permits the sequential application of subjectivity and polarity analysis via LM. We subsequently used
the subjectivity model constructed from the Customer Reviews data above and ran it on our unbalanced data set from
Section 4.3.1. This produced an accuracy of 0.70 with P =
0.69, R = 0.64. Although this represents a modest improvement in performance over results in 4.3.1, it also suggests
that training with enough suitable and sizable supplemental
training data may boost performance. What is clear is that
in order to beneﬁt appreciably from such a ﬁrst stage subjectivity ﬁlter, one would need to obtain accuracy levels substantially higher than we have witnessed using these three
external resources.
Also worth noting is that the higher
precision requirements of operational environments at the
expense of recall may be acceptable, depending on customer
14To avoid giving the Movie Review database with its 10,000 sentences
an unfair advantage over the other two in Table 4, we used half the
set when running side-by-side comparisons with the ‘balanced’ collections.
needs and use cases.
Thus a system may miss some evidence, but still be able to perform well enough to make
sound global sentiment assessments.
CONCLUSIONS
We conduct a survey on opinion mining techniques and
discuss how this new ﬁeld could be applied to the growing
domain of legal blogs. Opinion mining promises to be highly
beneﬁcial to legal practitioners who must remain current in
new developments about the law and the legal profession.
We also perform a series of preliminary experiments on
opinion mining in blawgs, which may help answer some basic research questions about sentiment analysis in the legal
space, such as appropriate applications of this technology
and the strengths and weaknesses of Language Model vs.
Naive Bayes classiﬁers.
Introductory as this study is, it
leaves open other questions about more sophisticated opinion mining applications, such as those that examine authoritative legal perspectives of current issues under scrutiny by
the courts.
Observations on Findings
Opinion mining is a hard problem, in particular when
done on real data.
The results of our eﬀorts to harness
Language Modeling and Naive Bayes techniques have yet
to meet operational requirements. We can, however, make
some meaningful observations.
• Using a balanced corpus simply does not reﬂect how
the data is actually distributed. Negative sentiment
often occurs more frequently than positive sentiment
in the blogosphere. This ﬁnding may call into question
results from other studies which rely exclusively upon
balanced training data .
• A Naive Bayes classiﬁer with Language Model smoothing performs slightly better than Language Modeling
alone, at least for reasonably small values of n.
• Masking or removing product names does not have any
signiﬁcant impact on our results.
• Adding subjectivity data from a diﬀerent domain may
help, provided that it is relevant to the application and
of suﬃcient quantity.
Future Work
We are currently investigating other approaches to opinion
mining which use alternatives to language modeling. These
include other basic binary classiﬁers for the sentiment and
polarity analysis tasks. But future mining tools should also
be able to assess and summarize the sentiment of legal communities, at levels that may not yet require human-level
understanding.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Breck Baldwin and Bob Carpenter for their
insights into the application of language modeling in this
domain. We are also grateful to Therese Peterson for her
querying, editing and annotating services.