.",- «, f--tef
U.S. Geological Survey
Professional Paper 1348
The region of the Imbrium and Serenitatis basins during six episodes of
lunar history. From lower right to upper left, the paintings depict the Moon's
surface as it may have looked (1) late in the Nectarian Period; (2) in the Early
Imbrian Epoch, soon after formation of the Imbrium basin; (3) late in the
Early Imbrian Epoch; (4) in the Late Imbrian Epoch; (5) in the Eratosthenian
Period; and (6) as it is today Paintings by Donald E. Davis, courtesy of the
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY
OF THE MOON
ASTRONAUT DAVID SCOTT AT STATION 6, APOLLO 15 LANDING SITE. APOLLO 15 FRAME H-11514.
The Geologic History
of the Moon
By DON E. WILHELMS
with sections by JOHN F. McCAULEY
and NEWELL J. TRASK
U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY PROFESSIONAL PAPER 1348
A comprehensive review of lunar science and evolution
from the viewpoint of historical geology, based on data from
both photogeologic observations and lunar-sample analysis
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE, WASHINGTON : 1987
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
DONALD PAUL HODEL, Secretary
U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
Dallas L. Peck, Director
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Wilhelms, Don Edward, 1930-
The geologic history of the Moon.
(U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1348)
Bibliography: p. 283-292
Supt. of Docs, no.: I 19.16:1348
1. Lunar geology. I. McCauley, John Francis, 1932-
. II. Trask, NewellJefferson, 1930-
. III. Title. IV. Series: United
States. Geological Survey. Professional Paper 1348.
QB592.W5 1987
For sale by the Books and Open-File Reports Section,
U.S. Geological Survey, Federal Center, Box 25425, Denver, CO 80225
Preface ........................................................... VII
Acknowledgments ................................................. VII
Abstract .......................................................... VIII
Chapter 1. General features ......................................
2. The stratigraphic approach ............................
3. Crater materials ...................................... 25
4. Basin materials Orientale ............................ 55
5. Mare materials .......................................
6. Structure ............................................. 105
7. Relative ages ......................................... 121
8. Pre-Nectarian system ................................. 137
9. Nectarian System ..................................... 161
10. Lower Imbrian Series .................................. 193
11. Upper Imbrian Series .................................. 227
12. Eratosthenian System .................................. 247
13. Copernican System .................................... 263
14. Summary ............................................. 274
References cited .................................................. 283
Index ............................................................ 295
[Plates are at end of book]
1. Index to photographic coverage
2. Photographic coverage of the Moon, showing best photograph or
set of photographs of each area
3. Geologic map of ringed basins
5. Structural features
6. Pre-Nectarian system
7. Nectarian System
8. Lower Imbrian Series
9. Upper Imbrian Series
10. Eratosthenian System
11. Copernican System
12. Geologic map of the present Moon
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
By DON E. WILHELMS
The Moon held little interest for most scientists after its basic
astronomic properties had been determined and before direct explo-
ration appeared likely .
Speculations about its internal structure, composition, and origin
were only broadly constrained by cosmochemical data from mete-
orites and solar spectra, and by astronomic data about its size, shape,
motions, and surficial properties .
Most investigators who were active before the space age began in 1957
believed that significant new advances in lunar knowledge required
acquisition of additional data.
One analytical technique, however, was insufficiently exploited
before the 1960's. Few scientists since the geologist Gilbert (1893) had
studied the lunar surface systematically from the historical point of
view. Those who did immediately obtained important new insights
about the Moon's postaccretion evolution . Then, the pioneering work of E.M. Shoemaker and R.J.
Hackman focused the powerful methods of stratigraphy on lunar
problems . Stratigraphy is the study of the spatial
distribution, chronologic relations, and formative processes of layered
rocks. Its application to the Moon came relatively late and met resis-
tance, but the fundamental stratigraphic approach 
was, in fact, readily transferable to the partly familiar, partly exotic
deposits visible on the lunar surface . *
Stratigraphic methods were applied systematically during the
1960's in a program of geologic mapping that aimed at reconstructing
the evolution of the Moon's nearside .
Order was discovered among the seemingly diverse and random
landforms of the lunar surface by determining the sequence in which
they were emplaced. The stratigraphic sequence and the emplace-
ment processes deduced therefrom provided a framework for explora-
tion by the Apollo program and for the task of analyzing the returned
During the 1970's, the sophisticated labor of hundreds of analysts
was brought to bear on the wealth of material returned by the Amer-
ican Apollo and the Soviet Luna spacecraft. Our present perception of
the Moon has emerged from the interplay between sampling studies
and stratigraphically based photogeology. These two approaches are
complementary: Photogeology contributes a historical context by
viewing the whole Moon from a distant vantage point, whereas the
samples contain information on rock types and absolute ages unob-
tainable by remote methods. Neither approach by itself, even the
most elaborate program of direct surface exploration, could have
yielded the current advanced state of knowledge within the relatively
short time of two decades .
This volume presents a model for the geologic evolution of the
Moon that has emerged mainly from this integration of photogeologic
stratigraphy and sample analysis. Other aspects of the vast field of
lunar science are discussed here only insofar as they pertain to the
evolution of visible surface features. Chemical data obtained by
Use of the prefix "geo-" for lunar and planetary studies has been criticized, but it is justified by: (1) applicability
to all other solid bodies of the geologic principles developed for the Earth; (2) elimination of the need for new terms
for every new world observed at geologically useful scales, whose number now exceeds 20; (3) the Greek etymology,
which includes the meanings "land" or "ground", and (4) two decades of usage . The prefix "seleno-" is no longer used by professional lunar scientists except in
some terms referring to coordinates, control points, or the global figure (selenographic, selenodetic). Although
"astrogeology" was chosen as a convenient and appropriate name for the U.S. Geological Survey's
branch devoted to lunar and planetary studies, "lunar (planetary) geology" is more commonly used. "Planetology" is
a broader term that includes such nongeologic sciences as atmospherics and planetary astronomy.
remote sensing supplement the photogeologic interpretations of some
geologic units (see chap. 5), and geophysical data obtained both from
lunar orbit and on the surface constrain hypotheses of the origin of
many internally generated structures and deposits. Studies of the
same data that treat the Moon as a whole, including speculations
about the intriguing but unsolved problem of its origin, have been
adequately covered in other reviews .
This volume is written primarily for geoscientists and other
planetologists who have examined some aspect of lunar or planetary
science and who want a review of lunar science from the viewpoint of
historical geology. It should also provide a useful summary for the
advanced student who is conversant with common geologic terms. It
may, furthermore, interest the geologist who has not studied the
Moon but who wishes to see how his methodology has been applied to
another planet.
The volume's organization reflects the stratigraphic practice of
first identifying and interpreting geologic units, then ranking them
in chronologic sequence over the whole planet. Chapter 1 presents
what may be considered the raw data by briefly describing the major
surface and subsurface lunar features and defining some common
terms. Chapter 2 explains the general philosophy of stratigraphy by
showing how it has been applied to some critical past and contempo-
rary lunar problems. Chapters 3 through 6 are devoted to the four
major classes of lunar features craters, basins, maria, and tectonic
structures with emphasis on craters and basins. These four chap-
ters contain descriptions and interpretations that apply to the rest of
the volume; except for some new hypotheses concerning basin origin
and lithospheric thickness, these chapters are based mostly on exist-
ing literature and should be of use mainly to the reader unfamiliar
with lunar geology. The rest of this volume is organized around the
dimension of time. Chapter 7 reviews general guidelines for ranking
lunar deposits in order of relative age. Chapters 8 through 13 trace the
histories of the craters, basins, and igneous materials belonging to
each of the six main divisions of the lunar stratigraphic column.
These six chapters constitute the core of the original contribution of
this volume and contain information for all of its intended audience.
The volume is summarized in chapter 14 and in 12 maps of the two
lunar hemispheres (pis. 1-12) at the end of this volume.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This volume is dedicated to Eugene M. Shoemaker, who, more
than any other individual, was responsible for the incorporation of
geology into the American space program. First, in his study of
Meteor Crater in Arizona, he developed a physical theory of the
impact process on which subsequent cratering investigations have
been based, and established the structural and petrographic indica-
tors of impact later used on the Earth and the Moon . With his colleague Edward C.-T.
Chao, he applied these criteria in establishing an impact origin for
the previously enigmatic Ries crater (Rieskessel), Germany , which has become a model for larger lunar
craters. Then, in four major papers written over two years ,
he (1) put lunar geologic mapping on the firm stratigraphic footing
that still supports it ; (2) cham-
pioned the impact interpretation of large fresh lunar craters by the
most convincing combination of arguments yet advanced ; (3) accurately appraised the objectives and future
course of lunar exploration, including the forerunner role of the small,
dry, and airless Moon in comparative planetology ; and (4) attacked the problem of extraterrestrial absolute ages
by means of the impact-cratering rate on the Earth . As chairman of the Joint Working Group responsible
for recommending a detailed program of scientific exploration and by daily contacts at the U.S. National Aeronautics
and Space Administration (NASA) headquarters in 1962 and 1963, he
was able to implement many of his sound and visionary concepts of
exploration strategy. He has followed up his earlier interests by
definitive studies of the lunar regolith, primary- and secondary-crater
populations, and the impact flux from interplanetary space . He was the
geologist on the experimenter team for the Ranger program, the
principal experimenter for the Surveyor television experiment, and
the leader of the field geology teams for Apollos 11,12, and 13. He has
continued to guide and inspire those of us fortunate enough to have
been associated with him during the development of lunar geologic
investigations.
The manuscript was prepared with the help of numerous other
scientists who are or were active in lunar research as members of the
U.S. Geological Survey's Branch of Astrogeology. John F. McCauley
contributed much of chapter 4, was codeveloper with me of many of
the concepts of stratigraphy and basin formation embodied in this
volume, and furnished valuable reviews of chapters 1 through 8.
Odette B. James and Paul D. Spudis helped fill gaps left by my
ignorance of lunar petrology and kindly supplied photographs of
lunar rocks and thin sections. James submitted the first version of the
section on mare-basalt samples and suggested major beneficial
changes in all the sections on petrology. Spudis contributed drafts of
the sections on Apollo 15 in chapter 10, read two versions of the entire
manuscript, and contributed many valuable suggestions to every
part. Richard J. Pike and Joseph M. Boyce contributed drafts of the
sections on complex craters (chap. 3) and the DL method (chap. 7),
respectively. Baerbel K. Lucchitta and David H. Scott contributed
drafts of much of chapter 6. Perceptive reviews were furnished by
Maurice J. Grolier and Carroll Ann Hodges of chapters 3 and 4,
respectively. Jay L. Inge prepared the shaded-relief base for the two-
hemisphere maps (pis. 1-12). Donald E. Davis prepared most of the
artistic illustrations. Gary D. Clow helped with the mathematics. The
manuscript furthermore benefited from the first-hand experience of
Survey geologists Gordon A. Swann, George E. Ulrich, and Edward W.
Wolfe as leaders or members of the field geology teams for Apollos 14,
15, 16, and 17. Non-Survey experts also generously helped with sec-
tions outside my fields of research. Discussions with Gunther W.
Lugmair (University of California, San Diego) and S. Ross Taylor
(Australian National University, Canberra) clarified many aspects of
geochronology and petrology. Carle M. Pieters (Brown University)
contributed figures and a valuable review of the section on remote
sensing in chapter 5.
I am most deeply indebted to Albert Estrada and David B.
Snyder. Estrada provided indispensible help in preparing the pho-
tographic illustrations and gave valuable counsel about scope. Snyder
read two versions of the manuscript in sequence from beginning to
end and greatly improved its clarity by his careful scrutiny and
This research was originally commissioned by the U.S. Geo-
logical Survey. Otherwise, the Survey's involvement in the lunar
program has been entirely funded by NASA under some 30 contracts.
Studies under Contracts R-66, T-1167B, T-5874A, T-66353G,
W13,130, and W13,709 led most directly to this volume. The NASA
personnel who monitored these contracts extended understanding
support of the geologic approach to deciphering the flood of data
returned so spectacularly from the Moon. Special thanks go to NASA
contract monitor Robert P. Bryson for his perception and support of
our approach during the most active phases of the program. Prepara-
tion of this manuscript was partly supported in 1978-80 by the
Planetary Geology Program Office of NASA, Stephen H. Dwornik and
Joseph M. Boyce, chiefs, under Contract W13,709. In 1977-80, both
the Lunar and Planetary Programs Office and the Planetary Geology
Program Office of NASA supported my research on chronology and
ringed basins that is incorporated into this volume. The Geochemis-
try and Geophysics Office of NASA, William L. Quaide, chief, sup-
ported the Lunar Geoscience Consortium under Contract W13,130,
which included my study of the maria also incorporated here.
More than two decades of study have established the major
features of lunar geologic style and history. The most numerous and
significant landforms belong to a size-morphology series of simple
craters, complex craters, and ringed basins that were formed by
impacts. Each crater and basin is the source of primary ejecta and
secondary craters that, collectively, cover the entire terra. The largest
impacts thinned, weakened, and redistributed feldspathic terra-
crustal material averaging about 75 km in thickness. Relatively small
volumes of basalt, generated by partial remelting of mantle material,
were erupted through the thin subbasin and subcrater crust to form
the maria that cover 16 percent of the lunar surface. Tectonism has
modified the various stratigraphic deposits relatively little; most
structures are confined to basins and large craters.
This general geologic style, basically simple though complex in
detail, has persisted longer than 4 aeons (1 aeon = 109 yr). Impacts
began to leave a visible record about 4.2 aeons ago, after the crust and
mantle had differentiated and the crust had solidified. At least 30
basins and 100 times that many craters larger than 30 km in diameter
were formed before a massive impact created the Nectaris basin about
3.92 aeons ago. Impacts continued during the ensuing Nectarian
Period at a lesser rate, whereas volcanism left more traces than
during pre-Nectarian time. The latest basin-forming impacts created
the giant and still-conspicuous Imbrium and Orientale basins during
the Early Imbrian Epoch, between 3.85 and 3.80 aeons ago. The rate
of crater-forming impacts continued to decline during the Imbrian
Period. Beginning in the Late Imbrian Epoch, mare-basalt flows
remained exposed because they were no longer obscured by many
large impacts. The Eratosthenian Period (3.2-1.1 aeons ago) and the
Copernican Period (1.1 aeons ago to present) were times of lesser
volcanism and a still lower, probably constant impact rate. Coper-
nican impacts created craters whose surfaces have remained brighter
and topographically crisper than those of the more ancient lunar
FIGURE 1.1. Lunar nearside photographed 4 days after full Moon from the Pic du Midi
Observatory, France, in August 1964. Left (west) half is illuminated at high Sun elevations,
which enhance albedo (brightness) variations, and right (east) part at lower Sun elevations,
which enhance relief by casting shadows. Terminator (line between dark and illuminated
areas) is at long 51 ° E. Extensive ray systems surround craters Copernicus (upper left center)
and Tycho (near bottom). Mare Nectaris, surrounded by concentric rings, is along termi-
nator at lower right.
Note: Before 1961, lunar directions were stated with reference to their position in the sky
as viewed from the Earth. Mare Orientate, the "Eastern Sea," is on the left limb of the Moon
as seen in the Northern Hemisphere, that is, near the east horizon of the Earth. In 1961, the
"astronautical convention" was adopted in anticipation of manned spaceflight: The direction
from which the Sun rises on the Moon was henceforth called east, as it is on the Earth. The
definition of north remained the same, but after 1961, more publications began orienting their
figures with north at the top rather than at the bottom (as it is seen in astronomic telescopes).
The 0° meridian is in the center of the nearside, and the diametrically opposite longitudal line
on the farside is 180°. On most maps, longitudes increase both eastward and westward from
the 0° meridian until meeting at the 180° meridian, which is also the terrestrial convention.
Some lunar maps use a 360° system of longitudes, increasing eastward from the 0° central
meridian. In this volume, the Orientate limb is considered the west, photographs are oriented
with north at the top except as noted, nearside longitudes are less than 90°, and farside
longitudes are greater than 90°.
1. GENERAL FEATURES
Surface ...
Subsurface
Near full Moon, the naked eye sees a contrast between dark and
light surfaces (of low and high albedo, respectively) that has been
fancied as a "man in the Moon" or other configurations (fig. 1.1). In
1609, Galileo noted that the dark spots are smooth and the brighter
areas rugged . These terrain types are still desig-
nated by their 17th-century names maria (singular, mare) and terrae
(singular, terra; commonly known as uplands or highlands; table 1.1).
The maria constitute about 16 percent, and the terrae 84 percent, of
the lunar surface. Maria occupy about 30 percent of the lunar near-
side, the hemisphere visible from the Earth; spacecraft exploration,
beginning with the Soviet Luna 3 in 1959 ,
showed that they constitute only about 2 percent of the farside (figs.
1.2-1.4). South of about lat 35° S., however, the proportions are
reversed; the southern farside is richer in maria than is the southern
nearside (fig. 1.5).
Most of the maria are approximately circular. The circular maria
are bordered by annular or arcuate, commonly mountainous terra
rims. The terra structures in which the circular maria lie are called
ringed basins or, simply, basins ; fol-
lowing Andersson and Whitaker, these convenient lettered names are used in this volume
in preference to some new names that were invented for use on the large-scale charts
made from Apollo orbital data]
Latin name
Common name
Description
Mare (maria)----
-- Sea (not used in this
Dark, smooth plains.
Lacus, palus, sinus -- - Small mare.
Terra (terrae) 1 -------- Highlands, uplands,
Rugged, relatively bright (high albedo)
continents.
Mons (montes)---------- Mount, mountain(s)------ High massif(s), generally forming
arcuate ranges.
Promontorium - Promontory----- ------- Mountains partly enclosed by mare.
Rupes-- Scarp Fault in mare or high arcuate scarp in
Dorsum (dorsa)--------- Mare ridge, wrinkle
Narrow ridge, mostly in mare.
Rima ( rimae)--------
- Ri 11 e-
Narrow, elongate depression (sinuous,
arcuate, or straight).
Vallis (valles)-------- Valley--------------- - Wide, elongate depression, commonly
consisting of inconspicuous craters.
Catena (catenae)------- Chain------------ ----- Chain of distinct craters.
-._. Crater- ---
--- Circular or subcircular depression,
generally bounded by a raised rim. 2
._ .. _____ _-__ Basin, ringed basin Large craterlike depression containing
one or more rings in addition to a
1 There is no sharp distinction between an individual "terra" and the "terrae."
"Terrestrial" refers to the planet Earth.
2 Usage has established the term "ejecta," for the material thrown out of craters,
as a singular noun, despite its origin as a Latin plural.
3 The terms "mare" and "basin" are commonly confused.
Genetically, these two fea-
tures are only indirectly related (see chap. 2).
Rasins are terra structures, not all
of which contain maria.
Efforts to alleviate this serious semantic confusion have led
to use of such terms as "mountain-bordered mare," "mare basin," "dry mare," "thalassoid"
 , and "multiringed basin."
Terms for basins that contain the
word "mare" are unsatisfactory, and even "basin" is misleading because these structures
are characterized by huge mountainous rings as much as by the excavated depression.
Nevertheless, it is probably too late to coin a new term.
In this volume, the term
"basin" or "ringed basin" is used for all lunar excavations at least 300 km in diameter;
a more exact definition has not yet been agreed upon (see chap. 4).
Kuiper, 1962). Most large mountainous rings or arcs that do not
encompass maria are also parts of basins (figs. 1.4, 1.5). Concentric
rings characterize all well-exposed basins.
The maria are mostly level and smooth at coarse scales but
contain local topographic relief. Mare ridges (dorsa) are long intricate
welts on the mare surfaces (fig. 1.6). Rilles (rimae) are narrow troughs
or grooves much longer than they are wide; they include genetically
distinct sinuous, arcuate, and straight varieties. Few ridges but many
arcuate and straight rilles cut the terrae as well as the maria. Dark-
mantling materials are as dark as or darker than the maria but
assume part of the topographic form of the underlying terrain (figs.
Craters, ranging in size from those visible with binoculars to
micropits observed on returned samples, are ubiquitous on the lunar
surface. At coarse scales, they are much more numerous on the terrae
than on the maria. Most lunar craters have rims elevated above, and
floors depressed below, the surrounding terrain. Craters smaller than
about 16 to 21 km in diameter have relatively featureless interiors;
larger craters are more complex, possessing central peaks, arcuate
wall terraces, and other interior landforms (see chap. 3). Some crater
exteriors resemble the adjacent terrain except for a short rim flank;
others display coarse concentric structure near the rim crest, grooves
on a lower rim flank, and numerous smaller satellitic craters, which.
are most conspicuous between about one and three crater radii from
the rim (fig. 1.6). Bright rays radiate hundreds or thousands of kilo-
meters from some craters (figs. 1.1,1.6).
Most terrae appear at first glance to consist of little except large,
randomly distributed, overlapping craters. However, regional dif-
ferences in terra morphology emerge upon further inspection
 . The central and northern nearside is
characterized by ridges and grooves radial to the Imbrium basin,
which contains Mare Imbrium (figs. 1.6-1.8). The terra east of the
neighboring circular basin, Serenitatis, has a choppier, less regular
pattern of elevations and depressions (fig. 1.7). Several regions con-
tain particularly dense concentrations of craters that are grouped in
chains or clusters. Concentric arcs of the Nectaris basin, which
encompass the small Mare Nectaris, are conspicuous in the southeast
quadrant (fig. 1.1). An even more conspicuous system of concentric
rings, radial lineations, and satellitic craters surrounds Mare Orien-
tale on the west limb of the Moon (fig. 1.9). Tkrra plains that are
smooth and level like the maria, but lighter in color, occupy more
crater floors and other depressions in and near the Imbrium- and
Orientale-radial terrains (figs. 1.8, 1.9) than in any other region.
These textural patterns in the Imbrium, Nectaris, and Orientale
regions, as described in detail in this volume, play major roles in
elucidating the geology of the Moon. They are expressions of major
stratigraphic units and form the basis for interpreting less distinctive
The farside seems, at first, to be even less regularly patterned
than the nearside. This difference is due mostly to the absence of
maria and of the extensive circum-Imbrium radial pattern that
characterize the nearside terrae. Later descriptions show that con-
centric and radial patterns also characterize the farside (fig. 1.4),
although they are generally less extensive, less pronounced, and less
well photographed than those of the nearside. The southern farside,
which contains most of the farside's maria, also contains the farside's
most conspicuous concentric rings and other noncrater morphologies
(fig. 1.5). A major purpose of this volume is to show the basic strat-
igraphic order that underlies the morphologic features of the terrae.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
FIGURE 1.2. East limb (right edge of lunar disc as seen from the Earth) and adjacent part of
farside, divided by long 90° E. Mare Crisium (C) is on nearside, and Maria Marginis (M)
and Smythii (S) partly on farside. Maria also fill such craters as Lomonosov (L; 93 km, 27°
N., 98°E.)andTsiolkovskiy(T; 180km, 20° S., 129° E.; partly in shadow; compare figs.
1.3, 1.4). Farside terrane in view, which is otherwise mostly terra, includes craters Fabry
(Fa; 179km, 43° N., 101°E.), Fleming (Fl; 130km), Hilbert(H; 170km), King(K; 77
km), and Pasteur (P; 235 km). A large subcircular area of light-colored plains lies between
Fleming and Lomonosov. Terminator is at long 131 ° E.; left-hand (west) edge of photograph
is at nearly the same longitude as terminator in figure I.I. Apollo 16 frame M 3021,
photographed by Apollo 16 mapping camera on Earthbound flight in April 1972.
Note: This volume includes photographs taken with three types of cameras carried in lunar
orbit by Apollo spacecraft: mapping or metric (M), panoramic (P), and hand-held or
bracket-mounted Hasselblads (H). All missions carried Hasselblads; Apollos 15 through 17
carried both mapping and panoramic cameras as well i
Note: Most crater diameters and positions in this volume are from Andersson and
Whitaker . Basin diameters and most crater diameters used in frequency studies are
from my measurements. Latitude is given before longitude throughout the volume. Coordi-
nates differ considerably among various maps, especially on the limbs and farside. One
degree of lunar latitude covers about 30 km.
1. GENERAL FEATURES
FIGURE 1.3. Part of southern farside centered on mare-filled crater Tsiolkovskiy (T).
Overlaps with fig. 1.2; compare Tsiolkovskiy and Hilbert (H; 170 km, 18° S., 108° E.).
Other craters: Langemak (L; 102 km; contains small mare patch), Fermi (F; 238 km), Milne
(M; 262 km; fig. 1.5), Jenner 0; 72 km; fig. 1.5), Pavlov (P; 141 km), Roche (R; 146 km;
superposed crater Pauli contains mare). PI, small ringed basin Planck (325 km, 60° S., 136°
E.; figs. 1.4, 1.5). Orbiter 3 frame M-121.
Note: Photographs transmitted from unmanned Lunar Orbiter spacecraft in 1966 and
1967 are labeled as follows: "Orbiter"
followed by mission number (1 5), M (medium resolution) or H (high resolution), and frame
number. Best Lunar Orbiter coverage of each area is outlined on plate 2.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
FIGURE 1 A. Equatorial and southern farside. Most of area is heavily cratered, smoother in
Gagarin (G; 272 km, 20° S., 149° E.) and north of Heaviside (H; 163 km, 11 ° S., 167°
E.). A distinct linear trough is north of Keeler (K; 169 km). Arcuate massifs below and to left
(west) of Keeler and Heaviside are parts of Keeler-Heaviside basin (KH). Maria fill
Tsiolkovskiy (T), Mare Ingenii (MI, in Ingenii basin), Jules Verne (]\f; 134 km), part of
Poincare basin (Po; compare fig. 1.5), and other depressions. Other craters: Chaplygin (C;
124 km) and Van de Graaff (V, double); other basins: Planck (PI, compare fig. 1.3) and
Mendeleev (M; 320 km, 6° N., 142° E.). Mosaic of Orbiter 1 frame M-l 15 (left) and
Orbiter 2 frame M-75 (right).
FIGURE 1.5. Southeast limb, showing concentration of maria and various ringed basins (see
chap. 4). A, massifs of Australe basin, which enclose Mare Australe, consisting of many
small mare matches resting in such craters as Jenner (J; compare fig. 1.3) and Lyot (L; 141
km); An, Antoniadi crater or basin (135 km); C, outer ring of Crisium basin; M, Milne
(compare fig. 1.3); MS, Mare Smythii in Smythii basin (compare fig. 1.2); PI, Planck basin
(barely discernible; compare fig. 1.3); Po, Poincare basin, containing several mare patches
(compare fig. 1.4); S, Schrodinger double-ringed basin (320 km, 76° S., 134° E.).
Indefinite basins (table 4.2) include Amundsen-Ganswindt (AG), Baimer-Kapteyn (BK),
and Sikorsky-Rittenhouse (SR). Grooves are radial to Schrodinger and to Nectans basin
(N; basin is outside photograph). Crater Humboldt (H; 207 km, 27° S., 81° E.) contains
rilles and small mare patches. Orbiter 4 frame M 9.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
FIGURE 1.6. Telescopic view of circular Mare Imbrium (MI) and Imbrium basin. MF,
Mare Fngoris; PP, Palus Putredinis; arrow, Apollo 15 landing site. Imbrium-basin rim is
composed of Monies Alpes (MA I), Monies Apenninus (MAp), Monies Caucasus (MC),
and lerra occupied by Iridum crater bounding mare fealure Sinus Iridum (SI). Lunar
stratigraphic scheme of Shoemaker and Hackman is based on relalions among
Imbrium basin, planar material of Apennine Bench (AB), Archimedes (left of A), mare
material, Eraloslhenes (E), and Copernicus (C; 95 km; compare fig. 1.1; salellilic cralers are
visible easl of crater) (see chaps. 2, 7). "Wrinkle ridges" (dorsa) are above A; rilles are below
PP. Crater pairs (see chap. 3) include Aristillus and Aulolycus (righl of A), Caroline
Herschel and Heis (CH), Feuillee and Beer (FB), and Helicon and Leverrier (HL). Olher
fealures: Cassini (Ca), Euler (Eu), Lambert (L), Manilius (M), Plato (PI), Pythagoras
(Py), and Timocharis (T); many irregular craters north of Mare Frigoris; d, dark-manlled
lerra surface. Mounl Wilson Observalory pholograph, catalog No. 257.
1. GENERAL FEATURES
FIGURE 1.7. Telescopic view centered on Mare Seremtatis (MS), overlapping area of figure
1.6. Lineations in Monies Haemus (H) on southern part of Serenitatis rim are radial to
Monies Apenninus; nonlineate hummocky terrain adjoins Monies Caucasus and Monies
Alpes. Terrain easl of Mare Serenitalis consisls of irregular cralers and massifs. Olher
fealures: Ar, Arisloleles (87 km, 50° N., 17° E.); At, Alias (87 km); E, Eudoxus; H,
Hercules; JC, Julius Caesar; M, Manilius; MH, Mare Humboldlinaum; MT, Mare
Tranquillilalis; P, Posidonius; R, Killer (29 km, 2° N., 19° E.); RH, Rima Hyginus;
densely cralered norlhern terrain including W. Bond (W; 158 km, 65° N., 4° E.); d, dark-
mantling material. Arrows, Apollo 15 and 17 landing sites. Mounl Wilson Observatory
photograph, calalog No. 262.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
»*BL.? '\;,AV«t((J?J
1. GENERAL FEATURES
FIGURE 1.9. Southwest limb (lower left as seen from northern
hemisphere of the Earth). Arrows indicate long 90 W.; upper
arrow on equator and lower on south pole. Conspicuous linea-
tions are radial to Mare Orientale and ringed Orientale basin
(centered at 20° S., 95° W.). Light-colored plains form part of
terrain outside Orientale radials, for example, in Schiller-Zuc-
chius basin (SZ), in central part of crater Schickard (S; 227
km, 44° S., 55° W.), and in and near crater Wargentin (W; 84
km). Other basins: Bailly (B; 300 km, 67° S., 69C W.),
Grimaldi (G; partly mare-filled), Mendel-Rydberg (MR,
barely visible), and South Pole-Aitken (SA, mountainous
massifs); OP, part of Oceanus Procellarum in Procellarum
basin. Footprint-shaped crater is Schiller (180 km). Orbiter 4
frame M-180.
FIGURE 1.8. South-central nearside, including parts of "Fra Mauro peninsula" (FM) and
Mare Nubium (MN), mare-filled crater Pitatus (Pi), fresh crater Tycho (T; 85 km, 43° S.,
11 ° W.; compare fig. 1.1), moderately fresh crater Werner (We), and north-south-trending
"backbone" of terra, including "chain" of large craters Ptolemaeus (P; 153 km, 9° S., 2°
W), Alphonsus (Alp), Arzachel (Ar), Purbach (Pu), Regiomontanus (R), and Walter
(Wa, 140 km, 33 S., 1 ° E). Smooth terra plains lighter than maria fill many craters, including
those in "chain" and Albategnius (Alb), Deslandres (D), Hipparchus (H), Orontius (O),
Playfair G (PG), and Stofler (S). Rupes Recta (RR, "Straight Wall") and grooves
("sculpture") in upper right quadrant are radial to Imbnum basin. Apollo 14 landing site is
just beyond north edge of photograph, above letters FM. Mount Wilson Observatory
photograph.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
TABLE 1.2. Spaceflights that provided lunar data
[Dates are beginnings of mission activities at the Moon.
Ranger 7 impacted on August 1, 1964 (G.m.t.)]
Type of mission
Landing location or orbital parameters
Surveyor 1
Lunar Orbiter 1
Lunar Orbiter 2
Lunar Orbiter 3
Surveyor 3
Lunar Orbiter 4
Explorer 35
Lunar Orbiter 5
Surveyor b
Surveyor 6
Surveyor 7
Fi rst impact- -
First unmanned flyby photography------------
First preimpact photography
Preimpact photography
Last preimpact photography -
Unmanned flyby photography
First unmanned landing---- --------------
First unmanned orbital; gamma-ray
Unmanned landing--
First unmanned orbital photography- -
Unmanned orbital photography
Unmanned 1 and ing
Unmanned orbital photography-
Unmanned landing ---
Unmanned orbital photography (global)
Unmanned orbital magnetics
Unmanned orbital photography
Unmanned landing, first chemical analysis
1 and ing-
First unmanned landing in terra
Unmanned flyby, first returned film-
First manned orbital-
Manned orbital------ ------
First manned landing
Unmanned flyby, returned film--
Manned landing -
Manned flyby (aborted landing)-
First unmanned sample return -
Unmanned flyby, returned film-
Lunakhod 1, first unmanned rover
First manned landing in terra
Manned landing, first long mission -
Unmanned orbital-
Unmanned sample return --
1 and ing-- - -
Last manned landing-
Lunakhod 2, unmanned rover-
Last unmanned sample return
Flank of crater Autolycus, lat 30° N., long 0°.
Farside and east limb; altitude, 65,000 km.
Mare Nubium (Cognitum), lat 10.6° S., long 20.7° W.
Mare Tranquil 1 itatis, lat. 2.6° N., long 24.7° E.
Floor of crater Alphonsus, lat 12.9° S., long 2.4° W.
Farside and west limb; altitude, 9,960 to 11,570 km.
Oceanus Procellarum, lat 7.1° N., long 65.4° W.
Perilune, 350 km.
Mare in crater Flamsteed P, lat 2.5° S., long 43.2° W.
Inclination, 12°; perilunes, 190 and 40 km.
Perilune, 165 km.
Perilune, 100 km.
Inclination, 12°; perilune, 50 km.
Oceanus Procellarum, lat 18.9° N., long 62.1° W.
Inclination, 21°; perilune, 55 km.
Oceanus Procellarum, lat 3.2° S., long 23.4° W.
Inclination, 85°; perilune, 2,705 km.
Perilune, 830 km .
Inclination, 85°; perilunes, 195 and 100 km.
Mare Tranquil 1 itatis, lat 1.4° N., long 23.1° E.
Sinus Medii, lat 0.5° N. , long 1.5° W.
Flank of crater Tycho, lat 40.9° S., long 11.5° W.
Altitude, >3,300 km.
Perilune, 110 km.
Best perilune, 15 km.
Mare Tranquil 1 itatis, lat 0.7° N., 23.4° E.
Southern farside and west limb; perilune, 2,200 km(?).
Oceanus Procellarum, lat 3.2° S., long 23.4° W.
Southern farside and west limb.
Mare Fecunditati s, lat 0.7° S., long 56.3° E.
Altitude, >1,120 km.
Sinus Iridum, lat 38.3° N., long 35.0° W.
Fra Mauro highlands, lat 3.7° S., long 17.5° W.
Apennine-Hadley region, lat 26.1° N., long 3.7° E.
Best perilune, 77 km(?).
Crisium-basin rim, lat 3.5° N., long 56.5° E.
Descartes highlands, lat 9.0° S., long 15.5° E.
Taurus-Littrow Valley, lat 20.2° N., long 30.8° E.
Mare in crater Le Monnier, lat 25.8° N., long 30.5° E.
Mare Crisium, lat 12.7° N. , long 62.2° E.
SUBSURFACE
Spacecraft exploration has provided some information about the
configuration of materials below the lunar surface. The uppermost
layers of both the maria and the terrae consist of fragmental material
called regolith . Regoliths are
generally thinner than about 5 or 6 m on the maria and thicker than
that on the terrae . They dominate the lunar scene at closeup scales (fig. 1.10) but
are not evident in the telescopic and Lunar Orbiter photographs
shown here, except as they affect albedo (figs. 1.1-1.9). The term "soil"
is commonly used either as a synonym for regolith or in reference to
its fine surficial material. Because this volume emphasizes regional
relations, it does not discuss the regolith in detail.
The underlying bedrock of the maria is basaltic and has a density
of 3.3 to 3.4 g/cm3. Mare basalt typically extends hundreds of meters
below the surface and locally reaches depths of about 5 km (see chap.
5). In contrast, the terra bedrock is feldspathic (plagioclase-rich)
material with a lower density estimated at 2.90 to 3.05 g/cm3 . Seismic data indicate that this
terra material forms a crust 45 to 60 km thick in the west-central
nearside and 75 km thick in part of the southeastern nearside . Extrapolations of these
measurements to other regions are based on elevation data, estimates
of the crustal density, and models of isostatic compensation, all of
which are subject to further refinement . Where measured, average elevations are higher, rela-
tive to the Moon's center of mass, on the farside than on the nearside
 ; the crust maybe as
thick as 120 km under some elevated terra on the farside . Most estimates of the mean crustal thickness
fall within the range 74 ± 12 km . A mean
thickness of 62 km corresponds to about 10 percent of the Moon's
volume, of 74 km to about 12 percent, and of 86 km to about 14 percent
(radius, 1,738 km).
Little is known about lunar intracrustal structure, except that
seismic velocities appear to increase at about 20 to 25 km below the
surface of southern Oceanus Procellarum .
This discontinuity may indicate a change in physical state (open
cracks above; solid, denser material below) or in chemical composition
 . At least the upper
few kilometers of the terra crust consists of breccia, a rock type
composed of angular fragments (clasts) set in a finer-grained matrix.
Beneath the terra crust and constituting all or most of the
remaining lunar volume is the ultramafic lunar mantle (fig. 1.11). Its
density is close to that of mare basalt and to the mean lunar density,
3.34 g/cm3. Seismic data suggest that the mantle is fairly uniform at
least to l,100±100-km depth, although small seismic-velocity
changes have been modeled . Seismic shear
waves are attenuated below 1,100 ±100 km. This central part of the
Moon may or may not include melted zones and (or) a chemically
distinct (metallic or sulfide-rich) core .
In the past, the mechanically deformable elastic lithosphere
seems to have coincided with the terra crust, which may be consid-
ered the petrologic or chemical lithosphere (see chaps. 6,8). Today, the
elastic lithosphere must include much of the mantle as well.
These basic facts or assumptions about the lunar subsurface are
needed as background for later discussions of lunar tectonism and
petrogenesis and for perspective on the overall constitution of the
Moon. This volume, however, mostly discusses the three-dimensional
form of the materials in the upper few kilometers or tens of kilometers
beneath the terra and mare surfaces.
1. GENERAL FEATURES
FIGURE 1.10. Astronaut views of lunar surface.
A. Lunar Module and astronaut at Apollo 11 landing site. Regolith consists of loose,
footprint-compacted material and a few rocks. Apollo 11 frame H-5931.
B. Wall of Rima Hadley (Hadley Rille) at Apollo 15 landing site, showing the only inplace
outcrops of lunar strata visited by astronauts, overlain by thin regolith and loose boulders.
Monies Apennmus, in distance, appear smooth because of cover of loose debris
(compare rugged appearance of mountains in fig. 1.6). Apollo 15 frame H 12115.
HIGH-VELOCITY
moonquakes
Negative Vs gradient
moonquakes
EXPLANATION
n Seismometers
Moonquakes
FIGURE 1.11. Two interpretations of major features of lunar crust and mantle.
A. Schematic equatorial slice through entire Moon. All known endogenic moonquakes are
on nearside. Crust believed to be thicker on farside than on nearside. Longitudes of
Apollo seismometers are shown. From Coins and others .
Depth (km)
Middle 7.5-8
1,400-1,600
B. Similar crustal structure but different mantle structure hypothesized by Latham and
others . V' compressional-wave velocity; Vs, shear-wave velocity; CT, Poisson's
ratio; Q , quality factor for shear waves.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
LONGITUDE (DEGREES)
LONGITUDE (DEGREES)
KHm CONTOUR
FIGURE 1.12. Approximate crustal thicknesses (in kilometers) on nearside (A) and farside (B). From Bills and Ferrari
 .
FIGURE 2.1 (OVERLEAF). Geologic map of part of areas covered by figures 1.6 and 1.7. Important units include: Cq, Copernican crater materials; CId, Copernican, Eratostheman, or Imbnan
dark-mantling materials; EC, Eratosthenian crater materials; Em, Eratosthenian mare materials; Ic t and Ic2, Imbrian crater materials; Im, Imbrian mare materials; Ip, Imbnan plains materials
(Apennine Bench Formation); lal, Alpes Formation; lap, materials of Monies Apennmus; If, FraMauro Formation; Iplt, Imbrian or pre-Imbnan materials, undivided; plr, pre-Imbnan rugged
materials. Arrow, Apollo 15 landing site. From Wilhelms and McCauley .
2. THE STRATIGRAPHIC APPROACH
General principles ................................................. 17
Case histories ..................................................... 17
Craters ........................................................ 17
Mare versus basin .............................................. 19
Terra materials ................................................. 19
Correlation of samples and stratigraphic units ......................... 21
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
Some earlier observers, influenced by experience with terrestrial
geology, interpreted the Moon's surface in structural terms. Real or
imaginary alignments of landforms were construed as faults or folds,
and the present topography was explained as the product of pro-
gressive endogenic deformation of an originally simple surface . Crater and basin rims were thought to have
been emplaced gradually along arcuate fissures. Chronologic
sequences can be partly inferred in these structural models. A small
crater inside a larger, or one crater rim that cuts across another, are
signs of relative age in all but the most contrived scenarios. A sharp
scarp that cuts a mare surface must be younger than the surface.
Our present understanding of lunar geology, however, has
resulted from interpreting surface relations in terms of stratigraphic
units (figs. 2.1, 2.2). Building upon centuries of thought that appar-
ently began in 1669 with Nicolaus Steno ,
stratigraphers studying either the Earth or the Moon treat obaerva-
tions in terms of three-dimensional units of material. They do not
consider a crater or basin as an isolated landform but as the source of
a deposit. Similarly, a mare is not merely a surface with a certain
color or smoothness but the upper bound of a stack of three-dimen-
sional material layers. Each crater or mare deposit (1) is stratiform or
tabular, (2) has a finite, normally varying thickness, (3) is laterally
continuous over a finite area, (4) rests on other units, and (5) is
bounded above either by additional units or by a free surface .
Even topographically undistinctive terrains are composed of discrete
rock units (fig. 2.3).
These geometric properties of discrete rock bodies imply that
each body was formed at some instant or over some finite interval
during the course of geologic time. Upon deposition, each crater and
mare unit extended until it pinched out naturally or abutted against
an obstacle. Interruptions of such depositional patterns as radiality of
crater ejecta indicate blockage by an obstacle, superposition of a
younger unit, or transection by a later structure (fig. 2.25). Simply
put, younger units overlie and thus modify older units. Age relations
can be detected as far as the units extend. For the Moon, superposi-
tional and transectional relations can generally be seen and inter-
preted in temporal terms much more quickly and efficiently from a
photograph than on the surface. These simple observations form the
basis for any understanding of lunar geologic history.
The detection and mapping of stratigraphic units and sequences
do not necessarily imply that the genesis of the units is known but
only that each unit or sequence was formed by a single process or
related processes. A crater deposit could equally well be composed of
impact ejecta or extruded volcanic material; nonstratigraphic criteria
may be needed to distinguish between these origins. Matters of recog-
nition and interpretation of units are kept separate as far as possible
in photogeologic work . A major
purpose of stratigraphic studies, however, is to help determine the
origins of the units and of their constituent rocks. The debate about
internal or endogenic origin versus impact or exogenic origins of lunar
features is a thread running through lunar studies since their begin-
CASE HISTORIES
Three examples illustrate the application of stratigraphic princi-
ples to problems of origin. Before direct exploration began,
stratigraphic and theoretical studies had formulated pertinent ques-
tions and obtained many answers to genetic problems. Then, the
major remaining problems were solved in general terms by data
obtained directly from the Moon's surface by nine missions in the
seven years between the flight of Apollo 11 in 1969 and the Soviet
unmanned sampling mission Luna 24 in 1976 (table 1.2). The search
for more specific answers, especially to the third question, the origin
of terra materials, remains a field of active investigation. Later chap-
ters of this volume further consider these "case histories" in a strat-
igraphic context.
The exogenic-endogenic controversy about the origin of craters
probably occupied more early literature than did any other lunar
topic . The only major competitor for journal space was the Moon's
surficial layer, and even that subject was commonly discussed with
regard to impact-versus-volcanic arguments about crater origin . The debate continued through the era of Ranger, early
Luna, Surveyor, and Lunar Orbiter exploration . Caldera
origin was favored or entertained for several types of craters and is
still favored by a few observers .
However, the impact origin of large fresh craters typified by Coper-
nicus (fig. 1.6), and of most craters that share its principal features,
had been settled in most minds at the beginning of the space age
 .
Part of the solution was stratigraphic. An origin had to be consis-
tent both with the morphology of typical crater deposits and with the
spatial distribution of craters superposed on other stratigraphic
units. The exterior deposits are massive, extensive, and similar in
lateral morphologic gradation around craters ranging over more than
five orders of magnitude in diameter. Therefore, the crater-formation
process (1) released enormous energies and (2) operated similarly at
all scales. These properties characterize impacts of cosmic projectiles,
whose approach velocities range from the escape velocity of the Moon
(2.4 km/s) to about 70 km/s, most typically from 16 to 20 km/s . Relative to a planetary target, these velocities
are hypervelocity, that is, greater than the speed of sound in the
impacted medium . The
hypervelocity projectiles range in size from dust particles to small
asteroids. Thus, large primary impacts from space generate almost
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
unlimited kinetic energies. Projectiles launched from the primary
crater at lesser velocities (max 2.4 km/s) create morphologically var-
ied secondary craters over great distances. The repetitive map pat-
terns of crater deposits and the detailed morphologies of both primary
and secondary craters (see chap. 3) match those of experimental
impact and explosion craters much more closely than those of volcanic
Stratigraphic relations, in combination with the properties
expected of cosmic projectiles, also explain the spatial distribution of
craters. The number of craters superposed on a given terrane is
generally proportional to the age of the terrane . For example, craters are more abundant on the older
terrae than on the younger maria (figs. 1.6,1.7). Different ages of the
terranes and not different origins of the craters account for this
relation. Within a given terrane, small craters are always more abun-
dant than large craters, the sizes and frequencies are systematically
related, and the most conspicuous craters are randomly scattered.
This distribution is consistent with the inverse mass-frequency dis-
tribution of observable cosmic objects . Nonran-
dom distributions, which are also observed, are equally diagnostic of
impact origins: Secondary craters are grouped around larger primar-
ies. Apparently nonrandom distributions of large craters, such as the
FIGURE 2.2. Stratigraphic relations of craters Delisle (De; 25 km) and Diophantus (Di; 18 km), mare materials, and Imbrium basin. Massifs of Imbrium protrude
through mare surface as islands (1). Mare unit (2) is overlain by ejecta of Delisle (3). Another mare unit containing sinuous rille (4) embays Delisle ejecta. Secondary
craters of Diophantus (5) are superposed on rilled mare unit and Delisle.
A. Apollo 15 frame M-2076.
2. THE STRATIGRAPHIC APPROACH
north-south-trending "chain" in the south-central nearside terra (fig.
1.8), which were ascribed to major subsurface structures in the early
literature , actually are coincidental
alignments of primary craters of different ages . When large craters of the same age are plotted together,
almost all lineaments disappear (pis. 6 11). Afalloff in crater density
in the terra near the mare borders results from the inverse size-
frequency distribution: The missing craters are mantled by ejecta of
the largest members of the impact series, the ringed basins (figs. 1.6,
1.7). Thus, in any one epoch, the distributions of most large lunar
craters are truly random and would require an internal generating
process as random as primary impact a prerequisite in conflict with
the spatial regularities commonly cited by proponents of a volcanic or
tectonic origin.
The origin of craters having apparently atypical morphologies or
size-frequency distributions remained to be learned by a combination
of remotely based analysis and sampling during the 1970's. Although
no large craters were sampled individually, the overwhelming evi-
dence from returned rock samples is that almost all lunar craters are
of impact origin. The large degraded craters of the terrae, which
apparently possess only a truncated rim flank, originally resembled
fresh craters but have been eroded by impacts and deposition of later
ejecta (fig. 2.3; chaps. 8, 9). Continued study has uncovered impact or
modification processes that account for most of the odd landforms
once ascribed to volcani&m. Most elongate and irregular craters and
clustered craters were formed by oblique or simultaneous primary or
secondary impacts (chap. 3). Anomalous uplift of floors of impact
craters in basins accounts for most remaining departures from the
typical morphologies of large craters (chap. 6). Circular craters with
dark halos were formed by impact excavation of dark materials from
beneath lighter strata (chap. 13). A few small craters, all associated
with mare or other dark deposits, may be endogenic (chap. 5).
Impacts, therefore, created most lunar craters and thus are empha-
sized in this volume.
Mare versus basin
One of the most important products of the historical approach
was the discovery that a mare and the basin that contains it are
distinct features. Before the 1960's, these two features were almost
universally thought to have been formed by the same process, either
exogenic or endogenic; the terms "mare" and "basin" were equated.
Even later, one might read that "Mare Imbrium" was created by a
giant impact or that the "Imbrium basin" yielded samples of basaltic
lava. There is conclusive stratigraphic evidence, however, that the
mare materials are younger than the basin materials. Such craters as
Archimedes that lie inside the Imbrium basin (figs. 1.6, 2.1) must be
younger than that basin , except in the unlikely case
that the basin rim grew up along internal ring fractures. The mare
materials that fill Archimedes are younger still . In
stratigraphic terms , the sequence,
from oldest to youngest, is: (1) basin material, (2) plains material of
the Apennine Bench, (3) deposits of Archimedes, and (4) mare mate-
rial (figs. 2.1, 2.4).
Early work also established the genetic relation of the circum-
Imbrium terrane to the Imbrium basin. Gilbert (1893) and Baldwin
 perceived the radiality of the "Imbrium sculpture" sys-
tem of grooves, and Shoemaker and Hackman added the recog-
nition of craterlike Imbrium ejecta deposits (figs. 1.6-1.8). Mare
Serenitatis fills another circular basin, which is overlain by the
Imbrium sculpture or deposits (fig. 1.7). Yet Mare Serenitatis is
unaffected by the Imbrium deposits, and so considerable time must
have intervened after the Serenitatis basin formed and before Mare
Serenitatis filled it .
Maria and basins were, therefore, formed by different processes.
Even before the Apollo missions, most workers had accepted these
simple stratigraphic observations and knew that the maria are of
volcanic and the basins of impact origin. Furthermore, the maria were
identified as basaltic by their dark color and characteristic landforms.
The basins were known to be exogenic by their similarity to craters
and by the fact that only the kinetic energies of asteroidal masses
impacting at cosmic velocities could supply the requisite energies of
formation.
These conclusions were then confirmed by the first four Apollo
landings between July 1969 and July 1971 (table 1.2). Apollo 11
returned rocks with basaltic composition and unmistakable igneous
textures. Apollo 12 sampled other basalt flows half an aeon younger
that could not have been generated by the same event as the Apollo 11
basalt samples. 2 -1 The first nonmare mission, Apollo 14, returned
entirely different rock complex impact breccia from deposits of
the Imbrium basin (fig. 2.5A). Landing in the area covered by figure
2.1, Apollo 15 returned samples whose radiometric ages demonstrate
a half-aeon age gap between the Imbrium basin and some of the mare
basalt it contains (fig. 2.5B).
Terra materials
"Origin" of terra materials may mean either the chemical dif-
ferentiation and igneous evolution that shortly followed the Moon's
formation (see chap. 8), or the process that emplaced the visible
landforms and photogeologically observed stratigraphic units. Stra-
tigraphers, and this volume, concentrate on the timing and processes
of the second, emplacement phase of the rocks' history.
Interpretations of emplacement processes and of relative ages
are complementary. Recognition that the circum-Imbrium material is
of impact origin enabled it to be used as a stratigraphic horizon;
z-! One aeon = 109 years, or 1 billion years in American usage. Ages in this volume have been recalculated using
the radioactive-decay constants recommended in 1977 by the International Union of Geological Sciences . Most of them differ numerically from the ages given in the references cited in this volume.
B. Cutaway view including geologic cross section drawn along bent line in A. Interpretations of age relations depend on interpretations of landforms as expressions of
three-dimensional, laterally continuous units whose depositional pattern is interrupted only by blockage by older units or superposition of younger units.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
FIGURE 2.3. Vicinity of crater Tycho (T; 85 km), showing relative degradation of lunar craters. According to the principle of uniformitarianism , such other craters as Orontius (Or), Pictet (P), and Saussure (S) once resembled Tycho but have lost textural details with the passage of time. Extent of Tycho deposits and
secondary craters suggests that similar but now-invisible deposits surround older craters and compose intercrater terrain. Orbiter 4 frame H 119.
2. THE STRATIGRAPHIC APPROACH
materials older and younger than the basin could be distinguished
over much of the nearside outside the limits of the topographic basin.
Moreover, the absolute ages of the spot samples collected by Apollo 14
could be extrapolated over the entire mapped extent of the unit (fig.
2.1). The samples from the Apollo 15 and 17 landing sites (figs. 2.5B,D)
were also correlated with basins soon after the laboratory analyses
(see chaps. 9,10).
Some materials outside basin rims, however, were less readily
interpretable. Two morphologic units sampled by Apollo 16 at the
fourth major terra sampling site, the Cayley Plains and Descartes
Mountains (fig. 2.5C), have proved crucial in assessing the general
origin of the terrae. The history of their interpretation illustrates the
interaction between photogeologic stratigraphy and its verification
from actual samples of the mapped units.
The Cayley and other light-colored terra plains cover about 5
percent of the lunar terra surface and are the most distinctive terra
landforms after the more craterlike ejecta of fresh basins . Superpositional rela-
tions and crater densities indicate that the plains-forming materials
are older than the mare materials. Some of the photogeologic proper-
ties of the plains are marelike: They are smooth and level and are
concentrated in depressions. In other ways, the plains-forming mate-
rials are like basin materials: They are brighter than the maria and
may grade from thick in depressions to thin on adjacent more rugged
terra. Accordingly, the plains-forming materials have been inter-
preted as both volcanic and impact deposits.
The concentration of the plains near Imbrium and their grada-
tions with the coarse-textured basin ejecta implied lateral continuity
of the two types of deposits and, thus, an impact-ejecta origin of the
plains-forming material . Similar superpositional relations of apparently isolated
patches implied that all these patches belong to the same unit. The
Descartes Mountains resemble coarser parts of the Imbrium ejecta
blanket .
Later, the same stratigraphic evidence was interpreted dif-
ferently and helped support a revival of volcanic hypotheses . The concentration of plains near basins was
thought to result from marelike flooding of basin-related depressions,
and the plains deposits were interpreted as younger material super-
posed on the blanket. Just as lateral continuity implies restricted
time and mode of formation, its apparent absence may legitimately be
interpreted as indicating an origin by various processes over extended
times. Volcanic interpretations included (1) marelike materials
brightened by longer exposure to impact cratering, or (2) materials
more silicic than the basaltic maria. The plains-forming and grada-
tional mantling materials were commonly thought to be facies of
regional pyroclastic blankets, probably silicic ash-flow tuff, a highly
fluid material that spreads widely and that partly conforms to the
substrate . The hummocky Descartes materials were interpreted as vol-
canic on the basis of their close morphologic similarities to certain
terrestrial landforms . Volcanic interpretations
prevailed when Apollo landing sites were chosen .
However, a choice between mechanisms required analysis of actual
One of the most significant turning points in the course of lunar
geologic thinking came in April 1972, when Apollo 16 returned sam-
ples of complex terra breccia from typical patches of plains and
Descartes materials . As a result, volcanic interpretations were replaced by
impact interpretations. Regional stratigraphic relations turned out
to be better indicators of origin than did volcanic analogs. The signifi-
cance of this terra sampling transcends the revised interpretations of
the sampled units, because the hypothesis of impact origin could also
be extended to undistinctive, previously uninterpreted terra mate-
rials peripheral to craters and basins (fig. 2.3). Like the circum-
Imbrium terrane, such undistinctive terranes are coeval with the
crater or basin they surround and constitute discrete stratigraphic
horizons; they did not form piecemeal and do not present a hopelessly
complex problem for relative dating. More and more basins have been
identified since 1972, and their deposits have been increasingly recog-
nized as similar both to those of craters and to one another (pi. 3). This
series of analogous basin deposits constitutes the main stratigraphic
framework of the lunar terrae.
CORRELATION OF SAMPLES AND
STRATIGRAPHIC UNITS
Return of materials from the Moon has established the general
origins of most lunar stratigraphic units. The maria consist of
basaltic flows and pyroclastic blankets derived by internal melting
(fig. 2.6). The terrae consist of complex, partly shock-melted breccia
deposits that were assembled and emplaced by impacts (figs. 2.7,2.8).
However, not all questions of origin and age have been solved by
sampling. Especially serious is the fact that many returned samples
have not been definitely identified with particular photogeologic
One problem is that all samples, except some of mare basalt from
the Apollo 15 landing site (fig. 1.10B), were collected not from bedrock
outcrops but from the overlying regoliths. Regoliths are composed of
highly mixed materials and conceal the underlying bedrock stratigra-
phy and structure. Sample provenance commonly must be deter-
mined from the relative abundances of rock types at various points on
the surface. This problem of correlating samples with source beds is
more severe than is usually encountered on the Earth.
Second, not only the regolith but also the bedrock breccia itself is
recycled from earlier deposits. A given sample thus may have
acquired its chemical and textural properties during or before the
impact. For example, the fact that the morphology of the pho-
togeologically visible Cayley and Descartes units is gradational with
that of the Imbrium-basin deposits does not necessarily indicate that
the materials of those units are of Imbrium origin, because the mor-
phology may have been imposed when the Imbrium impact reworked
earlier materials. This situation is partly analogous to that encoun-
tered in terrestrial sedimentary conglomerate and partly unique to
lunar terra breccia. The bedding and matrix fabric of a conglomerate
are normally formed during sedimentation, whereas the component
clasts are relicts of an earlier rock. The matrix textures of a lunar
terra breccia also are generally acquired during ejection, emplace-
ment, and subsequent cooling. The clasts, however, may have been
EXPLANATION
Crater material
Crater material
M Mare material
I". *£ :l Crater material
MP-~| Plains material
bi Pvl Basin material
I* c » I Subcrater breccia
^ ,^Xm*-^___^x<^
^^s^^^^g^ggy^l^^
,r ^ > K'Xv x,' i i^ ~~ '£ /V(7 v':\;-, ^N%J -S-1 \
X'^rATrVi-7^v* ,^T- ^»»j£?*7~ ,~,P r ~ r, ~^7 > JxT-~'<Tv~C'/^f/x~7 ^ i^^^'y^T^'^'^Vx^'^' ""'^ ^'^^'--''-^]^^l 1-^'~- "'
^ ''-- " N i-,Vis>V-TV"" ~x " x -x- v v ^~J ' v/ - " w «-/x^"
FIGURE 2.4. Generalized geologic cross section based on area of figure 2.1, showing major lunar time-stratigraphic units.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
formed either by an earlier event or in an earlier stage of the same
event (see chap. 3); early-formed matrices may be broken up to
become clasts in the final deposit. Intense mixing and recycling
characterize the impact process.
Even a relatively uniform crystalline matrix of a terra breccia
may be hard to date. It is not always clear whether impact-melted
rocks (fig. 2.8) were heated sufficiently to reequilibrate the isotopes
used in geochronology. Thus, the laboratory ages of the melt rocks
may date an impact or an endogenic melting that preceded emplace-
,,- <4-v:^
wl&1HL*i' ^SKt .^£?5;^lJ.7:*llW»'r^l^P*sS
FIGURE 2.5. Settings of four latest and most elaborate Apollo sampling missions (arrows).
Each frame is an oblique view taken by an Apollo orbital mapping camera; boom of gamma-
ray spectrometer protrudes into two views.
A. Region of Apollo 14 landing site on Fra Mauro peninsula. Large crater in center, to left
of boom, is Fra Mauro (95 km, 6° S., 17° W.; compare fig. 1.8); Bonpland (60 km,
left) and Parry (48 km, right) in foreground. View northward. Apollo 16 frame
B. Region of Apollo 15 landing site in Palus Putredinis near Monies Apenninus. Large
craters at upper left are Aristillus (55 km, 34 N., 1 ° E.) and Autolycus (39 km, 31 ° N.,
1.5° E.) (compare figs. 1.6, 1.7). View northward. Apollo 15 frame M-1537.
ment of the stratigraphic unit that contains them. Substantial
petrologic, geochemical, geochronologic, and photogeologic work is
required to distinguish the times of origin of the constituents of a
terra breccia.
Lunar breccia poses the additional complexity that recycled pre-
impact units may have been situated either in the primary target area
of the new impact or outside that target area. Secondary impacts
rework exterior target materials and incorporate them into new
deposits, and the exterior and interior materials may have been
lithologically similar before the impacts. Some investigators doubt
whether the large volumes of melt rock found at two landing sites
(Apollos 14, 16) are relatable to basins centered at great distances
from these sites. Local origins in craters nearer the landing sites,
followed by reworking during the basin impacts, are favored by many
C. Region of Apollo 16 landing site west of west rim of Nectaris basin (under boom;
compare fig. 1.1). Fresh crater at bottom is Descartes A (16 km, 12° S., 15° E.),
superposed on rim of crater Descartes. View westward. Apollo 16 frame M 566.
D. Region of Apollo 17 landing site in Taurus-Littrow Valley east of Mare Serenitatis.
Large crater at top is Posidonius (95 km, 32° N., 30° E.; compare fig. 1.7). View
northward. Apollo 17 frame M-939.
2. THE STRATIGRAPHIC APPROACH
investigators, though not by me. Much of the uncertainty about the
preimpact position of the constituent materials results from igno-
rance of the mechanics of very large impacts. Neither the size of the
excavated part of basins nor the amount of melt they generate is
agreed upon. These questions occupy considerable space in this vol-
In summary, the dominance of impact craters and basins on the
Moon appears to be well established by analyses of the returned
samples, although only a few individual units have been sampled
directly. In the evolution of thought toward impact mechanisms, more
and more layered rock bodies have emerged from anonymity among
the Moon's seemingly chaotic features to take their place in the lunar
stratigraphic column. The lithologic characterization and absolute
ages of many of these units present more difficult problems.
FIGURE 2.6. Thin sections of typical mare basalt.
A. Sample 12051. Laths of plagioclase (light gray), surrounded and partly enclosed by
grains of pyroxene (medium gray) (subophitic texture). Plane-polarized light; field of
view, 2.2 mm.
B. Sample 15538. Laths of plagioclase (long parallel structure) partly enclose pyroxene
grains poikilitically. Crossed polarizers; field of view, 2.2 mm.
Note: The Lunar Receiving Laboratory (LRL) at the U.S. National Aeronautics and
Space Administration's (NASA) Manned Spacecraft Center (MSC), Houston, Tex.,
assigned numbers to lunar samples upon their arrival from the Moon according to the
following scheme. The numbers contain five digits, followed by a comma and additional digits
if the sample has been split. The first digits represent the mission number: 10, Apollo 11; 12,
Apollo 12; 14, Apollo 14; 15, Apollo 15; 6, Apollo 16; 7, Apollo 17. In some Apollo 15
and most Apollo 16 and 17 samples, the subsequent digit represents the station from which
the sample was collected. For Apollo 16: 0, station 10, the region near the landed lunar
module (LM) and the geophysical instruments (Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package
[ALSEP]); 3, station 13; 7, station 11 (stations 3 and 7 had been designated in premission
planning but were dropped; Muehlberger and others, I960). Some station numbers include
intrastation samples as well. The last digit of Apollo 15, 16, and 17 numbers refers to the size
of the sample: 0, unsieved material; 1,2,3, and 4, increasingly large pieces of sieved material;
5, 6, 7, and 9, "rocks," that is, samples larger than 1 cm across. The third and fourth digits
are complexly derived designations for specific samples defined in the lunar-sample catalogs
prepared by the LRL; for example, the fourth digit of Apollo 16 and 1 7 numbers, if odd,
refers to parts of large rocks and, if even, to fragments from the soil.
FIGURE 2.7. Clast-nch "black and white" breccia (sample 15445) from station 7, Apollo
15 landing site, on flank of Montes Apenninus.
A. "Mug shot" made when sample first arrived at LRL from the Moon.
B. Thin section of part of sample (15445,66), showing ragged, chaotically arranged
plagioclase crystals and other fragments in aphanitic matrix. Plane-polarized light; field
of view, about 2 mm.
FIGURE 2.8. Crystalline, igneous-appearing texture of impact-melt rock Oames > 1973),
sample 14310,170 from Apollo 14 landing site. Texture is partly subophitic, like that of
basalt sample in figure 2.6A, and partly intersertal (fine-grained minerals in interstices of
larger plagioclase crystals).
FIGURE 3.1 (OVERLEAF). Craters on farside area centered at 20° S., 162° E., in Keeler-Heaviside basin (massifs of ring constitute horizon). Large complex crater in center is Keeler (169 km);
smaller fresh crater on east (left) wall of Keeler is Plante (38 km); degraded crater in lower left is Stratton (71 km). Small simple craters include overlapping, aligned secondary craters between
Keeler and Stratton, superposed on other materials. Compare figure 1.4. Apollo 12 frame H-4961.
3. CRATER MATERIALS
Introduction ....................................................... 27
General features .................................................. 27
Typical morphology ............................................. 27
Secondary-impact craters ....................................... 29
Atypical craters ................................................. 32
Cratering mechanics ............................................... 33
Introduction .................................................... 33
Shock compression ............................................. 40
Cavity excavation and growth .................................... 41
Ejecta deposition ............................................... 42
Secondary cratering and ground surge ........................... 42
Deformation and nonballistic ejection ............................ 43
Peak and terrace formation ...................................... 43
Impact melting .................................................. 44
Formation times ................................................ 45
Impact breccia .................................................... 45
Terrestrial analogs .............................................. 45
Lunar-terra samples ............................................. 45
Summary of crater-material origins .................................. 47
Introduction .................................................... 47
Rim material ................................................... 47
Wall material ................................................... 48
Peak material .................................................. 49
Floor material .................................................. 50
INTRODUCTION
Stratigraphers have understandably devoted much attention to
the deposits of craters, the most conspicuous lunar landforms (fig.
3.1). Much of the upper lunar crust consists of interfingering beds of
crater material. Crater deposits provide more stratigraphic datum
horizons for reconstructing lunar geologic history than do any other
lunar materials, and large fresh craters can be relatively dated over
extensive areas. Interpretations of basins and terra samples of basin
deposits depend on knowledge of their smaller relatives, craters. The
importance of craters and their deposits requires a detailed descrip-
tion here of their appearance and formative processes.
To some extent, crater materials can be mapped and relatively
dated without knowledge of their origin. They obey the same basic
laws of sedimentation as does terrestrial sediment, despite their
radiation from randomly distributed point sources of energy . However, interpretation of the terrane beyond the
obvious influence of a crater depends largely on knowledge of the
crater's origin. On the Moon, the effects of an impact crater extend
much farther than those of an endogenic crater of the same size.
Craters lacking morphologies diagnostic of origin and age, therefore,
have a different stratigraphic significance if they are degraded impact
craters rather than separate genetic types. Thus, the question of
crater origin occupies much of the next section.
Because impact is now known to be the main crater-generating
process on the Moon, the rest of this chapter and this volume stresses
impact craters. The section below entitled "Cratering Mechanics"
discusses in detail how the distribution and interrelations of crater-
material facies arose. The brecciated and melted products of impact
are then described in general terms in preparation for later descrip-
tions of the impact-generated geologic units that have been sampled.
Finally, I summarize the origins of crater-material units as mapped
geologically.
GENERAL FEATURES
Typical morphology
Individual primary-impact craters resemble one another more
than they differ. Borrowing a term from stellar astronomy, Wilhelms
and McCauley called the series of morphologically related cra-
ters the main sequence. The rims of these craters are nearly circular.
Their floors lie below the level of the adjacent terrain. Their inner
walls slope steeply, and the flank outside the raised rim crest slopes
more gently. Systematic outward gradations of morphology reflect the
effects of ejection and deposition of a three-dimensional, laterally
continuous unit of inner-rim material and gradational outer deposits
of secondary craters. Main-sequence craters are randomly scattered
over a given terrain in numbers inversely proportional to crater
In general, lunar craters increase in morphologic complexity
with increasing size (figs. 3.1, 3.2). The size-morphology series is not
entirely gradational but undergoes a fairly abrupt discontinuity at
crater diameters of about 16 to 21 km .
Smaller fresh craters have simple, smooth interior profiles, smooth
and highly circular rim crests, and depth/diameter (d/D) ratios of
about l/5 (table 3.1). Their floors are commonly flat or gently sloping
and are evidently composed of rubbly or fine debris accumulated from
the walls (fig. 3.2B). Many ejecta blankets of the younger craters of
this relatively simple type display radial textures; some have subcon-
centric dunelike forms (fig. 3.2A).
Larger craters are more complex (figs. 3.2C-E, 3.4). In
unmodified form, they have one or more of the following interior
features: (1) a broad floor that is generally level but is interrupted by
various hills and mounds; (2) a centrally disposed hill, peak, or peak
complex; (3) single or multiple blocks or slices of material slumped
from the walls; (4) continuous terraces on the wall that represent
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
FIGURE 3.2. Simple and complex lunar impact craters.
A. Linne(2.5km, 28° N., 12° E.). Interior profile is smooth except for minor rubble; ejecta
is subconcentric and dunelike. Apollo 15 frame P 9353.
B. Taruntius H (8.5 km, 0.5° N., 50° E.). Profile is smooth except for level floor, composed
of rubble from walls; rim appears smooth, though not favorably illuminated in this
photograph. Apollo 10 frame H-4253.
C. Arago (26 km, 6° N. 21 ° E.). Large wall terraces, evidently formed by slumping; peak
and wall merge. Apollo 10 frame H-4630.
D. Tycho (85 km, 43° S., 11 ° W.). Characterized by very crisp, fresh-appearing topogra-
phy much more complex than that of Arago. Floor mounds are fissured. Pools of impact
melt are superposed on terraces and rim flank; radial flow texture of interior and exterior
melt is also visible. Concentric inner-rim texture grades to radial outer texture. Orbiter 5
frame M-125.
E. Hausen (167 km, 66° S., 88° W.). Floor is broader relative to diameter than in Tycho;
peak is relatively smaller, though large absolutely. Possible nnglike pattern of smaller
peaks is visible. Terraces and hummocky wall masses are conspicuous. Secondary craters
and herringbone pattern are conspicuous north and southeast of crater. Orbiter 4 frame
3. CRATER MATERIALS
TABLE 3.1. General crater-identification criteria
[Contributions from Richard J. Pike]
Primary impact
Secondary impact
Slope of size-frequency curve (cumulative)- -1.9 for postmare craters <2 km in diameter ------
Circularity 1 - Circular, <15-20 km in diameter; crenate, >20 km in
diameter (0.70<C<0.95; median, 0.82).
Depth - Much deeper than surrounding terrain where unmodified
Interior profile Simple, 16-21 km in diameter; complex, >16-21 km in
Rim-flank profile - Rugged near crest, then concave to 2 radii ---------
Rim-flank texture - Concentric, hummocky near crest; radial to about 1
Ejecta distribution Mostly symmetrical (but see fig. 3.11A)-------------
Mutual relations - - Interference features (fig. 3.14A) or "pushthrough"
(fig. 3.25) rare.
Spatial distribution- Random on a geologic unit except for rare pairs or*
triplets (fig. 3.14).
- Mostly <30 km in diameter; proportional to size of source Mostly «20 km in diameter.
- -3.6 to -4.0
About -2 .
Varies (0.35<C<0.75; median, 0.54) Varies (0.35<C<0.85; median, 0.55).
- Shallow except far from source - - Varies; floor commonly near level of surrounding
Featureless except where filled Varies.
- Inconspicuous except in large craters- - Varies; mostly smooth and low.
V-shaped or linear intercrater ridges Inconspicuous.
Directed away from source- - - Widespread.
Interference features common; downrange overlap common
(fig. 3.4F).
Concentrated about source in clusters, chains, or loops;
Amid dark material, on domes, or aligned on rilles.
commonly radial to basins; on bright rays when young.
'Circularity (C) is defined as the ratio of the area of the inscribed circle to that of the circumscribed circle (fitted to planimetric outline of rim crest).
wholesale circumferential failure of the rim, as opposed to the blocks
or slumps or to the minor debris wasting seen in simple craters; and
(5) a d/D ratio that varies with diameter, from about l/5 for small
complex craters to about lAo for the largest . Their
rims are scalloped or irregular, though still more or less radially
symmetrical; some of the scallops are the source areas of the wall
blocks or terraces (fig. 3.2C).
Exterior features are also better developed in large than in small
craters. Rim topography adjacent to the crest and out to about half a
crater radius is elevated, rugged, and commonly concentrically struc-
tured , simple and com-
plex are used here as technical terms for the two size-related mor-
phologic classes.
Secondary-impact craters
Secondary-impact craters differ in most respects from their par-
ents (table 3.1). Sizes are controlled not by the nearly unrestricted
masses and kinetic energies of cosmic fragments but by the size of the
primary crater and the 2.4-km/s lunar escape velocity, above which
the ejected fragments would leave the Moon. Because of the lower
impact velocities, rim-crest circularity is less commonly developed
than in hypervelocity primaries (fig. 3.4). However, circular second-
aries do form at large distances from their sources (fig. 3.5) and are
difficult to distinguish from primaries if not clustered. Because the
ejecta projectiles that form secondaries are larger relative to crater
size than the hypervelocity cosmic projectiles, irregularities in projec-
tile shape are more manifest in secondaries than in primaries. In
addition, unbonded debris may create secondary craters . Most interior profiles of secondaries are as smooth
CRATER DIAMETER , IN KILOMETERS
FIGURE 3.3. Depth-diameter (d/D) ratios of simple craters (steep slopes, left) and complex
craters (shallow slopes, right), including 1 36 craters on lunar terrae (uplands) and 203 craters
on lunar maria; craters 4.2 to 95 km in diameter are plotted. Simple-to-complex transition
occurs at about 21 -km diameter in terrae and at 16-km diameter in maria. Complex craters
show greater differences in d/D ratio in the two substrates than do simple craters. Square and
crosses denote craters with transitional morphologies. From Pike (I980a, fig. 9).
as or smoother than those of small primaries, but shallower . Ejected blocks are uncommon, and the exterior
textures of individual secondaries are also smoother than those of
primaries. Ejecta of grouped secondaries, however, may be texturally
complex (figs. 3AC-F, 3.6).
Spatial grouping is the main difference from primaries and is the
main diagnostic characteristic of secondary-impact craters. Whereas
primaries are randomly grouped, secondaries are highly concen-
trated. Secondaries generally occur in linear or curving chains or in
patches and clusters. Only a few of the farflung projectiles may
separate enough to form seemingly randomly scattered secondaries.
Secondaries may have revealed more about the cratering process
than have the primary craters. Early investigators equipped with
good photographs or observing the Moon visually with telescopes
were impressed by the myriad small craters that are satellitic to large
craters of the Copernicus type (fig. 3.4). What remains the most
convincing set of arguments for the impact origin of both the satellitic
and the primary craters was assembled at the beginning of the space
age by Shoemaker . On the basis of an excellent telescopic
photograph (fig. 3.4A), he mapped the satellitic craters of Copernicus
(fig. 3.4B) and successfully accounted for their pattern by cratering
and ballistic theory. He showed that the chains, loops, and clusters
were probably excavated by secondary impacts of ejecta derived from
certain structures in the bedrock struck by the Copernicus primary
impact. His analysis was supported afterward by field study of ray
loops formed from an identifiable bed in the target rock of one of the
fresh Henbury meteorite craters in Australia , by laboratory experiments , and by
examination of high-velocity to hypervelocity missile-impact craters
in natural materials .
Although primary impact of an object from space followed by
secondary impact of the resulting ejecta was shown to be consistent
with the lunar and terrestrial patterns of satellitic craters, other
mechanisms continued to be invoked. An explosive origin by the
sudden release of accumulated volcanic gases could theoretically
explain the patterns except for the enormous energy required, esti-
mated for Copernicus by Shoemaker at 7.5 x 1021 J.
Such energies could not accumulate in a planetary crust because the
weak rocks could not contain them without premature release . Endogenic mechanisms fail abjectly to explain the ray
pattern of Tycho, part of which extends to the limbs of the Moon (fig.
3.6) and thus would require enormous internal energies or global-
scale fault or fissure systems centered about a point. One advocate of
such structural systems realized that an impact must
have formed Tycho but postulated that the secondaries formed endo-
genically along impact-opened cracks, because the rays are not
exactly radial.
This offcenter relation of the rays was among the first arguments
for internal origin to be finally refuted by Lunar Orbiter photography
in 1967. Shoemaker , Baldwin , the "endogenist" Firsoff , and the
impact-plus-endogeny proponent Alter had all noted that the
nonradial rays consist of elements which are individually radial to
the primary crater and which commonly originate at secondary cra-
ters (fig. 3.4A). Orbiter photographs show that the ray elements
coincide with ridged ejecta of the secondary craters that was cast away
from the primary crater; the secondary-crater ejecta has a her-
ringbone or bird's-foot pattern (figs. 3AC-F, 3.6). Septa divide many
crater pairs, as they do several of the Henbury craters . In a major advance, the ridges, her-
ringbone pattern, septa, and even domelike features were closely
Eratosthenes
Copernicus " ' '-.-v' r~
FIGURE 3.4. Copernicus (93 km, 10° N., 20° W.), the classic locality for study of
secondary-impact craters.
A. Highly detailed telescopic photograph taken in 1929 by F.G. Pease with the 100-inch
telescope of Mount Wilson Observatory.
B. Map of secondary craters of Copernicus, constructed in 1960 by Shoemaker on
basis of photograph in figure 3.4A.
C. Lunar Orbiter photograph of Copernicus and northeast exterior, showing rays and
subconcentric chains of secondary craters (Rimae Stadius). Orbiter 4 frame H 121.
D. Copernicus on horizon (arrow), Rima Stadius I (S), and other secondaries superposed on
Mare Imbrium near crater Pytheas (P; 20 km). V-shaped ejecta is downrange from
Copernicus at each cluster of secondaries. View southward. Apollo 17 frame M 2444.
E. Detail of Rima Stadius I, showing V-shaped herringbone pattern. Orbiter 5 frame
3. CRATER MATERIALS
imitated in laboratory experiments (fig. 3.7) by Oberbeck and Mor-
rison . The intersection angles of the lunar V-shaped
ridges were fully modeled by various spacings and timings of nearly
simultaneous artificial impacts that caused cones of crater ejecta to
interact complexly upon collision. Ironically, some of the grossly off-
center satellitic chains that have the classic herringbone pattern
modeled by Oberbeck and Morrison are the Stadius chains east of
Copernicus (figs. 3AC-E), which were interpreted by some of the
most astute proponents of lunar impact before the Orbiter photogra-
phy as volcanic .
FIGURE 3.5. Group of small circular craters (left center) in crater Gagarin (272 km, 20° S.,
149° E.; compare fig. 1.4) are secondary to a distant crater. Largest crater superposed on
Gagarin nm is Raspletin (R; 49 km), presumably a primary. Apollo 15 frame M 293.
F. Southeast sector of Copernicus. Conspicuous secondaries with herringbone pattern lie mostly beyond (to right of) one crater radius (white dots). Superposed crater in center is Copernicus H (4.3
km; see chap. 13). Orbiter 5 frame M-147.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
Only the most obdurate endogenists 
could still believe in the volcanic origin of such craters as Copernicus
and Tycho or their satellitic craters after 1967. Secondary-impact
origin was also readily extrapolated to larger-scale associations, for
example, the 180-km-diameter primary crater Petavius and its reti-
nue of small craters . For larger craters, volcanic and
tectonic interpretations continued to appear for several years. A
secondary-impact origin was recognized for many, but not all, satel-
litic craters (max 10 km diam) of the 260-km-diameter Iridum crater
 . The satellitic craters
of the Orientale basin (fig. 3.9) were recognized as secondary-impact
craters by some geologists but were interpreted endogenically by others well into the
period of Apollo exploration . Internal
origins were widely favored for seemingly noncompound craters
larger than 5 km in diameter whose rims have such irregularities as
straight segments or reentrants to more than 1,000 km . The ratios of the largest satellitic-crater
diameters to the primary-crater diameter decrease relatively little,
from about 0.05 for 100-km-diameter primaries , through 0.04 for the Iridum crater , to
about 0.02 for large basins . Size-fre-
quency distributions of satellitic craters also are remarkably similar
over a wide size range; cumulative plots of craters satellitic to nuclear-
explosion craters, large lunar primary craters , and
basins all slope between about 3.6 and
-4.0. These slopes, which are much steeper than the -1.8 to -2
typical of primary craters, confirm the visual impression that second-
aries in a given cluster are more nearly equal in size than are
primaries in any given population. Over the entire size range, satel-
litic craters are concentrated at distances of one to two diameters
from the primary's center (one to three radii from the rim crest; figs.
FIGURE 3.6. Cluster of crisp-textured secondary craters of Tycho (on east rim of Ptolemaeus
at 9.2° S., 1.0° E.). Fine herringbone pattern is evident above directional arrows. From
Lucchitta . Apollo 16 frame P-4653.
3.4, 3.8-3.10). Even the detailed map patterns of satellitic-crater
fields of craters and basins are similar; chains, clusters, and loops are
as characteristic of basin secondaries as they are of crater secondaries
 . Patterns
of ridges between and distal to clustered basin secondaries resemble
those of crater secondaries and those formed in laboratory experi-
ments . The only significant
difference is a greater radiality of many basin-secondary groups; low
impact velocities and grazing impacts create groovelike crater chains
near basins (figs. 3.9A, 3.1QA).
The accumulated evidence on distribution and morphology (table
3.1) leaves little doubt that secondary craters compose a large percen-
tage of lunar craters. They probably outnumber primaries at diame-
ters smaller than 20 km and also occur with diameters of at least 30
km .
Atypical craters
Continued research has expanded the types of morphology
ascribable to impact. Although hypervelocity impacts normally create
circular craters, impacts at angles less than 10° in weak materials or
about 30° for certain combinations of target material, projectile mate-
rial, and velocity may generate noncircular craters . Elongate craters, such as Messier and Schiller (fig.
3.11), have been interpreted as volcanic or volcanotectonic. However,
craters formed by artificial oblique impacts mimic their shapes . Ejecta symmetry
in these experiments was typically bilateral; ejecta was concentrated
in lateral or downtrajectory directions, as is the Messier ejecta (fig.
3.1LA). The Messier ejecta possesses such typical impact charac-
teristics as radial ridges, secondary craters, and rays. The position of
Schiller along a basin ring (fig. 3.1 IB) was considered as supporting
the endogenic interpretation .
Schiller, however, consists of overlapping elliptical craters that could
have been created by oblique, nearly simultaneous impact of a frag-
mented projectile or by a very low-angle impact of the type simulated
by Gault and Wedekind (top center, fig. 3.12).
Similarities of neighboring craters have long impressed scru-
tinizers of the lunar surface .
Examples of pairs include Sabine and Ritter, Messier and Messier A,
Heis and Caroline Herschel, Helicon and Le Verrier, and Atlas and
Hercules (figs. 1.6,1.7,3.1LA, 3.14). Some of these pairs may be acciden-
tal Atlas and Hercules probably differ in age but too many pairs
exist to be entirely coincidental. Although endogeny was commonly
invoked , diagnostic features show that an
impact origin is more likely. Straight septa dividing some of these
pairs (fig. 3.14A) had been considered evidence for a volcanic origin
until they also were found at Henbury and among secondary-impact craters . Many of the craters are too large to be secondaries. Pairs of
large impact craters, such as East and West Clearwater, Quebec, also
occur on the Earth .
Two primary-impact mechanisms have been proposed to explain
the lunar groupings. First, Sekiguchi showed that tidal forces
may break up weak approaching bodies before they impact. Second,
small bodies may orbit mutually in space. The existence of these
miniature planetary systems was surmised by Baldwin and may have been substantiated astronomically .
Another atypical class of craters are those called smooth-rimmed
 . They lack the rough rim
texture of main-sequence craters and have been considered to be of
nonimpact origin. Apollo astronauts called them delta-rim craters
because of their equal exterior and interior slopes another depar-
ture from the main sequence, with its shallow outer and steeper inner
slopes. They were targeted for special attention during the Apollo
orbital missions because they were widely hypothesized to be cal-
deras . Most
smooth-rimmed craters are about 20 to 40 km across and occur near
3. CRATER MATERIALS
the borders of maria, a reasonable site for volcanism. The possible
significance of smooth- rimmed craters was brought home when
Lunar Orbiter 4 photographed two craters inside the Orientale basin
that are, therefore, of the same maximum age . Maunder is a typical fresh impact crater, complete with high
and rough inner rim, lower and radially textured outer rim flank,
deep floor, rugged central peak, wall terraces, and secondary craters.
The neighboring crater Kopff is opposite in each of these properties; it
has a smooth "delta" rim, elevated floor, no peak or terraces, and no
obvious secondary craters.
Although the smooth-rimmed craters are atypical, they also are
probably of impact origin. Amultivariate analysis of 11 pairs of dimen-
sions of terrestrial and lunar craters shows that they group with
impact craters . Kopff may have been formed by an
impact in a soft substrate , or it may be merely a premare "hybrid"
crater whose rim was smoothed by volcanism and whose floor was
uplifted before and after mare flooding. Other smooth rims and
elevated floors are consistent with similar modifications or with a
secondary-impact origin (fig. 3.15). The more typical crater Maunder
is simply younger than the smooth-rimmed craters and is not affected
by either volcanism or floor uplift.
In summary, we are left with impacts as the generators of most
lunar craters. Chapter 5 describes the relatively uncommon endo-
genic craters, and chapter 6 the modification of impact craters by floor
uplift. With these relatively few exceptions and a few anomalous
groups or individual craters (fig. 3.16), most features of lunar craters
are compatible with current impact theory.
CRATERING MECHANICS
Introduction
The basic processes that form simple impact craters are now
relatively well understood after two decades of intensive research on
laboratory impact craters, explosion craters, and natural terrestrial
and lunar craters. This section describes an idealized sequence of
events based on studies of these relatively simple craters. It adds
interpretations of complex craters and suggests some of the diffi-
culties that confront investigators trying to understand craters and
ringed basins more fully. The discussion draws heavily on earlier
summary works by Shoemaker , Moore and others
FIGURE 3.7. Craters formed by near-simultaneous impacts in the
laboratory, compared with morphologically similar secondary clusters
of Copernicus . In
each pair of examples, laboratory craters are on left, and lunar craters
on right. V, experimental impact velocity; S/D, ratio of separation
between impact points to average crater diameter; 6, impact angle of
incidence measured from normal to surface; a, angle between crater
axis of symmetry and flightline or radial line from Copernicus. Projec-
tiles impacted from direction below photographs. Lunar photographs,
Apollo 15 frame M-1699 (upper left) and Orbiter 4 frame H-121
(all others) (compare fig. 3.4C).
V = 0.82 km/s
S/D = 0.26
6 = 82.5°, a = 0°
V = 0.74 km/s
S/D = 0.01
6 = 60°, a = 0°
V = 0.77 km/s
S/D = 0.89
6 = 75°, a = 35°
V = 0.77 km/s
S/D = 0.90
6 = 75°. a = 69°
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
3. CRATER MATERIALS
FIGURE 3.9. Diverse Orientale-basin secondary craters north of the basin.
A. Chain (Vallis Bohr, arrow at bottom), clustered circular craters, fissured crater floors (f),
and herringbone pattern (h, near top), all formed by impact of Orientale ejecta. Head of
arrow marks one basin diameter (930 km) from basin center (one radius from rim). Thick
ejecta plains form scarp at p (see chap. 4). Large crater occupying most of photograph
width is Einstein (170 km, 17° N., 88.5° W.). Orbiter 4 frame H-188.
B. Domelike interference feature and radial ejecta of crater Struve L (above scale bar; 15
km, 21° N., 76° W.), 1,350 km north-northeast of Orientale center. Orbiter 4 frame
FIGURE 3.8.
Iridum crater (260 km; compare fig. 1.6) enclosing Sinus Iridum (SI). Almost entire terra in scene is blanketed by Iridum deposits or secondary craters; secondaries appear at about
one radius from rim of Iridum crater. Superposed craters are Bianchini (B; 38 km), Mairan (white M; 40 km, 42° N., 43° W.), and Sharp (S; 40 km); pre-Iridum craters are La Condamine (L;
37 km, 53° N., 28° W.) and Maupertuis (black M; 46 km). Mosaic of Orbiter 4 frames H-139, H-145, and H-151 (from right to left).
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
FIGURE 3.10. Secondary craters of Imbrium and Nectaris basins.
A. Regional view, showing distance of one basin radius (dashes, 580 km) from Imbrium rim (MA, Monies Apenninus); dotted outline, Nectaris rim. Locations of figures 3.1 OB, C, E and
3.16A, B are outlined; figure 3. IOD lies below area of photograph. Orbiter 4 frame M-108.
3. CRATER MATERIALS
B. "Imbrium sculpture," evidently composed of coalescing elliptical craters (sc). Large
crater is Hipparchus (151 km, 6° S., 5° E.). Gamma-ray spectrometer boom protrudes
from right. Apollo 16 frame M-839.
C. Crater Catharina D (CD; 9 km, 19° S., 21 ° E.) has been considered volcanic , but is oriented and situated properly (fig. 3.10A) to be an
Imbnum-basin secondary. Orbiter 4 frame H 84.
D. S-shaped group of Imbrium secondaries looping southward from rim of crater Riccius
(R; 71 km, 37° S., 27° E.) to crater Nicolai (N; 42 km, 42° S., 26° E.) and back
toward basin in another loop ending at crater Barocius G (B; 27 km). Arrow indicates
direction to Nectaris basin; partly filled craters south of (below) Nicolai and west (left) of
arrow are probably secondaries of Nectaris. Large crater Janssen (190 km; compare fig.
9.2) is partly visible in lower right. Orbiter 4 frames H-83 (right) and H-88 (left).
E. Complex morphology of Delaunay group of craters, suggesting volcanism or interference
of several large basin-secondary craters . View centered at 22.5° S., 3° E.
Orbiter 4 frame H-101.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
FIGURE 3. 11. Irregular primary-impact craters.
A. Messier (right) and Messier A (2° S., 47° E.). Radial ejecta and rays are north and
south of Messier, and long double rays to west (down trajectory). Apollo H-frame
(number unknown).
B. Schiller (S, footprint-shaped crater; 180-km long axis), superposed on ring of double-
ringed Schiller-Zucchius basin (compare fig. 1.9); Z, crater Zucchius (64 km, 61 ° S.,
50° W.). Orbiter 4 frame M-155.
SOLID ALUMINUM
6.35 mm diameter
HOLLOW ALUMINUM
9.53 mm diameter
6.35 diameter
FIGURE 3. 12. Craters formed by oblique impacts in laboratory . Spherical projectiles are described at top; target is
noncohesive quartz sand. Impact velocity, about 1.7 km/s; impact angles, above plane of target surface; trajectories, from left.
3. CRATER MATERIALS
A Crater rim
FIGURE 3. 13. Ray patterns formed by oblique impacts (from right).
A. In laboratory . Impact angle, 5° above horizontal.
B. By ballistic missile at White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. .
Material units: te, thick ejecta; td, thin to discontinuous ejecta; ts/tm, scattered ejecta and
target material. Arrow indicates missile trajectory; impact angle, about 45°.
FIGURE 3. 14. Probable pairs of primary-impact craters.
A. Bessarion B in Oceanus Procellarum (largest member of pair 12 km perpendicular to
axis of pair; 17° N., 42° W.). Simultaneous impact is indicated by septum. Orbiter 4
frame H-144.
B. Van de Graaff (230-km long axis, 27° S., 172° E.; compare fig. 1.4). Younger complex
crater is superposed at upper left. View southward. Apollo 17 frame H-22959.
C. Ritter (left, 29 km) and Sabine (right, 30 km, 1° N., 20° E.), classic lunar "calderas" at
edge of Mare Tranquillitatis near parallel Rimae Hypatia. Ranger 8 frame A 34.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
 , Baldwin , Gault and others , Gault , Ober-
beck , Roddy and others , and Melosh . Much of the
material in the volume edited by Roddy and others was sum-
marized by Cooper .
Shock compression
An impact crater results from the meeting of an irresistible force
with an immovable object . A hypervelocity colli-
sion generates intense high-pressure shock waves that propagate into
both the target and the projectile . As the shock front moves downward and outward into the
target, masses are set into motion with particle velocities much
greater than the speed of sound in the various materials. Pressures
and energies within the shock wave are commonly so great that parts
of both the target and projectile are melted and vaporized around the
impact zone . More significantly for the
ultimate crater, the shock wave strongly compresses and energizes a
mass of target material much greater than that of the projectile
 . Because peak
pressures in the shock wave are orders of magnitude above the
strengths of all rock materials, the materials flow hydrodynamically
 . In homogeneous targets, shock waves propagate out-
ward in approximately spherical fronts . The pressures in the shock wave quickly diminish radially
outward, until eventually the shock wave decays into an elastic wave
 . The distance at which the shock wave becomes
elastic is a function of original kinetic energy, projectile penetration
depth, duration of contact, rock properties, and deflections due to
layering and other inhomogeneities .
FIGURE 3.15. Smooth-rimmed class of craters .
A. Contrasting craters in Orientale basin: Kopff, right (42 km, 17° S., 89.5° W.), a
smooth-rimmed crater; Maunder, left (55 km, 15° S., 94° W.), a typical impact crater.
Orbiter 4 frames H-187 (right) and H-195 (left).
B. Crozier-McClure group on Fecunditatis-basin rim (14° S., 51 ° E; each of three central
craters, 21 24 km across). Clustering and smooth rims suggested caldera origin
 , but radial orientation and size range are also consistent
with Imbrium-secondary origin. Orbiter 4 frame H 60.
C. Gambart (25 km, 1 ° N., 15° W.). Dark rim material is probably volcanic, but current
interpretations favor superposed pyroclastic material rather than volcanic ejecta of crater.
Orbiter 4 frame H-120.
D. Lassell (23 km, 15.5° S., 8° W.) in eastern Mare Nubium. Orbiter 4 frame H-113.
E. Daniell (29 km, 35° N., 31 ° E.) in Lacus Somniorum. Volcanic origin is suggested, but
not proved, by irregular rim crest, elevated floor, and mare fill. Orbiter 4 frame H 79.
3. CRATER MATERIALS
Cavity excavation and growth
Very early in the sequence of events, even before the shock wave
reaches the projectile's trailing edge, small amounts of both the pro-
jectile and target material may be jetted from the sides of the impact
zone at velocities that may exceed the initial velocity of the projectile
 .
Most ejection, however, takes place at velocities first comparable to
and then much lower than the initial projectile velocity. The agents of
excavation in this main cratering-flow stage of ejection and cavity
growth are rarefactions set up when the shock wave intersects the
free surfaces and other discontinuities in the target and projectile.
The result is a sudden decompression. Particles of material are
deflected from the initially radial motions induced by the shock wave
into upward and outward trajectories curving back toward the surface
on the heels of the expanding shock wave .
A. Miiller group on east of rim of Ptolemaeus; largest crater is Miiller (22 km, 8° S., 2° E.).
Large craters exhibit morphology, size, and distal overlap typical of Imbrium-secondary
craters at this radial distance (800 km from Monies Apenninus); "Imbrium sculpture"
above and below chain is radial to Imbrium. Small chain is also typical of secondaries in
morphology and overlap but is not radial to Imbrium or any other likely source. Apollo
16 frame M-1671.
B. Abulfeda chain, parallel to Miiller chain and also site of numerous craters. A, Abulfeda
(65 km, 14° S., 14° E.). Orbiter 4 frame H-89.
Roddy, 1977, p. 297; Trulio, 1977; Melosh, 1980). Thus, most impact-
crater excavation is a response to the disequilibrium suddenly
induced by the intensely energetic, penetrative shock wave and is not
the direct result of an expansion like that induced by a true chemical
explosion . Another difference from most
explosions is that the energy from a hypervelocity impact is released
along the length of the path of penetration, which may be short or may
be an elongate, cigar-shaped zone . Explosions at moderately shallow depths,
however, may mimic impact effects 
because their energy may be coupled into the ground similarly
 .
Because the decompression and not the direct, intense shock
compression excavates most of the cavity, ejection endures longer
than the shock compression . After most of
the projectile material has been ejected, the cavity, lined with partly
molten material, continues to grow behind the advancing shock wave
by ejection of target material (figs. 3.17.E, F). Though basically orderly,
at least in simple craters ,
the ejection process is more subject to vagaries stemming from
inhomogeneous properties and structures of the target than is the
shock-compression phase. For example, inhomogeneities are the
probable cause of the pattern of secondary chains and loops .
Ejection of the target material occurs approximately in the order
it is enveloped by the shock wave . In
general, more highly shocked materials high in the target and just
outside the impact zone leave first at the highest velocities and angles
(measured above the horizontal). Molten material may be shot into
high ballistic trajectories. Subsequently, expanding concentric zones
that include more moderately shocked materials from increasingly
deep target materials are successively ejected. The ejecta forms an
upward- and outward-flaring curtain of debris in the shape of an
inverted lampshade (a frustum). The materials that form this curtain
are sheared up along the walls of the growing cavity to the cavity lip,
where they leave at angles parallel to the walls ; the curtain is like an
extension of the crater wall. The curtain continuously expands out-
ward during crater growth. It apparently always remains thin, at
least in small craters . Typical ejection angles for the main, middle stages of
experimental crater formation are 40° to 60° above horizontal but also
depart from these values, depending on such properties of the target
material as layering and competence .
C. Large group of craters with rectangular outlines, alternatively interpreted as originating
by volcamsm or secondary impacts. Shape and clustering
are consistent with source to lower right, but no likely source is in that direction. Group is
radial to Onentale basin, but Onentale secondaries at this distance are generally sharper
(compare fig. 4.6). Several other large craters are also clustered and may be basin
secondaries . Crater under north arrow is Asclepi (43 km, 55°
S., 25° E.). Orbiter 4 frame H-IOO.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
FIGURE 3.17. Stages in formation of a simple impact crater. Drawing by Donald E. Davis,
courtesy of the artist.
A. Initial contact and jetting.
B, C, D. Compressional shock wave propagates outward, and cavity grows by rarefaction
behind shock wave while projectile is consumed.
E. Cavity continues growth after projectile has been consumed.
F. Maximum crater size.
C. Frustum-shaped curtain of ejected debris continues outward expansion after cavity ceases
growth and overturned ejecta flap comes to rest.
H. Final crater configuration.
The cavity of a typical small simple crater ceases to expand
downward when^it has acquired depths of V5 to Vz of the diameter
 . Shearing flow at the walls may then
continue to broaden the crater after this maximum depth is reached
 . Weakly shocked and
nearly undamaged ejecta derived from near the walls leaves last,
during the final stages of crater excavation, under relatively low
stresses and at low velocities and ejection angles . The size of ejected debris increases
during cavity growth owing to decreasing shock pressures, decreas-
ing fragmentation of the wallrock, and lower ejection velocities.
Finally, ejection ceases as the tensile strength of the rock overcomes
the power of the rarefaction wave to move it.
Ejecta deposition
After the cavity ceases to grow, the inverted frustum-shaped
ejecta curtain continues to advance outward beyond the cavity (fig.
3.17G). The curtain continuously decreases in height while expanding
in diameter, as materials at the base are deposited on the surface from
the cavity rim outward. Because most ejecta is launched from a
simple crater at nearly constant exit angles but at decreasing
velocities, the ejecta front slopes outward at a nearly constant angle
with the surface, generally 40°-50° . As a result of this velocity distribution in the curtain, ejecta
deposition occurs in approximately the reverse order of excavation.
The first material to be deposited, from the base of the ejecta curtain,
is the last to have been engulfed by the shock wave and to be sheared
from the crater walls (figs. 3.17,3.18). That material is lofted or barely
pushed over the rim at low velocities and soon lands near the crater
rim. In simple craters, the near-rim material may form a more or less
coherent overturned flap in which the stratigraphic sequence of
redeposited target materials is the reverse of their preimpact
sequence . Some of the relief on crater rims is also
due to structural upthrust and outthrust in a manner dependent on
target structure and depth of energy release . For a considerable time after
the cavity stops growing, the curtain continues to move outward and
to drop material from its lower edge into an ever-expanding but
thinning ring of deposits.
Secondary cratering and ground surge
With increasing distance from the crater, the ejecta that strikes
the surface forms secondary craters rather than building up a deposit.
At some distance, the curtain separates into filaments of debris,
whose impact creates loops and chains of secondary craters and rays.
Circular secondaries are formed by the last material to impact the
surface, that which was launched first at the highest velocities and in
the longest, highest trajectories from sources high in the target near
the impact zone.
The general picture, then, around craters as well as ringed basins
is one of outward-thinning deposits of primary ejecta grading into
increasingly conspicuous secondary craters and their ejecta deposits
 . The secondary impacts excavate material of the
local terrain around the primary crater .
The amount of local material excavated increases outward. The pic-
ture is complicated around many craters and, particularly, around
basins by the superposition on secondary craters of material that has
flowed from points closer to the crater or basin . In the picture above of the regular advance of ejecta in a
narrow curtain, the ejecta that forms the secondaries was still in
flight when the ground-flow deposits left the crater, but the flying
ejecta impacts the surface before the ground-flow deposits reach the
secondary-impact zone.
The question of how the ground flow originates has been much
debated because of its importance in studies of lunar-sample prove-
nance. Chao and Chao and Minkin cited evidence
Tangent above
Tangent below
Numbers on contours indicate
the range of ejecta as a
function of R/V V'
FIGURE 3.18. Relation between sources of ejecta and range at which it is deposited . R, range; V, volume of ejecta; charge, 1.7 g of lead azide; target, dry
sand. Results are similar to those of much larger experiments . Zones of
target material nearest charge were ejected first and to greatest ranges; successively larger and
more distal zones were deposited nearer rim.
A. Charge tangential above surface.
B. Charge tangential below surface, similar to energy release of impacts.
3. CRATER MATERIALS
from the 25-km-diameter Ries complex crater or ringed basin, south-
ern Germany, which suggests that the inner ejecta was pushed over
the rim and moved outward along the surface by gliding and rolling.
Ground flow may also have emplaced most ejecta of the 1.7-km-
diameter simple crater Lonar, India . In
contrast, V.R. Oberbeck and his coworkers believe that all ejecta
travels in ballistic trajectories and that surface flow is initiated when
the ejecta impacts the surface after flight, whereupon it moves out-
ward, together with the abundant excavated local material, under the
forces of momentum and gravity. The mechanism proposed by Chao
 would also incorporate local material, because the surface
movement occurs under confining pressure, but the proportions of
local to primary material might be less than in the ballistic-impact
mechanism.
To avoid prejudging the proportions of primary ejecta and local
material present, use of the term "continuous deposits" is recom-
mended over "ejecta" for the inner ground-covering material . The term "base surge" is
commonly used for the outward flow but
implies gas- or water-assisted transport, which is unlikely on the
Moon. Therefore, the terms "ground surge," "debris surge," or "debris
flow" are preferable .
Deformation and nonballistic ejection
Beyond the sphere of shocked material that is launched into
ballistic flight, other target material is less highly shocked but is
deformed and sheared. Some of this material is pressed downward
and outward along the crater floor and walls in curving paths that
resemble those that precede the ballistic ejection . Part of this peripheral material may surge over the
walls and exit the crater at very low velocities without leaving the
Additional shock-damaged material is not permanently ejected.
Some may be lofted above the crater and fall back inside; other
material is mildly brecciated or fractured in place without significant
dislocation. Both the fallback and the inplace material form a breccia
lens in the bottom of the crater that grades downward and outward
into a zone of fractured rock .
The volumes of the cavity from which material was ejected and of
the deformed zone may obey different scaling laws . In general, a representative
linear dimension of a crater say, the radius or the cube root of the
volume will scale to the kinetic energy of impact . This linear dimension is also controlled
both by gravitational attraction, which inhibits lofting and flight of
ejecta, and by rock strength, which influences dissipation of shock
energy. Target strength becomes less important, and gravity more
important, with increasing impact magnitude; gravity dominates in
craters larger than about 100 m in diameter . Smaller craters are created for a
given impact kinetic energy when gravity dominates than when
strength dominates. In large craters and basins, the excavation cav-
ities may be "gravity craters," whereas their exterior zones may be
"strength craters" .
Various terms, most of them used in more than one sense, have
been applied to the excavated and nonexcavated parts of a crater. Both
"transient crater" and "true crater" have been used to describe the
combined zones out to the limit of the nonexcavated breccia, before
modification by slumping. However, the term "transient crater" com-
monly denotes a stage in the cavity growth. "Apparent crater" has
been used to denote the depression that is seen excluding the inplace
breccia; alternatively, it has been defined as that part of the depres-
sion which lies below the precrater ground surface. Therefore, the
usage of each term by a given author must be checked. In this volume,
I avoid these terms because of their ambiguity and use only "excava-
tion cavity," for the cavity from which material has been removed,
either permanently or temporarily before falling back.
Peak and terrace formation
The most conspicuous indicator of internal deformation in cra-
ters is the presence of central peaks and wall terraces in complex
craters . Diameters of complex craters are generally larger than 16 km in
the maria and 21 km in the terrae . Peaks
increase in size and complexity in proportion to crater size up to
crater diameters of about 40 or 50 km, but diminish in relative size in
larger craters . Wall failure first
appears as scalloping in small and rudimentary complex craters . Continuous terraces,
which probably form by base failure , are observed in larger complex craters. Within the transition
size range, d/D ratios also decrease markedly, and still larger craters
have broad shallow floors .
Interpretations of the simple-to-complex transition are com-
monly reduced to a choice between "push" and "pull" mechanisms:
Did the walls of a deep bowl-shaped cavity first collapse centripetally
into terraces and push up the central peak, or did the peak originate
by some type of rebound of the subcrater material that pulled the
walls inward to their collapse? The material trajectories and the
ultimate geometry would be similar in both cases. Some form of the
"pull" model seems to be supported by appearance of peaks before
terraces in the sequence of feature development. The issue largely
revolves about the question of the original depth and shape of complex
craters: Did they grow to d/D ratios that are proportional to those of
simple craters and then collapse in the "modification stage" , or did they
grow nonproportionally and start out with shallower depths ?
A variant of the "pull" model involves a more complex excavation
cavity, consisting of a deep inner part surrounded by a shallower
shelf. Only the central part grows proportionally. A key feature is
subhorizontal inward motion of the subcrater material during crater
growth (fig. 3.19). Material beneath the central depression is severely
deformed and sharply uplifted to become the central peak . In contrast,
strata beneath the shallow floor surrounding the peaks are mildly
deformed and are neither uplifted nor downdropped substantially.
Support is withdrawn from the walls, which collapse most completely
in large craters, where the inward motion is greatest.
Causes of the deformation and of the simple-to-complex transi-
tion remain particularly debatable . Some phenomenon may relate shallow depths of burst, peak
formation, and shallow floors. Shallow bursts, which may form peaks
in very small craters, have been documented by stratigraphic rela-
tions and the orientation of shatter cones in such terrestrial craters as
Grosses Bluff, Australia and Flynn Creek,
Tenn. . Low-density projectiles would release their
kinetic energy near the surface because of their shallow penetration
 , as would very large projectiles of any density (fig.
3.20). Large bodies penetrate to shallower depths relative to their
kinetic energy than do smaller objects, and require more time to be
consumed . Thus, (1) peaks may form
because of the shallow energy release; (2) more energy is directed
laterally than in deeper bursts, so that craters are shallow; and (3)
energy coupling is sustained over longer times, so that more of the
target material is heated than in rapid energy releases (see next
section below). Many properties of complex craters and ringed basins
(see chap. 4) are explainable in this way.
Shallow bursts do not explain all phenomena, however, because
the diameters in the simple-to-complex transition and the mor-
phologic properties of peaks and floors differ from region to region
and from planet to planet .
Two factors are commonly proposed as modulators or even as ini-
tiators of the complex-cratering process and also of basin-ring forma-
tion: (1) differing gravitational attraction at the planets' surfaces
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
FIGURE 3.19. Model of formation of features of complex crater, according to Pike (1980B, fig. 9). Only strata A, B, and C are exposed in central uplift, where they dip vertically or steeply.
Stratum F has been stripped from crater, although it forms a slump block (b). Stratum G is composed of ejecta and intracrater breccia. Faults creating terraces (t) pinch out at shallow depths.
Arcuate dotted lines indicate zones of deformation in center. Modeled after four complex craters on Earth; scale applies to average horizontal and vertical dimensions of those craters.
FIGURE 3.20. Relative depth of penetration and effect on crater diameter of large and small
projectiles . D, logarithm of diameter (in feet). Depth/diameter
ratios are typical of lunar craters. ///W /3 , scaled depth of burst; H, depth (in feet); W,
explosive energy (in pounds of TNT equivalent). Left panel, penetration assumed beneath
original ground surface to two projectile diameters for all seven sizes of craters; impact velocity
is set at 10 mi/s; unlikely result of very shallow crater overlying deep burst is obtained for
largest craters. Right panel, more realistic variable and shallow depths of penetration,
including surface bursts for two largest sizes. Projectiles flatten during consumption by shock
wave .
 , and (2)
substrate properties, especially layering. Discontinuities between
layers affect the coupling of impact energy into the target and refract
and reflect the shock waves . Different stratification may explain the different simple-to-
complex transition diameters between maria and terrae. Gravity or
substrate properties, however, cannot be the sole factor in complex-
crater formation, considering that peaks appear in all sufficiently
large craters on all impacted moons and planets .
In summary, shallow energy releases, strong gravitational
attraction, and sharp contrasts in target stratification all seem to
enhance formation of the peaks, shallow floors, and terraces charac-
teristic of complex craters. Different combinations of these factors
among planets or on a single planet, such as the Moon, yield quan-
titatively different results. None of these factors, however, may be the
fundamental cause of complex craters. Changes in the basic physical
effects of impact above some energy threshold ultimately may be found to be more significant.
Impact melting
Estimates of the amount and stratigraphic relations of impact
melt are important to the interpretations of lunar breccia presented
later in this volume (chaps. 9,10). Projectile size, impact velocity, and
density of both the projectile and the target affect the partitioning of
energy among mechanical excavation, deformation, and impact melt-
ing . High-velocity
impacts of small projectiles generate small amounts of very hot melt,
whereas slow large impacts generate larger amounts of less thor-
oughly melted material .
For the same mass and velocity that is, the same kinetic energy
low-density projectiles generate more melt than do dense projectiles
 . The melt traps much of the heat energy
of the impact and does not contribute to the excavation process except
for the melt that may have been lost by early jetting . Therefore, in proportion to kinetic energy,
large impactors melt more material and eject less fragmental mate-
rial than do small impactors.
Emplacement of impact melt is one of the last processes to run its
course during a cratering event but one of the first to be initiated. Melt
originates in the impact zone and is pressed outward along the walls
of the growing cavity (fig. 3.21). On the Moon, what appear to be flows
of impact melt are superposed on crater walls and flanks, and pools of
melt rest in depressions both inside and outside the rim crest (figs.
3.22, 3.23). These relations indicate that the melt is still mobile after
the fragmental ejecta leaves the crater .
Apparently the melt sloshes over the rim along with some of the last
fragmental ejecta, and locally flows back downward into the cavity
after terracing ceases .
V Projectili
Glass injected
along fractures
Laminated and banded materials
. (arrested cataclastic flow)
Compressed and
>y N^ sheared target
Tensile fractures
ractures-,
FIGURE 3.21. Formation and mixing of shock-grade zones in a simple crater, showing four
stages .
3. CRATER MATERIALS
Formation times
Impact craters form in less than a minute .
Schmidt suggested that formational time is proportional to the
sixth power of the excavated volume.
In some terrestrial craters, the melt contains breccia from the
peak . This observation confirms that
peaks form early in the cratering sequence, as suggested above,
because impact melt solidifies very quickly. In large craters on the
Canadian shield, the time between impact and melt solidification was
about 100 s . Final cooling below
temperatures able to metamorphose the melt and clasts required less
than 2,000 years .
IMPACT BRECCIA
Terrestrial analogs
Studies of impact-generated terrestrial materials, which began
during the 1960's in conscious preparation for the Apollo landings
 , have provided essential clues for interpretations of the
returned samples. Progressive mineralogic and textural changes in
the target rock have been correlated with intensity of the outward-
decaying shock wave .
Among the first impact-generated materials to attract attention
were tektites, small, glassy, aerodynamically shaped objects found in
strewn fields at several terrestrial localities. They have been thought
to be lunar in origin but
are much closer in composition to the target materials of terrestrial
craters . The tektites of each
strewn field probably originated during early jetting of very hot
material from a terrestrial impact , were carried to various altitudes in and above the atmosphere
by a fireball, and were dispersed by gases in the fireball and by
stratospheric winds .
Lunar studies have depended heavily on analogies to the Ries
crater in Germany and the numerous craters or ringed basins on the
Canadian shield. The diameters of the most conspicuous rings of the
three largest Canadian craters, Manicouagan and West and East
Clearwater, are 65, 32, and 23 km, respectively; however, the exterior
ejecta has been eroded away and the excavation diameters are uncer-
tain. The Canadian craters have furnished much data about shock
metamorphism and impact melting . The larger craters possess massive interior sheets of
impact-melt rock, about 100 m thick, which texturally resembles
igneous rock. The 25-km-diameter Ries crater has furnished fewer
impact-melt rocks (as parts of the deposit called suevite) but abun-
dant unshocked fragmental ejecta (mostly in the Bunte Breccia)
 . Representative types of terrestrial impact mate-
rials from these and other craters have been illustrated and compared
with lunar impact materials by Stoffler and others .
Lunar-terra samples
Except for tektites, the whole range of shock grades is much
better represented on the lunar terrae than on the eroded Earth.
Terra-breccia deposits display complex shock effects, ranging from
cataclasis of monolithologic rocks, through solid-state meta-
morphism, to intricate assemblages of cogenetic and foreign clasts
within clastic and impact-melted matrices . Some individual
specimens consist entirely of breccia or entirely of melt rock (fig. 2.8),
and have been so designated in the literature. However, these rock
types must have been parts of deposits containing both melted and
unmelted materials, and so the term "breccia" is used here as a
general term for lunar impact materials. 3 -1
3 :Only the breccia that forms deposits of the terra bedrock is discussed here. At the time of the first two Apollo
landings, the only known breccia was that created in regoliths, because the terrae had not yet been visited. The
regolith breccia (also called soil breccia, microbreccia, glassy breccia, vitric-matrix breccia, and numerous other
names) constituted an obviously different type of material from the igneous basaltic lavas found at those sites. When
the much coarser, more massive, more complex, and more extensive bedrock breccia became known, the nomen-
clature did not fully adapt to the differences. Some petrologic literature does not clearly distinguish between
regolith breccia, formed by innumerable small impacts near the lunar surface, and bedrock breccia, formed by fewer
and larger impacts (also called "megaregolith"). In this volume, "breccia" denotes bedrock breccia unless otherwise
indicated, and "megaregolith" is not used because it obscures the fact that the bedrock breccia forms discrete strata.
FIGURE 3.22. Material subunits of a typical large crater, modeled after craters Theophilus and Madler. Rim materials are three-dimensional deposits, from rim crest outward: rh, hummocky; rr,
radial; re, cratered (secondary craters). Structural units, not sharply demarcated in subsurface, are floor material (f), peak material (p), and wall material (w). Planar impact-melt rock (m) overlies
other units. Material of simple crater (c) overlies unit rr. Drawing by Donald E. Davis, courtesy of the artist.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
Some features of breccia deposits can be related to the outward
decrease in shock intensity during the growth of a crater (fig. 3.21),
whereas others illustrate the textural and compositional complexities
that impact cratering induces.
Impact melts that have glassy or crystalline textures most like
those of igneous basalt presumably were formed near the impact zone
(for example, ophitic texture, in which pyroxene encloses less abun-
dant plagioclase laths, or subophitic texture, in which pyroxene
partly encloses a subequal volume of plagioclase laths; compare figs.
2.6, 2.8). Poikilitic texture in which numerous small, more nearly
equant plagioclase grains and other debris are enclosed by large
pyroxene crystals is considered to be a sign that many minute clasts
were incorporated in the impact melt . Melt
rocks with these various textures were recovered from most sampling
sites, most abundantly from the Apollo 17 terra stations (see chap. 9).
Melt-poor friable fragmental breccia, likely formed in the outer parts
of excavation cavities, was returned from all the terra landing sites,
most abundantly by Apollos 14 and 16 (see chaps. 9,10). Some material
derived from the outer parts of the excavation cavities and ejected late
in the cratering sequence consists of coherent blocks (fig. 3.2LD).
This zoning is muddied by the turbulent processes that charac-
terize energetic impacts. Melted material of projectile and target that
is not jetted is pressed into the growing cavity (fig. 3.2IB). As the
crater grows, this material, formed near the energy-release zone, is
injected into the less highly shocked but fragmented rock in outer
zones . Thus, melt rock appears as matrices and dikes among
less highly shocked fragments (fig. 3.2LD). Unmelted but crushed
clastic debris may be similarly injected. These processes are illus-
trated by dimict breccia, consisting of fragmental breccia and melt
rock showing mutual intrusion and inclusion relations .
Such mingling of shock grades can be quite thorough: Rock and
mineral fragments, shocked to varying degrees, may be engulfed by
impact melt (fig. 2.7). Moreover, various breccia and melt types are
interbedded in the crater interiors . This
bedding varies in sequence and lithology for craters of different sizes
and different target materials , and commonly juxtaposes materials that have experienced a
FIGURE 3.23. Very fresh crater King on farside (77 km, 5° N., 121° E.)
A. Entire crater. "Lobster claw" central peak connects with wall and is overlain by lower
wall material (enlarged in fig. 3.32). Pool of impact melt outside northwest rim is
enlarged in figure 3.36. Apollo 16 frame H-19580.
wide range of shock pressures. At any stage in the cratering process,
the material being ejected may consist of a mixture of complete melt,
fragment-laden melt, and unmelted fragments.
Shearing of material from the crater walls and transporting it
outside the crater further mixes the ejecta and streaks it into bands
or pods. Glass-coated striated fragments evincing shearing during
ejection or transport are known . Some
samples even appear to be accretionary bombs . Mixing with the substrate
material increases outward from the crater because of surface trans-
port and increasing secondary-impact velocity of the ejecta. Lunar
breccia containing clasts of melt formed in the same impact that
emplaced the breccia has been referred to as "suevite"; clasts of
impact-melted rock in fragmental deposits analogous to the Ries
Bunte Breccia predate the deposit .
However, distinguishing the two types of deposit is difficult on the
Moon, where the source crater of a breccia is commonly unknown.
After the deposits come to rest, the intimate mixture of hot or
superheated melt and warm or cold fragments of varying composi-
tions in all conceivable combinations of grain size and abundance
leads to further modifications of the deposit . Melt and hot clasts are differentially quenched
during the rapid initial cooling of the deposit. Sharp local differences
in crystallinity, interface texture, and remaining content of frag-
ments may arise. The second, much slower stage of cooling further
metamorphoses the deposit and underlying materials. The ter-
restrial metamorphic terms "granoblastic" or "granulitic" (anhedral
grains of subequal size) are applied to many lunar textures believed
to have arisen from thermal metamorphism . Thus, the complexities arising in a
single impact may be so great that they mimic the relations arising
from multiple events .
The complexities of lunar impact deposits at the scale of the
outcrop or the hand specimen are not surprising in view of the
complexity of each individual impact and the fact that each volume of
material may be similarly reworked by many subsequent impacts.
Consequently, any attempt to categorize lunar impact materials is
bound to fall short of reality. The most useful in a series of attempts
B. Northeast rim, showing concentric textures of rim material downdropped along with
terraces inside rim and locally lying outside rim (lower part of photograph). Gradation
from concentric to radial pattern of outer rim material indicates increasing radial-flow
component of outer material. Apollo 16 frame M 1579.
3. CRATER MATERIALS
was probably that by Stoffler and others , who compiled a long
list of earlier names that should greatly aid the reader of the technical
literature. Stoffler and others used textures and structures,
which are signs of the process that formed the rocks, as their main
basis for classification. Essentially, this classification describes
matrices as either fragmental, crystallized from a melt, still glassy or
partially devitrified, or metamorphosed. Clast content can be
described according to need. From the geologic point of view, this
classification improves upon those based on chemical composition.
Many purposes are served by a still simpler breakdown into clast-rich
and melt-rich (clast-poor) breccia types.
Reconstruction of the history of lunar breccia deposits severely
challenges the petrologist, geochemist, and geologist. The place and
process of original formation of the clasts and of the raw materials for
the melts (chap. 8) must be disentangled from the process by which
they arrived at the place where they were collected (chaps. 9,10). Each
clast may yield a different isotopic age, attesting to many endogenic
and impact events in the sample's history, or only to incomplete
migration of Ar, Rb, and Sr isotopes (chaps. 9,10). The crater or basin
in which most of them originated can only be inferred. Unsuspected
complexities in the process of forming craters and, especially, basins
may have shaped the materials of the lunar terrae.
SUMMARY OF
CRATER-MATERIAL ORIGIN
Introduction
Around almost all impact craters, the processes described above
have created similar patterns of continuous ejecta grading outward to
secondary craters. The major apparent differences among craters are
between the interiors of simple and complex craters. Partly under-
stood variations in the target material, such as in structure, cohesion,
and topographic relief, also affect the details of morphology; and
variations in projectile velocity, density, and impact angle affect both
the morphology and the proportions of melted and ejected material.
Nevertheless, the basic morphologic patterns of impact craters are
much more alike than those of volcanic craters.
This similarity has greatly aided the reconstruction of lunar
geologic history. Stratigraphically based lunar geologic mapping has
become increasingly effective as the analogies between modified and
unmodified deposits have become clearer. The material subunits in
and around craters were generally recognized as stratigraphic
entities when they were mapped geologically in the 1960's , and their mapped limits
remain generally valid. The interpretations of some units, however,
have changed .
To enable modern use of these maps, this section updates the inter-
pretations of each class of unit on the basis of the newer research
summarized above, and suggests what rock types are likely to occur
in each unit and in the analogous units of basins.
Rim material
A raised rim, formed by uplift of the target and by deposition of
ejecta, surrounds the crater. The geologic unit "rim material" (a
member of the formation "crater material") essentially corresponds to
the continuous ejecta (fig. 3.22). Smooth, clean-looking rim surfaces
may have been stripped of ejecta by late-stage radial flow . On the near flanks of simple craters, ejecta materials have been
deposited in inverse order of their original sequence. Original strat-
igraphic units are more jumbled in complex craters .
Impact melt forms ponds in depressions and coats other parts of the
rim (figs. 3.23). The deposits also probably incorporate clasts and
veins of impact-melt rock along with fragmental ejecta. The relative
amounts of melted and unmelted ejecta depend on factors of projectile
size, density, and velocity, and on such target properties as density
and volatile content.
The hummocky facies of rim material (a submember) consists of
late-emplaced material that was derived from near the crater wall
and overlies the structurally uplifted and outthrust zone of larger
craters. Blocks of relatively undeformed material are scattered on the
rim (figs. 3.2A, 3.23.B). The rim's generally concentric structure
attests to final emplacement by outthrusting (fig. 3.23). In places,
younger crater rims have breached older rims, and the hummocky
materials flowed rapidly (fig. 3.24) or sluggishly (fig. 3.25) into the
gap. Therefore, the deposits were emplaced along the surface. Around
old craters, the hummocky rim facies, without the topographic sub-
tleties of young craters, is the only distinguishable rim material (fig.
Outward from the hummocky rim material, ridges in radial and
herringbone patterns form a continuous-appearing wreath with
irregular lobate margins (fig. 3.22). In the well-photographed complex
craters illustrated here, the radial rim facies (submember) is clearly
an outward gradation of the hummocky rim material (figs. 3.23, 3.24,
3.27). Surface flow after ejection is indicated by the textures curving
from concentric to radial patterns (figs. 3.235, 3.24, 3.27A). Some of
the ejecta apparently was molten (fig. 3.275). The gradation with
materials at the rim crest and the content of impact melt indicate that
the ejected ground-flow materials are dominated by primary ejecta.
The outer part of the radial rim material, however, contains locally
derived material because substrate material was incorporated either
by ground flow of the ejecta under confining pressure or during
ballistic emplacement of the ejecta.
FIGURE 3.24. Lineations of northwestern ejecta of crater Tsiolkovskiy, indicating ground
surge beyond concentric near-rim deposits. Smaller crater in upper left, probably filled with
additional Tsiolkovskiy ejecta, is Liitke (39 km). Apollo 17 frame M 2608.
FIGURE 3.25. Concentric ejecta of crater Shirakatsi (51 km, left), pushed through gap in rim
of older or nearly contemporaneous crater Dobrovol'skiy (38 km). North of Tsiolkovskiy,
centered at 13° S., 129° E. Apollo 17 frame M-2608.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
At some radius, ballistically generated secondary craters appear.
Much of the ejecta thrown from secondaries has a herringbone pat-
tern that originated by intersection of cones of their ejecta (figs.
3.4C-F, 3.6, 3.7). In the ideal case, derivation of the farthest-thrown
materials from near the impact zone (fig. 3.18) means that the second-
aries were formed by highly shocked material from shallow depths in
the primary target. Thus, whatever primary material is recovered
from the secondary ejecta will contain impact melt or other high
shock grades, whereas the local material in the secondary ejecta
should be less shocked because of the lower kinetic energies of the
secondary impacts. The proportions are not known, but locally
derived material probably increases with distance from the primary
crater. Some geologic maps distinguish a rim-material facies called
cratered rim material (fig. 3.22) and identify the underlying unit of
which it is composed .
The ejecta of young secondary craters commonly appears as rays
or bright splashes of freshly exposed material (figs. 3.4A, C, 3.6,3.28).
Most of this ray material was probably excavated from the local
terrain by secondary impacts. Many investigators of rays have sus-
pected that fine primary ejecta also composes parts of rays . Absolute dating of Copernicus and Aristillus depends on the
interpretation that the samples recovered on rays hundreds of kilo-
meters from those craters contain primary ejecta (see chap. 13).
Wall material
Wall material is a mixed unit that includes materials of the
terraces and all the slumps, debris, and impact melt that coat crater
walls. Walls may expose precrater strata (fig. 3.29). Edges of the
terraces may also contain precrater target rock, and tops may expose
downdropped rim material. Depressions in the terrace tops, which
are most common on the rears of the outward-tilted downdropped
surfaces, commonly contain pools of flat-surfaced material now recog-
nized as impact melt . Dribbles or cascades of
additional melt or debris, commonly bounded by levees resulting from
the flow, connect some terraces and the floor .
These melt features, which are seen only on high-resolution pho-
tographs, merely contribute to the overall rough appearance of the
walls as seen on telescopic photographs. Coarse wall hummocks are
probably slumps (fig. 3.27A).
FIGURE 3.26. Ejecta of moderately fresh (Eratosthenian) crater Werner (70 km, 28° S., 3°
E., above), superposed on crater Aliacensis (80 km, below), whose subdued walls, raised
rim wreath, and central peak were probably similar to those of Werner when first formed;
Ahacensis-radial ejecta is no longer visible. Rim nearest Werner is more highly degraded
than distal rim. Orbiter 4 frame H-100.
FIGURE 3.27. Eastern ejecta of Tsiolkovskiy (180 km).
A. Ground-surge emplacement is indicated by diversion from concentric to radial lineations
(arrows). Impact melt is visible at upper arrow and in box at bottom. Apollo 15 frame
B. Impact melt, partly enclosed in box in figure 3.27A, covers radial ejecta. Apollo 15
frame P-9580.
3. CRATER MATERIALS
FIGURE 3.28. Splashes of bright material dug from beneath darker surficial layers by
secondary-impact craters of a crater out of scene to lower left. Crater in picture is about 5.5
km across; near west rim of Gagarin. Apollo 15 frame P-8941.
FIGURE 3.29. Crater Euler (28 km, 23° N., 29° W.), showing wall materials weakly
coalesced into terraces at bottom and uncoalesced in upper left. Precrater stratigraphic units
are evident by albedo differences on upper right wall. Apollo 15 frame P-10274.
On many geologic maps, material slowly uncovered or displaced
downslope on crater walls is mapped as a unit called bright slope
material . This unit
was early recognized by geologic mappers and ascribed to renewal of
exposure of lunar rock by downslope movement ; it was generally
assigned a Copernican age regardless of the age of the underlying
unit. A substantial content of fresh material has been confirmed by
spectral studies (see chap. 5), and all high-resolution photographs of
steep lunar slopes reveal mass-wasted debris deposits (figs.
3.31 3.33). The time of exposure of materials in the colluvium at the
bases of massifs at the Apollo 15 and 17 landing sites has been dated
isotopically at tens or hundreds of millions of years, in contrast to
several aeons for the source rock. The colluvium and slope debris
contain material foreign to the source and introduced by impacts. The
oldest (darkest) slopes probably have accumulated the most exotic
material (fig. 3.31).
Peak material
The geologic unit "peak material" was probably derived from
greater depths than any other lunar-crater material because the
material in peaks formerly lay beneath the excavated part of the
crater (fig. 3.19). Peaks range considerably in morphology from low
hills and single centralized pinnacles, through multiple jagged peaks
clustered around a center, to dispersed smaller arrays (figs. 3.2C-E,
3.29, 3.32-3.35,4.2). All these forms are consistent with uplift mech-
anisms. Peaks probably formed during crater excavation by intensive
FIGURE 3.31. Bright streaks of fresh material and darker, longer-stabilized material on wall
of crater Lalande A (13 km, 6.5° S., 10° W.). Floor is composed of material already
accumulated by similar downslope movement. Apollo 16 frame P-5400.
FICURE 3.30. Cascade of impact melt (arrow) from terrace to floor on north wall of Copernicus; w, steep part of wall just below rim. Cascade has apparently drained melt pool (right of arrow end)
through groove (right of arrowhead) . Arrow is 5 km long. Orbiter 5 frame M-152.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
deformation of the central part of the target. The violent and extreme
uplift suggested by several lines of evidence given above seems to be
supported by the observation by Murray that some peaks seem
to have toppled over the crater rim (fig. 3.34). Because of the intense
deformation, peaks are structurally complex. Few, if any, peaks are
volcanic constructs accumulated after cessation of cratering, contrary
to the interpretations presented on many geologic maps and in much
other earlier lunar literature.
Floor material
Some floor materials are coeval with peak materials, some
slightly younger, and some much younger. Floor materials are
diverse, and photographs should be consulted during their rein-
terpretation. Some constitute peaklike uplifts (figs. 3.33,3.35), which
in many craters form an approximately annular pattern that fore-
shadows the larger rings of basins (fig. 3.2E; chap. 4). Separation of
such lumps from central peaks may be more a matter of scale-depend-
ent mapping convention than of genetic significance. Some hum-
mocky floor materials bridge the gap between peak and wall, and may
represent the toes of inward-displaced wall slivers or parts of the floor
uplift . Other floor materials
consist of debris from the walls (figs. 3.31, 3.33).
Impact melt, formerly believed to be volcanic, partly covers many
crater floors. Fissured floor materials that appeared on Lunar Orbiter
5 photographs of such young craters as Aristarchus, Tycho, and
Copernicus (figs. 3.2Z), 3.35) clearly were originally molten, and in the
spirit of the times, many workers once considered them to be volcanic
 . Some smooth floor materials (fig. 3.32) and other plains materials
(figs. 3.2Z), 3.36) retained volcanic interpretations longer than any
other geologic-map units. The smooth "ponds" are superposed on the
floor, wall, and rim, and thus were mapped not as crater materials but
as special postcrater units ; they were commonly ascribed to volcanic extrusions released or
localized by the impact . However, these
smooth and fissured materials have been identified as impact melt by
detailed observations of the freshest and best photographed craters
 . Impact melt veneers much of the crater interior and rim, and is
ponded in favorable depressions (fig. 3.36). Fissures that continue
from the floor over many of the floor uplifts indicate that melt rock
coats these uplifts as well . The
fissures and many irregular pits suggest drainage of impact melt into
underlying porous breccia , not volcanism
 . Some melt flows came to rest later than the peak
(fig. 3.32), in confirmation of terrestrial observations indicating that
peak formation is even quicker than melt solidification. The only
internally generated materials associated with craters are the mare
materials that flood many craters and, possibly, small amounts of
other material, such as that in the floor of the endogenic crater
Hyginus .
Impact-melted floor materials probably would provide a chemi-
cally representative sample of the target rocks because target mate-
rials are extensively homogenized during impact melting . Conversely, the material on older crater floors may be
completely unrelated to the crater that contains them or to the sub-
crater material (Aliacensis, fig. 3.26). Even craters that lack recog-
nized deposits of mare basalt or ejecta may be filled by debris derived
from the walls or introduced gradually as fragments by random
distant impacts. Such slowly accumulated floor materials may yield
random samples of large parts of the lunar surface.
In summary, geologic mapping of the materials of lunar craters
has proved to be generally accurate in delineating significant units
and determining mutual age relations, but the interpretations of
many mapped units have changed. The absolute-age differences
detected among crater-material facies by stratigraphic relations have
shrunk from millions of years to minutes. The materials have moved
continuously closer to an almost exclusive impact interpretation and
away from volcanic or hybrid interpretations, under the prodding of
sample analyses and continued photogeologic, Earth-analog, and
experimental studies.
FIGURE 3.32. Part of "lobster claw" peak of crater King (compare fig. 3.23A), showing
superposition of impact melt in gap of peak. Apollo 16 frame P-4998.
3. CRATER MATERIALS
FIGURE 3.33. Crater Proclus (28 km, 16° N., 47° E.), showing terrace-free walls, slump from upper wall (S), coarse floor mounds
probably produced by floor uplift, and fissured impact melt on floor (arrow). Apollo 17 frame P 2265.
FIGURE 3.34. Crater Anaxagoras (51 km, 73° N., 10° W.). Peak material apparently
toppled over rim at arrow . Orbiter 4 frame H-128.
FiGURt 3.35. Impact melt and floor mounds of Copernicus; melt is superposed on mounds at arrows. Fissures indicate shrinkage of melt and, possibly, drainage into subsurface cavities. Orbiter 5
frame H-153.
3. CRATER MATERIALS
FicURE 3.36. Lineations and festoons indicating flow of impact melt in exterior pool of crater King (fig. 3.23A). Melt has flowed over rim material and collected in depressions . Apollo 16 frame P-5000.
FIGURE 4.1. (OVERLEAF) Orientale basin and its deposits. Scene centered on farside. Double-ringed basins are Hertzsprung (above) and Apollo (below, with some mare fill). Painting by
Donald E. Davis, courtesy of the artist.
4. BASIN MATERIALS ORIENTALE
Introduction ....................................................... 57
Orientale exterior, by John F. McCauley .............................. 66
General features ................................................ 66
Inner facies of the Hevelius Formation ............................. 66
Outer facies of the Hevelius Formation and secondary craters ....... 67
Relation between ground-flow deposits and secondary craters ...... 67
Plains .......................................................... 72
Orientale interior, by John F McCauley .............................. 72
Montes Rook Formation ......................................... 73
Maunder Formation ............................................. 76
Topography and gravity ............................................ 77
Origin of rings .................................................... 77
Introduction .................................................... 77
Genetic models ................................................. 77
Discussion ..................................................... 79
Conclusions .................................................... 81
Summary of basin-material origins .................................. 81
INTRODUCTION
Most simple craters, almost all complex craters, and all ringed
basins were formed by impacts. Collectively, these lunar features
constitute a series of impact excavations that have many common
properties over the entire size range but also show many differences
(figs. 4.1-4.3).
Appreciation of the importance to lunar geology of the largest
members of this size-morphology series, the basins, has grown slowly.
Gilbert (1893) may have been the first to perceive the Imbrium basin
as the largest example of the series on the nearside. This interpreta-
tion was supported by other influential early workers who
increasingly recognized the distinction between basin and mare
 . Shoemaker and Hackman pointed out the
similarity of the Imbrium-basin ejecta to crater ejecta. Several other
authors enunciated the differences in style from craters, while affirm-
ing a basic similarity of origin, by stressing the linearity of the basin-
radial Imbrium sculpture and the
concentricity of the ring systems . A landmark study of
rectified telescopic photographs by Hartmann and Kuiper 
documented the ring patterns and regular ring spacings of 12 tele-
scopically visible basins, including Orientale; they also coined the
term "basin" . McCauley 
then pointed out similarities of the circum-Orientale terrane to the
Imbrium ejecta. Titley and Eggleton tentatively
recognized ejecta of the Humorum basin, and Wilhelms and Trask
 suggested that the terrane around other basins contains basin
ejecta and secondary-impact craters. Stuart-Alexander and Howard
 and Hartmann and Wood reviewed the photographs
obtained of the whole Moon in 1966 and 1967 by the five Lunar
Orbiters and described the properties, distribution, and probable
origins of many additional basins and their maria.
Although these studies established the existence and the impact
origin of many large basins, the morphology and extent of the exterior
deposits and secondary craters were poorly known before Apollo
exploration began . Volcanic and
tectonic hypotheses still competed vigorously with impact hypotheses. The first new data that would eventually lead to the current
impact model were the superb photographs of the Orientale basin
obtained in 1967 by Lunar Orbiter 4 (figs. 1.9, 4.4). The Orientale
deposits are less obscured by later material than are those of any
other large well-photographed basin. The second and vital clue came
from the discovery of complex impact breccia at every sampling site in
the terrae, in particular, the Apollo 16 landing site, previously
thought to be underlain by volcanic materials . The third new development was the extension of
impact interpretations to the rest of the terrae, an exercise sum-
marized in this volume. More and more basins have been recognized
and established as the sources of surrounding deposits and satellitic
craters (pi. 3; fig. 4.3; tables 4.1-4.3).
FIGURE 4.2 (OVERLEAF). Crater-to-basin transition.
A. Antoniadi (135 km, 70° S., 1 72° W.), with both an inner ring and a small central peak.
Mare material fills depression inside inner ring and partly floods peak. Orbiter 4 frame
B. Compton(162km, 56°N., 105° E.), with conspicuous central peak and low but distinct
inner "peak ring." Cracks indicate floor uplift. Orbiter 5 frame M-181.
C. Petavius (177 km, 25° S., 60° E.), with massive complex central peak and vague
ringlike configuration of low peaks between central peak and wall. Uplift extending to
middle of wall is indicated by grabens. Slight filling by dark material is evident along
walls. Orbiter 4 frame H-184.
D. Gauss (177 km, 36° N., 79° E.), with entirely different floor structure from that of
Petavius, although both craters are of same size. Orbiter 4 frame H-165.
E. Humboldt (207 km, 27° S., 81 ° E.), with central peak and line of peaks. Other rugged
features of original floor are higher in north than in south; cracks indicate uplift of entire
floor. Light-colored plains may be later fill; dark crescents are later mare fill. Orbiter 4
frame M-12.
F. Landau (221 km, 43° N., 119° W.), with few distinct floor features; irregularly
depressed in northeast. Orbiter 5 frame M-12.
G. Campbell (225 km, 45° N., 153° E.), with some offcenter rugged relief. An offcenter
depression, as in Landau, is here filled by a small mare patch. Orbiter 5 frame M-103
(rectified).
H. Clavius (225 km, 58° S., 14° W.), with small offcenter peaks, probably partly covered
by later plains fill. Orbiter 4 frame M-124.
/. Schwarzschild (235 km, 71° N., 120° E.), with rugged, arcuate, crescent-shaped floor
topography. Orbiter 4 frame M-92.
Milne (262 km, 32° S., 113° E.), with complex single to triple arcs. Milne and
Schwarzschild are the most basinlike craters smaller than 300 km in diameter. Orbiter 3
frame M-121.
K. Gagarin (272 km, 20° S., 149° E.), with indistinct ring-form structure, though larger
than Milne. Orbiter 1 frame M-l 16.
fcl!" «''^"»L
H -"HSv ^'.,
<*k%a&» -;»*" t*.
1- :'t*.r.t-f'- J*'-1 $~&-^V4fsJf?*>* £T$*.
'-- ^fcf'^ ^'^^^C?^!^'- ^4^
^ *r.',)f i/J^i ''V,'
s-ip^' . * ft ' i */
*.'* svS^v^v ,
!^ j afe-?-' :f*.^v^/.'
S^i vi':v,^'ij%*
C. Schiller-Zucchius.
D. Planck.
E Birkhoff.
^^M'^, m^-w
/. Grimaldi.
C. Poincare.
/. Korolev.
//. Lorentz.
. Moscoviense.
FIGURE 4.3. Definite lunar basins at least 300 km in diameter, in order of increasing size and
complexity (see table 4.1 )L
E. Mendeleev.
L. Apollo.
M. Coulomb-Sarton.
'>&,.<&: £1
N. Ingenii.
O. Hertzsprung.
P. Freundlich-Sharonov.
~* Jr-f' **
tkftffiff,.,*
p-^p^f ::/ .-/
wji*** ?$&'>'
Q. Humboldtianum.
Mendel-Rydberg.
S. Serenitatis.
v*m.tmM' s; *
:f*;^D' c'*l ^?^^P;
". Keeler-Heaviside.
U. Humorum.
V. Smythii.
X. Australe.
Orientale.
Lfl^K. ***'
AV^^Ml^^^S**
*" "* -^& f (f *^f,^\i^ *, ^^^V&F" \.\**.
*-* *»jfc*'<* »7T» ^''--'
iI^^^W^L^^'
^ «4|»»*i^i^| ^*«-*:
* ,??^^^\ ^-
'»''">v?-'' t
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
TABLE 4.1. Definite lunar basins at least 300 km in diameter
[Basins listed in order of increasing size and complexity.
Names all in capitals have deposits napped on plate 3.
Names are derived, where possible, either from the mare fill of a basin (for example, the Imbrium
basin from Mare Imbrium) or from a name given by the International Astronomical Union, considering them as craters (for example, Apollo).
Otherwise, they are named here from two superposed, unrelated craters:
Name used here (reference^
Earlier designation (reference)
Sclil Mer-^ucchius (W79)- Basin near Schiller (HKS2J.
Coulomb-Sarton (L78) Unnamed basin B (HW71).
Freundlich-Sharonov (S73)
Mendel-Rydberg (W79) SE. limb basin (HK62) .
Keeler-Heaviside (S78)
South Pole-Aitken (S78)--- - Big backside basin (common usage).
Best photographs:
Photograph used in figure 4.3 is underlined; each includes one-half basin radius beyond topographic rim, where possible.
HK62, telescopic photograph from Hartmann and Kuiper ; r, rectified;
A16, Apollo 16 frame; M10, Manner 10 frame (Mercury-Venus mission that photographed the Moon djring flyby).
Others are Lunar Orbiter frames.
Major rings:
Diameters are listed for rings that are observed or inferred to extend more than half a basin circumference.
Approximate radii are listed for partial segments that may not form complete rings.
tional small segments are plotted on plate 3.
Topographic basin rim (also called main nm in descriptions) is underlined, queried where uncertain.
References:
849, Baldwin ; B63, Baldwin ; G93, Gilbert (1893); HK62, Hartmann and Kuiper ; HW71, Hartmann and Wood ; L78, Lucchitta ; M67, McCauley (1967ai b); S77, Scott and others
 ; S78, Stuart-Alexander ; SH62, Shoemaker and Hackman ; SH70, Stuart-Alexander and Howard ; T67, Titley ; WE77, Wilhelms and El-Baz ; WM71, Wilhelmi and McCauley ; W79,
Wilhelms and others .
Chapter numbers refer to the present volume.]
Center (lat, long)
FREUNDLICH-SHARONOV 4.3P
Keeler-Heaviside 4.3T
5 M-103(r)
Telescopic
A16 M-3035
4 M-194(r)
See fig. 4.4
Major rings
Description
Degraded craterlike rim.
Discontinuous inner ring, connected to rim by outward-sloping
Deposits obscured by Orientale.
Fresh craterlike rim and wall.
Inner ring consists of rugged crags forming nearly com-
plete circle, joined to wall in two places by exposed shelf.
Hummocky probable impact
impact melt on floor.
Extensive craterlike deposits, linear secondary chains.
Outer ring craterlike though degraded; bounded inward by steep scarp, outward by gentle
Inner ring mountainous.
No discernible deposits.
Poorly photographed; outer ring apparently craterlike, inner ring partial.
No discern-
ible deposits.
Craterlike outer rim with flat-bottomed troughs.
Inner ring of discontinuous small
peaks, connected to wall by outward-sloping shelf.
Craterlike deposits and numerous,
though subdued, secondary craters.
Craterlike rim.
Discontinuous, mostly obscured inner ring of narrow ridges.
craterlike deposits and secondaries.
Apparently craterlike rim.
Continuous but battered lower inner ring.
No deposits
Craterlike rim.
Low and ridgelike inner ring, continuous except where cratered.
Craterlike deposits and secondary craters west of basin.
Obscured by Orientale; probably craterlike rim.
Discontinuous rjgged inner ring.
deposits observed.
Craterlike rim locally divided by terracing.
Inner ring partly buried but detectable
for almost a complete circle.
Deposits *<ell exposed to west; extensive secondaries.
Crude figure-8 pattern of outer and inner rings.
Rim has crude echelon pattern sug-
gestive of large-scale terracing.
Inner ring complete for half of periphery; has
steep inner scarp and broad, gentle outer flank.
Deposits and secondaries poorly
photographed but visibly reduce prehasin crater population 400 to 500 km from rim.
Interrupted obscured main rim.
Bifurcations indicate terracing.
Inner ring partly
continuous and bounded by steep inward scarp and gentler outer flank, partly discon-
tinuous and rugged.
Concavity or discontinuity inside inner ring indicated by mare
localization.
Mare patches indicate outward slope of interring shelf and possible
exterior "ings.
Deposits dnd secondaries extend about 500 km southward.
Heavily obscured by Bi rkhof f and Lorentz deposits.
Rings uncertain; 400-km-di ameter
ring could he the rim.
Outer ring questionable; consists of discontinuous but large massifs.
Inner, 325-km-
diameter, mare-bounding ring, more complete, though battered, may be the nain rim.
Deposits not directly observed but may breach south rim of Keeler-Heaviside basin.
Craterlike rim in most sectors, irregular in northwest and indistinct in north.
of complete and distinct innermost ring resembles crater nm; rest consists of rug-
ged peaks.
Intermediate rings conspicuous, single, and benchlike or ridgelike in
most sectors; ragged, bifurcated, echelon in northwest; inconspicuous in north, where
ragged ridges and hills form upland nearly at level of surrounding terrain.
extensive, locally 600 km from rim; some secondary-crater lobes 900 km from rim.
Rim complete; seems craterlike but is poorly photographed.
Ridges suggest interior
ring structure, but connection into rings or terraces is uncertain.
Distinct radial
grooves and ridges and mantling of craters south of basin indicate deposits and sec-
ondaries extending at least 600 Kin from rim.
Figure-8 shape; each part of main rim about 600 km in diameter, equivalent in total
area to a circle 700 km in diameter.
Bel'kovich (?00 km diam) is either an indepen-
pendent crater or third part of inner basin.
Intermediate ring, fairly distinct in
south-southwest, consists of hills in southwest, many large hills in southeast, and
nearly continuous hilly area in north about at level of surrounding terrain.
600-km-radius arcs southwest of main rim.
Distinct deposits and secondary craters
(<20 km diam) extend more than 600 km from southeast rim.
Distinct separation of rings in south, but continuity uncertain.
Faint deposits in
southwest.
Ring structure indistinct in west half except in Montes Haemus.
Haemus, Taurus-Li ttrow
massifs, and other margins of mare probably form main rim .
"Vitruvius
front" and other irregular elevations form long arcs with 45J-kii radii.
Mare ridges suggest a buried 42n-km-diameter ring.
Basin may be double, with small
northern and large southern components ; center
as listed is that of combined components.
All rings and arcs composed of large but disconnected massifs whose connection as rings
and relation to excavation boundary are uncertain.
Deposits not observed.
820-km-di ameter ring defined by steep notched scarp in south and by discontinuous lower
ragged, semiradial or semiconcentric ridges or massifs elsewhere.
Part of most con-
spicuous mare-bounding ring (440 km diam) connects with 280-km-radius arcs as sloping
flank, elsewhere is divided into semidistinct rings with bridges to 820-km-diameter
325-km-diameter ring marked by terra shelf and mare bench.
Most distinct ring
separation is in south.
Deposits and secondary craters distinct only in southeast.
840-km-diameter ring defined by partial arcs bounded by steep inner scarp and gentle
360-km-di ameter ring continuous but low.
Deposits not observed.
Main topographic rim is well-defined scarp on west (Rupes Altai), discontinuous mare-
embayed mesas on east.
Intermediate nng broad and low, bifurcates in west, forms
discontinuous plateaus in east.
Inner ring diverse, low.
Possible additional ring
defined by mare border, 240 km in diameter.
Deposits extend 650 to 950 km, typically
750 kn, from center; secondaries extend 700 to 1,500 km.
Outer ring includes large massifs.
Intermediate, poorly defined ring contains massifs,
locally connected by rugged structure to outer ring.
Inner "ring" consists of
closed series of irregular elevations.
No deposits observed.
Most nearly complete concentric ring structure among large basins except in the west.
Outermost conspicuous ring is Cordillera, bounded inwardly by steep scarp or gentle
lip and topped by some ridgelike massifs.
Semicircular depression is outside this
ring, and a raised 650-km-radius ring may be east of basm.
Extension of Cordillera
west of basin merges witn extensions of Rook (620 and 480 km diam) rings as rugged,
References
Chapter 9;
Chapter 10
Chapter R;
Chapter 8;
Chapter 9;
Chapter 8;
Chapter 8;
Chapter 8;
Chapter 3;
Chapter 9;
Chapter 9;
Chapter S;
Chapter -i;
Chapter 3;
Chapter 9;
Chapter B;
Chapter 9;
Chapter 9;
Chapter 9;
Chapter 8;
Chapter 9;
Chapter 8;
Chapter 9;
Chapter 3;
Chapters 4
irregularly structured upland.
Other sectors of outer Rook ring consist of large
massifs with steep inner and gentler outer slopes in a sawtooth pattern.
Large sec-
tion of inner Rook r ing and small section of 320-km-diameter ring also have large
massifs; otherwise, inner Rook ring consists of smaller massifs or a steplike lip,
and 320-km-diameter ring is defined by a lip or gradual fallofr. Knobby hills sug-
gest a plateaulike central uplift. Radial structures in inner oasin.
ejecta and secondaries.
4. BASIN MATERIALS ORIENTALE
TABLE 4.1. Definite lunar basins at least 300 km in diameter Continued
Center (lat,
Description
References
South Pole-Aitken ---
Outer ring consists of tnree differently expressed segments:
rimlike scarp in north,
ridge bordering a trough in northwest, and irregular scarp in southeast.
Elevations
fall off inward from this ring, which also marks start of secondary chains.
inside northwest ridge and massifs inside southeast scarp are about 380 and 4bO km
in radius, respectively, but are not closely concentric.
Main mare-bounding nm is
most conspicuous structure, divisible into 500- and 635-km-diameter rings, the inner
consisting of large massifs with missing sector in east, and the outer of nigh but
irregular massifs and other ridges and hills, separated from inner ring by deep irreg-
ular depressions.
Innermost ring defined by a mare bench and small hills.
and secondary craters extensive to east (1,600 kin from center?), secondaries extensive
to north (900 km) and south (1,100 km).
Center as shown and 1,160-km ring are formed by Montes Carpatus, Apenninus, and Alpes.
North shore of Mare Frigoris has 900-km radius from same center and is another major
rim; both parts connect with Montes Caucasus.
Lineations in Caucasus radial to same
Montes Recta and Spi tzbergensis and rnare ridges define 670-km-dia,neter ring
about a more northerly center; other connections are less certain and not given here.
Lineate ejecta is north of Frigoris and soutn and southeast of Carpatus-Apenninus (Fra
Mauro Formation); knobby ejecta (Alpes Formation) is closer to r ings in all sectors,
imbricate on south Apenninus flank (material of Montes Apenninus).
Secondary craters
abundant in all exposed sectors to 1,400-2,700 Kin from center, typically to 2,300 km.
Huge massifs and scarps define single rim averaging 2,200 Km in diameter, or two rings
about 2,500 and 1,800-2,000 km in diameter.
Chapter 9; HK62, SH70,
WM71, WE77.
Chapter 10; G93, B49, B63,
HK62, SH62, WM71.
Chapter 8; S78, W79.
TABLE 4.2. Probable and possible lunar basins at least 300 km in diameter
[Basins naned by convention described in table 4.1.
All basins a^e pre-Nectanan (see chap. 8) except possibly Sikorsky-Rittenhouse (Nectarian?).
Diameter refers to outer or only observed ring.
References:
B53, Ba n dwin '1953); Bfi9, Ba'dwin
[ 11691; C74-R1, Cadogan '1974, 19811; HH77, Hawke and Hea-J [1977bl; MAS1, Maxwel 1
and Andre .'19S1); SH70, Stuart-Alexander and Howard ; WE77, ' lilhelms and El-Baz
 ; WM71, Wilhel'ns and McCauley ; W79, WilheVns and others ; *I81, Wh-'.aker ]
Center (lat, long)
'dence and status as basin
Arc.iate radges adjacent to Mpndel-Rydberg; possibly part of that basin-- ------
Craterlike rim and inner hills.
Buried by Scnrodinger deposits; possibly
part of South Pole-Aitken basin.
Craterlike rm and trace D c inner -Tig.
Buried by Schrodinger deposits;
possibly part of So.jtn Pole-Ait<en basin.
Concentration of plains nside and around rugged arcuate hills.
nay be exposed.
Probable hasm.
B63, p. 195; named here.
Balmer basm of 1/W1; renamed here.
\fil; similar to Gargantuan basin of C74-81.
Because of the pivotal role played by investigations of Orientale
both before and after the Apollo 16 mission, Orientale deposits are
taken as models for others and are thoroughly described in this
chapter. Similarities to the Orientale deposits appear repeatedly in
the rest of the terrae and reveal the presence of basin deposits in all
degrees of preservation from the fresh to the barely discernible.
Although all primary-impact excavations are surrounded by
basically similar ejecta and secondary craters, their interior mor-
phologies differ sharply from the small to the large end members of
the impact series (figs. 3.2, 4.2, 4.3). Morphologic complexity
increases most obviously in the simple-to-complex transition at diam-
eters of about 20 km and again at diameters of about 300 km. Like the
first, this second transition has exceptions. All unburied lunar impact
cavities larger than 300 km in diameter display interior rings;
however, some cavities smaller than 300 km also contain rings.
Antoniadi (135 km diam) and Compton (162 km diam) each have a
peak centered inside an inner ring. Schwarzschild (235 km diam) has
a partial ring, and Milne (262 km diam) has several. Several craters
display ringlike patterns of internal peaks (figs. 3.2#, 4.2C-E). Some
tectonically modified craters appear to possess a concentric structure
(see chap. 6). On the other hand, several partly buried circular depres-
sions larger than 300 km in diameter do not display the expected
second ring.
These deviations muddy the definition of the term "basin." All
authors agree that cavities larger than 300 km in diameter that have
concentric rings instead of central peaks are basins, but opinions
differ about whether this definition should be based entirely on size or
on the presence of a second ring regardless of size . This chapter concentrates on excavations at least 300 km in
diameter, and classifies those without observed interior rings as
indefinite basins (table 4.2). The problem of nomenclature for transi-
tional features smaller than 300 km is not resolved here.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
The origin of rings is among the most important unsolved prob-
lems of lunar geology. Orientale is also critical to this problem. Its
four major rings are the most regularly spaced on the Moon (fig. 4.3).
The 930-km-diameter Montes Cordillera ring, partly scarplike and
partly topped by massifs, bounds the basin (figs. 4.1, 4.4). Two jagged
massive rings, collectively called Montes Rook, have diameters of 480
and 620 km and lie inside the Cordillera. The fourth, innermost ring,
320 km in diameter, consists partly of scarps and partly of massifs. A
low fifth ring, 1,300 km in diameter, outside the Cordillera has also
been suggested . Each ring is 1.3 to 1.5
times larger than the one inside it, an interval that has been gener-
alized as the square root of 2 . Although
they are more regular than they are typical, as I will show below
(compare figs. 4.4, 4.5), the Orientale rings are generally taken as the
model for the spacing and formation of other rings in most of the
literature, including the section below entitled "Origin of Rings."
Central to the controversy is the identity of the boundary of
excavation. Some investigators, including myself, believe that the
excavation cavity of basins which corresponds to the excavation cavity
of simple craters is approximately the present basin itself, that is, the
depression. The topographic basin rim that bounds most of the basin
depression thus corresponds to the rim crest of simple craters. The
topographic rim of Orientale is the Cordillera. In this hypothesis, the
topographic rim bounds the excavation cavity and marks the inner
boundary of the most voluminous ejecta. Many other investigators,
however, believe that the primary, original cavity was smaller than
the present basin. They identify the boundary of the excavation cavity
with one of the interior rings or place it at a radial position formerly
occupied by a raised ring and now by a trough. Stratigraphic ques-
tions that could be better answered by knowing the identity of the
boundary include: (1) the position of the lithologic boundary between
the ejecta and the interior deposits, (2) the volume of excavated
material, (3) the ejecta's source depth in the terra crust or mantle, (4)
the amount of melt generated by the impact, and (5) the position of the
facies change between primary ejecta and ejecta of the secondary
ORIENTALE EXTERIOR
By John F. McCauley
General features
The exterior ejecta deposits of Orientale form nearly concentric
zones similar to the concentric facies of crater materials. In propor-
tion to cavity size, the extent of morphologically similar facies is the
same for both basins and large craters . A continuous deposit extends outward
an average distance of 450 km, or one basin radius, from Montes
Cordillera. Beyond this deposit, clustered secondary craters accom-
panied by their ridgelike and planar ejecta form a more varied ter-
rane of discontinuous deposits. In some sectors, dense concentrations
of secondaries extend 900 km (two basin radii) from the Cordillera;
secondaries also extend beyond 1,850 km in at least one raylike string
 , much like secondary
clusters along the bright rays of young craters. The most conspicuous
deposits of all types are shown on plate 3, and the continuous and
discontinuous deposits are distinguished.
The continuous deposits closest to the rim and the discontinuous
deposits at greater distances are collectively designated the Hevelius
Formation, the first Stratigraphic unit whose relation to Orientale
was recognized . This definition was based on
telescopic observations and was originally applied to a tract centered
around lat 2° N., long 68° W., that is now considered part of the outer
facies. Scott and others later expanded the definition to include
the continuous, more coarsely textured blanket farther west, which
had also been detected telescopically . The Hevelius
and other Orientale materials, except the plains materials also dis-
cussed here, collectively constitute the Orientale Group .
Inner facies of the Hevelius Formation
The continuous deposits of the Hevelius Formation form an enor-
mous doughnut-shaped zone, elongate north-south and from 300 to at
least 600 km wide, outside Montes Cordillera . This zone is difficult to delineate
west of Orientale because of the obliquity and poor quality of the
Lunar Orbiter 5 photographs of that area (pi. 3B; fig. 4.5). However,
this part of the Hevelius, called by Scott and others the inner
facies of the Hevelius Formation, is generally the most distinctive unit
of the Orientale Group. It displays abundant attributes of a massive
ejecta deposit that acquired a distinctive textural imprint during flow
along the rugged prebasin surface.
The inner, continuous Hevelius is texturally characterized by
elongate ridges and irregular troughs generally radial to Orientale;
figure 4.4C shows a typical locality. The ridges are curvilinear and
mutually crosscutting; some ridges have nearly streamlined forms,
and others appear ropy or filamentary. These landforms clearly
resulted from surface flow of deposits differentially affected by obsta-
cles. Some of the larger ridges have lobate edges that resemble the
fronts of viscous flows of lava or debris (fig. 4.4D). Numerous narrow
linear grooves are also visible, particularly in the lower and smoother
parts of the deposits. Another characteristic are the myriads of vague
elongate depressions and chains of depressions, visible only in good
photographs, that are overlain by ridged and grooved materials (fig.
4.4C). The shapes, subdued appearance, and distribution pattern of
these depressions indicate that they are secondary craters, partly or
completely buried by slightly later flows of ejected deposits. Although
these buried secondary craters contribute a negative-relief pattern,
the generally larger positive forms dominate the scene. Their dis-
tribution pattern and topography argue for strong centrifugal deposi-
tional movements within the materials that make up the inner,
continuous Hevelius.
The inner facies of the Hevelius Formation generally forms a
continuous ground cover that deeply buries or subdues large primary
craters on the pre-Orientale surface (figs. 4.1, 4.4F, G). The depth of
burial of these craters generally decreases outward from the basin.
Estimates based on the depth of crater burial indicate that the inner
facies of the Hevelius decreases in thickness from 3 to 4 km near
Montes Cordillera to no more than several hundred meters at its
outer edges . However, these estimates
assume that the buried craters had the dID ratios of fresh craters,
which compose only part of any random population of lunar craters.
Theoretical models of ejecta thickness 
are also very uncertain in view of the number of simplifying assump-
tions that underlie them . Calcula-
tions are hampered by uncertain cavity volumes, uncertain degree of
bulking of the ejected material , and the difficulties of
scaling from one gravity field to another .
Basin deposits are visibly irregular and lobate (pi. 3), and are not
equally thick all around a basin at a given radial distance. Thus, their
thicknesses are poorly known but are probably less than 4 km.
The well-developed radial or semiradial trends prevail within
most of the inner facies of the Hevelius except in a sector of about 50°
of arc east of the basin (figs. 4.4E-G). This anomalous region has little
radial texture and is part of the concentric facies of Moore and others
 , who noted an outward gradation here and elsewhere from this
concentric facies to more nearly radial material (top, fig. 4.4F). The
inner Hevelius in the anomalous area (fig. 4.4F) has stubbier ridges
and lobes than in more typical localities (figs. 4.4C, D, G). Large
patches of smooth to rolling weakly lineate terrain are also present,
some of which show numerous small ridges and troughs concentric
with the basin. In addition, the depressions formed by buried second-
ary craters are not so large and do not contribute so significantly to
the surface texture as in more typical parts of the inner Hevelius (figs.
4.4C, D, G). The long axes of many of these depressions are also
concentric rather than radial to the basin. Prebasin craters are not so
deeply buried as in the more strongly radial parts of the Hevelius
Formation at comparable distances from the basin. All indications in
this sector point to ejection of less material at lower velocities than
elsewhere.
Small patches of what has been described as the fissured facies
and interpreted as impact melt occur within
the inner facies of the Hevelius. These smooth but locally fractured
deposits lie in depressions and contrast sharply with the topography
of their surroundings (fig. 4.4S); they also are somewhat darker than
the adjacent material. Their patterns of fissures resemble those
caused by shrinkage of a coherent material. These small deposits
(areas less than a few tens of kilometers on a side) are widely scat-
4. BASIN MATERIALS ORIENTALE
tered, and are included in the inner facies of the Hevelius on the map
by Scott and others and in the inner Orientale unit on plate 3.
They resemble the smaller impact-melt pools on the flanks of craters
(figs. 3.23, 3.27, 3.36).
In mapping the Orientale region at 1:5,000,000 scale, Scott and
others distinguished a transverse facies of the Hevelius Forma-
tion, also included here in the inner Orientale zone (pi. 3). This
transverse facies consists of patches of closely spaced, ropy-looking,
intertwined ridges and intervening troughs arranged concentrically
around Orientale. Typical dimensions of these patches are about 30
by 60 km. They are common on the far sides of crater floors (figs.
4.4F-H) 300 to 600 km from Montes Cordillera. They seem to be more
abundant on the east side of the basin, but this apparent asymmetry
may be due to the poor photographic coverage of the west side (fig.
4.5). These subparallel features, which have been termed "decelera-
tion dunes" , are good evidence for the surface
flowage of Orientale ejecta. In the crater Riccioli, transverse ridges
are banked up on the far side of the crater floor, beyond which a
transversely textured flow lobe, 100 km long, emanates from a breech
in the distal crater wall (fig. 4.4H). The influence of topography on
several patches of less well defined transversely textured materials is
less obvious (figs. 4.4F-H).
The inner boundary of the Hevelius Formation has been per-
ceived both as sharply demarcated by Montes Cordillera and, alternatively, as irregular, gradational, and not every-
where coincident with Montes Cordillera . Much of the Cordillera scarp is draped by the Hevelius
Formation (figs. 4.4A-F). Locally, however, sharp breaks in texture
mark the inner contact of the Hevelius along the steeper parts of the
Cordillera scarp, particularly where this scarp is shadowed on pho-
tographs (fig. 4.4E).
Outer facies of the Hevelius Formation and
secondary craters
The outer facies of the Hevelius Formation , like the outer parts of all ejecta blankets, exhibits a greater
variety of surface textures than the inner facies. The facies boundary
is gradational but readily detectable on good photographs as the limit
of the large radial lobate ridges typical of the inner facies of the
Hevelius (figs. 4.4G, H). This contact is reproducibly mappable within
a few tens of kilometers on the nearside but is hard to detect on the
farside. Subdued, elongate, sinuous to irregular secondary-crater
depressions typical of the inner facies are replaced in the outer facies
by crisp secondary craters that are not overrun by ejecta. Buried
prebasin primary craters are also more conspicuous in the outer than
in the inner facies. Large patches of smooth plains also become
abundant near the facies boundary and interrupt the radial deposi-
tional patterns. The boundary is analogous to that between the con-
tinuous inner deposits and the herringbone-patterned fields at one
crater radius from the rim crest of craters.
The tract near the type area of the Hevelius Formation
 contains faintly lineate, thin, and discontinuous
material that mantles the wall of the crater Hevelius nearest to
Orientale and grades to smooth plains on the crater floor. The adja-
cent high ground shows numerous relatively straight grooves and
ridges, in contrast to the larger and more sinuous topographic forms
of the continuous Hevelius. Some of these smaller and straighter
grooves locally resemble mantled grabens but were probably created
during emplacement of the Hevelius Formation (loc. 2, fig. 4.4H).
Obvious depositional patterns are subordinate or absent, and this
"lineated terra material" or "grooved facies" has been considered to be partly of erosional origin.
However, depositional origins and erosional or secondary-impact ori-
gins are difficult to distinguish where the grooves are separated from
terrain with more diagnostic features .
In many places, the outer facies of the Hevelius Formation is
rolling to hummocky and furrowed, particularly near the crater
Criiger and eastward to Oceanus Procellarum (fig. 4.4H). This ter-
rane generally shows only vague radial lineations and elongate
depressions, as well as numerous subdued pits. Although a second-
ary-impact origin for this hilly and pitted terrain was mentioned
 , a volcanic origin was preferred before the Apollo 16
results were obtained . Continued studies have shown that the strange-
textured terrane is laterally continuous with Hevelius deposits sim-
ilar to those shown in figure 4.4F . The terrane
probably consists of a pre-Orientale surface mantled by Orientale
ejecta that had less radial momentum or velocity than other parts of
the blanket.
Although some deposits and grooves are of primary-ejecta origin
and others of doubtful origin, the outer zone of Orientale materials
mapped here (pi. 3A) is clearly characterized by the products of
secondary impacts. Obvious secondary craters large enough to map at
1:5,000,000 scale were considered by Scott and others as a
separate facies of the Hevelius Formation, but secondary craters are
not mapped separately from deposits here (pis. 3, 6-8). Secondary
craters of Orientale were described by Offield , Wilhelms and
McCauley , Moore and others , and Wilhelms (see
chap. 3). The Orientale secondaries overlap in chains and clusters
that are scaled-up equivalents of the secondaries described around
Copernicus by Shoemaker . Diameters of individual craters
are as large as 28 km, but most are from 7 to 20 km , typically about 10 km (figs. 3.9, 4.4C, G, H). Although
some distant clusters have downrange herringbone patterns (fig. 3.9),
these patterns are subordinate to straight ridges nearly radial to the
basin (figs. 4.4G, H). Bowl-shaped to elongate gougelike features are
typical of the Orientale-secondary field. Their downrange sides show
wavy or partly braided deposits that partly or completely obscure the
underlying topography. Many individual craters have well-developed
rims and appear to be moderately fresh; others are very subdued and
have been mistaken for prebasin craters . Orientale secondaries, including some that extend great dis-
tances from the basin (fig. 4.6), are abundant beyond a large lobe of
the Hevelius Formation southeast of the basin (pi. 3; fig. 4.4G). Sec-
ondaries are especially large and abundant north of the basin (fig.
3.9) and on the poorly photographed west side (fig. 4.5), but are rare in
the concentrically textured sector east of the basin (figs. 4.4E-G).
The outer facies of the Hevelius Formation, like the outer parts of
all impact-crater deposits, represents a progressively thinner to more
discontinuous cover that may locally extend to great distances from
Orientale without leaving a perceptible imprint on the topography.
The problem of identifying the outermost limit of ejecta is intrinsic to
mapping all impact and explosion craters. Here, the outer contact is
placed where no further linear or Orientale-radial structure can be
observed on Lunar Orbiter 4 H-frames (pi. 3). Beyond this contact,
only isolated secondary craters and crater clusters are recognizable
as related to Orientale (figs. 4.6, 7.7,10.5). Farflung Orientale ejecta
could have reached points thousands of kilometers from the basin
 . It may even be
concentrated in the furrowed and pitted terrain antipodal to Orien-
tale near Mare Marginis .
Relation between ground-flow deposits and
secondary craters
As discussed above, numerous vague and irregular depressions,
gouges, and clusters of radially lineate, buried secondaries occur
within both the outer and inner facies of the Hevelius Formation (figs.
4.4C, D, F, G). Some chainlike secondary craters buried by the contin-
uous Hevelius extend to the Cordillera ring (fig. 4.4D), as do similar
chains at the double-ring Schrodinger basin (fig. 1.5). Surficial flow
textures characteristic of the Hevelius Formation overlie these
chains; thus, the chains were probably formed by early-arriving clots
of ejecta traveling in relatively low ballistic trajectories from the
basin, and were later overrun by a slower-moving ground surge . Morrison
and Oberbeck suggested that most of the other radial and
concentric depositional ridges of the inner facies of the Hevelius were
created by interference and interaction of ejecta, as are the her-
ringbone patterns around craters. Such an origin would imply that
the ridges contain little primary basin ejecta. This process probably
did form many of the ridges in the outer parts of the secondary field
(figs. 3.9, 4.4G, H\ but not the long sinuous ridges and grooves of the
inner facies of the Hevelius, which were deflected by obstacles in a way
that indicates surface flowage of thick ejecta (fig. 4.4G). Furthermore,
the burial of the secondaries indicates that primary ejecta constitutes
most of the inner facies; any secondary ejecta present there must have
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
r^f/Jwat'l
*VVv'>' !'
:^t^^j4;.*
>'.V,:^ t N^l^lt wv 4
^"' T^'d?X^*^'^"Ci
v *'*\ '-'Kn ?;V '''A
800 KILOMETERS
FIGURE 4.4. Orientale basin and periphery.
A. Basin structure. 1, Cordillera ring (930 km); 2, outer Rook ring (620 km); 3, inner Rook ring (480 km); 4, innermost ring (320 km). After U.S. Geological Survey .
B. Central Orientale basin, showing the Hevelius Formation (1), fractured impact melt (2),
overlap of the Monies Rook Formation onto the Hevelius (3), Cordillera ring overlain by
Hevelius (4) and Monies Rook (5) Formations, typical knobby Monies Rook Forma-
lion (6), ouler Monies Rook ring massifs (7), inner Rook ring (8, 9a, 9b), massifs of
320-km-diameler ring (10), fissured domical Maunder Formalion burying part of 320-
km-diameter ring (II), and level Maunder Formalion cul by grabens (12). Inner Rook
ring massifs in soulh (9b) are widely separated by ihe Maunder Formalion. Perched
former higher slands of level part of ihe Maunder indicate subsidence (13). Onenlale-
basin materials are exposed from beneath shallow mare near center of basin (14). Circular
slructure of outer Rook ring (15) is possibly derived from prebasin crater. Crater
Maunder overlies basin and mare (16). Orbiter 4 frame H 195.
C. Typical continuous inner facies of the Hevelius Formation (bottom half of
photograph). Many ridges are flow features (1); depressions are buried second-
ary craters (2). Large secondaries (3) emerge among smooth deposits (4) farther
from basin. Fissures indicate possible melt deposits (5). Complex landforms were
generated by multiple near-simultaneous secondary impacts (6). Overlaps with
figure 3.9A. Orbiter 4 frame H-188.
D. Cordillera ring (1) south of basin, overlain by chain of Orientale-
secondary craters, Vallis Bouvard (2). Hevelius Formation mantles
the secondary chain and extends outward as a thick blanket (3). Lobes
of nonlmeate (4) or leveed (5) material continue the Hevelius deposit
outward. Orbiter 4 frame H 186.
E. Monies Rook Formation, decelerated by Cordillera ring into dunehke
(1) or radially textured (2) deposits. Monies Rook or Hevelius
Formation, with radial textures, overlies Cordillera scarp (3).
Maunder Formation is at left (4), inside outer Rook ring (5). Fissured
ejecta (6) is probable impact melt. Orbiter 4 frame H 181.
F. Radial (1) and concentric (2) textures of the Hevelius Formation directly east of
Cordillera ring (3). Flow of the Hevelius was blocked by crater Rocca and piled up as
dunelike mounds (4). Orbiter 4 frame H 173.
C. Transition between inner (1) and outer facies of the Hevelius Formation. Outer facies
includes secondary craters (2), ridged deposits of secondaries (3), and planar deposits
(4). Flow of the Hevelius was diverted by now-buried obstacles (5) and blocked by
crater Inghirami (6). Some secondary craters filled by deposits look deceptively old (7).
Orbiter 4 frame H-172.
H. Type area of the Hevelius Formation, centered at 1.7° N., 68.5° W. in crater Hevelius
(1). Linear troughs radial to Orientale are partly filled by deposits (2). Deposits were
decelerated by rim of crater Riccioli (3), but lobe of textured deposits extends northeast-
ward of rim (4). Lobe of plains deposits inside Grimaldi (5), playout of decelerated
deposits (6; same as at loc. 4, fig. 4.4F) into planar deposits (7), and pitted terrain (8)
are also related to Orientale. Postbasin features: grabens (9), crater Criiger (10), and
other mare-filled depressions (11). Mosaic of Orbiter 4 frames H 168 (bottom) and
H-169 (top).
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
been overwhelmed by the primary ejecta. This question of the propor-
tions of primary versus secondary ejecta in basin deposits is explored
in discussions of the Apollo 14 and 16 samples in chapter 10.
The photographic evidence, therefore, suggests an early stage of
secondary cratering followed by a ground-hugging debris surge that
first inundated and then mixed with the earlier debris. The last-
formed Orientale features, however, may also be secondary craters.
Unusually numerous, crisp circular craters, 10 to 15 km in diameter,
which at first glance appear to be primary craters younger than
Orientale, are present in the west-limb region of the Moon (figs. 4.1,
4.4, 4.5). These may be very late secondary craters excavated by
projectiles that were ejected from the Orientale basin at high angles
FIGURE 4.5. West and northwest sectors of Orientale basin (O) on farside (compare fig.
4.1), showing radial pattern of continuous inner facies of the Hevelius Formation (he) and
secondary craters (sc). CS, Coulomb-Sarton basin; L, Lorentz basin. Orbiter 5 frame
and that almost reached escape velocity . Circular
craters, presumably formed by high-velocity impacts, should be
widely dispersed over the Moon not only from Orientale but also from
all the older basins (figs. 4.6, 4.7).
The Hevelius Formation is gradational with the terra plains.
These plains are abundant in the transition zone between the inner
and outer facies of the Hevelius and occupy additional large tracts in
the outer facies. These relations have been much discussed since the
discovery by Apollo 16 of impact breccia in similar light-colored plains
in the central lunar highlands. Volcanic origins have been discounted
in all but a few areas . The principal
currently competing hypotheses are an origin as primary ejecta and
as ejecta from secondary craters. Relations at Orientale provide the
best photogeologic clues to the plains' origin.
Some nearly planar deposits have a distinguishable relief that is
an important clue to their origin. Ridges of the inner facies of the
Hevelius grade into faint rises in the plains of the transition zone
(figs. 4.4G, H). Flat-topped lobes with planar or faintly textured
surfaces seem to have oozed from the more rugged Hevelius ; some of these smooth deposits are
leveed . Fluidlike flow of the semiplanar material is indicated. A sub-
stantial content of impact-melted rock may be responsible, although
fluidlike flow of completely clastic debris is not excluded. Some tex-
tured deposits are superposed on secondary craters (figs. 4.4D, F).
Little secondary ejecta can be contained in textured deposits with
these stratigraphic relations.
By extension, fluidlike emplacement of material segregated from
the textured ejecta blanket is suggested for the completely planar
deposits that have ponded in depressions . This origin is even likely for such deposits as those in the crater
Wargentin (fig. 1.9), whose apparently thick fill was long considered to
be evidence for lunar volcanism. The light-colored deposits in War-
gentin lie just beyond the zone where the continuous Hevelius grades
into the plains. Although Wargentin may have been partly filled by
volcanic materials, the present surface deposit is probably of Orien-
tale ejecta .
Emplacement as secondary-crater ejecta, as hypothesized for all
light-colored lunar terra plains by Oberbeck and others ,
is likely for plains that lie far from the inner facies of the Hevelius but
adjacent to clusters of secondary craters (fig. 7.6). The dispute
between a primary and secondary origin for terra plains, therefore, is
one not of exclusive genesis but of relative contributions by the two
mechanisms.
The plains illustrate that the appearances and distributions of
lunar geologic units may be consistent with more than one genetic
interpretation. A further example is in the south-central highlands of
the nearside, where careful mapping showed that plains and man-
tling deposits become less conspicuous from west to east . The mappers interpreted the dif-
ferences as due to variations in the thickness of the deposits, which
they considered to be a function of the duration of volcanism. An
impact interpretation, more consistent with current understanding
of the lunar terrae, is that the plains are ejected materials which thin
away from their source, Orientale.
ORIENTALE INTERIOR
By John F. McCauley
All or almost all the materials of the Hevelius Formation lie
outside the topographic basin rim of Orientale (pi. 3). Additional
Orientale deposits occur mostly in the basin interior or on the Cor-
dillera rim close to the basin. Two major units are named the Montes
Rook Formation and the Maunder Formation (fig. 4.8); these forma-
tions complete the Orientale Group . Morphologic and, presumably, genetic analogs
occur in craters (figs. 3.2Z), 3.32-3.35) but are less conspicuous than
in Orientale. Their analogs in other basins are less obvious than those
4. BASIN MATERIALS ORIENTALE
TABLE 4.3. Geologic units of lunar basins
[Fm, Formation; n/n, recognized but not named; n/r, not recognized. Most units of other basins are named informally. References:
H66, Hackman ; H74,
Head ; M74, Moore and others ; S71, Stuart-Alexander ; S77, Scott and others ; WM71, Wilhelms and McCauley, 1971; W79, Wilhelms
and others ]
Morphology
Orientale (references)
Imbrium (references)
Nectaris (references)
Interpretation
Inner basin Wavy, fissured
Do Level, fissured--
- Maunder Fm (S77); corrugated
facies (H74).
- Maunder Fm (S77) n/r-
Shelf and inner
Rim and other
Inner flank Concentric,
wreathlike.
Flank Radial, coarse
Wavy, fissured---
Apennine Bench Fm(?)
Alpes Fm (WM71); Fra
Mauro Fm, hummocky
Rugged material (WM71) Rugged material (WM71)n/r
Hilly material (WM71)-
Flank depres-
Flank, trans-
ition zone.
Montes Rook Fm, knobby
facies (S77); domical
facies (H74).
Montes Rook Fm, massif facies
Concentric facies (M74) Fra Mauro Fm, hummocky
(H66); material of
Montes Apenninus (WM71).
- Hevelius Fm, inner facies
Fra Mauro Fm (H66, WM71) Janssen Fm (S71, WM71)
(S77); radial facies (M74).
- Fissured facies (M74) ---- n/n n/r-------------------
Concentric,
Wide valleys-
Hevelius Fm, transverse
facies (S77).
n/n (Vallis Bouvard type)-
Hevelius Fm, nonlineate
member (W79).
Transition zone Lobate, smooth
or leveed.
Do Subcircular
flat-floored
Transition,
Narrow grooves Grooved facies (M74)
outer zones.
Do Subcircular
bowl-shaped
Hilly material (WM71)n/n
Material of crater chains
and clusters (WM71).
Irregular-crater material
Undivided crater material
Do Radial, fine,
linear, or
Do- Planar, smooth
Satellitic-crater material
(WM71, W79); Hevelius Fm,
secondary-crater facies
Hevelius Fm, outer facies
S77, W79).
Material of crater clus-
ters and chains (WM71).
Terra material (WM71)-
- Plains material or facies Plains material-
Material of crater chains
and clusters (WM71);
satellitic crater
material (W79).
Janssen Fm (S71, WM71) -
Pitted-plains material
Impact melt, buckled.
Impact melt, fluid, little
Late low-velocity high-angle
Upthrust and covered by
Primary ejecta pushed over
Primary ejecta, flowed on
Ejected impact melt.
Primary ejecta, decelerated
Low-angle secondary impact.
Primary ejecta, fluidlike
Secondary impact, filled by
surface flow.
Eroded by secondary impact
or surface flow.
Secondary impact.
Secondary-impact ejecta.
Primary or secondary ejecta,
of the exterior deposits because of mare flooding and other modifica-
tions. Thus, Orientale provides a unique opportunity for study of the
interior materials of basins.
Montes Rook Formation
The Montes Rook Formation is characterized by multitudinous
smooth, equidimensional to elongate knobs, about 2 to 5 km across,
set in a matrix of smooth to rolling materials (figs. 4.45, D, E\ In
places, the formation contains weak lineations, mostly radial but
locally concentric with the rings (fig. 4.4E); much of it has a ropy or
imbricate texture. Most of the formation occurs between the Montes
Cordillera and Montes Rook rings, although several large patches are
exterior to the Cordillera . Islands of
lineate material, either belonging to the Hevelius Formation or
intrinsic to the Montes Rook Formation, lie within the confines of the
Montes Rook Formation (fig. 4.4E). Vague circular structures, less
conspicuous than the large primary craters buried by the Hevelius
Formation (fig. 4.4B), may be buried by the Montes Rook Formation
 .
In places, the Montes Rook Formation appears to embay the
coarsely lineate Hevelius (fig. 4.4B), and so the Montes Rook is the
later unit in the basin sequence. Like the Hevelius, the Montes Rook
material must have left the crater at least locally because it is so
clearly draped over the Cordillera scarp (fig. 4.45). Thus, it cannot be
the product of inward slumping of the crater walls along the Cor-
dillera scarp immediately or shortly after final excavation of the
crater, as proposed by Head , but is a distinct type of ejecta. The
Cordillera scarp is draped by ejecta, either of the Hevelius or of the
Montes Rook Formation, over most of its visible extent (figs. 4.4A-F);
thus, the scarp predates final ejecta deposition and cannot be the
product of postcratering collapse as is shown on the hypothetical
cross sections by Hartmann and Yale , Head , and
Howard and others .
The coarse, knobby, weakly lineate texture of the Montes Rook
Formation indicates a much smaller radial-ejection component than
that of the strongly lineate Hevelius. The Montes Rook Formation
probably consists of relatively coherent material ejected in relatively
low-velocity, high-angle trajectories, possibly in a distinct second
pulse of ejecta. Steep late-forming plumes of ejecta are observed
inside the main ejecta cone in some experimental craters formed in
layered target materials . Blocky materials are lifted steeply from the lower,
more cohesive layer and dropped onto the crater and onto the ejecta
already emplaced by the earlier, larger plume. In this sense, they
constitute an "overturned flap" displaying inverted stratigraphy, as
on the rims of simple craters ; however, the two ejecta
types do not form coherent layers on basin rims. A similar relation
between two deposits has been mapped at the Ries crater, Germany
(see chap. 3), which also formed in a layered target. The moderately to
intensely shocked suevite, derived from the crystalline basement,
was lofted and then dropped on unshocked Bunte Breccia, derived
moments earlier from the overlying sedimentary beds. In both the
experimental and natural craters, the earlier material exits at low
angles, and the later at higher angles.
Similar phenomena but a different cause were suggested by
Murray , who compared the Montes Rook knobs to the coarse
hummocks of probable impact melt on the floors of fresh complex
craters (figs. 3.2D, 3.32-3.35) and suggested that they were flipped
upward and slightly outward as the basin or crater floor rebounded
sharply during or after the main cratering. These suggestions entail
quarrying of the Montes Rook Formation from a deeper crustal layer
than the Hevelius Formation, or from the lunar mantle .
Scott and others mapped a massif facies of the Montes
Rook Formation in addition to the knobby facies just described. The
massifs of Orientale and other basins typically consist of rectilinear to
equidimensional blocks, ranging from a few kilometers to as much as
100 km in length (figs. 4.45, D, E\ The smoothness of their surfaces
(except at very high resolution) indicates slope steepness. Their back-
slopes are typically gentler than their inward-facing slopes (fig. 4.45).
Heights are estimated to be as much as 6 km above the plains at their
base ;
this relief is greater than that between the Cordillera ring and the
adjacent shelf. Scott and others considered the massif facies to
consist of a stratigraphic ejecta deposit superposed on a structural
uplift, as for similar massifs of Imbrium . This interpretation is consistent with
the photogeologic appearance of fresh massifs and with the stratigra-
phy of crater rims. The proportions of ejecta and structurally uplifted
material remain unknown.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
FiGURE 4.6. South-central terra of nearside, including secondary-impact craters of distant basins.
A. Arrow in crater Clavius (C; 225 km, 48° S., 15°W.) points to Orientale basin, centered 2,000 km to northwest; small sharp craters around arrow are probably secondary to Onentale.
Arrow in Longomontanus (L; 145 km, 49.5° S., 22° W.) points to Imbrium basin, centered 2,600 km due north; large overlapping craters around arrow are secondary to Imbrium
 . Similarcraterson west and north rim of crater Maginus(M; 163 km, 50°S., 6° W.) also are probably secondaries of Imbrium. Right-hand arrow points to
Nectans basin, centered 1,450 km away; three craters above arrow and degraded group below end of shaft are possibly secondary to Nectans, although lineations are not strictly radial to
that basin. Mosaic of Orbiter 4 frames H-l 19, H-124, and H-136 (right to left).
4. BASIN MATERIALS ORIENTALE
B. Area just east of figure 4.6A. Arrows point toward Orientale center and touch fresh-appearing craters that are probable Orientale secondaries. B, crater Baco (70 km, 51 ° S., 19° E.). Orbiter
4 frame H-100.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
FIGURE 4.7. Region of Orientale antipode; arrow indicates antipode (20° N., 85° E.).
Most of terra is pitted in manner apparently characteristic of antipodes of young basins.
MM, Mare Marginis, with bright swirls superposed; G, bright crater Goddard A (12 km),
possible source of swirls; J, crater Joliot (143 km); L, mare-flooded fringe of secondary
craters of Lomonosov. Mare material in quadrant below and right of Goddard A is among
oldest mare units (see chap. 10). Orbiter 4 frame H 17.
Maunder Formation
The Maunder Formation of the Orientale Group is named after
the unrelated large impact crater Maunder on the north floor of the
central Orientale basin (fig. 4.45). This formation, like others of the
Orientale Group, has been described under various names (table 4.3).
The Maunder consists of smooth to rolling plains of intermediate
albedo, many of which are closely fissured or fractured. As far as
observed, the Maunder lies between Mare Orientale and the outer
Rook ring and extends the peaks of the inner Rook ring (figs. 4.45, E;
The fractures are a secondary, superposed property of the unit
and thus not a proper part of the definition of a rock-stratigraphic
unit (see chap. 7), but they nevertheless characterize it; they led to
such descriptions as "corrugated" and "crackly." These fractures are
crudely concentric or radial to the basin (fig. 4.45). Most fractures are
open, downward-tapering V-shaped gashes, whereas others are
larger, flat-floored complex grabens. Many fractures radiate from
local centers, and others are aligned along the axes of broad gentle
elongate domes, which also characterize the Maunder terrain (fig.
4.45). The fractures are more abundant inside the inner Rook ring
than close to the outer Rook ring. Other, larger radial and concentric
grabens that are more pervasive probably were formed by later basin
subsidence (pi. 5; chap. 6).
Texturally, the Maunder Formation is a scaled-up equivalent of
the materials that cover the floors of such fresh unfilled large craters
as Tycho and Copernicus .
Though once interpreted as volcanic , these
floor materials are more convincingly interpreted as impact melts, on
the basis of a comparison with terrestrial analogs and stratigraphic
analysis (see chap. 3). The thickness of the Orientale melt is difficult
APPROXIMATE SCALE AT CENTER
10OO KILOMETERS
EXPLANATION
Mare materials
Post-Orientale crater materials
Orientale Group
Pre-Orientale terra
FIGURE 4.8. Geologic map of Orientale basin, showing major units discussed in this volume.
Units of the Orientale Group, from left to right, in "Explanation" are: Maunder Formation
(double vertical bars), Monies Rook Formation (check marks, knobby ejecta; dots, massifs),
Hevelius Formation (crosses, inner facies; dashes, outer facies), transversely structured parts
of the Hevelius Formation (small areas with wavy lines), and some of the many secondary
craters (black). From McCauley .
4. BASIN MATERIALS ORIENTALE
to ascertain; Head based an estimate of about 1 km thick on
extrapolations from early work on terrestrial craters. The draping
and mantling characteristics of much of the Maunder Formation
suggest that its material behaved in a fluid manner. Perched
shorelines locally visible (fig. 4.4B) suggest that it subsided to its
present position from some higher topographic level. Sinuous rilles
like those of maria (chap. 5) may mark local flowage of the melt .
The emplacement of the melt and the formation of the fracture
pattern are believed to have been nearly contemporaneous with for-
mation of the elongate ridges and domes, which are more commonly
radial or concentric with the basin than equidimensional (fig. 4.4B).
Mapping of excavations within experimental explosion craters shows
that similar structures are compressional anticlines and synclines
that formed late in the cratering sequence . If the domes in Orientale also formed late, the Maunder Forma-
tion may have been cracked by their uplift. The geometry of the cracks
is also consistent with draping on preexisting topography , which would be their origin if the folding ended before the melt
solidified.
TOPOGRAPHY AND GRAVITY
Favorably illuminated photographs (fig. 1.9) show that the eleva-
tions of the concentric troughs of the Orientale basin decrease inward
and that Mare Orientale has the lowest surface. The summits of
Montes Cordillera and Montes Rook appear to differ less in elevation
than do the adjacent troughs. Absolute elevations are less certain
because Orientale is not covered by photogrammetric-quality pho-
tographs. Preliminary measurements based on Apollo laser altimetry
of the basin's north shelf and on profiles obtained from telescopic and
Lunar Orbiter photographs suggest that Mare Orientale lies 2.5 to
5.5 km below, and parts of the rings and exterior terrain rise the same
distance above, the 1,738-km average radius of lunar terra surfaces
(relative to the center of figure) . If the mare-basalt fill is less than 1 km thick , the top of the impact melt in the basin center lies about 3
to 6 km below the 1,738-km datum and about 6 to 11 km below the
Stairstep structure is also evident in stereoscopic photographs of
the more heavily modified Crisium basin, which is a less representa-
tive basin but which lay more favorably under the Apollo 15 and 17
ground tracks (fig. 4.9). In the terra rim surrounding Mare Crisium,
interring troughs decrease in elevation inward toward the mare. The
mountain summits do not decrease in elevation so much (fig. 4.9); that
is, the overall relief between a given summit and the adjacent trough
increases inward, as it does at Orientale. Absolute elevation dif-
ferences are also similar Mare Crisium lies about 4 km below the
1,738-km datum and 3 to 6 km below
the basin exterior (fig. 4.9). Relative and absolute elevations of
another measured basin, Smythii, are remarkably like those of Ori-
entale, despite these basins' substantial difference in relative age
 .
Perturbations of spacecraft orbits have revealed some important
features of the Moon's gravity structure. The terrae are gravita-
tionally bland at short wavelengths . The relatively short-wavelength gravity anoma-
lies with the largest amplitudes are positive, and are called mascons
 . The gravity
anomaly of the Orientale interior is positive, but if the basalt of Mare
Orientale is removed from the gravity models, a ringlike negative
anomaly remains . The gravity
structure of a given basin as a whole requires two bodies the surfic-
ial mare basalt and a raised part of the mantle . Each basin impact removed an
unknown but significant thickness of crustal material .
The denser mantle then rose to compensate isostatically for the lost
mass. On the basis of models for Serenitatis (fig. 4.10), the mantle may
be about 20 to 25 km higher under Orientale than in nonbasin regions
 ; the same value was found for the Grimaldi
basin . The negative anomaly, also found in
many basins and fresh craters , suggests that compensation was incomplete . Further alteration of the gravity structure by the later
addition of mare basalt resulted in a superisostatic mascon in several
basins .
Small positive anomalies displayed by Montes Cordillera
 and Montes Apenninus of the Imbrium
basin indicate (1) a loading of the crust by
material removed from the basin and (2) a lithosphere sufficiently
strong to support much of this added load.
These gravity models are central to later discussions of basin-
excavation depths, mare-basalt localization (chaps. 5, 11, 12), and
tectonism (chap. 6). The crust-mantle discontinuity (lunar Moho)
probably resembles a series of domelike swells, whose diameter and
elevation are approximately proportional to diameters of the overly-
ing basins and which are superposed where basins are superposed.
The largest known basin, alternatively called Gargantuan or Procellarum , presum-
ably overlies the largest mantle uplift and the thinnest crust. This
basin was probably responsible for thinning of the crust from the
computed average of about 75 km to the observed value of 45 to 60 km
under southern Oceanus Procellarum (chap. 1). This thinning had
major consequences for later lunar geologic evolution . The identity of the boundary of excavation is particularly sig-
nificant. Discussions of basin-forming mechanics are generally based
on knowledge of cratering mechanics derived from small craters,
which can be generated experimentally and relatively easily modeled
(see chap. 3). Complex craters and large terrestrial astroblemes (1)
appear always to have been shallow and not to owe their complex
internal structure to the collapse of a deep cavity, (2) contain peaks
that seem to have formed by compression of a central zone during
subhorizontal centripetal movement, (3) are terraced as a result of
this centripetal movement, and (4) are surrounded by deposits and
concentrated secondary craters whose extent remains approximately
proportional to crater diameter (chap. 3). Some, but not all, of these
properties can be extrapolated to basins.
Genetic models
The general increase in complexity with increasing size of impact
cavities (figs. 4.2, 4.3, 4.11) has suggested to some investigators that
the peaks and terraces of craters and the rings and shelves of basins
differ in degree of development because of scale differences. Alter-
natively, they may have been formed by different processes. Proper-
ties of the target material, such as strength and layering, or
properties of the impactor, such as impact angle, velocity, size, or
shape, may be relatively more important in the larger events. The
physical effects of large and small impacts may differ fundamentally
in ways that are not yet clear.
A. Large-basin models. The main, topographic rim is the bound-
ary of excavation . Inte-
rior rings could have formed in two alternative ways:
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
1. Nested craters. In these models, rings are the rims of sub-
cavities of the main excavation . Nesting is observed in small
craters in the lunar regolith , and probably in the
Ries and other large terrestrial
craters or ringed basins . The initiator of the dual or multiple cavities in
experimental and natural terrestrial craters is a discontinuity in the
target materials between an overlying weak layer and a less easily
cratered substrate. Separate ejecta plumes may be ejected from the
nested craters.
2. Floor uplifts. Various mechanisms based on cratering mechan-
ics have been proposed. The morphologic similarity between central
peaks and rings consisting of peaks (fig. 4.35) suggests that the rings
are expanded peaks . Centripetal move-
ments, akin to those hypothesized for complex craters and observed in
large chemical-explosion craters , may
form ringlike structures in the innermost basin .
A more violent, oscillatory mechanism akin to that observed in
temporary craters formed in liquid has also been suggested. This
"tsunami" mechanism, induced by the seismic energy of impact, was
first proposed for external rings . Baldwin then reapplied it to rings of the cavity interior,
which is more likely to be fluidized by the intense and sustained
shock pressures intrinsic to impacts of large bodies . Dence and Grieve recently
revived the tsunami mechanism as an explanation for rings, on the
basis of the high uplifts of severely weakened subcrater material that
they inferred in terrestrial craters; and Murray independently
proposed it on the basis of several photogeologic observations similar
to those mentioned in this chapter. The oscillatory model is favored
here and is described additionally below (fig. 4.12).
B. Small-basin models. An inner ring or the former position of an
inner ring marks the boundary of basin excavation.
1. Late formation. Passive "megaterracing" is thought to widen
the topographic basin by inward movement and rotation of a large
annular tract of exterior terrain after excavation has ceased
 . According to this hypothesis,
the rear slip surface of the terrace cuts the rim flank outside the
excavation boundary and carries that boundary inward. The
topographic basin rim is the site of the slip at the rear of the "megater-
race," and the migrated excavation rim becomes an inner ring.
2. Contemporaneous formation. A similar geometry results from
centripetal movement and rotation during the excavation process
6600-7 500m
5700-6600m
Postbasin material
FIGURE 4.9. Topographic map of southern Crisium basin. Arbitrary vertical datum is 1,730,000 m from Moon's center. Elevations of summits (white numbers on black) and of troughs (black
numbers) are shown in hundreds of meters above this datum. Mare Crisium, 3,800 to 3,900 m; Mare Fecunditatis, 5,000 to 5,200 m; Mare Spumans, 5,500 to 5,700 m; Mare Undarum,
6,400 to 6,700 m. Postbasin materials include crater and mare deposits . Topography generalized from LM 62 , U.S. Defense Mapping
4. BASIN MATERIALS ORIENTALE
 . This more active process is
observed in large chemical-explosion craters, where centripetal
movement opens concentric exterior cracks and depresses an annular
shelf between the excavation boundary and the remnant topographic
rim. The rim and false rim are overlain by ejecta.
Discussion
1. The topographic rims of such double-ring basins as Schrodinger so
closely resemble those of craters in morphology and in their demar-
cation of the inner boundary of craterlike deposits they must be
equivalent in origin . That is, the rims approximate the boundary of
excavation, except as the excavation cavity was widened by visible
craterlike terraces. Thus, the 160-km-diameter inner ring is a
feature of the crater interior and not of the boundary of excavation.
The inner ring cannot bound the Schrodinger excavation because
such a cavity would be smaller than many craters, which have no
second ring outside their rims.
2. Similarly, I believe that the topographic rims of larger basins, such
as the Cordillera of Orientale, are also the boundaries of excava-
tion. This more controversial conclusion is based on: (a) The
abrupt demarcation of the Hevelius Formation at the Cordillera;
(b) the elevated massifs along parts of the Cordillera; (c) the
absence or ghostlike form4 x of prebasin craters inside the Cor-
dillera, in contrast to their abundance outside the Cordillera
 ; (d) the rimlike morphology, including steep
inner and gentler outer slopes and both scalloped and linear
segments ; (e) the qualitative similarity of both the
continuous and discontinuous deposits to crater deposits in overall
morphology and zoning; and (f) the proportional extent of the
Orientale ejecta in comparison with crater deposits . Montes Cordillera extend as a
major well-defined ring around three-fourths of the basin and are
not a minor, external structure. Similarly, the 570-km-diameter
ring of Hertzsprung and the 600-km-diameter ring of the southern
part of Humboldtianum are the boundaries of those excavations
(figs. 4.3O, Q, 4.11; table 4.1). Ejecta extends an average of onebasin
4 lrThe presence of ghostlike circular forms inside the Cordillera does not obviate the
interpretation that the Cordillera is the excavation boundary. If the excavations are shallow, surficial material could
be stripped away without destroying the deeper structure of prebasin craters.
FIGURE 4.11. Spacing of observed basin rings and ring segments, plotted by radial distance
from basin center (after table 4.1, with some approximate additions from pi. 3); see table 4.1
for letter symbols. Length of arc within each sector is approximately proportional to observed
circumferential extent of ring; width of line is approximately proportional to prominence.
Homologous rings in different basins are connected by dots. Double-ringed structure persists
through Korolev (J) or Apollo (L). Innermost and intermediate series begin in Hertzsprung
(O) or, possibly, in poorly observed Coulomb-Sarton (M). These new homologous series
expand in larger basins through Orientale (Y). Extensive new structure (not completely
described here) appears in Crisium (Z) and Imbrium (AA).
KILOMETERS
FIGURE 4.10. Two-body gravity model of Mare Serenitatis . A thin plate on surface (mare material) and a mantle uplift each
have densities of 3.4 g/cm3 (shaded); terra-crustal density, 2.9 g/cm3 . Values in space above mare are observed free-air anomalies from two spacecraft
orbits (in milligals); curved lines are isoanomalies of computed free-air gravity.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
FIGURE 4.12. Model of basin formation favored here. Drawing by Donald E. Davis,
courtesy of the artist.
A. Early stages of growth, resembling simple crater. Target rock is greatly weakened by
shock wave.
B. Cavity grows and becomes shallower relative to depth, ejection angle decreases, and
central uplift begins as in complex crater.
C. Central uplift collapses to form a temporary double-ringed basin.
D. Center rebounds, as in a waterdrop crater.
E. Wavelike motion enlarges inner ring shown in C and D, new innermost ring forms from
central peak in D, boundary of excavation becomes lower, and ejecta blankets basin walls
and exterior.
F. Excavation boundary reaches final size, and two inner rings and a central uplift have
G. Ejecta continues to move beyond excavation; continued oscillation of interior causes surge
of ejecta from intermediate nng and enlarges innermost ring.
H. Exterior deposits are mostly in place, two rings inside excavation boundary have frozen,
but innermost ring continues to grow, and center nses once again.
Innermost ring has grown to final size, and central uplift relaxes into low broad mound.
Final configuration.
diameter from each of these rings, which are also more rimlike
than any others in the basin. Although parts of the interior rings
(265 km diam in Hertzsprung and 300 km diam in Humboldtian-
um) are rimlike, these rings cannot bound the excavations because
the similar-size rim crests of Bailly (300 km diam) and
Schrodinger (320 km diam) are not surrounded by ring systems or
such extensive ejecta . Ring formation, whatever its
cause, must be an active process driven by the cratering flow.
4. Considerable evidence suggests that basins are shallow excava-
tions . First, they presumably
were never deeper relative to their diameters than were craters.
Copernicus, which is exactly Vio the diameter of Orientale, now has
a dID ratio of Vzs. According to the hypothesis presented earlier,
fresh craters were not much deeper when formed than they are
now . If Orientale's original dID ratio was Vw, its
original, transitory depth was 37 km. This value is close to that
obtained by adding the estimated present depth of 6-11 km (exte-
rior terrain to top of impact melt) to the crustal thinning implied
by the mantle uplift of 20-25 km. (Its present d/D ratio is between
Viss and Vs5, a decrease that indicates substantial rebound since
basin formation; furthermore, the negative gravity anomaly would
be much greater than observed if no rebound had occurred.) More-
over, these ratios apply only to the central basin inside the 320-km-
diameter ring; the shelves, which occupy much more area, are
several kilometers shallower. That the cavity-wall slopes were
gentle during excavation as well is suggested by the massive surface flows of ejecta and the linear, chainlike arrangement of sec-
ondary craters close to the rim (fig. 4.4D) both features indicat-
ing low-angle ejection. The apparent paucity or absence of mantle
material in the returned samples (chap. 8) furthermore suggests
that not even the 3,200-km-diameter Procellarum basin was exca-
vated through the 75-km-thick crust implying an original d/D
ratio of less than Vis for this largest lunar basin.
5. The major interior rings (for example, Montes Rook) probably
were formed by some form of active floor uplift. In morphology,
they resemble central peaks more closely than they do terrace lips.
Their gentle outer slopes and steep inner slopes resemble those of
crater rim crests, but the jagged massifs and peaks of their most
rugged parts more nearly resemble central peaks. The Rook rings
resemble the inner, rugged ring of Schrodinger much more closely
than they do the Schrodinger rim.
6. Even if rings and central peaks are both formed by uplifts, the
uplift process probably differs. Although a transition from craters
to basins is commonly stressed, the interior structure of most
craters 200 to 300 km in diameter is poorly developed (fig. 4.2), and
peaks actually decrease in absolute width in craters larger than
about 70 km in diameter . There-
fore, central deformation may be less intense in intermediate-size
impacts than in typical complex craters and typical basins. This
lull suggests different deformational processes .
7. Ring uplift may occur during a wavelike deformation of the cavity
floor, as follows (fig. 4.12). Highly shocked, effectively fluidized
material of the cavity rebounds, probably because of general
involvement of the whole floor in wavelike motion to compensate
for the cavity A smaller central zone then partly collapses when
4. BASIN MATERIALS ORIENTALE
gravity exceeds the inertial force and rock strength. If basin
growth stops at this point owing to insufficient energy and all
motions "freeze," the result is a double-ring basin similar to those
as large as Korolev (440 km) in the size series (figs. 4.3,4.11,4.12C;
table 4.1). In larger impacts, the collapsed part again rises in the
center, and so on for as many cycles as are consistent with basin
size, target strength, subsurface layering, other properties of the
target, and, possibly, projectile size and velocity. Apollo,
Hertzsprung, and Humboldtianum are large enough to have
acquired a partial third ring (fig. 4.12E). Orientale has a fourth
ring and a central uplift that signals the start of an additional
cycle. Material may flow inward from outside the crater to supply
the uplift, as is observed in waterdrop experiments. Sub-
lithospheric flow of an early weak, plastic lunar asthenosphere
may have enhanced wavelike ring formation . The uplift freezes from the outside
in because the inner part is the most highly fluidized. This expla-
nation attractively accounts both for regular structure, like that in
waterdrop experiments, and for irregular structure, as would be
expected in heterogeneous and fractured rock materials that do
not behave entirely like fluids.
8. Terrane outside the excavation is also deformed. Chapter 3 (see
subsection entitled "Deformation and Nonballistic Ejection") men-
tions that craters may consist of two parts whose sizes are con-
trolled by different scaling laws: an inner excavation cavity scaled
to gravity, and an outer unexcavated but deformed zone scaled to
rock strength . The deformed zone expands relative to
the excavation cavity in proportion to impact energy, and thus may
be very large for basins. External deformation, which in my model
forms fewer rings than is believed by most investigators, has
apparently formed arches concentric with the topographic basin
rims of Humboldtianum, Orientale, and possibly other basins (pi.
3; table 4.1). Experimental analogs show how these external arches
may have formed. Mounds and concentric rings were uplifted
around experimental craters created by certain combinations of
depth of burst and layering , as well as around
some large chemical-explosion craters . Seis-
mic energy is transmitted outside the cavity by elastic waves after
the shock wave decays . The
elastic waves are refracted and reflected by discontinuities
between material layers 
and might propagate quite far under favorable circumstances
 . Major topographic features, however, are
unlikely to have formed by such exterior processes. Although sev-
eral large rises and troughs in the Sinus Medii region have been
interpreted as external anticlines and synclines of Imbrium , mapping of the Procellarum
basin suggests, instead, that these and many other rings are part
of that giant three-ring basin .
9. The topographic rim, which bounds the ejection, is commonly
irregular in large basins. For example, Montes Caucasus east of
Mare Imbrium appear to split into two distinct arcs, one con-
tinuing northwestward as Montes Alpes and the other continuing
northeastward as the north shore of Mare Frigoris (fig. 4.3AA).
Like the Rook ring of Orientale, the Alpes are the inner bound of
knobby ejecta of Imbrium (Alpes Formation; see chap. 10). Like the
Cordillera rim of Orientale, the northern Caucasus and the Frigor-
is shore are the inner bound of radial secondary chains and sur-
face-flow ejecta. The Imbrium rings may have split in the middle of
Montes Caucasus because the deformation and excavation were
blocked by the preexisting Serenitatis massifs in the south but
were freer to expand in the north into a
trough of the Procellarum basin (pi. 3). Spalling, as observed ahead
of ejection in some explosion craters , may soften up
parts of the surrounding terrain for later ejection . Ejection from the outer shelves occurred at
very shallow angles, more like a surficial stripping than the con-
ical plumes of simple craters.
Conclusions
The clear division of basin structure into rings may have been
overemphasized, considering the pattern of hills, peaks, and ridges
that lack evident ring structure in several sectors of Hertzsprung,
Humboldtianum, Humorum, Nectaris, Serenitatis, western Orien-
tale, Crisium, and Imbrium (fig. 4.3). Partly regular and partly ran-
dom processes of floor uplift seem to be required to explain this
combination of ringlike and irregular patterns. The mechanism
favored here is oscillatory uplift of the cavity floor.
The conjecture about ring origin presented here has advanced
some ideas as partial explanations that have previously been pro-
posed as total explanations. Terracing has slightly widened the rim of
Schrbdinger and larger rims, such as the west rim of Korolev (fig.
4.3J), but decreases in magnitude with basin size, rather than
increasing as predicted by megaterrace models .
In the largest basins, terracing creates only minor slump slivers, such
as those northwest of Montes Apenninus . The crust-mantle interface or other
layering may modulate more basic processes by enhancing ejection,
ring uplift, and external deformation. Such oddities as Antoniadi and
Compton (figs. 4.2A, B) must have been caused by some such local
effects as layering . Oscillatory uplift
may account both for regularities where enhanced and for irreg-
ularities where resisted by rock properties. Knobby ejecta of the
interior and near-rim exterior may be flipped out by the oscillation.
Oblique impacts probably produced asymmetric ejecta distributions
(table 4.4) and may have caused internal asymmetries by distributing
coupled energy unevenly, because they release their energy not at a
point but along an elongate sloping zone .
A double or triple impact excavated the Humboldtianum basin , and other multiple impacts probably caused the elonga-
tion of Moscoviense and Serenitatis. External deformation did occur
but created only second-order features, not the main topographic rim
or other major arcs and troughs. The topographic rim is the boundary
of the excavation cavity but is irregular in many large basins. In
conclusion, basins are highly complex natural systems whose origin
cannot be learned by straightforward extrapolation from simple cra-
tering mechanics.
SUMMARY OF
BASIN-MATERIAL ORIGINS
Orientale and similar, older basins and their deposits were
formed in the following sequence of events. (1) A relatively deep,
craterlike cavity developed upon impact of a large cosmic projectile;
(2) this cavity expanded laterally and ejected massive amounts of
material at low angles, forming gouges and thick lineate deposits; (3)
the interior rebounded and ejected blocky melt-rich ejecta at higher
angles and lower velocities; (4) the rebound collapsed, then oscillated
further, each time to successively smaller radii, and left a ring at each
hingeline; (5) the last oscillation left a central uplift (known only in
Orientale). Ejecta was deposited and secondary craters were formed
during events 3 through 5; then, (6) impact melt settled into place,
and (7) distant secondary craters were formed.
The interpretations of the well-exposed, well-photographed Ori-
entale deposits presented in this chapter are the principal foundation
for interpreting older terra materials. Deposits of 17 basins and the
262-km-diameter transitional feature Milne (fig. 4.2J) are mapped
here (pi. 3; table 4.1). The presence of rings establishes the existence of
11 basins whose deposits are not identified but which presumably are
present; 17 other basins are also mapped whose existence can be
disputed (table 4.2). Topographic textures indicative of primary and
secondary ejecta emplacement are the first to become blurred over
time. The larger secondary craters survive longer but eventually are
also obliterated or can no longer be traced to their source basin. Even
the mountainous rings may be so thickly buried or heavily pitted by
later cratering that they become unrecognizable. Probably, therefore,
fewer basins are tabulated (tables 4.1, 4.2) and illustrated here than
were actually formed.
Deposits outside the topographic basin rim grade from thick to
thin. When fresh, the deposits closest to the rim were coarsely tex-
tured, as is the inner facies of the Hevelius Formation at Orientale.
These materials probably consist mostly of primary ejecta from the
basin. At an average distance of one basin radius, secondary craters
begin to dominate the scene. Secondary craters are visible around
many basins whose textured ejecta deposits are invisible (see chaps.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
8, 9). The inner and outer zones are here mapped separately only
where their approximate transition can best be distinguished,
around the Orientale, Imbrium, and Nectaris basins (pi. 3). The
outer zone is dominated by secondary ejecta derived from local ter-
rain, but the radius where the balance shifts is uncertain. The outer
deposits persist for two radii on the average but thin gradually to
apparent disappearance. Distinctive grooves at the basin antipodes
may indicate a Moon-wide influence of large basins. Much of the
barely discernible fine-scale relief of the lunar terrae must have
originated by basin ejecta deposition and secondary cratering.
Deposits of both the primary and the secondary zones are lobate
and asymmetric. Salients and raylike stringers of secondary craters
persist outward for several basin radii in some sectors. "Bow tie"
patterns suggesting oblique impacts at low angles are particularly
common (pi. 3; table 4.4). Although irregularities are not so evident
around old basins, they are inferrable. Therefore, the presence at a
given point of the deposits of a given basin cannot be predicted, unless
diagnostic textures or mantling relations are visible. Thicknesses are
very uncertain.
Several types of deposits are seen only in Orientale or a few other
young large basins (table 4.3). Abundant plains mark the transition
from the primary to the secondary ejecta of Orientale, Imbrium, and
Nectaris but are inconspicuous around smaller or older basins. The
presence of degraded older plains is, nevertheless, highly probable in
these positions. Planar and fissured impact melt is visible in Orien-
tale (Maunder Formation), but in no other basin with equal certainty.
At the large young basins, the presence of the knobby ejecta (Montes
Rook and Alpes Formations) inside the basin, on the topographic rim,
and on the earlier, thicker deposit (Hevelius Formation and the Fra
Mauro Formation around Imbrium) suggests late-stage ejection dur-
ing floor rebound.
Despite the incompleteness of the lunar record and the short-
comings of the data, a history of lunar basin deposits can be pieced
TABLE 4.4. Basin asymmetries suggestive of impact angle
[Azimuths measured clockwise from north. Basins yrouped into four age categories (see tables
4.1, 9.3)]
Schrodinger--
Imbrium- ------
Humboldtianum
Moscoviense-----
Nectaris-- --
Freundl ich-
(lat, long)
0 S., 134° E.
0 N., 147° E.
0 N., 175° E.
Azimuths of
ejecta lobes
Azimuths of central-
basin elongation
Sector 140° elevated
Interpreted
impact anyle
From 60° or 240°.
From 70° or 250°
(3?0°-340°?).
From 260°.
From 100°.
From 55° or 235°.
From 105° or
together from superpositional relations, superposed crater densities,
and degree of morphologic degradation relative to Orientale. This
history constitutes most of the history of the lunar terrae. Chapters 7
through 10 show how knowledge of the mechanisms that emplaced
the Orientale deposits supports the interpretations and dating of the
older deposits. Breccia and impact-melted rock ascribable to impact
processes (chap. 3) were recovered from basin deposits by all the
terra-sampling missions (pi. 3; fig. 4.13). Apollo 14 returned melt-
bearing ejecta of Imbrium corresponding to the Hevelius Formation
(chap. 10), Apollo 15 sampled massifs of Imbrium (chap. 10). Apollo 17
sampled melt-rich materials from the massifs of the Serenitatis basin
(chap. 9). Apollo 16 recovered materials of circum-Imbrium plains and
hilly-and-furrowed materials that are analogous to Orientale depos-
its but whose origin is controversial (chaps. 9,10).
FIGURE 4. \3. Schematic geologic section of typical lunar basin (based on Orientale), showing locations of Apollo (Ap) and Luna(L) sampling sites relative to basin facies sampled (C, Cnsium; I,
Imbrium; N, Nectaris; S, Serenitatis). Brackets indicate uncertain positions; alternatives are given for Apollo 16, depending on the basin it sampled (see chaps. 9, 10). Right side is based on
figure 4.4, left side on figure 4.5. Vertical exaggeration, x20.
FIGURE 5.1 (OVERLEAF). Lobate mare-basalt flows in Mare Imbrium. Apollo 15 frame M-1556.
5. MARE MATERIALS
Introduction .......................
Mapping properties ...............
Morphology ...................
Blanketing .....................
Albedo ........................
Color ..........................
Orbital chemistry ...............
Other properties ...............
Integration .....................
Thickness .........................
Returned samples ................
Introduction ...................
Composition ..................
Classification ..................
Origin and emplacement .........
INTRODUCTION
The darker half of the Galilean dichotomy, the smooth maria, are
topographically and geologically simpler than the ringed basins that
contain them. The maria are the most earthlike and probably the
most easily understood lunar features (fig. 5.1). They cover about 16
percent of the lunar surface, or 30 percent of the nearside and 2
percent of the farside. If younger craters were absent, maria would
cover about an additional 1 percent of the Moon (dashed contacts, pi.
4). Most maria flood large basins and their peripheral depressions;
they also flood craters and small basins that are superposed on larger
basins. Some mare occurrences have led to the identification of basins
where none were otherwise suspected. A few small maria that are not
related to known basins (pi. 4; figs. 5.2, 5.3) may, similarly, indicate
the presence of undiscovered basins.
Because of their resemblance to terrestrial volcanic terranes, the
maria were more readily interpreted before being sampled than were
the terrae. The approximately level mare surfaces were correctly
taken as signs of fluid, lavalike emplacement . Their landforms were perceived as analogous to volcanic land-
forms on the Earth . Although nonbasaltic composition and such exotic
origins as mobile dust and water-laid sediment were considered, the low albedo and certain diagnostic land-
forms suggested basic lava to most workers . Basaltic composition seemed to be substantiated by
Surveyor 5 and 6 analyses in 1967 ,
and was established by the Apollo 11 samples in July 1969. Basalt has
been returned from all the mare sites visited. The rock name "basalt"
can thus be used as a near-synonym for the less committal term
"mare materials," even in unsampled regions.5 -1
s-1 Strictly speaking, the term "maria" (singular and adjectival form, "mare") refers to the surfaces, and "mare
materials" to the rock-stratigraphic units that underlie the surfaces; however, "mare" and "maria" are commonly
used for the materials as well.
Stratigraphic relations of the mare-basalt flows are also readily
understood in principle because they are similar to relations familiar
on the Earth. The margins of the flows follow the contours of the
containing basins, as would any later fluidlike deposits. Relative
crater densities are consistent with the younger age of these flows.
FIGURE 5.2. Isolated mare patch in crater Kohlschiitter (arrow; 53 km, 27° N., 154° E.).
Many craters of subequal size are probably secondary to Mendeleev basin (see chap. 9),
outside lower left corner of scene. Boom of Apollo 16 gamma-ray spectrometer protrudes
into view at right. Apollo 16 frame M 729.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
The main obstacle to acceptance of these obvious relations was the
peculiar confusion between mare and basin (see chap. 2), which
persisted until the early 1960's and is still not entirely dispelled.
By definition, mare materials (1) form generally smooth and level
surfaces and (2) are dark. In some areas, mare units can be sub-
divided by their topographic characteristics. However, most subdivi-
sions are based on optical, spectral, or geochemical properties
commonly called remote-sensing properties. In this respect, mare
units differ from impact units, because they are igneous-rock bodies
whose compositional unity is more obvious than is morphology due to
emplacement. The recognition of mare subunits has advanced greatly
since 1972 over its rather primitive status before Apollo exploration
 . The following sections discuss the proper-
ties by which maria and their subunits are recognized and inter-
preted by remote observations, and the last section of this chapter
briefly describes and interprets the samples of mare basalt returned
from the Moon.
MAPPING PROPERTIES
Morphology
Certain areally minor, though genetically significant, mor-
phologies interrupt the flat mare surfaces. The most significant are
lava-flow fronts. These lobate edges resemble terrestrial lava lobes
and thus indicate that at least some maria consist of volcanic lavas.
The first flow fronts to be described and the largest yet known are in
Mare Imbrium . They are visible in good
telescopic photographs and were shown to coincide with color bound-
aries, presumed to be some sort of compositional contacts . These observations quieted
exotic hypotheses of mare origin in the minds of most workers. The
Imbrium lobes range from 10 to more than 35 m in height and bound
flows as much as 1,200 km long . These great dimen-
sions may indicate that each flow formed by rapid eruption of fluid
lava from a single large vent . The Imbrium flows are
probably the only relatively recent large flows still exposed, although
earlier, now-buried eruptions may have been equally large. Scarps of
shorter and thinner flows are observed in Oceanus Procellarum,
Mare Cognitum, Mare Vaporum, and Sinus Medii .
Otherwise, lunar mare flows are either too thin or, alternatively,
too floodlike to have formed lobate
scarps. A pooled, massive style of some mare units is suggested by
marginal terraces (fig. 5.3). Holcomb pointed out the similarity
of these "bathtub rings" perched on the terrae around some maria to
those left by subsidence of Hawaiian lava lakes. The terraces suggest
withdrawal of ponded lava by way of observed sinuous rilles .
Several types of positive landforms, mostly formed by extrusion
of basalt, are scattered in several, and concentrated in a few, maria
 . Most domes are subtle circular
features with low profiles, commonly topped by small smooth-rimmed
craters (figs. 5.5, 5.6); they are visible in telescopic visual observa-
tions or photographs made at low Sun illuminations .
The apparent internal origin of the domes was a major factor in
endogenic interpretations of the maria, and their low profiles sug-
gested fluid volcanism characteristic of mafic magmas. Low mare
domes are concentrated in Mare Tranquillitatis (Vitruvius region, fig.
5.5) and western Mare Insularum (Hortensius and Milichius regions,
fig. 5.6) but occur in other maria as well. Steeper, rough-surfaced
features commonly called cones are concentrated in the Marius Hills
 and are scat-
tered in several maria, for example, Mare Cognitum, Mare Tran-
quillitatis , and the border of Mare Serenitatis
 . Some cones occur in the terrae
(fig. 5.8). The difference between the domes and cones presumably
reflects variations in composition or in the eruptive process, and the
Marius Hills were a favored site for Apollo missions in hopes that they
would yield differentiated volcanic-rock types . The
morphologies of domes or cones are mimicked by kipukas or steptoes,
synonyms for protruding terra or mare deposits isolated from the rest
of their geologic unit by floods of later mare materials (see fig. 6.3).
The Riimker hills (fig. 5.9) apparently consist of several domes and
other mare-related units partly burying Imbrium-radial terra
 . None of the positive lunar volcanic landforms remotely
approaches a terrestrial or martian shield volcano or stratovolcano in
size. Almost all the landforms listed here occur in shallow maria
 . Some 200 such landforms were
recently classified by Head and Gifford .
FIGURE 5.3. Lacus Sohtudinis, showing down (d) and up (u) sides of marginal terraces of
mare. Scene centered at 27° S., 103° E. Apollo 15 frame M-2627.
FIGURE 5.4. "Scablands" north of Anstarchus Plateau. Mare lava probably drained out of
the region in the sinuous rille (left). Large craters in lower right are possibly secondary to
Orientale basin. Scene centered at 30° N., 53.5° W. Apollo 15 frame P-349.
5. MARE MATERIALS
FIGURE 5.5. Mare domes in northern Mare Tranquillitatis. Numerous elongate pits are on summits of low domes or in flat mare (arrows). Mare units are numbered in order of
decreasing age. Crater below number 3 (youngest unit) is Maraldi B (7 km). Scene centered at 15° N., 35° E. Apollo 17 frame M-305.
FIGURE 5.6. Detail of mare domes and other endogenic features, including circular domes with elongate central craters (1, 2); irregular domes with circular, nevertheless
probably endogenic, craters (3); concentrations of similar large, soft-appearing circular craters that could be endogenic (4, 5); sinuous rille (6); and elongate endogenic vent
or collapse feature . Some endogenic craters do appear amidst the maria,
however, and are fairly numerous along their borders (figs. 5.1QA-D);
others lie in small patches of dark material in the terrae (figs. 5.8,
5.WE H). Their internal origin is determined by this association with
volcanic materials or by their alignment along faults. For example,
random impact is unlikely to be responsible for the many craters
exactly centered on what are evidently volcanic domes (figs. 5.5, 5.6).
The craters or rimless pits along Rima Hyginus are similarly elimi-
nated statistically as impact craters because they are perfectly
aligned along the rille (fig. 5.WE). Although one leg of Rima Hyginus
is radial to the Imbrium basin, both the rilles and the craters are too
young to have been formed directly by the impact . Like many other endogenic craters (figs.
5.1QA-D), the rille craters and the main Hyginus crater at the rille
"elbow" could have formed entirely by collapse without the extrusion
of any material . Single craters situated along rilles,
amidst dark materials, and with elongate or irregular shapes are also
probably endogenic (figs. 5.WF H). A few craters not situated along
rilles resemble secondary-impact craters, but endogeny may be
assumed if the craters are highly irregular and are centered in dark
deposits (figs. 5.10G, H\ Although the dark ejecta of endogenic craters
is commonly more extensive relative to the crater size than is the
ejecta of impact craters (table 3.1), the volcanic ejecta is smoother, and
the craters are all small (mostly less than 10 km diam). Despite the
early popularity of a caldera origin for such large craters as the
smooth-rimmed class (fig. 3.15), large calderas are not expected on the
Moon; calderas form by collapse or magma withdrawal into shallow
magma chambers, which probably never existed on the Moon.
Sinuous rilles are another areally minor but visually arresting
type of mare feature. The Apollo 15 landing was targeted next to a
large sinuous rille, Rima Hadley (fig. 5.11; chaps. 10,11). Several other
rilles were considered for landings to determine their formational
1 ' '^>K^ ^ --V* ''?S'-,.*-^-/
''w^l*»l'4-n^ . . y/..'./ A'; j|--. :'. .
f i irV''Wi;'t^; * i'-i* ~. »>* ' i1
-.^.ff.a, ';.
FIGURE 5.7. Manus Hills, a complex of diverse, rough-textured domes or cones surrounded by smoother mare materials. Orblter 5 frame M 211.
5. MARE MATERIALS
FIGURE 5.8. Rough cones (black-and-white arrow) situated along linear rille and amidst
dark-mantling material or mare lava. Smooth-profiled irregular pit (white arrow) further
indicates basaltic volcanism in this terra setting. Crater rim separates craters Fra Mauro
(above) and Bonpland (below). Black-and-white arrow is 5 km long; scale varies because of
obliquity. Apollo 16 frame P-5425.
FIGURE 5.9. Riimker hills (Mons Riimker), a complex of subdued hills in northern Oceanus
Procellarum (41° N., 58° W.). Imbrium-radial lineations (upper right to lower left) suggest
an origin as terra covered by thin layer of dark-mantling material.
process and to collect samples of volatile or other exotic erupted
materials (fig. 5.12). Fieldwork on the Earth and at Rima Hadley has
shown that these meandering grooves are probably lava channels or
collapsed lava tubes, which are the sites of the last flows of molten
magma in a lava unit . Very
long and narrow rilles are likely to have been channels (always open);
others, including Hadley, display alternately roofed and unroofed
segments that indicate an origin as tubes (figs. 5.11,5.13). The sources
of some lunar rilles are in the terra or at the mare-terra contact (figs.
5.11, 5.12). Several appear to have erosionally incised the substrate,
including terra material . Sinuous rilles and
other volcanic landforms of the maria were thoroughly described and
illustrated by Lowman , Schultz , and Masursky and
others .
Blanketing
The property of blanketing or mantling terra topography dis-
tinguishes another class of dark, mare-related units, the dark-
mantling materials. They are as dark as or darker than the maria,
but their observed relief is partly rugged. The largest and most
numerous tracts with this seemingly anomalous combination of prop-
erties lie around the southern periphery of the Imbrium basin (pi. 4;
figs. 1.6,1.7, 5.14, 5.15). This position led to their interpretation as a
dark facies of Imbrium ejecta . Carr , however, showed that the
large dark areas on the southeast slope of Montes Apenninus are not
composed of Imbrium ejecta. He observed that flat surfaces next to the
dark ejecta are equally dark, and so the same dark material probably
covers both the ejecta and the much younger mare material (fig. 5.16).
Moreover, other patches of mantling material are peripheral to Mare
Serenitatis , Mare Humorum
 , Mare Nectaris , Mare Crisium , Mare Smythii , Oceanus
Procellarum , and, in fact, all
carefully scrutinized maria . This concentration near maria and the dark color indicate a
genetic relation of the dark-mantling materials to the maria. The flat
parts of maria may also contain dark-mantling materials, but these
are difficult to distinguish from mare lavas.
A more specific origin for the dark-mantling materials is sug-
gested by other physical properties. On both telescopic and spacecraft
photographs, they appear fine-textured, relatively uncratered, and
smoother than the underlying topography (figs. 5.15,5.16). No blocks
are visible in the 2-m resolution of the best Apollo photographs.
Mantles drape differentially over mountains, low hills, and flat sur-
faces, and are thickest in depressions and thin or absent on sharp
hills. The brightness of some hilltops surrounded by the deposits
indicates nondeposition or shedding of the dark material. Shedding is
the preferred explanation because some dark deposits lie at higher
elevations than some bright summits. Also, the action of mass wast-
ing is indicated by talus streaks that descend from the bright out-
crops (fig. 5.16). Shedding is consistent with the propensity of uncon-
solidated material to slide downslope.
The morphologic properties and distribution of the dark-man-
tling materials suggest that they consist of volcanic fragments,
pyroclastic material. The Marius Hills , the
Aristarchus Plateau, and Montes Harbinger were originally interpreted as terra features covered by vol-
canic ash (figs. 5.7, 5.12). Carr noted that the dark
deposits are situated near likely eruptive fissures in the form of rilles
in the maria (fig. 5.16). Unlike lavas, few dark-mantling materials
lack elongate or irregular, commonly rille-straddling craters, gashes,
or dark cones that are likely source vents (figs. 5.8, 5.WF H, 5.12,
5.16). Pyroclastic origin was favored for the dark-mantling materials
in all the early photogeologic work and has been confirmed by sam-
pling data (see chap. 11). The dark halos of many small endogenic
craters, such as those in Alphonsus (fig. 5.10F), are also dark-man-
tling deposits. Head and Wilson , however, suggested that the
eruptive mechanisms differ: The extensive, regional deposits are
thought to be strombolian (continuous eruptions), and the smaller
halos vulcanian (intermittent eruptions).
FIGURE 5.10. Endogenic craters.
A. Craters aligned along graben on south margin of Mare
Serenitatis (18° N., 26° E.; compare fig. 11.13) Apollo
17 frame P-2321.
B. Aratus CA (24.5° N., 11° E.), compared by Greeley
 to a volcanic crater in Idaho. Stereoscopic pair of
Apollo 15 frames P-9350 (right) and P-9355 (left).
C. Probable collapse craters in southern Mare Imbrium; col-
lapse of the deep, well-defined crater (5 km long) broke
mare surface, whereas collapse of the gentler crater proba-
bly did not. Apollo 1 7 frame P-3125.
D. "D-caldera" (Ina), an irregular crater (3 km long) with
peculiar floor texture. In Lacus Felicitatis (19° N., 5° E.),
perched on Monies Apenninus flank, 300 to 400 m above
nearest large mare (Vaporum; Strain and El-Baz, I960).
Apollo 17 frame M-1672.
E. Rima Hyginus; largest crater is Hyginus . Arrow (5 km long) indicates Ranger 9 impact
point (12.9° S., 2.4° W.). Apollo 16 frame P-4656.
G. Irregular crater, fissure, and dark-mantling material (cen-
ter) in Monies Riphaeus (6° S., 27° W.). Apollo 16 frame
H. Crater next to Rima Bode II (13° N., 4° W.), amidst
dark-mantling material (patch d3, fig. 5.14). Orbiter 5
frame H-122.
'*";- ?',, *l .'">;
FIGURE 5.11. Rima Hadley (Hadley rille) at Apollo 15 landing site (arrow). Rille hugs and
possibly erodes terra at A, and is bridged at B and C by basalt. D, dark-mantled "North
Complex," surrounded by level mare. Ledges are visible at E. StG, St. George Crater (2.25
km} Apollo 15 frame H-11720.
FIGURE 5.12. Aristarchus Plateau-Monies Harbinger complex of sinuous
A. Monies Harbinger and crater Prinz (P). Large fresh crater is Aristarchus
(A; 40 km, 24° N., 47° W.) Arrow indicates rille in C. View south-
ward. Apollo 15 frame M-2606.
B. Aristarchus Plateau. Aristarchus is at left edge; H, Herodotus (35 km,
23° N., 50° W.). Arrow indicates rille in D. View southward. Apollo 15
frame M-2611.
C. Terra ridge in Monies Harbinger (arrow in A), eroded by rille. Apollo 15
frame P-321.
D. Small meandering rille within largest lunar sinuous rille, Vallis Schroteri
(arrow in B), which probably formed in massive lava flow(s)i Apollo 15
frame P-341.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
FIGURE 5.13. Sinuous complex, consisting of ridge and elliptical and curved pits, that may
have originated as a lava tube whose surficial crust collapsed intermittently along its length
 . Crater in upper right corner is Gruithuisen K (6 km, 35° N.,
43° W.). Obiter 5 frame M-182.
FIGURE 5.15.
Ray-crossed patch of dark-mantling material south of Copernicus (dl) and
large patch south of Sinus Aestuum (d2; compare fig. 5.14). Sharp-nmmed (delta-rimmed)
crater at lower left is Gambart (G; 25 km, I ° N., 15° W.; compare fig. 3.15C). Telescopic
photograph.
FIGURE 5.14. Telescopic full-Moon photograph of Maria Imbrium (upper left) and Serenitatis (right). Bright crater Copernicus (C) is at left edge. Dark patches are south of Copernicus (dl), on
border of Sinus Aestuum (d2, d3), on border of Mare Vaporum (d4), and along margin of Mare Serenitatis (d5, d6). Serenitatis is also bordered by other dark mare units. U.S. Naval
Observatory, Flagstaff, Ariz., photograph.
5. MARE MATERIALS
FIGURE 5.16. Dark-manthng materials on southwest rim of Serenitatis basin (d5, fig. 5.14).
Decrease in number of exposed bright terra peaks from lower left to upper right indicates
increase in thickness of dark-mantling material toward the mare. Talus of dark-mantling
material (t) covering brighter slope indicates shedding of superposed dark deposit. Black-
and-white arrow indicates flooding of dark-mantling material by mare lava. Arrowheads
denote endogenic craters. Lacus Odii (LO), which is elevated substantially (approx 1.5 km)
above Mare Serenitatis, may consist of pooled dark-mantling material .
Arcuate rilles are Rimae Sulpicius Callus; S, crater Sulpicius Callus (12 km, 20° N., 12°
E.). Stereoscopic pair of Apollo 17 frames M-2701 (right) and M-2703 (left).
FIGURE 5.17. Eastern Mare Serenitatis and adjacent terrain. Dark-mantling material (d6;
compare fig. 5.14) is in region of Apollo 17 landing site. Central Serenitatis is depressed
below darker border zone; grabens (see chap. 6) are in border zone above crater Plinius (P;
43 km, 15 N., 24 E.). Elevation of Mare Tranquillitatis (bottom) is approximately the same
as that of Serenitatis border zone. Large crater Posidonius (95 km) along mare-terra contact
near top of photograph has an uplifted floor (see chap. 6). Telescopic photograph.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
Because of the contrast between exposures of feldspathic terra
breccia and mafic mare basalt, the maria can be delineated even by
unsophisticated observations (figs. 1.1,5.14). For example, Luna 3 was
able to reveal the important fact that the farside is deficient in maria,
despite poor camera resolution .
This observation illustrates that the mare-terra contrast shows
up best when the Sun illumination is high; shadows become very rare,
and true brightness differences are observed, at Sun angles higher
than about 45°. The highest possible Sun angle, exactly normal to the
surface, is called zero phase; the reflectance at zero phase is known as
normal albedo. Zero phase is never observed from the Earth because
the Moon would be eclipsed, and so quantities described by terms
such as reflectance, reflectivity, brightness, or, simply, albedo are
used more or less interchangeably as convenient approximations to
true normal albedo. Mare albedos generally range from 0.07 to 0.10;
that is, the maria reflect 7 to 10 percent of the incident visible light
 . With minor exceptions, the total range of
lunar visible albedos is about 0.07 to 0.24.
Considerable effort has been applied to quantifying albedo
because of its value in distinguishing geologic units . For geologic mapping of intramare units, however, high-Sun
photographs with good spatial resolution are required, even if not
accurately calibrated from region to region, because they show con-
tacts between albedo units. Mare units have been extensively mapped
since preparation of the geologic map of Mare Serenitatis , where the boundaries are relatively unobscured by rays
and the contrast between the dark border and the brighter interior is
evident. Four Serenitatis albedo units became standards for mapping
other areas . Although the causes of these
albedo differences were not known, the fact that albedo correlates to
some extent with mare units was clear.
A leading hypothesis was that albedo is related to age. Several
lines of evidence suggested that dark units are young and light units
old. Except with respect to large craters , the
inward-sloping Serenitatis border mare appeared to contain fewer
craters than the central mare. The dark-mantling materials of the
border are superposed on some mare materials and appeared to be
young. Dark-mantling or mare materials are superposed on lighter
planar materials in other areas, for example, in Alphonsus, Mare
SCALE 1.1 000000
LAMBERT CONFORMAL PROJECTION
STANDARD PARALLELS 21°20' AND 42°4O'
FIGURE 5. 1 8.
Geologic map of Mare Serenitatis and margin (from Carr, 1 966a). Dark mare (Ipm3, Ipm4) and dark-mantling materials (Emd, Els) of border zone are mapped in dark tones.
High-numbered units were thought to be young; they actually are young in northeast and northwest, but are old in south. Unit boundaries remain valid.
5. MARE MATERIALS
Imbrium, Palus Putredinis, Julius Caesar, and Sinus Medii (figs. 1.6,
5.WE, F, 10.35, 11.13). Moreover, crater rays are generally brighter
than the maria they cross, and so cratering was assumed to be an
"instant aging" process that brightened materials. Correlation of
albedo units thus became a means of correlating mare ages from area
to area , and albedo units were shown as age units
on most lunar geologic maps.
Albedo is now known to be more a function of composition than of
age, as suspected by some geologic mappers .
The dark basalt of the Mare Serenitatis border that was sampled by
Apollo 17 yielded some of the oldest absolute ages yet obtained on
exposed mare materials (see chap. 11). Albedo is a function of exposure
to the space environment and of the alteration processes that create
regoliths (soils) from bedrock. It is controlled by both the amount and
the composition of glasses developed from crystalline material by
small impacts . These glasses are darker than their parent crystalline mate-
rials. The most significant glasses in the darkening process are those
that bind other regolith fragments into the complex aggregates
known as agglutinates. Agglutinates accumulate in the regolith as a
function of exposure age. Eventually, the amount accumulated
reaches a steady state in which new micrometeorite impacts destroy
as much agglutinitic material as they create. The albedo is then at an
equilibrium value, and the regoliths are termed mature . The observable properties of mature regoliths are
relatively homogeneous over the extent of a given bedrock unit.
In mature regoliths, the composition of the agglutinates strongly
affects the albedo; regoliths highest in iron and titanium are the
darkest .
Because all undisturbed mare regoliths are believed to be mature, the
darkest regoliths form from the lavas that are highest in Fe and Ti.
Higher contents of these elements also explain why the maria are
darker than the terrae. The darkening agents may be Fe-Ti-rich
glasses, Fe and Ti oxides in such opaque minerals as ilmenite that are
contained in the agglutinates , and (or) metallic Fe
reduced from oxides by impacts and solar-wind sputtering . Although Fe may be the greater contributor to total
darkening, the differences in albedo among mare units may be due
more to differences in Ti content, because Ti content varies more
among mare basalt units than does Fe content .
In other words, all mare regoliths are dark because their glasses
contain Fe and Ti, but the darkest contain the most Ti.
le Monni* C
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
This correlation between darkness and Fe-Ti content applies
only to mature regoliths. Fresh exposures of mare materials may not
have been exposed long enough to accumulate impact glass in steady-
state amounts. Such exposures occur in two main settings. First, new
glass is shed, and nonglassy material continuously exposed, on steep
slopes; the fresh material is brighter than the less disturbed material
(figs. 3.28, 3.31, 5.16). In general, lunar slopes are brighter than
adjacent more nearly level terrain composed of the same geologic unit
 . Second, relatively recent impacts
exhume fresh material of mare lavas and redeposit it as bright rays.
On bright, fresh lunar surfaces, more crystalline material than glass
is exposed . Therefore, the formation of a crater
ray in a given unit is not necessarily one of "instant aging" but of
"instant rejuvenation." The correlation between youth and darkness
demonstrated by dark-on-light superpositions is valid where the
younger materials are richer in Fe and Ti, as in Alphonsus and the
other examples given above, but not for all juxtapositions of dark and
In summary, geologic maps prepared before the mid-1970's cor-
rectly show relative ray and slope ages, and the mare units generally
are correctly delineated. The mare units, however, should be inter-
preted as compositional, not age, units except where youth and com-
position correlate.
Color differences are subtle on the Moon. The spectra of all areas
are similar, and increase in reflectance toward longer wavelengths;
that is, all lunar colors are red. Differences do exist, however, and can
be detected with instrumented Earth-based telescopes and enhanced
by various photographic, instrumental, and computerized image-
processing techniques. Differences also appear conspicuous to the
trained astronaut eye . Color differences have proved to be valuable discrimi-
nators of lunar mare and dark-mantling units and, since the returned
samples were analyzed, have helped extrapolate known compositions
to unsampled units (table 5.1).
Reflectance spectra over wavelengths of 0.3 to 2.5 |xm (ultraviolet
to near-infrared) have been intensively studied during the space age
for information about lunar compositions obtainable by remote
means . Areas 10 to 20 km across are
measured photometrically. Absorption features due to mineral con-
stituents of the surface material may be detected near wavelengths of
0.4,1.0,1.2, and 2.0 |xm. These features are weak for agglutinate-rich
regoliths and stronger for crystalline rocks (fig. 5.19C). To compare
spectral differences, spectra are commonly divided by a standard
spectrum of a relatively uniform mare surface in central Mare
Serenitatis (designated MS-2; spectral class mISP, table 5.1). Small
departures from this curve are then exaggerated in graphs, which are
normalized to unity at 0.57 |xm to eliminate albedo effects and to
emphasize color differences (fig. 5.19). Most lunar spectra obtained
before 1978 cover the spectral range 0.3 to 1.1 |xm . Spectra in the 1.0- and 2.0-|xm bands have been
obtained more recently .
For mapping and discriminating units, the most useful color-
enhancement displays are images that show the spatial variations of
simple spectral parameters . Black-and-white pho-
tographs prepared by combining a photographic negative taken at
one wavelength with a positive taken at another provide much data at
good spatial resolution . Two major
mare subdivisions, relatively red and relatively blue, can be defined.
For example, Mare Tranquillitatis and the border of Mare Serenitatis
are relatively blue, and central Serenitatis is relatively red. The
young Imbrium flows are relatively blue, and most of the rest of Mare
Imbrium is relatively red. Several intermediate colors can also be
TABLE 5.1. Remotely sensed properties of mare units
[Spectral class from Pieters and Basaltic Volcanism Study Project .
Ultraviolet/visible ratio:
H, high (probably more than 5 weight percent TiOg); h, medium
high; m, medium; L, low (probably less than 2 weight percent TiOg).
D, dark (max
0.08); I, intermediate (0.03-0.09); B, bright (higher than appro* 0.09); 1-um absorption
S, strong; G, gentle; W, weak.
2-ym absorption band:
P, prominent; A, attenuated;
-, undetermined.
Color (fig. 5.20):
b, blue; i, intermediate; r, red.
Age (see chaps. 11-13):
II, earliest Late Imbrian; 12, middle late Imbrian; 13, latest Late
Imbrian; E-I, near the Imbrian-Eratosthenian boundary; E, Eratosthenian; C?, Copernican
(spectral class uncertain).
Interpretation based on Basaltic Volcanism Study Project ]
Interpretation
Tranquil!itatis,
Serenitatis
Procel1 arum--
Imbrium, N. Pro-
cel 1 arum.
Humorum, S. Pro-
cell arum.
Nub i urn--- - -
Fecunditatis,
Serenitatis
Central Serenita-
tis, W. Procel -
Widespreadi, r
Nectaris, S.
Fecunditatis.
Crisium, Roris,
E. Imbrium, W.
Serenitatis.
Somniorum, Mortis,
Imbrium border,
N. Procellarum,
Frigoris, Imbrium,
Apollo 16?
Highest Ti.
High Ti, radioactivity,
Fe?, olivine?
Similar to HDSA but
probably lower Ti.
Similar in Ti, Fe, and
radioactivity to HDSA
and hDSA, but possibly
richer in pyroxene.
Medium Ti.
Medium Ti, high Al.
Low to medium Ti.
sibly richer in Fe in
Serenitatis than in
Procellarum.
Class of generally low-
to medium-Ti basalt.
Low Ti, high Al.
Very low Ti, high Fe.
Low Ti, high radioac-
Very low Ti, probably
Low Ti, high in Fe or
pyroxene, high radio-
Such multispectral images contain considerable compositional
information. To a first approximation, the excess of ultraviolet or
near-ultraviolet color over the midvisual that is, blueness is a
measure of the content of both FeO and TiO2 in agglutinates within
mature regoliths . In figure 5.20 (made from
photographs filtered at 0.37 and 0.61 |xm), dark areas are bluer and
thus richer in these elements. The reason for the correlation is somewhat complex. As discussed, Fe and Ti
darken mature regoliths, and the dark materials in the regolith
suppress the intensities of individual absorption bands. The more Fe
and Ti in pure glass, the more ultraviolet light is absorbed, that is, the
redder the spectrum. The opposite can be observed, however, for many
Fe- and Ti-rich mature regoliths, because dark regoliths containing
well-developed agglutinates also strongly absorb in the visible and
near-infrared. The resulting greatly reduced spectral contrast causes
the apparent blue color of dark mature mare regoliths .
Low Fe and Ti contents, however, do not necessarily cause the
opposite effect. Red or intermediate-color maria are lower in Ti than
relatively blue maria, but their Ti content is not constrained . The role of Fe in the red maria is unclear. The
strength of an absorption feature near 1 |xm is affected both by the Fe
content of the regolith glass and by the proportion and composition of
the mafic minerals present. This interrelation has not yet been fully
examined .
The dark-mantling materials have distinctive reflectance spec-
tra . Mantles that appear black on the surface
or bluish-gray to an orbiting astronaut are spectrally blue as well, and
those that appear orange on the surface or reddish-brown to tan from
orbit are spectrally red. These colors are due to both the composition
and the crystallinity of the pyroclastic dark-mantling materials.
Some mantled regions differ spectrally from any sampled materials.
The bright interiors of fresh, young craters on both maria and
terrae differ spectrally from the surrounding mature regoliths
because their regoliths contain less agglutinitic material and more
unaltered mineral fragments (fig. 5.19C). These properties affect the
general properties of the spectral continuum and allow detection of
specific near-infrared absorption features . Visual wavelengths and, thus, the color-difference
image in figure 5.20 do not fully reveal the spectral properties of fresh
craters; these properties are better revealed by spectral images in the
visible and near-infrared because of the conspicuous 1.0- or 2.0-|xm
absorption bands of pyroxene .
5. MARE MATERIALS
Orbital chemistry
Two instruments flown in lunar orbit on the Apollo 15 and 16
missions have also permitted extrapolations of sample compositions
to unsampled parts of the Moon. The gamma-ray spectrometer and X--
ray-fluorescence spectrometer Adler and Trombka, 1977; Basaltic
Volcanism Study Project, 1981, chap. 2) are currently the only means
of estimating compositions on the farside (pi. 2). Whereas the reflec-
O H1 APOLLO 11
A H2FLAMSTEED
* hi LUNA 16
o ml APOLLO 12
m1' NECTARIS 3
MARE SOILS
- m4 MH-LI (305)
-0 11'APOLLO 15
- A CRISIUM 4
- L1 SOMIN 3
o L4 PLATO 7
- ^f£***f4§*$*«f$ ^ ^i-
,,. *..*«*««**** :
IMAGING FILTERS
--Uv5 -- Vis' H.^ -NEAR IR ill
WAVELENGTH, *m
WAVELENGTH, M m
MS2/CONT 9/16/81
MSR/CONT 9/16/81 RP2
RPOLLO 16/CONTJNUUM (.73,1.6)
DESCRRTES 2/CONTJNUUM 11/23/80
WRVELENGTH (MICRONS)
tance spectra help determine mineral and glass contents, the two
orbital instruments determine elemental compositions indepen-
dently of mineralogy.
The compositions determined are those of only the surficial
layers, the uppermost tens of centimeters in the case of the gamma-
ray data and the uppermost tens of micrometers for the X-ray data.
Investigators are nevertheless confident that most surficial regolith
materials represent underlying materials because the sharp bound-
flPOLLO 16
flPOLLO 17
MflRE SERENITflTIS 2
WflVELENGTH (MICRONS)
FIGURE 5.19. Typical relative-reflectance spectra of lunar soils (surficial fine materials of
regoliths) obtained by Earth-based telescopes. Courtesy of C.M. Pieters.
A. Spectra of mare soils between 0.3 and 1.1 |xm, relative to an area in central Mare
Serenitatis (MS2 or MS-2) and scaled to unity at 0.57 , and those to right (see table
5.1) are from Pieters . After Pieters .
B. Additional mare spectra of same type. Slopes of plots emphasize differences of spectra
from that of comparison area MS 2 (horizontal). Bandpasses of filters used in various
spectral-imaging studies are shown at bottom .
C. Near-infrared spectra of areas 5-10 km across, scaled to unity at 1.02 (Jim and divided
by a straight-line continuum. For a given terrane (highland or mare), spectra of soils (s)
and interiors of fresh craters (c) are qualitatively similar, but spectral contrast of soil
spectra is reduced by alteration products in the soils. Absorption bands of highlands are
centered near 0.90 (jtm, indicating that Ca-poor pyroxene is the dominant mafic mineral;
absorption bands of maria are near 0.98 (jtm, indicating that Ca-rich pyroxene is the
dominant mafic mineral.
D. Spectra in the visible and near-infrared, scaled to unity at 1.02 (Jim: a, terra soil around
Apollo 16 landing site, calibrated with returned soil sample 62231; b, Apollo 17
landing site, a Ti-rich basaltic soil; c, standard area MS2, probably a low-Ti basalt; d,
pyroclastic dark-mantling material near the Apollo 1 7 landing site.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
aries between mare and terra and among mare units, as seen on the
color-difference images (fig. 5.20), have persisted since the maria
formed . Small fragments of nonlocal material are
present in all regoliths, though not in sufficient quantity to mask the
local material.
The gamma-ray spectrometer measures the natural radioac-
tivity of K, Th, and U, as well as gamma rays emitted from other
elements during nuclear reactions induced by high-energy cosmic-
ray bombardment . The most useful results are obtained for concentrations of
Th, K, Fe, Mg, and Ti . The Ti values obtained by the gamma-ray
and spectral techniques agree moderately well . The gamma-ray spectrometers were
limited by low spatial resolution, from 2° by 2° (3,600 km2) to 10° by 10°
(90,000 km2) of the lunar surface; they analyzed about 22 percent of
the total surface. On the basis of this areal sample, the maria are
generally more radioactive than the terrae, and the western nearside
maria more radioactive than the eastern . Thus, the data are
limited to illuminated parts of the lunar surface, and interpretations
of the data must compensate for variations in solar activity. In all,
about 10 percent of the lunar surface was analyzed. The Mg/Al ratio is
most sensitive to terra-mare differences because it is substantially
greater for mare materials, whereas Si content differs little between
the maria and the terrae. Highly magnesian and highly aluminous
mare and dark-mantling materials are also detectable by this ratio,
other factors being equal . Suit-
able data analysis has resolved areas as small as about 1° by 1° (900
km2). At these resolutions, ejecta of individual craters and, therefore,
the subsurface materials exhumed and redeposited in the ejecta can
be analyzed .
Other properties
Two other regions of the electromagnetic spectrum, accessible
from the Earth or with the aid of a spacecraft, have potential value in
interpretations of the maria. The first region, in the thermal infrared,
FIGURE 5.20. Color-difference image, produced by subtracting photograph taken at 0.37 |xm from one taken at 0.61 jun. Longer wavelengths (red) appear
brighter and shorter wavelengths (blue) darker. Courtesy of E. A. Whitaker.
5. MARE MATERIALS
measures temperatures during a total eclipse of the Moon or from orbit
 . High eclipse
temperatures are valuable indicators of fresh blocky surfaces and
thus of youthful craters, which may be undetectable in low-resolution
photographs .
For mare units, there seems to be a correlation between high eclipse
temperatures and the youth of a unit . The knowledge gained from craters suggests that this correla-
tion results from the coarse, blocky regoliths that thinly cover young
mare units.
Lunar applications of radar have been intensively studied.
Earth-based signals at 3.8 and 70 cm have yielded the most detail,
including radar maps of the whole nearside disc .
Many factors affect radar echoes .
For geologic purposes, the echoes ideally would measure depth of
penetration and surface roughness at scales proportional to wave-
length larger than 70 cm for 70-cm radar and larger than 3.8 cm for
3.8-cm radar. Chemical composition, dielectric constant, electromag-
netic absorption, fine-scale roughness, and regional tilt may all addi-
tionally affect the echoes. Despite the difficulty of interpretation,
radar in combination with other remote-sensing techniques is a
useful measure of crater youth: Depolarized radar echoes from cra-
ters decrease with decreasing concentrations of blocks visible in
photographs and with decreasing infrared eclipse temperatures
 . Radar data, infrared eclipse tem-
peratures, and distinctive color spectra together help characterize
mare units and
reveal the presence of block-free dark-mantling materials that might
otherwise be taken for lava .
During the Apollo 14, 15, and 16 missions, radar signals were
relayed to and from the Moon by orbiting satellites . Though technically highly successful, this
"bistatic" radar experiment generated little new scientific informa-
tion beyond the fact that bistatic-radar roughness correlates with the
visual appearance of a terrain. Young mare units are rougher to radar
than older mare units.
Integration
The examples already given show that remote-sensing tech-
niques are most valuable when used in concert. Correlations among
data sets are readily visualized when converted to a common format
and displayed as false-color images showing any desired weighted
combination of the data sets . Geologic mapping
requires images with good spatial resolution, including low-Sun
images that enhance topographic detail, high-Sun photographs that
show brightness differences (figs. 1.1, 5.14), and multispectral images
(fig. 5.20). To characterize chemical and physical properties not deter-
minable from such images, lower-resolution data from other meas-
urements are located within each resulting map unit and then
extrapolated to the entire area it covers.
Generalizations based on integration of the data, to be discussed
further in chapters 11 through 13, include:
1. The western maria in the overflown strips are more highly radioac-
tive than the eastern.
2. Ti-rich, spectrally blue lavas form at least half of Mare Tran-
quillitatis, the adjoining border of Serenitatis, the lobate flows of
Mare Imbrium, central Mare Humorum, and much of Oceanus
Procellarum. Most of these lavas are in maria that overlie the
central basin and middle trough of the Procellarum basin (pi. 4).
The Tranquillitatis-Serenitatis units, which include the Apollo 11
and 17 landing sites, belong to a different high-Ti spectral class
(HDWA) than do the western units (HDSA, hDSA, hDSP).
3. Class hDWA occurs at several mare margins and fills most of Mare
Vaporum. On the color-difference photographs, its color appears to
be intermediate between red and blue and has been called
"orange" . A patch
at the Fecunditatis margin includes the Luna 16 landing site.
4. Red spectral classes, thought to be lowest in Ti content, are con-
centrated in Lacus Somniorum, Mare Frigoris, Sinus Roris, and
northern Mare Imbrium; that is, they occur in diverse settings
over the north half of the Procellarum basin. Apollo 15 landed
within one of these classes (LIG-). Red or orange class LISP also
occurs in Mare Crisium, where it probably underlies the Luna 24
landing site.
5. Red spectral class mISP forms extensive areas in central
Serenitatis and the outer trough of western Procellarum. These
two occurrences may differ in composition (table 5.1); they were
not sampled.
6. Orange or (partly) red spectral class mIG- covers much of the area
west of the central meridian and south of the strong blue-red
association in Mare Imbrium. Apollo 12 landed within this belt.
This class also forms much of Mare Crisium and Mare Fecun-
ditatis. These concentrations may have little significance, however,
because class mIG - is a group of low- to medium-Ti mare units
that may differ compositionally .
7. One interpretation of the orbital geochemistry is that Maria
Smythii, Fecunditatis, and Crisium are all Al-rich . Orange spectral classes mBG-,
characteristic of Mare Nectaris, and LBG-, common among the
northern very red units, also are probably Al-rich .
Recognition that the lunar mare surfaces are underlain by three-
dimensional deposits led early to measurements of their thickness.
Marshall estimated thicknesses in Oceanus Procellarum from
the degree of obliteration of flooded craters, whose preburial profile
was assumed to equal that of fresh craters of the same diameter
 . Baldwin , Eggleton and others
 , and De Hon refined this method on the basis of better
data for the profiles and rim dimensions. Mare-basalt thicknesses,
including thicknesses of individual flows, also subtly affect the size-
frequency distributions of craters . R.A. De Hon and his coworkers systemati-
cally extended these measurement techniques to most of the nearside
maria (fig. 5.21). They found that the eastern mare materials average
200 to 400 m in thickness and the
western closer to 400 m . Lenses thicker than 1,200 or
1,500 m also occur; more accurate values are hard to determine
because few craters are visible in such thick mare sections , or if they have been shallowed by floor
uplift (as is, in fact, observed in basins; see chap. 6). Horz 
estimated that De Hon's figures are a factor of 2 too high. On the other
hand, thicknesses will be underestimated if the craters are perched
on older mare materials. Head pointed out that the flooding of
the present central highlands of the nearside, which must resemble
the floors of some of the older basins, would require more mare
material than believed by either De Hon or Horz .
A few geophysical determinations of thickness are available. The
gravity data are consistent with thicknesses of 2 to 4 km in the
centers of mascon maria , the largest of which are Imbrium, Serenitatis,
Crisium, Humorum, Smythii, Nectaris, and Orientale . Large nonmascon maria include Tran-
quillitatis, Fecunditatis, and most of Procellarum. The 20- to 25-km-
deep seismic discontinuity under Oceanus Procellarum was first
interpreted as the base of the basalt section 
but is now thought to represent a physical or chemical discontinuity
within the terra crust (see chaps. 1, 8). Most of the mare fill of
northern Oceanus Procellarum is thinner than 500 m. However, in
one place in the north and in several places in the south, it reaches
thicknesses greater than 1,000 m where superposed basins or large
craters deepen the original Procellarum-basin floor .
A radar sounder flown on the Apollo 17 mission directly meas-
ured depths to discontinuities in two mascon maria, Serenitatis and
Crisium . If certain assumptions about the
dielectric constant of the overflown materials are correct, one horizon
in Mare Serenitatis lies about 1 km beneath the surface, and another
1.6 km deep in the west to 2.0 km deep in the east . One horizon apparently within the basalt section of Mare
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
Crisium lies 0.8 to 1.0 km below the surface of the shelf that separates
the conspicuous ridge system and the basin rim . What appears
to be the same interface is 1.4 km deep
inside the shelf.
Mare thicknesses have also been inferred from the geochemical
experiments . The craters Peirce (19 km)
and Picard (23 km) penetrated the 1.4-km-thick layer in Crisium and
excavated additional basalt whose Mg-rich chemistry is evident in the
X-ray data . These craters
may have excavated terra materials from beneath the mare . On the basis of assumed excavation depths, the total
mare thickness in Crisium may be 2.4 to 3.4 km .
Progressive decrease in the number of visible premare craters,
the gravity data, and the radar-sounder profiles indicate that the
mare materials are thickest in the mare centers . This
relation reflects the topography of the host basin: Each concentric
shelf of a basin is lower than the surrounding one, and the center is
the lowest of all (chap. 4; figs. 4.9, 5.16, 5.17, 5.23). Elevations of the
mare surfaces also mimic this step structure to some degree. For
example, Mare Crisium lies about 2 km lower than peripheral Mare
Spumans and 3 km lower than Mare Undarum (fig. 4.9). However, the
mare surface drops in elevation less than the basin floor because of the
inward mare thickening.
ISOPACH MAP OF WESTERN MARE BASALT
KILOMETERS
IOO/\M 2i5 Q 2j5 50/^0
FIGURE 5.21. Thickness of mare materials on western and eastern nearside.
FIGURE 5.22. Lunar gravity anomalies .
FIGURE 5.23. Thickness of mare-basalt flows in Mare Crisium.
A. Western Mare Crisium and part of Crisium basin, showing difference in elevation
(arrows) between mare shelf and depressed center. P, crater Peirce (19 km, 18° N.,
53.5° E.). Dashed lines indicate basin-concentric troughs, as interpreted by Wilhelms
 . Telescopic photograph.
B. Diagrammatic cross section of Mare Crisium, based on radar-sounder profile . Arrow denotes shelf indicated by arrows in A. Crater P (Peirce; also
Picard) penetrates younger mare unit and excavates older mare unit and, possibly, terra underlying the mare section (Head and others,
I978a). Scales are diagrammatic, exaggerated vertically.
5. MARE MATERIALS
In summary, enough mare thicknesses have been measured to
indicate that mare basalt is volumetrically minor. Few depths are
likely to exceed 4 km; the thickest sections are in the centers of the
circular maria. Thicknesses on mascon-mare shelves and nonmascon
maria are no more than about 0.5 km. Likely lower and upper limits
for the average mare-basalt thickness on the whole Moon are proba-
bly 0.2 and 1.0 km, respectively. Thus, the upper 75 km of the Moon
would consist of 0.24 percent mare basalt if the average thickness is
1.0 km, and of only 0.047 percent if it is 0.2 km (based on coverage of 17
percent of the total lunar area of 38 x 106 km2). Subsurface dikes and
sills would add an unknown volume to these small values.
RETURNED SAMPLES
Introduction
The samples of basalt returned from the lunar maria present
fewer problems than do those of breccia from the terrae, because most
lavas acquire their chemical and physical properties when their mag-
mas originate and when they are emplaced, and not from an earlier
geologic unit. Most rock-size basalt samples are not shock-melted or
metamorphosed. Their textures originated when the unit from which
they were collected solidified. Their radiometric ages almost unam-
biguously date the magma's crystallization and, therefore, the unit's
emplacement. No doubt remains that the sampled basalt flows origi-
nated as magmas melted within the Moon.
All nine sampling missions returned mare basalt, in greatly
varying amounts. Apollos 11 and 12 landed on maria (table 1.2) and
returned 16 and 36 rock-size (min 1 cm) basalt samples, respectively
The Apollo 11 material established the important fact that the maria
are ancient in absolute age, though young stratigraphically. Subse-
quent studies showed that they were derived by partial melting from
an already differentiated mantle source. Apollo 12 collected the
youngest sample suite (see chap. 12) and proved that maria differ in
age and composition from region to region. The remaining missions
found a wide scatter in age and composition (see chap. 11), and partly
clarified and partly complicated the picture of lunar-basalt
petrogenesis. Apollos 15 and 17 were multipurpose missions that
landed on mare surfaces and returned large amounts of basalt. Lunas
16 and 24 collected small cores of mare regolith. Even Apollos 14 and
16 and Luna 20, which landed on the terrae, obtained small bits of
mare basalt. All the landing sites were near the margins of maria (pi.
4) or in the terrae (pi. 3). Therefore, only relatively thin basalt sec-
tions, and no central mascon sections, were sampled.
Composition
Lunar-mare rocks are designated "basalt" by the same general
criteria used to define terrestrial basalt :
They are dark-colored, mafic, fine-grained extrusive or shallow-intru-
sive rocks. Their textures are familiar from terrestrial basalt, except
that they are fresher because they have not been chemically
weathered (fig. 2.6). Clinopyroxene and plagioclase together compose
75 to 90 percent of most mare basalt; pyroxene is the more abundant
mineral . Some compositional groups con-
tain as much as 20 percent olivine and 24 percent optically opaque
minerals .
In elemental abundances, lunar-mare and terrestrial basalt dif-
fer substantially except in Ca content (10-11 weight percent CaO)
 . Lunar-
mare basalt (1) contains no detectable H2O; (2) is very low in alkalis
(less than 1 weight percent), especially Na2O; (3) is generally high in
TiO2 low lunar and average terrestrial contents are about the
same; (4) is low in A12O3 (8-15 weight percent) and SiO2 (mostly
39-49 weight percent); maximum lunar and average terrestrial con-
tents of these oxides are about the same; (5) is very high in FeO (17-22
weight percent) higher than terrestrial basalt; and (6) is generally
richer in MgO (7-18 weight percent) the lowest lunar and average
terrestrial contents are about the same. An additional important
difference is in the extreme degree of reduction: Lunar-mare basalt
contains essentially no Fe3 + ; most Fe occurs as Fe2 + ; and a minor
amount of native Fe, formed by reduction at or near the surface, is
always present .
Mare basalt also differs chemically from terra melt rocks of
impact or volcanic origin. It is higher in FeO and MgO contents and
lower in A12O3 and CaO contents and Al2O3/CaO ratio. Its rare-earth-
element patterns, as normalized to those of chondritic meteorites,
generally have negative europium (Eu) anomalies, in contrast to the
positive Eu anomalies of most terra materials (see chap. 8). Lunar
basalt is very low in siderophile elements, elements that are concen-
trated in iron meteorites (see chap. 8). It differs further from impact
melts in its lack of included debris. Lunar-mare basalt and terra
materials thus, the whole Moon are very poor in volatiles .
Pyroclastic glasses, which constitute the dark-mantling mate-
rials, are partly similar and partly dissimilar to the mare lavas in
bulk composition. Orange and black glasses from the Apollo 17 land-
ing site are rich in Ti, but differ in trace elements and Mg from the
high-Ti lavas in the same region . Apollo 15
collected both Ti-poor green glasses and Ti-rich red glasses, neither of
which are identical to the Ti-poor Apollo 15 lavas .
Smaller amounts of other pyroclastic glasses are mixed in other
sampled regoliths .
Classification
Sampled mare basalt is generally classified on the basis of major-
element content (table 5.2). Some authors distinguish sharply
between high-Ti and low-Ti groups because the largest collections are
very distinct in this element; Apollos 11 and 17 returned exceptionally
Ti-rich basalt, whereas Apollos 12 and 15 returned low-Ti basalt . The Ti gap is occupied by a
few samples from the Apollo 12 landing site and small fragments from
the Apollo 14 terra landing site . Small fragments of a very low titanium
(VLT) group were found later in the Apollo 17 and Luna 24 regoliths
 . High-Al, feldspathic basalt is recognized
as a distinct category, although it also was recovered in only small
amounts ; it
characterizes collections from the eastern maria (see chap. 11) and
premare basalt of the mare type (chap. 9). Small rare glass droplets
and fragments found in all regoliths may represent additional
magma types . The continuum
of spectral classes suggests that the gaps in Ti content
and in other discriminative compositions are filled by unsampled
basalt types . Only about a third of the
observed number of spectral classes may have been sampled and Taylor .
values in weight percent]
Distinguishing
Apollo 11 high-K high Ti basalt High K, high Ti
Apollo 12 ilmenite basalt Intermediate Ti
Apollo 12 pigeonite basalt Low Ti, high Si
Apollo 12 olivine basalt Low Ti, high Fe, Mg
Luna 24 very low Ti basalt Very low Ti, high Al
Apollo 12 feldspathic basalt High Al , low Ti
Apollo 16 feldspathic basalt High Al, low to
intermediate Ti.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
282-284) lists the main chemical properties that distinguish
sampled groups. Most group names also include the name of a charac-
teristic mineral observed optically (a modal mineral); other classifica-
tions refer to a mineral that would theoretically crystallize from a
melt of the rock's composition (norm). For example, the terms
"pigeonite (low-Ca clinopyroxene) basalt" (table 5.2), "Si-rich basalt,"
and "quartz-normative basalt" have all been applied to the same
Apollo 12 or Apollo 15 samples.'The Apollo 17 basalt suite is sub-
divided by trace-element contents . Although textural terms are also used
to designate some groups (chap. 11), classifications based on texture
cut across those based on sampling site and chemistry .
Textural variety within a basalt suite from a given site reflects dif-
ferences in the crystallization and cooling histories of the lavas more
than differences in composition . Some
compositional differences within a given site have resulted from
minor fractionation after emplacement, though fewer than in many
terrestrial lavas .
ORIGIN AND
EMPLACEMENT
The mare-basalt magmas originated by partial melting of ultra-
mafic mantle material (mostly or entirely olivine and pyroxene)
 . The Eu
anomaly and other trace-element data demonstrate that the mantle
does not consist of primitive, undifferentiated lunar material but
segregated from the bulk Moon soon after it formed 4.55 aeons ago
 .
As discussed in chapters 12 and 13, known basalt flows were
extruded until 3.5 aeons after the Moon formed. Thus, a substantial
time gap separated the global differentiation that formed the mantle
source from the partial melting that led to basalt extrusion. Because
formation of mare basalt was a two-stage process, a source of heat in
addition to that remaining from planetary accretion was apparently
necessary to initiate the second-stage melting .
The amounts of radioactive K, Th, and U believed to have been
present in the source regions were sufficient to generate enough heat
to melt the very small observed amounts of basalt . These radioactive elements are most abundant in the Ti-rich
This partial melting is generally thought to have taken place
between 60 and 500 km below the surface . More precise estimates are controversial,
especially concerning high-Ti basalt. Various schemes have associ-
ated basalt composition with source composition, but, again, the data
are equivocal and the interpretations diverse. For example, high-Ti
basalt may be derived from clinopyroxene-rich zones, VLT magmas
from olivine-orthopyroxene zones, and high-Al basalt from
clinopyroxene-plagioclase zones . The mantle may be crudely layered; one suggestion
is that the low-Ti source lies 150 to 250 km below the surface, the high-
Ti source 100 to 150 km deep, and the high-Al source 60 to 100 km
deep, immediately beneath the crust . Alternatively, the high-Ti source may be lower than the low-Ti source
 . Delano suggested that the
pyroclastic glasses originated at the greatest depths, possibly 400 to
500 km below the surface, in an environment where carbon-oxygen
gases may have formed .
The presence of glass and the vesicularity of many lavas are the
only major indications of volatile activity on the Moon. The fact that
their eruptions were driven by volatiles may explain why patches of
dark-mantling materials appear where no lavas are known, as in such
isolated craters as Petavius and Humboldt (fig. 4.2).
Whether or not layering exists in the mantle, the variety of
sampled and unsampled compositions indicates considerable vertical
and horizontal heterogeneity in the basalt-source zones. In par-
ticular, the compositional variety of basalt erupted at a given site
simultaneously or within a very short time suggests that the sources
were compositionally heterogeneous over short distances .
After the magmas were generated, most were modified in the
original magma chambers, on the way to the surface, or on the surface
 . On the Moon as on the Earth (and probably all planets),
early-formed crystals fractionated from the liquid magma, mantle or
crustal materials were assimilated, and magmas from separate
chambers mingled. Only a few magmas may have been primary in the
sense that they remained unchanged after melting of the mantle
This volume can best contribute to the multifaceted question of
mare-basalt origin by examining the geologic setting and emplace-
ment histories of the observed mare units. Therefore, I consider why
maria are concentrated in basins, especially in particular basins.
Basic hydrostatic principles suggest that extrusion of basaltic
magmas is favored by (1) depressed surface elevations, (2) thin crusts
and lithospheres, (3) low magma densities, and (4) deep melting sites
 . Conditions 1 and 2 are most
favorable in basins. A basin impact removes several kilometers or tens
of kilometers of crustal material. The resulting depression is greatly
reduced by an uplift of the mantle to compensate for the lost mass
(chap. 4) but will partly survive if the lithosphere is strong. Addition
of the ejecta also thickens the crust near the basin by a few kilo-
meters. The depression not only collects whatever magmas are
extruded but also contains most of the extrusion vents (fig. 5.24). Even
if magmas melt at the same depth and ascend with equal freedom
everywhere on the Moon, more would be extruded in the depressions
than on the adjacent terra. A rising column of magma that would be
erupted in a basin may only be intruded as dikes and sills outside the
Basins may also affect extrusion in more active ways. A basin
impact generates heat that may aid the melting and weaken the
lithospheric barrier to magma ascent . Subbasin structures, such as fractured or brecciated zones sim-
ilar to those beneath craters, may facilitate magma movement and
divert some magmas to extrusion sites high on the basin periphery
(figs. 5.10D, 5.16; G, fig. 5.24).
Superposition of two or more basins or large craters enhances the
likelihood of mare extrusion at a given spot. The first or the only
extrusions will occur in the superposed excavations .
FIGURE 5.24. Diagrammatic cross section of typical basin 1,000 km in diameter; no vertical
exaggeration. Crust is about 75 km thick outside basin (see chap. 1) and is estimated at 55 km
thick beneath basin center; deformed zone (above dotted line) is estimated at 25 km thick, and
mantle uplift at 20 km. Magma-ascent paths, 60 km high above mantle surface, are indicated
diagrammatically in nine places (A-I) as systems of dikes and sills. At A, lava was extruded
onto floor of a crater superposed on the basin, and spilled beyond crater rim; at B, lava was
extruded directly onto basin floor; extrusions A and B combined to flood basin center. At C,
lava was extruded onto trough but did not overtop trough edges. At D, crust was too thick to
allow an equal column of magma to be extruded. At E, floor of superposed crater decreased
magma-ascent path by amount necessary to allow extrusion; crater interior was flooded. At F,
contact of deformed zone and less severely deformed crust afforded path for lateral migration
of lava, which was extruded high on basin flank at G. Crust at H and I outside basin was too
thick to allow extrusion, even beneath a crater (I) equal in depth to the flooded craters inside
5. MARE MATERIALS
This association is clearly illustrated on the farside, where such
craters as Leibnitz, Lyot, and von Karman and such small basins as
Apollo, Planck, and Poincare, all of which are superposed on the
South Pole-Aitken and Australe basins, contain most of the farside's
maria (pi. 4; fig. 5.25). In my opinion, similar superpositions of the
still-larger Imbrium, Serenitatis, Tranquillitatis, Nubium, and other
basins on the 3,200-km-diameter Procellarum basin cause the famil-
iar concentrations of nearside maria.
Factors other than basin distribution have also been thought to
affect mare distribution. Differential crustal thickness is commonly
cited as the explanation of the 15-fold hemispheric dichotomy in mare
distribution (pi. 4); the farside crust is thought to be thicker than the
nearside crust (chap. 1). The Procellarum basin, however, may cause
the difference. All the Moon's major maria except Crisium, Fecun-
ditatis, Humboldtianum, Nectaris, Orientale, and Smythii lie in
basins superposed on Procellarum (fig. 5.26). Of these maria, only
Crisium contains a thick section of mare, and Mare Crisium is much
smaller (500 km) than would be expected from the Moon's fourth
largest basin (1,060 km diam; chap. 9; table 4.1).
The relative importance of magma density and melting depth is
difficult to evaluate because of the many unknowns. High-Ti magmas
are the densest, and high-Al magmas the least dense .
In the scheme of Taylor and Jakes , low-Ti magmas originate at
greatest, and high-Al magmas at shallowest, depths. Thus, density
and depth may cancel each other as factors favoring extrusion. Basin-
controlled crustal thickness may play a greater role in affecting the
composition of extruded lavas. High-Al magmas preferentially fill
basins formed in thick crusts (Fecunditatis, Nectaris, Smythii),
whereas low-Ti magmas preferentially form over thin crusts (in the
Procellarum basin, especially where Serenitatis and Imbrium are
superposed on that giant basin). These factors are further evaluated
in chapters 11 and 12 after the historical dimension has been added.
FIGURE 5.25. Eastern nearside, east limb, and part of farside of Moon, showing spotty
distribution of mare patches in sparsely flooded Australe basin (lower right edge), peripheral
"lakes" concentric with Crisium basin, and other maria outside main mare concentration.
Apollo 11 frame H-6665, taken during return to Earth after first lunar landing.
FIGURE 5.26. Procellarum basin as drawn by Whitaker . Courtesy of E.A.
A. Telescopic full-Moon photograph of nearside, showing center (P) and parts of three rings
of Procellarum basin. I, center of Imbrium basin. Maria are concentrated inside largest
ring of Procellarum basin. In much early work, an asymmetry in basin distribution was
thought to cause the hemispheric dichotomy in mare distribution, but basins are dis-
tributed randomly (pi. 3); Procellarum may account for most of the dichotomy. Right
side of photograph overlaps with left side of figure 5.25. From Whitaker .
B. Observed scarps and terra margins concentric with basin (large dots), complete rings that
best fit the topography (small dots), mare ridges (lines; see chap. 6), and major
landmarks. From Whitaker .
6.STRUCTURE
FIGURE 6.1 (OVERLEAF). Lee-Lincoln scarp west of Apollo 17 landing site, partly covered by light-colored landslide of debris from South Massif (bottom). Scene centered at 20.25° N.,
30.75° E., covers 7.5 km north-south. Apollo 17 frame P-2309.
6. STRUCTURE
Introduction ...................................................... 107
Structures in maria and basins ..................................... 107
Mare ridges ................................................... 107
Arcuate rilles .................................................. Ill
Origin by mare subsidence ..................................... 112
Crater-floor fractures ............................................. 113
Straight rilles ..................................................... 113
General features ............................................... 113
Imbrium sculpture .............................................. 113
Other systems ................................................. 115
Interpretation lithospheric thickness ............................... 115
INTRODUCTION
Tectonic structures, like endogenic materials, play a smaller
role in lunar geology than was once widely thought. Miscellaneous
aligned landforms were interpreted as fault-controlled during much
of the telescopically based mapping of the 1960's. Geologists com-
monly mapped faults without the objectivity that proved so valuable
in mapping material units. Basin rings were generally mapped as
fault-bounded, and lineament trends were commonly assigned to the
"lunar grid," a hypothetical system of conjugate fractures .
High-resolution photographs, however, have substantiated the view
of some astute early observers that faults are rare on the Moon
 . Except for the faults
described in this chapter and for relatively minor gravitational fault-
ing along some rings, I believe that most supposed faults are coinci-
dental alignments of unrelated features. The lunar grid is probably
an artifact of the plotting methods .
The present lunar surface, therefore, has not been extensively
reshaped by endogenic forces, as has the Earth, but generally
retains the pattern imposed by cratering and deposition of strat-
igraphic units. The dominance of lunar geology by basins and maria
extends to most of the tectonic structures that do exist. Most of these
structures are inside basins, and many transect both the basin and
the mare (pi. 5). Some structures at mare margins that are related to
dark pyroclastic materials and irregular craters have already been
illustrated (figs. 5.10, 5.16). This chapter more thoroughly describes
and interprets basin-related mare ridges, arcuate rilles, and crater-
floor fractures.
Some straight rilles of fault origin also cut surfaces outside the
most conspicuous mare-filled basins. These rilles have not yet been
satisfactorily explained. Global deformation is commonly invoked,
but this chapter presents alternative, basin-related interpretations
for these structures as well. In particular, the 3,200-km-diameter
Procellarum basin , whose importance to terra
topography, lithospheric thickness, and mare localization has
already been mentioned (chaps. 4, 5; pis. 3, 4; fig. 5.26), is suggested
as a major control on the straight rilles as well as the ridges and
arcuate faults.
STRUCTURES IN
MARIA AND BASINS
More ridges
Deformation inside mare-filled basins is most manifest in two
classes of structures mare ridges and arcuate grabens. Mare ridges,
also known as wrinkle ridges and now formally named dorsa, are
linear positive features that occur in most maria (pi. 5). Most mare
ridges are on the nearside because most maria are there, but even
small isolated farside maria have ridges (fig. 5.2). Also, some ridges
extend from mare margins into the terrae, for example, the "Lee-
Lincoln" scarp at the Apollo 17 landing site (fig. 6.1) and some basin-
radial ridges south of Mare Humorum . The ridges generally occur in systems that are
subconcentric and subradial to maria (pi. 5; figs. 5.17, 5.23A, 6.2).
Systems in Oceanus Procellarum (fig. 6.3), which appear to be linear
and parallel , are concentric with the Procellarum basin
 .
In detail, mare ridges consist of linear segments that merge,
overlap, or are arranged in echelon (figs. 6.2, 6.3); many extend as
complex, branching echelon systems for hundreds of kilometers.
Ridges generally have two distinct morphologic parts a broad arch
and a narrow superposed spine . Some arches are com-
posed of overlapping domes. They range from several kilometers to as
much as 10 km in width and commonly are about 100 m high; in Mare
Serenitatis, some arches reach a height of 350 m . Such large arches appear on all photographs, but
many others appear only on photographs taken at low-Sun illumina-
tions (less than 15°) and are not necessarily disclosed by high pho-
tographic resolutions. Many arches are asymmetric, bounded on one
side by scarps or monoclinal bends that offset the mare surface by 50
to 100 m . In places, the asymmetry shifts sides along
the length of the ridge. Some scarps resemble flow lobes in shape. The
sharp spinelike ridges commonly form shorter, narrower, tortuously
braided networks along the crests and flanks of the broader arches,
and may occupy 25 to 60 percent of the total arch width . The spines are commonly 100 m high and about 200 m
wide . Some spines extend from the arches onto the
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
FIGURE 6.2.
Border zone between Mare Serenitatis and Serenitatis-basin rim, showing structures concentric with mare. View northward.
A. West and southwest border. Rugged terra is Monies Apenninus. Grabens concentric with and Iruncaled by mare are Rimae Sulpicius Callus (compare fig. 5.16). Apollo 17 frame M 952.
6. STRUCTURE
fi. East border. Twosetsofgrabens diverge upward from near bottom of photograph; one is closely concentric with the mare (a), and the other diverges eastward (b). L, LeMonmer(61 km, 27°
N., 31° E.). Dark-mantling material at bottom (d) is truncated by lighter central mare. Arrow, Apollo 17 landing site (compare fig. 5.17). Apollo 17 frame M-940.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
adjacent flat mare surfaces; others are solitary. In some places, both
the arches and the narrow spines are superposed on gentle linear
rises, as much as 500 m high and 25 km wide, that can be detected
only on low-Sun images or by topographic data .
Two main schools of interpretation of mare ridges have emerged.
The volcanic school favors intrusion and extrusion of lava, controlled
by global or basin-related tectonic patterns , or a vari-
ant autointrusion of lavas into fractures . The
tectonic school, which was founded by Baldwin , favors structural deformation of solid materials and is sup-
ported by the studies discussed in this chapter. Most investigators
agree that many circular wrinkle ridges were formed by compaction
over crater rims (fig. 6.4). Other, larger circular patterns of mare
ridges are ascribed to settling of mare sections over buried basin
rings; such ridges are, in fact, the only basis for locating the inner
rings of Imbrium, Serenitatis, Crisium, and other deeply filled basins
 . These landforms
and the associated ridges have been interpreted as ringlike volcanic
complexes. The moldinglike accumulations of material at the bases of
the terra remnants resemble volcanic flows , and their light color implies silicic composition.
However, the "moldings" are common along contacts between mare
surfaces and terra slopes, including those of obvious impact features
(figs. 6.1, 6.5), where they consist of debris accumulated from the
slopes . Therefore, these accumulations
are stratigraphically younger than the ridges and the mare materials
at the bases of the terra islands, whereas their source bedrock is older
than the maria.
Evidence for dislocations of nonmare units (figs. 6.6, 6.7) has led
to elaboration of the tectonic hypothesis. The complex ridge mor-
phology suggests crumpling of the surface under compressional
stress. Howard and Muehlberger suggested that the compres-
sion created thrust faults along intramare gliding horizons. Bryan
 and Maxwell and others explained the compression as a
FIGURE 6.4. Mare ridges, formed by subsidence of mare basalt over rim of crater Lambert
R (bottom; 55 km, 24° N., 20.5° W.). Unburied crater with shadowed interior above center
is Lambert (30 km). Apollo 15 frame M-1010.
FIGURE 6.3. Complex mare ridges and flooded terra islands in southern Oceanus Procellarum near crater Letronne . Some ridges and kipukas or
steptoes of elevated, presumably thin maria (t) mark subsurface extensions of crater rims and other terra. Photograph covers area of lat 7.0° 13.5° S., long 32.5° 41.5° W. Object at center
right of both frames is boom of Apollo 16 gamma-ray spectrometer. Stereoscopic pair of Apollo 16 frames M 2837 (right) and M 2839 (left).
6. STRUCTURE
buckling of the surface caused by settling of the maria into a reduced
area; thick sections of mare basalt settle most, and the stresses are
concentrated where the basalt thins .
Lucchitta also favored settling and suggested that the
ridges lie along fault systems that include both normal and reverse
faults, which are manifested by compression at the surface (fig. 6.8).
In these hypotheses, accepted here, most ridges originate basically by
compression resulting from vertical tectonism, although some are
probably of volcanic origin (fig. 5.13).
Arcuote rilles
Arcuate rilles (rimae) are flat-floored, steep-walled troughs (figs.
6.9, 6.10, 6.11). Each trough consists of a floor a few kilometers wide
and linear subparallel facing scarps 50 to 250 m high . The troughs are grabens created by extension, like many sim-
ilar grabens on the Earth . Like the ridges, most arcuate
grabens occur in parallel, crosscutting, or echelon sets; some occur
FIGURE 6.5. Moldmglike accumulations of debris at bases of partly inundated impact
A. Light-colored domelike features along mare ridge are terra islands that partly deflect the
ridges. Apollo 16 frame H-19244.
B. Part of crater Flamsteed P ("Flamsteed Ring") concentric with mare ridge (arrow).
Obiter 3 frame M-181.
C. Interior of crater Maraldi. Apollo 17 frame P-2302.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
singly. Most grabens are concentric with circular maria and the
containing basins (pi. 5; figs. 5.16, 5.17, 6.9-6.11). Moreover, they lie
within the topographic-basin rim as that rim is interpreted in chapter
4 (except for some subconcentric grabens east of Serenitatis, which
may be controlled by the middle Procellarum-basin rim; set b, fig.
6.2B). Grabens cut both the mare and the basin material (figs. 6.9,
6.10). With minor exceptions, they occur only in basins superposed on
the Procellarum basin, particularly Imbrium, Serenitatis, Tran-
quillitatis, and Humorum (pi. 5), and are rare or absent in the large
basins Crisium, Nectaris, and Smythii and on the farside.
Origin by mare subsidence
The recurring association of mare ridges and arcuate grabens
suggests a genetic connection . Their geometric
relation is similar in many basins: Subradial ridges innermost, arcu-
ate rilles outermost, and concentric ridges in between. Discovery of
FIGURE 6.6. Crater Bonpland D (6 km, 10° S., 18° W.) in Mare Cognitum, offset along
mare ridge. Apollo 16 frame P 5429.
FIGURE 6.7. Ridges continuous between mare and terra and appearing to thrust material
from bottom over material at top. Scene centered at 7° S., 29° W., in Monies Riphaeus.
View northward. Apollo 16 frame P-5452.
the mascons led to the currently
prevailing interpretation, which substantiates Baldwin's concept. The mare-basalt masses constitute the super-
isostatic loads in the mascon basins . These
superisostatic loads are generally smaller than they would be if no
isostatic compensation had taken place since mare emplacement
began ; therefore, the basalt must
have subsided. This subsidence stretched the peripheral parts of the
mare and the basin floor, creating the grabens, and compressed the
center, creating the ridges .
FIGURE 6.8. Interpretation of mare ridges by Lucchitta , based on models by A. R.
Sanford. Thrust relations on surface originate by vertical displacements along steep faults in
subsurface. Normal faulting occurs under tension in relatively raised block.
FIGURE 6.9. Arcuate rilles concentric with Mare Humorum and Humorum basin, between
southeastern Mare Humorum (left) and westward extension of Mare Nubium (right).
Craters include Campanus (C; 48 km, 28° S., 29° W.) and more highly degraded Mercator
(M; 47 km). Orbiter 4 frame H-132.
6. STRUCTURE
CRATER-FLOOR FRACTURES
Fractures in the floor materials of craters are among the com-
monest lunar tectonic structures (figs. 6.13, 6.14). They are concen-
trated in and near maria and basins without maria (pi. 5). Fractured-
floor craters larger than about 150 km also occur in nonbasin settings,
for example, Petavius and Humboldt (figs. 4.2, 9.5, 9.6). These two
craters are gravitationally neutral; they have neither the negative
anomalies of fresh craters nor the positive anomalies due to mare
basalt .
The fractured floors are higher relative to the crater rims and
surrounding terrain than are the floors of typical impact craters
 . Many of the floors, however, occur in craters with other
morphologies diagnostic of impact origin such as central peaks, as
in Gassendi and Posidonius (figs. 5.17,6.13A), and the whole range of
exterior impact phenomena including rays, as at Taruntius (fig.
6.13B). Uplift of impact-crater floors is the evident explanation. The
presence of fractured floors in Petavius and Humboldt (fig. 4.2) sug-
gests that originally negative gravity anomalies resulting from mass
loss during impact excavation were erased by the uplifts. Vitello on
the Mare Humorum border (fig. 6.13C) possesses a freshly fractured
floor, a mantle of dark material, and an enhancement in thermal-
infrared wavelengths during eclipse all
features pointing to a caldera origin or, at least, to eruptions from the
floor fractures . However, these fea-
tures are also consistent with floor uplift (fig. 6.15), which opened
fissures fresh enough to expose blocks that appear "warm" during
eclipse, and with mantling by the dark material a common phe-
nomenon along other mare borders as well .
The uplift interpretation also suggests an explanation for a wide
range of other lunar landforms . The
shallow tilted floors and arcuate structures of 15 craters larger than
20 km in diameter in the Smythii basin suggest cylinderlike uplifts that broke free where the wall
and floor meet (fig. 6.15). Especially great uplift probably formed the
irregular, knobby elevated interior of Gaudibert, along the Mare
Nectaris margin , which had been thought
to be volcanic . Even small craters with such elevated
interior structures as nested rims or rings of bulbous material (figs.
6.13Z), G) may be modified by tectonic uplift rather than by volcanism,
as is commonly believed . Twin
impacts followed by uplift account for the nearly identical neighbor-
ing shallow-floored craters Sabine and Ritter along the Tran-
quillitatis border (fig. 3.14C), which superficially resemble terrestrial
calderas more than they do impact craters .
Although many fractures and unusual landforms have been cre-
ated by uplifts of impact-crater floors, a few fractured-floor craters
have a less well organized fracture pattern that suggests shrinkage of
a cohesive material (fig. 6.13H). Most such craters lie near but outside
basins, and the fractured material may be impact melt ejected from
the basins ,
unless it is otherwise-unknown terra volcanic material .
Igneous intrusions have been suggested as the cause of floor
uplifts because the uplifts are concentrated near maria and are
commonly overlain by dark mantles or small maria . Intrusions seem reasonable, considering the affected
craters' setting. All that is required, however, is isostatic leveling
resulting from viscous relaxation of the substrate . The required plasticity is probably due to the
weaker lithosphere beneath basins and large craters.
STRAIGHT RULES
General features
More puzzling than the arcuate grabens and floor fractures are
rilles that are here called straight by contrast with the other, curved
or complexly shaped fractures. Although long stretches are straight
(pi. 5; figs. 6.16-6.21), most straight rilles curve or sharply inflect as a
whole. In detailed shape of profile and in their echelon patterns,
straight and arcuate rilles are similar (fig. 6.16). The straight rilles
are also grabens . Some rare single fault scarps not part
of a rille are also considered here.
Imbrium sculpture
Faulting initiated by the Imbrium impact was the preferred
explanation during the 1960's for the "Imbrium sculpture" system of
radial grooves and ridges . A coalescence of elliptical craters to
form the grooves is evident on Apollo photographs (fig. 3.10B),
however, confirming the secondary-ejecta origin proposed by Gilbert
(1893) and Baldwin . Nevertheless, some true faults are
radial or subradial to Imbrium; those cutting the Apennine Bench,
for example, probably formed in response to adjustments of Mare
Imbrium and the Imbrium basin (fig. 6.10).
Vallis Alpes (the Alpine Valley, fig. 6.17) lacks the smoothly scal-
loped matching walls and raised lips characteristic of low-angle sec-
ondary chains. Some of its walls match but are jagged, steep, and
FIGURE 6.10. Apennine Bench, showing grabens concentric with Imbrium basin cutting basin, bench, and mare material (lower right). Radial grabens and vent for dark-mantling material (arrow)
are also present (Imbrium center is outside upper left corner of photograph). Large rugged mass is Monies Archimedes, overlain and surrounded by planar Apennine Bench Formation (see chap.
10) and by secondary craters of Archimedes, centered north of view. Mare at upper right is Palus Putredinis, west of Apollo 15 landing site. Pair of craters at left edge of bench are Feuillee (left; 9
km) and Beer (9.5 km). Mosaic of Apollo 15 frames M-589 through M-594 (from right to left).
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
^;.$^m*f±wm*^
- ^Jl^t*>. ;-. ^i- ?^ v -^-^ ;^'^v| '^>".^.y \ %
W\J&*&*$ffi/'*&& 'V\":'.
>g v. IT^-T^.;>r -H'MteiiL f.i : -
.-. < >' M V.- V^f »V' ^
V'f / ^'fiWf At>- **fe v-.VrA:
y; r: «r *r ^ v f ' ^
i'< * V.* ?'^
**'*&** R **? ». *.
' '**.** **
xrVi'**' ^ Br-'^VHv^-1^
"^''l' *|'*' ri~g"yT,'-*'r. f ^W.'-Aiv' '|?i^J "JIT^ ^
^ ^v" 1^',:^1-
^ i:":\:« ^^ ^J
'»ti 1'. ;'J '
.*.' ^;:;S.M i'VJV»"#
'^'¥1- '*"i f- l't'T'
-''* 5 -JT^f '
Klfe^v 1^*^,
..^.^t -.^..^..^..^ i _^tfr^:4^, i,
^'*'-x^f9 ^v*
;i ! '/ .^.." ^. H't*"
^vv^^g-'f^"^-:'''.^
'.., -> :-J,\i;*-ftvi.-. ^ -
< ;. ^v>--v
: ^- :--V"^.«l*«J
' '" "* ' -S* "" ' l'-'
*"" -vv/--:
."^ j*"'. **> -
R -"V v ,^r-
» *,,., " ., *>
' ; '"^i1; t
- fi>:^p>i^pt:^
t ....%-...--v--..v.^ ^<. % . n; ^-" t\-»;»-!-^yv : '"
,-'"" ^^ :vV^,*f|*«J
s ^^ ^..^f,*.^ {'^>7Vv.:- -.
t rsrr-i-^rj.
=»-*--, =- frf -~-^ .
.- f" 1 ^, rr*-; r: '^Xi-t-^-jf jf*fc-\«'-~:^'-' * % * "- ^~» - "
»«:,, y »y. ,
'" N;^V..'.<r
'wi : &&-, . >w-v
FIGURE 6.11. Arcuate rilles in border zone of Mare Tranquillitatis (5° N., 21 ° E.) south of crater Arago, about 90 km east of mare edge. Intricate structure shown here is probably also common in
other, less well photographed rille systems. Orbiter 2 frame M 43.
6. STRUCTURE
composed of linear segments. The valley is probably a graben formed
shortly after the Imbrium impact, as was once proposed for all sculp-
ture. Its radiality is consistent with an origin by isostatic doming of
the subbasin mantle (see chap. 4).
Such radial or subradial faults as the Straight Wall (Rupes Recta,
fig. 1.8), one leg of Rima Hyginus (figs. 5.1QE, 6.16A), the Cauchy set
(fig. 6.18), and several parallel grabens in southwestern Mare Fecun-
ditatis (fig. 6.19) are more puzzling because they cut mare materials.
They cannot be direct products of the Imbrium impact. If they are
related to Imbrium, they may have formed by some sort of rejuvena-
tion of radial fractures .
Other systems
The geometric relation of other straight rilles to basins is less
apparent. Many grabens in the central and east-central equatorial
zone of the nearside are concentrated along trends between 20° and
30° north of west (pi. 5). Most of these grabens belong to a set that
extends 1,600 km east-southeastward from Rima Bode II (fig. 5.1QH),
through the eastern leg of Rima Hyginus and Rimae Ariadaeus (fig.
6.16), to the Imbrium-radial rilles in Mare Fecunditatis (figs. 6.19,
9.7). The only basin to which all these grabens are geometrically
related is Procellarum, to whose center 
they are radial or subradial. Their trend is paralleled in other areas
by the Cauchy set of structures (also subradial to Procellarum; fig.
6.18), the short Miiller crater chain (fig. 3.16A), and the 300-km-long
Abulfeda crater chain (fig. 3.16B). The origin of these crater chains,
which are radial to no known basin or large crater, is unclear (see
chap. 3). Some grabens near Sinus Medii have a complementary trend
of 20°-30° north of east (pi. 5; fig. 10.28).
At the east end of Sinus Medii is the complex Triesnecker system
of grabens (pi. 5; fig. 6.20). This system as a whole is oriented north-
south but includes many other trends, which mutual transection
relations show to be contemporaneous . East-west
extension is the apparent cause.
The Moon's most complex system of (exposed) grabens occupies
the southwest shore of Oceanus Procellarum from about lat 5° N. to
lat 22° S. (fig. 6.21). The prevailing trends are nearly concentric with
the Procellarum shoreline or radial to the general region of both the
Imbrium- and Procellarum-basin centers. Other straight rilles lie
along the northwest Procellarum shore, which also contains the
largest lunar concentration of fractured-floor craters (pi. 5; fig. 6.14).
INTERPRETATION
LITHOSPHERIC THICKNESS
Many, if not most, of the structures described in this chapter are
ascribable to thinning of the elastic lithosphere beneath basins. The
subsidence of basin-filling mare basalt is aided by a thin lithosphere
and inhibited by a thick lithosphere . Solomon and Head suggested that a lithospheric
thickness of about 75 km has prevented graben formation in the
Crisium, Nectaris, and Smythii basins. The crust in the region of the
seismic stations on the southwest nearside is 45 to 60 km thick (chap.
1). Because arcuate grabens have formed in this seismically explored
region, such crustal thicknesses apparently facilitate mare subsi-
dence and graben formation. Because the estimates of lithospheric
and crustal thickness are similar in magnitude, the feldspathic crust
and the elastic lithosphere were probably equivalent at the time of
graben formation. The mantle constituted the more plastic
asthenosphere.
Chapter 4 suggests that the Procellarum-basin impact exerted a
major control over crustal (lithospheric) thickness (fig. 6.22). Con-
sequently, arcuate grabens are restricted almost entirely to the inte-
rior of that basin (pi. 5). Even the old shallow basin Tranquillitatis
and the thin basalt of Mare Tranquillitatis, which lie inside Pro-
cellarum, are cut by marginal grabens (fig. 6.11). Lithospheric thick-
ness related to Procellarum also may be reflected in the gravity
structure. Outside Procellarum, even such relatively thin maria as
Nectaris, Orientale, and Smythii preserve mascons. Despite their
thinness, these maria lie at low elevations (more than 3.5 km below
the average lunar sphere, 1,738 km in radius; fig. 6.23; table 6.1).
Thus, the thick lithosphere apparently hindered isostatic uplift
of basins, extrusion of mare basalt, sinking of mascons, and formation
of grabens. Each condition was opposite inside Procellarum. Oceanus
Procellarum and Mare Tranquillitatis, though areally large, have
only small, local gravity highs . The superisostatic loads per unit area in Imbrium and
Serenitatis are smaller than would be expected from their thick
mare-basalt sections . Apparently,
the thin lithosphere inside Procellarum abetted early isostatic uplift
of such basins as Tranquillitatis and permitted later isostatic sinking
in response to loading even by thin basalt. The concentration of maria
in Procellarum and in the superposed basins is another result of the
thinner lithosphere. Although mascons are not known on the farside,
the depth of the giant South Pole-Aitken basin , the paucity of farside maria except in the basins
superposed on South Pole-Aitken (pi. 4), and the absence of grabens
all suggest farside lithospheric thicknesses at least as great as those
on the non-Procellarum nearside.
The factors that localize the straight rilles are less clear but may
be further effects of the Procellarum basin. The complex system along
the west Procellarum shore comprises the grabens most likely to be
related to this giant basin. Widespread extension of the Procellarum
margin is suggested by the trends and extent of the fracture system,
which are consistent with a broad regional uplift of the mantle under
the basin.
More speculatively, the many straight rilles on the central and
east-central nearside may have a similar origin. Mantle uplift
beneath the Procellarum basin may explain the 1,600-km-long system
and such "Imbrium-radial" faults as Rupes Recta, the grabens cut-
ting the Fra Mauro peninsula (fig. 5.8), and the Cauchy set. Con-
tinuation of mild uplift into the time of mare-basalt extrusion would
account for the otherwise-puzzling transection of the maria by these
faults. The Triesnecker system, whose overall orientation diverges
from others in its vicinity, may have been localized by Sinus Medii,
whose southeast boundary is a Procellarum ring (pi. 4; fig. 5.26).
Sinus Medii may have been isostatically uplifted because of viscous
relaxation of the weak lithosphere, in the manner of a fractured crater
floor. Tides, relaxation of a tidal bulge , or some other
global effect would seem to be attractive alternative causes of the
deformation of this near-Earth zone. To my knowledge, however, the
observed distribution of lunar faults is inconsistent with any of the
global mechanisms that have been thus far proposed. The Tries-
necker system and the systems of long straight grabens, therefore,
provide additional examples of basin-related alternatives to global
origins for lunar structures.
A progressive thickening over time of the lunar lithosphere in all
regions is evidenced by increasing resistance to defor-
mation . The arcuate and straight grabens
cut terra units and old mare units (chap. 11), whereas the ridges
deform both old and young mare units .
Thus, the graben opening was the first deformation to cease. Mare
extrusion ceased somewhat later, when the elastic lithosphere
exceeded 100 km in thickness . Presumably,
most previous conduits for ascent of mare magmas were shut off.
Wrinkling of the central mare surfaces and crater-floor uplift were the
longest enduring modifications. All these changes were presumably
the result of general global cooling. Decreasing plasticity of part of the
mantle added thickness to the lithosphere, which once consisted only
of the terra crust. Although the mascons indicate that the super-
isostatic loads still exist, continued subsidence is unlikely because
endogenic moonquakes do not all correlate with maria . If any asthenosphere
remains today, it is too deep to affect surface deformation. The only
recent deformation that has been suggested since analysis of the
Apollo results is minor thrust faulting in the terrae .
Younger mare basalt
- 'f''-"'-vOlder mare basalt
FIGURE 6.12. Diagrammatic cross section showing stresses responsible for graben opening
and ridge formation during subsidence of mare basalt in a double-ringed basin. Short vertical
lines cutting older mare unit and underlying basin material denote grabens.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
FIGURE 6.13. Raised fractured floors of craters.
A. Gassendi (110 km, 17.5° S., 40° W.), on north border of Mare Humorum. Floor is
almost as high as mare, but peaks indicate impact origin. View southward. Apollo 16
frame H-19295.
B. Taruntius (56 km, 5.5° N., 46.5° E.), on northwest border of Mare Fecunditatis, a
typical fresh impact crater except for raised floor. Or biter 1 frame M 31.
C. Vitello (42 km, 30.5° S., 37.5° W.), on south margin of Mare Humorum, with dark-
mantled rim and very fresh fractures on uplifted floor. Orbiter 4 frame H 136.
D. Pitatus (97 km, 30°S., 13.5°W.), on south border of Mare Nubium. Concentric rilles
result from uplift of crater floor and later mare fill. Small bull's-eye crater at left may have
similar cause. Chain of craters at right are secondary-impact craters of Imbrium basin.
Line of white dots in lower left is photoprocessing artifact. Orbiter 4 frame H 119.
E. Group of double-ringed craters, 30 to 35 km in diameter, in Mare Smythii. Cylinderlike
uplift of floor is indicated (fig. 6.15). Orbiter 4 frame H 17.
6. STRUCTURE
F. Gaudibert (34 km, 11 ° S., 38° E.) and two smaller craters on margin of Mare Nectaris.
Bulbous landforms are possible evidence for viscous extrusive volcanism 
but were probably created by extensive uplift . Dark-mantling material
surrounds teardrop crater along fracture in lower right crater. Orbiter 4 frame H 72.
Liouville DA (11 km, 46.5°, 52° W.), on border of Sinus Roris, possibly containing
volcanic extrusions but probably another uplift phe-
nomenon. Sinuous rille Rima Sharp I is at right. Orbiter 4 frame H-163.
H. Tamm (38 km, 4.5° S., 146.5° E., foreground) and Van den Bos (32 km), 225 km
southeast of Mendeleev-basin rim, filled by fissured, viscous-appearing material possibly
emplaced as impact melt of Mendeleev. View southward. Apollo 10 frame H-4966.
TABLE 6.1. Physical properties of major nearside basins containing large maria
[D, diameter (km); basin D's from table 4.1.
Average elevation:
Elevation of central mare inside obvious sloping margins, in km below 1,738-km datum .
Mascon mass:
excess mass in units of 1020 g .
Mascon load:
superisostatic load in center of mare, in units of 10 8 dyne/cm 2 ]
Imbrium (with
Frigoris) .
Imbrium (without
Frigoris).
Nor"t~ar*ic__
Tranquill itatis
Humbol dti anum
£rima1 Hi __________
600 (each)
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
!fei»m--V""
FIGURE 6.14. Numerous fractured-floor craters along west border of Oceanus Procellarum
between lat 28° N. and 57° N. R, crater Rontgen (126 km, 33° N., 91 ° W.), superposed on
Lorentz basin. Linear structure at bottom is radial to Imbrium basin. Orbiter 4 frame
FIGURE 6.15. Crater floor uplifted (arrows) from original position (dashes) lower than
surrounding terrain.
FIGURE 6.16. Straight rilles Hyginus (A) and Ariadaeus (fi). Rima Ariadaeus continues
westward in B as rille indicated by arrow in A. Largest crater in B is Silberschlag (13 km, 6°
N., 6.5° E.). Surface offsets and echelon patterns are obvious. Apollo 10 frames H-4648
(A) and H-4645 (B).
6. STRUCTURE
FIGURE 6.17. Vallis Alpes (Alpine Valley), 200 km long and oriented radially to Imbrium
basin. Knobby material is Alpes Formation (see chaps. 4, 10).
A.Regional setting, centered 47° N., 0°. Orbiter 4 frame H-115.
B. Detail. View southwestward. Orbiter 5 frame H 102.
FIGURE 6.18. Mare Tranquillitatis, faulted by Cauchy rille (Rima Cauchy, right) and
complex scarp (Rupes Cauchy, left), oriented radially to Imbrium basin (beyond top of
photograph). Fresh crater between the two structures is Cauchy (12 km, 10° N., 39° E.).
Part of crater Taruntius (compare fig. 6.13B) is visible in lower right corner. Apollo 11 frame
FIGURE 6.19. Grabens cutting Mare Fecunditatis, crater Goclenius (longest dimension, 72
km; 10° S., 45° E.), and mare fill of Goclenius. View southwestward. Apollo 8 frame
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
FIGURE 6.20. Triesnecker system of grabens east of crater Triesnecker (left center; 26 km,
4° N., 3.5° E.). Part of northwest branch of Rima Hyginus is at right, oriented northwest
radially to Imbrium basin. Apollo 10 frame H-4816.
FIGURE 6.21. Grabens along west margin of Oceanus Procellarum south of crater Hevelius
(106 km, 2° N., 67° W., cut by top edge of photograph). Circular mare below Hevelius fills
Grimaldi basin (compare fig. 4.4f/). Orbiter 4 frame M-161.
FIGURE 6.22. Diagrammatic cross section of half of Procellarum basin, showing interpreted
crustal thinning from 75 km outside basin to 25 km in basin center, caused by excavation and
mantle uplift; dashed line denotes preimpact position of mantle-crust interface (lunar Moho).
Ring radii are shown above lunar surface; basin rim is at 1,600 km. Dotted
lines denote additional excavation and crustal thinning by later basins; basin in Procellarum
center penetrates crust to mantle, but same-size basin in intermediate and outer Procellarum
troughs bottoms in crust. Vertical and horizontal dimensions and curvature to true scale.
Surface relief and relative relief of concentric rings and shelves are barely detectable.
FECUNDITATIS
N. TRANQUILLITATIS
. NECTARIS (TONGUE)
SERENITATISN%A
PUTREDINIS
HERTZSPRUNG
FIGURE 6.23.
Elevations of lunar maria compared with those of the terrae, most of which
define a sphere 1 , 738 km in radius about the center of gravity (Sjogren and Wollenhaupt,
1 976). Derived from laser altimetry and photogrammetry obtained during Apollo 1 5 and 1 6
missions . Smythii,
Crisium, Serenitatis, Imbrium (S. Imbrium), and Grimaldi vary in elevation, although all
have large mascons. Elevations of maria in Aitken, Tsiolkovskiy, and Van de Graaff
probably reflect elevations of crater floors; Aitken is on rim of South Pole- Aitken basin, and
van de Graaff well inside. Chaplygin, Gagarin, Heaviside, Hertzsprung, Keeler, Men-
deleev, and Pasteur are filled by terra plains, not maria. Polar plot relative to 1,738-km-
radius sphere about lunar center of gravity.
UOUBLUJO-J uassuep
(uiSBq lunuqiui) UOUBUJJO-J ojnB|/\j BJ-J
ueuqiuj AjJBg
UNO 31AJI1
OIHdVdOllVHIS
snisin oiHdvuoiiv«is->iood
FIGURE 7.1 (OVERLEAF). Diagrammatic lunar stratigraphic column illustrating relations among three classes of stratigraphic units (youngest at top). Three named basin materials are the denning
rock-stratigraphic units of the oldest time-stratigraphic units. Individual lunar rock-stratigraphic units (mare or crater materials; table 7.2) formed within very brief time intervals, but groups of
rock-stratigraphic units may cross time-stratigraphic boundaries.
7. RELATIVE AGES
Introduction ...................................................... 123
Stratigraphic nomenclature ........................................ 123
Superpositions ................................................... 125
Mare-crater relations .......................................... 125
Crater-crater relations .......................................... 127
Basin-crater relations .......................................... 127
Mapping conventions .......................................... 127
Crater dating .................................................... 129
General principles ............................................. 129
Size-frequency relations ........................................ 129
Morphology of large craters .................................... 129
Morphology of small craters, by Newell J. Trask .................. 131
DL method .................................................... 133
Summary ........................................................ 133
INTRODUCTION
The goals of both terrestrial and lunar stratigraphy are to inte-
grate geologic units into a stratigraphic column applicable over the
whole planet and to calibrate this column with absolute ages. The
first step in reconstructing the relative stratigraphy is the identifica-
tion of the material units of craters, basins, and maria (see chaps.
2-5); stratigraphic relations to neighboring units are generally rec-
ognized in the course of recognizing and defining a unit. The next
step is to relate as many units as possible to areally extensive units.
Units contacting one of these key stratigraphic horizons are dated
directly by geometric relations, and others are dated means of the
statistics and morphologies of superposed craters. In present prac-
tice, laterally extensive deposits of the Nectaris, Imbrium, and Ori-
entale basins divide the time-stratigraphic column into four major
sequences, from oldest to youngest: pre-Nectarian, Nectarian,
Lower Imbrian, and Upper Imbrian through Copernican 
Copernican
Eratosthenian
Procellarian
 . The first three of these sequences, which are older than
the visible mare materials, are also dominated internally by the
deposits of basins. The fourth (youngest) sequence consists of mare
and crater materials. This chapter explains the general methods of
stratigraphic analysis that are employed in the next six chapters
and on plates 6 through 11 to subdivide and calibrate the lunar
stratigraphic column.
STRATIGRAPHIC
NOMENCLATURE
The task of reconstructing the lunar stratigraphic column has
benefited from application of the threefold code of stratigraphic
nomenclature developed in North America for terrestrial geology
 . This
code is just as applicable to the Moon as to the Earth .
Complete understanding of the stratigraphic nomenclature
used in this volume requires some familiarity with the three major
types of stratigraphic units recognized by the code (fig. 7.1). Rock-
stratigraphic (rock) units are the observed, physical units that can
be identified and mapped objectively. Ideally, they are defined by
physical properties intrinsic to their emplacement process and are
described additionally by other reproducibly observable properties.
The basic rock-stratigraphic unit is the formation; formations can be
combined into groups and divided into members. Most of the forego-
ing discussions in this volume have concerned descriptions and
interpretations of rock-stratigraphic units.
Time-stratigraphic (time-rock) units include all the rock-strat-
igraphic units emplaced on a planet within a given time interval. The
basic time-stratigraphic unit is the system, which can be divided into
series (and finer subdivisions in terrestrial geology). Time-strat-
igraphic units are defined on the basis of specific rock-stratigraphic
units. Time-stratigraphic units do not overlap, and the upper bound-
ary of one unit is the lower boundary of the next.
The time intervals corresponding to the time-stratigraphic units
are the third type of unit. They are defined by the corresponding time-
stratigraphic units and are not physical units. Periods correspond to
systems, and epochs to series.
Lunar time-stratigraphic nomenclature has changed somewhat
since the concept of lunar stratigraphy was introduced by Shoemaker
and Hackman . The first two maps published by the U.S. Geo-
logical Survey at a scale of 1:1,000,000 used the original scheme, and the remaining 42 maps of this
series used modified versions (fig. 7.2A; table 7.1). Subsequent map-
ping, which covers the Moon at a 1:5,000,000 scale (fig. 7.2B), has
incorporated additional refinements (table 7.1).
The purpose of distinguishing rock-stratigraphic and time-strat-
igraphic units is illustrated by changes in concept and definition of
the Imbrian System (Imbriarc refers to the system, and Imbriwm to
the basin). Initially, Shoemaker and Hackman 
defined the Imbrian System as equivalent to the "immense sheet" of
material around Mare Imbrium now given such rock-stratigraphic
names as the Fra Mauro Formation (table 4.3). They named the mare
material the "Procellarian System", after the largest expanse of mare
material, Oceanus Procellarum. The concept of the Imbrian Period
was quickly extended to cover a longer timespan than that necessary
to emplace the sheet .
The crater Archimedes, for example, was recognized as younger than
the Imbrium basin but older than the Procellarian System (fig. 1.6).
After Shoemaker and Hackman's report was prepared but
before it was formally published, the Imbrian System was divided
into the Apenninian Series, equated with the "regional material of
the Imbrian System" (the sheet), and the younger Archimedian
Series, equated with the deposits of Archimedes and other craters of
similar stratigraphic position .
One problem with these classifications was that they equated
time-stratigraphic and rock-stratigraphic units. The definition of the
Procellarian System by Shoemaker and Hackman was founded
on the belief, based on telescopic crater counts and consistent strat-
igraphic relations, that the mare materials were formed within a
short time interval . However, continued
crater counts and strat-
igraphic observations showed that they vary substantially in age. It is now clear
that sections of mare basalt cross time-stratigraphic boundaries;
mare and crater materials interfinger well into the Eratosthenian
System . This extraterrestrial example vividly illustrates the
rationale behind the threefold stratigraphic code, which sprang from
discoveries that many terrestrial lithologic units are time-trans-
gressive. The rapid alternation of volcanic and impact deposits could
-.'XL-. - ' -' **/ £ '
~^3^*\'--*fc* '^^
FIGURE 7.2. Index maps of lunar geologic mapping.
A. Nearside, showing coverage by 1:1,000,000-scale series. Number above quadrangle name refers to
base chart (LAC series) by the U.S. Air Forces Aeronautical Chart and Information Center
(ACIC). I-number refers to published map in U.S. Geological Survey Miscellaneous Investigations
B. Nearside and farside coverage by geologic maps at 1:5,000,000 scale: 1 703, Wilhelms and
McCauley ; 1-948, Wilhelms and El-Baz ; 1-1034,
Scott and others ; 1-1047, Stuart-Alexander ; 1-1062, Lucchitta ; I-l 162,
Wilhelms and others .
7. RELATIVE AGES
TABLE 7.2. Selected stratigraphic units in southern Mare Imbrium and part of north-
ern Oceanus Procellarum
[Stated superpositional relations refer to units in actual contact. After Wilhelms ]
Materials in area
superposed
Aristarchus-
Pytheas-----
Copernicus--
Diophantus--
Mare unit 6-
Mare unit 5-
Mare unit 4
Timocharis -
Eratosthenes-
Lambert------
Mare unit 3
Mare unit 2
Mare unit 1
Aristarchus
Prinz---------
Imbrium basin-
Very fresh secondary craters None-----do Aristarchus
Fresh ejecta and secondary craters Kepler -
Large clusters of secondary craters
Pytheas along major rays.
Fresh ejecta, small fresh secondary
Copernicus-
craters; no rays.
Flow-textured lavas (DL=140-195 m) Diophantus
Flow-textured^ lavas (DL=170-215 m) Mare unit 6-
Fresh ejecta 'and secondary craters; no
Mare unit 5rays.
Fresh ejecta and secondary craters Mare unit 5-
Flow-textured lavas (D, =210-245 m) Euler -
Fresh ejecta and secondary craters Mare unit 4-
Extensive, subdued secondary craters Timocharis
Slightly subdued ejecta and secondary
Mare unit 4craters.
Smooth lavas (DL^255 m) Mare unit 4-
Asymmetric ejecta and secondary craters Mare unit 3-
Smooth lavas (DL=240-385 m) Krieger
Smooth lavas (DL=270-385 m) Mare unit 2-
Dark-mantling material (DMM) Mare unit 1-
Subdued ejecta and secondary craters DMM ------
Isolated islands- Prinz------
Copernicus.
Diophantus.
Mare unit 6.
Mare unit 5.
Mare unit 4.
Mare unit 4.
Timocharis.
Eratosthenes.
Mare unit 3.
Mare unit 2.
Mare unit 2.
Mare unit 1.
Imbrium basin.
None of above.
not have been expressed by Shoemaker and Hackman's nomenclature
without misuse of the time-stratigraphic concept .
One possible modification would have been to redefine the Pro-
cellarian System to include crater deposits that interfinger with mare
materials. The course that was taken, at a meeting of lunar stra-
tigraphers held in Flagstaff, Ariz., in November 1963, was to drop the
name "Procellarian System" and to designate mare materials by the
rock-stratigraphic name "Procellarum Group" . The upper boundary of the time-
stratigraphic Imbrian System was to be defined by some part of the
rock-stratigraphic Procellarum Group. Other rock-stratigraphic
names were to be devised for Eratosthenian and Copernican mare
materials when they were discovered. The contemporaneous crater
materials were mapped as material units assigned to the appropriate
system or series. Later, even the name "Procellarum Group" was
dropped in favor of the informal rock-stratigraphic or lunar-material
name "mare material," because "Procellarum Group" retained a time-
stratigraphic connotation (Wilhelms, 197Gb). 7-1
The 1963 and 1970 stratigraphic schemes were used throughout
most of the l:l,000,000-scale mapping program (table 7.1). The
Imbrian System included all materials from the base of the Fra
Mauro Formation stratigraphically up to unspecified mare units
between the premare crater Archimedes and the postmare crater
Eratosthenes . Thus, the Imbrian
System included all basin, crater, mare, and other materials
emplaced from the time the Imbrium basin formed until the time its
flooding was mostly complete. The amount of fill excluded from the
Imbrian System was not specified in this working definition.
Chapters 10 and 11 refine the definition of the Imbrian System
and define two series, Lower and Upper Imbrian, separated by the
Orientale-basin materials. An earlier major change in the strat-
igraphic scheme divided the pre-Imbrian of Shoemaker and
Hackman into the pre-Nectarian and Nectarian Systems
 . Although the defi-
nition of the Imbrian-Eratosthenian and Eratosthenian-Copernican
boundaries remains imprecise, no further serious obstacles have
appeared in the lunar stratigraphic nomenclatural scheme.
7-1The equation of the Imbrian System or the Apenninian Series with rocks interpreted as Imbrium ejecta
would have been less of a practical problem because the ejecta has not proved to be time-transgressive, as are the
mare materials. However, assumptions about the time significance of rock units so commonly prove to be erroneous
in terrestrial and planetary geology that the threefold code is best adhered to from the beginning of the study of any
new planet .
Several other formal rock-stratigraphic units were introduced during the mid-1960's as antidotes to the
potential confusion of time and rock units and as means of clarifying local stratigraphic relations .
Some of these names are still used, but present practice emphasizes Moon-wide similarities of agiven class of unit by
use of such informal names as "mare materials" and "crater materials." Such units may be assigned to time-
stratigraphic units or subdivided by physical properties as required. Formal names are now normally given only (1)
to units that are difficult to describe simply and that form important regional deposits, such as the Hevelius or Alpes
Formations; or (2) to separate patches of similar-appearing deposits that are being distinguished for some reason,
such as the Apennine Bench and Cayley Formations. Whitford-Stark and Head , however, resuggested the
practice of formally naming mare units.
SUPERPOSITIONS
Mare-crater relations
Superpositions are recognized on photographs by topographic
contrasts that are not explicable by facies changes within one unit.
Rugged landforms may be muted by smoother blankets, and smooth
topography may be crosscut by rugged texture. Many crater deposits
and mare flow units illustrate such relations. Some superpositional
relations are obvious (fig. 7.3); others are established by subtle flood-
ing of secondary craters by thin mare flows (fig. 7.4). The difference
between a slightly flooded secondary crater and an unmodified sec-
ondary superposed on other lavas may be detectable only on the best
photographs.
Secondary craters greatly extend the area over which the pri-
mary crater can be relatively dated. Secondaries along conspicuous
rays serve best for long-distance correlations because the rays visible
on favorably illuminated and processed photographs point out the
source (fig. 7.4). For example, the clustered craters at the Ranger 7
impact site were tentatively identified as secondary to both Coper-
nicus and Tycho despite their 600- and 1,000-km distances, respec-
tively, from those primary craters .
Tycho, Copernicus, Kepler, and other young craters have been identi-
fied as the sources of projectiles that reached every potential Apollo
landing site mapped in the equatorial belt, hundreds or even thou-
sands of kilometers from the source craters . In principle, secondary craters can also be traced to nonrayed
craters by analysis of the flight directions of the ejecta projectiles:
Large secondary craters generally occur in a cluster uprange toward
the primary, and herringbone patterns, radial grooves and ridges,
and smooth deposits occur downrange (figs. 3.4, 3.6-3.8, 7.4). Strat-
igraphic relations both at the primary crater and at the outlying
clusters can thus be used to date units relative to this dispersed
stratigraphic datum.
FIGURE 7.3. Crater Plato (101 km, 52° N., 9° W.X between Mare Imbrium (bottom) and
Mare Frigoris (top). Mare materials fill Plato and truncate its south rim deposits (arrows),
thus are younger than Plato. Fully developed rim deposits and secondary craters of Plato are
preserved where superposed on terra (part of Monies Alpes); thus, Plato is younger than
Monies Alpes. Secondary craters of Plato are superposed on secondary craters of Indum
crater (arrow). Or biter 4 frame H 127.
SM^^fe!-Slitef^':: :r-^^ ^f'frn'- ,v G
Ifc, H-A^iis* iS-
FIGURE 7.4. Part of Mare Imbrium, including crater Euler (E; 28 km, 23° N., 29° W.)
and inundated massifs of Imbrium basin (bottom, fig. 7.4A). White arrows indicate same
scene in both frames; left-hand arrow points to crater Aristarchus, 650 km to west, and lower
arrow to Copernicus, centered 450 km to south-southeast. Alignment of secondary-crater
groups indicates these primary craters as sources of the excavating projectiles.
A. Ejecta and secondary craters of Euler, subtly flooded by mare material (black-and-white
arrowheads). Apollo 17 frame M-2291.
B. Aristarchus secondaries superposed on Copernicus secondaries . This region is favored both by photographs of the
necessary quality and by relatively extensive mare flows that can be
used to correlate units over hundreds of kilometers . More commonly, mare materials mappable as single
flow units extend only a few tens of kilometers . Small units are generally dated by methods based on small
superposed craters, as described below in the section entitled "Crater
Crater-crater relations
Superpositions among crater materials establish local strat-
igraphic sequences in all parts of the Moon. How near craters must be
to allow relative dating depends on the freshness of their deposits and
secondary craters. Rayed and other fresh craters can be dated relative
to other craters as they can to mare units, that is, if the secondary
craters happen to contact the other crater. Several pairs of rayed and
nonrayed craters listed in table 7.2 are relatively dated by the chance
impacts of younger secondaries upon older. Degraded craters lacking
obvious secondaries can be relatively dated if one rim happens to cut
out part of another, the so-called "cookie cutter" obliteration.
Figure 3.26 illustrates the more common case between these
extremes, in which the radial ejecta of one crater (Werner) is super-
posed on an older crater lacking ejecta texture (Aliacensis). The
Aliacensis rim is swamped within about one Werner radius from the
Werner rim and is visibly marked to about one additional radius. If
the radial textures of Werner were not visible, the degradation of the
Aliacensis rim could nevertheless be detected one radius, but not two
radii, from the Werner rim. These relations provide two guidelines
used during preparation of the paleogeologic maps in this volume
(pis. 6 11): (1) Subdual of a crater's rim within one radius of another
rim indicates that the first crater is the older, and (2) ages are
determinable at greater distances where textural evidence is avail-
able. Each case, however, is individual.
Basin-crater relations
Similar observations help date the extensive deposits of ringed
basins relative to one another and to other units. Massif-lined rings of
some basins truncate those of other basins (fig. 1.7), and the continu-
ous deposits of younger basins swamp older basins and craters (fig.
7.5). Secondary-impact craters of basins are so common and extensive
on the Moon that units more than 1,000 km from the basin rim can
potentially be related by superpositions . The source of morphologic features distant from basins is even
easier to determine than is the source of crater secondaries because
more outer lineaments of basins are radial. Many superpositions are
detectable on the basis of radial structure even in highly degraded
terranes. The possibility that, around old basins, the linear or
chainlike pattern of basin secondaries may be indistinguishable from
the radial-flow lineations does not matter in establishing superposi-
tional relations.
Near a basin rim, craters younger than a basin appear much
fresher, of course, than those older. Farther from the rim, this dif-
ference becomes increasingly less apparent as prebasin craters are
increasingly less affected by the basin deposits. Morphologic dif-
ferences between buried and superposed craters caused by basin
ejecta are generally detectable even around old basins out to one
basin radius from the rim (the average range of the continuous ejecta)
and commonly out to one diameter (the average range of abundant
secondary craters). Basin deposits, however, are lobate and asym-
metric, and so each case must be considered individually. Southeast of
Orientale, subtle grooves and ridges radial to that basin can be used
to distinguish pre- from post-Orientale units beyond 1,300 km from
the Orientale rim . Distant craters are
easily datable if fortuitously struck by large projectiles (fig. 7.6).
Orientale ejecta in "rays" may have excavated secondary craters as far
away as the central and southeastern terra . On the other hand, dating of some
craters only a few hundred kilometers from the rim may be ambigu-
ous. For example, the swale-and-hummock topography of the zone
near the crater Criiger could be interpreted either as superposed but
poorly developed Orientale-secondary craters or as well developed
Orientale secondaries blanketed by Criiger ejecta (fig. 7.8). The
weaker primary textures around older basins cause even more ambi-
guities (fig. 7.9). Some older craters may be scored or cratered in one
sector but unaffected in another (figs. 7.6, 7.9). Therefore, determina-
tion of superpositional relations depends on knowledge of the whole
geologic setting of the units in question.
Mapping conventions
Assignment of circumbasin materials to time-stratigraphic units
older than, contemporaneous with, or younger than a given basin
depends partly on interpretations of the topography, as is again well
illustrated by the history of changes in mapping convention around
the Imbrium basin.
During most geologic mapping at 1:1,000,000 scale, the Imbrium
sculpture was thought to originate by impact-induced faulting (see
chap. 6). Mappers assigned units clearly cut by the sculpture to the
pre-Imbrian, and units superposed on the grooves to the Imbrian or
younger systems (fig. 7.7). The grooved terrain was mapped as
Imbrian where the grooves and adjacent swales were interpreted as
intrinsic to the Fra Mauro Formation and thus contemporaneous
with Imbrium is here mapped as Imbrium-related to
emphasize the age of the surficial morphology (pis. 3, 8). Lunar
Orbiter photographs have revealed similar radially lineate terrane
over a vast area (see chap. 10). Lunar Orbiter and Apollo photographs,
coupled with the Apollo 16 results, have also led to changed age
assignments for such features as "volcanic domes," reinterpreted as
parts of the Imbrium-secondary regime and thus lowermost Imbrian
instead of Imbrian or younger (see chap. 10).
FIGURE 7.5. Terrain southeast of Imbrium basin, lying just beyond lower right corner of
photograph. Circular mare in top half of photograph is Mare Vaporum, about 220 km
across. Linear- and knob-textured terrae are parts of Imbrium-basm ejecta. Circularity of
mare suggests that it fills a Vaporum basin or crater, which was deeply buried by Imbrium
ejecta before mare flooding. Several small craters (arrows) were superposed on Imbrium
material before mare flooding. Graben near left-hand crater (above and parallel to arrow) is
also post-Imbnum and premare (graben is part of set possibly not related to basins; see chap.
6). Rima Hyginus is in background (H). View southerly. Apollo 17 frame M 1674.
a **«..¥»«
FIGURE 7.6. Terrain southeast of Orientale basin, heavily affected by its ejecta. Large circular
crater is Schickard (227 km, 44° S., 55° W.), whose rim is scored by linear ejecta of Orientale
secondaries (s). Barrage of secondaries with linear or braided ejecta destroyed part of rim of
crater Schiller C (SC; 49 km) but left other rim segments untouched; Schiller C is 1,475 km from
Orientale center and 1,000 km from rim (Monies Cordillera). Orbiter 4 frame H-160.
7. RELATIVE AGES
In lunar geologic mapping, the age of an ejecta unit applies to the
time it was emplaced, which is not necessarily the same as the isotopic
ages of the contained materials. 72 The materials contained in
Imbrium-secondary ejecta may consist partly of projectile material
from the Imbrium basin, they may be identical to materials of the
impacted and redistributed pre-Imbrian terrane, or they may contain
intimate mixtures of the primary and redistributed "local" material.
As illustrated by the Apollo 16 materials, the provenance of the
constituent materials is commonly difficult to determine either pho-
togeologically or petrographically (see chaps. 2, 9, 10). Mapping of
large tracts as related to Imbrium (pi. 8) stresses the interpreted
basin age and origin of the morphology over the age and provenance of
the contained materials. Similar conventions are used here for all
basin peripheries to show the full extent of basin-related deposits
(pis. 3, 6-8,12).
CRATER DATING
General principles
This account has shown how the Moon's extensive datum hori-
zons, as well as less extensive strata, can potentially be ranked
stratigraphically by detection of superpositional relations among
their depositional features. These conceptually simple methods must
be supplemented on much of the lunar surface by chronologic inter-
pretations of small craters superposed on other units. Craters are
used to correlate isolated units in the same way as fossils are used on
the Earth . Craters are thus (1) strat-
igraphic units in their own right and (2) time counters for other units,
including other, larger crater units.
Which of these stratigraphic roles a given crater plays depends
on the purpose of the investigation and on the size of the crater
relative to the steady-state size for the cratered surface. The continu-
ous bombardment of cosmic projectiles creates craters of all sizes,
from micropits to basins. Within any given time interval, far more
small than large excavations are produced. A surface becomes satu-
rated with the smallest craters, so that new impacts destroy as many
such craters as they add. Craters of these sizes are thus in a steady-
state or equilibrium condition. The steady-state sizes for a surface of a
given age are limited by a computable crater diameter, conventionally
designated Cs . Craters smaller than Cs are in all states of aging, from the very
fresh to the totally flattened. Craters larger than Cs range from very
fresh to only partly destroyed. Cs increases over time . The second set of
methods is based on erosional morphology created mostly by small
craters acting in the steady state. The visible craters they have
degraded are assumed to have been morphologically similar when
7 2On all but the most recent geologic maps , massif materials were exempted from
the practice of assigning ages according to time of emplacement. Massifs were assigned the age of the component
prebasin rock to stress the interpretation that they are structural uplifts of relatively cohesive materials not
severely broken up and redistributed by the impact. For example, Imbrium massifs were mapped as pre-Imbrian
massif material, and Nectarian basin massifs and rugged material as Nectarian or pre-Nectarian . In this volume, massifs are assigned the age of the basin of which they
are parts.
FIGURE 7.7. Pre- and post-Imbnum craters, distinguishable over extensive area. Pre-
Imbrian age of Flammarion (F; 75 km), Ptolemaeus (Pt; 153 km), and Alphonsus (Al; 1 19
km) is demonstrated by superposition of linear "Imbrium sculpture" (Gilbert, 1893); pre-
Imbrian age of Purbach (Pu; 118 km), Regiomontanus (R; 124 km), and La Caille (L; 68
km) is demonstrated by superposition of more nearly circular secondary craters. Plains filling
the craters also postdate sculpture and secondary craters, possibly by a very short time.
Regiomontanus is 1,400 km from Imbrium rim (Monies Apenninus) and 2,100 km from
center. Craters Herschel (H; 41 km), Arzachel (Ar; 97 km), Thebit (T; 57 km), and Werner
(W; 70 km) lack Imbrium effects and thus are post-Imbrium (Imbrian and Eratosthenian).
Arrows indicate possible secondary craters of Orientale basin, centered 2,600 km in
direction of arrow shafts (south of west). Mosting (M; 25 km, 0.5° S., 6° W.) and the craters
superposed on rim of Thebit (Thebit A and Thebit L) are Copernican. Orbiter 4 frame
formed, within a given size range. Surfaces are assumed to have been
worn down uniformly over the whole Moon in proportion to their time
of exposure. The small eroding impacts were both primary and sec-
ondary; the secondaries formed in proportion to the number of pri-
maries . This gradual erosion by small
impacts seldom creates novel landforms but quantitatively alters the
original crater morphology. Modifications that, in contrast, took place
rapidly or episodically can be recognized by identifying superposed
ejecta blankets, mare filling, or such anomalies as tectonically
uplifted floors. In practice, the morphologically based methods are
divided into those applicable to craters either larger or smaller than
about 3 km in diameter.
Size-frequency relations
The use of statistical studies of craters as a dating tool is based on
the assumption that primary impacts crater a surface in proportion to
its time of exposure. The analyst must, therefore, (1) count only
craters larger than Cs ; (2) distinguish primary, secondary, and endo-
genic craters; and (3) eliminate buried craters from the counts . For most strat-
igraphic purposes, craters should be counted on individual geologic
units and not over whole "provinces." Where the geology is too com-
plex or the data inadequate to attain this ideal, as is commonly the
case , other methods must be applied. Thus,
stratigraphic analysis should accompany any use of craters in deter-
mining ages.
Figure 7.10 summarizes the properties of size-frequency curves
likely to be encountered in lunar work. The inverse relation between
the masses and frequencies of impacting primary bodies produces
inverse size-frequency relations of craters (fig. 7.10A). Continued
bombardment by the same population of bodies moves the production
curves higher on the graph, but the slopes remain the same (fig.
7.WB). The slope of the steady-state distribution also remains the
same, always shallower than the production curves (fig. 7.10.B).
"Rollovers" of the end of a curve representing small diameters result
either from inability to observe small craters or from mutual oblitera-
tion of craters in and near the steady state (fig. 7.10C). Subsequent
burial removes the smaller members of a crater population and thus
truncates the production curve (fig. 7.10D); this truncation is the-
oretically abrupt but, in fact, may resemble the effects illustrated in
figure 7.1QD. Resumed cratering may have the same production curve
as did preburial cratering, but the offset in the curve remains visible
because craters of the sizes that were buried remain relatively
depleted (fig. 7. WE). Finally, craters may not all have the same pro-
duction function (figs. 7.10F, G); cumulative plots of craters larger
than a few kilometers across are commonly observed to slope at 1.8
 , but bends appear at
smaller diameters. Plots of secondary craters differ considerably in
slope from those of primaries , and the addition of substantial numbers of second-
aries to crater populations may cause the bends observed in many
crater-frequency curves below diameters of about 2 km (fig. 7.10G).
Additional aspects of and problems with these methods are dis-
cussed in later chapters of this volume may have been the first to show that older lunar craters are
systematically shallower than younger craters of the same size.
Crater classifications have been developed independently on this
basis .
The morphologic system most used in the U.S. Geological Sur-
vey's lunar mapping program was based less on overall morphology
than on the morphologies of parts of craters (fig. 7.11). Crater-subunit
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
TABLE 7.3. Stratigraphic criteria for lunar time-stratigraphic units
[Cs , limitiny diameter of the steady state; all values approximate, estimated from the data of Boyce and Johnson and Moore and others , from rollovers in the
curves in fiyure 7.16, and from the approximate formula DL=1.7CS .
D|_, diameter of largest crater theoretically eroded to 1° interior slopes (see text); n/a, not applicable because method is invalid for the stated system or series (see chap. ID).
Subunits: Approximate diameters of craters datable by evaluation of their material-subunit morphologies.
Crater frequencies (cumulative); see chapters 8 through 13 for the basis of the stated values; n/a, not applicable because craters of this size are not useful for age determina-
tions on the system or series.
Stratigraphic superpositions:
X, Stratigraphic relations determinable; radii, distance from the rim crest within which the relations are generally detenninable; n/a, not applic-
able because no units are known.
Stated values of Cs , D|_, and crater frequencies are the ranges for the entire system or series; they overlap for adjacent systems or series because of uncertainties, and depend
partly on the substrate (in parentheses)]
System or series
Eratosthenian System- -
Upper Imbrian Series-
Lower Imbrian Series-
Pre-Nectarian system
<100 (mare)
80-30D (mare)
32D-860 (basin)
8DD-4.000? (basin)
>4,ODD? (basin)
<165 (mare),
£?OD (crater)
145-250 (mare)
23D-550 (mare)
Crater frequency
(number per km2 )
<7.5xlO'4 (mare),
<1.0xlD~ 3 (crater)
7.5X10" 1* to
v.2.5xl(T 3 (mare)
^ 2.5xlO~ 3 (mare) to
-X-2.2X1D- 2
-x.2.2-4.8xlD' 2 (basin)
1.8-3. 3xl , was the initial
means for extending the Imbrium-region stratigraphy to the rest of
the Moon . Correlations are best made by
comparing the morphologies of isolated craters with those of craters
previously dated relative to one of the regional datum planes. The
methods work best for primary-impact craters (for which they were
intended) and less securely for secondaries, which vary greatly in
morphology around a given source and do not initially resemble
primary craters, except where situated far from the source.
Pohn and Offield first divided craters into three size
classes based on the planimetric shapes of the rims of fresh craters of
each class: More than 45 km diameter, round with distinct rim cren-
ulations; 20 to 45 km, polygonal; 8 to 20 km, round (fig. 7.11; Mutch,
fy^$.KW .;
Ift.f^^l^^^,-^^;
» ''^\^^v : ^^wl^j^t'^"1r
FIGURE 7.8. Large mare-filled crater Criiger (46 km, 17 S., 67 W.), 370 km from Monies Cordillera. Dunelike topography to southwest in large crater Darwin is decelerated surface-flow ejecta
of Orientale (see chap. 4), but Stratigraphic relation of other hummocky ejecta to Criiger is unclear. Orbiter 4 frame H 168.
7. RELATIVE AGES
1970, p. 272). The first two classes are complex; the third, simple.
Because of these differences in the initial morphologies, a slightly
different morphologic continuum is definable for each size class.
Craters from 1 to 8 km in diameter can also be ranked by morphologic
criteria . Craters in each class are
ranked in order of age by an arbitrary decimal scale, 0.0 (oldest) to 7.0
(youngest). The seven criteria for estimating age illustrated in figure
7.11 still appear to be valid, except that interior radial channels do not
occur even in many old craters.
This classification was widely used and generally successful. The
sequence of eight ringed basins and the relative ages of several mare
provinces derived by Offield and Pohn agree with those given in
this volume. Plains units were found to be only slightly older than old
mare units a correct result that was misinterpreted on some geo-
logic maps to mean that a terra type of volcanic plains is coeval with
the mare type . Offield and Pohn 
believed the light plains to be volcanic, but their age ranks showed the
plains to be consistent with Orientale and Imbrium provenances.
They also stated that "Numerous craters not obviously related to the
Orientale and Imbrium basins are determined to be of the same age
as the basins and are tentatively identified as basin secondaries"
 an important result subsequently
extended to craters that "look" older and younger than the basins
 , lineate
radially to Nectaris basin; basin rim (Rupes Altai, RA) is only 100 km northeast.
Unlabeled west rim of Sacrobosco is less conspicuously affected by Nectaris material. Most
smaller craters are probably secondaries of Imbrium and Nectaris basins. Orbiter 4 frame
Morphology of small craters
By Newell J. Trask 
To fill the need for stratigraphic correlations of units of interest to
early Apollo landings, Trask devised a system based on
the morphology of small craters (less than 3 km diam). These ubiq-
uitous features were and remain necessary tools for dating mare
units because of the uneven distribution of stratigraphically discrete
and extensive mare flows or crater deposits at closeup scales. The
craters on the mare surfaces range in morphology from sharp to
indistinct. The sharpest craters have well-defined rim crests and
bright, blocky ejecta blankets. Less sharp craters have rounded rim
crests, little in the way of an ejecta blanket, and few surrounding
blocks. The most indistinct craters are very shallow depressions and
lack a well-defined rim crest. Figure 7.12 shows examples of this
continuum of crater types for various crater diameters. Where craters
of the same approximate size are superposed, the sharper are super-
posed on the less distinct, indicating that the sharper craters are the
younger. These observations suggest that most new craters are sharp
and distinct and become progressively more subdued and indistinct
over time; in other words, craters in the lower frames of figure 7.12
once looked like those in the upper frames. The sharpest craters (top,
fig. 7.12) have all the characteristics of impact craters, including rays
and ray loops. Thus, nearly all craters in the 0.05- to 3-km diameter
range were probably formed by impacts. Older surfaces should, there-
fore, have more craters than younger surfaces and should also have
more older-appearing craters than younger surfaces. Such a relation
between the number of craters on the surface and the number of old-
appearing, subdued craters is, in fact, observed.
Observation of these relations on the entire suite of Lunar
Orbiter photographs led Trask to the following working
hypotheses. (1) When first formed, craters appear sharp and fresh. (2)
All craters undergo modification to less sharp and more subdued
forms by erosion of the rim crest and infilling of the floors. (3) Smaller
craters disappear sooner than larger ones. (4) There exists for any
surface a critical crater diameter (Csl, Cs2, Cs3, fig. 7.10B), which
increases over time for a given surface; craters smaller than Cs that
are as old as the surface have had time to be completely destroyed,
whereas those larger have not.
These hypotheses, in conjunction with the assumption that the
rate of crater degradation is approximately the same everywhere on
the maria, formed the basis for assigning geologic ages to craters in
geologic mapping of potential Apollo landing sites .
By concentrating on the oldest craters, surfaces could also be dated.
Figures 7.12 and 7.13 illustrate this system of assigning ages. The
horizontal lines in both figures represent equal points in time, or
isochrons. Accordingly, a gentle depression 50 m in diameter, for
example, is of the same age as a 1-km-diameter crater that is only
moderately subdued; and a 50-m-diameter moderately subdued
crater is of the same age (Copernican) as a 1-km-diameter crater with
well developed rays. The degree of crater degradation implied by this
assumed equivalence seems reasonable in the light of theoretical
studies on the extent and mechanism of crater subdual by the impact
of small particles . The number, spacing, and names
of the time intervals on the vertical axes of figures 7.12 and 7.13 were
chosen to be consistent with the stratigraphic scheme used in
regional mapping. In that scheme, the base of the Imbrian System is
defined by the Fra Mauro Formation, upon which gentle depressions
as much as 1 km in diameter are superposed; therefore, 1-km-diame-
ter gentle depressions are placed at the base of the Imbrian System in
the scheme of figures 7.12 and 7.13. Similarly, the dividing line
between the Eratosthenian and Copernican Systems generally is
placed between craters with bright halos and craters without bright
halos in the diameter range 5 to 10 km in both small- and large-scale
mapping, although individual cases may depart from this rule. The
six numbered subdivisions of the Copernican System were chosen
solely for convenience in the detailed site mapping and are not used at
regional scales. The approach and assumptions are similar to those
applied in the system for determining relative ages of craters larger
than 8 km in diameter that was described above.
Trask examined high-resolution Lunar Orbiter 1, 2,
3, and 5 photographs of parts of the maria to determine whether
systematic differences exist in the relative ages of the oldest super-
posed craters as determined by this scheme. The isochrons labeled
"Eratosthenian mare" and "Imbrian mare" in figure 7.13 refer to two
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
mare surfaces with different crater populations and different appar-
ent relative ages. Craters 700 m in diameter on the Imbrian mare
range in morphology from indistinct gentle depressions, barely map-
pable as craters, to fresh excavations; craters of the same size on the
Eratosthenian mare range from strongly subdued but still quite
distinct to fresh. Thus, craters of the same size may be older on the
Imbrian than on the Eratosthenian mare, as expected (fig. 7.14). The
Apollo 12 landing site (fig. 7.14B) falls near the Eratosthenian-
Imbrian boundary in this system. Still younger mare surfaces not
visited have gentle, indistinct depressions no smaller than 300 m in
diameter (fig. 7.14A). The most highly degraded craters 10 m in
diameter on Copernican 6 surfaces would be bright and blocky. In
summary, a search for the largest craters barely visible on a surface
can be used to date surfaces.
A difficulty with this system and all others based on morphology
is the likelihood that craters of different origins may have different
initial morphologies . Secondary-impact craters near
their sources will begin their existence with the subdued rim crests
and shallow depths characteristic of older primary craters of their
size. Attempts were made in mapping of the Apollo landing sites to
distinguish secondary craters by their clustering, alignment, and
elongation; this system was applied to the secondaries cautiously and
with allowance for the probable initial differences.
Another difficulty is that the physical characteristics of the mate-
rials in which craters form influence their sizes and morphologies.
Craters in such low-cohesion materials as regolith, pyroclastic glass,
and fragmental terra breccia will appear more subdued even when
first formed than will craters in basaltic bedrock (see chaps. 12, 13;
CRATER DIAMETER, IN METERS
CRATER DIAMETER (D), IN KILOMETERS
FIGURE 7.10. Idealized cumulative crater-frequency curves representing different geologic
and observational conditions.
A. Crater-production functions with indicated slopes.
B. Distributions of three different ages but same production function. Limiting diameters of
steady state for all three ages (Cs] , Cs2 , C53 ) define a curve sloping more gently than
production functions; if production slope is 3, slope of steady-state distribution is 2
 .
C. Gradual rollover for frequencies of small craters, caused either by (1) inability to observe
small craters with available photographic resolution or by (2) removal of small craters by
mutual interactions of primary- and secondary-crater populations.
D. Production function (slope, 2), truncated by burial of smallest and shallowest craters.
Rollover is gradual because diameter cutoff is not precise under natural conditions.
E. Frequency of D (dashed), altered by renewed cratenng.
F. Idealized plots of secondary craters (steeper slope, about 3.6) and primary craters
(slope, about 2). After Shoemaker .
G. "Calibration distribution" of Neukum and others , showing different slopes in
three diameter ranges. Steep slope in middle regime probably results from mixtures of
secondaries and primaries, as in F.
7. RELATIVE AGES
Lucchitta and Sanchez, 1975). Moreover, craters formed in low-cohe-
sion material degrade more quickly than those in cohesive bedrock.
These effects are complex in craters formed in interlayered rock
types, such as regolith and basalt .
Other postformational modifications, such as downslope movement
dependent on angle of slope, will also cause variations in mor-
phologies and frequencies among contemporaneous craters of the
same size . Despite the need to consider so many
variables, the general validity of this dating system in any one area is
supported by the superpositions of craters assigned young ages on
craters assigned older ages, and by the densities of small superposed
D L method
A quantitative refinement of the above model has been exten-
sively applied by the U.S. Geological Survey in dating geologic units
too small to be dated reliably by crater counts . Craters 200
to 2,000 m in diameter are generally examined. The method is based
on a theoretical model of crater erosion operating in the steady state
 . As in the method of
Trask described above, the largest crater almost destroyed on a sur-
face is sought. However, because a search will not necessarily disclose
that crater, the crater's size is calculated. On a given surface, craters
somewhat larger than Cs will be less nearly obliterated than the
craters of diameter Cs . The hypothetical larger craters selected are
those whose walls slope at 1°; their diameters are DL (in meters). As a
rule of thumb, DL = 1.7CS .
Two related techniques are used to determine DL values. The
technique originally devised first
determined the largest crater whose slope is eroded to the Sun-
illumination angle of the photograph being examined. In practice,
Polygonality
Satellitic
Class I (>45 km)
Class II (20-45 km)
Class III (1-20 km)
FIGURE 7.11. Changes in diagnostic crater features with age .
Numbers 0 through 7 denote seven morphologic stages corresponding to relative ages, from
oldest to youngest. Width of symbol indicates relative degree of development of each feature at
each stage.
this crater (diameter, Ds) is bracketed by finding the largest
unshadowed crater and the smallest diameters at which all craters
are clearly shadowed. Ds is then converted mathematically to DL (DL
is thus a theoretical diameter). In the second technique , which can be applied to photographs of lower quality than
the first, the crater (diameter, Dm ) that is shadowed to the midpoint of
its floor is bracketed. The upper bound on Dm is the diameter for
which all craters of that size and larger are shadowed to the midpoint;
its lower bound is the largest diameter of those craters that are
shadowed halfway or slightly less. Dm is also converted mathe-
matically to DL.
DL values of geologic units are quoted extensively in this volume.
The method appears to have yielded correct results for mare units
 but less secure results for light-plains units (see
chap. 10). Its successful application depends on several conditions: (1)
Photographic quality sufficient to distinguish true shadows and true
diameters; (2) Sun-illumination angles between 8° and 20° above
horizontal (Soderblom and Lebofsky technique), or between 8° and
30° (Boyce and Dial technique); (3) a sample area of at least 100 km2
for young surfaces (Sun angle, 10°) and 1,800 km2 for terra plains ; (4)
the same initial crater shapes; (5) crater-wall slopes of from 8° to 25°,
the interval over which the underlying theoretical model, assuming
erosion by small impacts, applies; (6) craters exposed, not blanketed
by later deposits; (7) craters having a slope of - 3 on cumulative size-
frequency plots when formed; (8) craters formed on level surfaces
(detectable on the photographs); and (9) inclusion of craters super-
posed on only one geologic unit. Condition 7, which may not apply to
primary craters larger than 2 km in diameter (fig. 7.10G), probably
explains why DL and size-frequency values are inconsistent for light
plains and other units characterized by large superposed craters
 . Condition 9 may be the
one most frequently violated, because measurements have commonly
been made at the center of rectangles laid along a grid rather than
within the confines of units mapped geologically. Thus, small units
may have been missed.
Most of the pitfalls of the DL method, or any other attempt to
determine the ages of lunar and planetary materials, can be avoided
by commonsense and examination of a surface from the viewpoint of
the sequence of events through which it was shaped.
Lunar stratigraphic units are relatively dated by a combination
of superpositional criteria and methods based on superposed craters.
Pairs of adjacent crater, basin, or mare units can normally be dated by
straightforward observations of superpositions and transections
based on the simple concept that the younger units modify the older.
In favorable cases, secondary-impact craters extend the areas in
which these observations can be applied.
Craters play a dual role as individual stratigraphic units treated
by these relations and as time counters for other units' ages. Crater
dating rests on the assumption, implied by the law of superposition,
that the craters overlying a given stratigraphic unit have size-fre-
quency distributions and morphologies typical of stratigraphic inter-
vals younger than the unit. Old units support more craters than do
younger units. Topographically sharp craters are superposed on all
units, but large subdued craters only on old units (unless the subdual
results from burial by still younger deposits).
The properties of the inverse size-frequency relation result in a
hierarchy of dating methods (table 7.3). Direct observation of craters
smaller than Cs is not useful in dating because fewer craters are
observed than were formed. However, observation of the cumulative
effect of these craters on morphologies is useful in dating. Craters
slightly larger than Cs are dated by the method of Trask described
above, or by the DL method. The determined ages bracket the ages of
small planar units on which the craters formed. Still larger craters
(more than 3 km diam) are dated by assessments of the degradation of
their subunits. Ages of whatever units underlie or overlie these cra-
ters can then be bracketed. Sufficiently extensive units can be dated
not only by individual craters but also by statistical evaluation of the
superposed craters larger than Cs . In general, because Cs increases
over time, increasingly larger craters must be depended on for dating
of increasingly older units.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
Crater diameter
1-3 KILOMETERS
1 KILOMETER
400 METERS-1 KILOMETER
200-400 METERS
100-200 METERS
^^St *i£*sA*'-- ->
50-100 METERS
FIGURE 7.12. Craters smaller than 3 km in diameter, arrayed by age and size. Sun-illumination angles are mostly 19.5° above horizontal; a few are from
18.2° to 23°. Craters of each size decrease in sharpness with age. From Trask .
Eratosthenian mare
Imbrian mare
CRATER DIAMETER (RIM CREST TO RIM CREST)
FIGURE 7.13. Assumed relations between sizes, properties, and relative ages of craters from
0.01 to 10 km in diameter. Categories are intergradational; horizontal lines are isochrons
indicating crater populations on Eratosthenian and Imbrian mare materials. From Trask
 .
7. RELATIVE AGES
Thus, there is a substantial practical difference in dating the six
divisions of the lunar stratigraphic column considered here (fig. 7.16;
table 7.3):
1. Copernican units are dated by the frequencies and morphologies of
craters so small as to be visible only on the best photographs.
2. Eratosthenian crater units photographed at high resolution can
also be dated by size-frequency counts. Eratosthenian mare units
and some impact-melt pools can be dated by the DL method.
3. Late Imbrian mare units are readily accessible to the DL method.
4. Only a few crater units of Late or Early Imbrian age are large
enough to support enough craters larger than Cs for statistically
valid size-frequency counts. These craters are dated mostly by the
degradational morphology of their own subunits.
5. The Early Imbrian Orientale and Imbrium basin materials are
extensive enough, young enough, and well enough photographed
to be dated by craters over a large diameter range (fig. 7.16).
6. The steady-state size increases for older units (fig. 7.16; table 7.3),
and only craters larger than 20 km in diameter are thought here to
be valid as counters for the whole Nectarian and pre-Nectarian
age range. Morphologies of individual Nectarian and pre-Nec-
tarian craters larger than about 20 km in diameter supplement
the size-frequency counts.
The next six chapters show in detail how the lunar stratigraphic
column is constructed by these methods.
f *ty».v,ryi
^.rv".-* -
* *^a»;-*s
»'-! %' ;,> : ,%*"it T'^v ' s *5?.^f^
iL^*'^" ^X-"" '
" '^ :?"^ ";* r:^ -.v ».^5^|j
-\ \t ' " » * ;\ - J "*.,
", ;»';^i'-vi:»^.^
V'.;-,.^.i;^,^v ... ' = ; *,^..- .'- % ^t^'^
' ' V'-rH"-lj!:v *
*^" ., '.*- "
5 KILOMETERS
5 KILOMETERS
5 KILOMETERS
FIGURE 7. 1 4.
Surfaces of four ages, showing differences in crater populations. Sun angles are all from 2 1 . 3° to 22.8° above horizontal. From Trask
 .
A. Young Eratosthenian mare in southern Oceanus Procellarum, characterized by small sharp craters and much level intercrater terrain.
B. Older Eratosthenian mare near Apollo 1 2 landing site; larger and more subdued craters are present.
C. Imbrian mare near Apollo 1 1 landing site, characterized by high density of subdued craters and little noncratered terrain. Arrow indicates low
swell discussed by Trask ( 1 971).
D. Fra Mauro Formation near type area. Saturation of surface by large subdued craters suggests that many more craters formed than are now
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
' ' ' ' "I
' ' ' ' "I
Lunar light plains regions
1. West of Apollo 15 LS
5. Parry floor
10. Ptolemaeus floor
2. Apollo 16 LS
7. Bonpland floor
11. Albategnius floor
3. North of Apollo 16 LS
8. Guericke floor
12. Meton floor
4. Fra Mauro floor
1 5. Mendeleev floor
Other regions
6. Apollo 14 LS
20. Apollo 12 LS-
9. Mare west of Archimedes 21. Copernicus
13. Mare Tranquillitatis
22. Mosting
14. Apollo 11 LS
16. Mare near Brayley
17. Mare Serenitatis (light int.) 25. Eratosthenes
18. Oceanus Procellarum
26. Aristarchus
19. Apollo 15 LS (mare)
CUMULATIVE CRATER FREQUENCY PER KM 2 FOR D=ONE KM
FIGURE 7.15. Comparison of DL values and cumulative crater frequencies, normalized to
crater diameters of I km . For many plains whose DL value is 550 m, DL
values and crater frequencies do not correlate. "Event" refers to basin materials; Imbrium
"event" counts were made on Montes Apenninus . LS, landing
CRATER DIAMETER, IN KILOMETERS
FIGURE 7. 1 6.
Cumulative size-frequency distributions of craters in each time-stratigraphic
system. Curves are solid within the diameter range where frequencies are most accurately
determined, and long-dashed where extrapolated. Short-dashed curves represent average
frequencies of primary-impact craters of only the age indicated: pNc, pre-Nectarian; Nc,
Nectarian; Ic, Imbrian; CEc, Copernican and Eratosthenian, undivided (after Wilhelms
and others, 1 978). Other curves include all primary craters accumulated on the units. Where
photographic data permit, successively smaller craters can be counted on successively younger
units (many CEc and Ic craters smaller than 4.5 km in diameter are visible, but average
frequencies were not determined). Numbers of smallest plotted Nc, pNc, Nectaris, and Al-
Khwarizmi/King craters are diminished relative to larger craters of same age (compare fig.
7. 1 OC). Rollover in curve indicating this deficiency is sharper and extends to larger diameters
in pNc than Nc (rollover is less pronounced for Al-Khwarizmi/King than for pNc because
former curve is plot of all accumulated craters, including CEc and Ic, which have relatively
linear distributions). Al-Khwarizmi/King curve is steep at largest plotted diameters because
of small statistical sample (see supplementary table). Imbrium-basin material is only lunar unit
for which statistically valid frequencies in entire diameter range are available. Counts on
Copernicus from Neukum and Konig (1 976); counts on Montes Apenninus and on Fra
Mauro Formation (combined here) from Neukum and others (I975a, b); Imbrium- and
Nectaris-basin counts of craters at least 20 km in diameter from present study. Data and
system boundaries further discussed in chapters 8 through 1 3 .
FIGURE 8.1 (OVERLEAF). Predominantly pre-Nectarian terrane on northern farside, including densely cratered tracts and smoother areas covered by basin deposits and secondary craters.
Orbiter 5 frame M-53.
8. PRE-NECTARIAN SYSTEM
Introduction ......................
Crustal petrology and geochemistry
Composition ..................
Igneous or impact origin? ......
Early crustal petrogenesis .........
Magma ocean ................
Multiple plutons ...............
Crustal zonation ...............
Basin and crater materials .........
Introduction ...................
Recognition criteria ............
Basins ........................
Craters .......................
Volcanic rocks ...................
Chronology ......................
INTRODUCTION
The lunar pre-Nectarian system8-1 provides our clearest look at
the early Solar System. The barrage of cosmic bodies that must have
affected all moons and planets is richly recorded by pre-Nectarian
basins and large craters, which are packed more densely than those
of any other age (pi. 6; fig. 8.1). Their deposits cover a triangular area
of the southern nearside and large parts of the farside. Smaller
craters presumably formed in proportional abundance but were
degraded by other craters (see chap. 7). Fine distinctions among
facies of basin and crater deposits, which are observed in rayed cra-
ters and the Orientale basin, have similarly been blurred but can
commonly be detected by comparisons with the younger analogs.
Any maria that may have formed must have been even more com-
pletely devastated by the rain of impacts. Faults and folds dating
from the pre-Nectarian are unknown, although they may have
formed then as they did later. Therefore, efforts to understand early
lunar and Solar-System history depend largely on interpreting the
generally subdued and modified deposits of pre-Nectarian basins
and craters.
Another look into the distant past is provided by the samples
returned by the Apollo and Luna spacecraft (pi. 3). When fully evalu-
ated, data from the sample analyses should show much about the
composition of Solar-System material, the bulk composition of the
Moon, and the processes by which a body of the Moon's size and
composition differentiates. A major problem confronting analysts is
distinguishing the effects of these early chemical and petrologic
processes from those of the later impacts which formed the deposits
that contain the samples. By definition, all materials formed since
the origin of the Moon until the formation of the Nectaris basin are
pre-Nectarian . Accordingly,
both the stratigraphic units that are still visible and the plutonic
rocks of the early terra crust that were originally created by igneous
processes are pre-Nectarian.
It is important to stress this distinction between the internal
origin and impact emplacement of lunar terra rocks. The various
groups of scientists that have investigated these two phases in the
rocks' history have not always communicated effectively. Most
petrologists and geochemists have concentrated on the endogenic
phases, and their interest in the origin and chemistry of the Moon
and of its early crust is reflected in the most commonly used lunar
petrologic nomenclature. For example, names derived from ter-
8-11b indicate that the pre-Nectarian system is not a formal stratigraphic name, the term is not capitalized
(see introduction to the section in this chapter entitled "Basin and Crater Materials").
restrial igneous petrology have been applied, inappropriately, to
rocks melted and emplaced by impacts . Stratigraphers are more inter-
ested in the times and processes of assembly and deposition of the
breccia beds. These events in the rocks' histories are emphasized
here and in the breccia-classification scheme discussed above in
chapter 3 . The early crust is not
described comprehensively here but is treated
mainly from the standpoint of its role as raw material for later
stratigraphic units.
Unfortunately for those interested in the early Moon, no rocks
of the early crust are preserved in outcrop, and only small fragments
believed to be relatively unaltered samples of that crust have been
recovered from the breccia deposits formed and emplaced by later
impacts. Still more seriously for attempts to decipher the early
Moon, no deposits identifiable with a specific pre-Nectarian strat-
igraphic unit were sampled. All the terra landings took place on
Nectarian and Imbrian deposits because operational factors pre-
vented Apollo and Luna from landing on the farside and southern
nearside tracts where pre-Nectarian materials are exposed (pi. 6).
Therefore, the photogeologically decipherable record and the sample
record for the pre-Nectarian are connected much more tenuously
than for later time-stratigraphic systems. Correlation of pre-Nec-
tarian absolute and relative time scales and determination of the
rates of impact and volcanic activity are difficult problems confront-
ing stratigraphic and laboratory analysis.
CRUSTAL PETROLOGY AND
GEOCHEMISTRY
Composition
The lunar terrae are composed of a crust of material that dif-
ferentiated from the bulk Moon early in lunar history. The crustal
composition was determined during early pre-Nectarian time by
processes that are basically igneous, and was later mixed and other-
wise modified by impacts. This mixing aids attempts to determine the
average crustal composition, although it obscures whatever geo-
chemical provinces may once have existed. Data from unmanned
Surveyor analyses , returned-sample
analyses, and orbital geochemical sensing (see chap. 5) currently
combine to indicate an average terra composition rich in Al (25-29
weight percent A12O3) and Ca (approx 14 weight percent CaO) .
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
This chemistry is reflected in the low density of the crust
 and in the fact that highly calcic pla-
gioclase is the most abundant sampled mineral. The next most abun-
dant minerals in terra samples are low-Ca pyroxenes (mostly
orthopyroxene, with subordinate pigeonite), olivine, and augite (high-
Ca clinopyroxene). Aluminous or chrome spinel, ilmenite, silica min-
erals, troilite, and Fe metal are common accessories, and many other
trace minerals are present . Lunar
rocks vary far less in mode (optically visible minerals) and in mineral
chemistry than do terrestrial rocks.
A series of rocks commonly called the ANT suite composes most
of the returned terra material, where 'ANT" refers to the plutonic-
rock types anorthosite (min 90 percent plagioclase), norite (pla-
gioclase and orthopyroxene), and froctolite . The pla-
gioclase-rich composition of the terrae was first recognized in studies
of small fragments in the Apollo 11 mare regolith , and the ANT suite was defined on the basis of small
fragments in the Luna 16 and 20 regolith samples . Because the importance of impact mixing and melting was
not fully appreciated during these early analyses, compositional
types were commonly delineated incorrectly on the basis of mixed,
brecciated, fine-grained, or even glassy rocks as if they were plutonic
igneous rocks containing large optically identifiable crystals. The
name "anorthosite" has been especially misused for materials that
are not anorthosites in either the compositional or textural sense.
In ANT terminology, the "average" terra rock is an anorthositic
norite or a noritic anorthosite . Unfortunately for the nonspecialist, this
composition is also referred to as "highland basalt." This term was
coined during study of regolith glasses and is
one of several terms containing the word "basalt" that, especially in
literature of the early 1970's, refer not to crystalline extrusive rocks
but to magmas whose existence was predicted on the basis of glassy
fragments . Early workers commonly stated that "high-
land basalt" represents the most important primary magma of the
ANT rocks occur at all terra-sampling sites, though greatly vary-
ing in amount from the small fragments returned by Apollos 11,12,
and 14 and Lunas 16 and 20 to many kilograms from the Apollo 15,16,
and 17 landing sites. Earthlike granite and granodiorite are absent,
but rare fragments of "granite" and "quartz monzodiorite" have been
found ; these materials consist
dominantly of quartz and potassium feldspar and contain varying
amounts of relatively Fe-rich pyroxene and olivine and of relatively
sodic plagioclase.
The most abundant type of highly differentiated lunar terra
material is known, confusingly, by many partial synonyms, of which
KREEP and KREEP-rich rock are the most nearly appropriate (table
8.1). The major-element composition of this material is not well
defined, and the term refers primarily to an assemblage of minor and
trace elements present in characteristic proportions . The catchy acronym "KREEP" refers to potassium (K), rare-earth
elements (REE), and phosphorus (P); other diagnostic trace elements
are Ba, Rb, Th, U, and Zr. These distinctive elements share the
properties of large ionic radius (they are large-ion lithophiles [LIL])
and exclusion from the major mineral phases ("incompatible").
Although the name "KREEP basalt" commonly appears ,
very few KREEP-rich samples have igneous textures. The term
"KREEP" is properly used in a chemical, not a lithologic, sense for
these diversely textured rocks. Major normative minerals of KREEP-
rich materials are similar to those of the ANT rocks, except that
plagioclase is more sodic (mostly less than An88) and orthopyroxene
and pigeonite are richer in Fe. Thus, both the minor- and major-
mineral phases indicate advanced differentiation according to the
Bowen reaction series. The incompatible elements are the
longest to survive in residual liquids of magmas from which crystals
have separated, and are the first to appear in new partial melts.
TABLE 8.1. Major-oxide compositions of major types of lunar terra
[All values in weight percent.
Others, mostly Ti02 ,
Na 20, K20, and Cr20 3 ; still
other trace elements characterize KREEP .
After Taylor ; data on high-K KREEP from Reid and
others .
Compositions generally range from anorthosite (A,
left) to norite (N, right) or, for MgO, to trocto-
Gabbro is synonymous with norite, except that
high-Ca pyroxene characterizes gabbro and low-Ca
pyroxene characterizes norite .
In the terrae, low-Ca pyroxene is
more abundant than high-Ca pyroxene.
Compositions range from low-K (left) to high-K
KREEP-rich materials are also called KREEP
basalt, Fra Mauro basalt ,
nonmare basalt , high-Al
basalt, alkali high-Al basalt , norite , KREEP norite, and many
other names and acronyms .
Low-, medium-, and high-K KREEP-rich
materials are commonly referred to as low-, medium-,
and high-K Fra Mauro basalt (LKFM, MKFM, and HKFM,
respectively).
(low-high K)
Average terra
A common classification recognizes three categories of KREEP-
rich materials that are similar in major-element bulk composition but
differ in the proportions of the distinctive minor elements,
exemplified by potassium: high K (more than 1 weight percent K2O),
medium K (approx 0.5 weight percent K2O), and low K (approx 0.1
weight percent K2O) . Also, the Fe/Mg ratio
and SiO2 content increase as the K content increases. Low-K KREEP
is the most abundant category and, in fact, may be the second most
abundant component of the terra crust after the ANT suite . Low-K KREEP occurs in glasses
or fragment-laden impact melts in some abundance at all landing
sites except the mare-dominated Apollo 11 site . It was
first suggested as a magma type on the basis of glassy fragments
 . As a legacy of the large Apollo 14 collection,
these three categories of material are commonly called high-K,
medium-K, or low-K Fra Mauro basalt (HKFM, MKFM, LKFM)
 . However, this
volume avoids the term "basalt" for nonvolcanic rocks and restricts
the name "Fra Mauro" to the rock-stratigraphic unit the Fra Mauro
Formation.
Igneous or impact origin?
A petrologically and stratigraphically important question is how
many terra rocks have compositions that result from igneous proc-
esses and how many have compositions that were assembled by
impacts. Until about the time of the Third Lunar Science Conference
in 1972, most investigators seemed to favor an origin of certain Apollo
14 samples with KREEP-rich compositions and textures indicating
crystallization from melts as endogenic volcanic basalt ("Fra Mauro
basalt"; fig. 2.8). The current consensus, however, is that almost all
terra melt rocks with basaltlike textures originated as impact melts
 .
The main clues are (1) trace elements indicating contamination by
meteorites and (2) small-scale textural and compositional hetero-
geneity, especially among clasts.
Although impact-created rocks dominate the terrae, some igne-
ous rocks from the early pre-Nectarian crust were recovered .
A diligent search has been conducted for samples of these "pristine"
rocks, which have also been referred to as meteorite-free, endogenic,
8. PRE-NECTARIAN SYSTEM
endogenous, indigenous, primitive, and plutonic . The following are the main
criteria for pristinity that currently are most widely accepted.
1. A low content of siderophile elements, many of which are charac-
teristic of iron meteorites and chondrites . The highly siderophilic
elements Au, Ir, Os, Pd, and Re probably accompanied metallic Fe
during early differentiation of Solar-System material and thus
were concentrated in planetary cores and small Fe-rich bodies. A
few investigators believe that the silicates of the Moon are intrin-
sically richer in these elements than is generally believed and that
pristine rocks low in siderophiles are impact-melt rocks from
which siderophiles have been removed by extraction of metal
 . Most inves-
tigators, however, believe that high concentrations of these ele-
ments indicate meteoritic contamination, although their absence
does not necessarily prove pristinity .
2. Igneous, especially cumulus, textures. Impact melts rarely cool
slowly enough to develop cumulus textures, which are conspicuous
in layered intrusions on the Earth, where such factors as gravity,
liquid density, and fluid currents have produced quasi-sedimen-
tary features . Thus, lunar cumulus textures indicate pris-
tinity (fig. 8.2D). Such textures furthermore suggest that the rock's
composition arose by igneous processes. In contrast, metamorphic
textures commonly form in deposits of impact melt and breccia
whose compositions arose by mechanical mixing of preexisting
FIGURE 8.2. "Pristine" terra samples.
A. Cataclastic anorthosite (sample 60025), as photographed in Lunar Receiving Labora-
tory after arrival from Apollo 16 landing site. Little texture is evident. Scale cube is 1 cm
on a side in this and all other "mug shots."
B. Thin section of sample 60025. Most optically observable crystals (modes) are of
plagioclase. Texture is seriate. Crossed polarizers; field of view, about 2 mm.
rocks. Volcanic textures may form either in true volcanic rocks or
in impact melts, and thus are ambiguous when not supplemented
by other clues, such as siderophile content.
3. Grain size larger than 3 mm, indicative of slow cooling in a plu-
tonic environment. In many pristine samples, however, the orig-
inal igneous textures and the coarse grain size have been obscured
by subsequent shock-induced cataclasis.
It seems clear today that the bulk compositions of most terra
rocks are determined by impact-induced mixing. Plots of bulk major-
element compositions of lunar terra rocks reveal that individual
endogenic cumulates and other pristine samples vary much more in
composition than do obviously impact-generated polymict breccias
and regoliths containing siderophiles . The "anorthositic norite" or "highland basalt" average terra
composition, granulitic impactite , very high alumina "basalt" , andlow-KKREEPare among
the compositional types that fall in the middle of such plots away from
known pristine rocks. Low-K KREEP is found mostly or entirely in siderophile-bearing fragment-laden melts
C. Coarse-grained granulitic troctolite (sample 76535) from North Massif, Apollo 17
landing site. Major modes are plagioclase (58 percent) and olivine (37 percent), with
accessory orthopyroxene (4 percent) .
D. Thin section of pristine pink spinel troctolite clast (sample 67435,14). Original igneous
cumulate texture is largely preserved . Euhedral to subhedral
olivine (gray) is enclosed poikilitically by plagioclase (white). Plane-polarized light; field
of view, about 2 mm.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
 . This extensive
impact mixing is to be expected from the geologic style of the Moon
because each new impact mixes and melts rocks, most of which
already are complex breccia deposits with compositions far removed
from those of their endogenic origins. New hybrid compositions are
formed by each event, and continued impacting creates a hybrid
average of the original pristine compositions. Mixing models attempt
to reconstruct the observed compositions of regoliths and bedrock-
breccia deposits from a set of end members believed to represent
original magma types .
In summary, the composition of the lunar terra crust was derived
by mixing pristine ANT compositions with smaller amounts of highly
differentiated KREEP-rich material. Although a few intact fragments
of the early crustal rocks were recovered, the textures and structures
of almost all returned terra samples were created by impacts. Many of
the samples assembled by impacts retain the early endogenic com-
positions, whereas others have been compositionally as well as tex-
turally altered during the impact reworking. Problems still persist in
identifying the sources of specific samples and determining the rela-
tive amounts of pristine and impact-mixed materials. However,
enough clues about the early crust have been assembled from this
obscure record to reconstruct the following partial plutonic history of
the early crust.
EARLY CRUSTAL PETROGENESIS
Magma ocean
Analysis of the small fragments from the Apollo 11 regolith led to
what is still the leading model for the origin of the early crust . The terra crust and the
mantle source of mare-basalt magmas are widely thought to have
separated from a very large volume of magma popularly called a
magma ocean . The first hint of
an early widespread differentiation of primitive materials came from
REE abundances. Europium is overabundant in "average" terra rocks
and underabundant in mare basalt relative to chondritic REE abun-
dances . This relation is consistent with an efficient
mechanical separation of the ultramafic mare-source material, as
cumulates, from a magma from which large amounts of plagioclase
had already crystallized and extracted Eu relative to the other REE's.
Plagioclase has large lattice sites that accept the large divalent
(reduced) ion that only Eu among the REE's possesses.
"Oceanic" depths of 200 to 400 km are commonly favored,
although lesser or greater depths are not excluded (half the lunar
volume lies above, and half below, 360-km depth) . Because of its lesser density, the
plagioclase-rich terra-crustal material presumably floated in the
magma ocean, whereas ultramafic cumulus crystals sank to form the
upper mantle that became the mare source .
The divide between the sunken and floated materials is generally
assumed to be the seismic discontinuity at the base of the crust. If the
ocean was 360 km deep and the crust is 75 km thick, the crustal
material constituted about a quarter of the original oceanic volume.
The origin of KREEP in general and its role in "magma
oceanography" in particular have generated a very large literature
because of its persistent appearance in lunar samples and its exotic
highly differentiated chemistry . Its origin has been ascribed to partial
melting of ANT material or, as commonly in more recent literature, to
a late stage in fractionation of the magma ocean. KREEP has been
considered to be derived from a minor liquid accumulated in dis-
persed niches throughout the magma ocean or the crust, or, alter-
natively, concentrated in certain regions. The question of its origin is
difficult to resolve because because most or all analyzed KREEP is a
chemical constituent incorporated into other rocks, rather than a
distinct rock type itself.
Multiple plutons
Study of pristine rocks, many of which are thought to be relics of
the primordial crustal differentiation, has shown that the magma-
ocean model outlined above is too simple. Many of the pristine crustal
rocks, especially those from the Apollo 17 landing site, are cumulate
norite and troctolite that apparently formed by settling in their
parent magmas . Data from the
orbital geochemical instruments, as interpreted by mixing models,
indicate that the topmost part of the "average" crust can contain no
more than about 60 percent anorthosite 
and that compositions range laterally from highly feldspathic to
highly mafic . Moreover, the orbital instru-
ments covered only a small percentage of the Moon and are subject to
calibration problems (see chap. 5). Therefore, mafic materials may be
more abundant than once thought.
Compositional subtleties of the mafic and anorthositic ANT
rocks suggest that more than one magma system may have built the
terra crust. For example, if the Mg/(Mg + Fe) ratios in mafic minerals
(olivine, pyroxene) in the pristine rocks are plotted against the
Ca/(Ca + Na + K) ratios in plagioclase, two distinct trends are defina-
ble . One trend consists of
highly feldspathic rocks (anorthosite and troctolitic anorthosite) that
contain relatively calcic, uniform plagioclase and relatively Fe-rich,
compositionally varying mafic minerals; these rocks are termed fer-
roan anorthosite because of the Fe-rich mafic minerals . The other trend consists of more mafic rocks (troc-
tolite, spinel-bearing troctolite, norite, gabbronorite, and a few ultra-
mafic rocks) that have highly varying plagioclase and relatively mag-
nesian, compositionally varying mafic minerals; these rocks are
referred to as Mg-rich plutonic rocks or the Mg suite. In an individual
rock of the Mg suite, Mg-rich mafic minerals are associated with Ca-
rich plagioclase, and Fe-rich mafic minerals with more sodic pla-
gioclase. These associations are what is to be expected in typical
cotectic igneous differentiation . The anorthosite was at
first thought to be more anomalous 
a Very probably or definitely pristine
v T Probably pristine
Mg-rich trend
An CONTENT OF PLAGIOCLASE, IN MOLE PERCENT
FIGURE 8.3. Ferroan-anorthosite and Mg-rich trends in ANT rocks, separated by a
distinct hiatus. Examples shown are for olivine (ol) and orthopyroxene (opx) in pristine rocks
 . However, the same type of miner-
alogic variation has been discovered in anorthosite of the Stillwater
layered igneous complex . No simple
magma system is likely to have generated both trends simultaneously
 .
To accommodate the intricacies and the global scale that both
seem required, several authors have proposed "separate pluton" mod-
els, in which layered Mg-suite plutons intruded from below into an already-
floated crust of ferroan anorthosite . Alternatively, the early pre-Nectarian crust
may never have been an "ocean" but only a system of magma "pods" or
"ponds" . Complex petrologic
schemes dating from the accretionary period or operating in an early convecting magma ocean 
have also been proposed. Impacts must have bombarded the primitive
Moon catastrophically; they would have pierced any solid crust that
formed on an "ocean" and have stirred and mixed the liquid, influenc-
ing the early geochemistry and petrogenesis . Although the magma-ocean
concept is still favored by most petrologists and geochemists, it is
becoming increasingly modified and complex.
Crustal zonation
Possible layering or, more likely, crude vertical zonation of the
crustal material has been studied by a combination of seismic,
petrologic, and impact investigations. Seismic data indicate a discon-
tinuity in the crust at about 20- or 25-km depth that is commonly ascribed to
an interface between low-density, relatively porous crustal rock and
denser sealed material of the same composition . Alter-
natively, or additionally, this seismic feature could represent a com-
positional discontinuity between more feldspathic material above
and more mafic material below . A distinct KREEP-rich layer has also been sug-
gested, either between layers of anorthosite and more mafic material
 or at the base of the crust .
Because basins probe the subsurface, the surface distribution of
ejecta compositions should help in reconstructing any layering or
zonation that exists. The large size of basins might suggest excavation
as deep as the mantle. Mineral assemblages in some spinel-bearing
Mg-suite rocks have been cited as requiring pressures available only
in the deep crust or mantle of the Moon . However, alternative phase-equilibria schemes
allow an origin as shallow as 25 km, well within the crust . Although most terrestrial
dunite is probably of mantle origin, at least one Mg-suite lunar dunite
probably originated in the crust, judging from its association with,
and mineralogic similarity to, troctolite sample 76535, whose cooling
and reequilibration depths were probably in the range 10-30 km
 . Orbital geo-
chemistry suggests crustal composition even for Imbrium-basin
ejecta, which I believe was derived from the cavity of the Moon's
largest known basin, Procellarum (fig. 8.4). Therefore, little, if any,
mantle material was brought to the surface in impact ejecta, and
shallow basin excavations restricted to the crust are implied.
Crustal thickness and surface composition seem to be related;
the more aluminous the material, the thicker the crust . That is, the Pratt (unequal density)
model of isostasy seems to be more nearly applicable to the terrae
than is the Airy model . The Airy (equal density)
model was assumed in arriving at the commonly stated conclusion
that the farside crust is thicker than the nearside crust . Most investigators have nevertheless concluded that
the farside crust is thicker (see chap. 1), even under Pratt or mixed
isostatic models .
This difference in crustal composition and thickness, however,
may not be hemispheric in extent. The orbital geochemistry suggests that the crust is both thinner and more
magnesian beneath the two largest lunar basins, Procellarum and
South Pole-Aitken, than in other regions where data are available.
Seismic data (see chap. 1) suggest that the crust is 50 or 60 km thick
under southern Oceanus Procellarum and about 75 km thick under
the highly feldspathic Apollo 16 landing site, which is near the Pro-
cellarum rim (pi. 3). Crustal thicknesses are similar on the southern
nearside and western (long 90°-180° E.) farside . The X-ray spectrometer detected higher Al/Mg ratios
on the farside and on parts of the eastern and southeastern nearside
than in the Imbrium-Procellarum region . No data known to me contradict the
conclusions that the thick aluminous crust is restricted to the rims
and exteriors of the two giant basins and that the thinner, more
magnesian crust is concentrated in basin interiors. Additionally, the
gamma-ray spectrometer detected the high radioactivity charac-
teristic of KREEP in the Imbrium-central Procellarum region
 , where I would expect the thinnest
part of the lunar crust.
The sample data support the conclusion that the giant basins
control the crustal thickness and, thus, the compositional zone that
was accessible to later impacts (fig. 8.4). The greatest depths were
reached by the Imbrium basin, whose ejecta (Fra Mauro Formation) is
correspondingly the lunar deposit richest in KREEP (see chap. 10).
Mg-suite rocks and low-K KREEP, probably derived from the same or
shallower depths, apparently compose most of the Imbrium (Apollo
15; chap. 10) and Serenitatis (Apollo 17; chap. 9) rims. The Apollo 16
and Luna 20 landing sites are the richest in feldspathic ANT mate-
rials (chap. 9), as befits their derivation from the thick crust of the
outer Procellarum shelf or exterior terrain.
This picture, though internally consistent, is subject to revision
or rejection on the basis of better data. Lateral zonation of primordial
origin also is possible. Only four major sample suites from four
landing sites have been collected from the terrae, and each suite
added complicating detail to the lunar petrogenetic picture. On the
basis of the complexities generally uncovered when geologic systems
are examined closely, fine-scale local intrusions only crudely
organized into petrologic provinces might be expected. The pattern
that seems to reflect global layers exposed by large basins might be
fortuitous.
BASIN AND CRATER AAATERIALS
Introduction
The severely deformed, chemically and texturally mixed, side-
rophile-rich materials found in the Nectarian and Imbrian deposits
attest to a high rate of impacts during pre-Nectarian time as well.
More specific information on the characteristics of individual pre-
Nectarian units is sparse because none were sampled directly and
because the chemical and petrologic criteria for recognizing such
units are ambiguous. Attempts have been made to identify individual
impacting projectiles with specific basins by means of distinctive
siderophile signatures , but the success of these attempts is limited by knowledge of
the prebasin stratigraphy. The study of pre-Nectarian impact depos-
its thus requires stratigraphic analysis.
Originally, pre-Nectarian and Nectarian were combined as pre-
Imbrian . This designation sufficed
for most old units mapped at 1:1,000,000 scale because the mapping
was confined to the central nearside, which is dominated by the
Imbrium basin (pi. 3). If they were subdivided at all, pre-Imbrian
craters were numbered according to the morphologic criteria estab-
lished by Pohn and Offield .
The desirability of stratigraphically dividing the pre-Imbrian
emerged during mapping of the nearside regions farthest from
Imbrium. While mapping south of Mare Nectaris, Stuart-Alexander
 recognized a lineate surface as the expression of Nectaris-basin
deposits and secondary-impact craters similar to those of the Orien-
tale and Imbrium basins (fig. 8.5); she named the deposit the "Jans-
sen Formation" . At first, the Janssen was
used to subdivide pre-Imbrian crater materials into numbered pre-
and post-Nectaris categories descendant from Pohn and Offield's
Present surface
Post-Procellarum surface
KREEP-rich basalt
SERENITATIS
CRISIUM -3 A'
FIGURE 8.4. Hypothetical crustal layers intersected by impact basins.
A. Index map based on plate 3, showing basins from which samples were obtained. PI, P2,
P3, rings of Procellarum basin (dotted where inside younger basins; inner rings dashed).
Shading, Mg-rich terrane after formation of Procellarum and before formation of other
B. Diagrammatic geologic fence diagram, suggesting crustal and mantle configuration after
Procellarum impact, subsequent uplift, and partial fill by hypothetical KREEP-rich
volcanic basalt (black). Three gradational crustal layers are intersected by Procellarum-
basin surface: upper Al-rich material is exposed outside basin and on outermost shelf
(between PI and P2); Mg-rich material is exposed on intermediate shelf (between P2
and P3) and in central basin; and lower-crustal KREEP-rich material is near surface (or
may be exposed) near center of basin. Nectaris and Crisium basins were formed mostly in
Al-rich terrane (Apollo 16 and Luna 20 samples, respectively); Serenitatis basin was
formed in Mg-rich terrane (Apollo 17 samples); Imbrium basin was formed in Mg-rich
terrane (Apollo 15 samples) and also ejected large amounts of KREEP-rich material
and (or) KREEP-rich basalt (Apollo 14 samples). Arrows indicate paths of ejecta.
Curvature of surface trace and of the Moon is ignored; vertical exaggeration is arbitrary.
8. PRE-NECTARIAN SYSTEM
numeric designations . In 1975, the pre-Imbrian was formally
divided into the pre-Nectarian and Nectarian . This division is shown on all subsequently published
geologic maps, where appropriate, and is used here. The utility of this
subdivision was proved as the limb, farside, and polar regions were
mapped further and large numbers of pre-Nectarian and Nectarian
units were identified . The term "pre-Imbrian," however, is still used where more
convenient, as in places on the nearside where the finer distinction
cannot easily be made. Because neither "pre-Nectarian" nor "pre-
Imbrian" has a formally defined base, such terms as "system" and
"period" used in conjunction with them are informal and not cap-
Recognition criteria
A start in establishing a pre-Nectarian age is to examine terrain
covered by the deposits and secondary craters of the Nectaris basin
(fig. 8.5). Deposits overlain by these materials are, by definition, pre-
Nectarian. Pre-Nectarian basins in direct contact with Nectaris-
basin materials include Australe, Fecunditatis, Mutus-Vlacq, Tran-
quillitatis, and Werner-Airy (pi. 6; table 8.2). Craters lightly nicked by
Nectaris secondaries but not deeply buried by deposits are type
examples of pre-Nectarian craters (figs. 8.5C, D\
Units not in contact with Nectaris-basin materials can poten-
tially be dated by comparing the size-frequency distributions of
superposed primary craters with those of craters superposed on Nec-
taris (fig. 8.6; table 8.2). Size-frequency curves lying entirely above
that for Nectaris demonstrate a pre-Nectarian age. One curve for a
basin here considered to be pre-Nectarian (Apollo) crosses below the
Nectaris curve, but only at the statistically weak end representing
the frequencies of large craters.
The differences among the many curves demonstrate the fact
that the lunar terrae do not have some single characteristic size-
frequency distribution but are composed of basin blankets, each of
which has reset the visible crater population of the surfaces it covers.
The slopes of the cumulative crater-frequency curves decrease and
become more highly curved from the youngest to the oldest surfaces
(fig. 8.6). Some of the crater-frequency curves approach a slope of 1
for craters as large as 60 or 70 km in diameter, a slope substantially
lower than that of 2 or 1.8 which is commonly believed to repre-
sent the production frequency for younger craters . Although the -1
slope has not been modeled in studies of crater saturation , it nevertheless probably results from mutual obliteration
of pre-Nectarian and Nectarian craters.
Several factors in addition to this destruction of craters limit the
counts to craters at least 20 km in diameter. Meaningful counts are
restricted to (1) superposed craters and (2) primary craters. A super-
posed crater useful in dating the basin, and a subjacent crater whose
inclusion in the counts would be erroneous, may differ only slightly in
appearance. Numbers of secondary craters generally do not indicate
time of exposure because such craters are generated in bursts when
their parent primaries form. The superposed-buried and primary-
secondary distinctions can be made only in well exposed, well pho-
tographed terrains. Some counts of pre-Imbrian craters are inevita-
bly restricted to small areas because of burial by later deposits; the
buried craters are visible but are useless for dating (fig. 8.7). Pho-
tographic quality on the farside is inadequate for interpreting craters
smaller than 20 km in diameter on many basins, especially at lati-
tudes poleward of about 40°.
The results of these natural and artificial shortcomings are indis-
tinct separations of the curves for old basins and statistically poor
curves for the smallest and the youngest (least cratered) units. No
individual craters are dated here by crater densities except the 265-
km-diameter crater-basin transitional feature Milne (figs. 4.2J, 8.11).
For most pre-Nectarian craters, the small superposed craters that are
required for statistically significant counts have been erased by
mutual obliteration and degradation on slopes. Several counts of
superposed craters are listed in table 8.2 as "poor," meaning that they
contain few total craters or lack small craters because of burial. These
counts are not plotted in figure 8.6 except for the marginally useful
one for the Coulomb-Sarton basin.
Pre-Nectarian surfaces may be heavily or only moderately cra-
tered, depending on age and happenstance position relative to young-
er secondary clusters. Although densities of superposed secondary
craters are almost useless for dating, clustered secondaries are very
useful for establishing relative age if they can be traced to their source
basins (fig. 8.7A). Once a basin is established as pre-Nectarian, super-
position of its secondary clusters on another basin or crater unit
establishes the pre-Nectarian age of that unit as well. Where avail-
able, superpositions prevail over crater counts as age criteria. Second-
ary clusters can also be used to date small units, such as those of
individual pre-Imbrian craters that are inaccessible to size-frequency
studies. Numerous stratigraphic relations between pre-Nectarian
and younger basins and between pre-Nectarian basins have been
established by such superpositional relations (table 8.2).
This volume divides 30 pre-Nectarian basins into 9 age groups
(table 8.2). Each group is headed by one basin whose relative age
seems to be well established by crater densities or superpositional
relations. Additional basins are tentatively placed in the groups on
weaker grounds.
The first group consists of the giant South Pole-Aitken and
Procellarum basins. South Pole-Aitken is characterized by saturation
of superposed impact structures as large as basin size (fig. 8.8; table
8.2). The history of its discovery illustrates the need for mapping large
areas. When Hartmann and Kuiper realized that basin rings
are prevalent on the Moon, they predicted the presence of a large
farside basin on the basis of telescopic photographs showing huge
mountains near the Moon's south pole. This prediction went
unnoticed when Soviet Zond photographic altimetry and Apollo laser
altimetry revealed a large depression as much as 5 to 7 km below the
average farside surface . Some
massifs had been photographed by Apollo 8, but their connection with
a basin was not immediately perceived . Wilhelms and El-Baz mapped other massifs without
knowing of their connection with the basin. Several observers then
independently discovered that mountains over a huge area of the
southern farside and southernmost nearside form a giant ring . Now, there
is little doubt about the existence of this "Big Backside Basin,"
although the number and exact diameters of the rings are uncertain
 .
Regional studies also suggest the presence of the Procellarum
 or "Gargantuan" basin. Some
of the profound effects of this 3,200-km-diameter basin on the later geologic evolution of the Moon have
already been described. (1) Its excavation thinned the crust consider-
ably, possibly by 50 km, and the mantle rose in isostatic compensation
(figs. 6.22, 8.4). (2) As a result, the terra surface was lower, and the
elastic lithosphere thinner or weaker, during mare extrusion and
structural deformation in the Procellarum region than elsewhere on
the Moon. (3) Their relation to Procellarum accounts for numerous
concentric ridges and troughs of the terrae, which, like the mountains
now known to be parts of South Pole-Aitken, would be anomalous if
not part of a basin (fig. 8.10). (4) Redistribution of crustal materials by
the Procellarum impact may be an important factor in the distribu-
tion of anorthositic, Mg-suite, and KREEP-rich terra materials (fig.
8.4). (5) More speculatively, Procellarum ejecta and, possibly, ejecta of
the South Pole-Aitken basin may account for the suggested thicken-
ing of the farside crust . (6) The Procellarum basin is the
reason for the existence and circular shape of Oceanus Procellarum
(pi. 4; fig. 5.26), which otherwise would have had to form by a special
"continental" type of mare-basalt volcanism otherwise unknown on
the Moon. (7) Other maria, contained in basins superposed on Pro-
cellarum, are more numerous, larger, and deeper than maria in
equally large or larger basins outside Procellarum (pi. 4). (8) Isostatic
compensation has gone further inside Procellarum than on the
thicker lithosphere outside. (9) More uplifted crater floors lie in and
near Procellarum than elsewhere (pi. 5). (10) Arcuate rilles, opened by
mare subsidence, are abundant inside but rare outside the basin (pi.
5); straight rilles may also be controlled by this largest lunar feature
(see chap. 6). Additional effects of Procellarum on mare volcanism are
described in chapters 11 through 13.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
Age group 2 (table 8.2) rather arbitrarily consists of eight basins
whose existence is uncertain; their collection into a single group is
based on the assumption that if these basins were younger (and if
they exist), they would be more obvious. The -1 slope of the
cumulative size-frequency distribution of the numerous craters
counted on Al-Khwarizmi/King (figs. 8.6, 8.11) characterizes that
ancient basin. If this basin does not exist, the -1 slope characterizes
other ancient lunar terrane, possibly South Pole-Aitken deposits,
which probably extend into this region. Two of the age-group 2 basins,
Flamsteed-Billy and Insularum, were identified on the basis of cir-
cular patterns of terra islands in the western maria . This criterion for basin identification
arose from the discovery that seemingly isolated elevations generally
are parts of basin rings.
The basins of age groups 3 and 4 are also so heavily degraded that
they have lost most traces of ejecta, and superposed and prebasin
craters are difficult to distinguish in their peripheries. Nevertheless,
they are still likely to be true basins. Saturation by large craters
appears to affect the size-frequency plots significantly; the slopes of
some curves for craters believed to be superposed approach 1.
Because of this saturation or deep burial by later basin or mare
deposits, ranking of basins by age within one of these older groups is
not considered feasible, even where crater frequencies appear to
differ substantially . These plains are centered within a partial circle of
massifs and ridges . This con-
centration of plains suggests the presence of a basin, Mutus-Vlacq,
regardless of the plains' origin (see chap. 9). Some of the Mutus-Vlacq
massifs had been identified in earlier mapping but were considered to
be "volcanic domes" before the Apollo 16 results downgraded the significance of
terra volcanism. Similarly, Lomonosov-Fleming was identified by
mapping mounds, ridges, and scarps that form a circle 620 km across
and that encompass extensive light-colored plains . Although no interior ring is observed in either of
these basins, the term "ringed basin" is appropriate because the
presence of another ring or rings beneath the plains fill is predictable
by analogy with better exposed basins.
Although the indistinct Nubium, Fecunditatis, and Tran-
quillitatis basins cannot be accurately dated by superposed craters,
they are subjectively ranked with the other age-group 3 basins on the
supposition that they would be equally conspicuous if not flooded by
mare materials. Fecunditatis probably has at least two exposed and
one buried ring and thus has the most elaborate visible ring structure
of the poorly observed basins listed in table 4.2. The 680-km-diameter
ring, overlain by the young fractured-floor crater Taruntius
 , is the most conspicuous, but another ring, about
980 km in diameter, is probably the main topographic rim.
Age group 4 consists of three well-established basins. The diame-
ters, numbers of rings, and age relations of Keeler-Heaviside and
Ingenii, however, are somewhat uncertain because several nearby
massifs may belong to the South Pole-Aitken basin (figs. 1.4, 8.7).
Although the two basins assigned to group 5 are poorly pho-
tographed or obscured by younger deposits, their deposits apparently
have diminished the crater densities within a basin radius or diame-
ter of the rim, as expected around basins. Smythii contains a distinct
mare (fig. 8.11) and a mascon (table 6.1) but has only indistinct rings.
Coulomb-Sarton (figs. 4.3M, 8.14) was discovered shortly after pho-
tography of the farside by the Lunar Orbiter spacecraft and was
designated "unnamed basin B" . The rings
are vague, and the identity of the topographic rim uncertain (table
4.1). Wood and Head withdrew the basin from the list of lunar
basins. Massifs and abundant interior plains do exist, however, and
the basin is here considered to be definitely established .
A. Regional view showing concentrations of textured deposits and secondary craters of Nectaris basin (hachured black outlines) and areas of B through D (white outlines). Orbiter 4 frame
8. PRE-NECTARIAN SYSTEM
fi. Poorly exposed pre-Nectarian deposits. Part of Vallis Rheita (VR), a secondary chain
of Nectaris basin, overlain by Nectarian craters Rheita (R; 70 km, 37° S., 42° E.) and
Young D (YD; 46 km). Other Nectaris-basin secondary chains (Nsc) are overlain by
Nectarian primary crater Stemheil (S; 67 km). Crater Metius (M; 88 km) also is
probably Nectarian because it interrupts pattern of Nectaris-basin deposits. Fabricius
(F; 78 km) is much younger, probably Eratosthenian. Orbiter 4 frame H 71.
C. Moderately well exposed pre-Nectarian craters, including Vega (V; 76 km, 45° S., 63°
E.), Fraunhofer E (FE; 42 km), Fraunhofer J (FJ; 63 km), Reimarus R (RR; 35 km),
and Peirescius (P; 62 km), overlain by circular and subcircular Nectaris-basin secondary
craters (Nsc). Vega and Peirescius are good type examples of pre-Nectarian crater
morphology because large rim segments are preserved. Orbiter 4 frame H 52.
The well-dated basins of the four youngest age groups (table 8.2)
have observable exterior deposits and secondary craters where well
exposed and well photographed. The craterlike rims of Birkhoff and
Lorentz are surrounded by ejecta and secondary craters to distances
of at least one basin diameter (fig. 8.14). Secondary craters of Apollo
are visible in the moderately well photographed zone south of the
basin , although they are covered
by younger materials in the north and northeast. Apollo, Birkhoff,
and the large crater or small basin Milne were considered to be
Nectarian because of their evident ejecta ; the crater counts,
however, indicate a pre-Nectarian age . Grimaldi ejecta appears to have smoothed
its periphery, although it is too heavily obscured by Orientale deposits
to demonstrate textured ejecta . The
Planck and Schiller-Zucchius basins similarly lack textured ejecta
but have smoothed the surrounding terrain and reduced the crater
densities.
Freundlich-Sharonov is an especially instructive basin. The
basin rings and interior are poorly photographed (fig. 4.3P), and their
pattern emerged only upon mapping .
Stuart-Alexander noted that superposed craters are relatively
sparse in the surrounding terrain. A good photograph of the south
basin periphery reveals relatively uncratered terrain lineate radially
to the basin (fig. 8.7A). Analogy with Orientale indicates that the
lineations are not tectonic or volcanic but were formed by the deposi-
tion of Freundlich-Sharonov ejecta. The basin would probably not
have been discovered or interpreted as a typical impact basin without
knowledge of other basins.
The progress of basin discovery suggests that additional pre-
Nectarian basins will be found. Moreover, many basins probably
formed before the South Pole-Aitken and Procellarum basins but are
now completely obliterated. Basin deposits probably covered all parts
of the Moon many times over in the manner displayed by the visible
In the absence of reliable crater counts, morphologic com-
parisons are used to date stratigraphically isolated craters. These
D. Well-exposed pre-Nectarian terrane, lightly pitted by Nectaris-basin secondary craters,
affording additional typical pre-Nectarian morphologies. Subdued pits are superposed
on pre-Nectarian craters Nearch (N; 76 km, 58.5° S., 39° E), Rosenberger (R; 96
km), Rosenberger C (RC; 47 km), Rosenberger B (RB; 33 km), and probably Vlacq
(V; 89 km). Well-defined part of Nectaris-basin secondary field is in upper right (Nsc).
Orbiter 4 frame H-83.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
TABLE 8.2. Pre-Nectarian basins
[Age yroups in order of increasing age, each group arbitrarily Headed by the largest basin of toe yroup. Diameters from table 4.1.
Parenthetical Qasins,
existence not definitely established; parenthetical areas, buried; parenthetical densities, poor sample.
Superposed craters are at least 20 km in diameter
unless otherwise noted.
Underlying and overlying basins determined from directly observed superpositional relations; n.d., no relations detected]
Superposed craters
...........
,,,,£ I 2 \
Freundlicn-
(Arnundsen-
Ganswindt) .
Coulomb-Sarton
Keeler-Heaviside--
Lomonosov-
(Mutus-Vlacq)
Tranquillitatis
(Al-Khwarizmi/
(Pinyre-Hausen)
(Balmer-Kapteyn)--
(Flamsteed-
(Grissom-White)
(Tsiolkovskiy-
South Pole-
(Procellarum)-----
Underlying basin
Lorentz, Coulomb-
South Pole-Aitken(?)--
South Pole-Aitken(?)
Tranquillitatis --
------------n.d
n.d ------------------
Overlying oasin
Oriental e, Hertz-
sprung, Korolev.
Orientale, Imbrium----
Orientale, Irnbrium,
Hertzsprung, Bi rk-
hoff, Lorentz.
Freund lich- Sharonov---
Schrodinger, Planck-
Keel er-Heaviside(?) -
Imbrium, Crisium,
Humboldtianum.
Crisium-- -- -
Orientale, Mendel-
Orientale, Imbrium
Crisium, Humboldt-
Hertzsprung, Apollo---
Orientale, Mendel-
Schrodinger, Planck,
Poincare, Australe,
( Sikorsky-Ritten-
house), (Amundsen-
Ganswindt) .
Hertzsprung, Korolev,
Keeler-Heaviside,
Most nearside
Small craters
Deeply buried.
Small craters
Small craters
Small craters
Deeply buried.
Deeply buried.
Complex burial
Deeply buried.
8. PRE-NECTARIAN SYSTEM
craters are compared with typical pre-Nectarian craters in the cir-
cum-Nectaris zone. Very few craters smaller than 20 km in diameter
have been recognized as unequivocally pre-Nectarian because of
severe degradation and the ambiguous significance of morphology
 . In general, pre-Nectarian craters larger
than 20 km in diameter that are degraded by the accumulated impact
flux and not by catastrophic deposition of later deposits have lost fine-
scale textures but still retain the overall shape of fresh craters (figs.
8.5B-D, 8.7C, 8.11, 8.14B, C; table 8.3). A short, sloping rim flank is
still visible, but not the fine radial texture of the outer flanks that is
displayed by younger craters; pre-Nectarian radial textures are visi-
ble only around basins, where they correspond to chains of secondary
craters or, possibly, to large ridges of primary ejecta (fig. 8.7). The
general morphology, but little sharp detail, of the crater rim-wall
terraces is visible; the terraces are commonly amalgamated, and
their edges cut by subradial notches. Floors are shallower, and rims
more rounded, than in younger craters. Despite the degradation,
many complete and well-defined rim segments are preserved.
Because of this preservation of the overall morphology of the main
impact sequence, even in older craters, good practice is to compare
morphologies not only of the whole crater but also of small areas of the
same size on each crater.
Like crater densities, morphologies of craters can be used as
dating tools only if their geologic setting is also considered. Later
deposits may degrade craters differentially (fig. 8.5). Moreover, typ-
ical "pre-Nectarian" morphologies may result from burial of a Nec-
tarian crater by Nectarian or Imbrian basin deposits. For example,
the subdued craters shown in figure 9.21 that are buried by deposits of
the Nectarian Hertzsprung basin could be either Nectarian or pre-
Nectarian. Much sharper, unburied craters could be pre-Nectarian
(figs. 8.7C, 8.14B, C).
O = Coulomb-barton
x = Ingenii
AK = AI-Khwarizmi/King
FS = Freundlich-Sharonov
KH = Keeler-Heaviside
LF = Lomonosov-Fleming
pNc = Average pre-Nectarian
crater frequency
CRATER DIAMETER, IN KILOMETERS
FIGURE 8.6. Cumulative size-frequency distributions of craters at least 20 km in diameter
superposed on pre-Nectarian basins. Materials of Nectarian and Imbrian Systems are
indicated. Curve pNc includes only pre-Nectarian
craters, whereas each basin curve includes all postbasin primary craters of sizes indicated;
curve pNc is average for best exposed pre-Nectarian terranes. Error bars represent square
root of plotted point, added to and subtracted from value of point (compare table 8.2). Data
tabulated in supplementary table.
TABLE 8.3. Representative pre-Nectarian craters
[Cross rules divide table into craters smaller than 60 km, 60 to 119 km, and at least
120 km in diameter; interiors only are mapped in plate 6.
F-S, Freundlich-Sharonov
basin; N?, possibly Nectarian]
Daedalus U
Con'olis L-
Rosenberger B
Reimarus R -----
Daedalus R ---------
Fraunhofer E- ------
Krusenstern --------
Rosenberger C ------
Blanchinus -------
Pei rescius
Apianus ------------
Fraunhofer J -----
Barbier ------------
Riccius ------------
Li cetus ------------
__________
Vega ---------------
Birkhoff X
Mutus _______
Esnau It-Pel terie
Cyrano _ __-_
Rabbi Levi
Barrow -------------
Playfair G -----
Rosenberger ------
Schlesinger --------
Sacrobosco ---------
Pur-bach ------------
Goldschmidt --------
Messala ------------
Regi omontanus
Szilard ----------
Paschen ---------
Stebbins ---------
Fowler -------------
Curie --------------
Hipparchus ---------
Ptolemaeus ---------
Richardson ---------
Heaviside ----------
Magi nus ----------
Einstein -----------
Tsander ------------
Von Karman ---------
Janssen ----------
Galois ---------
Landau -------------
Von Karman M -------
Deslandres
Pasteur ------------
Lei bni tz -----------
Milne --------------
3.10D, 11.5
2.5A, 10.19
1.8, 10.31
8.11, 10.46
1.5, 10.46
4.7, 9.4, 9.28
1.8, 3.10, 10.27
1.8, 7.7, 10.28
1.7, 10.6, 10.15
3.100, 9.1, 9.2
4.2F, 8.14
4.2G, 12.9
1.3, 4.2J, 8.11
1.4, 3.5, 4.2K
Older than F-S.
Younger than F-S.
Pitted by Nectaris
Older than F-S.
Pitted by Nectaris
Mantled by Nectaris
Mantled by Nectaris
Pitted by Nectaris
Relatively fresh.
Relatively fresh.
N?; covered by the
Fra Mauro and
Cayley Formations.
Typical ._
Covered by the
Janssen Formation.
Ring arcs.
Despite the problems, the results of dating basins by superposi-
tional relations, crater counts, and assessments of superposed crater
morphology are generally consistent. No known craters with pre-
Nectarian morphology are clearly superposed on Nectarian basins.
This general internal consistency is the outcome of a series of itera-
tions in which the morphologic criteria for pre-Nectarian age were
repeatedly reassessed. Anomalous rebound of craters inside basins
and anomalous degradation by deposits of younger craters were
detected by geologic mapping. Thus, some assignments of crater age
in this volume differ from those shown on earlier geologic maps,
including those by Wilhelms and El-Baz and Wilhelms and
others . Pre-Nectarian craters are subdivided on the paleogeo-
logic map (pi. 6) as exposed (solid black), buried (solid rim-crest
outline), or possibly Nectarian (dashed rim-crest outline).
A total of 1,208 pre-Nectarian craters larger than 30 km in
diameter, 456 of which are unburied by pre-Nectarian or younger
deposits, are mapped here (pi. 6). They vary greatly in areal density
because the units that underlie them vary in age and because the
thickness of overlying deposits affects the number of buried craters
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
FIGURE 8.7. Stratigraphic relations between pre-Nectarian units on farside.
A. Radia! hneations (arrows) of Freundlich-Sharonov basin (FS), superposed on Keeler-Heaviside basin (named for unrelated craters Keeler [K; 169 km, 10° S., 162° E., probably Lower
Imbnan]andHeaviside[H; 163 km, pre-Nectarian]; compare figs. 4.3P, S); areas of B and C are outlined. Orbiter 2 frames M 75 (lower left) and M 34 (upper right); overlaps figure
8. PRE-NECTARIAN SYSTEM
that can still be seen. A density of 77 unburied pre-Nectarian craters
per million square kilometers (422 craters min 30 km diam in
5.45 x 106 km2) was determined for terrain of the oldest basins (age
groups 1-5, table 8.2) and other heavily cratered terrain. The younger
pre-Nectarian basins (age groups 6 9) display a much lower average
density of 10 such craters (34 in 3.24 x 106 km2). Extrapolation of the
larger value to the whole Moon (area, 38 x 106 km2) suggests that a
minimum of 2,940 craters larger than 30 km in diameter formed
B. Pre-Nectarian terrane pitted by probable secondary craters of Freundlich-Sharonov
basin (sc) and other, smaller secondaries. Craters older than Freundlich-Sharonov
include Daedalus R (DR; 41 km) and Daedalus U (DU; 30 km); Coriolis L (CL; 32
km) may be younger. A much younger crater chain secondary to a distant impact crater or
basin, probably Orientate (centered 2,800 km to east), is also superposed on Coriolis L
and Daedalus U. Crater Daedalus S (DS; 20 km) is also young, probably Imbrian.
Orbiter 2 frame H-33.
during pre-Nectarian time. Assuming that their deposits were as
extensive relative to crater size as are those of young craters, the
deposits covered about 110 percent of the Moon's surface area. Based
on the Nectarian frequency (see chap. 9), which is less affected by
saturation, the actual number of pre-Nectarian craters of this size
that formed while the 28 pre-Nectarian basins of groups 2 through 9
were forming was closer to 3,400. A still greater, unknown number
formed earlier.
C. Craters Cyrano (81 km) and Barbier (67 km), similar to pre-Nectarian craters in figure
8.5 and of a morphologic type absent in B, are beyond range of Freundlich-Sharonov
deposits; thus, Cyrano and Barbier are probably pre-Nectarian and possibly older than
Freundlich-Sharonov basin, despite moderately sharp topography. Orbiter 2 frame
THE GEOLOGIC HISTOKY OF THE MOON
FIGURE 8.8. Pre-Nectarian South Pole-Aitken basin, centered around lat 56° S., long 180°. Airbrush drawing by Donald E. Davis, courtesy of the artist.
FIGURE 8.9. South Pole-Aitken massifs photographed by Apollo 8. Arrow indicates crater
Mohorovicic A (20 km, 16° S., 163° W.) atop one arcuate massif; other massifs along lat 22°
S occupy horizon. At time of Apollo 8 mission, relation of the large mountains to a basin had
not yet been recognized. View southeastward. Apollo 8 frame H 2319.
8. PRE-NECTARIAN SYSTEM
FIGURE 8.10. Part of southern Oceanus Procellarum region, including Nectarian Humorum basin (H), pre-Nectarian Insularum (In) and Nubium (N) basins, and three rings of pre-Nectanan
Procellarum basin ; central Procellarum ring is expressed here mostly by mare ridges (compare fig. 5.26). Shallowness of mare is indicated by many islands belonging to basins
and craters that are superposed on Procellarum basin (pi. 3). Orbiter 4 frame M 125.
FIGURE 8.11. Large section of western farside, centered on craters Pasteur (P;
235 km, 12° S., 105° E., Pre-Nectanan) and Hilbert (H; I 70 km, 18° S.,
108° E., Nectarian), both filled by cratered plains. White dots, indefinite pre-
Nectanan basin Al-Khwarizmi/King , named for
craters Al-Khwarizmi (A; 65 km, 7° N., 107° E., Nectarian) and King (K;
77 km, 5° N., 121 ° E., Copernican); most conspicuous part of rim is southwest
of letter A. MS, Mare Smythii; s and black dashes, rim of pre-Nectarian
Smythii basin. Lacus Solitudinis (LS) is not related to known basins. Pre-
Nectarian crater or small basin Milne (M; 265 km, 31° S., 113° E.) has
basinlike ring structure but is omitted from table 4.1 because of its size. Orbiter 2
frame M-196.
8. PRE-NECTARIAN SYSTEM
FIGURE 8.12. Pre-Nectarian Mutus-Vlacq and Werner-Airy basins.
A. South-central nearside and area around south pole including Imbrian Schrodinger basin
on farside (s; 320 km, 76° S., 134° E.). Black dashes, rims of Mutus-Vlacq (below)
and Werner-Airy (indistinct, above). Arrowheads, prominent massifs of Mutus-Vlacq;
those indicated by larger arrowheads are also shown in B. Black p, Nectarian plains
concentrated in Mutus-Vlacq basin. N, Nectaris-basin rim (Rupes Altai). Pre-
Nectarian craters include Ptolemaeus (white p; 153 km, 9° S., 2° W.) and Vlacq, (v;
89 km, 53.5° S., 39° E.); Nectarian craters include Maurolycus (m; 114 km, 42° S.,
14° E.) and Airy (a; 37 km, 18° S., 5.5° E., possibly Imbrium-basin secondary crater);
Werner (w; 70 km, 28° S., 3.5° E.) is Eratosthenian. Orbiter 4 frame M-95.
B. Detail of Mutus-Vlacq massifs. Large arrows indicate same massifs as large arrowheads
in A. Small arrow indicates hill possibly belonging to an inner ring. M, Mutus (78 km,
63.5° S., 30° E., pre-Nectarian). Orbiter 4 frame H-82.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
VOLCANIC ROCKS
The discovery of ancient volcanic rocks on the Moon would be of
great interest from the standpoints of both petrogenesis and stratig-
raphy. The unforewarned geologist might think that such rocks have
been found in abundance because the terms "highland basalt,"
"KREEP basalt," and numerous other "basalts" are so common in the
literature. However, no pristine samples of terra composition are
known to be both pre-Nectarian in age and volcanic in origin; volcanic
KREEP basalt of Early Imbrian age is the oldest currently recognized
terra-type volcanic material (see chap. 10). Fragments of mare basalt
have been recovered from breccia deposits emplaced in the Nectarian
and Imbrian Periods, and a few have been radiometrically dated
(table 9.5; chaps. 9,10). Whether they are pre-Nectarian depends on
the absolute age of the Nectaris basin (see chap. 9); none are of
definite pre-Nectarian age.
Moreover, no plains or other terrane of pre-Nectarian age suffi-
ciently resemble maria to be definitely established as volcanic. Plains
in such basins as Mutus-Vlacq (fig. 8.12) may consist of pre-Nectarian
basalt underlying Nectarian ejecta, but this is uncertain (see chap. 9).
All pre-Nectarian interbasin terrane is ascribable to basin deposits
and is here mapped accordingly (pi. 6).
Despite the absence of firm evidence for pre-Nectarian vol-
canism, mare and KREEP basalt may have been extruded during the
period. The extensive early plutonism suggests accompanying vol-
canism, and some of the recovered mare-basalt clasts are, at least,
very close to pre-Nectarian in age. Another line of indirect evidence
for volcanism is the concentration of KREEP revealed by gamma-ray
spectrometers in the Imbrium-Procellarum region. The Procellarum
basin may have unroofed deep-seated KREEP-rich material that was
then excavated by further impacts; alternatively, however, KREEP
basalt may actually have been extruded volcanically into the basin
 . These pre-Nectarian
extrusions could have been recycled by later impacts and mare extru-
sions, so that the KREEP chemistry appears to be concentrated today
FIGURE 8.13. Pre-Nectarian Lomonosov-Fleming basin (dashes outline rim), named for
unrelated craters Fleming (F; 130 km, 15° N., 109.5° E., Nectarian) and mare-filled
Lomonosov (L; 93 km, 27.5° N., 98° E., Lower Imbrian). Pre-Nectarian craters include
Richardson (R; 161 km) and Szilard (S; 127 km)i Nectarian and Imbrian plains occupy
much of basin interior, especially between arrows and east of Fleming. Groovelike crater
chains (arrows; above, Catena Artamonov; below, Catena Dziewulski) are radial to and,
probably, secondary to the Imbnum basin, centered 3,000 km away on opposite side of
Moon. Apollo 12 frame H-8296.
in deposits of Archimedes, Aristarchus, Copernicus, and other craters
in the region. Continued sampling might well disclose pre-Nectarian
volcanic rocks here and elsewhere on the Moon.
CHRONOLOGY
The earliest pre-Nectarian event was the origin of the Moon.
Before the space age, the Moon's age was inferred from U-Th-Pb ages
of the Earth and meteorites to be 4.55 ± 0.07 aeons, assuming that all
these bodies formed contemporaneously . Absolute
dating of lunar rocks based on radiometric ages and assumed initial
isotopic ratios (model ages) is consistent with 4.55 aeons ago as the
approximate time of lunar origin .
Some recovered clasts of ANT rock yield very old isotopic ages
(table 8.4). Ferroan anorthosite is difficult to date because it contains
very little Rb, Nd, and Sm; its low initial 87Sr/86Sr ratios are consis-
tent with, but do not require, very primitive ages . More
precise ages appearing to be crystallization ages have been obtained
for pristine Mg-suite rocks (table 8.4). They range as old as 4.51 ± 0.07
aeons for inclusions in olivine of troctolite sample 76535 from the
Apollo 17 landing site . The
analysts were uneasy about the similarity of this age to that of the
Moon, but the age may, indeed, have been set by igneous melting in
the Moon shortly after its accretion . A
later event in the same rock's history at about 4.26 aeons ago is
recorded by Sm-Nd mineral isochrons and 40Ar-39Ar plateaus. If the
4.51-aeon age is an artifact, this later age may date the crystallization
of the troctolite, or it may date the end of a long cooling episode during
which isotopic reequilibration was possible .
Interpretation of such internal isochrons as dates of igneous
melting, along with evidence for very early geochemical fractiona-
tions (Rb-Sr, Pb-U, Sm-Nd), leads to the conclusion that the differen-
tiation which formed the lunar crust began during or immediately
after accretion . How long this differentiation lasted and the extent
of igneous activity after crustal formation but before extrusion of the
visible mare basalt are unanswered questions. The geologically
important date of when the crust solidifed enough to support basin-
and-crater topography probably is between 4.4 and 4.2 aeons ago; the
TABLE 8.4. Radiometric ages of samples of pristine pre-Nectarian lunar rocks
[Sample 15455, Apollo 15 ; numbers beginning with 6, Apollo 16 ; numbers beginning with 7, Apollo 17 .
Numbers after commas represent splits
of sample.
Mineralogy: cpx, clinopyroxene; ol, olivine; opx, orthopyroxene; pi, plagioclase.
Ayes calculated using decay constants recommended by the International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS)
 .
References:
B75, Boyard and others ; CL81a, Carlson and Luymair ; CLSlb, Carlson and Lugmair
 ; C75, Compston and others ; HS75, Husain and Schaefer ; HW75, Huneke and Wasserbury
 ; J77a, Jessberyer and others ; L75, Leich and others ; L76, Lugmair and otners ;
N76, Nakamura and others ; N79b, Nyquist and others ; NSla, Nyquist and others (igSla); PW75,
Papanastassiou and Wasserbury ; PW76, Papanastassiou and Wasserbury ; S74, Stettler and others
Source rock and litnology
(minerals in volume percent)
Norite clast (60-65 pi, 35-40
opx) from black-and-white
Tiny plagioclase clasts from
354-y polymict breccia.
7.9-g rake sample of Iherzolite
(58 ol, 21 pi, 15 opx, 5 cpx).
Plagioclase from 2-cm "Civet
Cat" norite clast from boulder
1, station 2.
Dunite (93 ol); part of clast
72415-7241R from boulder 3,
station 2.
Granulated 0.9-y norite clast
(53 pi, 40 opx) from 394-g
polymict breccia 73255.
156-g rake sample of troctolite
(37-60 ol, 35-58 pi, 4-5 opx).
Isotopic systems disturbed (CLRlb).
Crystallization or impact-excavation
Possibly as old as 4.36+0.13 aeons
Imprecise whole-rock isochrons.
Crystallization age; not disturbed.
Norite clas
Shocked norite clast (opx=pl)
from station 8 boulder.
Crystallization or impact-excavation
Crystallization age or artifact.
Crystallization age at least 4.33
aeons (CLSlb).
Crystallization age is probably
close to 4.34 aeons (CLSlb).
8. PRE-NECTARIAN SYSTEM
older date is more common in the literature . Taylor , however, suggested that
crystallization proceeded rapidly until 4.3 aeons ago and that intense
impact bombardment kept the crust thoroughly mixed and chemi-
cally requilibrated until about 4.2 aeons ago. The picture of igneous
petrogenesis that is emerging furthermore suggests that the differen-
tiation was complex. Local zones may have solidified early, especially
near the surface, and local hotspots probably persisted until late.
Early-formed crust was probably intruded by later plutons, dikes,
and sills. This complex, late-ending history 
seems more likely than the simpler scenarios that appear in much of
the literature.
Some pre-Nectarian clasts record probable postcrystallization
impacts. The 4.26-aeon event in the history of troctolite sample 76535
may have been an impact that ended the cooling . Dunite sample
72415 72418 was shocked at least once, probably during the pre-
Nectarian, before incorporation into the Apollo 17 melt-rich breccia
deposits . The more abundant Apollo 17
norite samples were also shocked before final emplacement
 . The
shock events may have been the formation of one of the pre-Nectarian
basins in the Serenitatis target area, such as Tranquillitatis (pi. 6).
Similarly complex, extended histories have been detected in other
primitive lunar rocks (table 8.4). The later events indicate that the
isochrons have been disturbed, and so the pristine ages are not
accurate except as minima.
The impact processing manifest in samples from younger depos-
its generally supports the high early impact rate indicated by the
abundance of observed pre-Nectarian basins and craters. For exam-
ple, widespread thermal metamorphism at shallow depths, probably
caused by accumulation of hot ejecta blankets, is suggested as the
origin of the granulitic textures of many impact-mixed rocks . However,
more specific information about pre-Nectarian chronology applicable
to the stratigraphic record has not been forthcoming from the rocks.
Attempts to calibrate the impact flux by means of the amounts of
siderophile elements or impact-melt rock are hindered by uncertain-
ties about projectile-to-ejecta ratio or energy partitioning between
impact melt and excavation .
Another potential method of establishing the emplacement ages
of pre-Nectarian units is the classic one of calibrating crater frequen-
cies with absolute ages. However, the relative ages of ancient surfaces
are difficult to determine precisely by crater frequencies because they
are saturated to large crater diameters ; all the frequency curves will have similar intercepts at 20-km
diameter and will differ only by subtle differences in the steady-state
diameters. In figure 8.16, an envelope of curves is fitted to (1) the
approximately known relative ages and well known absolute ages of
the Imbrian and Eratosthenian mare-basalt samples (see chaps. 11,
12), (2) the well known relative and absolute ages (3.85 aeons) of the
Imbrium basin (chap. 10), (3) the well known relative age and the
estimated absolute age (3.92 aeons) of the Nectaris basin (chap. 9),
and (4) the highest crater frequency found in this study, that within
the limits of the possible Al-Khwarizmi/King basin. The boxes for the
Imbrium, Nectaris, and Al-Khwarizmi/King surfaces are bounded
below by the actual observed cumulative frequencies of all craters
larger than 20 km in diameter and above by projections to 20-km
diameter from the parts of the curves representing craters large
enough to have escaped steady-state obliteration (fig. 8.6). Proper
comparison of the boxes requires comparing the same edge of each.
This extrapolation suggests that the Al-Khwarizmi/King crater popu-
lation is between 3.97 and 4.03 aeons old and that, accordingly, the
basin itself, part of pre-Nectarian group 2, is equally old or somewhat
A steep exponential decline like that plotted in figure 8.16 is only
one of many possible models of the early impact rate .
Possibly, the pre-Nectarian impact rate was closer to the Nectarian
rate (19,000 craters and 157 basins per aeon; see chap. 9) than is
generally assumed. In this case and if, additionally, the pre-Nec-
tarian crater size-frequency distribution was originally the same as
the Nectarian (small craters not yet destroyed), 3,400 craters from 30
to 300 km in diameter, as well as the 28 basins of pre-Nectarian
groups 2 through 9, formed from 4.1 to 3.92 aeons ago. A similar figure
of 4.06 aeons for the age of the oldest group-2 basins is derived by
assuming a constant rate of surface blanketing by basin deposits
(Nectarian basin deposits one basin diameter in radius theoretically
cover 41 percent of the Moon, and group 2-9 pre-Nectarian deposits
cover 84 percent). Thus, the models of steeply declining and constant
impact rates bracket the age of the oldest group-2 basins and accom-
panying craters between about 4.1 and 4.0 aeons. The younger age is
more likely if the early impact rate declined as steeply as shown in
figure 8.16, and may even be too old if the impacts declined still more
steeply. On the other hand, 4.1 aeons may be too young if the Nec-
tarian Period lasted longer than 0.07 aeon. I tentatively adopt 4.1
aeons as the age of the oldest group-2 basins because of this inter-
mediate position among the likely estimates.
The two giant basins of group 1, Procellarum and South Pole-
Aitken, probably formed before all the other visible basins and all the
visible craters. Because these basins are probably saturated by
impact structures of basin size, their ages are very difficult to esti-
mate without more calibration points or better models of the impact
rate than are available. The two models of the impact rate discussed
here imply different scenarios in the early era when these basins
formed. If the impacts declined steeply all through pre-Nectarian
time, far more basins formed than are observed. This scenario is, in
fact, consistent with the extreme impact processing observed in the
lunar crustal rocks and the relative paucity of "pristine" samples. If
extrapolated to the early pre-Nectarian, however, such steep curves
also imply that an unrealistically great mass of material impacted the
Moon since its accretion . This
difficulty is avoided if basins formed throughout pre-Nectarian and
Nectarian time at an approximately constant rate. About 14 basins in
addition to the two giant basins would then have formed from 4.2 to
4.1 aeons ago still enough for considerable impact processing of the
In summary, the many uncertainties preclude accurate esti-
mates of any pre-Nectarian event after the origin of the Moon 4.55
aeons ago. The many great impacts that must have preceded 4.2 aeons
may have struck either a solid or a mushy crust; the geologic record
does not specify which, but frequencies of craters and basins are, at
least, consistent with the 4.2-aeon date of crustal solidification given
earlier. Procellarum, South Pole-Aitken, and at least 14 now-oblite-
rated basins formed between crustal solidification and the oldest of
the 28 pre-Nectarian basins of groups 2 through 9. The group-2
basins began about forming 4.1 aeons ago if the Nectarian Period
lasted 0.07 aeon (from 3.92 to 3.85 aeons ago) and if the impact rate
was approximately constant during pre-Nectarian and Nectarian
time. These conservative estimates of 4.2, 4.1, and 3.92 aeons for the
major milestones of the pre-Nectarian period are consistent with
available data but may be considerably altered by better data on the
age of the Nectaris basin or the early impact rate. At least, pre-
Nectarian basins and craters clearly formed in such abundance that
they repeatedly destroyed earlier features and reworked earlier
crustal materials.
1^'V'£v w»
, M -y^v. *%r, - '«, '/ \\> * ,! » r
f;y, <f ^^^4 J':i.^>V .^ t
8. PRE-NECTARIAN SYSTEM
B. Detail of Coulomb-Sarton basin and superposed craters, including Coulomb (C) and Sarton (S). Orbiter 5 frame H 24.
C. Craters superposed on Birkhoff include Stebbms (S; 135
km, 64.°5 N., 142.5° W.) and Birkhoff X (BX; 77
km, 62° N., 149.5° W.), probably pre-Nectarian; and
Carnot (C; 52.5° N., 144° W.), fresher appearing than
the others, probably Nectarian. Numerous pits on floor
of Birkhoff are probably secondary craters of Stebbms,
Carnot, and other large nearby craters. Birkhoff deposits
or secondary craters overlie pre-Nectarian craters Fowler
(F), Schlesmger (Sch; 97 km, 47.5° N., 138.5° W.),
and probably Esnault-Pelterie (E-P; 79 km, 47.5° N.,
141.5° W.); sharper rim of E-P suggests, alternatively,
degradation only by Carnot deposits and superposition on
Birkhoff deposits. Secondary craters of Orientale and
(or) Hertzsprung basins are conspicuous in Fowler (com-
pare A). Orbiter 5 frame H-29.
FIGURE 8.14. Stratigraphic relations of pre-Nectarian basins Birkhoff (59° N., 145.5°
W.), Coulomb-Sarton (530? km, 52° N., 123°W.), and Lorentz (360 km, 34.5° N., 97°
W.) on northeastern farside.
A. Widely spaced dashes outline basin rims. Interior of Coulomb-Sarton basin (C-S) is
pitted by small subequal subdued craters probably secondary to Birkhoff and Lorentz,
and is overlain by radial chains secondary to Nectarian Hertzsprung basin (Nh),
centered in direction of arrow 1,350 km south of crater Fowler (136 km, 43° N., 145°
W., pre-Nectarian); dashed line encloses additional secondaries and other outer deposits
of Hertzsprung. Craters superposed on C-S basin include Landau (221 km, 43° N,
119° W., pre-Nectarian), Coulomb (89 km, 54.5° N., 114.5° W., Nectarian), and
Sarton (69 km, 49.5° N., 121° W., Nectarian). Overlap of old craters by Lorentz
ejecta is visible at X. Sharp small craters in lower left near crater Fersman (143 km, 18°
N., 125° W., pre-Nectarian) are secondary to the Imbrian Orientale basin (lo; centered
in direction of arrow) and to Hertzsprung. Kovalevskaya (111 km) is probably Upper
Imbrian. Orbiter 5 frame M-8.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
FIGURE 8.15. Region west and southwest of Apollo basin, including Apollo-secondary
craters (right of dashed line; most evident examples at letters as); black-and-white arrows
point toward basin center. Center of indefinite basin Grissom-White (GW) is also indicated,
but basin could be part of Apollo's peripheral structure. Pre-Nectarian craters include
Leibnitz (L; 236 km), Von Karman (V; 179 km, 44° S., 176° E.) and Von Karman M
(VM; 225 km). Oppenheimer (O; 206 km, 35° S., 166° W.) is believed to be Nectarian,
though poorly photographed. Orbiter 5 frame M-43, rectified at University of Arizona's
Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, Tucson, Ariz.
Al- Khwarizmi / King
craters ~\
|mbrjum basin
20-km craters J
ABSOLUTE AGE (AEONS BEFORE PRESENT)
FIGURE 8.16. Cratenng rate during pre-Nectarian, Nectarian, and part of Imbrian time.
Boxes represent observed crater densities (height) and absolute ages (width) given in later
chapters; crosses represent my estimates for most likely values. Craters larger than 20 km in
diameter (left vertical axis) were counted on Imbrium-basin and older units, and small craters
(right vertical axis) on Imbrium-basin and younger units; Imbrium basin (fig. 10.4; table 7.3)
provides calibration between cumulative frequencies of craters at 20- and I-km diameters.
Straight segments of curves drawn through corners of boxes enclose likely envelope of
cratering frequencies as a function of time (dashed); heavy solid line is drawn through centers
of crosses. Crater densities, but not absolute ages, are available for Al-Khwarizmi/King.
W31SAS NVIHV133N '6
FIGURE 9.1 (OVERLEAF). Deposits and secondary craters of Nectaris basin southeast of basin rim (upper left). View centered on Vallis Rheita (VR), a Nectaris-basm secondary-crater chain,
and crater Rheita, a superposed Nectarian primary-impact crater (R; 70 km, 37° S., 47° E.). Pre-Nectanan terrane is at lower left; largest crater is Janssen (j; 190 km, 45° S., 42° E.).
Compare figures 8.15 and 9.2. Orbiter 4 frame M-52.
9. NECTARIAN SYSTEM
Introduction ...................................................... 163
Nectaris basin ................................................... 163
General features .............................................. 163
Nectaris component in Apollo 16 samples ........................ 164
Absolute age .................................................. 168
Crisium basin .................................................... 170
General features ............................................... 170
Luna 20 samples ............................................... 171
Serenitatis basin .................................................. 171
General features ............................................... 171
Relative age ................................................... 173
Petrology of Apollo 17 samples ................................. 173
Emplacement process .......................................... 174
Absolute age .................................................. 177
Other basin and crater materials ................................... 178
Basins ........................................................ 178
Craters ....................................................... 180
Volcanic rocks ................................................... 190
Chronology ...................................................... 190
INTRODUCTION
The Nectarian System includes all materials of the Nectaris
basin and all younger lunar materials emplaced before the deposi-
tion of Imbrium-basin materials . Thus, the Nectarian Period comprises the timespan between
the Nectaris and Imbrium impacts. This system contains fewer rock-
stratigraphic units than does the pre-Nectarian but is nevertheless
widespread on the Moon (pi. 7). Nectarian basin materials cover a
large area on the nearside and farside centered on the east limb
(figs. 9.1-9.6). Other concentrations are on the farside around the
Orientale deposits. Nectarian craters, formed at a declining but still
frequent rate (fig. 8.16), are scattered randomly wherever younger
deposits are absent or thin. Nectarian plains are more evident than
are pre-Nectarian; photogeologic and sample data to be discussed
here suggest that some Nectarian plains may be partly volcanic in
Samples were collected from as many as three Nectarian basins.
The Apollo 17 mission collected large amounts of material of the
Serenitatis basin, which is probably Nectarian. Small fragments
returned by Luna 20 from a spot on the Crisium-basin flank proba-
bly were emplaced in the ejecta of that Nectarian basin. Apollo 16,
arguably, returned materials of the Nectaris basin. As always, the
term "Nectarian" in this context refers to the photogeologically
observed stratigraphy (see chaps. 2, 7, 8). Most of the materials
contained in Nectarian units originated endogenically during the
pre-Nectarian, and, additionally, had been extensively reworked by
pre-Nectarian impacts before emplacement during the Nectarian
Period. In general, the samples can be identified with specific Nec-
tarian stratigraphic units better than with the pre-Nectarian units
in which they once resided. The possible Nectaris-basin provenance
of the important and controversial Apollo 16 sample suite is dis-
cussed in this chapter, and alternative interpretations are weighed
in chapter 10.
NECTARIS BASIN
General features
Deposits of the Nectaris basin clearly separate pre-Nectarian
and younger Nectarian deposits over a wide area (pis. 3, 7; figs. 8.5,
9.1, 9.2, 9.5, 9.6). At 860 km in diameter, the Nectaris basin is only 70
km smaller than the Orientale basin (table 4.1), and probably
resembled Orientale before modification by later basin and crater
deposits. The west and south sectors have a moderately well defined
ring structure spaced like the Orientale rings (fig. 9.2A). In fact,
Nectaris was chosen as the type basin by Hartmann and Kuiper
The landscape south and southeast of the Nectaris basin is a
degraded equivalent of the Hevelius Formation and the secondary
craters south and southeast of Orientale . Thick mantling of pre-Nectarian terrane is evident from
the paucity of large craters in comparison with the region farther
south (figs. 8.5, 9.1). Like the circum-Orientale terrane, the Janssen
Formation and much other circum-
Nectaris terrane are strongly lineate radially to the basin center.
Vallis Rheita (figs. 9.1, 9.2) and similar troughs , consist of subtle overlapping or tangential elliptical craters
and evidently were formed by secondary impact, as was Vallis
Bouvard on the south Orientale-basin flank (fig. 4.4D). Subcircular
satellitic craters of Nectaris (figs. 9.1, 9.25) also resemble the second-
ary craters of Orientale in shape, cluster geometry, and distance from
the source basin, although they appear less crisp. At Nectaris, the
primary-secondary transitional zone that is reproducibly mappable
east of Orientale and is also detectable at Imbrium (chap. 4) has been
blurred by "aging" and secondary cratering from Imbrium (fig. 3.10A);
nevertheless, an attempt has been made here to identify the contact
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
between the two Nectaris fades (pis. 3, 7).
The north and east sectors of Nectaris have an overall arcuate
map pattern, but individual rings are inconspicuous (fig. 9.7). These
sectors resemble western Orientale in this respect (fig. 4.5), although
the Nectaris uplifts are more flat-topped than jagged. The northern
and eastern Nectaris ejecta is largely buried by younger deposits (pi.
7). Any secondary chains that were formed in these sectors have been
buried by younger deposits of the maria and of the post-Nectaris
Crisium, Serenitatis, and Imbrium basins (pis. 3, 7; figs. 9.3-9.6).
More light-colored plains are concentrated inside the Nectaris
basin than in other settings except the Orientale- and Imbrium-basin
peripheries (fig. 10.34). This setting suggests an analogy with the
Maunder Formation of Orientale, that basin's interior impact melt.
Hummocky material on the northern Nectaris terra is similar in
topography and relative position to the Montes Rook Formation and
may be the Nectaris equivalent . However, this hummocky material lies on the distal sides of
Imbrium-secondary craters and thus may consist of their decelerated
ejecta .
Light-colored plains are also widespread south of the basin (pi.
7). Wilhelms and McCauley and Scott interpreted the
large patches of cratered or "pitted" plains southwest of the basin (fig.
9.25) as volcanic in origin by analogy with the younger, Imbrian
plains also thought to be volcanic before the Apollo 16 analyses. The
subequal "pits" and larger, also subequal, flat-floored depressions
were thought to be volcanic because of their grouping. The superposi-
tion of the pitted plains and smoother Imbrian plains on the larger
craters was interpreted as analogous to the flooding of craters by
mare materials. An alternative explanation, however, seems to be
required by the Apollo 16 results. The plains grade with the lineate
Janssen Formation, as do circum-Orientale or circum-Imbrium
plains with the lineate ejecta of those basins. Therefore, the strat-
igraphic relations here can be interpreted by the impact model of
lunar-terra formation. The large grouped craters are probably Nec-
taris secondaries, and most of the smaller craters or "pits" are proba-
bly Imbrium secondaries. The plains were likely emplaced by one of
the ejecta-deposition mechanisms whereby a surge of debris arrives
at a site after the secondaries form. This concentration of plains may
result from catchment of the Nectaris ejecta by the Mutus-Vlacq
basin . In addition, a marelike
volcanic deposit, extruded into the Mutus-Vlacq basin during pre-
Nectarian time, may underlie the plains and contribute to their level
topography (see section below entitled "Volcanic Rocks").
The terrain west of Nectaris differs considerably from that in the
other sectors. Rupes Altai (the Altai scarp) constitutes a continuous,
well-defined topographic rim (fig. 9.2A). Despite its proximity to this
rim, the western region contains little evidence of Nectaris ejecta.
Thick, strongly lineate ejecta is visible at the same distance from the
southwest and southeast rim sectors. Part of the reason for the
difference is that the western Nectaris deposits were modified by
Imbrium projectiles when the strong Imbrium-radial pattern of cra-
ters and grooves was formed (figs. 3.10, 9.2A). Additionally, Nectaris
ejecta may have been deposited less thickly here than in the south.
Nectaris component in Apollo 16 samples
The thickness of the western Nectaris ejecta is important in the
interpretation of samples collected by the Apollo 16 mission. The
astronauts landed 60 km west of the Kant Plateau, a broad part of the
Nectaris-basin rim crest about 100 km wide (pi. 3; figs. 2.5C, 9.8). At
Orientale, thick ejecta is visible in the most nearly analogous posi-
tion, 160 km east of the Cordillera scarp, even though this point is in
FIGURE 9.2. Materials of Nectaris basin.
A. Regional view showing Mare Nectaris and Nectaris basin (upper right quadrant) and
area of B (outlined). Letter R is below crater Rheita and right of Vallis Rheita. Orbiter
4 frame M-83.
B. Detail of Janssen Formation (Nj), plains deposits (Np), Nectaris-basin secondary
craters (Nnsc), and Imbrium-basin secondary craters (lisc). Nj, type area of the Janssen
Formation , which partly buries pre-Nectarian crater Janssen;
arrow is radial to center of Nectaris basin. Craters Nicolai (42 km, 42° S., 26° E.) and
Pitiscus (82 km, 50° S., 30° E.) are Nectarian. Nj and Np thickly to thinly bury Nnsc;
lisc overlies Nectarian units (Scott, I972b). Orbiter 4 frame H 83.
9. NECTARIAN SYSTEM
the relatively "excluded" zone of ejecta (pi. 3; fig. 4.4F). Thus, Nectaris
ejecta probably either underlies or composes the surface materials at
the Apollo 16 landing site. However, the search for Nectaris materials
has been inconclusive.
Two photogeologic units were sampled by Apollo 16. The first is
the Cayley Formation, which forms the Cayley plains (figs. 9.8, 9.9).
This formation was emplaced during the Imbrian Period (chap. 10);
however, it may consist of Nectaris materials reworked during its
emplacement. The Cayley was sampled in the central and southern
parts of the region (all stations except 11 and 13, fig. 9.9). Station 10,
near the landed lunar module (LM) and the geophysical instruments
(Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package [ALSEP]), is probably
the most intensely examined part of the Moon . Nevertheless, no outcrops or large boul-
ders of the Cayley were found. A regolith 10 to 15 m thick obscures the internal stratigraphy of the
Cayley. The Cayley may contain coherent, lithologically uniform
strata or lenses , or may consist of
loosely aggregated poorly sorted clastic debris. Some of the mecha-
nisms described in chapter 10 could have emplaced a Cayley Forma-
tion consisting of poorly sorted Nectaris debris during the Imbrian
Regolith samples show that impact-melted materials are com-
mon in the Cayley Formation . Their sources
and ages, however, are major problems. A tight compositional cluster
(approx 29-31 weight percent A12O3) and a looser cluster (17-21
weight percent A12O3) suggest to Ryder that two groups of melt
rocks came from two distinct melt sheets. The first group is richer in
Al than the average terra 
and is mostly subophitic to intergranular in texture, like much vol-
canic basalt but resulting from thorough impact melting (lithologic
type SM, compositional type V, table 9.1). The low-Al samples are the
richest in KREEP, are laden with fragmental material, and are typ-
ically poikilitic in texture (lithologic type PM, compositional type K).
The poikilitic texture results from the relatively mafic composition
and from the presence of many clasts, which form nuclei for crys-
tallization of the melt . In
addition, many melt rocks have A12O3 contents intermediate between
the two clusters (lithologic type IM, compositional type I); their
compositions are commonly described inappropriately as "very high
alumina (VHA) basalt" .
The largest samples of the Cayley Formation were excavated by
South Ray Crater, 680 m wide and 130 m deep, which is 2 million years
old (table 13.2). Materials probably ejected from South Ray were
sampled at stations 4 and 8 . Among other materials is a
distinctive dimict (dilithologic) breccia that apparently characterizes
the Cayley Formation . These "black and
white" rocks consist of cataclastic anorthosite and fine-grained
impact-melt rock of "VHA" composition. The dimict breccia seems to
be analogous to terrestrial dike-breccia deposits formed in the outer
parts of impact craters (fig. 3.21). During cratering, melt intruded into
cataclastic feldspathic material in the walls of a growing crater or
basin and then was quenched, fragmented, and intruded by other
clastic feldspathic material . Fragments of similar
anorthosite and melt rock that also abound in the regolith probably
originated in dimict breccia.
The melt rocks of the Cayley Formation may have been emplaced
while hot as beds or pods , or they may
have been emplaced cold in isolated boulders that South Ray and
other craters happened to penetrate. If individual impacts generate
uniform melt sheets, one melt type, at most, is likely to have been
emplaced hot when the Cayley was emplaced . Thus,
reworking of an already complex deposit is suggested. Nonetheless,
large single impacts can generate great lithologic and compositional
complexities (see chap. 3). It is still unclear how many melt sheets are
represented by these melt rocks.
The other unit sampled by Apollo 16 is material of the Descartes
Mountains . For convenience, this
unit is here called the Descartes Formation, although it has not been
defined formally. The Descartes is divided into two gradational facies.
The northern or Smoky Mountain facies is grooved radially to the
Imbrium basin. Grooves in the southern or Stone Mountain facies
curve away from this Imbrium-radial direction into a more nearly
transverse trend approximately where the formation contacts the
Kant Plateau (figs. 2.5C, 9.9). This embankment of the Descartes
Formation against the Nectaris-basin rim has been considered as
evidence for a partial Nectaris origin of the topography . Thus, both the Imbrium and Nectaris basins may
have contributed to the morphology of the Descartes Formation; the
same is true for the materials of which it is composed.
Large sample collections were made at stations 11 and 13 on
Smoky Mountain from ejecta of the 1-km-wide, 50-million-year-old
(table 13.2) North Ray Crater . Station 11 is on the crater rim, and station 13
is about one crater diameter from the rim (fig. 9.9). North Ray pene-
trated a 50-m-high mass-wasted ridge that is part of Smoky Mountain
(300-400 m high overall). The 230-m depth of North Ray probably
ensures that the Smoky Mountain material was excavated . The station 11 and 13 samples are
mostly of fragmental feldspathic breccia whose fragmental melt-poor
matrix is composed of material similar to that of the larger clasts (fig.
9.10). About half the clasts are of cataclastic anorthosite , a quarter of granulitic breccia, and a
quarter of feldspathic fragment-laden impact melt (lithologic types
CA, G, and FM, respectively, table 9.1). The granulitic breccia is
thermally metamorphosed . The relation of the FM-type melts to the breccia deposit in
which they are found is not known. They may have been cogenetic
with the fragmental breccia or may predate the deposition of the breccia.
Determining which is the case here would be an important step in
interpretation of the Descartes Formation, especially considering the
rarity of impact melts in the breccia matrices; such melts are gener-
ally the most valuable for dating impact deposits.
Small amounts of the Stone Mountain facies may have been
sampled at stations 4 and 5, where feldspathic material like that at
stations 11 and 13 was recovered. Contamination by Cayley material
Note: Figures 9.3 through 9.6 constitute a series of overlapping oblique photographs taken
by Lunar Orbiter 4 of areas covered poorly from lower altitudes earlier in the mission (pi. 2);
Sun illumination is opposite from that in other nearside photographs.
FIGURE 9.3. (p. 166, left) Part of northeast quadrant of nearside, including Mare Crisium
and Crisium basin (bottom; centered at 17.5° N., 58.5° E.). Major Nectarian craters are
Cleomedes (Cl; 126 km) and Endymion (E; 125 km; pi. 7; table 9.4). Arrows indicate
secondary-crater chains radial to Crisium (C) and Imbrium (I) basins; terra south of dashed
line is covered by deposits of Crisium basin, except where covered by younger deposits of
Cleomedes, Geminus (G; 86 km, Eratosthenian), and Taruntius (T; 56 km, Copernican).
A, Atlas (87 km, Lower Imbrian); H, Hercules (69 km, Eratosthenian); M, Messala (124
km, pre-Nectarian, partly covered by Crisium deposits). Orbiter 4 frame H 191.
FIGURE 9.4. (p. 166, right) Part of northeast quadrant near east limb, including two
distinct rings of Humboldtianum basin (300- and 600-km diameter, centered at 61 ° N., 84°
E.) between Mare Humboldtianum (H) and crater Endymion (E; compare fig. 9.3).
Arrows indicate Humboldtianum-radial or -subradial directions; arrow I is also radial to
Imbrium (fig. 9.3), and arrow below crater Zeno (Z) is also radial to Crisium. Zeno is
superposed on Humboldtianum basin and overlain by Crisium-basin secondary-crater cluster
(compare fig. 4.3Q). Deposits and clustered craters between Gauss (G; 177 km, a
Nectarian crater with fractured floor) and Joliot (J; 143 km, pre-Nectarian) are probably
outer materials of Humboldtianum basin; deposits in lower third of photograph may be related
to Crisium (C). Basin deposits underlie Nectarian craters Gauss, Berosus (B; 74 km), and
Neper (N; 137 km, 9 N., 85 E.), Lower Imbrian crater Hahn (Ha; 84 km), and mare
basalt (M; Mare Marginis) (compare fig. 4.7) Orbiter 4 frame H-165.
FIGURE 9.5. (p. 167, left) Terrain south of Mare Crisium (C) and east of Nectaris basin.
Black-and-white arrows are radial to basin centers and denote large secondary-crater chains
of Crisium basin (c) and Nectaris basin (N; lower chain is part of Vallis Rheita); g, graben.
Outer deposits of Crisium (Nco) and Nectaris (Nno) include secondary craters and terra-
mantling deposits. Luna 20 landing site (L20) is on Crisium-basin rim (compare fig. 11.16).
Nj, Janssen Formation, partly covers pre-Nectarian crater Furnerius (F; 125 km, 36° S.,
60° E.). Np, plains of Nectarian age; INp, deposit in pre-Nectarian Balmer-Kapteyn
basin, probably consisting of Nectarian plains overlain by Imbrian plains, y, deposits
younger than Nectarian. Primary and secondary deposits of floor-fractured Lower Imbrian
crater Petavius (P; 177 km) are superposed on plains, Crisium-secondary chain (c; Vallis
Palitzsch), and crater Adams (A; 66 km); Adams and Pontecoulant (Po; 91 km, 59° S., 66°
E.), both Nectarian, overlie basin deposits. L, Langrenus (132 km), an Eratosthenian crater
superposed on Crisium deposits and Mare Fecunditatis. Orbiter 4 frame H 184.
FIGURE 9.6. (p. 167, right) Eastward continuation of geology shown in figure 9.5.
Southward extent of Crisium-basin deposits (Nco) is obscured by large, floor-fractured,
Upper Imbrian crater Humboldt (H; 207 km, 27° S., 81 ° E., unrelated to Humboldtianum
basin); clustered craters between H and arrow N (indicating Nectaris center) may be
Crisium-basin secondaries. C, direction to center of Crisium; Nno, outer deposits of Nectaris
basin. Po, Pontecoulant (91 km, 59° S., 66° E.); m, part of Mare Australe. Orbiter 4
frame H-178.
*&&&& JEW**-
«,»r V'&»V «*$3r^<ife:
. r -'j-i*i-^ :
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
(or a similarity of Cayley and Descartes material), however, is likely at
those stations, considering that many large samples consist of dimict
breccia with a 2-million-year exposure age .
In summary, the Cayley and Descartes Formations appear to
differ in several respects in addition to morphology . (1) The North Ray
Crater samples (probable Descartes) are more aluminous than the
South Ray Crater samples (Cayley). (2) The Cayley appears to contain
more impact-melt rock, whereas the Descartes is characterized by
friable fragmental feldspathic breccia. (3) More of the Cayley impact-
melt rocks are of low-K KREEP and "VHA" composition. (4) The
Cayley apparently has a higher magnetism as measured on the
surface, a possible indication of buried melt-rich breccia . Finally, (5), the Cayley is characterized by sharper
craters, more blocks ejected onto the surface from craters, and a
thinner regolith , properties consistent with the Cayley
being a more cohesive unit than the Descartes. A possible explanation
for these lithologic and topographic differences is that the Descartes
Formation consists mostly of Nectaris ejecta and the Cayley of melt-
rich Imbrium ejecta.
This complex region is still not well understood. Neither the
Cayley nor the Descartes Formation can be said to be well charac-
terized lithologically or stratigraphically. Apart from a boulder com-
posed of lithified regolith (sample 62195), the only boulders sampled
are those from North and South Ray Craters. The observed dif-
ferences may not be qualitative but may reflect relative proportions of
the same constituents . Analyses of the returned samples have stressed their
highly feldspathic composition, and only now are beginning to
address problems of the origin and emplacement age of the breccia
.- .^;..-.j.:
^ ,.,-p^.^ ^;
. r ---V^'';
FIGURE 9.7. North rim of Nectaris basin. Hilly terrain (h) is possible Nectaris equivalent
of Monies Rook and Alpes Formations. Topographic freshness, however, suggests emplace-
ment by Imbrium-basin secondary craters (arrow is radial to Imbrium). Imbrium-radial
grabens are in lower third of photograph (see chap. 6). View centered at 3° S., 37.5° E.
Orbiter 4 frame H-72.
TABLE 9.1. 40Ar-3t>Ar ages of Apollo 16 samples
[After James .
Sample numbers :
60-, station 10, central part of area
near Lunar Module and Apollo Lunar Science Experiment Package (ALSEP); 61-, sta-
tion 1, central area on rim of 300-m-diameter Flag Crater; 615-, chips from rake
sample 61500; 63-, station 13, on ejecta of North Ray Crater, about 800 m from
rim: 635-, 2- to 4-mm fines from rake sample 63500; 64-, station 4, on Stone
Mountain; 65-, station 5, on Stone Mountain; 66-, station 6, near base of Stone
Mountain; 67-, station 11, on southeast rim of North Ray Crater; 676-, 2- to 4-
mm fines from rake sample 67600; 677-, 2- to 4-mm fines from rake sample 67700;
68-, station 8, on ejecta of South Ray Crater, 3.3 km northeast of rim; 685-,
fragment from rake sample 68500; identical to DM (see below).
Digits and let-
ters after commas refer to splits of sample.
Lithologies:
CA, cataclastic (mechanically disrupted) anorthosite, found as
clasts in feldspathic fragmental breccia, as one of the major lithologies in
dimict breccia, and as monolithologic fragments in the regolith; some recrys-
DC, anorthosite in dimict breccia.
DM, impact-melt rock in dimict
breccia; texturally diverse; mostly fine grained, compositionally uniform melt-
rock component of the breccia.
FM, feldspathic fragment-laden impact-melt rock;
diverse texture, nonpoikilitic.
G, granulitic breccia ; probably recrystallized or partially melted after
heating of earlier breccia ; com-
positionally heterogeneous:
granulitic (granoblastic) texture consists of small
equant crystals lacking wel1-developed crystalline forms.
IM, intergranular
impact-melt rock; fine texture:
intergranular texture consists of pyroxene
filling voids between plagioclase crystals.
PM, poikilitic impact-melt rock:
poikilitic texture consists of large single grains (commonly of pyroxene) en-
closing many small crystals (commonly of plagioclase).
SM, subophitic impact-
melt rock; fine texture, grading to intergranular; glassy residuum also pres-
subophitic texture consists of pyroxene filling voids and partly surround-
ing plagioclase crystals.
A1 203 contents from Ryder and Norman and James .
Surface unit is unit in which sample was emplaced at surface and from which it was
collected :
Ca, Cinco a crater:
local, in regolith
developed from underlying unit; NR, rim or other ejecta of North Ray Crater; SR,
ejecta of South Ray Crater.
Source unit is photogeologic unit in which sample was emplaced near the landing
C, Cayley Formation; D, Descartes Formation.
Ages recalculated from original values, using International Union of Geological
Sciences (IUGS) decay constants , except for those
determined by Schaeffer and Husain , Schaeffer and others ,
and Schaeffer and Schaeffer ; reevaluation of the monitor used by these
analysts nearly compensates for the changes in decay constants .
References:
H73, Huneke and others ; J74, Jessberger and others ;
J77a, Jessberger and others ; K73b, Kirsten and others ; M78,
Maurer and others ; P75, Phinney and others ; S73, Stettler and
others ; S76, Schaeffer and others ; SH73, Schaeffer and Hussain
 ; SH74, Schaeffer and Husain ; SS77, Schaeffer and Schaeffer ;
T73, Turner and others ; TC75, Turner and Cadogan ]
References
Plagioclase
SR or local
SR or local
SR or local
SR or local
SR or local
SH74, P75.
Absolute age
Absolute ages determined by the 40Ar-39Ar method on materials
obtained from the Cayley and Descartes Formations do not clearly
indicate a difference in provenance consistent with the suggested
lithologic differences. Pre-Imbrian ages (older than 3.85 aeons) are
more common than Imbrium-basin ages. The following interpreta-
tion suggests an age for the Nectaris basin .
9. NECTARIAN SYSTEM
The dated material that is most critical with respect to a Nec-
taris-basin age was derived from the feldspathic fragmental breccia
deposits penetrated by North Ray Crater (table 9.1). Coarse fines (2-4
mm) of melt type FM collected by rake from the North Ray regolith
yielded a cluster of six dates between 4.09 and 4.14 aeons and one
younger date of 3.96 aeons . Because the
young fragment (67603,1-MD) is compositionally and texturally
identical to the apparently older clasts, 3.96 aeons is a maximum age
for the FM-type materials . The older ages were probably
inherited from an earlier event and were not reset when the feld-
spathic fragmental breccia deposits were assembled. Their close clus-
tering suggests an actual event at about 4.1 aeons. Wetherill 
suggested that the older event was the Nectaris impact, whereas
Maurer and others and James proposed that it was a pre-
Nectarian crater impact(s).
The other chronologically significant type of coarse fines derived
from the feldspathic fragmental breccia deposits is granulitic breccia.
The ages of six fragments range from 3.89 to 3.96 aeons, a range that
also includes the age of the youngest FM-type melt . This range may reflect analytical inaccuracies and may
record a single metamorphic episode generated by a major source of
near-surface heat, probably a hot basin-ejecta blanket . The geologic setting of the samples suggests the Nec-
taris ejecta as the source of this heat. The average of the age cluster,
3.92 aeons, or the youngest age, 3.89 aeons, which is also the age of a
dark clast and a plagioclase separate from sample 67016 , may date the Nectaris impact .
The wide range of isotopic ages presents obvious problems for
determining the emplacement ages of the Cayley and Descartes For-
mations. An age occupies almost every 10-million-year interval from
4.14 to 3.86 aeons ago, and four ages are younger (table 9.1). The
inevitably long list of uncertainties includes: (1) analytical errors; (2)
incomplete reequilibration of argon isotopes by impacts; (3) addition
or removal of argon by later events; (4) varying degrees of equilibra-
tion of clasts and matrices in the same sample, which are commonly
analyzed together; (5) failure to collect thoroughly reset materials
that do date an event; (6) uncertainty whether the recorded events are
the crystallization of plutonic rocks, metamorphism (granulitic brec-
cia), the main emplacing impact, or minor later impacts; and (7)
uncertainty whether the photogeologic unit underlying the sampling
stations was actually sampled , including Apollo 11 (see chap. 11) and Apollo 16 landing sites. Im, mare basalt of Imbrian age (Apollo 11); Ip,
plains material of Imbrian age (Cayley Formation; Apollo 16); Ihf, hilly and furrowed material of Imbrian age (Descartes Formation; Apollo 16). Arcs indicate basin rings as interpreted at time of
map's preparation.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
Descartes Formation). The problems are illustrated by sample 60315
from the Cayley, which yielded ages of 3.91 to 3.97 aeons (table 9.1).
Therefore, the dating may not be accurate; the ages listed in table 9.1
may date no real event at all.
These ages, however, are at least consistent with formation of the
Nectaris basin at about 3.92 ± 0.03 aeons, and this date is tentatively
accepted in this volume (fig. 8.16). The basin is unlikely to be younger
than that age range because no samples of granulitic breccia or type-
FM melt rock recovered from the Descartes Formation have yielded
younger ages . It is unlikely to be older than that age
range because some type-FM melts were reset during that time
interval, because metamorphism of granulitic breccia requires a
major heat source not available after the Nectaris impact, and
because the impact-rate curve (fig. 8.16) would have to bend to fit both
the available Imbrian ages and an older age for Nectaris (see chap. 8).
The ages older than 3.92 ±0.03 aeons (table 9.1) date pre-Nectarian
events, if they date any discrete events. The few younger ages may
have been introduced or partly reset during the Imbrium impact by
the mechanisms described in chapter 10.
CRISIUM BASIN
General features
Crisium has already been referred to in connection with basin
topography, ring origin, mare-basalt thickness, and structural modi-
fication because quantitative data were obtained by overflights of
y "f \my: *-* *.
FIGURE 9.9. Region of Apollo landing 16 site. Facies of the Descartes Formation in the Smoky Mountains is furrowed radially to
Imbrium basin; facies in Stone Mountain is furrowed transversely to Imbrium and radially to Nectaris basin. Lines, astronaut
traverses; numbered circles, sampling stations. Stereoscopic pair of Apollo 16 frames P-4558 (right) and P-4563 (left).
9. NECTARIAN SYSTEM
Apollo 15 and 17 instruments (pi. 2; figs. 4.9, 5.23). As in many large
basins, the identity of its topographic rim is unclear. The massive
mare-bounding rim, about 635 km in diameter, would seem to be the
logical choice as the topographic rim and, therefore, the boundary of
excavation. It probably does bound a deep cavity. Incomplete but
locally conspicuous arcs, however, form a near-circle, 1,060 km in
diameter, whose massifs are as high as or higher than those of the
635-km-diameter ring (figs. 4.3Z, 4.9, 9.11). These arcs are locally
rimlike (raised crest, steep inner slope, gentler outer flank) and mark
the inner boundary of conspicuous secondary chains (figs. 9.3, 9.5,
9.6). Thus, the outer zone may have been partly excavated. A large
basin excavation is consistent with the many topographic complex-
ities within the 1,060-km periphery, and that diameter is favored here
as the excavation diameter of Crisium.
Another fact favoring a large excavation is the probable great
extent of the ejecta and secondary craters. Crisium-secondary craters
extend as far as 900 km northward and 1,100 km southward of the
basin center (pi. 7; figs. 9.3-9.6). One group of secondaries seems to
be superposed on the crater Zeno, which, in turn, is superposed on the
Humboldtianum basin (fig. 9.4). The extent of the continuous ejecta is
less clear. Hummocky terrain occupies some sectors close to the basin,
as does the somewhat similar, though topographically sharper,
Montes Rook Formation of Orientale . Crisium
ejecta probably covers terrain in the poorly photographed zone east of
Crisium, which is smoother than the adjacent more heavily cratered
pre-Nectarian terrane (fig. 9.4). An extent of Crisium ejecta as great
as 1,600 km east of the Crisium center is suggested by a concentration
of radially arranged craters 10 to 20 km in diameter.
FIGURE 9,10. Feldspathic fragmental breccia (sample 67015) collected from rim of North
Ray Crater.
A. Whole sample. Melt-rich clasts are dark; light material includes feldspathic matrix and
clasts. Sides of cube (letter N), 1 cm. Courtesy of Lunar and Planetary Institute,
Houston, Tex.
B. Thin section of sample 67015,88. Senate-textured matrix consists of cataclastic plagioclase and minor pyroxene. Clasts include glassy-matrix breccia (g), clast-laden,
crystalline impact-melt breccia (m), and monomineralic plagioclase (p). Plane-polarized
light; field of view, 1.5 mm. Courtesy of P.D. Spudis,
The observed pattern of Crisium ejecta is three-pronged, rather
like that of the crater Messier (fig. 3.1 LA). A further similarity with
Messier is the elliptical outline of Crisium, elongate approximately
east-west. The east sector of the mare-bounding ring is almost miss-
ing (fig. 4.3Z). An oblique impact from the west, possibly by a frag-
mented body, is suggested as the cause of these asymmetries (table
Luna 20 samples
The Luna 20 mission returned a small core of regolith material
from a part of the Crisium flank that is outside the mare-bounding
rings and that is here considered to lie inside a buried part of the main
rim (pis. 3, 7; fig. 9.5). Most of the fragments are of aluminous ANT
rock not unlike the Apollo 16 suite; some are of low-K KREEP com-
position . They
have been dated at 3.84 ±0.04 aeons , an
age consistent either with a late Nectarian relative age of Crisium or
with an Imbrian age of superposed Imbrium-basin or Imbrian-crater
material. In view of the small size of the sample and the difficulties
encountered in dating the larger Apollo 16 and 17 sample suites, no
firm conclusions should be based on this age despite its apparent
analytical precision.
SERENITATIS BASIN
General features
Although Mare Serenitatis is one of the Moon's most conspicuous
circular maria (fig. 1.7), the Serenitatis basin is indistinct and was not
even listed as a basin by Hartmann and Kuiper . Its west sector
has been nearly destroyed by the Imbrium basin, and its north rim is
covered by hummocky Imbrium ejecta (Alpes Formation; figs. 1.7,
10.12). The map pattern of the north rim and the presence of two
mascons suggest that Serenitatis consists of a smaller northern basin
and a larger southern basin . Although
two independent impacts have been proposed, the considerable evi-
dence for multiple simultaneous crater impacts (see chap. 3) and
basin impacts (Humboldtianum, Moscoviense, possibly Crisium) sug-
gests such an origin here as well. Montes Haemus, the south
topographic rim of Serenitatis or "South Serenitatis," is conspicuous,
though covered by lineate and smooth Imbrium ejecta (figs. 1.7,9.12).
The east sector is of most interest because part of it was sampled
by Apollo 17. The terra east of Mare Serenitatis consists of angular
massifs that are partly concentric and partly radial to the mare (fig.
9.13). A general ring form is visible, but no single ring stands out. The
largest massifs surround the Taurus-Littrow valley, in which Apollo
17 landed. The vague ring containing these massifs resembles the
outer Rook ring of Orientale . Although parts of an indistinct ring
east of the Littrow massifs and ending near the crater Vitrivius (fig.
9.3) are higher than the massifs , this "Vitruvius front"
is not sharply delineated like Montes Cordillera of Orientale. There-
fore, eastern Serenitatis resembles the irregularly structured west-
ern Orientale more closely than it does the regularly ringed eastern
Orientale (fig. 4.1). As is common for large basins, the east boundary
of the excavation cavity of Serenitatis is thus poorly defined.
One possibility is that the Vitruvius front is the excavation
boundary; small amounts of material may have been ejected from the
zone between the Littrow and Vitruvius rings, as proposed above for
Crisium and in chapter 4 for other large basins. The most straightfor-
ward interpretation, however, is that the excavation boundary passes
along the east edge of Mare Serenitatis through the largest massifs of
the Littrow ring (figs. 5.17, 9.12, 9.13). I tentatively favor this inter-
pretation despite the similarity of the Littrow ring to the outer Rook
ring, which I believe lies inside the basin excavation. A diameter of
about 740 km 190 km smaller than Orientale fits the largest
Littrow and Haemus massifs. This identification of the rim is
strengthened by Whitaker's interpretation of the Vitruvius ring
as a part of the middle ring of the Procellarum basin (pi. 3; fig. 9.11)
an interpretation that also explains why the terra east of Serenitatis
is so irregular and why no relation of rings to basins is obvious.
iS-W&Wtrf'V
- *. HI-- fSi
'Ifsfl v '
9. NECTARIAN SYSTEM
Relative age
Serenitatis was long considered to be an old basin because of its
highly degraded appearance . Numerous degraded craters in the terra east of the
mare were thought to be superposed on the basin (figs. 1.7,5.17, 9.11,
9.14). The interpretation of these craters and the position of the rim
are critical to the important question of the relative age of the
Serenitatis basin. The clustering and nearly subequal size of some of
the craters suggest an origin as secondary craters of the Imbrium
basin . Almost all
the other craters resemble the degraded prebasin craters visible close
to the rims of the Orientale and Nectaris basins (figs. 4.4, 7.9).
Therefore, these craters are older than Serenitatis, provided that the
Serenitatis rim lies west of the craters near the edge of the mare. Only
three primary craters larger than 20 km in diameter visible east of
Serenitatis are clearly younger than Serenitatis and older than
Imbrium (Kirchhoff, Maraldi, Romer A; figs. 9.11, 9.14). Le Monnier
(61 km, 27° N., 31° E.; fig. 6.25) also seems likely to lie in this
FIGURE 9.11. Mare Cnsium and circum-Crisium terrain. Primary-impact craters common
to both scenes include Macrobius (M; 64 km, 21 ° N., 46° E., Lower Imbrian) and Proclus
(P; 28 km, late Copermcan; compare fig. 3. 33). Trough concentric with Crisium is west (left)
of Macrobius. Hummocky material, possibly ejected from Crisium or Serenitatis basin, is
between Proclus and Mare Tranquillitatis (MT).
A. Nectarian primary craters include Maraldi (Ma; 40 km, 19° N., 35° E.) and Tisserand
(T; 37 km); Romer (R; 40 km) is Copernican. Craters labeled "c" are believed to be
secondary-impact craters of Serenitatis or Imbrium basin because of compound shape,
alignment with basin radials, varying, diverse morphology of ridges, grooves, and
mounds, and concentration in size range 10-20 km. Deposits of Imbrian age (Ip, Itl)
and fine-scale morphology indicated by other symbols (1, It, pi, t), possibly related to
Imbrium basin, are superposed on rugged features of Crisium and Serenitatis basins
 . SA, Sinus Amoris; MT, Mare Tranquillitatis; m, other mare
patches. Rugged terra along north-south midline of photograph is probably part of
Procellarum basin (pi. 3). From Wilhelms . Apollo 17 frames M-195
(right) and M-302 (left).
B. Crisium-basm massifs, continuous in west and discontinuous (but poorly illuminated) in
east. Eratosthenian craters Peirce (Pe; 19 km, 18° N., 53.5° E.) and Picard (Pi; 23
km, 15° N., 55° E.) penetrate mare (see chap. 5). Mosaic of Apollo 17 frames
M-274, M-278, M-281, M-286, M-289, M-293, and M-294 (from right to
intermediate stratigraphic position, but it is only a "ghost" crater
whose age is uncertain.
Several additional lines of evidence are consistent with a rela-
tively young age of the Serenitatis basin. (1) The near-destruction of
the west sector by the Imbrium basin, a clear indicator of relative age,
has no significance for absolute age; the two basins could be almost
contemporaneous. (2) Serenitatis secondaries may be superposed on
Crisium ejecta and the Crisium rim .
(3) No Crisium ejecta is texturally evident near the Taurus-Littrow
massifs (figs. 9.11, 9.13); if Serenitatis is not the younger of the two
basins, the Crisium pattern of ejecta must have been highly asym-
metric (which, in fact, is possible, as shown by the analogy with
Messier). (4) The substantial thickness of the basalt in Mare
Serenitatis indicates little filling or isostatic rebound since formation
of the Serenitatis basin. (5) Apollo 17 astronaut R.E. Evans described
the massifs of Serenitatis as much fresher and more boulder-strewn
than those of Crisium ; although
morphology has not proved to be a very precise age indicator for basin
ages, at least this evidence helps counter reliance on Crisium's appar-
ently fresh overall morphology as an indicator of its youth.
In summary, the roughness of the terra east of Serenitatis is due
to Procellarum and Serenitatis massifs, Imbrium secondaries,
Imbrium deposits (fig. 9.11), Serenitatis secondaries, .and pre-
Serenitatis craters. None of these features establishes an old age for
the basin. A relatively young Nectarian age for Serenitatis is favored
Petrology of Apollo 17 samples
The Apollo 17 landing site (figs. 9.16, 9.17) was chosen mainly to
provide samples of terra outside strong influence of the Imbrium
basin and in a known geologic context . Petrologists, geochemists, and geochronologists held out
the hope that primitive terra would be sampled. Geologists wanted
information on basins other than Imbrium, on basin-formation pro-
cesses in general, and, as always, on dates of specific events. The mare
and dark-mantling materials were also to be sampled (see chaps. 5,
11), but Serenitatis-basin materials were the main objective.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
Most of the sampled material is fragment-laden impact melt with
a wide variety of textures but a narrow range of chemical composi-
tions. Matrices are rich in low-K KREEP . Their prevalent textures are the types
generally called poikilitic, ophitic, or subophitic, which indicate igne-
ous-like crystallization from hot melts . Other textures are aphanitic, crystallized from rapidly cooling
melts . Most lithic clasts are of
granulitic breccia, but clasts of Mg-suite cumulates are unusually
abundant (for example, norite sample 77215 from a 2-m clast, 156-g
troctolite sample 76535, and dunite sample 72415-72418; table 8.4).
Many of the Mg-suite cumulates probably came from a single layered
pluton . Multiple samples were collected from five melt-rock boulders,
three of which were sampled at station 2 on a colluvial apron at the
base of South Massif, and one each at stations 6 and 7 on basal aprons
of North Massif . All but one of the boulders
left telltale tracks indicating their source ledges, which crop out two-
thirds of the way up the massifs (fig. 9.20). Smaller samples of frag-
ment-laden melt rock were taken from station 3, on a light-colored
landslide derived from South Massif (figs. 6.1, 9.13, 9.16, 9.19). Some
material of an additional terrain, the "sculptured hills," may have
been collected at station 8. The sculptured hills have a hummocky
surface resembling the Montes Rook Formation at Orientate or the
Alpes Formation of Imbrium. The amounts collected are too small,
however, to assure that they fairly represent that unit .
Emplacement process
The fragment-laden melt rocks have generally been interpreted
as part of the Serenitatis-basin ejecta . This interpretation is consistent with the similarity of
the massifs to those of Montes Rook, many of which are surrounded
by the probably melt-rich Maunder and Montes Rook Formations (see
chap. 4). The ledges presumably compose either the massifs proper or
a thick superposed deposit. Superposition of Serenitatis ejecta is
consistent with photogeologic observations here and at Orientale and
Imbrium (figs. 4.4E, 10.7). However, the abundance of Imbrium-radial
material in the vicinity is consistent with superposition of Imbrium
ejecta on the Serenitatis massifs .
E R E\N I T A
FIGURE 9.12. Part of geologic map of nearside , including Apollo 17 landing site (arrow). Site is on unifcCId, dark-mantling material of Imbrian to Copernican
age, shown by mission results to be Imbrian (see chap. 11). Adjacent massifs (dark color, plr, pre-Imbrian rugged material) are parts of Serenitatis-basin ring, interpreted here as main basin ring
(table 4.1), which continues as Montes Haemus near left edge of map. Crisium-basin massifs (same color and symbol) are at right edge of map (compare fig. 9.11). Possible rings of Tranquillitatis
basin are also shown. Ages of mare units (Em, Im) have been partly revised since publication of map (see chap. 11). Lower left corner of figure adjoins upper right corner of figure 9.8.
9. NECTARIAN SYSTEM
FIGURE 9.13. Apollo 17 landing site (lower arrowhead: compare figs. 2.5D, 6.2B). South
Massif is below and left of arrowhead; North Massif is above arrowhead, d, dark-mantling
material. Units radial to, and believed related to, Imbnum basin are superposed on much of rugged terrain but not on massifs. Lineations
parallel to white line are not obviously related to any basin. L, Littrow, possible Imbnumbasin secondary crater. Ma, Nectarian crater Maraldi (compare fig. 9.11 A); V, Upper
Imbrian crater Vitruvius. Ragged line of massifs extending between Vitruvius and upper
arrowhead is "Vitruvius front" (Head, I974b)i From Wilhelms (I960, fig. 18); overlaps
with figure 9.11 A. Stereoscopic pair of Apollo 17 frames M-444 (right) and M-446
FIGURE 9.14. Terrain northeast of Serenitatis (arrow S), northwest of Crisium (arrow C),
and south-southwest of Humboldtianum (arrow H). Craters above (north of) black line are
probable Serenitatis-basin secondaries, as indicated by radiality of clusters and associated
linear deposits. Lineate terrain south of black line is not closely radial to any basin but is
subradial to Imbrium and Crisium. Humboldtianum-basin secondary origin of irregular chain
or compound craters around arrow H (including Berzelius, B) is suggested by approximate
radiality. Kirchhoff (K; 25 km, 30° N., 39° E.) and Romer A (R; 35 km, 28° N., 37° E.)
are probably the only post-Seremtatis, pre-Imbnan primaries in view. From Wilhelms
 . Orbiter 4 frame H-74.
FIGURE 9.15. Southwest rim of Crisium basin. Large crater groups aligned along arrow are
probably secondaries of a basin; they are 1,000 km and 2,000 km from centers of Serenitatis
and Imbrium basins, respectively. Degraded morphology favors a Serenitatis source; super-
position then shows that Crisium is the older basin. P, Proclus (28 km; compare fig. 9.11).
Apollo 11 frame H-6230.
THE GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE MOON
FIGURE 9.16. Premission geologic map of Apollo 17 landing site by B. K. Lucchitta . Landing took place
within proposed circle. Sampled units, in order of decreasing age: pltm, pre-Imbrian terra-massif material; Iplh, Imbrian or pre-
Imbnan hilly material ("sculptured hills"); Ips, Imbrian smooth plains material (subfloor basalt; see chap. 11); EC, Eratosthenian
crater material; Cce, craters now believed secondary to Tycho (chap. 13); Cb, bright Copernican material (light mantle or landslide);
dh, dark-halo craters (now known to be Copernican impact craters; see chap. 13).
FIGURE 9.17. Astronaut traverses and locations of sampling stations at Apollo 17 landing site.
9. NECTARIAN SYSTEM
The general chemical uniformity of the sample suite has led most
of the authors cited above to conclude that the Apollo 17 samples were
emplaced in a single impact, whereas others cite differences in chem-
istry, clast content, or apparent assembly process as evidence for
multiple impacts . The argument that
impact melting and mixing of facies homogenize target materials of
terrestrial craters is
commonly used to defend the multiple origins of lunar sample suites
FIGURE 9.18. Vesicular poikilitic impact melt (sample 76215) from station 6 boulder,
North Massif, Apollo 17 landing site. Probably part of Serenitatis melt-rich ejecta.
A. Hand specimen. Sides of cube, 1 cm. NASA photograph.
B. Thin section of sample 76215,55. Poikilitic texture is well developed in pyroxene
oikocryst (bottom center); incipient subophitic texture is around vesicles (black). Crossed
polarizers; field of view, about 2 mm. Courtesy of RD. Spudis.
FIGURE 9.19. Slab cut through center of aphanitic, clast-laden impact melt (sample 73255)
from station 3, Apollo 17 landing site . Vesicular rind and
nonvesicular interior suggest origin as melt bomb.
evaluated as "different." Extensive mixing does occur, but not total
homogenization. Only the zone near the projectile is totally melted; in
impacts of large, relatively slow projectiles, much additional material
is incompletely melted and partly preserves the inhomogeneities of
the target because of
incomplete outgassing and isotopic reequilibration, as is usual in
terra breccia deposits. In fact, dozens of sophisticated Ar-Ar analyses
by stepwise heating of the same breccia sample (73215) yielded ages
spread over 300 million years . The
laser-melting technique of determining the Ar isotopes resolved
apparent age differences between parts of the same sample only 0.1
mm apart . However, the same careful
TABLE 9.2. 40Ar-39Ar ages of Apollo 17 terra samples
Stations :
2, at contact between light mantle (landslide) and
north base of South Massif; 3, on light mantle near lower slope of Lee-Lincoln scarp;
6, on south slope of North Massif; 7, near base of North Massif, 0.5 km east of sta-
Samples : All are from boulders or are impact-melt samples
larger than 1 cm.
722-, station 2, boulder 1; 724-, station 2, boulder 3; 732-, sta-
tion 3, rocks collected from nm of 10-m-diameter crater; 760-, station 6, subboulder
5; 762-, station 6, subboulder 1; 763-, station 6, subboulder 2; 77-, station 7; num-
bers 770-, 771-, and 772- each refer to a separate sample from a 3-m boulder.
Lithologies:
Samples 72255, 73215, and 73255 are light gray, others are "blue-gray" or
"green-gray"; the various colors are commonly thought to derive from different source
Calculated using International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS) decay con-
stants .
References:
CT76, Cadogan and Turner ; E79, Eichhorn and others ; H78,
Huneke ; L75, Leich and others ; M77, Mliller and others ; J77b,
Jessberger and others ; J78, Jessberger and others ; P75, Phinney and
others ; S79, Staudacher and others ; S78, Stettler and others ;
TC75, Turner and Cadogan