Proceedings of the International School of Physics “Enrico Fermi”
Course CLIV, M. Martini, M. Milazzo and M. Piacentini (Eds.)
IOS Press, Amsterdam 2004
Scientiﬁc methods and applications
to archaeological provenance studies
R. H. Tykot
Department of Anthropology, University of South Florida - Tampa, FL 33620, USA
Introduction
The study of prehistoric exchange systems is a major topic of archaeological research,
since the reconstruction of trade is important not only for understanding economic aspects of ancient societies, but also the social and political systems in which it operated. In
addition to changes in theoretical approaches to studying trade, technological advancements in our ability to determine the source of archaeological materials have greatly
enhanced the quantity and quality of this data. The analytical methods and instrumentation used in archaeological provenance studies, the research design of projects, and
examples of speciﬁc studies are presented below.
Analytical methods and instrumentation
For many materials, characterization begins with macroscopic observations and measurements of physical properties such as color, density, hardness, and refractive index.
There are few examples, however, where these properties have been suﬃcient by themselves to reliably distinguish among sources.
One example is for the south central
Mediterranean where obsidian found at neolithic sites is most likely to be from Pantelleria if dark green, and from Lipari if black/grey. Caution is especially warranted for
materials (e.g. ﬂint, ceramics) which at ﬁrst appear to be identiﬁable based on color,
which may be inﬂuenced by depositional circumstances, weathering, natural or intentional heat treatment, etc.
c⃝Societ`a Italiana di Fisica
R. H. Tykot
Table I. – Archaeological materials which have been the subject of provenience studies.
copper and
copper alloys
basalt, granite, rhyolite
other clay
glass beads
ﬂint and chert, jasper, quartz
greenstone (jadeite and nephrite)
hematite and magnetite
limestone and marble
sandstone and quartzite
soapstone (steatite and chlorite)
The next step for many materials is microscopic examination, typically in thin section
using a petrographic microscope where the mineral grains and inclusions may be identiﬁed
using natural, polarized, and/or cross-polarized light. Petrographic analysis is destructive
since a thin section of at least 1 cm2 is required. However it is not an expensive or diﬃcult
procedure and thin-section equipment and petrographic microscopes are available at
just about any university with a geology department. There are many examples where
petrographic analysis alone has been enough to distinguish lithic and ceramic sources
(e.g. “greenstones” in the Alps and southern Italy; ﬂint in northern Italy).
In most cases, however, measurements of physical properties and/or petrography
cannot distinguish among all possible sources in a given region of study.
early 1960s, instrumental methods of chemical analysis have been commonly used in
archaeological provenance studies, often focusing on the trace element “ﬁngerprinting” of
individual sources. Obsidian was the ﬁrst material shown to be ideal for such studies ,
although success with other lithic materials, ceramics, glass, and even certain metals has
been achieved.
Over the past 30 years, instrumental improvements in sample handling, precision and
accuracy, along with advances in data reduction, have resulted in a number of analytical
methods having been successfully employed in archaeological provenance studies on many
materials (table I). Methods which measure elemental or isotopic composition have been
those most widely used (table II). The most common elemental methods of analysis include neutron activation analysis (NAA), X-ray ﬂuorescence (XRF), and proton-induced
X-ray/gamma-ray emission (PIXE/PIGME); optical emission spectroscopy (OES) and
atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) have been largely superseded by inductively coupled plasma spectroscopy (ICP-S; often referred to as ICP). Quantitative X-ray analysis
is also available with an electron microprobe equipped with wavelength-dispersive spec-
Archaeological provenance studies
Table II. – Instrumental methods of elemental and isotopic analysis.
Bulk chemistry
Trace elements
Isotope ratios
pottery, glass,
metal, stone
only a few elements
pottery, glass,
metal, stone
pottery, glass,
metal, stone
solid, powder
only a few elements
pottery, glass,
metal, stone
solid, powder
excellent, surface analysis
pottery, glass,
metal, stone
solid (spots)
semi-quantitative
pottery, glass,
metal, stone
solid (spots)
excellent, surface analysis
low sensitivity
PIXE/PIGME
pottery, glass,
metal, stone
solid (spots)
very good, surface analysis
pottery, glass,
metal, stone
pottery, glass,
metal, stone,
bone, organics
(spots w/laser
bone, organics,
C, N, O, S, H, He
glass, metal,
stone, bone
heavy elements (Pb, Sr, Nd)
Neutron Activation Analysis
X-Ray Fluorescence
ICP Mass Spectrometry
ICP Atomic Emission Spectroscopy
Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy
Optical Emission Spectroscopy
PIXE/PIGME
Proton Induced X-Ray/Gamma Ray Emission
Electron Probe Micro Analysis
Scanning Electron Microscopy (X-ray analyzer)
Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometry
Stable Isotope Ratio Analysis
R. H. Tykot
trometers (WDS), and most scanning electron microscopes have semi-quantitative analysis capabilities using energy-dispersive spectrometers (SEM-EDS). All of these methods
involve the measurement of characteristic wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation (in
visible, X-ray, or gamma-ray portions of the electromagnetic spectrum) absorbed or emitted when a sample is “excited” (e.g. by bombardment with neutrons, protons, X-rays,
or electrons). A complex spectrum is produced in which peaks at certain wavelengths
are characteristic of one or more elements, and the area under a peak (intensity) is proportional to the amount of that element present in the analyzed material. Problems of
spectral overlap and matrix interferences, however, are quite common, so the speciﬁc
elements which can be analyzed vary from technique to technique. While accuracy is
addressed through the use of standards of known values, detection limits (precision) vary
both between methods and within each method depending on the brand or conﬁguration
of the instrument. Detection limits for many elements are in the parts per million range
(or less) for most of these techniques; the microprobe and SEM are limited to the analysis
of major and minor elements.
Methods based on atomic or molecular mass spectra include thermal ionization mass
spectrometry (TIMS), used for precise measurements of the isotope ratios of heavy elements (e.g. lead, strontium); stable isotope ratio analysis (SIRA), for light elements (e.g.
carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur); and ICP mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), for a large
range of elements but often at reduced precision relative to TIMS . The usefulness
of isotopic methods for provenance studies is three-fold: 1) the precision of a mass isotope
measurement is typically much greater than for elemental analysis methods because there
are far fewer overlaps in mass spectra than in electromagnetic spectra, allowing smaller
diﬀerences between sources to be identiﬁed and measured; 2) elemental composition may
be diﬀerent between a raw material (e.g. metal ore, clay) and a ﬁnished product (metal
artifact, pottery vessel), whereas the relative abundance of the isotopes of most elements
remains unchanged (not important for lithic provenance studies, unless weathering has
altered an artifact’s composition); and 3) elemental concentration can also be calculated
from mass isotope measurements (as is most commonly done with ICP-MS). TIMS has
been extensively used for lead isotope analyses of copper, lead and silver objects in the
Mediterranean , and for strontium and neodymium isotopes in other materials such as
ivory , but rarely for lithic provenance studies . Isotope ratio measurements using
ICP-MS, however, are less time consuming and costly, and the precision of the newest
magnetic sector instruments with multicollectors rivals that of TIMS. The use of a laser
ablation device with ICP-MS has already been shown to be particularly important for
archaeological materials because only the tiniest scar is left on the artifact where the
sample was removed, thus minimizing the destructive nature of sampling artifacts and
the time often spent preparing a sample for quantitative chemical analysis. The reduced
precision of LA-ICP-MS relative to solution ICP-MS does not appear to be a factor in
archaeological provenance studies, especially of homogeneous materials like obsidian .
The use of stable isotope analysis of carbon, oxygen, and other light elements
for provenance studies is mainly limited to limestone, marble, and other carbonatecontaining lithic materials. Cathodoluminescence and electron paramagnetic reso-
Archaeological provenance studies
nance have also been used in marble provenance studies with some success (see
Maniatis, this volume, p. 179). Fission track dating has been widely used for obsidian
sourcing, and is very successful when signiﬁcant diﬀerences exist in the age of formation of the diﬀerent obsidian sources . In areas with many obsidian sources and
subsources, however, more can be distinguished using elemental methods of analysis.
Magnetic parameters , M¨ossbauer spectroscopy and backscattered electron
petrography have been applied with only limited success to obsidian sourcing.
Unfortunately, in too many cases instrumental methodology has been emphasized
at the expense of addressing sourcing issues of archaeological signiﬁcance. While it is
necessary to ﬁrst demonstrate that a particular analytical technique can be applied to
provenance studies, all too often preliminary studies have failed to consider the limitations inherent in the analysis of many archaeological materials. The result has been
that many techniques have been tried out, but few have been widely used to determine
the source of signiﬁcant numbers of artifacts. Further details on the scientiﬁc principles
and instrumentation of the techniques most commonly used in archaeological provenance
studies follow .
Spectroscopy and spectrometry
The atomic properties of elements are the basis for many analytical methods. The
number of protons in the nucleus deﬁnes each element, while for many elements there
are two or more isotopes (which have diﬀerent numbers of neutrons). The elements with
naturally produced unstable isotopes (e.g., carbon, potassium) are useful for dating,
while those with stable isotopes (e.g., lead, strontium) may also vary in their isotope
ratio and thus are useful for provenance studies.
For most elements in the periodic
table, though, it is the diﬀerent numbers and positions of electrons in orbitals and shells
around the nucleus that provide the basis for their analytical identiﬁcation, while in the
ground state there are an equal number of electrons to protons, with up to two in the
innermost shell, eight in the next, and from eight to eighteen in the third. Each electron
position has a speciﬁc energy, so that a ﬁxed amount of energy is absorbed or emitted
by transitions of electrons from one position to another and each element has a speciﬁc
pattern of emission or absorption lines. Energy is also characterized as electromagnetic
radiation or photons (from radio waves to visible light to X-rays):
wavelength λ is inversely proportional to frequency ν; c = 3 × 108 m/s;
energy E is inversely proportional to wavelength; Planck’s constant h = 6.626×10−34 J s.
Since the intensity of emission or absorption lines (whether measured as energy or radi-
R. H. Tykot
ation) is directly proportional to the number of atoms emitting or absorbing, both the
identity and quantity of each element may be determined.
Optical spectroscopy. – Optical emission spectrometry (OES), primarily used in the
1950s to 1970s, used spark volatilization of a solid powdered sample in a graphite cup to
excite electrons in the outer orbital, thus causing emission in the visible light spectrum
when the electrons return to the ground state. The spectrum of resonance lines produced
was then separated with a system of mirrors, diﬀraction grating, and slits, and recorded
on a photographic plate. OES was replaced by the 1980s by atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS), which measures absorption rather than emission for individual elements .
In this technique, the sample in solution is atomized in a ﬂame or graphite furnace, irradiated with light of a particular elemental frequency, and the loss of irradiation due
to absorption is measured using a photomultiplier tube. The main limitation of AAS is
that diﬀerent lamps are needed for each element measured, so that sample preparation
and analysis for many elements is very time consuming.
By the 1990s, inductively coupled plasma spectroscopy (ICP-AES) replaced AAS for
multi-element quantitative analysis; besides automation of analysis of diﬀerent elements,
its high-temperature torch dissociates compounds better than AAS and thus eliminates
many spectral overlaps. An electrically conductive plasma of about 8000 ◦C is created by
igniting an argon gas ﬂow with Tesla sparks which then ﬂows through a radio frequency
induction coil. The sample (typically in solution) is aspirated into the torch and atomized and ionized, producing elementally characteristic ionic spectra which are ﬁltered by
a scanning monochromator and measured by a photodetector. ICP instruments have
strong temporal and spatial stability resulting in low background noise and thus very
low detection limits (ppb range), while automated scanning allows rapid measurement
of up to 70 elements. ICP-AES is now the standard instrument used for trace element
analysis in archaeological provenance studies, especially of ceramics and materials that
easily may be put into solution .
X-ray spectroscopy. – X-ray analysis depends on the measurement of high-energy transitions between the deepest orbitals of an atom, rather than the outer orbital transitions
measured in optical spectroscopy. The excitation beam causes the ionization of inner
(K, L) orbital electrons, which ultimately fall back into their stable energy levels, resulting in the emission of X-rays of characteristic energy and wavelength. Several methods
may be used to excite the sample, producing ﬂuorescent X-rays, the most common being
X-ray ﬂuorescence (XRF) in which a primary X-ray beam is used to excite the sample (see also Milazzo, this volume, p. 227). For all X-ray techniques, the exciting
beam interacts signiﬁcantly only with sample atoms within 20–200 µm of the surface of
a solid or pressed pellet sample. The X-rays produced are measured using either energy dispersive (EDS) or wavelength dispersive (WDS) spectrophotometers. In EDS,
energy (E) is measured using a known crystal and angle, while in WDS, wavelength (λ)
is measured at diﬀerent angles from the sample. According to Bragg’s law, wavelength
Archaeological provenance studies
is directly related to the angle and the d spacing of the crystal:
nλ = 2d sin θ.
In X-ray diﬀraction (XRD), the d-spacing of the sample is determined by measuring theta
using a ﬁxed wavelength. Other important features of X-ray techniques includes whether
the sample itself is placed within a vacuum chamber, since elements below z = 22 (titanium) produce X-rays which are absorbed by air. While older X-ray instruments with
vacuum chambers usually could not detect elements below z = 12 (magnesium), newer
XRF instruments with special ﬁlters allow analysis for almost all elements, with sensitivity in the low ppm range. Synchrotrons have also been used recently as extremely intense
X-ray sources which allows for microbeam analysis with superior analytical sensitivity
(see Pantos et al., this volume, p. 299). Total reﬂection X-ray ﬂuorescence spectrometry
(TXRF) takes advantage of a diﬀerent excitation geometry setup to analyze a tiny sample (less than 1 mg) removed from an object for many trace elements with only minimal
matrix eﬀects. The sample chamber is usually ﬁlled with air so only elements above
z = 12 may be detected.
In electron microscopy, an electron beam (typically focused on spots 1 to 40 µm in
diameter) creates the orbital vacancies. Secondary electrons released from surface atoms
show topography of 3-dimensional objects, while the backscattered electrons from interactions with the nucleus reﬂect atomic mass/number. The background continuum
of X-radiation produced by deceleration of the primary electron beam, however, limits the sensitivity of this technique to the detection of major and minor elements. For
proton-induced X-ray emission (PIXE), it is a proton beam tapped from a particle accelerator which causes the initial vacancies. Sensitivity is in the 1–10 ppm range for most
elements, with measurement precision of 5–10%. The main advantage of PIXE is its
ability to analyze whole objects in air, without sample removal (see also Mand`o, oral
communication).
Gamma-ray spectroscopy. – Similar spectroscopic measurements are also commonly
done using two techniques which stimulate gamma-ray emissions. In neutron activation
analysis (NAA), the sample is irradiated with a beam of neutrons from a nuclear reactor,
while in proton-induced gamma-ray emission (PIGME), the sample is irradiated with
protons from a particle accelerator.
The irradiation produces “artiﬁcial” radioactive
elements, which emit gamma-rays at diﬀerent times based on the length of irradiation
and the half-life of each element. In NAA , crushed solid samples of about 100 mg
are typically irradiated for about ﬁve seconds, and then the short-lived elements (Ba,
Cl, Dy, K, Mn, Na) are measured about 25 minutes later. A second set of crushed solid
samples (ca. 250–300 mg) are placed in the neutron ﬂux for about 70 hours, and left to
decay for about 8 days before measuring the medium-lived elements (Ba, La, Lu, Nd, Sm,
Y and Yb). After another three weeks, the long-lived elements (Ce, Co, Cs, Eu, Fe, Hf,
Rb, Sb, Sc, Sr, Ta, Tb, Th, Zn and Zr) are measured. The elements H, B, C, N, P and
Pb cannot be detected since they form nuclides with half-lives too short or too long to be
R. H. Tykot
easily measured. Sensitivity for NAA is below 1 ppm for most elements, while precision
is perhaps the best of all elemental techniques. The related technique of prompt neutron
activation analysis (PNAA) is based on the measurement of the gamma-rays emitted
when the nuclei initially absorb neutrons from the nuclear beam.
In PIGME (as for PIXE) the particle beam may be focused, typically to about 1 mm2,
while diﬀerent radionuclides are produced compared with NAA, so that diﬀerent elements
are typically measured. PIGME is often done along with PIXE to produce information
on the greatest number of elements in the sample.
Isotope spectrometry. – There are three main types of isotope spectrometry applied to
archaeological materials. Thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS) has been widely
used to precisely measure isotopes of heavy elements such as strontium and lead, while
stable isotope ratio analysis (SIRA) is used to precisely measure isotope ratios of light
elements such as carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur and hydrogen. ICP mass spectrometry
(ICP-MS), while measuring individual mass units, is more commonly used as an elemental
analysis technique, at least when the isotopes in the sample are present in their natural
abundance ratio. Newer instruments however also are used for quantitative isotope ratio
analysis (see Pernicka, this volume, p. 309).
Thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS) requires a complicated series of sample
preparations. Following dissolution, elements of interest must be separated and puriﬁed
using ion exchange columns before being deposited on a rhenium ﬁlament. While excellent precision is achieved, the time and cost of analysis has mostly limited archaeological
provenance applications to copper, lead and silver sourcing in the Mediterranean region .
In stable isotope mass spectrometers, the sample is converted to a gas (e.g. CO2, N2)
which is then ionized and the diﬀerent mass gases (e.g., 44, 45, 46; 28, 29) collected in
separate Faraday cups. Samples may be introduced as gases already puriﬁed using oﬄine
cryogenic distillation units, or through automated systems such as common or individual
phosphoric acid baths which produce CO2 from samples containing carbonates and CHN
analyzers which produce CO2 and N2 from organic samples. Liquid (HPLC) or gas (GC)
chromatographs coupled with stable isotope mass spectrometers allow analysis of isotope
ratios of speciﬁc components of organic samples.
ICP-MS is similar to ICP-AES, except that after ionization in the plasma, the ions
pass into a mass spectrometer for separation and measurement. There are few mass
spectral overlaps, and for elemental analysis nearly all can be overcome by analyzing
alternative isotopes. An internal spike using indium or rhenium allows for calibration
against any instrument drift. In a quadrupole mass spectrometer, the entire mass range
may be rapidly scanned, producing results for all but several elements. Solution detection
limits are about 1 ppb for light elements, and 50 parts per trillion for heavy elements,
with precision 1–3% for most elements. Like ICP-AES, ICP-MS combines small sample
size and low per sample cost with the ability to analyze a large number of major and
trace elements (including rare-earth elements, platinum group elements, Ag, Au, Th,
and U). Magnetic sector ICP-MS instruments with multiple detectors allow simultaneous
Archaeological provenance studies
measurement of several isotopes and achieve precisions comparable if not superior to
ICP-MS can also be used with a laser ablation device (usually Nd-YAG), which can
remove from a solid specimen a sample just 200 microns wide, sending it directly to the
ICP source. The laser beam is usually allowed to pass over the ablation area once prior to
data acquisition to remove surface contaminants, followed by several scans on the same
sample. Precision is reduced relative to solution samples, but comparable resolution is
achieved by using element ratios rather than absolute concentrations. While the small
amount of sample ablated makes this technique minimally destructive, samples must
nevertheless ﬁt inside the ablation chamber.
Standards and calibration. – The analysis of standard reference materials is critical
for all analytical techniques, both to ensure consistent results on a single instrument,
and to allow comparison with results obtained in other laboratories. Ideally, reference
materials should be similar in composition to the samples of interest, since matrix eﬀects
occur for most analytical techniques. For solution techniques, blanks should be prepared
in a similar manner to regular samples. Most laboratories analyze an in-house secondary
reference material, as frequently as every 5th to 10th sample, to control for instrumental
drift and ensure stability.
Principles and prerequisites of provenance studies
In order for a provenance study of lithic artifacts to be successful, there are several
prerequisites: 1) all relevant geological sources must be known; 2) these sources must be
characterized for the physical properties or parameters (e.g., color, density, mineralogic,
elemental or isotopic composition) which will be measured for the artifacts; 3) one or more
properties must be homogeneous within an individual source; 4) measurable, statistically
valid diﬀerences between sources must exist for one or a combination of these parameters;
and 5) they must be measurable using analytical methods appropriate for archaeological
artifacts .
Many provenance studies have been attempted when not all of the prerequisites have
In some cases, not all of the possible sources were known, so not all of
the artifacts tested “matched” a known source. In others, intra-source variability and
inter-source diﬀerences have not been well established because only a small number of
geological specimens have been tested; this makes source attributions of artifacts, even
when they match one source, unreliable, since some specimens from other sources might
also have the same measured values. A suﬃcient number of well-selected samples from
each source is required to make such “overlaps” statistically unlikely.
Locating and
characterizing all of the geological sources may be diﬃcult for lithic types which occur
in multiple, small outcrops; some rocks are more likely than others to form in dispersed
patterns yet still have the same physical characteristics.
In general, provenance studies have been most successful when the number of possible
geological sources is naturally limited. While many potential sources may be eﬀectively
R. H. Tykot
Table III. – Considerations in choosing an analytical method for provenience studies of archaeological materials.
Analysis type
bulk or surface?
minimum sample size required
destructive or non-destructive?
solid or powder form?
precision and accuracy
pre- and post-analysis handling
availability and cost
excluded because of geographic distance (especially in certain time periods), we must
avoid a tautological situation in which artifacts from “unlikely” sources are never identi-
ﬁed as such —often the exception to the rule will be the most signiﬁcant ﬁnding. With
fewer natural sources, there is less chance of additional sources remaining unknown, a
smaller total number of specimens must be characterized (advantageous for time and
cost reasons), and the likelihood of ﬁnding some parameter which meets prerequisites 3–
5 above will be much greater. The characterization of obsidian in the Mediterranean, the
Near East, and elsewhere is the classic success story for just these reasons. Provenance
studies of other stone materials (e.g., chert/ﬂint, steatite, greenstone, marble, basalt,
granite) also have been successful when the above criteria were satisﬁed.
The eﬃcacy of many techniques for provenance studies of certain materials has been
demonstrated. Even though the use of some techniques may be successful in a scientiﬁc
sense, they may not be readily applicable to all archaeological studies because of sampling
requirements, cost, or availability (table III).
Sample selection and other considerations
Archaeological materials are often compositionally similar to naturally occurring materials —for lithic artifacts the composition is the same as in the raw material— but
analytical methods appropriate for geological specimens may not be suitable for archaeological artifacts. First and foremost we must consider the destructive nature of many
analytical techniques. In many cases, a sample is physically removed from each artifact,
either as a solid or as a powder. This may be done because the artifact is too large to
analyze whole; it is impractical or impossible to transport the artifact(s) to the laboratory; or the technique itself requires samples to be powdered or put into solution. AAS
and ICP, for example, usually require the sample to be put into solution; XRF and PIXE
need a polished ﬂat surface to produce fully quantitative results; and the determination
of some elements by NAA will leave the sample too “hot” to be returned.
For heterogeneous materials it is important to take enough sample so that it is reasonably representative of the whole artifact —100 milligrams seems to be a standard
amount. Electron microprobe analyses of areas 40 µm in diameter or less have shown
that for homogeneous materials like obsidian, it is suﬃcient to remove 1 mm2 samples
from an artifact. Similarly, for isotopic measurements of major components, e.g. carbon
and oxygen in marble, as little as one milligram may be necessary. While these quantities
Archaeological provenance studies
are certainly small, their removal from an artifact may nevertheless have a signiﬁcant
impact on its integrity, especially for small artifacts such as lithic ﬂakes and blades,
marble ﬁgurines, etc. For elaborate or morphologically distinctive artifacts it may be
necessary to remove the sample by drilling from a less visible portion of the artifact, a
time-consuming activity at the least. For such artifacts, it is often impossible to remove
a solid sample. LA-ICP-MS leaves only a tiny crater where sample has been removed by
the laser, but the artifact must be transported to the instrument, and it must ﬁt inside
the laser ablation chamber which is typically only two or three inches in diameter.
For solid samples, it is also important to consider whether the technique produces
results based on the bulk or surface composition of the sample, and the range of elements
(or isotopes) which can be analyzed. For lithics, bulk and surface composition should be
the same, but artifact surfaces may become weathered or otherwise altered by the burial
environment. Care must be taken therefore when using surface analytical techniques such
as XRF, PIXE, and LA-ICP-MS. While NAA gives the bulk composition of the sample, it
is rarely used to provide data on the major element composition of lithic materials; XRF
and PIXE provide data on major and many trace elements. Among the solution-based
techniques, analyses also often focus on trace rather than major element composition.
Precision (the plus or minus, or replicability, of each analysis) and accuracy (nearness
to actual values) vary not only for each technique, but also for each element (or isotope)
under analysis. Overall analytical precision is limited by a combination of sample preparation techniques and instrumental conditions, while accuracy is typically corrected for
through the use of standard reference materials, ideally similar in composition to the
sample so as to avoid matrix eﬀects. Elemental (or isotopic) composition cannot be considered characteristic of a particular source if the analytical precision of the measurement
approaches the diﬀerence in value between two sources.
The actual process of taking compositional data and attributing an artifact to a particular source is not a trivial exercise. Suﬃcient samples of geological source material
must be available to establish the variability within a single source (absolutely a minimum of 15 and preferably 25–30 for homogeneous sources). Elements which have limited
ranges of variation within sources, and have little or no overlap with other sources must
then be selected; many elements will not be useful in source discrimination. For obsidian,
bivariate plots of certain trace elements appear to be suﬃcient for visual assignment of
artifacts to individual island sources, at least in the Mediterranean . In other regions, and/or to assign artifacts to speciﬁc subsources, multi-variate statistical analysis
is usually necessary (see Baxter, this volume, p. 17). The most powerful method is discriminant function analysis, in which sources are predeﬁned based on the compositional
data for geological specimens, and artifacts are assigned based on their posterior probability of belonging to one of these pre-existing groups. As with all statistical techniques,
one must verify the suitability of the data for a particular technique (e.g., requirements
of normality).
Availability of instrumentation and the cost of analysis unfortunately are two practical aspects in the choice of technique for archaeological provenance studies. Funding,
when more than nominal, is nevertheless ﬁnite, and per sample costs are likely to be less
R. H. Tykot
when instrumentation at an academic institution —especially one’s own— is employed.
A trade-oﬀtherefore often results when these factors are considered along with the type
of analysis, sample requirements, and particular elements analyzed. Fortunately, costs
have been much reduced for many methods due to lower prices for the instrumentation itself combined with automation of the analysis. Lower costs and generally reduced
sample size requirements now permit the analysis of larger numbers of artifacts. Such
studies overcome the interpretive limitations imposed by small data sets, and allow detailed examination of geographic and temporal diﬀerences in lithic exploitation patterns.
Comparison of the results from earlier and more recent studies of obsidian artifacts at
several sites in the central Mediterranean illustrate the importance of analyzing statistically signiﬁcant numbers of artifacts prior to drawing conclusions about the relative
importance of individual sources.
Trade and exchange
Scholarly interest in trade and exchange has been especially high for the past 25 years,
especially since technical advances made it possible to determine the source of materials
such as pottery, jade, turquoise, amber, marble, copper, lead, and obsidian. Numerous
edited volumes have been devoted to this subject . In addition to speciﬁc case
studies, the literature includes a number of essays which discuss the nature of production,
trade and exchange, and review the history of their archaeological interpretation .
Trade is deﬁned in modern economics as the mutual movement of goods between
hands, but in the archaeological record it is the movement of the materials themselves,
not their ownership or possession, which is easily determined. Anthropologists seek to
establish a life history for these goods, from the procurement of their raw materials to
their ultimate disposal. Signiﬁcantly, the goal is not to simply document an economic
transaction but also the circumstances and reasons behind it.
Flaked stone artifacts are among the most common in the archaeological record,
and are often made from materials that do not occur locally (e.g., obsidian and ﬂint).
They are the product of several distinct behaviors, which may have occurred at diﬀerent
times in diﬀerent places: acquisition of the raw material; preparation of a core; ﬂaking,
trimming and shaping; use; maintenance or modiﬁcation; and disposal. In addition, their
presence at a particular site will have been aﬀected by such variables as the rarity of the
raw material, the number of production stages necessary, whether production was done
by specialists or not, and how long a tool retained its usefulness. Finally, the movement
or trade of these stone artifacts may not have been strictly for their utility as tools, but as
prestige items used only by select individuals or under special (e.g. ritual) circumstances.
Stone used for axes and other ground rather than ﬂaked tools was also often traded
over great distances in prehistoric Europe, with a similar set of factors and variables
involved . By the Iron Age (1st millennium BC), though, stone tools were largely
replaced by metallic ones, and by Roman times the stone material most widely traded
was marble, used mainly for sculpture. Besides the complex sociopolitical systems of
classical Greece and Rome which created this demand, large labor forces and advanced
Archaeological provenance studies
transportation methods were able to support the trade of tons and tons of marble from
sources in many areas of southern Europe. Such labor organization did not exist in the
Bronze Age, when Stonehenge was constructed, and debate continues over the geographic
rather than primary geological sources of the stones used .
Ceramics are very common at archaeological sites beginning in the Neolithic period
(by the 7th millennium BC in southeastern Europe, and somewhat later in the rest of
The ﬁnished product, like ﬂaked, ground, or carved stone, is the result of
signiﬁcant eﬀort by experienced individuals, but which is even more complex in that it
involves not only the acquisition of clay, which is likely to have been available locally,
but also of temper and in many cases pigments for painting, as well as fuel for the ﬁring.
Unlike stone tools, some of the most important properties of ceramics (e.g. form and
decoration) are determined entirely by their makers. But while ceramics may have been
traded because of variance in these characteristics, in many cases it was the contents
of ceramic vessels (e.g., amphoras) which were the primary material being traded over
large distances.
Metal artifacts are also the result of considerable eﬀort and transformation from the
raw ore. Unlike clay, most metal ores are not readily available, signiﬁcant eﬀort was
often necessary in their acquisition, and an even greater amount of ﬂux and fuel was
necessary for the smelting process, along with the furnace and its accessories. While the
subsequent melting of already puriﬁed metal for casting artifacts is less complex and
could be done in any village settlement, smelting would have required greater labor
organization. By the Copper and Bronze Ages (4th-2nd millennia BC), both puriﬁed
metals (lead, silver, gold, copper, tin) and ﬁnished, often alloyed (e.g. bronze) artifacts
were traded over great distances in Europe and the Mediterranean. Unlike stone tools
and ceramics, metal artifacts could be entirely recycled and turned into new objects.
While stone, ceramics, and metals may be the most common materials found at
archaeological sites, they were not the only materials traded in prehistoric Europe, nor
are they the only ones that can potentially be sourced. Among the other trade items that
have been studied are amber, a natural resin , and glass, another pyrotechnological
product which becomes common only in the Roman period. But as will become evident,
trade studies have focused on ceramics and a few types of stone and metals because of
certain properties they have which allow artifacts to be scientiﬁcally matched with the
source of their raw materials. Following brief discussions of European trade in copper
and marble will be a full case study of obsidian trade in the Mediterranean.
Copper. – By the Late Bronze Age (ca. 1600–1200 BC), bronze tools and weapons
were in high demand in many societies. In the eastern Mediterranean, much of their
production and trade must have been to satisfy the needs of the state level societies
of Greece, Crete, Anatolia and Egypt.
While the tin sources used are still unclear,
archaeological and analytical evidence points to Cyprus (from which the word copper is
derived) as the most important copper source in this region. Several sites on the island
have produced evidence for smelting of copper ores, including slag, tuyeres and crucibles.
But the best evidence for trade in Cypriot copper comes from a characteristic style of
R. H. Tykot
pure copper ingots found oﬀthe island. Copper oxhide ingots, weighing on average about
30 kg, and resembling the stretched-out hide of an ox but more likely shaped that way
to facilitate carrying, are known from sites in Cyprus, Crete, Greece, Turkey, Israel,
Egypt, Albania, Bulgaria, Sicily and Sardinia, as well as the famous shipwrecks at Cape
Gelidonya and Uluburun in Turkey. Most of the known ingots come from shipwrecks or
from coastal sites, suggesting the importance of sea-borne traﬃc for their distribution.
The excavation of the 14th and 13th century BC shipwrecks at Uluburun and Cape
Gelidonya has indicated that large cargoes of copper and tin ingots, glass ingots, ivory,
ostrich eggs, ebony logs, myrrh and frankincense, and probably resins, olive oil and
wine were regularly transported over great distances in the eastern Mediterranean. The
personal possessions found on board both wrecks point to the Levant for the identity of
the crew. The location of these wrecks, and the main cargo items on board, indicate that
they were heading west, while archaeological evidence and ancient texts indicate that
shipments also must have headed south to Egypt.
While copper sources also exist in many of these areas, copper is a reﬁned product, ready for alloying and casting, and thus would have been immediately useful and
exchangeable for other goods at any Bronze Age settlement regardless of its location.
Nevertheless, it is also possible that local copper was used to make oxhide ingots, under the control of Aegean or Levantine prospectors, or simply to imitate a recognized
standard type. Modern mass spectrometers are sensitive enough so that in addition to
lead objects, copper and silver artifacts containing trace quantities of lead can also be
measured. The lead isotope ratios determined for copper artifacts thus can be matched
directly to known ore samples because the ratios of the isotopes do not change during
the smelting or reﬁning process, although the quantity of the element does .
In the last 20 years, an extensive database of lead isotope ratios for copper and other
ores throughout Europe and the Mediterranean has been established, and many ingot
and artifact collections tested. The results obtained strongly indicate that Cyprus was
the source of the vast majority of the copper oxhide ingots tested, including those found
in Sardinia, an island with its own signiﬁcant copper sources. At the same time, the
lead isotope ratios for artifacts and other shaped ingots match those of the local ore
sources, although there is also evidence that artifacts may have been made of mixed ores
or recycled copper and bronze. Since oxhide ingots, although of pure copper, could not
have been made in a single smelting but must themselves have been remelted, they too
could have mixed lead isotope ratios, resulting in some debate over the reliability of the
lead isotope approach since the mixture of ores from two diﬀerent sources might result in
values similar to a third which has not yet been found or documented . While it
will always be possible that some artifacts were made from small ore deposits which
are now worked out, these should constitute only a fraction of the overall production,
and for the most part the analyses of the oxhide ingots have produced very consistent
Since Mycenaean style ceramics found at many of the same sites as oxhide
ingots have also been chemically tested and shown to match Aegean clay sources ,
it is socioeconomically likely that copper ingots and many other materials were traded
together with these ceramics and their contents, both by land and sea.
Archaeological provenance studies
Marble. – Beginning in the Iron Age, marble was widely used for sculpture and architectural decoration because detailed features could be carved and the ﬁnished object
painted, probably with less eﬀort and expense than for bronze sculpture. Many marble
sources in the Mediterranean are still being quarried today, for example the large Carrara quarry system in northern Italy and several on Greek islands, and unfortunately this
modern activity has erased much of the direct evidence of ancient quarrying. Sourcing
marble is particularly useful since many sculptures are in private or museum collections
with no speciﬁc information on where they were found. Determining the source of the
marble may be important in assessing the sculpture’s authenticity and age, since for example a sculpture in the Greek Archaic style could not have been made of Italian marble
unless it was a Roman or later copy. Many excavated sculptures or architectural items
were also made in multiple pieces so it is informative about economic and other practices
to learn whether certain marble sources may have been speciﬁcally preferred for certain
parts of sculptures (e.g. the head or bust). Of course, determining the source of the marble that was used documents speciﬁc trade connections that existed, and provides some
quantiﬁcation of the relationships that existed between diﬀerent regions in the Greek,
Roman, and later periods.
Since many of the marble sources that were exploited in antiquity are of white marble, it is not easy to distinguish among most of them based on their visual appearance,
especially in a sculpture with a smooth and polished surface. Nevertheless, some marble
sources have gray streaks, large grains, or other visual characteristics which assist in the
sourcing of artifacts. But it is really the application of analytical methods that allow
many sources to be positively identiﬁed. Some marble is dolomite, rather than calcite,
which can be determined by elemental analysis of the magnesium content (calcite is calcium carbonate whereas dolomite is calcium magnesium carbonate) or by X-ray diﬀraction. For dolomitic marble sculptures found in the central or eastern Mediterranean, it
is highly likely that they came from a particular source on the island of Thasos in the
northern Aegean. For the more common calcite marble, stable isotope analysis of carbon
and oxygen has been the technique most widely used, although this analysis by itself
is not enough to distinguish among all of the Mediterranean white marble sources .
Instead, a multi-method approach which combines XRD and isotopic analysis with grain
size measurements and petrographic features works for most of the main Mediterranean
sources . Strontium isotopes are also likely to be very useful, but a large database of
values for marble quarries has not yet been established.
The analysis of a large number of classical marble sculptures in museum collections
and from archaeological sites has suggested many things about the ancient marble trade,
including the chronology of use of diﬀerent quarry sources and thus the local economic
and political circumstances in which intensive marble exploitation occurred. Marble was
ﬁrst quarried on a large scale beginning in the 7th century BC, on Naxos in the Cyclades,
with other island sources exploited shortly afterwards. Mount Pentelikon was the major
source of marble used for classical Athenian architecture, while the translucent marble
of Paros was preferred for important statues. In Italy, Carrara marble was commonly
used, but Pentelic marble was chosen for architecture of particular prestige during the
R. H. Tykot
Republican and Imperial periods, and marble from Paros was commonly used for freestanding sculptures. The Romans later opened up many quarries in Asia Minor, and
marble from Prokonnesos (Marmara) became increasingly common from the Hadrianic
period onward, probably for economic reasons related to ease of transport. During the
Imperial period, dolomitic marble from Thasos was also commonly used for ﬁne sculpture,
and was probably carved by northern Greek artists working in Greece or who traveled
with their materials throughout the Mediterranean.
In other parts of Europe, local
marble sources were also exploited and used for statues and architecture, but important
or prestigious sculptures were often made of marble imported from the Aegean. One of
the best examples of this are the Thracian horsemen sculptures from Romania, which
express a local religious myth but are commonly made of marble from Prokonnesos or
Paros .
Obsidian sourcing in the central Mediterranean: a case study
Obsidian is widely considered an ideal material for source tracing using elemental
methods of analysis, and provenance studies of Mediterranean obsidian have been described as a success story . As such, a review of obsidian research, speciﬁcally in
the central Mediterranean, illustrates well the principles and prerequisites of provenance
studies and their potential contribution to reconstructions of prehistoric trade.
Many trace elements in obsidian are related to the gross compositional makeup of the
parent magmatic material because of their individual chemical volatility and solubility.
Many “incompatible” elements are insoluble in solid magmatic phases, and have higher
concentrations in the liquid magma (e.g., Sr, Ba, Rb, Cs, La, Ce, Y, Ti, Zr, P, Ta,
Nb, Be, B and Li). The evolutionary nature of magmas, which continuously incorporate
the surrounding crust while forming (crystallizing) new solid rock, results in changing
patterns of absorption by diﬀerent minerals in the solid phases. Both diﬀerential crustal
contamination and fractional crystallization of the magmatic melt contribute to considerable diﬀerences in the concentrations of the incompatible elements in volcanic ﬂows, and
these elements are thus particularly useful for obsidian provenance studies. Although water percolating in rock deposits can exchange Sr, Na, K and other elements with volcanic
glasses, this eﬀect is much more pronounced in devitriﬁed glass or volcanic ash than in
obsidian, and one need not worry about discrepancies between geological specimens and
archaeological artifacts deposited under diﬀerent environmental conditions for the last
several thousand years.
While it was only in the early 1960s that chemical characterization studies of obsidian
began, the principal Mediterranean sources of obsidian were already known. Prior to the
application of instrumental methods of analysis, an ordinary wet chemical analysis of major elements had produced the surprising (and erroneous) result that obsidian artifacts
in Malta were of Melian origin . The ﬁrst successful provenance study of Mediterranean obsidians relied on trace element concentrations of barium, zirconium, niobium
and yttrium, measured by optical emission spectroscopy . These results demonstrated
that it was possible to diﬀerentiate many of the sources in the Mediterranean region, but
Archaeological provenance studies
they did not distinguish between Lipari and Palmarola. Furthermore, all sources were
represented by a very limited number of specimens.
More detailed examination of the Mediterranean sources, using neutron activation
analysis, was completely successful in attributing artifacts not only to speciﬁc islands,
but even in distinguishing among multiple ﬂows on Sardinia and Melos , and
in the complex sources of central Europe and central and eastern Anatolia .
The existence, however, of multiple Sardinian ﬂows was based on compositional clusters
of artifacts rather than of geological samples, so the actual location of several sources
remained unknown.
For Lipari, several ﬂows have been identiﬁed —some of historic
age— but only the Gabellotto ﬂow has been studied in any detail . Multiple ﬂows
also exist on Pantelleria, but these too have only been preliminarily studied . Fissiontrack dating also emerged as a useful provenance method since the ages of the diﬀerent
island sources were substantially diﬀerent . Provenance studies based on ﬁssiontrack dating, however, were unable to distinguish among the multiple Sardinian sources,
which were presumably close in age . The interpretive signiﬁcance of being able to
distinguish between multiple ﬂows was not really recognized until provenance studies of
large numbers of artifacts began to reveal patterns in the exploitation of speciﬁc obsidian
sources .
During the 1970s and 1980s a number of other archaeometric techniques were tested
for their usefulness in provenance studies. Initial attempts at using strontium isotopes ,
M¨ossbauer spectroscopy , electron paramagnetic resonance , and magnetic parameters have only rarely been pursued, and were generally unsuccessful in distinguishing
among all sources.
It was only in the 1980s that serious attempts were made to locate and properly characterize all of the Sardinian obsidian sources. Besides the well-known source at Conca
Cannas (SA), additional Monte Arci sources were located in situ and some of the questions surrounding the SB source previously identiﬁed only from archaeological samples
were resolved. Unfortunately this research was only brieﬂy published and never continued . Another geologist conducted a thorough survey and analysis of the Sardinian
sources but never formally published his thesis . He was able, however, to identify 4
chemical subgroups among numerous localities with small unworkable nodules, in addition to the 4 usable sources previously identiﬁed. Also working independently, another
researcher identiﬁed two SC subgroups, but neither was found in situ . All three of
these studies relied on X-ray ﬂuorescence analyses of trace elements, supplemented in two
cases by neutron activation. It was also demonstrated that all of the main Mediterranean
obsidian sources (Sardinian A, B, C, Lipari, Pantelleria, Palmarola, Melos, Giali) could
be chemically diﬀerentiated on the basis of major/minor elements alone (ﬁg. 1). The
use of major elements to discriminate between three principal Sardinian groups was also
conﬁrmed using atomic absorption spectroscopy as part of an obsidian hydration dating
project .
When this author began his own research on the Sardinian sources, there nevertheless
remained a number of problems regarding the sources and usage of Sardinian obsidian.
The SC source(s) had not been located in situ, and the number and location of SB sources
R. H. Tykot
Fig. 1. – X-ray ﬂuorescence of major elements can discriminate most Mediterranean obsidian
was not entirely resolved. A detailed survey of obsidian outcrops in the Monte Arci area
began in 1987 and has resulted in the in situ location of all usable sources and their
chemical characterization by ICP-MS (ﬁg. 2), XRF and electron microprobe . For
the purposes of archaeological provenance studies, it is useful to chemically distinguish
among four geographically speciﬁc sources (SA, SB1, SB2, SC), which also have distinctive characteristics that might have been important in their exploitation by prehistoric
peoples (e.g., accessibility and density of source material; color, transparency, and luster; fracture properties). It is not possible to distinguish among these four sources using
ﬁssion-track dating or SEM-EDS, although both appear to have suﬃcient precision to
distinguish two Monte Arci subgroups .
Until a decade ago, it was nearly impossible to assess the relative importance of different sources at a single site or within a single chronological period (ﬁg. 3).
obsidian from about 100 western Mediterranean sites had been analyzed, most sites were
represented by only a few samples, many from imprecise contexts. Only four sites had
more than ten analyses, and only at Skorba in Malta could we look at chronological
change in source utilization. This situation has begun to be addressed with larger numbers of artifacts analyzed at several sites in southern France ; at Gaione and Arene
Candide in northern Italy ; at many sites in Sardinia and Corsica ; at
Acconia and Bova Marina in southern Italy; at Grotta dell’Uzzo in Sicily ;
at Zembra in Tunisia , and several other sites in Tuscany, the Adriatic islands, and
elsewhere (ﬁg. 4).
These analyses of signiﬁcant numbers of artifacts at individual sites allow for hypothesis testing and interpretation that was not possible with limited numbers of analyses . For example, it has been hypothesized that in Sardinia during the Early
Archaeological provenance studies
Fig. 2. – Multivariate discriminant function analysis of ICP-MS data for Monte Arci (Sardinia)
reveals ﬁve distinct source groups.
Fig. 3. – Distribution of obsidian in the central Mediterranean. Data for sites from all time
periods are shown.
R. H. Tykot
Fig. 4. – Frequency of obsidian sources present at archaeological sites in diﬀerent regions of the
central Mediterranean.
Neolithic (ca. 6000–5000 BC), less-organized selection of source material would result in
the presence of obsidian ﬂakes from multiple sources, and in its relatively ineﬃcient use;
by the Late Neolithic (ca. 4000–3000 BC), procurement would have been better organized, focusing on the higher quality SA obsidian, and featuring more eﬃcient reduction
technology in the production of cores and blades . An apparent shift in source utilization which supports this technological hypothesis of obsidian selection is observed at
Arene Candide in Liguria, where less intensive, on-site production of tools from multiple
obsidian sources (SA, SB, SC, PI) in the Early Neolithic is followed by nearly exclusive
importation of blades of high-quality Lipari obsidian in the Late Neolithic .
This pattern, however, is not paralleled in Sardinia and Corsica, where type SC
obsidian becomes much more important in the Late Neolithic (ﬁg. 5). At Grotta Filiestru,
for example, the use of clear, glassy type SB2 obsidian from the western ﬂanks of Monte
Arci decreases over four Neolithic cultural periods, while the use of opaque, less glassy
type SC obsidian from the northeastern part of Monte Arci increases; type SA is never
more than 20% of the assemblage. In contrast, type SA accounts for an average of 40%
of the assemblage at Basi in Corsica, SB2 is never important, and this pattern does not
appear to change signiﬁcantly throughout that site’s occupation, which spans much of
the Early and Late Neolithic. At the same time, more than 90% of the Sardinian obsidian
found at sites in southern France is of type SA.
These diﬀerent obsidian use patterns —both geographic and chronological— imply
that the cultural factors and exchange mechanisms involved in the chaˆıne op´eratoire of
Archaeological provenance studies
Fig. 5. – Change in Monte Arci source usage between the Early (a) and Late (b) Neolithic.
Mediterranean obsidian were complex. Obsidian may not have always been dispersed
through simple down-the-line transactions from its respective source zones. It is also
possible that maritime contacts between Sardinia and the mainland were not necessarily
routed across the shortest open-water crossings (from Sardinia to Corsica to Elba to
Tuscany and then northward along the coast to Liguria and southern France). Diﬀerences
in use-function, especially if considered in the context of more locally available alternative
lithic resources, may correlate with obsidian selection and can be investigated through
the integration of provenance determination and use-wear analysis .
R. H. Tykot
Discussion and conclusion
Many lessons can be learned from this example of obsidian provenance studies in the
Mediterranean. First, complete characterization of all relevant geological sources should
be conducted prior to the analysis of archaeological artifacts. In the case of western
Mediterranean obsidian, analyses of artifacts continued for more than two decades before
all of the sources were located in situ. While it is possible to go back and try to assign
artifacts based on our current knowledge of the sources, many artifacts have not been
analyzed for the particular elements or other characteristics necessary to distinguish
among the sources. In other cases the compositional data which would allow reassignment
were not published, and the artifacts themselves may have been entirely sacriﬁced for
the analysis, or otherwise are now no longer available for reanalysis.
Second, elemental characterization and ﬁssion-track dating are the only methods
which have been applied with any success and frequency to Mediterranean obsidian
artifacts. A lot of eﬀort has been expended testing a variety of alternative methods to
see if they could distinguish among the Mediterranean sources. Other methods, however, have proven to be ineﬀective, inappropriate for obsidian sourcing because of sample
requirements or expense, or just have not been pursued beyond an initial study. While
the application of new techniques to archaeological materials should be encouraged, the
involvement of both physical scientists and archaeologists at the beginning of the investigation would likely result in a more eﬃcient use of time and resources. A systematic
approach to sourcing is highly recommended .
Third, artifacts from a large number of sites have been analyzed, but until recently
the selection criteria were poorly conceived. Far too many obsidian artifacts come from
unstratiﬁed or imprecisely dated contexts to have any real interpretive value, and with
few exceptions too few from a single context have been analyzed to evaluate the relative frequency of the source(s) represented at a single site or in a single cultural phase.
Greater eﬀort should be expended on analyzing signiﬁcant-sized assemblages from properly excavated contexts, and on using the results to address questions of archaeological
interest (e.g. exchange mechanisms; transport routes; sociocultural interactions; island
colonization; diﬀusion of technology; raw material selection and use-function). Parallel
information could be derived from provenance studies of ﬂint, greenstone and other lithic
materials, as well as ceramics.
Fourth, methods must be chosen which are appropriate for archaeological artifacts,
and for the particular questions being addressed. The information obtained should be
maximized, while any impact on the artifacts should be minimized. Keeping costs down
eﬀectively results in the ability to analyze more artifacts and to obtain more reliable
use patterns. Consultation or collaboration with geologists or archaeological scientists is
recommended to determine which method(s) are most appropriate. Provenance studies,
while providing direct information on the exploitation and use of raw materials from
speciﬁc sources, will continue to contribute towards an understanding of human behaviors
at other points in the chaˆıne op´eratoire, especially when integrated with typological,
technological, and other studies.
Archaeological provenance studies