RESEARCH ARTICLE
Open Access
Computer literacy and E-learning perception in
Cameroon: the case of Yaounde Faculty of
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
Georges Bediang1,2*, Beat Stoll3, Antoine Geissbuhler2, Axel M Klohn3, Astrid Stuckelberger3, Samuel Nko’o1
and Philippe Chastonay3,4
Background: Health science education faces numerous challenges: assimilation of knowledge, management of
increasing numbers of learners or changes in educational models and methodologies. With the emergence of
e-learning, the use of information and communication technologies (ICT) and Internet to improve teaching and
learning in health science training institutions has become a crucial issue for low and middle income countries,
including sub-Saharan Africa. In this perspective, the Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences (FMBS) of
Yaoundé has played a pioneering role in Cameroon in making significant efforts to improve students’ and lecturers’
access to computers and to Internet on its campus.
The objective is to investigate how computer literacy and the perception towards e-learning and its potential could
contribute to the learning and teaching process within the FMBS academic community.
Method: A cross-sectional survey was carried out among students, residents and lecturers. The data was gathered
through a written questionnaire distributed at FMBS campus and analysed with routine statistical software.
Results: 307 participants answered the questionnaire: 218 students, 57 residents and 32 lecturers. Results show that
most students, residents and lecturers have access to computers and Internet, although students’ access is mainly
at home for computers and at cyber cafés for Internet. Most of the participants have a fairly good mastery of ICT.
However, some basic rules of good practices concerning the use of ICT in the health domain were still not well
known. Google is the most frequently used engine to retrieve health literature for all participants; only 7% of
students and 16% of residents have heard about Medical Subject Headings (MeSH).
The potential of e-learning in the improvement of teaching and learning still remains insufficiently exploited. About
two thirds of the students are not familiar with the concept of e-leaning. 84% of students and 58% of residents had
never had access to e-learning resources. However, most of the participants perceive the potential of e-learning for
learning and teaching, and are in favour of its development at the FMBS.
Conclusion: The strong interest revealed by the study participants to adopt and follow-up the development of elearning, opens new perspectives to a faculty like the FMBS, located in a country with limited resources. However,
the success of its development will depend on different factors: the definition of an e-learning strategy, the
implementation of concrete measures and the adoption of a more active and participative pedagogy.
Keywords: E-learning, Medical education, Developing Countries, Africa
* Correspondence: 
1Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Yaounde I,
P.O. Box 1364, Yaoundé, Cameroon
2Department of Radiology and Medical Informatics, University of Geneva,
Geneva, Switzerland
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2013 Bediang et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License ( which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Bediang et al. BMC Medical Education 2013, 13:57
 
Background
Academic teaching faces great challenges. The integration and the assimilation of ever changing knowledge,
the management of an increasing number of learners
and the gradual transition from a “traditional” model (i.e.
ex cathedra lectures) to an “active” and “interactive”
model where the learner is the main actor of his learning
process . In this perspective, the use of ICT, including
Internet, represents a promising approach. Defined as “the
use of new multimedia technologies and Internet to improve the quality of learning by facilitating, on the one
hand, the access to resources and services, and on the other
hand, exchanges and remote collaboration” , e-learning
has been reported as facilitating learning and teaching in
different domains , including health sciences and medicine . This integration in the field of training in medicine and health sciences is currently witnessing a boom
 . Although e-learning has been adopted in many educational institutions in the health sciences, there still is a lack
of evidence of its effectiveness , and even more so in
the context of low and middle income countries. In sub-
Saharan Africa, the use of ICT by the health training institutions has increased over the past decade . Several
initiatives are supported by governments, donors or the
civil society . Yet most of African countries still have
huge deficits in ICT infrastructures, connectivity , and
qualified human ICT resources.
Cameroon has increased its computer equipment
and improved the access to Internet on its campus with
the support of the ministry of higher education and
international academic partners. To date, FMBS has
about twenty computers dedicated to public use in the
library. The Internet connection is provided to the campus by an optical fiber and distributed via cable or
wireless to all the FMSB computers. This Internet connection has a theoretical bandwidth of 1024 kilobits per
second. Currently, there is no policy or strategy on
e-learning in FMBS. Furthermore, there are no formal
educational content for students or medical residents
relying on information technology (ICT). However, efforts are made to encourage community members to
purchase computers for personal use. In addition, since
4 years, a basic training is delivered on the introduction
to computing. Designed for undergraduate students, the
objective of this course is to provide them basic computer skills.
This survey investigated the computer literacy of the
members of the academic community and their perception of e-learning, as well as its potential contribution to
learning and teaching at the FMBS. The latter are two
key conditions for the implementation of e-learning
within this faculty, aiming at improving the quality of
teaching and learning.
A cross-sectional study based on a questionnaire was
conducted with three different groups of subjects: students (medicine, pharmacy and dentistry), residents
(postgraduate training) and lecturers of the FMBS. An
adapted version of a questionnaire developed by the
Unit of Development and Research in Medical Education
at the medical faculty of University of Geneva was applied. The questionnaire was formerly validated by the
experts who conducted a similar study for the implementation of e-learning at the faculty of medicine of
Geneva. With the administrative agreement of FMBS,
the questionnaire was sent out to an opportunistic sample . The research team met members of the FMBS
academic community who accepted to participate from
when contacted in all sectors and locations, namely:
FMBS campus, lecture halls, laboratories, hospitals, and
library. The team relied on different leaders (e.g., head
of promotions, chief or junior residents) in order to
sensitize students and residents for their voluntary participation. Teachers were contacted via letters sent to
heads of departments and asked to inform their collaborators about the study. The official address list of the
teachers was used to identify them. The questionnaires
were then collected, either directly after being completed, during an appointment with a member of the research team, handed to the head of promotion or in
some cases by e-mail.
For the academic year 2009–2010, the FMBS was constituted by approximately 1000 students, 275 residents
and 160 lecturers. The questionnaire was designed with
89 questions for lecturers and 74 for students and residents. Questions were divided into several sections: access to computers and to Internet; mastery of computer
and medical information research strategies; knowledge
and perception of e-learning and finally, participants’
profile. Various methods of questioning were proposed:
multiple choices, ranking or Likert’s scale type questions.
The data was digitalized through the programme
EpiData Entry 3.1 and analysed with the statistical software SPSS 17.0 using descriptive statistics. The following
statistical tests were used: the non-parametric Kruskal-
Wallis test to compare the three independent
groups (i.e., students, residents, lecturers) with respect
to their perceived ability to use computer; and the Chisquare test to compare them for others variables. A significant level of p < 0.05 means that at least one of the
groups is different from others.
This study was carried out according to the ethical
principles of the Helsinki Declaration and in line with
the local guidelines for driving research projects (confirmed by a letter N°0034/UYI/FMSB/VDPSAA). All
participants were fully informed about the objectives of
this study and agreed to voluntarily participate.
Bediang et al. BMC Medical Education 2013, 13:57
 
 
Response rates
Six hundred (600) questionnaires were distributed, i.e.,
400 to students, 110 to residents and 90 to lecturers.
Out of these questionnaires, 307 (51%) were completed
and analysed: 218 from the students, 57 from the residents and 32 from the lecturers. Unfortunately, some
items obtained a low rate response without any correlation with a sub-group of respondents.
Participant profile
Gender balance was almost reached with 56% of participants being men and 44% being women. Among the
group of students, 67% were medical students and 63%
were at the bachelor level. Eighty-eight percent (88%) of
the residents were in their first, second or third year of
specialization. The group of lecturers came from nine
academic departments and 53% had a long teaching experience (6 to over 15 years).
Computer and Internet access
Results show that the majority of students, residents and
lecturers use computers and Internet: 78% (170/217) of
students, 100% (56/56) of residents and 100% (32/32) of
lecturers use computers (p < 0.001), while 49% (105/215)
of students, 85% (47/55) of residents and 100% (32/32)
of lecturers use the Internet (p < 0.001).
Computers are mainly accessed at home: 76% (63/215)
of students, 81% (46/57) of residents and 91% (29/32) of
lecturers). Home is the first place to access Internet for
residents (61% [35/37]) and lecturers (87% [28/32]) however it is mainly carried out at the cyber café for 49%
(105/216) of students.
The majority of participants to the study have a laptop:
53% (116/217) of students, 81% (44/54) of residents and
50% (16/32) of lecturers (p < 0.001). However, it is important to underline that 17% (37/217) of students still
do not have a personal computer.
Computer and information literacy
Participants’ perception of their computer skills was
evaluated based on a scale ranging from 1(nil) to 6 (very
good). Compared to residents and lecturers, the students
reported more confidence in their ability to use a computer (Table 1).
Software used
By far, the software the most frequently used (i.e., several
times per week to several times per day) is office software such as text processing (44% [90/204] of students,
68% [37/54] of residents, 93% [29/31] of lecturers,
p < 0.001). In comparison, other software such as statistical
software are not used frequently (1% [2/192] of the
students, 4% [2/52] of the residents, 14% [4/28] of the
lecturers, p < 0.001).
Internet services
The two most used Internet services in each group are
i) the search for medical information used by 41% [84/203]
of the students, 57% [30/53] of the residents, 39% [11/28]
of the lecturers, and ii) the e-mail service used by 28%
[56/203] of the students, 26% [14/53] of the residents, 43%
[12/28] of the lecturers.
The FMBS does not offer institutional e-mail addresses. Consequently, only 39% (81/207) of students,
66% (37/56) of residents and 100% (29/29) of lecturers
have a private electronic mail box (p < 0.001). For residents (71% [40/56]) and lecturers (48% [14/29]), e-mails
are primarily used to communicate with friends.
Health information retrieval
Medical information the most searched for on Internet
is scientific articles, those searches are conducted by
87% [184/212] of students; 98% [56/57] of residents;
100% [31/31] of lecturers). This result could be linked to
the fact that 76% (23/30) of the lecturers frequently recommend to their students (several times per week) to
search for further medical information online in order to
complete their teaching.
The most frequently used search engine is Google.
The Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) vocabulary remains mostly unknown to learners: only 7% (16/215) of
students and 16% (9/56) of residents have heard about
it, while it is fairly well known among the lecturers (57%
[17/30]), p < 0.001).
Evidence-based and reliability of health information
The concept of evidence-based medicine is still not well
known to students (27% [56/209]) compared to residents
(95% [54/57]) and to lecturers (93% [28/30], p < 0.001).
Furthermore, participants have little knowledge about
accreditation processes of medical web sites, as well as
about organizations in charge of it.
Table 1 Computer skills of participants
Ability with a computer*
*The Kruskal-Wallis test was used for the comparison of the three groups:
x2 = 22.09, ddl = 2, P < 0,001.
Bediang et al. BMC Medical Education 2013, 13:57
 
 
Knowledge and perception of E-learning
Current use of ICT for learning or teaching
Although the traditional tools for teaching such as the
blackboard, the overhead projector or transparencies are
still quite frequently utilized, most participants prefer
the use of computer software and constitute 92% [190/
207] of the students, 100% [57/57] of the residents, 97%
[30/31] of the lecturers, p = 0.056. Among lecturers, 53%
(16/30) have never used Internet in the classroom. However, a vast majority (94% [30/32]) are willing to use
Internet by making some elements of their teaching
available on the Internet.
Understanding of E-learning
A majority, about two thirds of the students (131/201)
are not familiar with e-leaning, which reveals a significant difference compared to the group of residents and
lecturers. The majority of students (84% [158/189])
never accessed e-learning resources, and a little more
than half of residents (58% [32/55]).
Three definitions of e-learning were proposed, which
were ranked by each group based on their respective
relevance.
About two thirds (64% [68/107] of students, 67% [24/
36] of residents and 70% [16/23] of lecturers) considered
the following definition as the most relevant: “e-learning is
the use of ICT and Internet to improve teaching and
learning, and to foster exchange and collaboration at a distance”. However, about a third of all groups (29% [31/107]
of students, 28% [10/36] of residents and 30% [7/23] of
lecturers) considered as most relevant that “e-learning is
useful for providing a teaching at a distance without any
contact between the lecturer and the student”.
Perceived value of E-learning
When asked about the value of e-learning, a majority of
students, residents and lecturers consider that e-learning
is favouring learning by students in several ways as
displayed in Table 2.
When asked about the value of e-learning tools to facilitate or improve teaching, a majority of lecturers consider it very helpful (Table 3).
There is a large consensus among the three groups
about the usefulness of specific e-learning resources/
tools for learning or teaching at the faculty (Table 4).
More specifically, digital learning environments (Learning Management System; LMS) were considered as
useful by 94% (166/177) of students, 91% (42/46) of residents and 96% (22/23) of lecturers (p = 0.754). Furthermore, 76% [81/107] of students and 84% [16/19] of
residents consider “posting online the documents used
for teaching” at the faculty was of prime importance
while the lecturers (82% [18/22]) favour practical information (e.g. description, objectives and planning of the
teaching, agenda of the main upcoming events).
Discussion
This is the first study focusing on e-learning in Cameroon
at the university level. The objective was to investigate the
integration of ICT and e-learning at the FMBS, in order to
facilitate their integration into teaching and learning.
The answer rate to the questionnaire was of 51% of
persons contacted. For each of the three groups, it represents a proportion of 20% or more of the total corresponding enrolment group at FMBS: 22% for students,
21% for the residents and 20% for the lecturers. These
results provide a global view on ICT utilisation and on
the perception of e-learning at the FMBS.
The data collected are based on self-appreciation. While
subjective appraisal has been valued as an indicator in
many surveys, it also raises the question of potential bias
on the objective utilisation and practices studied. Thus it
can also be considered reflecting either overestimation or
underestimation, which can differ from one group to
Table 2 Perceived value of e-learning for the students’ learning
Improves access to educational resources
Improves teacher/learner interactions
Improves collaboration with teacher/learner
Improves quality of feedback
Improves methods of personal working
Develops autonomy in learning
Develops a learning more suited to our setting
Develops critical thinking
Improves creativity
Develops transversal skills (autonomy, self-assessment, etc.)
* The chi-square test was used for the comparison of the three groups.
Bediang et al. BMC Medical Education 2013, 13:57
 
 
another. For example, students belong to the Internet generation more than lecturers do . They were born
when computers and Internet became available throughout the world whereas the lecturers are from a generation
who witnessed the emergence of computers and Internet
Overall, a fairly good mastery and access to ICT, including Internet, was observed in the FMBS community – in
all three groups of students, residents and lecturers.
Considering these results, we can underline a huge opportunity for a faculty of medicine like the FMBS, located in a
country with limited resources. However, major challenges
must be faced, among which the rapid knowledge growth
and the diversification of training offered in parallel to an
increasing number of students with scarce resources yet
aiming at high quality of training.
This promising perspective is reinforced by the large
consensus of participants to adopt e-learning and “voluntariness” to develop e-learning systems at the
FMBS. To note that a low response rate was found for
this question compared to the question on access and
mastery of information technology. This is probably due
to the fact that e-learning is a new concept and most do
not know what to answer and thus abstained, and this
although the definition of e-learning was clearly given at
the beginning of the question to precisely avoid nonresponses of the participants and help understanding the
concept of e-learning. The low rate could also be due to
the assumptions of participants that this was so relevant
that it did not need rating.
Perspectives
Considering the enthusiasm generated by e-learning its
implementation, taking into account the local context,
requires particular attention in order to avoid the
“paradoxal” situations , in which the implementation
of e-learning would not produce the expected results.
This is even more relevant in low-and middle-income
setting where infrastructural and human resources are
often lacking , especially in Africa where specific
models should be thought and implemented . Successfully achieving implementation goals can only be
done with the will and the involvement of all actors at
the faculty. Thus, managers of the institution need to establish a clear e-learning strategy and to take all
measures for its sound implementation.
Scientific literature reveals that in order to integrate elearning in a training curriculum, one has to consider certain key challenges related to technology, to individuals, to
educational material, as well as to the context .
Concerning technology, the development and dissemination of ICT throughout the world favoured at a large
scale the informal integration of ICT at the FMBS; even
though the majority report that their favourite place to
get access to a computer is their home and access to
Internet is the cybercafé. This could be explained on one
hand, by the fact that the participants consider the
FMBS campus as a place of knowledge acquisition; the
understanding and assimilating steps of this knowledge
takes place in a more intimate and familiar environment.
Table 3 Perceived value of e-learning for teaching
(lecturers)
Frequence Percentage
Improves preparation and driving of teaching
Improves the quality of bibliographic
references
Enriches the teaching content
Improves research and relationship with
Makes educational material available
Enables to Archive documents
Helps to prepare teaching
Improves clarity of the educational material
Improves quality of communication
Improves follow-up of students activities
Table 4 Perceived usefulness of specific e-learning resources for learning or teaching
Printing Device
Online content (text)
Podcasting
Interactive educational software
Tools for self-evaluation
Computerized simulator of clinical cases
Communication tools
Collaborative tools
* The chi-square test was used for the comparison of the three groups.
Bediang et al. BMC Medical Education 2013, 13:57
 
 
On the other hand, the insufficient quality of services related to the computers’ access, to Internet or to other
services like documents printing or photocopying at the
campus, may explain some dissatisfaction as reported
in some studies . The weakness of technology
performance as a barrier for the e-learning has been
reported from another low income country context
 . Moreover, the participants of this study report
that they possess fairly good skills in basic use of computing tools. Most of them frequently use a computer,
Internet, and private e-mail addresses. Office software,
especially text processing software, is the most frequently used software, as illustrated in a study from
Nigeria . The same study shows that Internet is also
identified as a valuable source of medical information
research . However, participants of the study have a
rather scarce knowledge of processes and resources
available for medical information research online. This
study shows that Google engine is the most frequently
used programme despite the fact that search engines
such as Google are demonstrated to be less appropriate
than professional databases like MEDLINE to obtain
reliable medical information , which is shown to be
more accurate and reliable even than Google Scholar
 . The participants were also found to have little
knowledge of international initiatives (i.e., HINARI by
WHO) and to favour free access to scientific literature,
as has been reported in a study targeting five African
countries including Cameroon .
With respect to individual learning, the focus should
be on critical factors to improve the motivation, the
computer’s skills, the strengthening of confidence and
support of students as well as teachers . The perception of e-learning being useful and user-friendly as well
as personal attitudes are part of the acceptation model
of e-learning . Those factors predict the satisfaction
of the learners . In our study, a majority of students were not familiar with the concept of e-learning
and what it refers to. However, when provided with a
clear definition and concrete examples, most of them
perceived e-learning as useful, with high efficiency potential, as has been reported in the literature , the
majority wished it was further developed at the FMBS.
This positive perception of e-learning is an important
result for the future educational development for the Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences. Furthermore,
the development of participant’s computers skills is a key
issue. Research demonstrates that human factors such as
lack of computer skills, anxiety towards computer usage
and personal discipline are critical to the success of elearning . This requires capacity building training
programs in computer science, which must be specifically
designed and built for the curricula . The peer
mentoring strategy for training (i.e., tutoring of students
by other students) could also be explored . With the
support of the Faculty of Medicine of Geneva University,
this type of intervention was experienced at FMBS between 2004 and 2007. Regarding the lecturers in this survey, the mastery of these technologies is a critical factor of
the e-learning success and capacity building through
continuous medical education using peer mentoring technics calls upon a profound institutional change in the
management of many aspects of the teaching methods.
From an educational perspective, the result of our
study can only reiterate, as underlined in other studies,
the strong need to reflect on the type of pedagogy and
to develop the required and adequate support to increase the effectiveness of e-learning . E-learning
has the potential to foster or reinforce new training
strategies around the learner, often designated as “a
learner-centered pedagogy”: i.e., a pedagogy based on
motivation, information, analysis, interaction and production . On the other hand, specific attention should
be given to the “importance of curriculum design for
learning performance” . For example, the concept of
evidence-based medicine supporting the use of factual
data to improve the quality of care remains little known,
in particular by students. The application of this concept
is very much based on literature published in high income countries, with restricted relevance and adequacy
in a Sub-Saharan Africa countries with limited resources
and health coverage like in Cameroon . This problem can be solved through the promotion of initiatives
aiming at improving both access to biomedical information in Africa (e.g., Open Access Africa or the
HINARI Program ), and quality and visibility of biomedical information coming from Africa .
Moreover, the observed discrepancies between the
wishes of learners and those of the teachers about the nature of the contents to be posted on line highlights the
need to base these reforms on an integrative approach
with both the learners’ specific needs (key stakeholders) as
well as those of the teachers. For the FMBS faculty, the
implementation of these new approaches could be coordinated by the service in charge of academic affairs in collaboration with all faculty departments.
Finally, the context in which the implementation of
e-learning takes place is also of key importance and
should be taken into account for the success of such an
initiative . This requires the establishment of
adapted organization and regulations to foster its institutional and socio-cultural anchoring . With respect
to the implementation of e-learning, it will be important
for the e-learning managers within a specific faculty to
establish the mechanisms to ensure important dimensions: the availability of qualified and dedicated human
resources, the financing and adequate allocation of
resources, and finally, the support of stakeholders
Bediang et al. BMC Medical Education 2013, 13:57
 
 
(students, teachers, administrators) according to their
needs . Since 2006, a conference called "eLearning
Africa" brings together educators and e-learning experts in Africa. One of the aims of this conference is to
provide an opportunity for African universities to develop partnerships in e-learning. Finally, the very recent
Summit of the “Francophonie” in Kinshasa pointed out
the relevance of e-learning and launched a new online
education programs. All those promising development
are signalling the potentially rapid development of
e-learning strategies and policies to improve and increase
the pace and reach out of medical education in Africa.
Conclusion
This study contributes to give a global idea of computer
literacy and e-learning perception at the FMBS. Most
participants have a fairly good mastery of ICT, although
good practices about their use remain insufficiently
known. The ICT integration at the FMBS is still mostly
individually based with little coordination. The huge potential offered by e-learning and e-learning methods in
improving teaching and learning still remains largely unexploited at the FMBS, although students, residents and
lecturers are convinced of its utility and relevance.
The advances in connectivity and mobile computing (i.e.
on smartphones and tablets) and the interest for e-learning
opens new perspectives to medical faculties in Africa to develop even new models adapted to the African context such
as mobile learning. However, its local development starts
with the definition of a clear strategy, the implementation
of some key measures as well as the adoption of an educational methodology allowing the learners to be more active
in their training while taking account of their specific
Abbreviations
ICT: Information and Communication Technologies; FMBS: Faculty of
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences; MeSH: Medical Subject Headings;
LMS: Learning Management System.
Competing interests
The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
GB: was involved in the conception of the study, the collection of data, the
analysis and the interpretation of data, as well as the writing, discussion and
revising of this research article. GB has translated the final French version of
the paper in English. BS: have been involved in the conception of the study,
the analysis and the interpretation of data, the redaction, the discussion and
the revising of this research article. AG: was involved in the conception of
the study, and the interpretation of data, the writing, discussion and revising
of this research article. AK: was involved in the conception of the study, the
writing, the discussion and the revising of this research article. AS: was
involved in the conception of the study, the revising and editing of this
research article. SN: was involved in, the collection of data and the revising
of this research article. PC: was involved in the conception of the study, the
analysis and the interpretation of data, the redaction, the discussion and the
revising of this research article. AG, AK, AS, PC corrected the English version
and approved it. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
Authors’ information
GB: Medical Doctor, MSc in Medical Informatics, student in Master of Public
BS: Medical Doctor, MPH, Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine, Faculty
of Medicine, University of Geneva
AG: Medical Doctor, Professor, Head of Department of Medical Informatics
and Radiology, University of Geneva
AK: Medical Doctor, Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Geneva
AS: PhD, Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Geneva
SN: Medical Doctor, Professor, Vice-Dean in charge of Academic Affairs of
PC: Medical Doctor, Professor, Head of Institute of Social and Preventive
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva
Acknowledgments
Our thanks go to Professor Fritz Baumann, former head of Geneva-Cameroon
Medical Cooperation for his support in the study logistics.
Author details
1Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Yaounde I,
P.O. Box 1364, Yaoundé, Cameroon. 2Department of Radiology and Medical
Informatics, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. 3Institute of Social
and Preventive Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva,
Switzerland. 4Unit of Development and Research in Medical Education,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
Received: 20 July 2012 Accepted: 16 April 2013
Published: 19 April 2013