ProtTrans: Toward Understanding the Language
of Life Through Self-Supervised Learning
Ahmed Elnaggar , Michael Heinzinger , Christian Dallago
, Ghalia Rehawi
, Llion Jones,
, Tamas Feher , Christoph Angerer, Martin Steinegger,
Debsindhu Bhowmik
, and Burkhard Rost
Abstract—Computational biology and bioinformatics provide vast data gold-mines from protein sequences, ideal for Language Models
(LMs) taken from Natural Language Processing (NLP). These LMs reach for new prediction frontiers at low inference costs. Here, we
trained two auto-regressive models (Transformer-XL, XLNet) and four auto-encoder models (BERT, Albert, Electra, T5) on data from
UniRef and BFD containing up to 393 billion amino acids. The protein LMs (pLMs) were trained on the Summit supercomputer using
5616 GPUs and TPU Pod up-to 1024 cores. Dimensionality reduction revealed that the raw pLM-embeddings from unlabeled data
captured some biophysical features of protein sequences. We validated the advantage of using the embeddings as exclusive input for
several subsequent tasks: (1) a per-residue (per-token) prediction of protein secondary structure (3-state accuracy Q3=81%-87%); (2)
per-protein (pooling) predictions of protein sub-cellular location (ten-state accuracy: Q10=81%) and membrane versus water-soluble
(2-state accuracy Q2=91%). For secondary structure, the most informative embeddings (ProtT5) for the ﬁrst time outperformed the
state-of-the-art without multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) or evolutionary information thereby bypassing expensive database
searches. Taken together, the results implied that pLMs learned some of the grammar of the language of life. All our models are
available through 
Index Terms—Computational biology, high performance computing, machine learning, language modeling, deep learning
INTRODUCTION
EEP Learning (DL) has recently been advancing handin-hand with High-Performance Computing (HPC) to
achieve new scientiﬁc breakthroughs in both ﬁelds. More
powerful supercomputers , and advanced libraries
 , , , , enable the training of more complex models on bigger data sets using advanced processing units
(incl. Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) and Tensor Processing Units (TPUs)).
Through contextualized Language Models (LMs) , ,
Natural Language Processing (NLP) has been beneﬁting
substantially
particular
Transformers have reached state-of-the-art (SOA) performance for several tasks , . Limitations in annotations
do not constrain LMs: the self-supervised training exclusively relies upon the sequential order of the input, e.g., by
reconstructing corrupted tokens given the surrounding
sequence. After training, we can extract some information
learned by the LMs, referred to as embeddings. Transfer-learning refers to the idea of using such embeddings as input for
subsequently trained supervised models. These two steps
outsource the computationally demanding LM pre-training
to the HPC infrastructure, leaving the computationally less
demanding inference to commodity hardware.
Proteins are the machinery of life, built from 20 different
basic biochemical building blocks (called amino acids). Like
beads, those amino acids are strung up in one-dimensional
(1D) sequences (the beads are referred to as residues once
connected). These 1D sequences adopt unique three-dimensional (3D) shapes (referred to as protein 3D structure) ,
and these perform speciﬁc function(s) (simply put: as
sequence determines structure determines function). We know
many orders of magnitude more protein amino acid sequences than experimental protein structures (sequence-structure
gap) . Knowing structure helps to understand function.
generally, the
sequence-annotation
through prediction methods based on artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI) is one of the crucial challenges for computational biology and bioinformatics. Tapping into the vast wealth of
unlabeled data through transfer-learning is becoming crucial to bridging these gaps.
Top prediction methods in computational biology ,
 , , , , combine machine learning (ML)
Ahmed Elnaggar, Michael Heinzinger, Christian Dallago, Ghalia Rehawi,
and Burkhard Rost are with the Department of Informatics, Bioinformatics &
Computational Biology - i12, Technical University of Munich (TUM), 85748
Garching/Munich, Germany. E-mail: , {mheinzinger,
assistant}@rostlab.org, , .
Yu Wang is with the Med AI Technology (Wu Xi) Ltd., Wu Xi, Jiang Su
214000, China. E-mail: .
Llion Jones is with the Google AI, Google, Mountain View, CA 94043
USA. E-mail: .
Tom Gibbs, Tamas Feher, and Christoph Angerer are with the NVIDIA,
Santa Clara, CA 95051 USA. E-mail: {tgibbs, tfeher, cangerer}@nvidia.com.
Martin Steinegger is with the School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National
University, Seoul 08826, South Korea. E-mail: .
Debsindhu Bhowmik is with Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), Oak
Ridge, TN 37830 USA. E-mail: .
Manuscript received 20 July 2020; revised 3 May 2021; accepted 21 June 2021.
Date of publication 7 July 2021; date of current version 9 September 2022.
(Corresponding author: Ahmed Elnaggar.)
Recommended for acceptance by C. S. Ong.
Digital Object Identiﬁer no. 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3095381
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 44, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2022
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see 
and evolutionary information (EI), ﬁrst established as the winning strategy to predict protein secondary structure ,
 in two steps. First, search for a family of related proteins
summarized as multiple sequence alignment (MSA) and
extract the evolutionary information contained in this MSA.
Second, feed the EI into the ML through supervised learning
of implicit structural or functional constraints. Such methods need no additional information as input other than the
EI which is amply available giving the exploding databases
of bio-sequences , . However, there are several prices
to pay for EI. First, when predicting for entire proteomes (all
proteins in an organism), compiling the EI becomes computationally costly . Second, EI is not available for all proteins (intrinsically disordered proteins or dark proteome
 ). Third, the improvement is best when the EI is most
diverse , . The latest, and arguably largest leap ever
in terms of protein structure prediction, namely Alpha-
Fold2, relies on an advanced combination of EI and ML
 . Although predicting protein structure at unprecedented levels of accuracy, the method is many orders of
magnitude more computationally expensive than the creation of ”minimal” MSAs.
In analogy to NLP, protein Language Models (pLMs)
interpret an entire protein sequence as a sentence and its
constituents – amino acids – as single words. Protein
sequences are constrained to adopt particular 3D structures
optimized for accomplishing particular functions. These
constraints mirror the rules of grammar and meaning in
NLP. Since pLMs extract features directly from single protein sequences, such single-sequence based methods might,
for the ﬁrst time in almost three decades, reach top performance without using EI/MSAs.
In this project, dubbed ProtTrans, we pursued two objectives. First, we explored the limits of up-scaling language
models trained on proteins as well as protein sequence databases used for training. Second, we compared the effects of
auto-regressive and auto-encoding pre-training upon the
success of the subsequent supervised training, and compared all LMs trained here to existing state-of-the-art (SOA)
solutions using evolutionary information (EI) .
Protein Language Models (pLMs) copy the concepts of Language Models from NLP by using as tokens (words in NLP)
amino acids from protein sequences, treating entire proteins
like sentences in LMs. In step 1 these pLMs are trained in
self-supervised manner, essentially learning to predict
masked amino acids (tokens) in already known sequences
(Data: 2.1, Method: 2.4). Once trained, we need to establish
that the pLMs capture relevant information (Data: 2.2). This
ﬁrst step uses only protein sequences without any annotation as input. In step 2, we transfer what the pLMs learned
by extracting the embeddings and using them as input for
supervised training of per-residue/per-token (secondary
structure) and per-protein/pooling (transmembrane proteins and subcellular location) prediction tasks (Data: 2.3,
Method: 2.5). The second step uses experimental labels
about proteins for the supervised training. Details about
Hardware (2.6) and Software (2.7) provide details about
implementing pLMs.
Data for Protein Language Models (pLMs)
We measure the impact of data amount on performance
through three data sets :
Uniref50 , UniRef100 , and BFD (Big Fantastic Database) , . Merging UniProt and proteins translated
from multiple metagenomic sequencing projects, BFD has
become the largest collection of protein sequences: about eight
times larger than the largest sets used previously for pLMs
 . The 8-fold increase in data increased the number of
tokens 5-fold (Table 1), as proteins were 1.6-fold longer in Uni-
Ref100. Without a clear mapping for LMs from NLP to proteins, i.e., the concept of words can be related to single amino
acids, a window of amino acids (k-mer motifs ) or functional units (domains ), we decided to interpret single
amino acids as input tokens/words. Thereby, protein databases contain several orders of magnitude more tokens than
corpora used in NLP, e.g., Google’s Billion Word data set 
top in NLP with about 829m (million) tokens (words), compared to BFD with 393b (billion) tokens (amino acids). Interpreting domains as words, would cut the number of tokens in
BFD roughly by a factor of 100 (average domain length )
still leaving 5-times more tokens in BFD than the Billion Word
corpus. Uniref50, UniRef100 and BFD were tokenized with a
single space (indicating word-boundaries) between each
token. Each protein sequence was stored on a separate line,
lines/proteins
representing
equivalent
”sentences”. Additionally, an empty line was inserted
between each protein sequence in order to indicate the ”end
of a document”; however, this is only essential for models
with auxiliary task (Bert and Albert). Non-generic or unresolved amino acids ([BOUZ]) were mapped to unknown (X).
For training ProtTXL and ProtT5, the data was transformed to
pytorch and tensorﬂow tensors, respectively on the ﬂy. For
ProtBert, ProtAlbert, ProtXLNet and ProtElectra, the data was
pre-processed and stored as tensorﬂow records. Given tensor-
ﬂow records with terabytes, data sets had to be chunked into
6000 ﬁles for thousands of parallel workers.
Data for Unsupervised Evaluation of
Embeddings
We extracted the information captured by the protein LMs
through embeddings, i.e., vector representations from the last
hidden state of the protein LM (Fig. 1) and analyzed it by
Data Protein LM - UniRef50 and UniRef100 Cluster the UniProt
Database at 50 and 100 percent Pairwise Sequence Identity
(100 percent Implying That Duplicates are Removed) ; BFD
Combines UniProt With Metagenomic Data Keeping Only One
Copy for Duplicates , 
Number proteins [in m]
Number of amino acids [in b]
Disk space [in GB]
Units: number of proteins in millions (m), of amino acids in billions (b), and of
disk space in GB (uncompressed storage as text).
ELNAGGAR ET AL.: PROTTRANS: TOWARD UNDERSTANDING THE LANGUAGE OF LIFE THROUGH SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING
projecting the high-dimensional representations down to
two dimensions (2D) using t-SNE . Toward this end, we
took annotations from several sources. First, a non-redundant (PIDE<40%) version of the SCOPe database 
(release 2.07 with 14,323 proteins). Second, we mapped proteins into the three major domains of life (archaea, bacteria, or
eukarya) or to viruses (removing all proteins with missing
classiﬁcations). The number of iterations for the t-SNE projections was set to 3,000 and the perplexity to 30 for all plots
with the exception of the amino acid plot for which we used
a perplexity of 5. All visualizations used the same random
seed (42).
Data for Supervised Training
We also assessed the information captured during selfsupervised pre-training of our protein LMs by using
embeddings extracted from those models as sole input for
supervised training. Although we mostly relied on previously published data sets to ease comparisons to other
methods, for the supervised training, we also added a novel
test set to reﬁne the evaluation.
Per-Residue Prediction /Single Tokens. To predict properties
of single tokens (here: single amino acids, dubbed residues
when joined in proteins), we used the training set published
with NetSurfP-2.0 describing secondary structure in 3and 8-states (class distribution for all data sets in SOM
Tables 4, 3, available online). We also included other public
test data sets, namely CB513 ), TS115 , and CASP12
 . Each of those has severe limitations (CASP12: too
small, CB513 and TS115 redundant and outdated). Therefore, we added a new test set using only proteins published
after the release of NetSurfP-2.0 . We
included proteins from the PDB with resolutions  2:5
 and  20 residues. MMSeqs2 with highest sensitivity
(-s 7.5) removed proteins with >20% PIDE to either the
training set or to itself. On top, PISCES removed any
protein considered by its procedure to have >20% PIDE.
These ﬁlters reduced the number of new proteins (chains)
from 18k to 364 (dubbed set NEW364).
Per-Protein Prediction/Embedding Pooling. For the prediction of features for entire proteins (analogous to the classiﬁcation of whole sentences in NLP), the DeepLoc data
set was used to classify proteins into (i) membrane-bound
versus water-soluble and (ii) ten classes of subcellular localization (also referred to as cellular compartments).
Step 1: Self-Supervised Protein LM Pre-Training
We trained six successful LMs in NLP (T5 , Electra ,
BERT , Albert , Transformer-XL and XLNet )
on protein sequences. BERT was the ﬁrst bidirectional
model in NLP which tried to reconstruct corrupted tokens,
and is considered the de-facto standard for transfer learning
in NLP. Albert reduced BERT’s complexity by hard parameter sharing between its attention layers which allows to
increase the number of attention heads (64 chosen here).
Electra tries to improve the sampling-efﬁciency of the pretraining task by training two networks, a generator and a
discriminator. Instead of only reconstructing corrupted
input tokens, the generator (BERT) reconstructs masked
tokens, potentially creating plausible alternatives, and the
discriminator (Electra) detects which tokens were masked.
This enriches the training signal as the loss can be computed
over all tokens instead of the subset of corrupted tokens
(usually only 15 percent). T5 uses the original transformer
architecture proposed for sequence translation, which consists of an encoder that projects a source language to an
embedding space and a decoder that generates a translation
to a target language based on the encoder’s embedding.
Only later, models used either the encoder (BERT, Albert,
Electra) or the decoder (TransformerXL, XLNet), but T5
showed that this simpliﬁcation might come at a certain price
as it reaches state-of-the-art results in multiple NLP benchmarks. Additionally, it provides the ﬂexibility to apply different
methodologies
strategies, e.g., T5 allows to reconstruct spans of tokens
instead of single tokens.
As self-attention is a set-operation and thus order-independent, Transformers require explicit positional encoding.
Models trained with sinusoidal position signal like BERT,
Albert or Electra, can process only sequences shorter or
equal to the length of the positional encoding which has to
be set before training. Due to the huge memory requirement
of Transformer-models, this parameter is usually set to a
value lower than the longest proteins, e.g., Titin with 33k
residues. Here, we trained models that were affected by this
limitations (ProtBERT, ProtAlbert, ProtElectra) ﬁrst on proteins of length  512, then on proteins  1024. Only setting
the length of the positional encoding to 40k after pre-training allowed the models to process protein sequences up to a
length of 40k. In contrast to this, TransformerXL introduced
a memory that allows it to process sequences of arbitrary
Fig. 1. Feature extraction overview - We give a general overview on how
ProtTrans models can be used to derive features (embeddings) for arbitrary protein sequences either on the level of single amino acids or whole
proteins and how they can be used for classiﬁcation tasks on both levels.
First, an example protein sequence ”SEQ” is tokenized and positional
encoding is added. The resulting vectors are passed through any of our
ProtTrans models to create context-aware embeddings for each input
token, i.e., each amino acid. Here, we used the last hidden state of the
Transformer’s attention stack as input for downstream prediction methods. Those embeddings can either be used directly as input for prediction tasks on the level of individual tokens, e.g., a CNN can be used to
predict an amino acid’s secondary structure. Alternatively, those embeddings can be concatenated and pooled along the length-dimension to
get ﬁxed-size embedding irrespective of the input length, i.e., global
average pooling is applied. The resulting protein-level embedding can
be used as input for predicting aspects of proteins, e.g., a FNN can be
used to predict a protein’s cellular localization.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 44, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2022
length. Still, the model cuts sequences into fragments but
allows for ﬂow of information between fragments for longer
proteins by re-using hidden states of fragments which have
already been processed. While its memory is uni-directional
as fragments are processed sequentially, TransformerXL
captures only uni-directional context within one memory
fragment (auto-regressive) while XLNet, which uses a similar memory mechanism to process sequences of arbitrary
length, allows to gather bidirectional context within one
memory fragment.
In contrast to this, T5 learns a positional encoding for
each attention head that is shared across all layers. This
way, the model learned to combine the relative offset
between residue pairs of lower layers, enabling the model
to make predictions beyond the actual length of the positional encoding. No auxiliary tasks like BERT’s next-sentence prediction were used for any model described here.
ProtTXL, ProtBert, ProtXLNet, ProtAlbert and ProtElectra were trained on UniRef100, ProtT5 on UniRef50, and
ProtTXL, ProtBert & ProtT5, on BFD (Table 2). Largely, we
transferred conﬁgurations successfully from NLP to protein
sequences , , , with the exception of the number
of layers that was increased to optimize memory utilization.
ProtTXL. The Transformer-XL1 was trained using both
UniRef100 and BFD-100 datasets (referred to as ProtTXL and
ProtTXL-BFD, respectively; Table 2). Both models used a
dropout rate of 15 percent, a memory length of 512 tokens
and using mixed precision. The number of layers, number of
heads, batch size, learning rate, weight decay, training steps
and warm-up steps were adjusted according to training set
size as well as GPU utilization. The number of warm-up
steps was set to cover at least one epoch for each data set. We
tested initial learning rates between 0.001 and 0.005 which
were increased linearly at every training step over the warmup period. To avoid model divergence during training, the
learning rate had to be (i) reduced along with the warm-up
steps (for BFD), or (ii) increased for both (for Uniref100).
Even after increasing the warm-up steps to two epochs, the
maximum learning rate remained at 0.0025 for both data
sets. Beyond this point, the training diverged. Using weight
decay to regularize the network increased the GPU memory
usage as it required to compute the norm of all weight vectors on our models, thus reducing the batch size. ProtTXL-
BFD was trained for 40k steps in total, with 13.6k warm-up
steps using a learning rate of 0.0005, while ProtTXL was
trained for 31k steps with 5k warm-up steps using a learning
rate of 0.002. The Lamb optimizer was able to handle the
resulting batch sizes of 44k and 22k for ProtTXL-BFD and
ProtTXL, respectively, without divergence.
ProtBert. BERT2 was trained using both UniRef100 and
BFD-100 datasets (referred to as ProtBert and ProtBert-BFD,
respectively; Table 2). Compared to the original BERT publication, the number of layers was increased. Unlike Transformer-XL which was trained on Nvidia GPUs, mixedprecision was not used to train other models because those
were trained on TPUs. Similar to the BERT version trained
in the Lamb paper , ProtBert was ﬁrst trained for 300k
steps on sequences with a maximum length of 512 and then
for another 100k steps on sequences with a length of a maximum length of 2k. While ProtBert-BFD was trained for 800k
steps, then for another 200k steps for sequences with maximum length of 512 and 2k, respectively. This allows the
model to ﬁrst extract useful features from shorter sequences
while using a larger batch size, rendering training on longer
sequences more efﬁcient.
ProtAlbert. We trained Albert3 on UniRef100 (ProtAlbert;
Table 2). We used the conﬁguration from the ofﬁcial GitHub
repository for Albert (version: xxlarge v2). For Albert the
number of layers is increased through the number of times,
Albert stacks its single layer. Compared to the original
Large-Scale Deep Learning: The Table Shows the Conﬁgurations for Pre-Training the Protein LMs Introduced Here (ProtTXL,
ProtBert, ProtXLNet, ProtAlbert, ProtElectra, ProtT5) Using Either Summit, a TPU Pod v2 or a TPU Pod v3
1. 
2. 
3. 
ELNAGGAR ET AL.: PROTTRANS: TOWARD UNDERSTANDING THE LANGUAGE OF LIFE THROUGH SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING
publication, we achieved increasing the global batch size
from 4096 to 10752 on the same hardware. The reason for
this counter-intuitive effect is the reduced vocabulary size
in proteins: the entire diversity of the protein universe is
realized by 20 different amino acids, compared to tens of
thousands of different words. Similar to ProtBert, ProtAlbert was ﬁrst trained for 150k steps on sequences with a
maximum length of 512 and then for another 150k steps on
sequences with a maximum length of 2k.
ProtXLNet. XLNet4 was trained on UniRef100 (ProtXL-
Net) using the original NLP conﬁguration (Table 2)
except for the number of layers that was increased to 30
layers which reduced the global batch size to 1024. Due to
the relatively small batch-size, we used the original optimizer: Adam with a learning rate of 0.00001. The model
was trained through more steps, i.e., 20k warm-up and
847k steps to compensate for the smaller batch-size of this
ProtElectra. Electra5 consists of two models, a generator
and discriminator (same number of layers, generator 25
percent of the discriminator’s hidden layer size, hidden
layer intermediate size, and number of heads). We copied
Electra’s NLP conﬁguration with two changes: increasing
the number of layers to 30 and using Lamb optimizer.
Again, we split the training into two phases: the ﬁrst for
proteins  512 residues (400k steps at 9k global batch size),
the second for proteins  1024 (400k steps at 3.5k global
ProtAlbert
ProtXLNet relied on pre-computed tensorﬂow records as
input, Electra allowed to mask sequences on the ﬂy, allowing the model to see different masking patterns during
each epoch.
ProtT5. Unlike the previous LMs, T56 uses an encoder
and decoder . We trained two model sizes, one with 3B
(T5-XL) and one with 11B parameters (T5-XXL). T5-XL was
trained using 8-way model parallelism, while T5-XXL was
trained using 32-way model parallelism. First, T5-XL and
T5-XXL were trained on BFD for 1.2M and 920k steps
respectively (ProtT5-XL-BFD, ProtT5-XXL-BFD). In a second
step, ProtT5-XL-BFD and ProtT5-XXL-BFD were ﬁne-tuned
on UniRef50 for 991k and 343k steps respectively (ProtT5-
XL-U50, ProtT5-XXL-U50). Contrary to the original T5
model which masks spans of multiple tokens, we adopted
BERT’s denoising objective to corrupt and reconstruct single
tokens using a masking probability of 15 percent. All T5
models used the AdaFactor optimizer with inverse square
root learning rate schedule for pre-training. Like ProtElectra, T5 masks each sequence on the ﬂy. In our hands, the
encoder outperformed the decoder on all benchmarks signiﬁcantly and running the model in half-precision during
inference instead of full-precision had no effect on performance but allowed to run the model on on a single Nvidia
TitanV (12GB vRAM). Thus, we dropped the decoder from
further analysis which cuts model size by half during inference. For completeness, we made weights for encoder and
decoder publicly available.
Step 2: Transfer Learning of Supervised Models
In the transfer-learning step, embeddings from our pretrained protein LMs served as sole input to subsequent
supervised training, thereby transferring knowledge acquired during self-supervised pre-training to other tasks. To
best analyze the impact of transfer learning, we deliberately
kept the supervised models using the embeddings from the
protein LMs as input minimal. In particular, compared to
SOA solutions such as NetSurfP-2.0, all our experiments
used the pre-trained LMs as feature extractors without ﬁnetuning, i.e., without gradient back-propagating to the LMs.
Throughout, we extracted the embeddings from the last hidden state of the pre-trained LMs as described in detail elsewhere . To brieﬂy summarize (Fig. 1): we applied tasks on
two different levels, namely on the level of single tokens (perresidue) and whole sentences through pooling (per-protein)
predictions. For the per-residue prediction, we input the
embeddings into a two-layer convolutional neural network
(CNN). The ﬁrst CCN layer compressed the embeddings to
32 dimensions using a window size of 7. The compressed
representation was fed into two different CNNs (each with
window size 7). One learned to predict secondary structure
in 3-states, the other in 8-states. The network was trained on
both outputs simultaneously by adding their losses (multitask learning). For ProtBERT-BFD embeddings we additionally trained three other models: logistic regression, FNN and
LSTM. Similar to the CNN, the two-layer FNN ﬁrst compressed the output of the language model down to 32 dimensions which the second FNN-layer used to predict 3- and 8states simultaneously. The bi-directional LSTM compressed
the embeddings down to 16 dimensions. Concatenating both
directions, the resulting 32 dimensional representation was
used by a FNN layer to predict 3- or 8-states. As the CNN performed best (SOM Table 8, available online), we used CNNs
throughout. For the per-protein prediction, we also extracted
the embeddings from the last layer of the protein LMs. However, then we pooled the representations over the lengthdimension resulting in a ﬁxed-size representation for all proteins. Using ProtBERT-BFD embeddings, we compared alternative pooling strategies (SOM Table 8, available online) and
chose mean-pooling for all further experiments. The resulting
vector was used as an input to a single feed forward layer
with 32 neurons which compressed information before making the ﬁnal predictions for both per-protein tasks, i.e., the
prediction of subcellular localization and the differentiation
membrane-bound
water-soluble
simultaneously (multi-task learning).
HPC hardware is advancing both through infrastructure of
supercomputers, such as Fugaku , Summit or the
SuperMUC-NG , and through its components, such as
TPU pods , speciﬁcally designed to ease large scale neural
Concurrent
improvements in form of more efﬁcient libraries such as
Horovod allow executing general purpose code on large
distributed clusters with minor code changes. In this section
we give details on the hardware used for training language
models on large protein sequence databases.
ORNL Summit & Rhea. The Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) provides several clusters for researchers who
4. 
5. 
6. 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 44, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2022
need computational resources not provided by research
facilities such as universities. Here, we used Summit and
Rhea. Summit was used to train the deep learning models,
while Rhea was used for the pre-processing of data sets
including the distributed generation of tensorﬂow records.
Summit is the world’s second fastest computer, consisting of approximately 4618 nodes. Each node has two IBM
POWER9 processors and six NVIDIA Volta V100 with 16GB
of memory each . Every POWER9 processor is connected
via dual NVLINK bricks, each capable of a 25GB/s transfer
rate in both directions. A single node has 0.5 TB of DDR4
main memory and 1.6TB of non-volatile memory that can
be used as a burst buffer. Summit is divided into racks with
each rack having 18 nodes. In all of our experiments we
reserved 936 nodes for training. As having nodes on the
same rack decreases the communication overhead, we
reserved entire racks.
The smaller cluster (Rhea) contains two partitions: Rhea
and GPU. The Rhea partition has 512 node, each with 128
GB of memory and two Intel Xeon E5-2650. The GPU partition has only 9 nodes, each with 1 TB of memory and two
Intel Xeon E5-2695. Reha reduced the time needed for
creating tensorﬂow records for the BFD dataset from 7.5
months (!) to fewer than two days, by converting the original sequential script to distributed processing using MPI.
The generation script used two nodes of the GPU partition,
with a total of 112 parallel threads.
Google TPU Pod. In 2016, Google introduced tensor processing unit (TPU) as its application-speciﬁc integrated circuit
optimized for training neural networks. TPUs can be
accessed through Google Cloud. Training the protein LMs
used both older TPU generation (V2) with 256 cores, and the
latest TPU generation (V3) with 512 and 1024 cores. These
cores are divided into hosts with each host having access to 8
cores. Consequently, we had access to 32, 64 and 128 hosts
for V2/V3-256, V3-512 and V3-1024, and each core had 8 GiB
and 16 GiB of high-bandwidth memory for V2 and V3. Training on the TPUs required access to a virtual machine on Google Cloud and storage on Google Bucket .
Summit integrates several pre-conﬁgured modules which
include the most popular libraries and tools required for
simulation, deep learning, distributed training and other
purposes. We used the IBM Watson Machine Learning
module versions 1.6.0 and 1.6.2 for our deep learning training. In contrast to this, the Google Cloud server, which we
used for the TPU Pod training, had to be conﬁgured manually because only the operating system was installed.
Pytorch was used to train ProtTXL, tensorﬂow to train
ProtBert, ProtAlbert, ProtXLNet, ProtElectra and ProtT5.
Both libraries used the Horovod framework to train the
models on distributed clusters such as Summit. Horovod
supports distributed GPU training with minimal change in
the code. It supports different backends including MPI,
NCCL and IBM PowerAI distributed deep learning (DDL).
We tested all three backends and found DDL to be the fastest
for our training purpose on Summit. The time needed to ﬁnish a single batch with ProtTXL-BFD increased from one to
two nodes due to the communication overhead (Fig. 2). After
two nodes the communication overhead plateaued, even
when scaling up to 936 nodes with 5616 GPUs. Summit has
integrated DDL in their Watson Machine Learning module
which comes with most DDL libraries including pytorch,
tensorﬂow, apex, DDL and horovod. However, Summit has
only a license for using DDL up to 954 nodes. Contrary to
Summit, training on TPU Pods did not require any changes
in the Tensorﬂow code to use either a single TPU host or to
distribute workload among multiple TPU hosts.
Mixed precision allows to ﬁt larger models and batch
sizes into GPU memory by using 16-bit precision only or a
mix of 16-bit and 32-bit precision. Nvidia’s APEX library
 was used for mixed precision training of ProtTXL,
because APEX supports pytorch. As ProtTXL training
became instable when training with 16 Bit precision, we
switched to almost half precision training (more details in
SOM - 1.2 Software, available online). We did not use
mixed-precision for models trained on TPUs.
Another optimization technique/library crucial for our
training on Summit was IBM’s large model support (LMS)
 . Similar to gradient checkpointing , LMS virtually
extends the GPU memory by outsourcing parts of the model
from GPU to main memory. This allows training models
larger than the GPU memory. The obvious drawback of
LMS is the increase in training time due to shuttling data
between CPU and GPU and back. However, the reduced
memory consumption of the model allows to increase the
batch size, potentially compensating for the communication
overhead. ProtTXL was used to evaluate the effect of
Pytorch’s implementation of LMS while ProtBert was
trained for a few steps BFD using Summit to evaluate
tensorﬂow’s implementation of LMS. Training ProtBert for
a few steps was sufﬁcient to assess the effect of LMS on
batch-size, model size as well as an estimate of training
time. In the end, we used LMS only for ProtTXL to strike a
balance between model size and training time. The number
of LM parameters could be increased by about 15.6 percent
for ProtTXL-BFD and to 6.6 percent for ProtBert (SOM Fig.
10a, available online). Additionally, we could increase the
batch size by 700 percent for ProtTXL-BFD (SOM Figs. 10b
Fig. 2. Large scale dataset training: The ﬁgure shows the overhead of
increasing the number of nodes/gpus for both ProtTXL (blue; low) and
ProtBert (red; high). The overhead increases slightly from 1 to 2 nodes
but remains constant even when scaling up to 936 nodes with a total of
5616 GPUs. Having a low overhead means the model has a near-linear
scale-up across thousands of GPUs, upper-bounded by the theoretical
ELNAGGAR ET AL.: PROTTRANS: TOWARD UNDERSTANDING THE LANGUAGE OF LIFE THROUGH SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING
and 10c, available online). The NV-Link between CPU and
GPU on Summit-nodes, reduced the training time for
ProtTXL by 60 percent while it increased by 72 percent for
ProtBert (SOM Fig. 10d, available online).
Section 3.1 established that the protein LMs (pLMs) learned
to distinguish between different types of proteins by projecting high-dimensional embeddings onto 2D using t-SNE
 . Section 3.2 showed that pLM embeddings succeeded
as exclusive input for supervised training to predict protein
features on the per-residue/token-level (secondary structure) and on the per-protein/sentence-level (location and
membrane/non-membrane). In fact, predictions based on
embeddings from single protein sequences were competitive with, or even surpassed, top methods relying on information
alignments
Section 3.3 established that the on par performance will create substantially lower costs in terms of computing, energy,
or CO2 consumption for every future protein prediction.
Step 1: Protein LMs Learn Without Labels
Embeddings extract constraints about protein function and
structure learned by the protein LMs during self-supervised
pre-training on raw (unlabeled) protein sequences. t-SNE
plots visualized this information by projecting the
embeddings onto 2D and by overlaying annotations (labels)
of structural, functional or evolutionary features. Using
attention maps, we analyzed the DNA-binding zinc-ﬁnger
motif well conserved in evolution in more detail.
Capturing Biophysical Features of Amino Acids. Applying t-
SNE to the uncontextualized token embedding layer visualized information extracted by the pLMs for individual
amino acids independent of their context (residues next to
it). As previously established for another pLM , the t-
SNE projections (e.g., ProtT5-XL-U50 SOM Fig. 14a, available online, or ProtBert-BFD SOM Fig. 15a, available online)
suggested that all pLMs captured essential biophysical
amino acid features, including charge, polarity, size, hydrophobicity, even to the level of aliphatic ([AILMV]) versus
aromatic ([WFY]).
We compared the embedding projection with a randomly initialized model of identical architecture to ascertain that the observed effects did not originate from
coincidental
originating
projecting
highdimensional data (Fig. 3 A) or some inductive bias of neural networks . The random projection clearly did not
carry biophysical information, while the embeddings projection did.
Fig. 3. Protein LMs learned constraints. t-SNE projections visualized information extracted by the unsupervised protein LMs (here best-performing
ProtT5-XL-U50; upper row: before training (Random), and lower row: after pre-training on BFD & UniRef50. (A) The left-most column highlights single amino acids by biophysical features. (B) The middle column annotates protein structural class (taken from SCOPe). (C) The right-most column
distinguishes proteins according to the kingdom of life in which it is native. Although the random projections on top may suggest some adequacy of
the clusters, the trained models shown on the lower row clearly stood out. Incidentally, the comparison of the two also highlighted the potential pitfalls
of using t-SNE projections from many dimensions onto 2D: although random, the human might see some correct patterns even in the top row. Most
impressive might be the ﬁne-grained distinctions of biophysical features of amino acids (A), however, more surprising are the classiﬁcations of entire
proteins according to structural class (B) and organism (C). For these, we created embeddings through global average pooling over the representations extracted from the last layer of ProtT5-U50 (average over protein length, i.e., per-protein embeddings; Fig. 1).
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 44, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2022
Capturing Protein Structure Classes. We averaged over the
length-dimension of the representations derived from the
last layer of each pLM (Fig. 1) to derive ﬁxed size representations for each protein and superposed structural class from
SCOPe . ProtBert-BFD and especially ProtT5-XL-U50
embeddings visually separated the proteins best (SOM Figs.
14-19, available online). Although sequence length was not
explicitly encoded and our pooling squeezed proteins into a
ﬁxed vector size, all pLMs separated small from long proteins (brown, e.g., ProtT5-XL-U50 SOM Fig. 14D, available
online). All models also distinguished between water-soluble and transmembrane proteins (light blue, e.g., ProtT5-XL-
U50 SOM Fig. 14D, available online) and, to some extent,
between proteins according to their secondary structure
composition(e.g., all-alpha (dark blue) versus all-beta (dark
green) ProtT5-XL-U50 Fig. 14D, available online). While having much higher entropy, even the random model clustered
small proteins from long proteins (brown, Fig. 3B).
Capturing Domains of Life and Viruses. The analysis distinguished three domains of life: archaea, bacteria, and eukarya,
along with viruses - typically not considered as life. We used
the same proteins and per-protein pooling as above for
SCOPe. All pLMs captured some organism-speciﬁc aspects
(e.g., ProtT5-XL-U50 SOM Fig. 14E, available online).
Eukarya and bacteria clustered better than viruses and
archaea. Comparing different pLMs revealed the same
trend as for protein structure classes: ProtTXL (SOM 19E,
available online) and ProtBert (SOM 16E, available online)
produced higher entropy clusters, while ProtAlbert (SOM
17E, available online), ProtXLNet (SOM 18E, available
online), ProtBERT-BFD (SOM Fig. 15E, available online)
and ProtT5-XL-U50 (SOM Fig. 14E, available online) produced visually easier separable clusters.
Capturing Protein Function in Conserved Motifs. A similar
overall per-protein analysis as for structural classes and
domains of life also suggested some clustering according to
protein function as proxied by enzymatic activity (EC-numbers and subcellular location (SOM -1.3 pLMs unsupervised, available online). We focused in more detail on the
attention mechanism at the core of each Transformer
model providing some limited understanding , .
We visualized the attention weights of ProtAlbert to
analyze the structural motif of a zinc-ﬁnger binding domain
(SOM Fig. 11, available online) crucial for DNA- and RNAbinding and conserved across diverse organisms. Some of
the attention heads of ProtAlbert (SOM Fig. 11, available
online; line thickness resembles attention weight) focused
mostly on the four residues involved in zinc-binding (residues highlighted in the left part of SOM Fig. 11, available
online) which is essential for function.
Step 2: pLMs Competitive as Input to Predict
The acid test to prove that pLM embeddings extracted
important constraints is to exclusively use embeddings as
input to supervised training. We proxied this through predictions on two different levels, namely on the per-residue
or token level (secondary structure) and on the per-protein
or sentence level through pooling over entire proteins (location, and classiﬁcation into membrane/non-membrane proteins). The pLMs remained unchanged, i.e., both approaches
(per-residue/per-protein) used only embeddings derived
from the hidden state of the last attention layer of each pLM
(Fig. 1), i.e., pLMs were only used as static feature extractors.
Per-Residue Secondary Structure Prediction
To ease comparability, we evaluated all models on standard
performance measures (Q3/Q8: three/eight-state per-residue accuracy, i.e., percentage of residues predicted correctly
in either of the 3/8 secondary structure states) and on standard data sets (CASP12, TS115, CB513). To increase the
validity, we added a novel, non-redundant test set (dubbed
NEW364). For simplicity, we only presented values for Q3 on
CASP12 and NEW364 (TS115 and CB513 contain substantial
redundancy; Q8 results brought little novelty; SOM Tables 7,
6, available online). As error estimates failed to capture the
performance variation between NEW364 and CASP12, we
used CASP12 as lower- and NEW364 as upper-limit.
Comparing Supervised Architectures. We input embeddings
from ProtBERT-BFD into four different supervised models
(Methods): logistic regression (LogReg), FNN, CNN and
LSTM. LogReg provided an advanced baseline (Q3(LogReg)
=74.3-79.3, lower number for set CASP12, upper for set
NEW364; SOM Table 5, available online). LSTMs and CNNs
performed alike and better than LogReg (Q3(CNN)=76.1-
81.1% versus Q3(LSTM)76.1-80.9%). In the following, we
focused on the more energy-efﬁcient CNNs.
Comparing pLMs. Trained on UniRef100 (Table 1), Prot-
Bert outperformed other models trained on the same corpus
(SOM Tables 7, 6, available online). For ProtTXL and Prot-
Bert, we could analyze the inﬂuence of database size upon
performance: 10-times larger BFD (Table 1) helped ProtBert
slightly (DQ3: +1.1%) but made ProtTXL worse (DQ3: -0.6%;
SOM Tables 7, 6, available online). The gain was larger
when ﬁne-tuning the two ProtT5 versions (XL and XXL) by
ﬁrst training on BFD and then reﬁning on UniRef50. Consistently, all models ﬁne-tuned on UniRef50 outperformed
those trained only on BFD (Fig. 4, SOM Tables 7, 6, available
online). Although these gains were consistently numerically
higher, the statistical signiﬁcance remained within the 68
percent conﬁdence interval (maximal difference: 1.1 percent
compared to one standard error of 0.5%).
Embeddings Reached State-of-the-Art (SOA). All models
(ProtTXL, ProtBert, ProtAlbert, ProtXLNet, ProtElectra,
ProtT5) and all databases (BFD, UniRef50/UniRef100) tested
improved signiﬁcantly over context-free feature extractors
such as word2vec-based approaches (DeepProtVec in Fig. 4
and SOM Table 6, available online). Both ProtTXL versions
fell short compared to an existing ELMo/LSTM-based solution (DeepSeqVec ) while all other Transformer-models
outperformed DeepSeqVec. Embeddings extracted from
another large Transformer (ESMB-1b ), improved over
all our non-ProtT5 models (Fig. 4 and SOM Table 6, available
online). Most solutions using only embeddings as input
were outperformed by the top SOA method NetSurfP-2.0
 using evolutionary information (Fig. 4 and SOM Tables
7, 6, available online). However, ProtT5-XL-U50 reached
nearly identical performance without ever using multiple
sequence alignments (MSA). Analyzing the average Q3 per
protein of both models for set NEW364 in more detail (SOM
Fig. 12, available online), revealed that 57 percent of the
ELNAGGAR ET AL.: PROTTRANS: TOWARD UNDERSTANDING THE LANGUAGE OF LIFE THROUGH SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING
proteins were predicted with higher Q3 by ProtT5-XL-U50
(CASP12 was too small for such a differential analysis).
pLMs Shone for Small Families. The size of protein families
followed the expected power-law/Zipf-distribution (few
families have many members, most have fewer ). To
simplify: families with fewer members carry less evolutionary information (EI) than those with more. One proxy for
this is the number of effective sequences (Neff), i.e., the
number of proteins in an MSA clustered at 62 percent PIDE
 , . We analyzed the effect of Neff by comparing Net-
SurfP-2.0 (using MSAs/EI) to ProtT5-XL-U50 (not using
MSAs) through four subsets of NEW364 applying different
Neff thresholds, i.e., the subset of proteins without any hit
(Neff=1 with 12 proteins), fewer than 10 hits (Neff  10
with 49 proteins) and Neff>10 (314 proteins) (Fig. 5; details
on MSA in SOM, available online). ProtT5XL-U50 improved
most over NetSurfP-2.0 for the smallest families (Neff=1).
More Samples Better Performance. Despite substantial differences, all pLMs exhibited a similar trend: performance
correlated with the number of samples presented to train
(pre-train). We computed the number of samples as the product of the number of steps and the global batch size (Fig. 6;
Spearman’s r=0.62). In particular, comparing the two largest models (ProtT5-XL and ProtT5-XXL) suggested more
pre-training steps to be more beneﬁcial than bigger models.
Per-Protein Location & Membrane Prediction
To investigate per-protein (sentence-level) predictions of
protein function, we trained FNNs on subcellular location
(also referred to as cellular compartment) in ten classes and
on the binary classiﬁcation of membrane versus non-membrane (also referred to as globular) proteins. Levels of tenstate (Q10 for location) and two-state (Q2 for membrane/
globular) measured performance. Toward this end, we
pooled over the entire protein (Fig. 1).
Mean-Pooling Performed Best. Using ProtBERT-BFD embeddings, we compared four different pooling strategies for
collapsing per-residue (token-level) embeddings, the dimensions of which differ for proteins of different length, into representations of ﬁxed length. These were min-, max-, and
mean-pooling, as well as, the concatenation of those three
(concat). The ﬁrst two (min/max) performed almost fourteen
percentage points worse for location (Q10) and about three for
membrane/other (Q2) compared to the others (mean/concat,
SOM Table 8, available online). While mean-pooling and concat performed similarly for the classiﬁcation task (membrane/
other), mean-pooling outperformed concat for location by
about ten percentage points (SOM Table 8, available online).
In the following, we used only mean-pooling to benchmark
the per-protein/sentence-level predictions.
Comparison of pLMs. The per-protein prediction of location largely conﬁrmed the trend observed for per-residue
secondary str: All pLMs introduced here (marked by * in
SOM Table 9, available online) clearly outperformed the uncontextualized word2vec-based approaches (DeepProtVec;
Fig. 7, SOM Table 9, available online). Except for ProtTXL
and ProtXLNet, all transformers trained here outperformed
the previous ELMo/LSTM-based solution (DeepSeqVec).
Increasing the corpus for pre-training the pLMs 10-fold
appeared inconsequential (Prot* versus Prot*-BFD in Fig. 7
and SOM Table 9, available online). In contrast, ﬁne-tuning
ProtT5 models already trained on BFD using UniRef50
improved (Prot*/Prot*-BFD versus Prot*-U50 in Fig. 7 and
SOM Table 9, available online). Although most embeddingbased approaches were outperformed by the SOA using
MSAs (DeepLoc), both best ProtT5 models outperformed
DeepLoc without MSAs: Q10, Fig. 7 and SOM Table 9, available online.
Similar for Membrane/Other. Results for the classiﬁcation
into membrane/other (Q2; SOM Table 9, available online),
largely conﬁrmed those obtained for location (Q10) and secondary structure (Q3/Q8): (1) ProtT5 pLMs ﬁne-tuned on
UniRef50 performed best without MSAs, (2) the 10-fold
larger pre-training BFD had no noticeable effect, (3) our best
pLMs outperformed existing transformer pLMs (ESM-1b)
(Fig. 7). In contrast to location and secondary structure, additionally pre-training on UniRef50 appeared not to increase
performance (SOM Table 9, available online) and both
ProtT5 remained 1-2 percentage points below DeepLoc.
Fast and Reliable Predictions From Embeddings
We compared the time needed to generate representations
for EI/MSA-based prediction methods and pLMs by generating MSAs and embeddings for each protein in the human
proteome (20,353 proteins with median length of 415). We
used the fastest method available, namely MMseqs2 ,
Fig. 4. Per-residue (token-level) performance for secondary structure
prediction: CASP12 (red) and NEW364 (blue) constitute two test sets.
Protein LMs trained here are shown in the left panel of the ﬁgure. Additions of BFD mark pre-training on the largest database BFD, U50 mark
pre-training with BFD and reﬁning with UniRef50. We included protein
LMs described elsewhere (marked as: protein LMs others, namely ESM-
1b , DeepProtVec and DeepSeqVec ). All embeddings were input
to the same CNN architecture. Two approaches used amino acids
instead of embeddings as input (marked as: no LMs: DeepOneHot one-hot encoding - and DeepBLOSUM62 - input BLOSUM62 
substitution matrix), as well as, to the current state-of-the-art (SOA)
method NetSurfP-2.0 , and Jpred4 , RaptorX , , Spider3
 . The rightmost four methods use MSA as input (marked as: MSA
input evolutionary information). While only rotT5-XL-U50 reached the
SOA without using MSAs, several protein LMs outperformed other methods using MSA. All protein LMs other than the context-free DeepProtVec
improved signiﬁcantly over methods using only amino acid information
as input. One interpretation of the difference between the two data sets
is that CASP12 provided a lower and NEW364 an upper limit. The top
row shows the complete range from 0-100, while the lower row zooms
into the range of differences relevant here.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 44, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2022
with parameters established by NetSurfP-2.0 to generate
MSAs (SOM for more details, available online). MMseqs2
was about 16 to 28-times slower than the fastest pLMs (ProtElectra and ProtBert), and about 4 to 6-times slower than
our best model (ProtT5-XL; Fig. 8. ProtT5-XL, required on
average 0.12 seconds to generate embeddings for a human
protein, completing the entire human proteome (all proteins
in an organism) in only 40 minutes.
We also investigated the cross-effect of sequence length
and batch-size (SOM Table 10, available online) on the inference speed of different pLMs. When using a single Nvidia
Quadro RTX 8000 with half precision on varying batch-sizes
(1,16,32) as well as sequence lengths (128, 256, 512), ProtBert
and ProtElectra provided the fastest inference with an average of 0.007 seconds per protein when using a batch size of
32, followed by ProtT5-XL and ProtAlbert (0.025s). The
batch-size of most pLMs could have been increased on the
same hardware but was limited to allow a direct comparison between all models, due to large memory requirements
for ProtT5-XXL. The script for running this benchmark is
freely available as part of our github repository.
DISCUSSION
Substantial Computing Resources Needed
HPC Supercomputers such as Summit and Google’s
cloud TPU Pod , combined with optimized libraries such
as IBM’s DDL and Horovod set the stage for training
LMs with billions of free parameters on terabytes of data in
hours or days. Increasing model size improves performance
for some NLP applications , although the massive data
challenges the communication between thousands of nodes
and divergence between large batches during training.
Here, we presented some solutions to overcome these challenges for training protein LMs (pLMs) by fully utilizing 20
percent of Summit for TransformerXL , one TPU Pod
V3-512 for Bert , Electra , Albert and XLNet ,
Fig. 6. Number of pre-training correlated with performance. We plotted 3state secondary structure prediction performance (Q3) on NEW364 for
all pLMs trained here against the number of samples seen during pretraining (training steps times global batch-size in K). For simplicity, we
dropped the ”Prot” preﬁx from all models. Despite the vastly different
pLMs, the high Spearman’s r of 0.62 indicated a common trend: more
pre-training samples: better prediction.
Fig. 5. Effect of MSA size. We used our new test set (NEW364) to analyze the effect of the size of an MSA upon secondary structure prediction
(Q3) for the two top methods (both reaching Q3=84.3%): NetSurfP-2.0
(using MSA) and ProtT5-XL-U50 (not using MSA). As proxy for MSA
size served Neff, the number of effective sequences (clustered at
62 percent PIDE): leftmost bars: MSAs with Neff=1, middle: Neff& 
10, right: Neff>10. As expected ProtT5-XL-U50 tended to reach higher
levels than NetSurfP-2.0 for smaller families. Less expected was the
almost on par performance for larger families.
Fig. 7. Per-protein (sentence-level) performance: The prediction of location in 10 states (lower bars in cyan: Q10: percentage of proteins with 1
of 10 classes correctly predicted) and the classiﬁcation of membrane/
other (higher bars in magenta: Q2: percentage of proteins correctly classiﬁed in either of two classes). Embeddings were derived from pLMs by
mean-pooling, i.e., averaging over the length of the entire protein
(Fig. 1). Abbreviations as in Table 4 except for one method using neither
pLMs nor MSA (no LM no MSA: DeepLoc-BLOSUM62 ), and two
methods using MSAs (MSA input evolutionary information): the current
state-of-the-art (SOA) method (performance marked by horizontal thin
lines in magenta and cyan) DeepLoc , and LocTree2 . Almost all
pLMs outperformed LocTree2 and a version of DeepLoc not using MSAs
(DeepLoc-BLOSUM62). Only, ProtT5-XXL-U50 and ProtT5-XL-U50 outperformed the SOA. A recent method optimized location prediction from
ProtT5 embeddings through a light-attention mechanism; it clearly outperformed the SOA without using MSAs (LA_ProtT5 & LA_ProtT5-U50
 ). The top row shows the complete range from 0-100, while the lower
row zooms into the range of observed differences.
ELNAGGAR ET AL.: PROTTRANS: TOWARD UNDERSTANDING THE LANGUAGE OF LIFE THROUGH SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING
and a mix of TPU Pod V3-256, V3-512, and V3-1024 for
ProtT5-XL and ProtT5-XXL . This implied the parallel
use of 5616 GPUs on Summit or 256/512/1024 TPU cores
on a TPU Pod, while avoiding training divergence with specialized optimizers such as LAMB up to a global batch
size of 44K samples (here: protein sequences).
Training pLMs Longer Most Important
Mostly, we proxied the relevance of information extracted
by pre-trained pLMs through the performance of the subsequent supervised tasks trained exclusively on embeddings
from pre-trained pLMs. Using pLMs only as static feature
extractors, we considered the pLM to improve (or to be better)
when the supervised task using embeddings from this pLM
as input reached higher performance.
BFD - Biggest Data to Pre-Train. We trained our pLMs on
the largest protein database ever used for this purpose,
namely BFD , more than an order of magnitude larger
than the standard UniProt . Although bigger did not
supervised
performance,
improved through pre-training on more data (UniRef100
Nevertheless,
performance
increase appeared small given the 10-fold larger data set
(e.g., DQ3(ProtBert-BFD/UniProt)=1.3%). In contrast, the
pre-training protocol by which we ﬁrst trained on the larger
but more noisy (more mistakes in sequences) and redundant BFD and then continued pre-training using the
smaller, less redundant UniRef50, improved performance
signiﬁcantly for both ProtT5 versions (DQ3(ProtT5-XL-
BFD/U50)=2.8%
DQ3(ProtT5-XXL-BFD/U50)=1.4%).
The improvement through reﬁned pre-training for ProtT5-
XL (3B parameters) exceeded that for ProtT5-XXL (11B
parameters), presumably, because it saw more samples
when continuing pre-training for a similar amount of time
(limited by resources).
This highlighted a remarkable trend common across the
wide diversity of pLMs and data sets: the performance of
supervised downstream tasks using embeddings from pretrained pLMs increased with the number of samples presented during pre-training (Fig. 6; Spearman’s r=0.62). We
could not observe a similarly consistent trend for model
size. However, this might be attributed to some trade-off:
training for more steps might require models with sufﬁcient
capacity to absorb the information of the corpus. For
instance, while ProtBERT-BFD (420M parameters) saw
around 27B proteins during pre-training, it fell short compared to ProtT5-XL-BFD (3B parameters) which saw only
around 5B proteins (Figs. 4, SOM Tables 6, 7, available
online). This ﬁnding aligned with results from NLP suggesting that larger models absorb information faster and need
less training to achieve similar performance . However,
the comparison between, e.g., ProtT5-XL and ProtT5-XXL
suggested a possible cap to this trend, as larger models see
fewer samples in the same amount of computing power.
The clear correlation between performance and samples
spotlighted the crucial role of substantial computing resources (HPC, TPUs, and GPUs): big data needs large models
need loads of computational resources.
pLMs Learned Global Constraints
Some rudimentary information about how proteins are
formed, shaped, and function has been learned by the
pLMs during pre-training: all our pLMs (ProtT5, ProtBert,
ProtElectra,
ProtAlbert,
ProtXLNet)
valuable information as revealed by visualizing embeddings without further supervised training on labeled data.
The comparisons to randomly initialized pLMs highlighted
two other aspects. First, how easy it is to incorrectly imagine
patterns when projecting from high-dimensional spaces into
2D: although the random pLMs contained no information,
some annotations might have suggested the opposite (Fig. 3
top row untrained). Second, the pLMs extracted important
global constraints about protein structure and function
(lower row in Fig. 3). These span from the most local (individual token level) biophysical features of amino acid building blocks (e.g., hydrophobicity, charge, and size, Fig. 3 A),
over global classiﬁcations into structural classes (Fig. 3 B),
to the macroscopic domains of life (Fig. 3 C). Global structural (e.g., overall secondary structure content, Fig. 3 B) and
biochemical (e.g., transmembrane, SOM Fig. 14B, available
online) properties appeared most distinctive. In contrast,
local features relying on short motifs were less separated
(EC-numbers: Fig. 14F, location: Fig. 14C, available online)
but still clustered, e.g., for secreted/extracellular proteins or
hydrolases.
On a more ﬁne-grained level, the visual analysis of the
attention mechanism at the core of each Transformer, con-
ﬁrmed the pLMs to have even picked up more subtle signals
of short functional motifs. Speciﬁcally, a few attention heads
of ProtAlbert zoomed into the four residues most important
Fig. 8. Inference speed comparison: The time required to generate protein representations for the human proteome (20.353 proteins) is compared using either our protein LMs or mmseqs2 (protein sequence
search tool used to generate evolutionary information; NetSurfP-2.0
 parameters are used). Here, we used mmseqs2 (red bar) to search
each protein in the human proteome against two large protein database
(UniRef90 and UniRef100 with 113M and 216M proteins, respectively).
Only embedding or search time is reported, i.e., no pre-processing or
pre-training was measured. mmseqs2 was run on an Intel Skylake Gold
6248 processor with 40 threads, SSD and 377GB main memory, while
protein LMs were run on a single Nvidia Quadro RTX 8000 with 48GB
memory using half precision and dynamic batch size depending on
sequence length (blue bar).
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 44, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2022
to coordinate zinc-binding (SOM Fig. 11, available online).
Although limited in scope , such an analysis provided
some explanation about the inner workings of Transformers
not needing large sets of experimental annotations (labels).
On top, the resulting interpretations of the AI/ML might be less
biased than experimental annotations. For instance, databases with annotations of protein function such as Swiss-
Prot and of protein structure such as PDB are
extremely biased by today’s experiments , , .
pLMs Top Without MSAs - AI Without EI
The t-SNE and UMAP analyses revealed the pLMs to have
extracted some understanding of the language of life. As prediction is the acid test for understanding, we extracted the
pLM embeddings as input to predicting aspects of protein
structure. Overall, the results conﬁrmed that evolutionary information (EI, i.e., methods using multiple sequence
alignments MSAs) signiﬁcantly outperformed most pLMs
not using such information, except for ProtT5-XL (on all
per-residue and per-protein tasks, Figs. 4, 7 and SOM Tables
7, 6, 9, available online). ProtT5-XL eliminated this gap from
embeddings-only input: on some tasks/data sets, it outperformed
state-of-the-art
method, on others it remained slightly behind. Newer
pLMs using context improved over both previous pLMbased approaches (8-9 percentage points in Q3), other
transformers (2-4 percentage points in Q3), and over
non-contextualized word2vec-type approaches , 
(18-22 percentage points in Q3).
The performance differences between two data sets
(CASP12 and NEW364) highlighted another problem. While
it is clear that we need to reduce redundancy within the
evaluation set and between it and all development sets, it is
less clear how to exactly do this. In focusing on CASP12 and
approached
assumptions.
CASP12 mostly measures how well predictions will be for
proteins with unseen structures. A comprehensive rigorous
realization of data sets following this perspective has
recently been published . NEW364, on the other hand,
builds on the assumption that the maximal redundancy is
deﬁned by sequence similar to protein in the PDB. In this sense,
we interpreted results for CASP12 as a lower and those for
NEW364 as an upper limit. The NEW364 comparisons also
highlighted the importance to constantly create up-to-date
data sets with enough non-redundant proteins never used
for development by any of the methods assessed.
pLMs so Powerful to Render Simple Baseline Effective. While
pre-training pLMs is computationally costly, training supervised models using embeddings as input requires much less
energy. For instance, the logistic regression trained on top of
ProtBERT-BFD was already competitive with substantially
more complex CNNs or LSTMs in predicting secondary
structure (SOM Table 5, available online). In another example, a parameter-free nearest neighbor lookup using distances
embeddings
outperform
homology-based inference for predicting protein function
 . This suggested that pLMs are particularly suitable
when so few experimental annotations (labels) are available
that the complexity of modern deep learning becomes prohibitive. In fact, all supervised solutions presented here that
reached the SOA were much less complex (fewer free
parameters) than the EI-based methods they reached. We
focused on the development of pLMs using performance on
supervised tasks to rank without optimizing particular
supervised solutions. Others have already begun surmounting EI-based methods by custom-designing pLM-based solutions possibly even through end-to-end systems ,
 . Such solutions can even compete when MSAs are absolutely essential, e.g., for predicting effects of single amino
acid variants (SAVs) .
Bi-Directionality Crucial for pLMs. In NLP uni-directional
(auto-regressive) and bi-directional (auto-encoding) models
perform on par , . In contrast, the bi-directional context appeared crucial to model aspects of the language of life.
While auto-encoding models such as Albert utilize context to both sides during loss calculation, auto-regressive
models such as TransformerXL consider only context to
one side. Performance increased substantially from unidirectional ProtTXL to bi-directional ProtXLNet (Fig. 4, SOM
Tables 6, 7, available online). This might be compensated for
by ﬁrst pre-training on sequences and their reverse and then
concatenating the output of uni-directional LMs applied on
both directions. While this does not allow the LM to use bidirectional context during training, it allows supervised networks to combine context derived independently from both
sides. For instance, ELMo concatenates the embeddings
derived from a forward and a backward LSTM. The protein
LM version of ELMo (SeqVec) outperformed the uni-directional ProtTXL but not the bi-directional ProtXLNet. The difference in model size (SeqVec = 93M versus ProtXLNet =
409M) and in pre-training data (SeqVec = 30M versus ProtAlbert=224M) might explain some of this effect. Nevertheless,
pure uni-directionality as used in TransformerXL appeared
detrimental for modeling protein sequences.
Have pLMs Reached a Ceiling?
Short answer: clearly not. For instance, since ﬁrst submitting
this work , the mark has been pushed substantially higher. More generally, adopting techniques from
NLP to proteins opens new opportunities to extract information from proteins in a self-supervised, data-driven way.
New protein representations may complement existing solutions, most successful when combining evolutionary information7 and machine learning , , , . Here we
showed for the ﬁrst time that pLM embeddings input to relatively simple supervised learning models can reach similar
levels of performance without using EI and without optimizing the supervised training pipeline much. However,
the gain in inference speed for pLMs compared to traditional solutions using EI/MSAs is so signiﬁcant that largescale predictions become, for the ﬁrst time since 30 years,
feasible on commodity hardware. For instance, the best-performing model ProtT5-XL-U50 can run on a Nvidia TitanV
with 12GB vRAM. Nevertheless, given the pLMs described
here and elsewhere , , , , , , , we
might expect an upper limit for what pLMs can learn
7. Throughout this work, we used evolutionary information (EI) as
synonymous for using multiple sequence alignments (MSAs). Whether
pLMs do not implicitly extract EI will have to be proven in separate
publications.
ELNAGGAR ET AL.: PROTTRANS: TOWARD UNDERSTANDING THE LANGUAGE OF LIFE THROUGH SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING
through masked language modeling (or auto-regressive
pre-training). This work could establish three ﬁndings. (1)
Less noisy and less redundant corpora (e.g., UniRef50)
improved over larger but more noisy and redundant corpora (e.g., BFD). (2) In our perspective of limited resources,
it was most important to use the resources for long-enough
training because the number of samples seen during pretraining correlated with the prediction performance of
downstream tasks. Ultimately, this seemed to originate
from a trade-off between sufﬁcient model size and sample
throughput. (3) The bi-directional outperformed the unidirectional models tested. However, given the advances of
protein LMs over the course of the reviewing of this work,
we have seen no evidence for having reached a limit for
pLMs, yet.
Many Open Questions. Answers to the following questions
might advance the status-quo. (1) Would the addition of
auxiliary tasks such as next-sentence or sentence-order prediction offered by BERT or Albert suit protein sequences? A
suggestion might be incorporating structure information
 or evolutionary relations , . (2) Might the efﬁciency of training transformer pLMs improve through
sparse transformers or attention optimized with locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) as introduced recently by
the Reformer model or more recent work of linear
Transformers ? (3) Which data set, pre-processing,
redundancy reduction and training batch sampling should
be used to improve? (4) How much will it improve to tailor
the supervised training pipeline to particular tasks? We
treated secondary structure or location prediction more as
proxies to showcase the success of protein LMs than as an
independent end. (5) Will the combination of EI and AI 
bring the best protein predictions of the future, or will the
advantages of single-protein predictions (speed, precision)
win out? In fact, single-protein predictions also have the
advantage of being more precise in that they do not provide
some implicit average over a protein family.
Overall, our results established that the combination of
HPC solutions for training protein LMs and subsequent
training of supervised prediction methods scaled up to the
largest data sets ever used in the ﬁeld. Only the combination
of these different domains conclusively demonstrated that
pLMs reach up to or even above the performance of the best
methods in the ﬁeld combining EI and AI without ever
exploiting multiple sequence alignments.
CONCLUSION
Here, we introduced many novel protein language models
(pLMs) and proved that embeddings extracted from the last
pLM layers captured constraints relevant for protein structure and function. Although neither the usage of the largest
ever database (BFD) to pre-train pLMs, nor that of very
large models generated the most informative embeddings.
Instead, pre-training sufﬁciently long on considerable diversity made a difference, and more recent pLMs performed
best. Using embeddings as exclusive input to relatively
small-size CNN/FNN models without much optimization
yielded methods competitive in predicting secondary structure, sub-cellular location and in classifying proteins into
membrane/other. In fact, for the ﬁrst time, new small-size
supervised solutions based on pLM embedding input
reached levels of performance challenging the state-of-theart (SOA) methods based on evolutionary information (EI)
taken form multiple sequence alignment (MSA) input. In
contrast, the models presented here never used MSAs. This
will save immense expenses when routinely applying
embedding-based protein predictions to large data sets, but
it also opens a path toward protein-speciﬁc rather than family-averaged predictions. Ultimately, joining the strengths
of three different, yet complementary, ﬁelds (HPC, NLP
and computational biology) affected the advance. Selfsupervised pre-training combined with transfer-learning
tapped into the gold-mines of unlabeled data opening the
door for completely novel perspectives (and solutions) on
existing problems.
AVAILABILITY
We made all protein LMs trained here publicly available at our
ProtTrans repository ” 
ProtTrans/”. This repository also holds jupyter python notebooks with various tutorials, e.g., on how to extract embeddings or visualize attention using freely available online
resources (Google Colab). Additionally, secondary structure
predictions for ProtT5-XL-U50 are available through the PredictProtein webserver: “ 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Tim Karl, TUM, and Jian
Kong, TUM, for invaluable help with hard- and software,
Inga Weise, TUM, and Aline Schmidt, TUM, for support
with many other aspects of this work, Florian Matthes,
TUM, for his generous support and encouragement, crucial
support and feedback from NVIDIA, in particular to Ulrich
Michaelis, Ada Sedova, Geetika Gupta, Axel Koehler, Frederic Pariente, Jonathan Lefman, and Thomas Bradley, and
many at ORNL without whom no aspect of this work could
have been realized, particular thanks to John Gounley,
Hong-Jun Yoon, Georgia Tourassi, Bill, Brian, Junqi, Graham, and Veronica (ORNL Summit). The authors would
also like to thank Jack Wells (ORNL) for opening the door
to kicking off this project. From IBM, the authors would like
to thank Nicolas Castet and Bryant Nelson for their help to
ﬁx issues and enhance the performance of IBM PowerAI.
From Google, the authors would like to thank Jamie Kinney,
Alex Schroeder, Nicole DeSantis, Andrew Stein, Vishal Mishra, Eleazar Ortiz, Nora Limbourg, Cristian Mezzanotte,
and all TFRC Team for helping to setup a project on Google
Cloud and solving Google cloud issues. No ProtTrans
model was easily publicly available without support from
the Hugging Face team, including Patrick von Platen, Julien
Chaumond, and Clement Delangue. The authors would
also like to thank Konstantin Weißenow for helping with
grant writing and providing early results for the structure
prediction task. The authors would also like to thank both
Adam Roberts and Colin Raffel for help with the T5 model,
and the editor and the anonymous reviewers for essential
criticism, especially, for suggesting to compare t-SNEs to
randomly initialized models. The authors would also like to
thank Leibniz Rechenzentrum (LRZ) for providing access
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 44, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2022
to DGX-1(V100) for the testing phase. This work was supported in part by Software Campus 2.0 (TUM) through the
German Ministry for Research and Education (BMBF), in
part by the Alexander von Humboldt foundation through
the German Ministry for Research and Education (BMBF),
in part by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft under
Grant DFG-GZ: RO1320/4-1, and in part by NVIDIA with
the donation of 2 Titan GPUs used for the development
phase. The work of Martin Steinegger was supported in part
by the National Research Foundation of Korea under Grants
2019R1A6A1A10073437 and NRF-2020M3A9G7103933, in
part by the New Faculty Startup Fund and the Creative-Pioneering Researchers Program through Seoul National University. The work of Rostlab was supported in part by Google
Cloud and in part by Google Cloud Research Credits Program
to fund this project under Covid19 HPC Consortium grant.
This work used resources of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) Leadership Computing Facility, which is a DOE
Ofﬁce of Science User Facility supported under Grant DE-
AC05-00OR22725, and resources of TPU pods under Tensor-
Flow Research Cloud grant. A. Elnaggar and M. Heinzinger
contributed equally to this work.