Compression Artifacts Reduction by a Deep Convolutional Network
Yubin Deng
Chen Change Loy
Xiaoou Tang
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{dc012,dy113,ccloy,xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
Lossy compression introduces complex compression artifacts, particularly the blocking artifacts, ringing effects
and blurring. Existing algorithms either focus on removing blocking artifacts and produce blurred output, or restores sharpened images that are accompanied with ringing effects. Inspired by the deep convolutional networks
(DCN) on super-resolution , we formulate a compact
and efﬁcient network for seamless attenuation of different
compression artifacts. We also demonstrate that a deeper
model can be effectively trained with the features learned
in a shallow network. Following a similar “easy to hard”
idea, we systematically investigate several practical transfer settings and show the effectiveness of transfer learning
in low-level vision problems. Our method shows superior
performance than the state-of-the-arts both on the benchmark datasets and the real-world use case (i.e. Twitter). In
addition, we show that our method can be applied as preprocessing to facilitate other low-level vision routines when
they take compressed images as input.
1. Introduction
Lossy compression (e.g. JPEG, WebP and HEVC-MSP)
is one class of data encoding methods that uses inexact
approximations for representing the encoded content. In
this age of information explosion, lossy compression is
indispensable and inevitable for companies (e.g. Twitter
and Facebook) to save bandwidth and storage space. However, compression in its nature will introduce undesired
complex artifacts, which will severely reduce the user experience (e.g. Figure 1). All these artifacts not only decrease perceptual visual quality, but also adversely affect
various low-level image processing routines that take compressed images as input, e.g. contrast enhancement ,
super-resolution , and edge detection . However,
under such a huge demand, effective compression artifacts
reduction remains an open problem.
We take JPEG compression as an example to explain
compression artifacts. JPEG compression scheme divides
(a) Left: the JPEG-compressed image, where we could see blocking artifacts, ringing effects and blurring on the eyes, abrupt intensity changes on
the face. Right: the restored image by the proposed deep model (AR-CNN),
where we remove these compression artifacts and produce sharp details.
(b) Left: the Twitter-compressed image, which is ﬁrst re-scaled to a small
image and then compressed on the server-side. Right: the restored image by
the proposed deep model (AR-CNN)
Figure 1. Example compressed images and our restoration results
on the JPEG compression scheme and the real use case – Twitter.
an image into 8×8 pixel blocks and applies block discrete
cosine transformation (DCT) on each block individually.
Quantization is then applied on the DCT coefﬁcients to
save storage space. This step will cause a complex combination of different artifacts, as depicted in Figure 1(a).
Blocking artifacts arise when each block is encoded without considering the correlation with the adjacent blocks, resulting in discontinuities at the 8×8 borders. Ringing effects along the edges occur due to the coarse quantization
of the high-frequency components (also known as Gibbs
phenomenon ).
Blurring happens due to the loss of
high-frequency components. To cope with the various compression artifacts, different approaches have been proposed,
some of which can only deal with certain types of artifacts.
For instance, deblocking oriented approaches 
perform ﬁltering along the block boundaries to reduce only
 
blocking artifacts.
Liew et al. and Foi et al. 
use thresholding by wavelet transform and Shape-Adaptive
DCT transform, respectively. These approaches are good at
removing blocking and ringing artifacts, but tend to produce
blurred output. Jung et al. propose restoration method
based on sparse representation. They produce sharpened
images but accompanied with noisy edges and unnatural
smooth regions.
To date, deep learning has shown impressive results on
both high-level and low-level vision problems . In particular, the SRCNN proposed by Dong et al. shows the great
potential of an end-to-end DCN in image super-resolution.
The study also points out that conventional sparse-codingbased image restoration model can be equally seen as a deep
model. However, we ﬁnd that the three-layer network is not
well suited in restoring the compressed images, especially
in dealing with blocking artifacts and handling smooth regions. As various artifacts are coupled together, features extracted by the ﬁrst layer is noisy, causing undesirable noisy
patterns in reconstruction.
To eliminate the undesired artifacts, we improve the SR-
CNN by embedding one or more “feature enhancement”
layers after the ﬁrst layer to clean the noisy features. Experiments show that the improved model, namely “Artifacts Reduction Convolutional Neural Networks (AR-CNN)”, is exceptionally effective in suppressing blocking artifacts while
retaining edge patterns and sharp details (see Figure 1).
However, we are met with training difﬁculties in training
a deeper DCN. “Deeper is better” is widely observed in
high-level vision problems, but not in low-level vision tasks.
Speciﬁcally, “deeper is not better” has been pointed out in
super-resolution , where training a ﬁve-layer network becomes a bottleneck. The difﬁculty of training is partially
due to the sub-optimal initialization settings.
The aforementioned difﬁculty motivates us to investigate
a better way to train a deeper model for low-level vision
problems. We ﬁnd that this can be effectively solved by
transferring the features learned in a shallow network to
a deeper one and ﬁne-tuning simultaneously1. This strategy has also been proven successful in learning a deeper
CNN for image classiﬁcation . Following a similar general intuitive idea, easy to hard, we discover other interesting transfer settings in this low-level vision task: (1) We
transfer the features learned in a high-quality compression
model (easier) to a low-quality one (harder), and ﬁnd that
it converges faster than random initialization. (2) In the
real use case, companies tend to apply different compression strategies (including re-scaling) according to their purposes (e.g. Figure 1(b)). We transfer the features learned
1Generally, the transfer learning method will train a base network ﬁrst,
and copy the learned parameters or features of several layers to the corresponding layers of a target network. These transferred layers can be left
frozen or ﬁne-tuned to the target dataset. The remaining layers are randomly initialized and trained to the target task.
in a standard compression model (easier) to a real use case
(harder), and ﬁnd that it performs better than learning from
The contributions of this study are three-fold: (1) We
formulate a new deep convolutional network for efﬁcient
reduction of various compression artifacts. Extensive experiments, including that on real use cases, demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method over state-of-the-art methods both perceptually and quantitatively. (2) We verify that reusing the features in shallow networks is helpful
in learning a deeper model for compression artifact reduction. Under the same intuitive idea – easy to hard, we reveal
a number of interesting and practical transfer settings. Our
study is the ﬁrst attempt to show the effectiveness of feature transfer in a low-level vision problem. (3) We show
the effectiveness of AR-CNN in facilitating other low-level
vision routines (i.e. super-resolution and contrast enhancement), when they take JPEG images as input.
2. Related work
Existing algorithms can be classiﬁed into deblocking oriented and restoration oriented methods.
The deblocking
oriented methods focus on removing blocking and ringing artifacts. In the spatial domain, different kinds of ﬁlters have been proposed to adaptively deal with
blocking artifacts in speciﬁc regions (e.g., edge, texture,
and smooth regions).
In the frequency domain, Liew et
al. utilize wavelet transform and derive thresholds at
different wavelet scales for denoising. The most successful deblocking oriented method is perhaps the Pointwise
Shape-Adaptive DCT (SA-DCT) , which is widely acknowledged as the state-of-the-art approach . However, as most deblocking oriented methods, SA-DCT could
not reproduce sharp edges, and tend to overly smooth texture regions. The restoration oriented methods regard the
compression operation as distortion and propose restoration
algorithms. They include projection on convex sets based
method (POCS) , solving an MAP problem (FoE) ,
sparse-coding-based method and the Regression Tree
Fields based method (RTF) , which is the new state-ofthe art method. The RTF takes the results of SA-DCT as
bases and produces globally consistent image reconstructions with a regression tree ﬁeld model. It could also be
optimized for any differentiable loss functions (e.g. SSIM),
but often at the cost of other evaluation metrics.
Super-Resolution Convolutional Neural Network (SR-
CNN) is closely related to our work. In the study, independent steps in the sparse-coding-based method are formulated as different convolutional layers and optimized in
a uniﬁed network. It shows the potential of deep model in
low-level vision problems like super-resolution. However,
the model of compression is different from super-resolution
in that it consists of different kinds of artifacts. Designing
Feature extraction
Feature enhancement
Reconstruction
Compressed image
Reconstructed image
“noisy” feature maps
“cleaner” feature maps
“restored” feature maps
Figure 2. The framework of the Artifacts Reduction Convolutional Neural Network (AR-CNN). The network consists of four convolutional
layers, each of which is responsible for a speciﬁc operation. Then it optimizes the four operations (i.e., feature extraction, feature enhancement, mapping and reconstruction) jointly in an end-to-end framework. Example feature maps shown in each step could well illustrate the
functionality of each operation. They are normalized for better visualization.
a deep model for compression restoration requires a deep
understanding into the different artifacts. We show that directly applying the SRCNN architecture for compression
restoration will result in undesired noisy patterns in the reconstructed image.
Transfer learning in deep neural networks becomes popular since the success of deep learning in image classiﬁcation . The features learned from the ImageNet show
good generalization ability and become a powerful
tool for several high-level vision problems, such as Pascal
VOC image classiﬁcation and object detection .
Yosinski et al. have also tried to quantify the degree
to which a particular layer is general or speciﬁc.
Overall, transfer learning has been systematically investigated
in high-level vision problems, but not in low-level vision
tasks. In this study, we explore several transfer settings on
compression artifacts reduction and show the effectiveness
of transfer learning in low-level vision problems.
3. Methodology
Our proposed approach is based on the current successful low-level vision model – SRCNN . To have a better
understanding of our work, we ﬁrst give a brief overview of
SRCNN. Then we explain the insights that lead to a deeper
network and present our new model. Subsequently, we explore three types of transfer learning strategies that help in
training a deeper and better network.
3.1. Review of SRCNN
The SRCNN aims at learning an end-to-end mapping,
which takes the low-resolution image Y (after interpolation) as input and directly outputs the high-resolution one
F(Y). The network contains three convolutional layers,
each of which is responsible for a speciﬁc task. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst layer performs patch extraction and representation, which extracts overlapping patches from the input image and represents each patch as a high-dimensional
Then the non-linear mapping layer maps each
high-dimensional vector of the ﬁrst layer to another highdimensional vector, which is conceptually the representation of a high-resolution patch. At last, the reconstruction
layer aggregates the patch-wise representations to generate
the ﬁnal output. The network can be expressed as:
Fi(Y) = max (0, Wi ∗Y + Bi) , i ∈{1, 2};
F(Y) = W3 ∗F2(Y) + B3.
where Wi and Bi represent the ﬁlters and biases of the ith
layer respectively, Fi is the output feature maps and ’∗’ denotes the convolution operation. The Wi contains ni ﬁlters
of support ni−1 × fi × fi, where fi is the spatial support of
a ﬁlter, ni is the number of ﬁlters, and n0 is the number of
channels in the input image. Note that there is no pooling or
full-connected layers in SRCNN, so the ﬁnal output F(Y)
is of the same size as the input image. Rectiﬁed Linear Unit
(ReLU, max(0, x)) is applied on the ﬁlter responses.
These three steps are analogous to the basic operations
in the sparse-coding-based super-resolution methods ,
and this close relationship lays theoretical foundation for its
successful application in super-resolution. Details can be
found in the paper .
3.2. Convolutional Neural Network for Compression Artifacts Reduction
Insights. In sparse-coding-based methods and SRCNN,
the ﬁrst step – feature extraction – determines what should
be emphasized and restored in the following stages. However, as various compression artifacts are coupled together,
the extracted features are usually noisy and ambiguous for
accurate mapping. In the experiments of reducing JPEG
compression artifacts (see Section 4.1.2), we ﬁnd that some
quantization noises coupled with high frequency details
are further enhanced, bringing unexpected noisy patterns
around sharp edges.
Moreover, blocking artifacts in ﬂat
areas are misrecognized as normal edges, causing abrupt
intensity changes in smooth regions. Inspired by the feature enhancement step in super-resolution , we introduce a feature enhancement layer after the feature extraction layer in SRCNN to form a new and deeper network
– AR-CNN. This layer maps the “noisy” features to a relatively “cleaner” feature space, which is equivalent to denoising the feature maps.
Formulation. The overview of the new network AR-
CNN is shown in Figure 2. The three layers of SRCNN
remain unchanged in the new model. We also use the same
annotations as in Section 3.1. To conduct feature enhancement, we extract new features from the n1 feature maps of
the ﬁrst layer, and combine them to form another set of feature maps. This operation F1′ can also be formulated as a
convolutional layer:
F1′(Y) = max (0, W1′ ∗F1(Y) + B1′) ,
where W1′ corresponds to n1′ ﬁlters with size n1 × f1′ ×
f1′. B1′ is an n1′-dimensional bias vector, and the output
F1′(Y) consists of n1′ feature maps. Overall, the AR-CNN
consists of four layers, namely the feature extraction, feature enhancement, mapping and reconstruction layer.
It is worth noticing that AR-CNN is not equal to a deeper
SRCNN that contains more than one non-linear mapping
Rather than imposing more non-linearity in the
mapping stage, AR-CNN improves the mapping accuracy
by enhancing the extracted low-level features. Experimental results of AR-CNN, SRCNN and deeper SRCNN will be
shown in Section 4.1.2
3.3. Model Learning
Given a set of ground truth images {Xi} and their corresponding compressed images {Yi}, we use Mean Squared
Error (MSE) as the loss function:
||F(Yi; Θ) −Xi||2,
where Θ = {W1, W1′, W2, W3, B1, B1′, B2, B3}, n is the
number of training samples. The loss is minimized using
stochastic gradient descent with the standard backpropagation. We adopt a batch-mode learning method with a batch
size of 128.
3.4. Easy-Hard Transfer
Transfer learning in deep models provides an effective
way of initialization.
In fact, conventional initialization
strategies (i.e. randomly drawn from Gaussian distributions
with ﬁxed standard deviations ) are found not suitable
for training a very deep model, as reported in . To address
2Adding non-linear mapping layers has been suggested as an extension
of SRCNN in .
data𝐴target𝐵1
data𝐴target𝐵2
data𝐴target𝐵3
Figure 3. Easy-hard transfer settings. First row: The baseline 4layer network trained with dataA-qA. Second row: The 5-layer
AR-CNN targeted at dataA-qA. Third row: The AR-CNN targeted
at dataA-qB. Fourth row: The AR-CNN targeted at Twitter data.
Green boxes indicate the transferred features from the base network, and gray boxes represent random initialization. The ellipsoidal bars between weight vectors represent the activation functions.
this issue, He et al. derive a robust initialization method
for rectiﬁer nonlinearities, Simonyan et al. propose to
use the pre-trained features on a shallow network for initialization.
In low-level vision problems (e.g. super resolution), it is
observed that training a network beyond 4 layers would encounter the problem of convergence, even that a large number of training images (e.g. ImageNet) are provided . We
are also met with this difﬁculty during the training process
of AR-CNN. To this end, we systematically investigate several transfer settings in training a low-level vision network
following an intuitive idea of “easy-hard transfer”. Speciﬁcally, we attempt to reuse the features learned in a relatively
easier task to initialize a deeper or harder network. Interestingly, the concept “easy-hard transfer” has already been
pointed out in neuro-computation study , where the prior
training on an easy discrimination can help learn a second
harder one.
Formally, we deﬁne the base (or source) task as A and the
target tasks as Bi, i ∈{1, 2, 3}. As shown in Figure 3, the
base network baseA is a four-layer AR-CNN trained on a
large dataset dataA, of which images are compressed using
a standard compression scheme with the compression quality qA. All layers in baseA are randomly initialized from a
Gaussian distribution. We will transfer one or two layers of
baseA to different target tasks (see Figure 3). Such transfers
can be described as follows.
Transfer shallow to deeper model. As indicated by ,
a ﬁve-layer network is sensitive to the initialization parameters and learning rate. Thus we transfer the ﬁrst two layers
of baseA to a ﬁve-layer network targetB1. Then we randomly initialize its remaining layers3 and train all layers toward the same dataset dataA. This is conceptually similar to
3Random initialization on remaining layers are also applied similarly
for tasks B2, and B3.
(a) High compression quality (quality 20 in Matlab encoder)
(b) Low compression quality (quality 10 in Matlab encoder)
Figure 4. First layer ﬁlters of AR-CNN learned under different
JPEG compression qualities.
that applied in image classiﬁcation , but this approach
has never been validated in low-level vision problems.
Transfer high to low quality. Images of low compression quality contain more complex artifacts. Here we use
the features learned from high compression quality images
as a starting point to help learn more complicated features in
the DCN. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst layer of targetB2 are copied
from baseA and trained on images that are compressed with
a lower compression quality qB.
Transfer standard to real use case. We then explore
whether the features learned under a standard compression
scheme can be generalized to other real use cases, which
often contain more complex artifacts due to different levels
of re-scaling and compression. We transfer the ﬁrst layer of
baseA to the network targetB3, and train all layers on the
new dataset.
Discussion. Why the features learned from relatively
easy tasks are helpful?
First, the features from a welltrained network can provide a good starting point. Then
the rest of a deeper model can be regarded as shallow one,
which is easier to converge. Second, features learned in different tasks always have a lot in common. For instance,
Figure 3.4 shows the features learned under different JPEG
compression qualities. Obviously, ﬁlters a, b, c of high quality are very similar to ﬁlters a′, b′, c′ of low quality. This
kind of features can be reused or improved during ﬁnetuning, making the convergence faster and more stable. Furthermore, a deep network for a hard problem can be seen as
an insufﬁciently biased learner with overly large hypothesis
space to search, and therefore is prone to overﬁtting. These
few transfer settings we investigate introduce good bias to
enable the learner to acquire a concept with greater generality. Experimental results in Section 4.2 validate the above
4. Experiments
We use the BSDS500 database as our base training
set. Speciﬁcally, its disjoint training set (200 images) and
test set (200 images) are all used for training, and its validation set (100 images) is used for validation. As in other
compression artifacts reduction methods (e.g. RTF ),
we apply the standard JPEG compression scheme, and use
the JPEG quality settings q = 20 (mid quality) and q =
10 (low quality) in MATLAB JPEG encoder. We only fo-
Table 1. The average results of PSNR (dB), SSIM, PSNR-B (dB)
on the LIVE1 dataset.
cus on the restoration of the luminance channel (in YCrCb
space) in this paper.
The training image pairs {Y, X} are prepared as follows
– Images in the training set are decomposed into 32 × 32
sub-images4 X = {Xi}n
i=1. Then the compressed samples Y = {Yi}n
i=1 are generated from the training samples
with MATLAB JPEG encoder . The sub-images are extracted from the ground truth images with a stride of 10.
Thus the 400 training images could provide 537,600 training samples. To avoid the border effects caused by convolution, AR-CNN produces a 20 × 20 output given a 32 × 32
input Yi. Hence, the loss (Eqn. (4)) was computed by comparing against the center 20 × 20 pixels of the ground truth
sub-image Xi. In the training phase, we follow and
use a smaller learning rate (10−5) in the last layer and a
comparably larger one (10−4) in the remaining layers.
4.1. Comparison with the State-of-the-Arts
We use the LIVE1 dataset (29 images) as test set to
evaluate both the quantitative and qualitative performance.
The LIVE1 dataset contains images with diverse properties.
It is widely used in image quality assessment 
as well as in super-resolution . To have a comprehensive qualitative evaluation, we apply the PSNR, structural
similarity (SSIM) 5, and PSNR-B for quality assessment. We want to emphasize the use of PSNR-B. It
is designed speciﬁcally to assess blocky and deblocked images, thus is more sensitive to blocking artifacts than the
perceptual-aware SSIM index.
The network settings are
f1 = 9, f1′ = 7, f2 = 1, f3 = 5, n1 = 64, n1′ = 32,
n2 = 16 and n3 = 1, denoted as AR-CNN (9-7-1-5) or simply AR-CNN. A speciﬁc network is trained for each JPEG
quality. Parameters are randomly initialized from a Gaussian distribution with a standard deviation of 0.001.
Comparison with SA-DCT
We ﬁrst compare AR-CNN with SA-DCT , which is
widely regarded as the state-of-the-art deblocking oriented
method . The quantization results of PSNR, SSIM
and PSNR-B are shown in Table 1. On the whole, our AR-
4We use sub-images because we regard each sample as an image rather
than a big patch.
5We use the unweighted structural similarity deﬁned over ﬁxed 8 × 8
windows as in .
Table 2. The average results of PSNR (dB), SSIM, PSNR-B (dB)
on the LIVE1 dataset with q = 10 .
NumberRofRbackprops
AverageRtestRPSNRR(dB)
deeperRSRCNN
Figure 5. Comparisons with SRCNN and Deeper SRCNN.
CNN outperforms the SA-DCT on all JPEG qualities and
evaluation metrics by a large margin. Note that the gains
on PSNR-B is much larger than that on PSNR. This indicates that AR-CNN could produce images with less blocking artifacts.
To compare the visual quality, we present
some restored images6 with q = 10 in Figure 10. From
Figure 10, we could see that the result of AR-CNN could
produce much sharper edges with much less blocking and
ringing artifacts compared with SA-DCT. The visual quality has been largely improved on all aspects compared with
the state-of-the-art method. Furthermore, AR-CNN is superior to SA-DCT on the implementation speed. For SA-DCT,
it needs 3.4 seconds to process a 256 × 256 image. While
AR-CNN only takes 0.5 second. They are all implemented
using C++ on a PC with Intel I3 CPU (3.1GHz) with 16GB
Comparison with SRCNN
As discussed in Section 3.2, SRCNN is not suitable for
compression artifacts reduction. For comparison, we train
two SRCNN networks with different settings. (i) The original SRCNN (9-1-5) with f1 = 9, f3 = 5, n1 = 64 and
n2 = 32. (ii) Deeper SRCNN (9-1-1-5) with an additional
non-linear mapping layer (f2′ = 1, n2′ = 16). They all use
the BSDS500 dataset for training and validation as in Section 4. The compression quality is q = 10. The AR-CNN is
the same as in Section 4.1.1.
Quantitative results tested on LIVE1 dataset are shown
in Table 2. We could see that the two SRCNN networks
are inferior on all evaluation metrics. From convergence
curves shown in Figure 5, it is clear that AR-CNN achieves
higher PSNR from the beginning of the learning stage. Furthermore, from their restored images6 in Figure 11, we ﬁnd
out that the two SRCNN networks all produce images with
noisy edges and unnatural smooth regions. These results
demonstrate our statements in Section 3.2. In short, the
6More qualitative results are provided in the supplementary ﬁle.
Table 3. The average results of PSNR (dB), SSIM, PSNR-B (dB)
on the test set BSDS500 dataset.
success of training a deep model needs comprehensive understanding of the problem and careful design of the model
structure.
Comparison with RTF
RTF is the recent state-of-the-art restoration oriented
method. Without their deblocking code, we can only compare with the released deblocking results. Their model is
trained on the training set (200 images) of the BSDS500
dataset, but all images are down-scaled by a factor of
0.5 . To have a fair comparison, we also train new AR-
CNN networks on the same half-sized 200 images. Testing is performed on the test set of the BSDS500 dataset
(images scaled by a factor of 0.5), which is also consistent
with . We compare with two RTF variants. One is the
plain RTF, which uses the ﬁlter bank and is optimized for
PSNR. The other is the RTF+SA-DCT, which includes the
SA-DCT as a base method and is optimized for MAE. The
later one achieves the highest PSNR value among all RTF
variants .
As shown in Table 3, we obtain superior performance
than the plain RTF, and even better performance than the
combination of RTF and SA-DCT, especially under the
more representative PSNR-B metric. Moreover, training on
such a small dataset has largely restricted the ability of AR-
CNN. The performance of AR-CNN will further improve
given more training images.
4.2. Experiments on Easy-Hard Transfer
We show the experimental results of different “easy-hard
transfer” settings, of which the details are shown in Table 4.
Take the base network as an example, the base-q10 is a
four-layer AR-CNN (9-7-1-5) trained on the BSDS500 
dataset (400 images) under the compression quality q =
10. Parameters are initialized by randomly drawing from
a Gaussian distribution with zero mean and standard deviation 0.001. Figures 6 - 8 show the convergence curves on
the validation set.
Transfer shallow to deeper model
In Table 4, we denote a deeper (ﬁve-layer) AR-CNN as “9-
7-3-1-5”, which contains another feature enhancement layer
(f1′′ = 3 and n1′′ = 16). Results in Figure 6 show that the
Table 4. Experimental settings of “easy-hard transfer”.
initialization
Gaussian (0, 0.001)
Gaussian (0, 0.001)
Gaussian (0, 0.001)
transfer deeper
1,2 layers of base-q10
He et al. 
Gaussian (0, 0.001)
transfer 1 layer
1 layer of base-q20
transfer 2 layers
1,2 layer of base-q20
base-Twitter
Gaussian (0, 0.001)
transfer q10
1 layer of base-q10
transfer q20
1 layer of base-q20
NumberRofRbackprops
AverageRtestRPSNRR9dB]
transferRdeeper
Figure 6. Transfer shallow to deeper model.
NumberRofRbackprops
AverageRtestRPSNRRqdB)
transferR1Rlayer
transferR2Rlayers
Figure 7. Transfer high to low quality.
Number(of(backprops
Average(test(PSNR(idB)
transfer(q10
transfer(q20
base−Twitter
Figure 8. Transfer standard to real use case.
transferred features from a four-layer network enable us to
train a ﬁve-layer network successfully. Note that directly
training a ﬁve-layer network using conventional initialization ways is unreliable. Speciﬁcally, we have exhaustively
tried different groups of learning rates, but still have not
observed convergence. Furthermore, the “transfer deeper”
converges faster and achieves better performance than using
He et al.’s method , which is also very effective in training a deep model. We have also conducted comparative experiments with the structure “9-7-1-1-5” and observed the
same trend.
Transfer high to low quality
Results are shown in Figure 7. Obviously, the two networks
with transferred features converge faster than that training
from scratch.
For example, to reach an average PSNR
of 27.77dB, the “transfer 1 layer” takes only 1.54 × 108
backprops, which are roughly a half of that for “base-q10”.
Moreover, the “transfer 1 layer” also outperforms the ‘baseq10” by a slight margin throughout the training phase. One
reason for this is that only initializing the ﬁrst layer provides the network with more ﬂexibility in adapting to a new
dataset. This also indicates that a good starting point could
help train a better network with higher convergence speed.
Transfer standard to real use case – Twitter
Online Social Media like Twitter are popular platforms for
message posting. However, Twitter will compress the uploaded images on the server-side. For instance, a typical
8 mega-pixel (MP) image (3264 × 2448) will result in a
compressed and re-scaled version with a ﬁxed resolution
of 600 × 450. Such re-scaling and compression will introduce very complex artifacts, making restoration difﬁcult for
existing deblocking algorithms (e.g. SA-DCT). However,
AR-CNN can ﬁt to the new data easily. Further, we want
to show that features learned under standard compression
schemes could also facilitate training on a completely different dataset. We use 40 photos of resolution 3264 × 2448
taken by mobile phones (totally 335,209 training subimages) and their Twitter-compressed version7 to train three
networks with initialization settings listed in Table 4.
From Figure 8, we observe that the “transfer q10”
and “transfer q20” networks converge much faster than
the “base-Twitter” trained from scratch. Speciﬁcally, the
“transfer q10” takes 6 × 107 backprops to achieve 25.1dB,
while the “base-Twitter” uses 10 × 107 backprops. Despite
of fast convergence, transferred features also lead to higher
PSNR values compared with “base-Twitter”. This observation suggests that features learned under standard compression schemes are also transferrable to tackle real use case
problems. Some restoration results6 are shown in Figure 12.
We could see that both networks achieve satisfactory quality
improvements over the compressed version.
5. Application
In the real application, many image processing routines
are affected when they take JPEG images as input. Blocking
artifacts could be either super-resolved or enhanced, causing signiﬁcant performance decrease. In this section, we
show the potential of AR-CNN in facilitating other lowlevel vision studies, i.e. super-resolution and contrast enhancement. To illustrate this, we use SRCNN for superresolution and tone-curve adjustment for contrast enhancement , and show example results when the input is
a JPEG image, SA-DCT deblocked image, and AR-CNN
restored image. From results shown in Figure 9, we could
see that JPEG compression artifacts have greatly distorted
the visual quality in super-resolution and contrast enhancement. Nevertheless, with the help of AR-CNN, these effects
7We will share this dataset on our project page.
PSNR /SSIM /PSNR-B
32.46 dB /0.8558 /29.64 dB
33.88 dB /0.9015 /33.02 dB
34.37 dB /0.9079 /34.10 dB
Figure 10. Results on image “parrots” show that AR-CNN is better than SA-DCT on removing blocking artifacts.
30.12 dB /0.8817 /26.86 dB
32.60 dB /0.9301 /31.47 dB
Deeper SRCNN
32.58 dB /0.9298 /31.52 dB
32.88 dB /0.9343 /32.22 dB
Figure 11. Results on image “monarch” show that AR-CNN is better than SRCNN on removing ringing effects.
Original / PSNR
Twitter / 26.55 dB
Transfer q10 / 27.92 dB
Figure 12. Restoration results of AR-CNN on Twitter compressed images. The origina image (8MP version) is too large for display and
only part of the image is shown for better visualization.
Base- / 27.75 dB
(a) Super resolution output
(b) Contrast enhancement output
Figure 9. AR-CNN can be applied as pre-processing to facilitate
other low-level routines when they take JPEG images as input.
have been largely eliminated. Moreover, AR-CNN achieves
much better results than SA-DCT. The differences between
them are more evident after these low-level vision processing.
6. Conclusion
Applying deep model on low-level vision problems requires deep understanding of the problem itself. In this paper, we carefully study the compression process and propose a four-layer convolutional network, AR-CNN, which
is extremely effective in dealing with various compression artifacts. We further systematically investigate several
easy-to-hard transfer settings that could facilitate training
a deeper or better network, and verify the effectiveness of
transfer learning in low-level vision problems. As discussed
in SRCNN , we ﬁnd that larger ﬁlter sizes also help improve the performance. We will leave them to further work.