Machine learning for large-scale wearable sensor data
in Parkinson disease: concepts, promises, pitfalls and
Ken J Kubota, BS, SEP1, Jason A. Chen, BSE2,3 and Max A. Little, PhD4,5
Department of Data Science, tranSMART Foundation, 401 Edgewater Place, Suite 600,
Wakefield, MA 01880, US
Verge Genomics, 450 Mission Street, Suite 201, San Francisco, 94105, US
Interdepartmental Program in Bioinformatics, University of California at Los Angeles, 695
Charles E. Young Drive South, Los Angeles, CA 90095, US
Aston University, Aston Triangle, Birmingham, B4 7ET, UK
Media Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, US
Corresponding Author: Ken J Kubota, Department of Data Science, tranSMART Foundation, 401
Edgewater Place, Suite 600, Wakefield MA 01880, United States
Tel.: +1-415 235-2914, E-Mail: 
For the treatment and monitoring of Parkinson disease (PD) to be scientific, a key requirement is that
measurements of disease stages and severity are quantitative, reliable and repeatable. The last 50
years in PD research have been dominated by qualitative, subjective ratings obtained by human
interpretation of the presentation of disease features at clinical visits. More recently, “wearable”,
sensor-based, quantitative, objective, and easy-to-use systems for quantifying PD signs for large
numbers of participants over extended durations have been developed. This technology has the
potential to significantly improve both clinical diagnosis and management in PD and the conduct of
clinical studies. However, the large-scale, high-dimensional character of the data captured by these
wearable sensors requires sophisticated signal processing and machine learning algorithms to
transform it into scientifically and clinically meaningful information. Such algorithms that “learn”
from data have shown remarkable success at making accurate predictions for complex problems
where human skill has been required to-date, but they are challenging to evaluate and apply without
a basic understanding of the underlying logic upon which they are based. This article contains a nontechnical, tutorial review of relevant machine learning algorithms, also describing their limitations
and how these can be overcome. It discusses implications of this technology and a practical roadmap
for realizing the full potential of this technology in PD research and practice.
Introduction
Medical practice aspires to diagnose patients at the earliest of clinical signs; to monitor disease
progression and rapidly find optimal treatment regimens. Clinical scientists and drug developers seek
to enroll large numbers of participants into trials with minimal cost and effort, to maximize scientific
validity of studies. Patients wish to increase their quality of life while reducing physical clinic visits,
and patient care seeks to minimize reliance on the clinic and transition into patient’s homes. In this
article we describe a combination of technologies – wearable devices and machine learning – which
Machine learning for PD wearables
 
may be key to these aspirations. These technologies promise to enable this vision by providing
objective, high-frequency, sensitive and continuous data on the signs of PD.
Machine learning systems have become a pervasive part of modern life. As examples, mail delivery
corporations use machine vision algorithms to automatically transcribe hand written addresses on
envelopes to route them to their intended destination, and vehicle license plate reading algorithms
automatically track vehicles around road networks based upon images captured using roadside
digital cameras.1 In both applications, without machine learning it would require human skill and
constant attention to carry out the transcription, but machine learning software performs this task to
almost human levels of accuracy, but with far superior speed and reliability.
Meanwhile, consumer devices such as cell phones, smartphones and more recently smartwatches
are worn and used by nearly a third of the world’s population on a daily basis.2 These devices are
fully-featured, Internet and telephone network connected wearable computers (“wearables”)
incorporating numerous digital sensors measuring physical quantities of the wearer and their
environment. They put the vast combined utility of cell phones, laptops and desktop computers in
the hands of the wearer, 24 hours a day, in almost any environment.
These twin technologies – wearables and machine learning – have developmental histories driven by
rapid advances in hardware miniaturization, computing power, mass data storage, Internet-enabled
information accessibility, and conceptual advances in computer science, software engineering and
mathematics. These advances have reached the point at which wearable devices with machine
learning, might allow cheap, reliable, validated disease process-relevant measurements, which would
normally only be collected at infrequent, physical clinic or research center visits, if at all.
Wearable sensor data is complex because it is high frequency (rates of hundreds to thousands of
observations per second) and often high-dimensional (many different sensors capturing multiple
forms of data simultaneously) and so it is high volume. Machine learning methods are widely
applicable to many kinds of data, but wearable sensor data is particularly difficult to visualize,
understand and manage without specialized algorithms such as those used to process and analyze
digital sensor data collected in other industrial applications such as mail sorting or speech
recognition.
Since these technologies have only really matured in the last 10 years, they are unlikely to have
formed part of the traditional training of clinicians and clinical researchers. The objective of this
article is to present what machine learning is, the terminology used and its relationship to that used
in traditional biomedical statistics (Table 2) and how it may be applied to wearable sensor data in
clinical PD measurement, provide a short tutorial on the most relevant machine learning methods,
and describe the major pitfalls and limitations of machine learning-based approaches to sensor data
analysis, and how these limitations can be mitigated.
Defining wearables and statistical machine learning
Here we define a wearable device/wearable as an electronic device which is small, easily and
comfortably worn, for extended periods of time, on some part(s) of the body. The device contains
digital sensors measuring particular physical parameters such as acceleration, light flux, sound
pressure, skin temperature or blood volume. We include ‘quasi-wearable’ devices such as
smartphones within this definition. Wearables can be consumer or medical. Consumer refers to
devices with no specific clinical function but which can be reprogrammed to perform clinical
measurement (clinimetric) functions. Medical devices are designed and marketed for specific clinical
Machine learning for PD wearables
 
Machine learning is usually defined as the application of mathematical algorithms that can find
arbitrary patterns or structure in data, and make predictions for new input data.3 Unlike traditional
programming where complex algorithms are designed and programmed to produce exactly specified
outputs, machine learning attempts to “self-program” from data alone, mimicking the human ability
to synthesize rules from data.
The distinct character of wearable sensor data versus traditional clinical neurology data
PD wearable data is radically different from traditional clinical data, which is a ‘static’, small-scale,
subjective snapshot of PD status. Traditional data is often comprised of demographic attributes (for
example age and gender), and disease data (such as date of first symptom onset, diagnostic category,
and ordinal-scale UPDRS questions).4 It takes substantial time and effort to collect such data, so even
the most detailed studies collect at most 200 or so data items at each patient visit, with months
between visits.
By contrast, wearable data comprises ‘continuous’ high-frequency digital sensor readings, potentially
tens of thousands per second, reporting quantities such as acceleration, rate of rotation, blood
volume, acoustic pressure, skin temperature, GPS coordinates, magnetic field strength and ambient
light flux.
Of course, traditional data has merits: for example, a clinical rater, although inherently subjective,
synthesizes vast amounts of sensory information about the subject, and can actively seek out
confirmatory data from disparate sources in order to reach a holistic diagnosis or disease severity
assessment.
Example large-scale wearables studies in PD research: detecting medication
responsiveness
Here we pick out two large-scale consumer wearable studies providing an indication of what might
be achievable in future.
The “Smartphone-PD” global observational study recruits healthy and PD participants using software
downloaded to participant’s own Android smartphones.5 As of 2015, 457 individuals were recruited
and over 46,000 hours of raw sensor data captured for 6 months’ duration from each participant,
including GPS location, accelerometry, gyroscope, magnetometer, proximity and ambient light flux.
Sensor data from short (less than 5 minute) controlled, systematic tests of gait, voice, touchscreen
tapping, postural and rest tremor conducted using the smartphone allowed a machine learning
algorithm to discriminate drug-responsive from non-responsive participants,6 and to quantify the
level of responsiveness to treatments against l-dopa equivalent dosage. Similar results were found in
the US-wide “mPower” iPhone-based study of PD.7 Here, touchscreen tapping sensor data from 57
PD participants was analyzed using various machine learning algorithms. Individualized medication
responsiveness was also quantifiable using this tapping data.
This evidence for the clinical utility of this approach is promising: drug titration and timing is a
delicate problem in PD disease management which might be substantially improved by real-time,
objective and validated assessment of potential new treatments for PD. Many other smaller-scale
studies have used machine learning for wearable device data in PD (Table 1).
Machine learning: a brief tutorial
Statistical machine learning methods subsume most traditional statistical methods used in
biomedicine, for example: parametric and non-parametric null hypothesis testing, linear and logistic
regression, discriminant analysis, principal components, factor analysis and cluster analysis. Typically,
Machine learning for PD wearables
 
machine learning extends these methods to cope with high-dimensionality and nonlinearity which is
of particular importance in wearable sensor data. It overlaps with artificial intelligence but the
problems it seeks to solve are usually recognizable to traditional biomedical statistics (Table 2).
Statistical machine learning is one of the fastest-growing scientific disciplines; we describe the
primary conceptual ‘branches’ and their importance in PD wearable data analysis.
Signal processing: data conditioning and feature extraction
A prerequisite of most machine learning approaches to sensor data analysis is the preparation of the
digital data by identifying useful regions to process (segmentation). This signal processing is usually
essential because in practice, sensor data is not always meaningful, for example, if the wearable is
not actually being worn.8 Once reliably segmented, these data can then be summarized into a small
set of features, which are then input to the machine learning algorithm.1 Feature extraction makes
the machine learning problem tractable, because it substantially reduces the number of data
dimensions.
Supervised machine learning
Supervised learning trains an algorithm to mimic some input-output relationship (Figure 1A). Such
methods require labeled data: each training input must be associated with an output value. We have
examples of input paired with output data, and the algorithm finds a rule which maps the input data
onto the output. The pattern to be learned is this rule, which can be used to make predictions when
given new inputs. Depending upon the kind of output data – whether it takes a continuous range of
values or a finite discrete set – the mathematical mapping is known as regression or classification,
respectively.
Regression: As an example, consider output data where the labels represent clinically-scored severity
of a PD sign (say, on the scale 0-100), and some (simplified) features related to that sign from a
wearable device. In this situation, regression can form an automatic way of predicting the clinical
score using the device. This approach has been used to predict UPDRS ratings from digital voice
recordings, accelerometers, and touch screens.9 For example, Stamatakis et al.10 demonstrate logistic
regression to predict UPDRS from features of performance on a finger tapping test recorded by
accelerometer.
In classical statistical techniques such as linear regression and linear discriminant analysis this
mapping rule is linear: that is, the classification decision boundary or regression curve is a hyperplane
(e.g. line or a plane and equivalent geometric object in higher dimensions). By contrast, many
supervised machine learning algorithms are in principal capable of discovering any nonlinear
relationship.1 This makes them particularly suited to finding high-dimensional, complex rules. These
kinds of relationships might be impossible to intuit, but they are abundant when dealing with
biomedical data, so one is often forced to use machine learning algorithms.
Classification: This method finds significant applications separating (discriminating) between two or
more discrete output values.1 An archetypal application example of machine learning classification is
diagnosis: discriminating between healthy and PD cases. By comparing the expert diagnosis (the
labels) against the predicted diagnosis from the classifier, all the familiar metrics of diagnostic
performance such as sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive value, ROC and AUC
values (for classifiers with probabilistic outputs) can be computed. However, machine learning
classifiers can produce classifications from high-dimensional input data where they find a general
decision boundary in the input space which separates the data into the separate classes (e.g. healthy
versus PD). Example classifiers include the support vector machine (SVM; Figure 2A) which can in
Machine learning for PD wearables
 
principle find a boundary of any complexity; Patel et al.11 use SVMs to identify patients with PD from
accelerometer data.
Other examples of classifiers include the artificial neural network (Figure 2B) which mimics the gross
hierarchical connectivity of biological neural circuitry1; Jane et al.12 used neural networks to detect
PD gait disturbances from wearable accelerometers. More recent incarnations such as the
convolutional neural network have shown state-of-the-art prediction accuracy in applications such as
image and speech identification13, although their robustness to confounding factors is somewhat in
Decision trees are another widely-used classification algorithm which finds a decomposition of the
input space into high-dimensional, hierarchically nested rectangular regions, assigning an optimal
class label per region, the decomposition represented as a tree-like diagram (hence the name). The
technique is substantially enhanced in accuracy by randomization and resampling – using many
different possible decompositions – leading to random forest classification. Arora et al.9 used random
forests in discriminating patients with PD from controls from a broad variety of smartphone sensor
Unsupervised machine learning
Supervised methods require labeled data and this is very often a difficult situation to arrange,
particularly so for large-scale wearable data. Unsupervised machine learning methods do not require
labeled data as the method attempts to find the parameters of specific structure in the input data
(Figure 1B).1, 3
(Unsupervised) clustering partitions the data into separate groups (clusters), each with
representative characteristics. When making predictions, clustering techniques, much like classifiers,
map an unknown input onto a discrete output value which is the identifier for the closest cluster to
that input data. A classic example is K-means which attempts to group the data so as to minimize the
total distance between the center of each cluster and each input data point. The learned parameters
are the cluster centers, and the process creates clusters which are approximately spherical in the
input space. K-means is fairly well established in PD studies which seek to identify sub-types of PD,
such as those who are tremor-dominant versus those with rapid motor function decline and
cognitive impairment.15
In clustering, each data point is assigned to only one cluster: clusters do not overlap. However, in
many situations this is an unrealistic simplification; it is more accurate to presume that the clusters
overlap. In techniques such as mixture modeling the clustering is assumed to be uncertain, so that
each data point is given a probability of belonging to every cluster.3
Dimensionality reduction
Most PD wearable data comprises an enormous number of separate measurements so it is said to
have a large dimensionality. However, it may be the case that the intrinsic dimensionality of the data
is much smaller. Consider 3D data with (X,Y,Z) coordinates for each data point, but where the data
actually all lies on a 2D plane embedded in this 3D space. Any point on that flat ‘object’ can be
located by specifying just two coordinates (X, Y). Dimensionality reduction attempts to find such
lower-dimensional data structures embedded in very high-dimensional input spaces.1 Making
predictions involves finding the corresponding coordinates of the higher-dimensional input data
point on the lower-dimensional object.
Assuming linear relationships in the data, the classical principal components analysis (PCA) finds
hyperplanes, that is, lines, planes and their higher-dimensional analogs. Linearity is also assumed in
Machine learning for PD wearables
 
independent components analysis (ICA), which makes less restrictive mathematical assumptions
about the data.1 By contrast, a large variety of manifold learning methods can find arbitrary,
nonlinear low-dimensional geometric objects.16 In PD research PCA and related techniques have
been used to find a few intrinsic dimensions of PD signs within high-dimensional UPDRS data.17, 18
Advanced machine learning methods
Advances in machine learning research have led to a wide variety of other algorithms, we describe a
few important ones here. For partially labeled data where only some of the output training data is
available, semi-supervised techniques such manifold regularization can provide direct constraints on
the structure of the data which helps to locate the classification decision boundary in the input space
(Figure 1C).19 Most supervised algorithms can be applied to partially labeled through iterative selftraining by substituting for the unknown outputs with predictions from the method trained on the
labeled data. Non-parametric Bayesian methods such as Gaussian processes allow for finding not
only the optimal parameters from the training data, but also the appropriate number of parameters.
Thus, non-parametric Bayesian methods can adapt to the complexity of the data as more data is
encountered.20 For example, Dirichlet process mixture models in PD subtyping discover both the
number of subtypes and the representative clinical characteristics of each subtype.21
Pitfalls and remedies of machine learning
Wearable PD data analysis will usually require statistical machine learning algorithms of varying
sophistication to make clinical sense of this data. There are many traps to be avoided if wearables are
to find practical use in clinical applications. Here we discuss several of these issues and how they
might be addressed.
Overfitting and underfitting: finding the right model
Science is not just about collecting data, it is concerned with formalizing general hypotheses about all
the relevant data, which can make predictions to be tested. Prediction accuracy is crucial to the
practical value of the hypothesis. Thus one goal of science is to come up with models (hypotheses
based on assumptions) which are at exactly the right level of simplicity/complexity to predict the
relevant observed and unobserved data. As a familiar example, classical null hypothesis testing can
be considered as a model selection problem in which we select between a simple null and a more
complex alternative hypothesis. This principle of tuning the complexity of a model, also known as
Occam’s razor, has a counterpart in algorithms for wearable data analysis embodied in the
complementary concepts of overfitting and underfitting.1
An overfitted model is more complex than can be justified by the data. An overfitted model might
have too many free parameters and thus risks confusing random noise or other confounds in the
training data for genuine disease-related structure. This is a pervasive problem in statistical machine
learning because the complexity of the model can often be set as high as required to get arbitrarily
high prediction accuracy. An example: with K-means it is possible to get the prediction error as low as
desired by simply increasing the number of clusters, K, and if each data point has its own cluster, zero
prediction error can be obtained. Of course, this would not be a meaningful clustering, but it
illustrates what can go wrong with careless use of machine learning algorithms. The opposite
situation, where the model is too simple, is known as underfitting: such a model will be insensitive to
the actual disease-related structure in the data, producing predictions with poor accuracy.
The (inevitably imperfect) remedy is appropriate complexity control, a critically important and
weighty topic. The more robust machine learning algorithms have some kind of complexity control
parameter (and Bayesian algorithms naturally incorporate complexity control through the “spread”
Machine learning for PD wearables
 
of the prior distribution over the model’s parameters) but many can be adapted to use samplingbased approaches which we discuss below. However, there are inherent strengths and weaknesses
to all forms of complexity control and no technique is guaranteed to find the ideal solution under all
circumstances.1, 22
Hold-out testing is a popular sampling approach to complexity control. The data is split into testing
and training subsets, and the algorithm parameters are found from the training subset. The
prediction accuracy is computed on the test subset. Thus, no information from the training subset is
used in testing the algorithm. Since the test subset will always be a different random subset of the
overall population data to the training subset, the machine learning technique is appropriately
penalized for making overly accurate predictions on the training data. The rationale is that an
algorithm which has perfect predictions for the training data has almost zero probability of making
good predictions on the test data. In cross-validation, hold-out testing is repeated by randomized
train/test splitting, and this leads to an estimate of the variability of the prediction error. This
variability establishes a statistically meaningful confidence interval for the prediction error when
predictions are made on the population data (which is unavailable in principle).
The major weakness of cross-validation is that it requires every measurement in the data (grouping
all dimensions together into one measurement) to be (1) statistically independent of all the rest, and
yet (2) share the same statistical distribution as all the rest of the measurements, and (3) this
distribution must match the population distribution.22 These three strict conditions make the
problem of distributional mismatch acute: for example, if there is any internal heterogeneity in the
data, then each training subset is unlikely to contain all the information required to learn the overall
structure in the data. As a result, the predictions on the test set are unlikely to be accurate and holdout testing will give misleadingly low prediction accuracy. Unfortunately, identifying departures from
these strict assumptions is, in the final analysis, as difficult as having a complete statistical model for
the data, and this is, of course, exactly what we do not know and are trying to find!
Another serious weakness with hold-out approaches is that of data leakage, where some unintended
effect causes the training subset to inadvertently contain information about the test subset, which
can dramatically undermine the independence between training and test subsets required to make
this a valid procedure.23 It can be extremely hard to identify sources of data leakage because data
can be confounded by all manner of unknown effects. This difficulty is compounded by the fact that
there are often unintended interactions between the machine learning algorithm and the kind of
leakage: some algorithms are less sensitive to leakage than others.
Another test of prediction performance is replication, sometimes called true hold-out testing, which
is analogous to prospective testing. Here, a completely different data set (ideally collected in another
lab or in a different sample of the population) is used to test the prediction performance of the
machine learning technique trained on the original data set. Replication helps to avoid problems such
as data leakage, but it can sharpen the deleterious influence of distributional mismatch, because it is
extremely hard to guarantee a perfect match in experimental conditions across different
experimental settings.
For sampling methods, replication testing is generally held to be the most faithful representation of
how the machine learning method would perform for the population in general, followed by hold-out
testing such as cross-validation. There are many different forms of cross-validation including: leaving
out one sample or subject from the training set, or 90%-10% train/test splitting, and they all have
different statistical properties which can entail differing estimates of the prediction error and
confidence in these estimates.
Machine learning for PD wearables
 
The above suggests that data and algorithms go hand-in-hand: it is not possible to rely on wearable
data alone – we need to supply some assumptions in order to make the data collection effort
scientific. But this is why the choice of machine learning algorithm, and the underlying assumptions
that each entails, is critical for the success of any machine learning approach to wearable data
analysis; in other words, data alone do not suffice. Similarly, since there are inherent assumptions to
any complexity control method which may not hold entirely true for the data it is necessary to
compare the results obtained using several methods in order to gain a more comprehensive
understanding of the performance of any machine learning algorithm.
Data quality issues
As discussed above, wearable data vastly exceeds the amount of data collected in classical clinical
neurology applications, and there are many advantages to this. But, it is generally true that “big
data” is not automatically better than small. This section examines some of the reasons why.
One of the most pertinent issues is the perennial problem of sampling/selection bias, which is an
unavoidable issue in just about every statistical study.24 The obvious population biases are uneven
technology adoption in particular sub-populations, for example, the more vulnerable older PD
patients are unlikely to have familiarity with contemporary technologies and so tend to select
themselves out of wearable studies. Since they are likely to have advanced PD, wearable studies will
have to be carefully planned and executed to avoid omitting the more severe PD cases. Similarly,
there are behavioral sampling biases: imagine a wearable being charged and not worn during the
“wearing off” period for a particular PD participant, that period is thereby omitted for that
participant. These are obvious sampling biases, but there could be much more subtle biases that only
come to light during replication attempts. These issues can be mitigated by the careful use of wellknown population sampling designs.
One of the main advantages wearables is the possibility of continuous monitoring which can be
scaled up to study sizes of thousands of individuals or larger, and to conduct studies in the “home
setting” rather than the “lab”. The freedom to collect more realistic, unconstrained ambulatory data
across large sections of the population is valuable but we lose a substantial amount of experimental
control over the data collection. Studies conducted this way are fundamentally different to most
classical clinical studies, in that participant behavior is largely unconstrained. So, we have little
information from moment to moment about what participants are doing, with far greater
opportunity for confounding effects to undermine any subsequent analysis. Analyzing behavioral
data from wearables in PD is a nascent science, and there is still much that is unknown about how to
establish vital contextual information from sensor data which allows us to take into account the
effects of confounders. To mitigate this issue, it is suggested that multiple sources of sensor data
should be collected so that context can be more easily established.
Another major problem with data collection is potential lack of accuracy of labels. For example,
where participants are prompted to state when they have taken their medications using a
smartphone app, they may fail to report, or they may enter incorrect times and dosages. Of course,
this problem is not unique to wearable studies, but the problem may be more acute than traditional
studies because identifying a few bad labels among a huge number may be very difficult indeed.
Machine learning algorithms which are explicitly designed to handle errors in labels have more
recently been developed and may be useful in this situation.
Data drift and non-stationarity
The vast majority of machine learning algorithms make the implicit assumption that the distribution
of the training data is static and unchanging over time. But, one of the unavoidable facts of human
Machine learning for PD wearables
 
behavior is that it is adaptable to the circumstances, flexible and changeable. When machine learning
algorithms are trained on a particular data set, they are trained to discover structure which is specific
to that data as if it is a sample from the population distribution. But in practice, it is rare for the
population distribution to remain static, and it is very likely to drift over time in response to changing
environmental or personal conditions of the wearer. Therefore, by the time the machine learning
system is deployed the distribution of the observed data may no longer match that of the training
data, causing the machine learning predictions to be invalid.
There are several responses to this: simpler machine learning algorithms are less likely than more
complex algorithms to be ‘brittle’ in the face of changing distributions, so that simpler methods can
be preferred when data drift is expected.25 The problem with this approach is that simpler methods
often produce less accurate predictions, because they are underfitted. An alternative is to re-train
the algorithm on the data as it is accumulated in deployment, but this may require new labeled data
which is difficult to obtain, and/or increased computational and implementation complexity which
may rule out immediate user feedback applications.
Lack of model interpretability
Machine learning algorithms have unprecedented predictive power. They can make high-accuracy
predictions and discover structure and relationships in data which would be well beyond the reach of
any unaided human analyst to intuit. However, these techniques do not generally supply explanatory
power. In other words, they are “black boxes” which ingest data to produce predictive outputs.26
There is a major disadvantage to such opacity: if the algorithm goes wrong, it is difficult to find out
why. Also, the only guaranteed way to probe the full behavior of these black boxes is to explore all
possible combinations of the inputs, which, for high-dimensional wearable data, is intractable. In
other words, a method such as a convolutional neural network is a powerful prediction machine, but
is of severely limited utility for facilitating understanding of the structure in the data.
This is a serious shortcoming because one of the main principles of science is explain structure in
data, which can link up to existing knowledge and therefore corroborate, confirm, revise and extend
our knowledge about reality. We are also missing a vital check on the validity of machine learning
predictions which will have life-changing implications for patients if used to make clinical treatment
decisions. Mitigating this problem requires careful attention to establishing the logical connections
between the physical properties measured by the sensors, any features extracted and their
relationship to the underlying physiology, and the mathematical structure of the machine learning
algorithm used to make predictions.
Technical implementation complexity
One of the guiding principles of engineering is modularity: building a system out of parts which can
be tested independently. Modularity allows us to isolate effects to particular components of the
system and thus prevent failure in one part from causing catastrophic, system-wide failure. Most
machine learning algorithms are, unfortunately, not modular at all. Small changes in one parameter
can have substantial and largely unpredictable effects on all the rest of the model. All the input data
must be in exactly the same form as it was when used to train the model.27
These kind of strong dependencies and general ‘brittleness’ to even slight changes mean that the
engineering complexity, particularly in system maintenance, is very high, and premature system
design choices can have large knock-on consequences which cannot be addressed without
considerable engineering effort. What this means in practice is that for wearable data, the route
from data capture to algorithm development and into clinical deployment is far from easy, and it is
Machine learning for PD wearables
 
not clear at this stage whether the promising early results obtained in academic studies will actually
translate to deployment.
Of course, this is something that occurs with any nascent technology, but with machine learning, the
gap between academic studies on the intellectual frontier and final technical implementation is
wide.27 This is systemic to the academic enterprise because it is generally uninterested in the
technical implementation details. Perhaps a useful analog is that machine learning algorithm
research and development is like basic research, and technical implementation issues are like
translational research, and as it stands at the moment, there is a disproportionate amount of effort
and funding being put into the basic science, and little, if any, research into the translational aspects.
Options to address this issue include careful design and testing of each component algorithm in the
machine learning system to ensure that each component is robust and can function effectively when
not part of the overall system.
Technological difficulties arising
As this field is nascent there is still much to understand about how to maximize the effectiveness of
wearable data. For example, the raw digital data from a single sensor can, by itself, be misleading – in
the Fox Insight study28, patients report that mowing the lawn or exercising can mimic a tremor, and
derived smartphone assessments of gait parameters from this raw sensor data have also been
inaccurate for participants living in a cluttered environment.
So, while continuous wearable data is objective, it needs effective statistical signal processing for
data quality control and high-accuracy prediction algorithms to be scientifically valuable. The
transformation of raw data into a form that accurately reflects PD disease severity and progression
requires continued research, even as large-scale studies such as Fox Insight28, Smartphone-PD5 and
mPower7 continue to amass data.
Conclusions and Future Directions
From where we stand now with this technology, how will we get to a state where it fulfills its full
potential in PD? We can identify several key steps: clinimetric algorithm validation, open platform
standardization and dissemination, and data sharing.28
Clinimetric validation is required for regulatory approval, much like the measurement of e.g. blood
glycosylated hemoglobin or blood pressure. Over and above demonstrating ease of repetitive use,
approval requires that (a) it provides an accurate parameter of a clinically relevant feature of the
disease, (b) there is confirmed evidence that this parameter has an ecologically relevant response
within some specific clinical application, and (c) a target numerical range exists where the parameter
measures adequate treatment response. The specific clinimetric validation approach taken needs
some care: although it is possible to use machine learning algorithms to map wearable sensor data
onto existing clinical scales such as UPDRS9, this is a poor approach because wearable sensors can be
far more sensitive and precise than subjective ratings. This suggests that we should look to other
reliability measures such as test-retest, parallel forms or internal consistency testing.29
Platform standardization requires that the software and algorithms are made publicly available for
general and widespread use, because any technology lives or dies by the scale of its adoption and
dissemination in the wider community. Since PD measurement is a niche technology application, it is
unlikely to be profitably funded over the long term through private investment. However open
Machine learning for PD wearables
 
source communities can be committed to maintaining and improving on public interest projects such
as this, substituting the need for investment with community-sourced ‘intellectual capital’.
Finally, science demands continual replication and confirmation on new data, for which data sharing
is key. At the same time as learning more about PD, by sharing data we can further refine algorithms
and provide increasingly extensive and rigorous clinimetric validation evidence. This will require
careful planning at the initial stages of clinical trial design using this technology, since participants
need to be consented to share the data widely. There are many other considerations that arise from
this requirement, for example, dealing with data privacy issues. These must also be worked through
in detail.
Figure 1: A graphical depiction of how machine learning algorithms can process input data from
wearables in PD. In each panel the horizontal and vertical dimensions on the page represent values
of “features” (see main text) of the wearable sensor data. For example, in a two-dimensional space
as depicted here, each point is associated with two features, one for the horizontal and one for the
vertical dimension. (A) Supervised methods use labeled training data (left, labels correspond to red
and blue coloring) to make predictions about new data. Here, a supervised classifier learned on the
training data is used to categorize new data in either the blue or red class (right). The learned class
Machine learning for PD wearables
 
decision boundary is depicted by the dashed line. (B) In PD wearable applications, labeled training
data can be difficult to acquire but unlabeled training data is often available in large quantities.
Unsupervised learning methods can use this unlabeled data (left) to learn the parameters of the
relationship between data points. Here, a clustering algorithm identifies subgroups of the data (right,
dashed ovals). This grouping implicitly separates the entire space of the data into two nonoverlapping regions assigned to each class, which can then be used to classify new input data, as with
supervised classification. (C) Semi-supervised learning is a “blend” of supervised and unsupervised
learning methods, using both labeled and unlabeled training data (left) to strengthen its class
predictions (right). This allows full exploitation of datasets with both labeled and unlabeled data, a
common occurrence with PD wearables.
Figure 2: Common supervised learning algorithms. (A) Support vector machines (SVM) separate input
data into classes using decision boundaries which are high-dimensional analogs of flat lines and
planes in a higher-dimensional mathematical representation of the input data (right). The actual
input data (left) has only two dimensions, so, each axes corresponds to values of “features” (see
main text) of the individual data points, one for horizontal and one for vertical. In its own natural two
dimensions (left), the input data is inseparable by a line, but can be separated by a high-dimensional
plane after transformation into the higher dimensional space (right) by SVM. The dashed decision
boundary (left panel) is the class boundary which results from projecting the high-dimensional plane
down onto the input space. (B) A graphical illustration of the computational algorithms underlying
artificial neural networks. A simple artificial neuron (left) with two input feature values A and B. Each
feature value is multiplied by a weight (w1, w2) and the result is added together, and forms the input
to a mathematical function which is used to determine the predicted class output of the neuron (0 or
1). A training algorithm applied to the training data determines the parameters of the algorithm
which are the weight values. Simple artificial neurons such as these are connected together, input to
output, into networks to make powerful classification algorithms, for example, a “two-layer feed-
Machine learning for PD wearables
 
forward” network taking three feature inputs and producing two outputs (right). (C) Depicting
decision trees and random forests (RF) for three-dimensional input feature data (top graph axes with
f1 horizontal, f2 depth and f3 vertical, red/blue indicates training data class). A decision tree
represents hierarchical splitting of the input data into rectangular regions which are “nested” inside
each other, successively “zooming in” to a small region of the input space which contains only a few
data points which are expected to belong to only one class. Each split occurs at specific values of the
input features, giving rise to the decision boundaries (horizontal and vertical dashed black lines on
small inset feature axes). To make a decision tree prediction, the feature values of an input data
point determine which route down the tree to follow; obtaining a predicted class (red/blue
diamonds) at the bottom of the tree. Random forests create many “randomized” decision trees by
training each tree on a randomly chosen subset of both the training data and the feature axes. For a
new input (white circles, inset feature axes), each decision tree is followed (thick black arrows) to
obtain multiple class predictions, one from each tree (circled in orange). By majority vote over these
predictions a final random forest class prediction is obtained (in this case red).
Table 1: Uses of machine learning algorithms for PD wearable sensor data.
Machine Learning Algorithm
Prediction
Reported Results
Hoff et al.
activities of
daily living
accelerometers
linear regression
supervised
dyskinesia
correlation coefficient of 0.83, 0.87,
0.82 while sitting, counting, and
spelling, respectively
Keijsers et
activities of
daily living
accelerometers
neural network classifier
supervised
dyskinesia
classification accuracy of 93.7%, 99.7%,
and 97.0% in the arm, trunk, and leg,
respectively
Little et al.
voice recording
support vector machine
supervised
Parkinson's
overall classification accuracy of 91.4%
Patel et al.
motor tasks
accelerometers
support vector machine
supervised
bradykinesia,
dyskinesia
percent estimation error of 2.8% for
tremor, 1.7% for bradykinesia, and
1.2% for dyskinesia
Cancela et
accelerometers,
gyroscopes
k-nearest neighbor, decision tree, neural network,
support vector machine
unsupervised
and supervised
bradykinesia
classification accuracy
of 70-86%,
depending on the algorithm
activities of
daily living,
accelerometers,
gyroscopes
naïve Bayes, 5-nearest neighbor, decision trees,
random forest
supervised
dyskinesia
classification accuracy of 93.73% for
levodopa-induced dyskinesia detection
Zwartjes et
activities of
daily living
accelerometers,
gyroscopes
decision tree
supervised
bradykinesia
classification accuracy of 99.3% for
activity classifier; correlation of 0.84
with UPDRS tremor score
fine motor
smartphone
touchscreen
linear regression
supervised
total UPDRS
correlation coefficient of 0.6 with total
Roy et al.
accelerometers,
neural network
supervised
tremor, dyskinesia
sensitivity of 88.6-93.8%, specificity of
91.9-94.6%, global error rate of 6.3-
8.4% for tremor; sensitivity of 90%,
specificity of 91.3-95.5%, global error
rate of 4.5-9.4% for dyskinesia
accelerometers,
gyroscopes
random trees, random forest, decision trees, naïve
Bayes classifier, neural network classifier, knearest neighbor
supervised
freezing of gait
sensitivity of 99.69% and specificity of
99.96% for detecting freezing of gait
Rigas et al.
accelerometers
hidden Markov model classifier
supervised
classification
classification accuracy of 87% for
tremor severity
accelerometers
support vector machine, sparse multinomial
logistic regression
supervised
type of activity
standing, walking)
cross-validation accuracy of 86% for
SVM and 85.2% for SMLR
Tripoliti et
activities of
daily living
accelerometers,
gyroscopes
naïve Bayes classifier, random forest, decision
trees, random trees
supervised
freezing of gait
sensitivity of 81.94%, specificity of
classification
96.11% and AUC of 98.6% for freezing
of gait events
Machine learning for PD wearables
 
Arora et al.
voice recording,
smartphone
touchscreen
random forest
supervised
activities
sensitivity of 96.2% and specificity of
96.9% in PD diagnosis; average mean
absolute error in modified motor
UPDRS score of 1.26 points
selfselected
kernel Fisher discriminant, naïve Bayes classifier,
k-nearest neighbor, support vector machine,
random forest
supervised
gait disturbances,
Parkinson's
classification accuracy of 92.6% using
regression normalization
Cook et al.
activities of
daily living;
and Go test
infrared motion
detectors,
decision tree classifier, naïve Bayes classifier,
random forest, support vector machine, adaptive
boosting, principal component analysis
unsupervised
and supervised
Parkinson's
disease with or
impairment
classification accuracy of 97% and AUC
of 0.97 in classifying healthy aged
controls from PD without MCI using
adaptive boosting with decision tree
and random resampling
Jane et al.
transducer
Q-back propagated time-delay neural network
supervised
gait disturbances,
Parkinson's
classification accuracy of 90.91-92.19%
for PD, depending on the input dataset
Table 1 citations:
Hoff30, Keijsers31, Little32, Patel11, Cancela33, Tsipouras34, Zwartjes35, Memedi36, Roy37, Mazilu38, Rigas39, Albert40, Tripoliti41, Arora9, Wahid42, Cook43, Jane12
Table 2: Glossary of main machine learning terminology.
There are two different interpretations of probability in statistics. The frequentist
interpretation defines probability as an intrinsic property of observations, for
example, the observed prevalence probability of any one individual having
Parkinson’s being estimated at around 150/100,000 from historical diagnosis
data. The Bayesian interpretation defines probability as a prior degree of belief
(about e.g. a diagnosis) that is updated as more data arrives, for example, as the
individuals symptoms are observed.
Classification
Assignment of input observation data to a category (e.g. diagnostic class:
Parkinson's disease vs. healthy).
Clustering
Grouping observations in a dataset together under the same category/class
where they are similar to each other according to their input data values.
Cross-validation
A method to estimate the prediction accuracy/performance of a machine
learning model which would be expected to generalize beyond any particular
dataset. It is a procedure whereby (1) the dataset is partitioned into a subset
used to train the model and a subset to test model performance (hold-out
testing), and (2) the procedure is repeated with different partitions of the
The number of features in a dataset. For example, a dataset which includes
height, weight, and blood pressure would have a dimension of three; a dataset
with measurements from multiple sensors in a wearable device will usually have
far higher dimension.
Dimensionality
Decreasing the number of total features needed to capture all the useful
information in the observations, e.g. by removing features that are highly
correlated with other features (feature selection) or by deriving a smaller set of
new features from combinations of the existing features (for example by using
principal or independent components analysis).
Summarized input data that can be used to predict a corresponding output. For
example, a summary of the patient’s accelerometer data from a wearable device
or a clinical observation are both features that may be used to predict
Parkinson's disease symptoms or diagnostic status.
Hold-out testing
A method to measure the accuracy/performance of a machine learning model in
which a subset of the dataset is used to train the model and the remainder is
used to test the accuracy of the model.
Input/output
A machine learning method is a mathematical algorithm or model that acts on
input data to produce output data. For example, in classification, the input to the
machine learning model is a high-dimensional data item or a smaller set of
features, and the output is a predicted class label for a particular diagnosis.
The “ground-truth” outputs (e.g. diagnostic classes/categories in disease
classification or symptom severities in symptom severity regression) for a training
Learning/training The process of optimizing a machine learning algorithm, using training input data,
to make accurate predictions.
Mathematical
algorithm/
A model is a set of mathematical equations which describes a (statistical/nonstatistical) relationship between variables, and implemented in software as a
series of programming steps (algorithm). In the context of this article these
models represent machine learning methods.
complexity
Usually characterized by either the number of input features required to make
predictions, the number of assumptions, of the number of “degrees of freedom”
implicit in a mathematical model. Overly complex models overfit the data by
producing outputs that accurately predict the training data outputs but not the
test data; overly simple models may not be sensitive enough to the input data to
Machine learning for PD wearables
 
make accurate predictions.
Parametric/nonparametric
Types of machine learning models based upon assumptions about the input
space. Linear regression is a parametric model, because it is specified by a finite
set of parameters (the regression coefficients). Parametric models are typically
straightforward to calculate and easily interpreted, but require assumptions
about the input data which may be unrealistic. A non-parametric model (e.g. a
kernel support vector machine) does not make simple assumptions such as
linearity and so can discover arbitrary input-output relationships. While it can
produce accurate predictions for complex input-output relationships, it is more
difficult to calculate and often yields non-interpretable models.
Prediction
Typically, a prediction is an estimate of an output data quantity (such as a
diagnostic category or a symptom severity measure) produced by a trained
machine learning algorithm, using input data (such as sensor readings).
Probabilistic
graphical model
A general mathematical framework for statistical modeling of complex
phenomena by representing the relationships between all the variables (e.g.
input features and outputs) in the problem as a graph of statistical dependencies
between these variables.
Regression
Predicting the value of an output variable by the value of associated input
variables and a known relationship between them.
Regularization
A method to control against overfitting by penalizing model complexity (for
example additional input features in a regression or classification model),
therefore allowing for a proper trade-off between training accuracy/performance
and generalizability to other data.
Replication
Similar to hold-out testing but where the test subset is obtained from an entirely
different experimental setting. This is analogous to prospective testing.
Supervised/
unsupervised
/semi-supervised
Machine learning algorithms that create a mathematical model to produce
output data, trained on either labelled data (supervised), unlabelled data
(unsupervised), or a mix of labelled and unlabelled data (semi-supervised).
Test/train subset
Machine learning algorithms create a predictive mathematical model by
identifying patterns from observations in a training subset of a dataset. However,
evaluation of the accuracy/performance of such a model is biased towards
unrealistic accuracy if computed using the same training subset, and typically an
independent test set is used to evaluate the performance of the model.