Vol.:(0123456789)
AI and Ethics 2:405–429
 
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Putting AI ethics to work: are the tools fit for purpose?
Jacqui Ayling1   · Adriane Chapman1
Received: 29 May 2021 / Accepted: 10 August 2021 / Published online: 12 September 2021
© The Author(s) 2021
Bias, unfairness and lack of transparency and accountability in Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems, and the potential for the
misuse of predictive models for decision-making have raised concerns about the ethical impact and unintended consequences
of new technologies for society across every sector where data-driven innovation is taking place. This paper reviews the
landscape of suggested ethical frameworks with a focus on those which go beyond high-level statements of principles and
offer practical tools for application of these principles in the production and deployment of systems. This work provides an
assessment of these practical frameworks with the lens of known best practices for impact assessment and audit of technology.
We review other historical uses of risk assessments and audits and create a typology that allows us to compare current AI
ethics tools to Best Practices found in previous methodologies from technology, environment, privacy, finance and engineering. We analyse current AI ethics tools and their support for diverse stakeholders and components of the AI development
and deployment lifecycle as well as the types of tools used to facilitate use. From this, we identify gaps in current AI ethics
tools in auditing and risk assessment that should be considered going forward.
Keywords  AI · Ethics · Impact assessment · Audit
1  Introduction
Ethics for AI has been experiencing something of a gold
rush in the last few years, with frameworks, guidelines and
consultations appearing thick and fast from governments,
international bodies, civil society, business and academia.
Bias, unfairness and lack of transparency and accountability
in AI systems, and the potential for the misuse of predictive
models for decision-making have attracted attention across
a range of domains from predictive policing to targeted marketing to social welfare . There is disquiet about the
ethical impact and unintended consequences of new technologies for society across every sector where data-driven
innovation is taking place, and an increasing recognition
that even the latest updates to data protection regulation (e.g.
GDPR ) are not addressing all the ethical issues and societal challenges that arise from these new data pipelines and
computational techniques.
This paper sets out to review the landscape of suggested
ethical frameworks with a focus on those which go beyond
high-level statements of principles (see for review
of principles), and offer practical tools for application of
these principles in the production and deployment of systems. ‘Efforts to date have been too focused on the ‘what’
of ethical AI (i.e. debates about principles and codes of conduct) and not enough on the ‘how’ of applied ethics’ [7, p.
2143]. We can all nod our heads sagely in agreement with
principles like fairness and justice, but what does fairness
and justice look like in a real-life decision-making context?
How are organisations and those within them to reckon with
the complex ethical tug-of-war between ‘the bottom-line’
and upholding ethical principles? To do this, we examine
proposed tools to operationalise ethical principles for AI
(as opposed to statements of ethical principles), in relation
to well-established impact and risk assessment, and audit
procedures, that have been used to manage human activities,
and new technology.
Societies face a series of complex and difficult problems across multiple domains to which the application of
data-driven AI technologies is being eagerly pursued. The
ability to collect and store vast troves of data, coupled with
increases in computational power, provides the substrate for
* Jacqui Ayling
 
Web and Internet Science Group (WAIS), School
of Electronics and Computer Science, University
of Southampton, Southampton, UK
AI and Ethics 2:405–429
an explosion of AI applications, particularly machine learning. The kinds of harms that have been of growing concern
build on traditional data privacy harms (see for example ). Concerns around AI are grouped first around epistemic
concerns (the probabilistic nature of insights, the inherent
inscrutability of ‘black box’ algorithms, and the fallibility
of the data used for training and input). Then, there are normative concerns about the fairness of decisional outcomes,
erosion of informational privacy, and increasing surveillance
and profiling of individuals. Algorithmic systems also create
problems of accountability and moral responsibility, where it
is unclear which moral agent in the process bears (or shares)
responsibility for outcomes from a system .
Disastrous outcomes like the loss of human life through
machine malfunction (think medical applications or autonomous cars), or the hijacking and manipulation of critical
systems by bad actors (think military systems, or smart city
technologies controlling essential services). These kinds
of outcomes pose significant challenges for both government and business and could result in reputational damage, regulatory backlash, criminal proceedings and a loss
of public trust . As Daniel Solove presciently noted we
risk creating a Kafkaesque world with 'a more thoughtless
process of bureaucratic indifference, arbitrary errors, and
dehumanization, a world where people feel powerless and
vulnerable, without any meaningful form of participation in
the collection and use of their information’ [12, p. 1398]. It
is to meet these challenges that the current interest in ethical
frameworks has become so heightened.
In response to increasing public debate and political
concern about the negative effects on individuals and wider
society of AI, a veritable AI ethics industry has emerged,
promoting a variety of different frameworks and tools .
Several authors have identified different phases in
the response to increasing public debate about the impact of
AI technologies. In the first phase from 2016 to 2019, many
high-level ethical principles for AI were published as evidenced by these catalogues of ethical principles and frameworks for ethical, trustworthy responsible AI .
This first phase focused on the high-level ethical principles
that might best address the impacts of AI and data-driven
systems framed as applied ethics and dominated by a philosophical approach as opposed to legal or technical approach.
A second phase saw a more technical approach from
the computer science community focusing on fairness,
accountability and transparency as an engineering ‘ethicalby-design’ problem-solving exercise . The current
phase is seeing a move ‘from what to how’ , with proposals for governance mechanisms, regulation, impact assessment, auditing tools and standards leading to the ability to
assure and ultimately, insure AI systems . There is also
latterly a shift towards acknowledgement of political, social
and justice issues ‘beyond the principled and the technical,
to practical mechanisms for rectifying power imbalances’
 . As Crawford argues, AI ethics is not just a ‘tech
ethics’ problem, amenable to ‘tech ethics’ fixes, but raises
deeply political questions about how power is wielded
through technology.
Meta-analyses of AI ethics proposals have thus far
focused mainly on classifying and comparing the ethical
principles suggested, where some convergence can be identified for principles like transparency, fairness, privacy and
responsibility . What is less clear and needs investigation are other variables for these proposals like scope, applicable context, ownership of or responsibility for the process,
method of implementation and representation of stakeholders. There are already established governance methodologies
for assessing and mitigating the impact of new technologies,
processes, and infrastructure across the domains of environment , information privacy , data protection and
human rights . Impact assessment and audit methodologies take core values and combine them with a process for
the public, outside experts, and policymakers to consider
complex social and technical questions.
This work provides an assessment of the myriad of frameworks, principles, templates, guidelines and protocols that
have arisen around AI through the lens of known best practices for impact assessment and audit of technology. We as a
community have taken the first steps in identifying that there
is a problem to be addressed and started to identify how to
apply this by proposing tools to manage ethical challenges
and risks. However, maturity in these thoughts is still to be
achieved. Looking at the environmental movement of the
mid-twentieth century, in which ethical considerations for
many diverse parties, application of technology and societal
concerns all converged, there are parallels for best practice
in the current AI ethics, impact assessment and audit conversations. There are also robust, long-established audit and
assurance practices in other sectors like financial services.
In particular, we look back to the impact assessment and
audit tools, processes and procedures to identify the gaps in
our current approaches. We then lay out the methodology
that we will use to identify the holes in current mechanisms
by content analysis of a range of pertinent aspects using
typological schema. These have been developed by review
of previous best practice and current discussions around
AI governance. Next, we present the current mechanisms
being used to encourage these ethical practices in AI technology. We then provide an overview of the development
of impact assessment and audit, and the key components
as they related to understanding impact across participants,
technology and processes. Using the typologies created
from the review of previous practice, we analyse current AI
frameworks according to these criteria to identify the gaps
in current approaches. This paper contributes to the literature by mapping the current landscape of suggested tools
AI and Ethics 2:405–429
for ethical assessment of AI systems, placing these tools in
a historical tradition of managing the impacts of technology,
thereby exposing possible areas for strengthening these tools
in practice.
2  Background to impact assessment
and audit practices
2.1  Impact assessment
Ethical tools and frameworks for AI do not spring like Dionysus fully formed from Zeus’ thigh, they are part of a development of governance tools to tackle health, environmental
and privacy impacts of technology that began in the 1960’s.
Impact and risk assessment is ‘a type of fact-finding and
evaluation that precedes or accompanies research, or the
production of artefacts and systems, according to specified
criteria. Assessing the impact of some X upon some Y has
been practiced for generations, and has engendered debates
over methods, purpose, focus, policy relevance, terminology,
and efficacy’ [13, pp. 6–7]. These assessments are shaped by
notions of relevance (what is important to society and which
phenomena are worthy of attention), evidence (identification
of causes and effects), and normative claims (what is good,
acceptable or tolerable) [28, p. 4].
2.2  Technology assessment
Technology assessment (TA) is a practice that began with
the US Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) 1972–1995
 . TA was ‘foremost an attempt to gain political control over the potential negative effects of technological
development by means of early warnings. TA was supposed
to predict unintended negative consequences of technical
innovations to facilitate more adequate policy-making’ [31,
p. 544]. In the 1990s, Europe also developed its own TA
institutions like the Scientific Technological Options Assessment (STOA) and recent activities include setting up the
STOA Centre for AI . Several different varieties of TA
have been developed, for example in the Netherlands and
Denmark, TA was extended to address issues of participation. Instead of the traditional TA model with panels of
experts producing reports for policy-makers, participatory
TA (pTA) includes contributions from a much wider group
of stakeholders like lay people, journalists, trade unions and
civil society groups . pTA uses various forms of public
deliberation including focus groups, citizens’ assemblies and
consensus conferences to gather data for reporting . The
lack of an ethical dimension to TA has also led to suggestions for an ethical TA (eTA) , which mirror many
of the concerns found in AI ethics frameworks .
2.3  Environmental impact assessment
Environmental Impact Statements (EIS) were pioneered in
the US by the 1969/70 National Environmental Policy Act
(NEPA), leading to many other jurisdictions enacting environmental legislation Environmental Impact Assessments
(EIA) broadened the process to include the identification
of future consequences and included in the process public
consultation and review mechanisms . ‘[T]he role of the
stakeholders or parties at interest plays such a critical role
in technology assessment, and involvement of citizens in
environmental impact statements is mandated by law’ [29,
p. 374]. These assessments are part of many jurisdictions
planning and/or environmental legislation, intended to allow
stakeholders, including the public in its widest definition,
to contribute to decision-making on infrastructure development like dams and roads . It should be noted
though that there is a lack of clear definition in EIA literature
and practice as to what ‘participation’ actually means .
There are also specific assessment techniques for products
and materials to assess environmental impact which map
life cycles .
Environmental Risk Assessment (ERA) developed as
a separate practice from the broader scope of EIAs, using
formal quantitative analysis of probabilities for undesirable
outcomes of a process or substance . Fiscal Impact
Analysis (FIA) is an economic impact tool commonly used
in land use planning decisions , and EIAs often includes
forms of cost–benefit analysis (CBA) .
2.4  Social and human rights impact assessment
EIAs and ERAs were criticized for focusing on only biophysical and economic impacts and not including the social
and cultural impacts of proposed developments or technologies, leading to the development in the 1990s of Social
Impact Assessments (SIA). SIA is not a widely applied form
of assessment ‘largely because of the challenge of defining, predicting and measuring social change and impact, in
addition to legal and regulatory frameworks that are persistently weak or ineffectual in terms of social impact’ [43, p.
91]. They still remain fairly uncommon, but have been used
in policy impact assessments, for example, by the IMF to
try and understand the impact of macro-economic policy
changes .
2.5  Privacy and data protection impact assessment
The concept of privacy, which underpins modern data protection legislation, is essentially normative and represents
the cultural and historical values of societies. In the Western
tradition, there are two core assumptions, the first appealing to a ‘natural’ divide of the public 2:405–429
work and business) and the private realm (the realm of the
home, family, body and personal property, where the individual is considered the best judge of their privacy interests.
The second assumption posits privacy as a prerequisite for
the liberal democratic state. There are shifting social norms
around the value and definition of privacy, with debates
revealing tensions, for example, between the goals of privacy
vs security and privacy vs economic growth .
The ‘fair information practices’ (FIP) movement emerged
in the US in the work of Westin , in response to
growing societal concerns over the collection and processing of personal data in both the public and private sector.
It was not until the mid-1990s that Privacy Impact Assessments (drawing on the model of EIAs) emerged in various
forms across different jurisdictions . By 2007, the UK
Information Commissioners Office published a handbook
describing a methodology for conducting a PIA, which was
further developed in Europe into a Data Protection Impact
Assessment (DPIA), a key tool in the latest iteration of data
protection regulation, the GDPR .
Privacy impact assessments developed to meet the need
for public trust in information processing by identifying and
managing risks. This is part of a wider move in industrialised societies to manage potential risks of new technologies,
processes or products that can also be seen in TA and EIA
 . DPIA’s use checklists and risk assessments to document the data processing and any necessary mitigations if
risks are identified in an iterative review process .
2.6  Audit
There are long-established techniques for auditing processes
and systems, for example in the financial sector where there
exist globally agreed standards like Generally Accepted
Accounting Principles (GAAP) and International Financial
Reporting Standards (IFRS) . These rules lay down the
process for transparent 3rd-party auditing which have been
adopted into law by the majority of jurisdictions around the
world. There are also audit and assurance standards in safety
critical engineering for industries like aviation, nuclear
power, or more recently, autonomous vehicles .
Audit techniques are also used for third-party verification for accreditation to international industry standards e.g.
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) .
An audit consists of the examination of evidence of a process or activity, like financial transactions or an engineering
process, and then evaluation of the evidence against some
standards or metrics, which could be a regulation or standards regime , or internal management metrics ,
as illustrated in (Fig. 1).
To conduct an audit, there first needs to be a set of auditable artifacts that record decisions, systems and processes.
Brundage et al. define as this as problem space for current
AI production in that they ‘lack traceable logs of steps taken
in problem-definition, design, development, and operation,
leading to a lack of accountability for subsequent claims
about those systems’ properties and impacts’ . This
is where some of the technical tools addressing AI ethics
(see “Discussion”) can become part of an audit process by
providing evidence for evaluation by auditors. Audit also
requires non-technical governance processes to ensure
consistency with relevant principles or norms .
Impact assessments like EIA, and audits such as those
conducted in the finance sector have well-established protocols regulated by legal requirements. Independence of
assessment and audit is used to ensure transparency and
places liabilities on both the parties assessing and the
assessed parties. ‘Whether the auditor is a government body,
a third-party contractor, or a specially designated function
within larger organisations, the point is to ensure that the
auditing runs independently of the day-to-day management
of the auditee’ [56, p. 2]. External assessment provides publicly available documents which can also serve a broader
range of stakeholders beyond the entity or process in question to include users, customers and wider society.
2.7  Risk assessment and techniques
While a myriad of processes, tools and applications of these
tools at various parts of the production cycle exist across the
historical impact assessment and audit activities above, one
of the key elements is risk assessment.
Modern conceptions of risk (risk = accident × probability) became a fully-fledged part of modern societies with the
risk assessment practices developed in response to concerns
over the impact on the environment and human health from
human activity in the form of development, technologies
and industrial processes and materials. In 1969, in an article
entitled “What is our society willing to pay for safety?” 
articulated a systematic and quantitative approach to risk,
and introduced the concept of trade-offs between risks and
benefits . Debates within the environmental movement,
and the associated legal and organisational structures that
grew out of this period, came to be famously characterised
by Beck in the 1980s as the ‘Risk Society’ . Beck posited that the project of modernity had become not how to
distribute wealth or goods, but how to distribute the risks, or
‘bads’, of modern industrial society, where technical experts
are given pole position to define agendas and impose bounding premises a priori on risk discourses’ [59, p. 4].
A risk-based approach has developed throughout the latter part of the 20th and into the twenty-first century, taking
the methodology and approaches from environmental management and risk assessment and applying them to areas
like occupational health and safety, business risk (financial,
operational, reputational), quality and information security.
AI and Ethics 2:405–429
Risk assessment techniques vary from quantitative to qualitative approaches depending on the sector and application. Risk assessments often rely on scoring or ‘traffic light’
systems for ranking risks , and highlighting those areas
that need treatment, either in the form of mitigation (changing the risk score) or in taking measures (like insurance)
or documenting decisions to ‘trade off’ the risk against the
potential benefits. Risk assessments are also used for achieving compliance with the existing regulatory frameworks.
The latest European iteration of data protection (GDPR)
also takes a risk-based approach to privacy protections for
data subjects. Many of the ethical frameworks proposed for
AI build on these models and approaches to risk assessment.
For the business sector, managing reputational risk is an
important consideration and providing evidence of responsible behaviour has direct links to both users/customers and
also to investors and boards. Many investors use Environmental Social and Governance (ESG) assessments, where
they look for evidence of compliance with international
standards and norms, where the risks (especially reputational) could impact across all three areas of ESG assessments for investors. Business-focused AI ethics tools fall
into the suite of tools organisations deploy to protect the
core value. Managing risk allows institutions to ‘adopt procedures and self- presentation to secure or repair credibility’
[59, p. 4], a core purpose of contemporary risk management
strategies .
Risks in AI can manifest as either underusing the technology and missing out on value creation and innovation,
or overusing/misusing the technology . Floridi et al.
 draw attention to risk that results from not using the
technology, and how these risks need careful trade-offs to
ensure the greatest benefit. As Jobin et al. note in their
systematic review of global AI guidelines, conflicts can be
identified in the different proposals ‘between avoiding harm
at all costs and the perspective of accepting some degree of
harm as long as risks and benefits are weighed against each
other. Moreover, risk–benefit evaluations are likely to lead
to different results depending on whose well-being will be
optimized for and by which actors. Such divergences and
tensions illustrate a gap at the cross-section of principle formulation and their implementation into practice’ [5, p. 396].
2.8  Stakeholder theory and participation
The influential European Commission’s report on ‘Trustworthy AI’ proposes that ‘management attention at the highest level is essential to achieve change. It also demonstrates
that involving all stakeholders in a company, organisation
or institution fosters the acceptance and the relevance of
the introduction of any new process (whether or not technological). Therefore, we recommend implementing a process
that embraces both the involvement of operational level as
well as top management level’ [64, p. 25]. A wide-ranging
network of stakeholders can be plotted in the production and
deployment of new technologies that extend far beyond the
domain of engineers and developers (see Table 3).
Since the development in the 1980s of corporate stakeholder theory , it has become common parlance to refer
to ‘stakeholders’ across a range of organizational domains.
Stakeholder theory provides a well-established framework
that allows us to:
1. Identify and describe all interested and affected parties
in the deployment of a technology
2. Acknowledge stakeholders have legitimate interests in
technology
3. Affirm that all stakeholders have intrinsic value, even
if their concerns do not align with the concerns of the
technology producers
4. Identify the responsibilities of parties with relation to a
given process .
Table 3 (below) identifies the broad categories of public
and private sector stakeholders who either have direct roles
in the production and deployment of AI technologies, or
who have legitimate interests in the usage and impact of such
technologies. Stakeholder theory has long challenged the
assumption that a company’s exclusive obligation is to their
shareholders or investors, with business leaders increasingly
recognizing the need for a wider set of obligations beyond
the narrow vision of ‘shareholder primacy’ .
2.9  Technical and design tools
Another active space in the AI ethics debate is within the
AI/ML community itself where much attention and research
has been focused on metrics like fairness, accountability,
explainability and transparency.1 A range of computational
approaches have been suggested, offering quantitative metrics for fairness, methods to ‘debias’ training data sets, test
models against protected characteristics and provide explanations of ‘black box’ algorithms, packaged up into AI fairness toolkits . These toolkits have been criticised for offering a ‘reductionist understanding of fairness
as mathematical conditions’ [71, p. 1], and reflect a longer
history of attempts to reduce (un)fairness to a metric .
Studies with ML developers highlight that considerations
of a model’s context, and the specificity of the domain in
which it is used, are vital to improve features like fairness
1  E.g. new conferences have been created like ACM FAccT 
facct​confe​rence.​org/​index.​html and high profile conferences in the
AI/ML space increasingly including work on ethical problems like
NeurIPS 
AI and Ethics 2:405–429
 . Many would argue that in fact, developing ethical AI
requires not only technical ‘fixes’ but the deployment of
social science disciplines is vital to address negative outcomes .
Other suggestions focus on design processes, for example, awareness raising for design teams in workshop style
events , or participatory design processes . The
human–computer interaction (HCI) community is also concerned to translate previous work in, for example, Value
Centred Design, to address the issues in human–AI interactions .
3  Methodology
This study draws from the rich impact assessment and audit
literature from other domains to develop a typology for comparative document analysis of proposed AI ethics tools. To
understand how proposed AI ethics tools might be applied,
it is first necessary to understand what they are offering, how
they differ, and to identify any gaps. This understanding can
be used to refine and develop these tools for future use. The
AI ethics documents themselves provide the data for study,
which have been analysed using qualitative content analysis,
‘a research technique for making replicable and valid inferences from data to their contexts’ [80, p. 403]. Typologies
of salient features were developed in response to research
questions (see Table 9), using a review of related literature
and AI ethics documents, and iteratively refined. Typologies are useful heuristics to enable systematic comparisons
 , and extensive related literature was reviewed to build
representative typologies for the tool types under examination which would yield useful comparisons across a diverse
range of documents.
The research process is set out in Fig. 2. The process
began with a systematic collection of AI ethics documents
using the document types and keywords detailed in Table 2.
We used a combination of web searches, citation scanning
and monitoring of relevant social media and news items to
identify suitable candidates between May 2019 and December 2020. Other collections of AI ethics documents were
also used both as sources of relevant documents, and for
validation . The initial search yielded n = 169
documents. Many of these documents are drafted by public,
private or not-for-profit organisations and constitute ‘grey
literature’ not typically found in academic databases .
Academic sources were also included, particularly as the private sector is active in producing and publishing academic
papers on this topic .
The lead researcher on this project has a background in
environmental management techniques, and has previously
been trained to conduct ISO:14000 audits . Reflecting on the processes used to provide assurance for the
environmental impact of organisations, we considered there
to be parallels in the need to implement processes to assure
the ethical design and deployment of AI systems. This background knowledge informed the decision to reflect on impact
assessment and audit processes in other domains, many of
which have a long lineage. We wanted to understand better
the features of the current proposed tools for implementing
AI ethics, to assess if these tools are fit for purpose, and
where gaps might be illuminated by previous practice.
This initial data set was analysed using a qualitative content analysis methodology to elicit frequently applied
terminology and approaches. The documents were stored in
Zotero reference manager and coded in an MS Excel spreadsheet iteratively to identify recurrent key words and concepts
that were used to describe their main purpose, type of document, author and audience. The key terms derived from this
process are shown in Table 1.
From this, we devised a set of sub-questions with which
to query the data which shaped the categories and codes we
developed (see Table 9). These questions were considered
the salient features that would allow us to understand and
compare the AI ethics tools. Key terms were then used to
search for literature that mirrored these terms across different domains as show in Table 1. The deep background
literature review of previous practices was used to identify
categories which became the codebook (see Table 9). This
was a reflective process where we identified principles and
categories across domains and used them create typological
sets as follows:
The next step was to narrow down the initial large data
set of n = 169 documents, which contained many documents
that were statements of principles or discussions of AI ethics. We were only interested in those documents that would
give an organisation or practitioner a concrete tool to apply
to AI production or deployment. See for a discussion
of why principles are not enough on their own, and how we
need to bridge to gap between principles and practice. We
Table 1   Key terms and background literature
Key terms from initial content
analysis of ethics frameworks
Background literature review to
build content analysis
Impact assessment
Technology Assessment
Environmental Impact Assessment
Technical tool
Social and Human Rights Impact
Design tool
Assessment
Application stage
Privacy and Data Protection Impact
Stakeholder
Assessment
Risk assessment
Risk Assessment
Procurement
Type of author
Technical and Design Tools
Stakeholder theory
AI and Ethics 2:405–429
excluded all that did not contain practical tools to apply ethical principles (see Table 2), leaving a data set n = 39 documents that offered practical tools to operationalise ethical
principles in the production and deployment of AI systems.
3.1  Typology of stakeholder types
After review of stakeholder theory , a categorisation of key stakeholder groups relevant across both
public and private sector was developed, adapting a typology
from . Table 3 presents a typology of stakeholders that has been adapted and extended from the identification of possible stakeholders described in [64, p. 25], where
it is interesting to note the table did not include users or
customers, or shareholders. We have therefore extended the
categories to mirror the roles in the public sector, and also
widened the stakeholders beyond the confines of the production or deployment of the technologies to include all stakeholders who are affected or have in interest in the process.
Table adapted from [64, p. 25], .
3.2  Typology of tool types for impact assessment
Table 4 shows the key features of impact assessments
derived from our literature review.
3.3  Typology of tool types for audits
Table 5 shows key processes mapped from the review of
audit techniques.
3.4  Internal vs external process
Table 6 shows the codes we created to identify if the tool
was designed for internal organisational use, or provided for
third-party inspection.
3.5  Technical and design tools
A sub-set of tools being suggested for operationalising ethical AI comprise design and engineering tools for use in specific stages of the production pipeline (see Table 7 Typology
of technical and design tools.) These are either materials
for use in design teams in workshop style events ,
tools for producing documentation of the design, build and
test process , or technical tools for testing models,
protecting privacy and security, testing for bias ,
or tracking provenance of data .
Table 2   Criteria for sample identification
Document type
Codes, principles, checklists, risk assessments, reports,
white papers, academic research, technical tools, documentation, impact assessments, audits, guidelines,
standards, registers, contracts, policy documents,
recommendations, webpages, institutional reports,
declarations, professional ethics
Opinion articles, speeches, audio/visual materials,
images, legislation
AI, artificial intelligence
data—ethics, stewardship, big data
machine learning, deep learning
algorithms
predictive analytics
automated decision-making
advanced analytics
automated scoring, profiling, aggregating, sorting
data science
digital technology
Traditional data protection, privacy
Type of content
Practical proposals for implementing ethics for AI,
including both model and data
Ethical principles and frameworks without proposals for
how to apply these principles
Public, private and not-for-profit sector (including
NGO’s), academic research, standards bodies
Authors not representing an organization, or not peerreviewed publication
Availability
Public, online
Data collection time period
May 2019 to December 2020
Document publication date
Pre-2016 and post 2020
AI and Ethics 2:405–429
Table 3   Typology of stakeholders
Stakeholder
Public sector
Private sector
Environment
Marginalised or excluded groups
Environment
Marginalised or excluded groups
Impacts on physical environment, ecosystems
and its members, energy and raw material
extraction and use. Workers in extractive
or digital industries (e.g. mining, content
moderation, data annotation). Traditionally
marginalised groups with limited voice in
society (e.g. the poor, minority ethnic groups,
refugees and immigrants, disabled, incarcerated, women, children)
Vested interest
Shareholders
The electorate have a right to transparent
processes, and should have the ability to
contribute to decision-making (participation).
Shareholders and investors also have fiduciary duty to consider the ethical behaviour of
their investment vehicles
Decision-makers
Elected Official
Chief Executive
Senior Management (C-suite)
Senior management discusses and evaluates
the AI systems’ development, deployment
or procurement and serves as an escalation
board for evaluating all AI innovations and
uses, when critical concerns are detected. It
involves those impacted by the possible introduction of AI systems and their representatives throughout the process via information,
consultation and participation procedures
Compliance/Privacy
Legal Department
Compliance/Privacy
Legal Department
Corporate Responsibility Department
The responsibility department monitors the
use of an ethical assessment and its necessary evolution to meet the technological or
regulatory changes. It updates the standards or internal policies on AI systems and
ensures that the use of such systems complies
with the current legal, regulatory and policy
frameworks and to the values of the organisation
Delivery Managers
Service Managers
Domain Experts
Product Managers
Service Development or equivalent
The Product and Service Development department uses an ethical assessment to evaluate
AI-based products and services and logs all
the results. These results are discussed at
management level, which ultimately approves
the new or revised AI-based applications
Quality Assurance Policy
Service delivery staff
Quality assurance
Quality Assurance
The Quality Assurance department (or
equivalent) ensures and checks the results
of an ethical assessment and takes action to
escalate an issue higher up if the result is
not satisfactory or if unforeseen results are
The HR department ensures the right mix of
competences and diversity of profiles for
developers of AI systems. It ensures that
the appropriate level of training is delivered
inside the organisation
Procurement
Procurement
Procurement
The procurement department ensures that the
process to procure AI-based products or
services includes an assessment of ethics
Data Scientists/Engineers
Developers
Project Managers
Developers
Project managers
Developers and project managers include an
ethical assessment in their daily work and
document the results and outcomes of the
assessment
AI and Ethics 2:405–429
3.6  Production and deployment process for AI
AI systems go through stages of production, from initial definition of a use case, development of a business case, through
the design, build, test and deploy process . Assessment
and audit tools can be applied at different stages of the process (or attempt to capture cover the whole pipeline), and
can be focused on the data flowing through the pipeline, or
the attributes of the model, or both. Table 8 defines codes
for these stages. The pipeline for deployment of systems
often includes selling the AI system to a customer, who will
deploy the system, at which point ethical considerations can
be included in the procurement process.
Table 4   Typology of impact assessment methods
Impact assessment
Checklist; questionnaire
Widely deployed tool across impact assessments and audits to describe activity and interrogate aspects of project or
process. Can be used for both potential projects and to documentation for audit
Baseline study
Commonly used in EIA and policy assessments to ascertain baseline conditions against which proposed projects or
policy can be measured
Participation process
Mandated part of EIA process, public stages of EIA involve scoping and review, and publicly available documentation
Cost–benefit analysis
Assessment tool to compare economic costs with potential benefits
Risk assessment
Can be qualitative or quantitative, frequently translated to a scoring or traffic light output
Life-cycle assessment
Assessment technique for products or materials to calculate environmental or health impacts
Change measurement
Commonly used in policy or human rights impact assessment to determine impacts
Expert committee
Used in assessment process to provide expert evidence or domain knowledge
Governance process
Business and administrative processes to document activity and provide verifiable documentation
Procurement process
Structured process to assess the impact of a purchasing decision
Table 5   Typology of audit methods
Checklist; questionnaire
Widely deployed tool across impact assessments and audits to describe activity and interrogate aspects of project
or process. Can be used for both potential projects and to documentation for audit
Documentation
Audits require artifacts for inspection and assessment such records of processes, materials, outcomes and decisions
Output from audits is commonly in the form of auditors’ reports
Governance process
Business and administrative processes to document activity and provide verifiable documentation
Table 6   Typology of internal vs external process
Internal vs external
assessment/audit
Internal/self-assessment
Designed to be used only as internal
organisational tool. Outcomes assessed
only by internal parties. No process for
wider transparency or participation
External/3rd party
Designed to be used by external auditors,
standards body. May include provision
for publication of results/outcomes for
wider transparency
Table 3   (continued)
Stakeholder
Public sector
Private sector
Service users
Participation of users in development, and/or
publication of assessments for public interrogation. (NB: this layer is missing from the
EU categories)
Independent Oversight Bodies
Expert Committees
Freedom of Information Requests
Regulators
Independent Review/Oversight Bodies
Expert Committees
Regulators
Public Sector governance has a variety of
structures aimed at accountability and transparency and compliance with the law
AI and Ethics 2:405–429
3.7  Document analysis
A total of n = 169 items were identified under the broad category of AI-related ethics frameworks, which after application of the exclusion criteria resulted in a final list of n = 39
ethics tools see Appendix 1. The documents were analysed
using qualitative content analysis , through the development of a codebook of variables to identify key features
(see Table 9 below). This was an iterative process where the
codes were refined during the process of reading and coding
the material.
The terms impact assessment and audit are used in differing ways in the domain of AI ethics tools made coding of
these documents complex. As Carrier and Brown note,
there is much ambiguity over the use of the term ‘audit’ in
relation to AI ethical assessment being used by what they
term as the ‘AI ethics industry’. Across the landscape of AI
ethics audit and impact assessment tools, terms are often
used loosely, or are used interchangeably. In a recent Ada
Lovelace Institute report, ‘Examining the black box’, algorithmic audit is into divided into two types, a narrow ‘bias
audit’ or a broader ‘regulatory inspection’ which addresses
‘compliance with regulation or norms, necessitating a number of different tools and methods, typically performed by
regulators or auditing professionals’ [99, p. 3]. Algorithmic
impact assessment is divided into an ex ante risk assessment,
and what the report terms an ‘algorithmic impact evaluation’ which assesses the effects of an application after use
[99, p. 4]. The codes reflect a decision by the researchers to
define ‘impact assessment’ as an ex ante process which was
predicting possible impacts, with audit being an ex-postprocess for examining ongoing activities. This is not necessarily reflected in the language of the documents themselves,
depending on the author and field or discipline from which
they originated.
The coding process was consisted of reading and re-reading the documents and coding them against the typologies to
create the results (see Table 10). The research methodology
used is a reflexive and adaptive , creating a robust process for relating the document data to their context as shown
in the diagram in Fig. 3. Despite this, the limited size of the
team analysing and coding the documents presents a limitation in that often validity of qualitative analysis is considered
to be justified by the process of recurrent iterations with different coders . Despite this limitation, we believe we
have made every effort, from the conception and planning of
the project, through to development of typologies and coding
of results, to consider where bias and omission could occur
in the process . We believe we have developed categories for assessing AI ethics tools that reliably surface salient
features which can be used to compare across disparate types
of tool or procedure.
We also have not set out to provide an exhaustive review
of the computational techniques in the AI/ML research to
address ethical issues like fairness and explainability, for
this, see for example .
Table 7   Typology of technical
and design tools
Technical and design tools
Workshop materials
Materials produced for use by design teams as workshop or discursive events
e.g. scenarios, design cards, agile design events
Documentation
Technical documentation like logs and incident reports, technical descriptions
Technical tools
Specific technical applications for addressing issues like privacy, security,
bias, transparency, provenance in models and data
Table 8   Typology of when tool used and if applied to data and/or model
Stage in process tool used/applied to data and/or model
Business/use case
A problem space, or area for improvement is identified, and the use case and business case are developed
Business case is translated into design requirements for engineers
Training data collection
Training and test data are identified, collated, cleaned and prepared for training the model
AI application is built
The system is tested
Deployment
The system goes live
Monitoring
System performance is monitored as it performs in the wild
Procurement of system
Third party buys system for their own use
Depending on the focus of the tool, either the data pipeline is the main object of assessment, or the model itself
AI and Ethics 2:405–429
4  Results
The data set of 39 proposed tools for ethical AI was coded
using the typologies developed from the literature review
of sectors, stakeholders, historical practice, and stages in
AI production process, and shown in Table 10. The documents are arranged in ascending year of publication, with
the majority of documents being produced in in 2019/2020,
2020 comprising half the total. Some judgement was
required in coding these documents as to whether they were
an impact assessment or audit, as the terms are used with
varying meanings across the AI ethics documents.
Key findings:
• The focus has moved from data to models from 2017
to 2020. Earlier documents were often concerned with
issues around ‘big data’, with concerns shifting to models and algorithms. This does not mean that data are not
considered in these later iterations 2:405–429
• Contrac ng of
external auditor,
building of audit
Risk Assessment
misrepor ng
risks, sector
speciﬁc risks and
regulatory
environment
Audit strategy
• Includes design
of tests for
controls and
veriﬁca on of
Evidence gathering
• Scep cal
evalua on of
evidence spplied
and use of tests
and external
veriﬁca on
• Final repor ng of
audit opinion
Fig. 1   Audit process
Table 10   Overall results for coded document set (n = 39) (see Appendix 1 for document details)
AI and Ethics 2:405–429
and test data), but the focus shifts from a more traditional
data protection approach.
• Stakeholder types directly using the tools are clustered
around the product development phase of AI (developers, delivery, quality assurance), with the output from the
tools (reporting) being used by management Decision-
• There is little participation in the assessment or audit
process by certain stakeholder groups (Voiceless, Vested
Interests and Users) who are not included in the process
of applying the tools or interacting with the outputs as
tools for transparency or decision-making. Perhaps most
surprising is how little inclusion there is of Users/Customers in these tools.
• Nearly all of the tools are for Internal Self-assessment,
with only the IEEE standards requiring any kind of external verification, and the two examples of public registers
providing explicit transparency.
• Techniques and practices deployed by other forms of
Impact Assessment (like EIAs) are not present or rarely
suggested in ethical AI impact assessments (Participation
process, Baseline study, Life-cycle assessment, Change
measurement or Expert committees.)
• Checklists/questionnaires are ubiquitous across Impact
Assessment tools. Audit tools less frequently use Checklists but do require Documentation of processes.
• The output from the tools can provide documentation
for Oversight from external actors, but as the majority
are internal activities, there is generally no process or
requirement for the wider publication of the results of
these tools.
Fig. 2   Flow diagram of methodology
Fig. 3   Sector produced by/for use by
AI and Ethics 2:405–429
• A third of the Impact Assessment tools focus on Procurement processes for AI systems from 3rd-party vendors,
indicating the need for not only producers of AI products
to engage with ethical assessment, but also the customers
for these products, who will be the ones deploying the
Figure 3 illustrates the main sectors who are either producing ethical AI tools, and compares this to those sectors
for whom the tool is intended for use. It shows the main sectors targeted by ethics tools are the public and private sector,
which reflects the main sectors where AI systems are being
designed and produced (private sector), and the concerns
around deployment of AI in public sector institutions. There
is also interest from the academic community in AI ethics
tools and how to address these issues, with the not-for-profit
sector (civil society, NGO’s and think tanks) also looking
to provide solutions to ethical issues in AI production and
deployment, although not-for-profit are not producers of AI
systems, some sectors of not-for-profit (like development
agencies) do deploy these systems. It is interesting to note
that it can be difficult to separate academic research from
private, corporate research in AI as there is strong cross-fertilization between these, with scientists moving between sectors, and technology companies funding their own research
outputs, and funding university research.
Figure 4 shows the number of tools that include which
type of stakeholder in their terms of reference either as producers of artifacts, or consumers of the product. For example, a developer team uses an ethics tool to assess a system
which produces an output (e.g. report). This output can then
be released to other stakeholders who can act on or respond
to the findings. As might be expected, the stakeholders who
are likely to be applying the tool are mainly in the production side of AI systems (developer, quality assurance and
delivery roles), with the results of the tool being used by
decision-makers and senior staff. The tools can also comprise evidence for shareholders and citizens, and oversight
bodies. Despite participation processes being recommended
in some impact assessments (see Fig. 5 Impact Assessment
Tools), we can see that the range of stakeholders involved
in the proposed tools only really captures those involved in
producing AI systems, or procuring them, and wider stakeholders (to whom negative impacts of deployment of an AI
system actually accrue, i.e. users and wider stakeholders in
society) are not included in these processes.
Fig. 4   Stakeholder applying
tool vs stakeholder using product from tool
Fig. 5   Impact assessment tools
Fig. 6   Audit tools
AI and Ethics 2:405–429
Figure 5 represents the number of component tools used
within an Impact Assessment. A checklist or questionnaire
is used in all 16 Impact Assessments coded in the study (as
compared to only 4/16 audit tools Fig. 6 Audit Tools). It is
a structured way to record proposals, decisions and actions,
and can also be used to embed a governance process for
the process of applying an ethical tool. Risk assessments
were also commonly included, often embedded as part of
the checklist process. Impact assessments were also used
as part of a procurement process to assess ethical impacts
and risks of purchasing an AI system. Unlike other types
of impact assessment like EIA, little attention was paid to
measurement of baseline conditions or predicting change.
There were also omissions in these proposed tools for AI
which did not include the types of impacts that would be
measured in a life-cycle assessment for a product or process,
leaving out key considerations like resource or energy use
and sustainability.
Figure 6 shows the tools types identified in ethics tools
that are categorised as audits. The focus of these is on appropriate documentation for verification and assurance in the
audit process, the reporting process and on having appropriate governance mechanisms in place.
Figure 7 illustrates whether the ethical tool is an internal
assessment or audit, as opposed to a verification process
from a 3rd party. External verification only occurs in 5 of
the 35 tools analysed, surfacing in either the certified standards from IEEE or in tools like incident databases which are
designed for transparency.
Figure 8 breaks down these tools into workshop and
design tools, forms of technical documentation, and tools
for testing or monitoring data and models. The workshop
materials do not fit into an impact assessment or audit framework and are not designed to provide verifiable evidence of
process, but more to elicit ‘ethical thinking’ from design
teams, unlike the documentation tools which can provide
evidence for audits. The technical tests are part of creating
robust systems and can also provide an audit trail.
Figure 9 illustrates the stage in the production process
pipeline that the proposed tools apply to, and also categorises these tools depending on whether they are focused on
the data or the model. Many of the tools are designed for
use early in the process—at the use case and design phase,
where the main focus on the model is found. The attention
to the model is also more marked in the deployment and procurement process, with data also being an important object
for assessment early in the process.
5  Discussion
Reviewing the landscape of tools for applying ethical principles to AI, our research reveals some key themes emerging. Emerging from our analysis, there are three key areas
where tools are being developed—impact assessment, audit
and technical/design tools. As Fig. 10 illustrates, these
approaches target different stages of AI system development
and provide different outcomes. Ex ante impact assessments
are used at the early stages of use case development, and for
procurement processes to provide a predictive decision-making tool for whether a proposed AI system should progress to
development and/or be deployed or purchased and what are
Fig. 7   Internal/self-assessment vs external/3rd-party assessment/audit
Fig. 8   Technical and design tools
Fig. 9   Stage in process tool applied
AI and Ethics 2:405–429
the possible impacts of its use. Ex post impact assessment
is used as a post-deployment tool to capture the impacts of a
system, often in comparison to a particular set of stakeholders, or issues like impact on human rights or democracy.
Audit tools showed an equal level of presence in our study
to impact assessment which can be used for assurance of
production and monitoring purposes. Audit processes traditionally follow well-defined systematic processes that
require third-party verification. There is some confusion in
the current landscape between a technical intervention (often
called an audit e.g. for fairness or bias), and what is more
generally understood business practice of formal auditing
 . In our study, we have differentiated between those tools
that more closely resemble other comparable audits, and categorised tools for specific aspects of the assessment of data
training sets or models as technical tools—not audits. Technical tools do have an important role to play in addressing
ethical issues in AI systems, but ultimately need to be part
of a wider governance process. The documentation produced
by these tools should form part of impact assessment and
audit processes in order that all ethical aspects of a product
can be captured (not just a focus on, e.g. metrics for fairness
 ). In Fig. 8, Technical and Design Tools have been
incorporated into the model as an input to the category of
auditable artifacts which are necessary for evidence in both
impact assessments and audits.
This study contributes to the discussion about ethical AI
by clarifying the different themes emerging in this landscape. It also serves to illustrate how complex this landscape is, and as others have noted ,
this provides a barrier to those developing or purchasing AI
systems as to which tool is appropriate for their purposes.
Addressing ethical issues systematically requires resource
and time, familiarity with assessment/audit regimes and the
ability to use the outputs of these tools to make judgements.
Even with the aid of procedures and processes to surface
ethical risks, there are still difficult judgements to be made
in the real world. Competing claims between different actors,
balancing protection and benefits and differing ethical viewpoints mean that even the most rigorously applied tools will
still require complex human judgements. As Floridi 
observes ‘there is no ethics without choices, responsibilities,
and moral evaluations, all of which need a lot of relevant and
reliable information and quite a good management of it.’
Ethical tools can though, provide a reliable evidence base
on which to make decisions, but without robust oversight
may result in procedures that produce a checklist mentality
and performative gestures that constitute ‘ethics washing’
 .
An important finding from our research also puts in
plain sight the fact that these tools are emerging in a landscape where there currently there are no specific regulatory regimes or legislation for AI systems. In Fig. 8, the
top-level—Regulation and Standards—has no direct connection to the processes below. This means that these tools
are for voluntary self-regulation without external governance mechanisms where third-party agents can interrogate
the process and decisions. As Raab notes, ‘an organisation
or profession that simply marks its own homework cannot
make valid claims to be trustworthy’ [13, p. 13]. Impact
assessment and audit practices in other domains as discussed
above sit within national and international regulation and
provide for external verification and assurance. Metcalf
et al. conclude that historically impact assessments
Fig. 10   Process model for application of tools
AI and Ethics 2:405–429
are tools for evaluation that operate within relationships of
accountability between different stakeholder groups. As our
analysis reveals there is currently a focus in AI ethics tools
on a narrow group of internal stakeholders, with little transparency or accountability to wider stakeholders. In order for
those who build AI products and services, and those who
buy them, to provide credible and trustworthy governance of
this technology, external verification, means of redress and
contestation by different stakeholder groups, and methods
of control for wrongdoing are required.
There are moves now to draft legislation to address the
specific problems AI systems can produce with the EU leading the global pack with its recently published ‘Proposal
for a Regulation laying down harmonised rules on artificial
intelligence’ . It proposes a risk-based approach to AI
regulation, proposing an audit regime which will strengthen
enforcement and sets out ‘new requirements for documentation, traceability and transparency… The framework will
envisage specific measures supporting innovation, including regulatory sandboxes and specific measures supporting
small-scale users and providers of high-risk AI systems
to comply with the new rules’ [110, p. 10]. China is also
working on these challenges with new regulation being proposed for data protection which includes processing using
AI techniques, and specific new regulation for applications
like facial recognition and autonomous vehicles .
In the US, a surprisingly strongly worded blog by the
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) states that companies building or deploying AI should be ‘using transparency
frameworks and independent standards, by conducting and
publishing the results of independent audits, and by opening
your data or source code to outside inspection your statements to business customers and consumers alike must be
truthful, non-deceptive, and backed up by evidence.’ The
post makes reference to a range of existing laws which might
be applied to AI products and warns ‘keep in mind that if
you don’t hold yourself accountable, the FTC may do it for
you’ . As Bryson argues ‘All human activity, particularly commercial activity, occurs in the context of some sort
of regulatory framework’ [114, p. 8]. Providing assurance
of the safety, security and reliability of a project, product
or system is the basis for the impact assessment and audit
traditions discussed in this paper, the practices of which can
be usefully applied to the domain of AI. It should also be
noted that these traditions sit within established legal and
regulatory frameworks. AI will need a similar regulatory
ecosystem, which are being developed across jurisdictions,
but yet to be formally adopted. Future work could usefully
deploy typologies based on existing regulations and standards to map where gaps exist.
Our findings also serve to illustrate the confusion in language and approach to what are understood as the key features of impact assessment and audit. The latest thinking
emerging from the UK Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation (CDEI) echoes the findings in our research, recognising
the need for clarification around AI ethics methodologies in
practice . The CDEI categorises the difference between
impact assessment and audit and assurance in a similar way
to our mapping in Fig. 8, which they divide into compliance
assurance (audit), and risk assurance (impact assessment)
which are used at different stages of the process and meet
different needs. ‘The current discourse sometimes mistakenly calls on risk assurance tools like impact assessments
to achieve the goals of Compliance, leading to complex and
burdensome efforts to address common challenges. Meanwhile, sometimes compliance mechanisms like audits are
discussed as if they can achieve loftier goals—an exercise
which may be better suited to Risk Assurance tools like
impact assessments’ . Clarifying the types of tools
appropriate for which assessment and governance outcomes,
and implementing well-regulated compliance regimes for
producers of AI systems would be a great step towards
effectively operationalising the ethical principles and concerns motivating the production of AI ethics tools. A note
of caution though on how effective regulation might be, see
for example, the recent European Parliament resolution on
UK protection of personal data where concern is expressed
‘about the lack and often non-existent enforcement of the
GDPR by the UK when it was still a member of the EU;
points, in particular, to the lack of proper enforcement by
the UK Information Commissioner’s (ICO’s) Office in the
past’ [116, p. 6].
We also found gaps in the inclusion of a wide range of
stakeholders in the process of AI ethics tools. As Fig. 2 illustrates, current tools, not surprisingly, are designed for use
by those in the production process of AI systems and the
key decision-makers around that process. Participation in
these tools was found to be limited beyond these core stakeholders, except for tools explicitly focused on participation
processes . There is a long tradition in HCI of Participatory Design (PD), and Human/Ethically/Value-centred
Design , which have been wrestling with the problem
of inclusion and participation in the process of design and
production of ICT systems . Participatory processes
have also been addressed in pTA where governance of
emerging technology includes deliberative public forums
 , and research organisations like the Ada Lovelace
Institute enabling ‘informed and complex public dialogue
about technology, policy and values, and represent the voice
of the public in debates around data and AI’ .
Including wider stakeholders presents challenges at the
level of companies producing AI systems, as it is time and
resource heavy and requires particular sets of skills not necessarily present in developer teams . Participation is also
about power, who has the power to decide, who is invited to
the table, whose views and goals take precedence. As Beck
AI and Ethics 2:405–429
pointed out in the field of PD ‘rather than participation, concern with power and dominance needs to be stated as the core
of the research field’ [118, p. 77]. Who should decide on the
design and use/non-use of AI systems is often framed as a
‘project of expert oversight’, giving little or no input to those
stakeholders subject to AI systems , and where the process can become a form of ‘participation washing’ . This
is where informed public debate must feed into regulation and
the law, to ensure appropriate governance is in place to protect
rights and represent the views of all stakeholders in a society.
6  Conclusion
This work provides an analysis of the AI guidelines and
frameworks that have practical tools to operationalise ethical concerns. By reviewing best practices from historical
frameworks created to assess the effects of technology on the
environment , information privacy , data protection
 and human rights , we create a typology of concerns
that previous generations of impact assessments and audits
have found beneficial to consider. Using this typology, we
examine the current crop of AI and data ethical guidelines
and frameworks.
The available guidelines cluster around the product development phase of AI and are focused on being used by and
documenting the concerns from mainly developers, delivery, and quality assurance roles. The reporting output from
these tools is then used by management decision-makers
as opposed to inform the developers of better practice, or
any other stakeholders. Moreover, there is little participation
in the assessment or audit process by certain stakeholder
groups, particularly the voiceless, vested interests and users,
who are not included in the process of applying the tools or
interacting with the outputs as tools for transparency or decision-making. Nearly all of the tools available are for internal self-assessment, with only the IEEE standards requiring
any kind of external verification, and the two examples of
public registers providing explicit transparency. In addition
to missing large stakeholder groups, the current set of AI
Guidelines and tools do not fully utilize the full range of
techniques available, including: participation process, baseline study, life-cycle assessment, change measurement or
expert committees. Finally, we note that there is no regulatory requirement for any utilization of impact assessments
or audits within this field at the moment, minimizing likely
adoption and true application of them.
Appendix 1: Source documents
URL DOI ISBN
Access date
Risks, Harms and
Benefits Assessment
UN Global Pulse
UN Global Pulse
 
lse.​org/​policy/​risk-​asses​
27/06/2018
AI and Big Data:
A blueprint for a
human rights, social
and ethical impact
assessment
Mantelero, Alessandro
Computer Law & Security
 
clsr.​2018.​05.​017
17/05/2019
ALGORITHMIC
IMPACT ASSESS-
MENTS: A PRAC-
TICAL FRAME-
PUBLIC AGENCY
ACCOUNTABIL-
Reisman, Dillon;
Schultz, Jason;
Crawford, Kate;
Whittaker, Meredith
AI Now Institute
 
aiare​port2​018.​pdf
24/06/2019
An Ethical Toolkit for
Engineering/Design
Shannon, V; McKenna, D
Markkula Center for
Applied Ethics, Santa
Clara University
 
in-​techn​ology-​pract​ice/​
ethic​al-​toolk​it/
14/09/2019
Ethical Data and Information Management:
Concepts, Tools and
O'Keefe, Katherine;
Brien, Daragh O
Kogan Page Ltd
978-0-7494-8205-3
15/01/2020
Ethical OS
Institute for the
Future; Omidyar
Ethical.os
 
13/06/2019
AI and Ethics 2:405–429
URL DOI ISBN
Access date
Ethics & Algorithms
Toolkit (beta)
GovEx; City and
County of San
Francisco; Harvard DataSmart;
Data Community
Ethicstoolkit.ai
 
27/01/2020
AI Fairness 360
IBM Research
aif360.mybluemix.net/
12/01/2020
AI Procurement in a
World Economic
World Economic Forum
 
repor​ts/​ai-​procu​rement-​
in-a-​box/
13/10/2020
AI-RFX Procurement
The Institute for
Ethical AI &
Machine Learning
 
18/06/2019
Algorithmic Impact
Assessment (AIA)
Secretariat, Treasury Board of
Government of Canada
 
gover​nment/​system/​digit​
al-​gover​nment/​modern-​
emerg​ing-​techn​ologi​es/​
respo​nsible-​use-​ai/​algor​
ithmic-​impact-​asses​
sment.​html
27/06/2019
Codex for Data- Based
Value Creation
Swiss Alliance for
Data-Intensive
Services Expert
Swiss Alliance for Data-
Intensive Services
www.​data-​servi​ce-​allia​nce.​
16/03/2020
Consequence Scanning – doteveryone
Doteveryone
Doteveryone.org
 
uk/​proje​ct/​conse​quence-​
scann​ing/
18/06/2019
IBM Watson Open-
 
en/​cloud/​watson-​opens​
13/11/2020
IEEE SA—The Ethics
Certification Program for Autonomous and Intelligent
Systems (ECPAIS)
IEEE Standards
Association
 
indus​try-​conne​ctions/​
ecpais.​html
30/08/2019
Judgment Call the
Game: Using Value
Sensitive Design
and Design Fiction
to Surface Ethical
Concerns Related to
Technology
Ballard, Stephanie;
Chappell, Karen
M.; Kennedy,
Proceedings of the 2019
on Designing Interactive
Systems Conference
 
33222​76.​33236​97
16/11/2020
Model Cards for
Model Reporting
Mitchell, Margaret;
Wu, Simone;
Zaldivar, Andrew;
Barnes, Parker;
Vasserman, Lucy;
Hutchinson, Ben;
Spitzer, Elena;
Raji, Inioluwa
Deborah; Gebru,
asXiv Working Paper
 
32875​60.​32875​96
25/09/2019
Model Ethical Data
Impact Assessment
Information Accountability
Foundation
 
ility.​org/​publi​catio​ns/
08/12/2019
ODI Data Ethics
 
data-​ethics-​canvas/
27/06/2019
AI and Ethics 2:405–429
URL DOI ISBN
Access date
Understanding artificial intelligence
ethics and safety:
A guide for the
responsible design
and implementation
of AI systems in the
public sector
Leslie, David
The Alan Turing Institute
 
13/01/2020
A Proposed Model
AI Governance
Framework—Second
PDPC Singapore
Personal Data Protection
Commission Singapore
 
resou​rces/​model-​ai-​gov
12/01/2020
AI Blindspot: A Discovery Process for
preventing, detecting, and mitigating
bias in AI systems
Calderon, A; Taber,
D; Qu, H; Wen, J
 
09/11/2020
Algorithm Register
City of Amsterdam
City of Amsterdam
 
nl/​wonen-​leefo​mgevi​ng/​
innov​atie/​de-​digit​ale-​stad/​
grip-​op-​algor​itmes/
27/11/2020
Assessment List for
Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence
(ALTAI) for selfassessment
EU HLEG AI
European Commission
 
eu/​en/​europ​ean-​ai-​allia​
nce/​pages/​altai-​asses​
sment-​list-​trust​worthy-​
artif​icial-​intel​ligen​ce
30/08/2020
Closing the AI
Accountability Gap:
Defining an End-to-
End Framework for
Internal Algorithmic
Raji, Inioluwa
Deborah; Smart,
Andrew; White,
Rebecca N;
Mitchell, Margaret; Gebru, Timnit; Hutchinson,
Ben; Smith-Loud,
Jamila; Theron,
Daniel; Barnes,
FAT*’20 Barcelona
 
10.​1145/​33510​95.​33728​
16/11/2020
Co-Designing Checklists to Understand
Organizational
Challenges and
Opportunities around
Fairness in AI
Madaio, Michael
A.; Stark,
Luke; Wortman
Vaughan, Jennifer; Wallach,
Proceedings of the 2020
CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems
 
33138​31.​33764​45
08/10/2020
Corporate Digital
Responsibility
Lobschat, Lara;
Mueller, Benjamin; Eggers,
Felix; Brandimarte, Laura; Diefenbach, Sarah;
Kroschke, Mirja;
Wirtz, Jochen
Journal of Business
 
jbusr​es.​2019.​10.​006
28/01/2020
Data Ethics Framework
 
nment/​publi​catio​ns/​data-​
ethics-​frame​work/​data-​
ethics-​frame​work-​legis​
lation-​and-​codes-​of-​pract​
ice-​for-​use-​of-​data
13/10/2020
AI and Ethics 2:405–429
URL DOI ISBN
Access date
Datasheets for Datasets
Gebru, Timnit;
Morgenstern,
Jamie; Vecchione,
Briana; Vaughan,
Jennifer Wortman;
Wallach, Hanna;
Daumé III, Hal;
Crawford, Kate
 
 
12/06/2020
Empowering AI Leadership
World Economic
World Economic Forum
 
page/​RsXNk​ZANwM​
30/09/2020
Fairlearn: A toolkit
for assessing and
improving fairness
Bird, Sarah; Dudík,
Miroslav; Edgar,
Richard; Horn,
Brandon; Lutz,
Roman; Milan,
Vanessa; Sameki,
Mehrnoosh;
Wallach, Hanna;
Walker, Kathleen;
Design, Allovus
 
en-​us/​resea​rch/​uploa​ds/​
prod/​2020/​05/​Fairl​earn_​
White​Paper-​2020-​09-​22.​
13/10/2020
IEEE Draft Model
Process for Addressing Ethical Concerns
During System
Design P7000/D3
IEEE Standards
Association
 
proje​ct/​7000.​html
04/06/2020
IEEE Recommended
Practice for Assessing the Impact of
Autonomous and
Intelligent Systems
on Human Well-
Being Std 7010
IEEE Standards
Association
 
indus​try-​conne​ctions/​ec/​
auton​omous-​syste​ms.​html
30/08/2020
Responsible AI
TensorFlow
Tensorflow.org
 
resou​rces/​respo​nsible-​ai
02/11/2020
Standard Clauses for
Municipalities for
Fair Use of Algorithmic Systems
City of Amsterdam
City of Amsterdam
 
nl/​wonen-​leefo​mgevi​ng/​
innov​atie/​de-​digit​ale-​stad/​
grip-​op-​algor​itmes/
27/11/2020
Toward situated interventions for algorithmic equity: lessons
from the field
Katell, Michael;
Young, Meg;
Dailey, Dharma;
Herman, Bernease; Guetler, Vivian; Tam, Aaron;
Binz, Corinne;
Raz, Daniella;
Krafft, P. M
Proceedings of the 2020
Conference on Fairness,
Accountability, and Transparency
 
33510​95.​33728​74
28/01/2020
Value-based Engineering for Ethics by
Spiekermann,
Sarah; Winkler,
IEEE pre-print
 
06/10/2020
Welcome to the Artificial Intelligence
Incident Database
Partnership on AI
The Partnership on AI
 
21/11/2020
White Paper on Data
Ethics in Public
Procurement of AIbased Services and
Hasselbalch, Gry;
Olsen, B; Tranberg, P
DataEthics.eu
 
conte​nt/​uploa​ds/​datae​
thics-​white​paper-​april-​
25/08/2020
AI and Ethics 2:405–429
Appendix 2: Abbreviations
Cost–Benefit Analysis
UK Centre for Date Ethics and Innovation
Data Protection Impact Analysis
Environmental Impact Assessment
Environmental Risk Assessment
Financial Impact Assessment
Ethical Technology Assessment
Fair Information Practices
US Federal Trade Commission
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
EU General Data Protection Regulation
International Financial Reporting Standards
Participatory Design
Participatory Technology Assessment
Social Impact Analysis
Technology Assessment
Funding  Supported by EPSRC funding via Web Science CDT.
Availability of data and material  All data contained within paper.
Declarations
Conflict of interest  No conflicts.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
copy of this licence, visit