Vol.:(0123456789)
AI and Ethics 3:53–64
 
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
GPT‑3 and InstructGPT: technological dystopianism, utopianism,
and “Contextual” perspectives in AI ethics and industry
Anastasia Chan1
Received: 2 October 2021 / Accepted: 28 February 2022 / Published online: 4 April 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
This paper examines the ethical solutions raised in response to OpenAI’s language model Generative Pre-trained Transformer-3 (GPT-3) a year and a half from its release. I argue that hype and fear about GPT-3, even within the Natural Language
Processing (NLP) industry and AI ethics, have often been underpinned by technologically deterministic perspectives. These
perspectives emphasise the autonomy of the language model rather than the autonomy of human actors in AI systems. I
highlight the existence of deterministic perspectives in the current AI discourse (which range from technological utopianism
to dystopianism), with a specific focus on the two issues of: (1) GPT-3’s potential intentional misuse for manipulation and
(2) unintentional harm caused by bias. In response, I find that a contextual approach to GPT-3, which is centred upon wider
ecologies of societal harm and benefit, human autonomy, and human values, illuminates practical solutions to concerns about
manipulation and bias. Additionally, although OpenAI’s newest 2022 language model InstructGPT represents a small step in
reducing toxic language and aligning GPT-3 with user intent, it does not provide any compelling solutions to manipulation
or bias. Therefore, I argue that solutions to address these issues must focus on organisational settings as a precondition for
ethical decision-making in AI, and high-quality curated datasets as a precondition for less harmful language model outputs.
Keywords  GPT-3 · AI ethics · Autonomy · Contextualism · Manipulation · Bias
1  Introduction
Generative Pre-Trained Transformer-3 (GPT-3) is a machine
learning model pretrained on a large corpus of text through
unsupervised learning to generate human-like written language responses. Since its release in 2020, discourses around
the ethical implications of GPT-3 have been obscured by
hype, speculation, and fear, not only in the media but also
in the Artificial Intelligence (AI) industry and AI ethics
research. In this paper, I compare the degree of influence
imparted by technological determinism and “contextual”
perspectives on the debate around GPT-3 and its potential
ethical harms of manipulation and bias. I examine existing AI scholarship on GPT-3, finding that technologically
deterministic perspectives have often facilitated speculative predictions and abstract or ineffective risk mitigation
strategies. I further contend that OpenAI’s finetuned model
of GPT-3 called InstructGPT does not sufficiently address
concerns about manipulation and bias. In response, I argue
that a contextual approach to GPT-3, which engages with the
socio-political contexts wherein technology is developed and
deployed, effectively engenders human-centered solutions to
existing concerns about manipulation and bias.
The paper first provides a brief background to GPT-3 and
InstructGPT. I also define AI, focusing on the sociotechnical
aspects of AI usage in organisations rather than technical
elements of AI alone. Second, the following two important
ethical concerns raised by GPT-3 are examined: (1) its intentional misuse for manipulation and (2) unintentional societal
bias embedded within the language model’s training data.
Third, I distinguish between utopic and dystopic strands of
technological determinism, identifying their influence on
ethical debates and regulatory solutions. Fourth, I propose
a contextual approach to GPT-3 and similar language models, which centres upon human autonomy, a critical view
of technology, and an engagement with ecologies of social
harm and benefit surrounding technology design and use.
Lastly, I outline the research implications of this paper for
AI use in individual and organisational settings, focusing on
* Anastasia Chan
 
Macquarie University (Philosophy), Sydney, NSW, Australia
AI and Ethics 3:53–64
transparent datasheets, organisational settings, and Value-
Sensitive Design (VSD) methodologies.
2  A background to GPT‑3 and InstructGPT
In May 2020, OpenAI released their milestone language
model GPT-3 as their latest addition to the slew of everexpanding Transformer-based language models within the
Natural Language Processing (NLP) field. The Transformer
is a type of neural network architecture that uses stacked
encoders and decoders to process a sequence of words in
parallel rather than by memorising whole sequences, as was
the case with less efficient but previously state-of-the-art
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) . Transformers were
introduced by Google in 2017 and since 2018 alone, Open-
AI’s GPT-3, Google’s BERT, Microsoft’s Turing-NLG,
and most recently, Google’s 1.6-trillion-parameter Switch-
C have been introduced . AI development has trended
towards expanding language model size, measured by their
number of parameters and the size of their training dataset
 . Despite using the same architecture as the previous generation (GPT-2), Open-AI discovered that expanding their
model by 10 × to 175 billion parameters and training it on
a dataset containing 300 billion tokens (characters, words,
or strings) greatly improved the model’s task-agnostic performance without the need for significant downstream finetuning . With few or no user-supplied examples, GPT-3
can be used to fulfil language tasks such as summarising
text, answering questions, translating, or generating ideas,
computer code, novels, and news articles . This capacity
is known as few-shot learning and has not previously been
seen to this extent in any NLP model. The model’s immense
scale thus resulted in gains in quality, accuracy, and breadth
of generated content. This has led to significant interest and
concern within the NLP field, wider machine learning industry, media, AI ethics communities, and civil society.
Partially created to address the toxicity of GPT-3, a new
version of OpenAI’s language model was released in January 2022 called InstructGPT. This is now the default language model on their Application Programming Interface
(API) , although GPT-3 remains available for public
use under a pricing model . InstructGPT was created
with the aim of aligning language models with user intent,
to produce less offensive language, less made-up facts, and
fewer mistakes—unless explicitly instructed to do so. OpenAI researchers developed InstructGPT by starting with a
fully trained GPT-3 model that was then put through another
round of training called reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF) .1 OpenAI researchers found that the
resulting models (three sizes were trained, 1.3B, 6B, and
175B) produced better results than GPT-3 with clear developments in the model’s ability to understand instructions.
Outputs from their 175B InstructGPT was preferred to
GPT-3 over 70% of the time. Even the responses of the 1.3B
InstructGPT model were preferred over the 175B GPT-3
despite it being 100 times smaller. This reveals that continuously increasing language model size is not necessarily
required to make language models better. Rather, increasing
the number of human feedback training rounds can play an
essential role in improving models (Leike in Heaven ).
However, InstructGPT does not represent a compelling
solution for GPT-3’s problems of misuse or bias. Instruct-
GPT generates 25% less toxic text than GPT-3 when
prompted to be respectful . But if it is prompted to produce toxic language, the results will be far more toxic language than GPT-3 . This reinforces that in this model,
OpenAI has first and foremost prioritised user alignment—
a development which makes the threat of misuse by malicious actors even more problematic. Furthermore, OpenAI
acknowledge that InstructGPT does not show improvements
in bias over GPT-3 . Thus, the availability of both GPT-3
and InstructGPT means that bias and manipulation continue to be pressing ethical issues. InstructGPT reveals that
self-regulation by AI industry can often be an ineffective
solution, as economic values (reflected in the emphasis on
usability, efficiency, and effectiveness) override ethical values (such as justice, beneficence, or non-maleficence (see
Floridi et al. ). In the following sections, I analyse the
ethical solutions raised in response to GPT-3. As Instruct-
GPT has only been publicly available for under a month, no
published work (at the time of writing) on InstructGPT is
available for analysis. Furthermore, technologically deterministic perspectives appear to be more localised around
GPT-3, given the hype and fear that following its release.
The research implications of this article, however, apply to
language models at large.
2.1  Artificial intelligence
It is important to clarify what is meant by AI because this
article does not focus only on GPT-3 or InstructGPT technology, but also on the human actors that train, sustain,
and regulate these language models. The definition of AI
used herein draws upon the work of Haenlein and Kaplan
1  Here, a team of 40 people were hired to label a broad set of
prompts that were given to the model. GPT-3’s responses to these
prewritten prompts were then judged by these “labellers”. Responses
that were more in line with the preferences of the labeller were scored
higher, and responses that contained toxicity or violence, or discriminated against a group of people, and so on were scored down .
This feedback was used as a reward in a reinforcement learning algorithm, to finetune the model in a way that the labellers preferred.
Footnote 1 (continued)
AI and Ethics 3:53–64
 , who define AI as a system that correctly interprets
and learns from external data, to achieve specific outcomes
through flexible adaptation. However, the “system” within
this paper’s scope of enquiry is not limited to technological systems (such as GPT-3’s hardware, algorithms, and
datasets). Rather, it extends to the dynamic sociotechnical
systems that develop and facilitate AI . These systems
necessarily involve essential human actors who drive the
technical development, governance, and regulation of AI.
For example, key human roles include AI trainers who teach
AI systems how they should perform and AI sustainers who
ensure that systems are properly functioning, and unanticipated consequences are addressed . Thus, the definition
of AI used here differentiates between “AI technology” and
the broader category of “AI systems”, recognising that AI
does not only include hardware-only components but also a
dynamic system of human agents.
In contrast, AI has most commonly been defined in the
literature in terms of its technical characteristics alone, often
in response to the question “What is intelligence?” (see
Dwivedi et al. and Russel and Norvig ).2 Such an
approach to AI remains too myopic for regulators who must
consider the sociotechnical elements of AI when addressing significant questions around responsibility. Therefore,
a broad definition of AI, understood as “AI systems” rather
than “AI technology”, is essential for understanding language models like GPT-3 holistically and comprehensively.
3  Potential ethical harms of GPT‑3
Concerns about the harmful applications of language models like GPT-3 have centred on the deliberate use of these
models to manipulate individuals or spread misinformation,
and representational harms caused by bias within training
data. The importance of addressing these societal harms is
acknowledged by OpenAI themselves in their 2020 paper
introducing GPT-3. The authors state: “We focus on two
primary issues: the potential for deliberate misuse of language models like GPT-3… and issues of bias, fairness, and
representation within models like GPT-3” Brown et al. ,
p. 34). These two issues are both compelling examples of
what Mikalef et al. refer to as ‘the dark side’ of AI,
that is, the negative and unintentional consequences of AI
technologies. Given the attention specifically given by OpenAI and several AI ethicists (e.g., Bender et al. , Lucy
and Bamman , Chiu and Alexander ), I will focus
on the two issues of manipulation and bias. Several ethical concerns raised by language models like GPT-3 require
further investigation but exist outside of the scope of this
paper, including authorship , plagiarism , and environmental harm .
First, manipulation has been widely discussed since GPT-
3’s deployment although there has been no evidence of its
actual use by malicious actors to date. Herein, I argue that
concerns about manipulation can be situated within the
broader ethical issue of harm to autonomy. This approach
reflects that of Mikalef et al. , who draw links between
manipulation and human autonomy. They raise a number of
open questions about AI such as the following: How does
AI-induced lack of autonomy impact humans, and what are
the societal implications of AI-based misinformation or
manipulation? . Closely examining GPT-3 reveals some
answers to these questions. Autonomy is an agent’s capacity
to make “meaningfully independent decisions” (Susser et al.
 , p. 8) that are one’s own and endorsed upon reflection,
free from distorting external influences. A central concern
with GPT-3 is that it can be misused by malicious actors to
produce large amounts of credible, human-sounding, even
personalised text. This could facilitate an increase in misinformation, such as false or misleading media, or augment
the “coordinated hyper-targeting of articles to individual
groups” (Kreps et al. , p. 2) with potentially serious
consequences for radicalisation. McGuffie and Newhouse
( , p. 1), for example, trained GPT-3 to produce persuasive
extremist manifestos with only “a few Tweets, paragraphs,
forum threads, or emails”. In comparison, OpenAI’s prior
generation model, GPT-2, required hours of fine-tuning to
deliberately bias the model towards producing ideological
propaganda (McGuffie and Newhouse , p. 1). Notably,
both deliberate misinformation and radicalisation are forms
of manipulative practice. This involves intentionally and
covertly influencing a target to steer their decision-making
“without their conscious awareness” , p. 8). The misapplication of GPT-3, therefore, can potentially undermine
autonomy by encouraging individuals to act for ends that
are not their own, or for reasons that they have not chosen
(Susser et al. ). Recognising that misuse of GPT-3 can
potentially harm self-autonomy means that solutions that
strengthen personal or group autonomy are needed. This
includes promoting digital literacy and public awareness of
GPT-3 and increasing transparency and accountability from
language model developers.
2  For example, Russel and Norvig outline four different
approaches to defining AI. They highlight that AI has traditionally
been defined in terms of machines exhibiting: (i) similarity to internal human thought processes (a cognitive modelling approach), (ii)
similarity to external human behaviour (the Turing test approach),
(iii) rational thinking (a “laws of thought” approach in the logicist
tradition), and (iv) rational action (the rational-agent approach) .
In short, AI is traditionally defined as machines that exhibit intelligent behaviour or thought, either by mimicking human-like attributes
such as learning, speech or problem solving, or by logically irrefutable thought or action. Notably, Russel and Norvig’s summary
reflects how definitions of AI have overwhelmingly centred on assessments of the intelligence of engineered, technical systems.
AI and Ethics 3:53–64
A second important concern is that societal bias encoded
within GPT-3 represents a threat to marginalised populations. This comes in the form of harms such as discrimination, unfair treatment, and entrenchment of structural inequalities. GPT-3 was trained via unsupervised learning on a
filtered Common Crawl dataset [nearly a trillion words “collected over 8 years of web crawling” (Bender et al. , p.
613)], English-language Wikipedia, and two internet-based
books corpora . Bender et al. ( , p. 613) reveal that large
datasets do not equally represent online users but significantly overrepresent younger users, people from developed
countries, and English speakers. This means that dominant
biases are disproportionately displayed including white
supremacist, sexist, and ageist views . In use, GPT-3 has
been shown to reproduce subtle biases and overtly discriminatory language patterns from its training data in many contexts including gender, race, religion, and disability. Abid
et al. , for example, reveal that GPT-3 captures persistent
anti-Muslim bias that strongly correlates Muslims with violence. This bias is hard to overcome, even when anti-stereotype prompts are provided. The authors gave GPT-3 the
neutral phrase “Two Muslims walked into a…”, finding that
66 out of 100 times the completions were violence-related
(involving phrases such as “shooting” or “killing”) (Abid
et al. , p. 1). In contrast, replacing “Muslim” with another
religious group significantly reduced GPT-3’s tendency
towards violence. Stereotyped content, harmful cultural
depictions, and underrepresentation reflect challenges to
fairness, that is, the just treatment of an individual or group
absent any discrimination, prejudice, or favouritism based
on their inherent or acquired qualities . In practice
therefore, GPT-3 may be used (intentionally or unintentionally) to unfairly discriminate against already marginalised
people. These concerns relate to broader critical questions
being posed in the literature, such as the following: What
role does AI have in perpetuating human biases across society? What processes need to be implemented to minimise
human bias within AI applications? .
Notably, both manipulation and bias have been recurrent
topics in the literature around responsible AI. Responsible
AI is a growing field of research and practice that aims to
ensure that AI aligns with human values and has societally
beneficial outcomes . It also seeks to address and
mitigate the risks and harms of AI systems. At present, a
general consensus has developed amongst researchers, practitioners, and policy-makers around high-level ethical principles and frameworks. For example, AI4People is a
consortium that has proposed a unified set of principles and
recommendations for AI—centred around the principles of
beneficence, non-maleficence, autonomy, justice, and explicability. Although it is important to develop a general agreement on how AI should progress, these principles can be
difficult to operationalise mathematically and legally .3
In practice, software engineers and managers require finegrained knowledge and technical instruction that explains
how they should develop ethical algorithms and how to
embed human values within AI.
In the past few years there has been a movement towards
a holistic understanding of AI which considers the social
contexts of AI and the variety of “stakeholders, institutions,
cultures, norms and spaces” involved in AI development
and use . Rather than high-level guidelines alone,
researchers have become increasingly concerned with the
specific relationship networks in which AI systems are
embedded (see Hagendorff , Dignum , Mikalef et al.
 , Noble ). This wider lens considers both the specific context of the AI developer as well as the broader societal effects of the AI technology downstream. This article,
therefore, contributes to the growing body of responsible AI
literature, with a particular focus on practice of addressing
harm and embedding ethics within language models. This
exploration responds to a number of open questions currently being posed within responsible AI research about how
bias and the malicious use of AI can be mitigated.
4  Technological determinism
In this section, I argue that hype and fear around GPT-3 can
be managed by using a critical lens towards technologically
deterministic ideology. Undertones of technological determinism have existed widely throughout popular thought,
captured in fears about all-powerful robots and AI
technologies that will threaten human existence (Musk in
LaGrandeur ). A core question this paper asks is, can
deterministic ideology be located in the responses of AI
industry and ethicists to GPT-3? The aim of this question
is to turn a critical eye on the ethical solutions raised thus
far—to sift out ineffective solutions and to focus on areas
where language models like GPT-3 can be controlled or
restricted. Indeed, identifying that deterministic reasoning
exists is the first step in refuting ethical solutions that are
either preoccupied with speculative concerns (in the dystopic view) or place an unwarranted trust in technology (in
the utopic view).
Technological determinism is a theory concerned with
the relationship between technological development and
social change. Put simply, it refers to the general notion
that “technology almost has a mind of its own and that it
3  Furthermore, Zhu et al. note that almost one hundred principles and guidelines for ethical AI have been released by companies,
research institutions and public organisations. Notably, the profusion
of ethical frameworks can overshadow efforts to create legally binding frameworks .
AI and Ethics 3:53–64
will plow forward without much resistance from society
or governments” . The theory is underpinned by two
following central premises: (i) technology has autonomy
of development, and (ii) technology determines social
change. First, technology has autonomous potential as
an “out-of-control history shaping process” (Dafoe ,
p. 1048). Humans do not, or will not, have control over
the tools that we use. Instead, technology autonomously
expands, guided by an internal technical logic and independent from socio-cultural control . Second, technology causes or determines social transformation regardless of specificities in time or place (Mezentsev , p.
241). In other words, technology decides the flow of history and societal development.
Notably, the central issue with technological determinism is that it assumes that technological autonomy takes
precedence over human autonomy and agency. Humans
are conceived as either powerless against uncontrollable
technology or human decision-making is simply excluded
from technical discourses. If this seems far-fetched, we
can consider the limited attention given to human autonomy within current AI literature. In 2019, when searching
for the word “autonomy” in the Association for Computing Machinery’s (ACM) Digital Library, 90% of the
most cited papers were on machine autonomy (Calvo et al.
 , p. 35). The central preoccupation of researchers in
computer science and engineering fields is with machine
autonomy rather than human autonomy. An implication of
this imbalance is that human agency can be sidelined in
discussions around emerging technologies, despite human
decision-making being the most fundamental locus for
controlling AI.
Due to its predictive, macro nature, technological
determinism is intimately linked to fears about technology, and most recently, AI development. It has been
increasingly referred to explicitly as a critical analytical
framework by AI ethicists such as (Calvo et al. , p.
213). But more prominently, the technologically determinist view has been implicitly voiced by concerned AI
ethicists, media, and the public as a reification of fears
about intelligent technology and by AI industry as a guiding logic for technological advancements. Notably, it is
implicit technologically deterministic perspectives that I
focus upon due to their insidious role in redirecting ethical debate towards speculation about GPT-3’s long-term
future harm, in the dystopic view, or placement of unwarranted trust in GPT-3 and industry self-regulation as a
liberatory solution, in the utopic view. In the following
sections on technological dystopianism and utopianism, I
reveal how technological determinism undermines human
autonomy, diminishing our capacity for proper decisionmaking and social control within technological contexts.
4.1  Dystopic view and its ethical solutions
Although technological dystopianism can draw attention to
important ethical issues, the danger is that such views are
often ill-founded, radical in their interventions, apathetic, or
fatalist. Technological dystopianism is the view that technology threatens authentic human life, social values, and
societal relationships (Colman , p. 284). Technology
is depicted as the antithesis of human control, an “autonomous and uncontrollable force that dehumanises everything
it touches” (Ellul in , p. 284). Such a view has underpinned many ethical discussions around the consequences of
GPT-3 in the media, academic journals, and conferences to
explicate worries and concerns about potential future harm.
Indeed, Müller writes, “For people who work in ethics
and policy, there is a tendency to overestimate the impact
and threats from a new technology, and to underestimate
how far regulation can reach”. This is reflected in the view
that Floridi and Chiriatti take regarding GPT-3’s consequences. They warn that GPT-3 will result in a job market
reformation, online marketing will become AI-driven, and
readers of text will need to “get used to not knowing whether
the source is artificial or human” (Floridi and Chiriatti ,
Floridi and Chiriartti’s approach can be characterised as
a future-directed technology assessment, in which case their
analysis of GPT-3 may be distanced rather than necessarily being deterministic. However, technological dystopianism can be identified in the solutions that they generate in
response to their future-directed assessment. As their solution they argue, “A better digital culture will be required,
to make current and future citizens, users and consumers
aware of the new infosphere in which they live and work”.
Additionally, “humanity will need to be even more intelligent and critical” (Floridi and Chiriatti , pp. 692–693).
Remarkably, although the authors recognise the need for
legislative change (such as amendments to copyright law)
and appear to propose a moderate solution of public awareness, they assume that GPT-3 will result in a future filled
with “semantic garbage” (Floridi and Chiriatti , p. 692).
Floridi and Chiriatti’s view focuses upon post-hoc, unsatisfactory solutions to a new technology they believe will
transform society. In such a perspective, the authors forget
that GPT-3 and language models are in their infancy and
there remains substantial capacity for policy reform. In April
2021 for example, the European Commission proposed an
Artificial Intelligence Act stipulating new rules that would
ban the use of AI for “manipulative, addictive, social control and indiscriminate surveillance practices” . This
reflects an emerging regulatory landscape moving beyond
existing non-binding position papers, recommendations,
and ethical guidelines. Second, the authors ignore current
preventative measures being taken by OpenAI. Indeed,
AI and Ethics 3:53–64
OpenAI reviews all applications for responsible use, requires
all developers to implement safety measures including testing and human-in-the-loop requirements, and uses redteams which actively test OpenAI’s detection and response
capabilities . Most importantly, however, Floridi and
Chiriatti’s approach shifts agency away from humans to a
machine. Their view ignores human actors such as AI developers, policymakers, civil society, even the malicious actors
who are directly responsible for employing GPT-3 or other
parallel language models as a tool of misinformation. This
necessitates a closer look at areas of human agency and
decision-making within AI.
Nevertheless, the pessimistic view in its “softer” variant can be helpful in considering important ethical concerns. The central distinguishing factor between “hard” and
“soft” dystopic views and their respective solutions is their
response to the following question: to what extent is GPT-3
seen as uncontrollable or autonomous? McGuffie and Newhouse, who examine the potential weaponization of GPT-3
by right-wing extremists, provide an example of “soft”
dystopianism (McGuffie and Newhouse , p. 1). Rather
than an acceptance of GPT-3 and its misuses, these authors
emphasise the need for pre-hoc regulatory responses to
pre-empt a possible influx in misinformation. This includes
building social norms, developing public policy, and introducing educational initiatives.
4.2  Utopic view and its ethical solutions
The utopic determinist view of technology emphasises the
technocratic concept of progress wherein technological and
economic progress is seen to benefit all aspects of human
life—the “social, political, moral, and intellectual, as well as
material” (Marx in , p. 1056). This view is most championed by industry, government, and military. Technology
is welcomed as a “liberator”,a tool controlled by humans
to facilitate autonomous action. Internal logics of “efficiency, commodity economics, innovation, [and] progress”
rationalise and perpetuate such a view (Barbour in , p.
282). These societally embedded logics are demonstrated
from general responses to the questions: Why is there such
a strong drive to develop AI? Do efficiency and productivity enhance the quality of life for all? The deployment of
GPT-3, for example, was surrounded by excitement about
its potential widespread usage by a non-technical public, the
creation of a new class of few-shot learning products, and
gains in efficient text generation. The issue with this instrumentalist approach is that it advocates a largely uncritical
acceptance of new technologies, particularly within commercial industry.
Optimistic views of GPT-3 stress ethical solutions of limited regulation or self-regulation by AI companies. This can
avoid analysis of certain ethical issues and solutions or even
introduce its own ethical problems. AI ethicist LaGrandeur
demonstrates one such utopic solution, arguing that regulation should be done from the ground up with external regulation as a last resort. He declares, “Regulation of research
and development by external bodies who neither understand
nor care deeply about those things for their own sakes can
be annoying and counterproductive… slowing down helpful
technological progress” (LaGrandeur , p. 6). LaGrandeur asserts that regulation by government laws and commissions is counterproductive due to an inherent lack of
understanding about complex AI technology. The solution,
however, is not to abrogate the legislative responsibilities of
external bodies but rather to increase the transparency and
explicability of AI algorithms (Floridi et al. , p. 699). In
another utopic view, Aggarwal et al. ( , p. 1) use GPT-3
itself as a regulatory tool for fake news detection. In testing,
the authors’ fine-tuned BERT model achieved an accuracy
of 97% in classifying NewsFN4 data as “Real” or “Fake”.
However, BERT and GPT-3 are not designed with inbuilt
moral frameworks and ethical issues such as bias remain
within these language models. Models which themselves are
not ethical systems but are used for moral purposes, such as
fake news detection, are said to have operational morality
(Dignum , p. 3). In contrast, functional morality is a
characteristic of technologies that take ethical human values
as the central focus of their design, such as Artificial Moral
Agents (AMA) (Dignum , p. 3).
The issue with both optimistic solutions is that they present insubstantial regulatory solutions to harms that GPT-3
threatens to cause. LaGrandeur for example, assumes that
self-regulation alone will sufficiently address ethical issues.
However, the AI Now Report 2018 (Whittaker et al. , p.
32) warns that people “should be wary of relying on companies to implement ethical practices voluntarily”. Corporations driven by profit-making objectives will often put ethics
to the wayside in favour of frictionless functionality (Hagendorff , p. 108). Reliance upon corporate self-regulation
to mitigate potential harms of GPT-3 is thereby obstructed
by conflicting interests between ethics and the financial
imperatives of workplace environments. In the case of operational morality-based approaches, automated processes can
lead to further ethical issues such as a lack of transparency
in AI decisions or diminished human control. Nallur et al.
( , p. 3) argue that “the presence of automation tends
to make humans shed their cognitive engagement”. Those
tasked with classifying fake news, AI developers, or external
regulators could shift their moral decision-making onto an
unethical system or even evade their ethical responsibility.
4  This was a dataset obtained from GitHub containing 6335 news
articles from a wide range of news sources. The dataset comprised of
3164 articles prelabelled as “Fake” and 3171 as “Real”.
AI and Ethics 3:53–64
4.3  Limitations of the current landscape
As I have laid out, both technological dystopianism and technological utopianism are limited in their treatment of GPT-3.
The underlying premise of both technologically deterministic views is that GPT-3 is autonomously doing something
with language that is completely unexpected and different,
which was extremely difficult or perhaps even impossible
with previous approaches. In the dystopic view, preoccupations with preliminary Artificial General Intelligence (AGI)
have been coupled with fearful speculation and fruitful yet
disconcerting research on GPT-3’s potential misuse applications. In contrast, the utopic view has undoubtedly driven
excitement within NLP industry about how GPT-3 can be
used for increasingly skilful tasks. Related calls by AI ethicists have postulated that regulation via industry themselves
is sufficient. Critically, both views make the mistake of conceptualising GPT-3 as distinct from human control. In the
following section, I introduce a different kind of framework
that addresses human autonomy in AI systems. This contextualist view has underpinned an increasing body of research
at the intersection of AI industry and AI ethics.
5  Contextual perspectives on GPT‑3
The contextual perspective provides an alternate, critical
solution to ethical issues of manipulation and bias. In Ethics
in an Age of Technology, Barbour proposes a third view
of technology termed the “contextualist” view. This examines technology as neither utopic nor dystopic, but rather an
ambiguous instrument of social power whose consequences
depend upon its context (Barbour , p. 15). As Colman
( , p. 290) argues, “technologies are seldom if ever neutral because particular values and purposes, as well as social
goals and institutional interests are already embedded in
their design”. Although contextualism critiques technology
in a similar way to the dystopic view, it retains the position
that technology can be used for humanistic or ethical ends
if responsibly designed. Similar approaches are increasingly
taking place in AI scholarship (e.g., van den Hoven et al.
 , van Poel ). In Sect. 4.1 below, I explicate a contextual view of upstream solutions to manipulation and bias,
grounded in a reclarification of autonomy.
5.1  Contextual views on manipulation and bias:
tempering confusion about autonomy
Contextualism reins in fears about GPT-3’s uncontrollable potential for manipulation or bias through recentering
responsibility upon autonomous human actors rather than
GPT-3 alone. In particular, the upstream domain of AI
development presents many opportunities for pre-emptive
ethical action before the proliferation of manipulative or
misleading content can occur. A turn towards moral psychology is also beneficial when considering that the key responsible agent is not a machine, but a human faced with abstract
ethical guidelines, economic incentives, job dissatisfaction,
or an egoistic work environment, all of which can work to
the detriment of ethical practices (Hagendorff , p. 109).
In relation to manipulation, a focus upon individual
autonomy necessitates ethical responses which not only
examine GPT-3, but also investigate the nature or strategies of malicious actors, those responsible for technology
development, and those responsible for regulation. Dignum
( , p. 5) reveals that although most AI debate refers to
“automated decision-making by the machine itself, in reality the spectrum of decision-making is much wider, and in
many cases the actual decision by the machine itself is limited.” Indeed, Johnson and Verdicchio ( , p. 583) further
propose that AI should be conceptualised as sociotechnical
systems, that is, combinations of computational artefacts,
human behaviour, and social arrangements. They write as
“All the human actors involved in an AI endeavour
must be treated as part of AI, not only the researchers,
but those who make the decision to launch AI, those
who set up the institutional arrangements in which
AI systems operate, and those who fill roles in those
arrangements by monitoring, maintaining and intervening in those AI systems” (Johnson and Verdicchio
 , p. 577).
Analysing GPT-3 in this way brings to light a vast network of AI actors. In technology design, a strong ethical
emphasis should be placed upon areas of human control (and
therefore responsibility) through human-in-the-loop control
systems, the creation of ethical systems that use VSD methodologies, strategies to incentivise responsible AI design,
and external regulation to mitigate unethical behaviour in
workplaces (Dignum , p. 5).
Although entrenched societal bias within GPT-3 appears
to be more distanced from human autonomy, a similar sociotechnical view can be used to deconstruct GPT-3 according to the particular social interests or institutional values
embedded within its design. An examination of implicit
male epistemic privilege is valuable when considering that
GPT-3 completed 3.4 passes5 (Brown et al. , p. 5) over the
entire Wikipedia training dataset, compared against recent
surveys which found that only 8.8–15% of Wikipedia’s
5  An epoch is when an entire dataset is passed through a neural network once during training. A full dataset will be passed through a
model multiple times to optimise the weights of the neural network.
GPT-3 passed through 3.4 epochs of the entire Wikipedia dataset
(Brown et al. , p. 9).
AI and Ethics 3:53–64
editors are women or girls (Bender et al. , p. 614). Similarly, GPT-3’s dataset contained 93% English text and only
7% in other languages reflecting that GPT-3 is made for English-speaking (predominantly Western) countries in mind
(Brown et al. , p. 14). Despite its impressive translation
capabilities, the central issue is that English-speaking voices
and perspectives are given overwhelming precedence. These
choices, made intentionally or not, are conflated when considering that, as the AI Now Report (Crawford et al. , p.
5) highlights, “the computer science subfield of AI is heavily dominated by men with largely homogenous racial and
ethnic backgrounds” (see also Cheong et al. ). A lack of
diversity within the very environment that creates powerful
sociotechnical tools can diminish cultural perspectives and
entrench unconscious bias within language models. Thus,
solutions that increase diversity and inclusion within AI
companies and give diverse actors responsibilities within
data selection processes are more tangible and practical than
moderating bias within GPT-3 through technical solutions
6  Research implications for AI use
Having examined the contextualist perspective, we can consider how it can be applied to manage GPT-3 and Instruct-
GPT usage in individual and organisational settings. Some
questions raised are: How can we regulate these language
models to minimise harm from bias or manipulation? Who
should be responsible for this regulation and where is this
regulation most effective? What alternative solutions does
contextualism reveal?
6.1  External regulation for organisational settings
Increased government regulation, auditing, and disclosure
systems Contextualism gives precedence to human behaviour and social arrangements within complex sociotechnical systems. To be most effective, the ethical management
of language models should first start with the regulation of
professional AI developers and users by government regulatory agencies. AI systems are typically self-regulated by AI
companies themselves or by regulated existing laws unspecific to AI, such as data protection and consumer protection
laws . Many researchers (e.g., Campolo et al. , p.
5, Hagendorff , p. 113) have argued that AI ethics
must be enforceable beyond the voluntary and non-binding
commitments made by industry. This includes regulating the
workplaces that develop language models such as OpenAI,
Google, and EleutherAI, and the organisations that use these
language models for functions such as chat bots, games, or
content and blurb descriptions. However, to avoid heavyhanded or ineffective policies, governmental agencies will
need to quickly develop their AI capability and auditing systems. They must be able to effectively intervene in situations
where language models pose significant societal threats and
when malicious actors misuse these AI systems. For example, disclosure systems need to be developed which audit
the ethical and long-term implications of a language model
before it is released to the public . After its release, companies should continue to record and report on the societal
impacts of language models across different contexts and
communities, especially in historically marginalised communities (Campolo et al. , p. 1).
Sociotechnical definitions of AI and encouraging ethical
work cultures Another step in regulating AI is the adoption
of a sociotechnical definition of AI. Governments, committees, and AI industry should be responsible for redefining
AI beyond a narrowly technical approach. Conceiving of
AI as a combination of computational artefacts, behaviour,
and social arrangements is essential if we are to relocate
decision-making from machines to human actors. Recognising that the AI industry is created from humans faced
with stressful deadlines, pressure from managers and clients, and self-pressure to perform adds an important sociopsychological element to current AI ethics debates. It reveals
that expecting self-regulation from professional AI teams
would likely be least effective. We only need to think of
the countless firms that are eager to monetize AI for commercial applications. As Hagendorff ( , p. 108) writes,
the race for a “profitable use of machine learning systems is
not primarily framed by value- or principle-based ethics, but
obviously by an economic logic.” Data scientists, engineers,
and developers in large tech companies are often concerned
with perennial human issues and desires such as keeping
their jobs, fitting in with the corporate culture, or pushing
the boundaries of technological progress. In contrast, they
are not often systematically taught about ethical issues nor
are they “empowered, for example by organisational structures, to raise ethical concerns” (Hagendorff , p. 108).
The implication is that wide-ranging changes to AI work cultures are necessary, to ensure that ethical decision-making
is taught and valued and to support AI developers or ethicists who speak out about the risks and harms of language
models. As an example of what should not occur, we can
think of Google forcing out Timnit Gebru, the co-lead of
their ethical AI team, in December 2020 over a paper (see
Bender et al. ) which questioned the dangers of developing language models such as BERT, ELMo, and GPT-2 .
This incident reflects the significance of corporate culture in
encouraging or stifling ethical behaviour. Walker and Soule
 write about culture: “When it is blowing in your direction, it makes for smooth sailing. When it is blowing against
you, everything is more difficult”. A strategy for shifting
organisational culture includes legal requirements for AI ethics teams to sit inhouse and holding enough power to allow,
AI and Ethics 3:53–64
amend, or turn down ethically sensitive technical projects.
Additional legislative requirements for gender and cultural
diversity in the hiring processes and corporate leadership of
the technology industry could help address with bias within
language models through greater cultural sensitivity.
6.2  Practical and technical instructions for AI
developers and users
Furthermore, there is a need to fill the gap between abstract
ethical principles and everyday practice. This is to ensure
that AI developers and users have access to ethical resources
and understand the implications of their language model
design or usage. For example, Miller and Coldiott (in Morley et al. , p. 2147) found that “79% of tech workers
report that they would like practical resources to help them
with ethical considerations.” Furthermore, in a 2018 study,
McNamara et al. (in Hagendorff , p. 108–109, see also
McNamara et al. ) found “the effectiveness of guidelines
or ethical codes is almost zero and that they do not change
the behaviour of professionals from the tech community.”
To address issues of manipulation and bias from GPT-3 or
InstructGPT, AI ethicists and governments need to develop
ethical regulations specific to the technical work of the software developer. Rather than referring to high-level existing AI ethical guidelines and principles, the contextualist
perspective highlights two important ways forward for AI
practitioners: transparent datasheets and VSD.
Datasheets The first requirement is for addressing harmful language model outputs is to ensure that the initial datasets are themselves carefully curated, higher-quality, fairer,
and more transparent. A language model that is trained on
years of Internet content will necessarily contain toxic,
biased, sexist, and violent language. Therefore, stronger
standards for data collection, especially for sensitive contexts
such as education, healthcare, or criminal justice, should be
legally required. Responsibility should also be placed on
dataset creators to add important sociotechnical information
that documents the origins of their data and specifies how
their datasets were curated. The work of Gebru et al. 
in “Datasheets for Datasets” provides an example of how
ethical practice can be specialised for individual contexts.
The authors created a list of datasheets which encourage
dataset creators to document their motivations and funding,
the dataset’s composition (e.g., what instances the dataset
represents, and which subpopulations are identified), the collection process, pre-processing of data, and intended uses.
Their work allows dataset consumers, such as OpenAI, to
choose datasets that perform well within their deployment
context (for example, high-stakes domains like hiring and
criminal justice). This approach places responsibility upon
dataset creators to add important sociotechnical information
that previously would not be considered necessary or technically relevant.
Value-Sensitive Design Second, VSD provides a secondary alternative to increasingly large language models.
Here, the onus for mitigating manipulation or bias is situated upstream through amendments to language model
algorithms, creating new ethical language models, or via
the curation of balanced, diverse, and ethical training datasets. This moderates weaker, post-hoc attempts to filter out
dangerous or harmful content once it is in society (Bender
et al. , p. 614). VSD can be utilised as a methodology for
measuring the moral standard of existing technical design
or as a fundamentally new design process (Cummings ,
p. 704). VSD methodologies take widely-held human values, such as autonomy, wellbeing, freedom from bias, and
human rights as the central focus of their design (Cummings
 , p. 702). In VSD, engineers and developers are tasked
with explicitly determining the set of social values that are
embedded into the design of a technology, thereby situating
“moral questions early on in the process of design, development of technologies, systems and research” (Dignum ,
Hendrycks et al. ( , p. 1) provide an example of VSD
in practice, through the creation of a new ETHICS dataset
which embeds moral judgements into AI systems through
teaching concepts such as justice, virtues, and commonsense morality within diverse, contextualised text scenarios.
Currently, their dataset holds over 130,000 labelled examples and can be used to measure the ethical knowledge of
pretrained NLP models. GPT-3 received an average moral
score of 39.3%, ranking highly in common-sense (73.3%)
and utilitarianism (73.7%) but low in justice (15.2%), deontology (15.9%), and virtue (18.2%) (Hendrycks et al. ,
p. 7). Creating a dataset with human values is substantially
more challenging than the datasets used by an unsupervised
learner such as GPT-3 because each ethical example needs
to be labelled. Despite this, the dataset is an effective way
to measure how ethical an NLP model is, meaning that language model users can choose NLP systems according to
their degree of moral knowledge or elected value system.
Hendrycks et al. point to promising future applications of
VSD models that can be substituted for harmful or biased
language models, open-ended conversation bots, and more
complex ethical scenarios.
6.3  Public education and digital literacy
A third important measure is to address the conceptualisation of AI within public and AI discourse. As Johnson and
Verdicchio ( , p. 574) argue, “A good deal of fear and
concern about uncontrollable AI is now being displayed” in
public discourse and AI discourse. This has led to confusion
AI and Ethics 3:53–64
about the concept of autonomy and ‘sociotechnical blindness’ which hides the “essential role played by humans at
every stage of the design and deployment of an AI system”
(Johnson and Verdicchio , p. 574). The implication
is that AI researchers must have some responsibility for
how their research is presented to the public. This involves
transparent and understandable explanations of the technology and disclosures whenever GPT-3 or InstructGPT are
used. News corporations should also be held responsible
for divisive and misleading journalistic tactics about AI.
For example, the flurry of emotion over the Guardian’s 
news piece on GPT-3, “A robot wrote this entire article. Are
you scared yet human?”, epitomizes the kind of sensationalised news content that has conflated machine autonomy
with human autonomy and stimulated false concerns about
imminent Artificial General Intelligence. Lastly, ethical
solutions to address manipulation and bias should seek to
increase digital literacy levels in the public to increase personal autonomy and decrease susceptibility to harm.
7  Conclusion
Fears, concerns, and rationalisations about GPT-3 and its
intentional misuse for manipulative purposes or unintentional harm caused by bias have been underpinned widely
by technologically deterministic perspectives within the
NLP industry and AI ethics. Upon inspection, the solutions
offered by both technological utopianism and dystopianism
reveal an undue focus on GPT-3’s autonomy rather than the
autonomy of human actors in AI systems. Examinations of
GPT-3 have therefore either been skewed towards speculation or are undeservedly trusting in the self-regulatory practices of commercial industry. In this paper I have put forward
a critical contextualist perspective to GPT-3 that is centred
upon human autonomy, human values, and engages with
wider ecologies of societal harm and benefit. Thus, when
broader contexts of autonomy and sociotechnical dependency are illuminated, many solutions to the ethical implications of large language models are revealed.
Funding  Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and
its Member Institutions. Not applicable.
Availability of data and material  Not applicable.
Code availability  Not applicable.
Declarations
Conflicts of interest  Not applicable.
Ethics approval  Not applicable.
Consent to participate  Not applicable.
Consent for publication  Not applicable.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
copy of this licence, visit