The Columbia Grasp Database
Corey Goldfeder, Matei Ciocarlie, Hao Dang and Peter K. Allen
Abstract— Collecting grasp data for learning and benchmarking purposes is very expensive. It would be helpful to
have a standard database of graspable objects, along with a set
of stable grasps for each object, but no such database exists.
In this work we show how to automate the construction of
a database consisting of several hands, thousands of objects,
and hundreds of thousands of grasps. Using this database, we
demonstrate a novel grasp planning algorithm that exploits
geometric similarity between a 3D model and the objects in the
database to synthesize form closure grasps. Our contributions
are this algorithm, and the database itself, which we are
releasing to the community as a tool for both grasp planning
and benchmarking.
I. INTRODUCTION
Dexterous robotic grasping has been an active research
subject for decades, and many grasp planning algorithms
have been proposed. However, very few grasp planning
algorithms are data driven, as collecting training data for
robotic grasping is difﬁcult. In this paper we introduce the
Columbia Grasp Database, a freely available collection of
hundreds of thousands of form closure grasps for thousands
of 3D models. Our primary interest is in using an object’s
3D geometry as an index into the database. Given a new
3D object, we can ﬁnd geometric neighbors in the database,
and the accompanying stable grasps for these similar objects.
If the number of objects to be grasped in the database is
very large and comprehensive then robotic grasping becomes
a pre-computed database lookup. While we have not yet
achieved this level of performance it is our directional goal.
The most direct way to construct a grasp database is
to collect grasping data from human volunteers. We could
gather a large set of example objects, outﬁt an army of
graduate students with grasp-capture devices such as datagloves, and record the results. Unfortunately, this approach is
prohibitively time consuming for large scale data acquisition.
More importantly, data collection from humans can only
produce grasps with the human hand. Since many popular
robotic hands cannot be easily mapped to the human hand,
a useful database should include grasps with multiple hands.
The Columbia Grasp Database was created using GraspIt!,
a publicly available grasp planning and analysis tool developed by our group . The database is intended to be used
in conjunction with GraspIt! or a similar simulation tool; as
we have shown in previous work , , planning results
obtained in simulation can be successfully applied to real
robotic hands performing grasping tasks.
All authors are with the Dept. of Computer Science, Columbia
University, NY, USA. Email: {coreyg, cmatei, allen}@cs.columbia.edu,
 
This work was funded in part by NIH BRP grant 1RO1 NS 050256-01A2,
and by a Google research grant.
Even for grasp planning algorithms that do not rely on
simulation, an environment such as GraspIt! is an important
tool for evaluation, as grasp quality measures are generally
impossible to compute in physical experiments. Part of our
motivation in producing a grasp database was to provide
a benchmark for robotic grasping tasks. Using a common
benchmark will make it possible to directly compare grasp
planning algorithms, which is currently difﬁcult to do.
Another contribution of this paper is a database-backed
grasp planning algorithm based on the data we have collected. Using this algorithm, we illustrate the usefulness of
a database for grasping, and highlight some of the lessons
learned during its construction. We also provide execution
results over the entire set of objects in the database at
their primary scale. We believe this to be one of the most
comprehensive tests found in the grasp planning literature,
demonstrating the use of the database as a benchmarking
In sum, our grasp database provides a number of new tools
for the general robotics community, including:
• baseline grasps for a very large number of objects.
• a set of scaled 3D models for grasp benchmarking.
• a large labeled dataset for machine learning of robotic
We are not aware of any previous attempt to construct
a large scale grasp database, or of any commonly used
benchmarks for evaluating robotic grasping. However, researchers have investigated grasp planning approaches that
assume such a database already exists. Bowers and Lumia
 collected grasps for a small number of planar objects
and used fuzzy logic to extrapolate grasping rules. Morales
et al. used GraspIt! to compute ofﬂine grasps for a small
database of graspable objects, and successfully identiﬁed
and executed those grasps on real objects in a complex
environment. Unlike the planner we present in this paper,
their approach requires an exact model of every possible
graspable object.
Other researchers have experimented with different forms
of precomputed grasp knowledge. Li and Pollard collected a database of 17 hand poses, and used shape matching
to match poses to graspable objects. Their work highlighted
the difﬁculty of automatically generating grasps that are
both stable and plausibly humanlike. Aleotti and Caselli
demonstrated grasp synthesis using examples acquired with
a dataglove . Saxena et al. generated 2D renderings
of a large set of example objects, and learned a modelfree mapping from images to graspable features. Their work
uses a two ﬁngered gripper and does not have an obvious
extension to dexterous hands.
II. BUILDING A GRASP DATABASE
Although building a grasp database by direct data collection is infeasible, the basic strategy of grasping many objects
and recording the grasp poses is still valid. However, it
requires replacing human input with an automated procedure
that does not need user attention. In our own previous
work , we have demonstrated the use of a grasp
planner running in a simulation engine. Grasp planning can
be considered an optimization task that can be performed
in simulation without user supervision. However, even when
simulations are performed on a powerful computer, the space
of possible grasps is too large to sample directly. This is
particularly true in the case of dexterous hands with many
intrinsic degrees of freedom (DOFs).
A. Eigengrasp planner
Recently, we have made substantial progress in reducing
the number of DOFs in grasping tasks by deﬁning eigengrasps, a low-dimensional grasping subspace that has shown
promise in allowing online computation and sampling of
the high dimensional grasping parameter space. Eigengrasps
can reduce the number of DOFs from over twenty in the
case of multi-ﬁngered anthropomorphic hands to as few as
two. It thus becomes feasible to stochastically sample this
low-dimensional grasping parameter space using simulation
techniques, and determine a wide range of stable, form
closure grasps on complex objects even for dexterous hand
In previous work we presented a grasp planning algorithm
that optimizes hand posture in a low dimensional eigengrasp
space to ﬁnd effective pre-grasp postures. These pre-grasps
are then heuristically developed into stable, form closure
grasps. The core of this algorithm is a simulated annealing
optimization, and since this is a stochastic method, we can
use multiple runs to ﬁnd different form closure grasps for
the same model. For a complete description of this planner
as well as discussion of the eigengrasp concept, we refer the
reader to .
Our goal in this paper is to apply this planner to a very
large set of objects, and obtain multiple results for each
object. We therefore use a slightly modiﬁed multithreaded
version which takes advantage of multi-core architectures
widely available today on commodity computers. A single
parent thread searches the eigengrasp space for likely pregrasps; for each pre-grasp position that crosses a quality
threshold, a separate child thread is created to reﬁne it.
The child thread performs a quick local simulated annealing
search with ﬁner step values, attempting to develop the pregrasp into form closure. If the resulting grasp indeed has
form closure, the pre-grasp and grasp are both saved in the
result list.
After creating a child thread for a pre-grasp state, the
parent thread’s state generation function rejects states close to
the child thread’s search area, forcing it to look elsewhere in
the state space for new grasps. The planner can be restarted at
any point by resetting the annealing temperature. The process
continues until either the desired number of grasps are found,
or a pre-set time limit is exceeded.
B. Constructing the Database
One of the main advantages of the grasp planner discussed
above is its ﬂexibility: it can be successfully applied to a wide
range of both object models and robotic hands. As eigengrasp deﬁnitions encapsulate the kinematic characteristics of
each hand design, the planner can operate on eigengrasp
amplitudes and thus ignore low-level operations and concentrate on the high-level task. The reduced dimensionality
framework also enables the use of anthropomorphic models
with more than 20 intrinsic DOFs. The planner can thus
operate identically across different hand models, without
any change or parameter tuning. In addition, the planner
makes no assumptions regarding the nature of the target
object and can operate on a wide range of 3D models. These
characteristics make it a strong candidate for large scale
application: once the desired object set and hand models
have been chosen, the batch execution of the planner over
the chosen set requires little, if any, user attention. For each
hand-object combination, the output is a list of stable grasps,
each with an associated pre-grasp in eigengrasp space. For
each grasp, the planner also computes two widely used
quality metrics that characterize the Grasp Wrench Space
(GWS): the epsilon and volume quality metrics introduced
by Ferrari and Canny .
A crucial aspect of the database construction is the running
time required for each hand-object combination. As the
planner has no intrinsic time limit, one has to be imposed
based on the size of the object set and the computing power
available. When building the database described in the next
section, each execution of the planner ran until we found
15 form closure grasps of the target object. In general, this
required about 10 minutes of run time. When dealing with
large datasets and different hand models, a subset of objects
will inevitably prove difﬁcult to grasp using our algorithm.
To prevent these from dominating the computation time we
also set an upper time limit of 20 minutes per model.
The total number of planner executions used to build the
database was approximately 22,000, as described in following section. The total computation time was approximately
1 month on 6 multi-core computers.
III. THE COLUMBIA GRASP DATABASE
In this section we describe the contents and structure of the
Columbia Grasp Database. The database is freely available
at grasping.cs.columbia.edu both as a PostgreSQL database
and as ﬂat text ﬁles.
A. 3D Models and Scale
The ﬁrst requirement for a grasp database is a set of
objects to grasp. Rather than distributing a new set of 3D
models, we chose to reuse the models from the Princeton
Shape Benchmark (PSB) , which is already in common
use in the shape matching community. We hope that a shared
dataset will encourage increased collaboration between shape
researchers and roboticists.
The disadvantage of this choice is that the PSB models
were not originally selected with an eye towards robotic
grasping, and so some of the models are not obvious choices
for grasping experiments. For example, the database contains
both airplanes and insects, all of which are outside the
normal grasping range of a human-sized hand. We chose
to treat all such “ungraspable” objects as toys, and rescaled
them accordingly. The rescaling factor for each model, as
compared with the “original” scale in the standard PSB, is
included in the database.
Even with all of the models at graspable size, the issue
of scale required further attention. Grasping is inherently
scale-dependent, but most of the models in the PSB might
plausibly exist anywhere within a small range of scales. This
was particularly true for the models rescaled to “toy” size.
To soften the impact of scale, we cloned each object at four
distinct scales, 0.75, 1.0, 1.25 and 1.5, where 1.0 represents
the rescaled size from above. As the PSB contains 1,814
distinct models, this left us with a total of 7,256 models to
For each model we store the radius of a ball that approximately contains the model. We use an approximately
enclosing ball rather than an absolutely enclosing ball to
avoid outlier sensitivity. We assume that all of the points on
a model’s surface are normally distributed around some ﬁxed
radius from the center or mass. The ﬁxed radius is simply
the mean distance from the surface to the center of mass,
and the “approximate radius” stored in the database is the
mean distance to the surface plus two standard deviations of
the distance to the center once the mean has been subtracted.
Along with shape and scale, the space of possible grasps
is inﬂuenced by the frictional properties and deformability
of both the hand and the object. Both in the construction the
database and in our experiments we treated all models as
being made of rigid plastic. The properties of the different
hands are described below.
B. Robotic Hands
Grasping is strongly hand-dependent, and so we need to
specify the hands used in our database. For the ﬁrst version of
the database, we chose to focus on two hands; a human hand
model in order to emphasize the “humanlike” nature of the
grasp selection, and the three-ﬁngered Barrett hand, which
is ubiquitous in robotics research due to its durability and
relatively low cost. The human hand model has 20 degrees
of freedom. The Barrett hand has 4 degrees of freedom, plus
a disengaging clutch mechanism which allows conformance
even when the proximal link of a ﬁnger is blocked. Both
models are available for download with GraspIt!.
Frictional forces play an important role in grasping, and so
we must specify the materials for each of our hands. There
is no exact consensus on the friction coefﬁcient of human
skin and so we chose µ = 1.0 as a plausible value for the
friction between the human hand and plastic . The ability
to create stable, encompassing grasps with subsets of ﬁngers
is also increased by using soft ﬁngertips that deform during
contact and apply a larger space of frictional forces and
moments than their rigid counterparts. In order to take into
account such effects, we use a fast analytical model for soft
ﬁnger contacts that we have introduced in previous work .
The Barrett hand is made of metal, but can be coated with
a higher friction material. We created two versions of the
Barrett hand, one uncoated and one with rubberized ﬁngers,
and computed grasps for then independently, in effect giving
us three hand models. For the metal Barrett hand we used
µ = 0.4 and for the rubber coated version we used µ = 1.0.
As the kinematic models are identical, grasps computed for
either Barrett model can be executed using the other, making
it possible to evaluate the advantage afforded by using the
higher friction material. We note that grasps from the regular
hand can be assumed to be form closure for the rubberized
hand as well, but that this guarantee does not hold in reverse.
In the future we intend to augment these hands with
other models, such as the DLR hand and the Robonaut
hand. We encourage researchers with novel hands to send
us models, both for inclusion with GraspIt! and for use in
future revisions of the database.
C. Grasps and Pre-Grasps
Our grasp database is intended to be used in conjunction
with GraspIt! or a similar grasp simulation tool. As such,
we provide the necessary data to recreate each grasp, in
the form of joint angles and hand position, and the contact
points between hand and object, which can be used as a
check to ensure that the grasp was simulated correctly. We
also provide the two measures of grasp quality mentioned in
Section II-B.
Each grasp entry consists of a pre-grasp and the ﬁnal grasp
pose. A pre-grasp is a pose from the instance before the hand
contacts the object; it represents “pure” grasp information
untainted by conformance to an exact object. Each of our pregrasps lies within the two dimensional Eigengrasp subspace,
as described in . In contrast, the grasp poses represent ﬁnal
positions for form closure. This ﬁrst version of our database
contains 238,737 distinct form closure grasps, comprising
25,585 grasps with the metal Barrett hand, 132,421 grasps
with the rubber Barrett hand and 80,731 grasps with the
human hand. Along with each grasp we record a pregrasp
pose and the epsilon and volume quality measures of .
D. Caveats
Since the grasps in the database were found using an
automated planner, not all of the grasps are truly humanlike
or reliable. There can be cases where a grasp satisﬁes our
quality metrics, but would require a degree of precision that
cannot be obtained in real-life execution. Aside from the
intrinsic limitations of grasp quality metrics, for which there
is as of yet no ﬁrm consensus on which to use, our approach
to grasp planning is purely geometric. This presents problems
for objects that do not match our assumptions. For example,
our assumption that all objects are rigid plastic results in
geometrically correct but unrealistic grasps on objects such
as ﬂowers or leaves. Furthermore, the lack of domain-speciﬁc
knowledge means that some of our grasps are semantically
incorrect, such as a mug grasped by placing the ﬁngers
inside, although they are still form closed.
Finally, all of our grasps were obtained from pre-grasps
that sample a low-dimensional subspace of the hand DOF
space. This is for the moment a necessary simpliﬁcation,
without which the planning problem for dexterous hands
is intractable at this scale. While our choice of subspace
is theoretically justiﬁed and shown to be effective , we
cannot reasonably claim that the database covers the entire
space of possible grasps. The choice of optimal subspace is
one of our directions for future research.
IV. DATABASED-BACKED GRASP PLANNING
One of our primary motivations of building a grasp
database was to collect enough grasping data to build new
grasp planners based on learning. In this section we present
a grasp planner that uses a k-Nearest-Neighbors approach
to ﬁnd candidate grasps for a model not in the database. In
general, the relation between hand pose and grasp quality
for a given object is both nonlinear and discontinuous, and
more sophisticated learning methods such as SVMs have so
far been shown to work only for simple objects , . We
hope that the data we have collected will facilitate further
research in this direction.
A. Algorithm
Our grasp planning algorithm is based on the intuition that
similar objects are likely to have similar grasps. Therefore, if
we wish to grasp an object not in our database, it makes sense
to look at the most similar objects that are in the database
and to attempt to grasp the new object in the same way.
Given a model to grasp α, we use a shape matching
algorithm to ﬁnd N = {n1...nk}, the k models in the
database most similar to α under some shape similarity
metric. In this paper we used L2 distances between Zernike
descriptors , which we have previously shown to be
scalable to very large libraries of 3D models . Zernike
matching is scale-normalized, but as detailed in Section III-
A, each PSB model exists in our database at 4 distinct scales.
For each ni we consider up to 2 models, n<
i , the largest
neighbor smaller than α and n>
i , the smallest neighbor larger
than α, using the scaled approximate radius described in
Section III-A. In the case of α smaller or larger than all
4 versions of the neighbor we only used one model for ni.
We present our grasp planning algorithm here. For simplicity, we have ignored the issue of scale and treated each
ni as a single model.
The entire process, from shape matching through ﬁnal
output, takes approximately 20 seconds. To illustrate the
behavior of this algorithm, we provide a number of examples
in Fig. 1.
B. Experiments
For our experiments, we removed each PSB model at scale
1.0 from the database one at a time and attempted to grasp it
Algorithm 1 DATABASE-BACKED GRASP PLANNING
Require: Model α to grasp with hand H, using k neighbors
and quality threshold τ.
N ←NEARESTNEIGHBORS(α, k)
R ←{} {The resulting form closure grasps.}
for all ni ∈N do
Align α and ni using PCA.
Co-locate the centers of mass of α and ni.
G ←the precomputed pre-grasps on ni.
for all g ∈G do
Transform g to α’s coordinate system.
Place H in the position and conﬁguration of g.
Move H backwards.
until NOCOLLISIONS(PALM(H), α)
for all finger ∈FINGERS(H) do
Open finger.
until NOCOLLISIONS(finger, α)
Move H forwards.
until INCONTACT(H, α)
CLOSEFINGERS(H)
if EPSILONQUALITY(H, α) > τ then
using only the known grasps from the remaining models. To
isolate the effects of shape matching, we used three methods
of choosing similar models. In each case we used k = 5
neighbors for every model.
Our ﬁrst method used the ground-truth labels provided
with the PSB. For each model, we chose neighbors within the
same shape category, starting with the ﬁnest categorization
and moving up to coarser categories if fewer than k neighbors
were available. Within the same category the choice of
neighbors was arbitrary. We designated the chosen models as
the ‘PSB classes’ neighbors. This method of indexing, while
not usable for arbitrary unclassiﬁed models, approximates the
performance of a theoretical ideal1 shape matching algorithm
that has perfect precision and recall over the PSB.
Our second method used L2 distances between Zernike
descriptors . For each model, we designated the k models
with the smallest L2 distance in Zernike descriptor space as
the ‘zernike’ neighbors. These descriptors are computed on
voxel grids and are quite robust, making them suitable for
use in matching newly acquired objects into the database.
1Even with perfect precision and recall, this theoretical algorithm may
not truly be ‘ideal’, as the categories in the PSB are semantic rather
than purely geometric. Nevertheless, since shape matching algorithms are
regularly evaluated using these categories as a ground truth, we adopt the
same convention.
Three example models and their grasps, using the database-backed planner with Zernike neighbors. For each model α (left), the top row of
images shows a neighbor nk from the database, the value of k, and a pre-computed grasp on that neighbor. Directly below each neighbor is the same
grasp executed on α, along with its GWS epsilon quality measure.
For our third method, we randomly selected k models from
the database and designated them as ‘unordered’ neighbors.
We emphasize that these are not random grasps in any sense;
α has been translated and axis-aligned with some model of
a similar scale. Furthermore, the pre-grasps applied to it are
pointed in the right direction, with joint angles drawn from
a high quality eigengrasp subspace and known to produce
form closure on another model with aligned principal axes.
We therefore expect that some of the pregrasps taken from
unordered neighbors will result in form closure grasps. Our
aim in using the unordered neighbors is to isolate the
performance gains based on shape matching while holding
constant the performance due to the overall high quality of
all of the grasps in the database.
We ran the experiment separately for each type of neighbor
selection and averaged the grasp quality of the nth best
grasp on each model over all 1,814 models in the database
at scale 1.0. As mentioned in the introduction, we believe
Barrett hand
Human hand
The nth best grasp from database-backed grasping with 3 neighbor selection methods and from the eigengrasp planner, averaged over the 1,814
models in the database at scale 1.0. As can be seen, the information provided by shape matching is more important for the complex human hand than it
is for the clawlike Barrett hand. This ﬁgure is best viewed in color.
this to be one of the most comprehensive grasp planning
experiments in the literature, as it consists of thousands of
runs on a highly varying set of objects. We can analyze these
results from a number of different perspectives: the absolute
performance of database-backed grasp planning, the relative
behavior of different neighbor selection methods and ﬁnally
the performance compared to running the eigengrasp planner
of Section II-A directly on the target object. Fig. 2 shows
these results for the human hand and the Barrett hand.
Although Zernike descriptors do not have perfect precision and recall over the PSB, their performance for our
grasp planner is nearly identical to the ground truth PSB
classiﬁcation. This is likely because the PSB classiﬁcation
is partially semantic, whereas our grasp quality measures
are purely geometric; a ‘poor’ neighbor for semantic shape
matching may still be geometrically close enough to share
high quality grasps.
The performance of the ‘unordered’ neighbors is as expected; good, due to the general quality of grasps in the
database and the axis-alignment between α and the unordered neighbor, but not as good as the shape matching
methods. Although the improvement due to shape matching
is small for the Barrett hand, for the human hand the
difference is quite signiﬁcant. We attribute this difference to
the many additional DOFs of the human hand, which creates
a need for careful pre-grasping. The Barrett hand, with its
4 degrees of freedom, has a far simpler conﬁguration space,
and the importance of pre-grasping is correspondingly less.
Of special interest is the comparison between the databasebacked methods and the eigengrasp planner. For the ﬁrst
few grasps, the performance of the shape matching methods
is essentially identical to that of the eigengrasp planner.
However, for subsequent grasps the quality quickly diverges,
with the advantage going to the database-backed methods.
This is even more impressive when we recall that the eigengrasp planner ran for approximately 10 minutes per model,
whereas the database-backed planners ran for about 20
seconds. The database-backed approach can take advantage
of pre-computed grasp data from multiple objects, essentially
extracting the useful information obtained from several runs
of the eigengrasp planner.
C. Planning for Real Objects
The ultimate goal of our database-backed planner is to
grasp new objects that are not in our database using sensor
data. While a comprehensive evaluation using such acquired
data is left for future work, we present here our preliminary
results. Using a commodity desktop 3D scanner, we acquired
a range image of a plastic toy. Due to the intrinsic limitations
of the acquisition method, the range image was both noisy
and incomplete, with several occlusions. We computed the
Zernike descriptor of the scan, found the nearest neighbors
in the database, and ran the planner as before for both the
Barrett and human hands. We found 88 form closure grasps
using the human hand and 112 form closure grasps using
the Barrett hand. Some of these results are shown in Fig.
3. In the future we intend to experiment with more scanned
objects, and to validate the planner output by executing the
grasps with a physical hand on the real object.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
We have created the Columbia Grasp Database, a large
collection of scaled models (n = 7, 256) and grasps (n =
238, 737) for several hands which we are making available
to the robotics community. Building the database was a
non-trivial exercise, and at present, no other grasp database
of comparable scale is available. We believe this to be an
important ﬁrst step in building a valuable tool for researchers
developing grasp synthesis algorithms, particularly those
pursuing machine learning approaches to grasping.
In addition to providing this data, we also demonstrated
its application as both a back-end and benchmark tool for
a novel, data-driven grasp planner. Our experiments showed
this approach to be efﬁcient at obtaining good form closure
grasps. In the process, we gained some new insights into
grasp planning. We found that a good choice of grasp
subspace, combined with axis-alignment, produced grasps
Some of the grasps planned for an acquired object with holes and occlusions, using the database-backed planner with Zernike neighbors. In total
88 form closure grasps were found for the human hand and 112 for the Barrett hand.
that could often be transferred to new objects even in
the absence of strong geometric correlation. As expected,
however, using geometric neighbor selection produced better
results, particularly in the case of the high DOF human hand.
Furthermore, the database approach outperformed the single
object planner of , showing that the database is effective
at distilling planning results from multiple objects into a
compact form.
In many cases the geometric similarity provided by the
Zernike and PSB classes neighbors was not fully exploited
due to poor alignment between a model and its neighbors.
We believe that the shape matching approach would beneﬁt
from using an alignment method more powerful than global
PCA, which is known to be suboptimal for aligning 3D
models . Better alignment might be obtained using a
different global transform, such as the Principal Symmetry
Axes transform or by using a pairwise alignment method
such as Iterative Closest Point.
Our database consists predominantly of complete 3D models. However, in real-life applications 3D sensor data such
as laser scans or stereo reconstructions often exhibits holes
or occlusions. Our preliminary results showed the databasebacked approach to be applicable to acquired scan data, as
an imperfect model can still be matched against the models
in the database. In future work we intend to evaluate the
performance of our planner more fully on sensed data and
real robotic grasping applications with real hands. We also
intend to augment the grasp database with additional hands
and additional 3D models.