AN ANALYSIS OF VARIABILITY I N NUMBER OF DIGITS
IN AN INBRED STRAIN OF GUINEA PIGS*
SEWALL WRIGHT
University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
Received December 14, 1933
THE DIGITS OF GUINEA PIGS
Guinea pigs normally have four digits on the front feet (no thumb) and
three digits on the hind feet (digits I and V absent). This condition is
found in all wild species of the family Caviidae and in the closely allied
family Hydrochoeridae.
A larger number of digits is found in general in the species of other
families of the hystricoid rodents. The reduction in the Caviidae and
Hydrochoeridae is thus in all probability a very ancient character.
It is a frequently stated principle of paleontology (DOLLO’S
lost parts never return. Nevertheless, it is well known that an extra digit,
resembling in every respect (when well-developed) a normal little toe is not
an especially uncommon occurrence in the guinea pig. CASTLE 
found a guinea pig with one imperfectly developed little toe and was able
by selection and inbreeding to build up a race in which this digit was in-
variably present and perfectly developed including bones, muscles and
nail and even a new plantar tubercle on the foot. I have found a similar
little toe in several independent stocks. It has also been described by
 and by PICTET . The appearance of the little toe
in two grades of development is shown in figure 1. Its position and struc-
ture have been the same in all stocks in which it has keen observed. This
type of polydactyly must be sharply distinguished from the duplication
of a digit which has occurred associated with other abnormalities of the
foot (figure 2) in a few cases in stocks which have no special tendency to-
ward the development of the reversionary type.
A series of grades of development of the little toes has been used in the
records but for the purposes of this paper two will suffice : “Good” in which
both little toes are full-sized and so firm that they do not bend back
laterally to the foot on moderate pressure, and “poor” including all lower
grades. Grades of perfection are recognizable within the category “good”
but the above line of cleavage seems to be the most objective one which
can be made.
* Part of the cost of the accompanying tables is paid by the CALTON
AND MENDEL MEMORIAL
GENETICS 19: 506 N 1934
VARIABILITY OF DIGITS IN GUINEA PIGS
PREVIOUS GENETIC RESULTS
CASTLE found that the extra-toed condition was transmissible
both by males and females and that the degree of transmission was closely
related to the grade of development. His original male with only a weak
fourth toe on one foot had 25 percent (9 out of 36) extra-toed young from
FIGURE 1.-Sketches
of left hind feet of guinea pigs. The normal 3-toed condition is shown at
the left. At the right is a foot with well-developed little toe and a corresponding plantar tubercle.
Between is a grade of imperfect development of the little toe.
related females and 6 percent (2 out of 32) from unrelated ones. Four out
of 9 young from polydactylous females were polydactylous. In the next 3
generations selected males produced increasing percentages of polydactyls
from the various classes of females but even matings between perfect
feet of an abnormal guinea pig, showing imperfect development of digits on
left foot and duplication of a digit on the right foot. This type of polydactyly is to be distinguished
from the atavistic type of figure 1.
polydactyls produced some normals as well as many with imperfect fourth
toes. A close approach to fixation of the perfect fourth toe was reached in
generation 5. Complete fixation was later attained and has continued to
the present in a branch of this strain in my possession. CASTLE noted a
slight excess tendency toward extra toes on the left side he noted that “an al-
ternative explanation is possible that the development of the fourth toe
depends upon the inheritance of several independent factors and that the
more of these are present the better will the structure be developed.”
and PAPANICOLAU
 concluded that the character is a
Mendelian dominant. In a more recent paper however, STOCKARD
reaches the conclusion that the mode of inheritance must be more complex.
He has found it occurring occasionally in eight distinct stocks and con-
siders it probable that it is latent in all stocks. The results of matings were
in the main similar to those reported by CASTLE. NormalXnormal pro-
duced 11 percent (22 out of 199) with the extra toe. Conversely when both
parents were four-toed, 25 percent (53 out of 214) of the progeny were
normal. Contrary to CASTLE he obtained no normals among 35 young,
both of whose parents had perfect fourth toes. In all cases in which both
parents were of the same grade, this grade was in excess among the prog-
eny. The proportion of four-toed young from matings in which one parent
was four-toed and the other normal varied with the grade of the former and
the source of the latter.
 has recently reported on experiments with this character.
Extra-toed animals appeared in a certain stock which had previously pro-
duced only normals, 3000 in number. The 7 pairs which produced poly-
dactyls at all, gave a total of 9 polydactyls in 144 young. The following
table gives in condensed form the results obtained in eight later genera-
tions in which both parents trace in part at least to this foundation stock.
PERCENT 4-TOE
Normal X Normal
Normal X 4-toe
4-toe X 4-toe
As in CASTLE’S
and STOCKARD’S
data, matings of polydactyls with un-
related normals gave smaller percentages of polydactyls (15 in 101 or
14.9 percent) than matings with related normals. PICTET’S
results re-
sembled CASTLE’S in the excess of left little toes over right ones (46 left
only, 18 right only, 139 both). He could find no heredity of the asym-
attempted to reach a definite factorial analysis. His reasoning
may be summarized as follows : normal x normal may give ratios approxi-
VARIABILITY OF DIGITS IN GUINEA PIGS
mating 15 normal to 1 polydactyl. This requires a dihybrid ratio at least.
But polydactyly cannot be due merely to a combination of two recessives
implied by the 15 : 1 ratio, since polydactyl Xpolydactyl may produce nor-
mals. Thus a third gene is required. The specific hypothesis put forward
is that polydactyly depends on the combination of P P with at least two
positive genes from the series E, e and N, n. The six combinations PPEENN,
PPEENn, PPEEnn, PPEeNN, PPeeNN, and PPEeNn are 4-toed while
the other 21 combinations are normal.
He assumes that all of the original matings of normalxnormal which
gave polydactyly were of the type PpEennXPpeeNn yielding 15 normal
to 1 polydactyl as observed. Matings between polydactyls from these
(PPEeNn) would then be expected to yield 5 normals to 11 polydactyls.
The observed F1 ratio, 9 normals to 19 polydactyls, is in agreement. The
ratio of 43 normals to 102 polydactyls from all matings between poly-
dactyls from the next 7 generations is pointed to as additional evidence,
overlooking that most of the polydactyls of these generations would be
homozygous in E or N or both and would give higher percentages.
In the cases of normalxnormal and normalxpolydactyl, he finds it pos-
sible to yick out formulae for the parents which will account for each type
of ratio observed. It must be taken into account, however, that with 6
different genetic constitutions assigned polydactyls and 21 to normals
there are 126 possible types of matings of normal with polydactyl and 210
between normals. This gives considerable room for choice of formulae to fit
observed cases. Under such conditions the demonstration that a choice of
formula is capable of accounting for observed ratios does not constitute
proof that the formulae are correct.
The whole argument also ignores the fact already demonstrated that non-genetic factors play such an important role that normals
and polydactyls may be of the same genetic constitution. It may be con-
cluded that the specific genes P , p , E, e and N , n cannot be taken seriously.
My own experiments began in a preliminary way in Dr. CASTLE’S
laboratory in 1914. The results showed clearly that further advance was
hardly possible without the use of stocks known to be homozygousor
nearly so, that is to say, of closely inbred stocks. Shortly thereafter I had
an opportunity to study the records of such stocks. A considerable number
of inbred lines were started at the experiment station of the U. S. Bureau
of Animal Industry at Beltsville, Maryland in 1906 and maintained by
brother-sister mating. Among the 23 which persisted more than a genera-
tion or two, it was found that 12 had produced no poly-
dactyls in a total of 8400 young as shown by the records
(which however merely noted the occurrence of polydactyly, not of nor-
mality during this period). Five of the strains had produced a total of 12
SEWALL WRIC.HT
polydactyls in 4600 young or 0.26 percent. The remaining 6 strains had
produced polydactyls in percentages ranging from 1.7 percent to 19.0 per-
Occurrence of polydactyls in 23 inbred shins.
PERCENT 4-TOED
1,3,9, 13,15,18, 19,20,21,23,32,34
2, 7, 14, 17,39
A study of the histories of these families, especially of 35 and 31, led to
the conclusion that “the segregation among the family lines is so sharp
that it is probable that a careful investigation of polydactyly would yield
Mendelian results, though much nongenetic variation must be present.”
Since 1916 the number of digits on the hind foot and the grade of extra
toe if present was made a matter of routine recording for every animal
born in the colony of the Bureau of Animal Industry. The positive nota-
tion of normality doubtless increased the reliability. A large branch of
family 35, descended from a single mating in the 12th generation of
brother-sister mating, was made the object of intensive study with regard
to non-genetic factors. Important effects of age of parents (presumably of
dam) and of season of birth were demonstrated and it was shown that
these constituted only a part of the total non-genetic variability . In the same paper the results of crosses between certain of the
strains (2,13,32,35) and Professor CASTLE’S strain of perfect polydactyls
were reported briefly as indicating “segregation of two or three major
genetic factors, the results being clearly different in crosses with different
3-toed stocks.”
The present paper will present more fully than before and on the basis
of additional data, the analysis of the variability within the inbred strain
No. 35. It is hoped to present in detail in later papers the results of the
crosses between inbred strains referred to above, the results of linkage tests
and the results in a strain (I) in which pollex and hallux appear as well as
little toe.
DIFFERENTIATION OF SUBSTRAINS OF FAMILY 35
The branching lines of descent from the foundation mating of family 35
are shown in figure 3 and table 1. Four branches (B, C, E and G) started
VARIABILITY OF DIGITS IN GUINEA PIGS
in the second generation. Three of these produced low percentages of 4-
toed young, while one (C, D) produced none at all among 335 young in a
history extending through the 12th generation. One of the other branches
of the 2nd generation (E) split off a branch (F) in the third generation
which never produced polydactyls. These early differences may easily have
been the result of segregation of factors heterozygous in the original pair.
Of greater interest are the records of the later branches, all descended
from a single mating in the 12th generation of brother-sister mating. Under
such mating, some combination of genes should have become nearly fixed
3.-Branches of family 35 showing percentages of polydactyly.
by the 12th generation, assuming of course the absence of new mutations
or selection for heterozygosis. The theoretical rate of decrease of hetero-
zygosis is 19.1 percent per generation, under which, 92 percent of the
genes, not similarly homozygous in the foundation pair of guinea pigs,
should have become homozygous. The percentage of unfixed genes should
be approximately halved with each additional 3 generations of brother-
sister ancestry.
All of the 21 substrains, descended from the single mating in the 12th
generation, indeed nearly all of the matings, have produced polydactyls.
The mere occurrence of both 3-toed and 4-toed young would indicate con-
tinued heterozygosis on such an interpretation as that of PICTET.
not necessarily do so, however, if non-genetic factors play a role. The dif-
ference in percentage among the strains (9 percent to 69 percent) are, how-
ever, indicative of real genetic differentiation.
SEWALL WRIGHT
Percentage of polydactyls in different branches of family 35.
PERCENT 4-T
FIRST MATING
PARENT RRANCB
Cpmparison of the observed frequencies of 3-toed and 4-toed young in
the 21 substrains with those calculated from the percentages in the grand
total (31.07 percent 4-toed) yields a X2 of 247. The probability that such
a value of X2 could arise by random sampling (20 degrees of freedom) is
indefinitely small. There may, however, be some other factor than heredity
tending to cause correlated occurrence within a substrain. It is shown later
that there is an important correlation between litter-mates which is not
VARIABILITY OF DIGITS I N GUINEA PIGS
genetic in origin. But even if litter-mates were invariably identical with
respect to number of digits, so that number of litters instead of number of
individuals should be used in calculating X2, the value of the latter would
still be as great as 101 (247 divided by 2.44 the mean size of litter) and
this still has no appreciable chance of arising by random sampling. There
seems to be no other factor which brings about correlated occurrence to
an important extent and as X2 could be reduced to 50 and have a chance
of only about .0002 of origin by random sampling, there can be no doubt
of the reality of the genetic differentiation among the substrains.
On comparing each substrain with that from which it was derived, it
will be seen that there has been some tendency toward persistence. The
correlation between successive substrains is +.47. There are at least half
a dozen cases, however, of changes of percentages which appear important.
Their interpretation as due to segregation is rather unlikely, in view of the
many generations of brother-sister mating back of some of the most
striking ones. The most plausible explanation seems to be the occasional
occurrence of minor mutations followed by segregation.
DEGREE OF DETERMINATION BY HEREDITY
It is of interest to determine the portion of the total variability due to
substrain differentiation. But at once we encounter the difficulty that the
character does not occur in grades from which the variance can be cal-
culated directly. The most significant classification is merely the dichot-
omy 3-toed or 4-toed.
It is already clear that this dichotomy cannot correspond to alternative
phases of a single factor. It is the result of a physiological threshold in a
character affected by many factors. It is therefore reasonable to assume
that there is a scale of factor combinations to which each factor makes
a fairly constant contribution and that variabilities may be compared on
such a scale. As the unit of measurement it is convenient to take the
standard deviation within a substrain (U, = 1). The deviation of the mean
(m) of each substrain from the threshold for polydactyly can be found from
a table of probability integrals on the assumption that the distribution
within each group is normal on such a scale as described. Thus for the
deviation of the mean of the group, m=prf-l(q-+)
where q is the pro-
portion above the threshold and prf-' is the inverse probability integral,
whereprf x =
. The variance of such means can now be found
by the usual formula
SEWALL WRIGHT
where m is the weighted average of the means, (-
If the set of
substrains are thought of as a random sample from a large number, cor-
rection should be made for the uncertainty of the grand average (iii) by
multiplying by -
where h is the number of substrains (assumed to
be of approximately the same size). If, on the other hand, the groups be
thought of, not as a sample, but as including all subdivisions of the
population, no such correction should be made.
In the present case the question at issue is the proportion of the variance
of the actual population due to the differentiation of its substrains, rather
than proportion in a hypothetical population made up of an indefinite
number of such substrains. This correction is accordingly not made in the
final estimate. It may be noted that it is even less justified in cases ana-
lyzed later, such as subdivision by age of mother and month of birth.
Another correction is for the variance of means due merely to accidents
of sampling within the substrains. The formula for the variance of means
of groups consisting of f individuals is - (-
- - The value - may be
taken, if the groups are approximately the same size. In the present case
this correction is not very important (!
-= .0106).
The variance of the total population is the sum of the variances within
groups and of group means:
UT2 = . The family is characterized for example by a
tricolor pattern. The percentage of white varies in individuals from 5 per-
cent to 100 percent but the substrains derived from the same mating in
the 12th generation vary only from 60 to 73 percent and wholly at ran-
dom. The parent offspring correlation of only +.024 k .013 with respect
to amount of white confirms the view that in this respect no appreciable
portion of the variability since the 12th generation is genetic.
THE CHICAGO STOCK
The data above refer to the history of family 35 from a mating in the
12th generation from 1916 to 1924 inclusive. A small stock has been main-
tained in Chicago from 1926 to the present. It has not been practicable
to continue the system of mating brother with sister but the entire stock
traces to a single Beltsville mating in the 22nd generation of inbreeding.
This Chicago branch has produced 152 polydactyls among 358 young
through June 1933, an average of 42.5 percent. This does not differ very
much from the record of 32.9 percent produced by the Beltsville sub-
strain (AA) from which it came and still less from the next most closely
allied Beltsville substrain (Z with a record of 40.0 percent).
It may be noted that the Beltsville records were made wholly as a
matter of routine, no greater attention being paid to strain 35 than to any
other. No statistical analysis was started until after the records through
1924 were complete. The Chicago data on the other hand were recorded
with especial care after such an analysis had been made on the Beltsville
CORRELATION BETWEEN PARENT AND OFFSPRING
In the Beltsville stock (table 3, next to last column) 3-toeX3-toe pro-
duced 26.6 percent polydactyls, while 4-toe X4-toe produced 41.6 percent.
This does not indicate much genetic difference between normals and poly-
dactyls within the stock, perhaps no more than expected on the basis of
the substrain differences demonstrated above.
To test this matter, the results of matings should be compared within
substrains or within groups of similar substrains. The data are divided
into four such groups (I with 9-16 percent, I1 with 17-29 percent, I11
with 32-42 percent and IV with 49-69 percent polydactyls respectively)
in table 3. The last column gives the average percentage from each type
of mating on weighting the percentage within each group from that type
of mating by the total number of young from that group.
It appears that within groups, 4-toe X 4-toe produced on the average
even fewer polydactyls than did 3-toe X3-toe (27.2 percent compared
with 30.6 percent) but the difference has no significance. The result from
Results of different types of matings within 4 subdivisions offamily 35. Number of matings (Mat.), number of yourzg ( U ) and percentage of polydactyls (percent 4-T)
are recorded.
(9 PERCEIYT-~~
(17 PERCENT-29 PERCENT)
(32 PERCENT-42 PERCENT)
(49 PERCENT-69 PERCENT)
VARIABILITY OF DIGITS IN GUINEA PIGS
3-toeX4-toe diverges considerably from the others but depends on too
few matings to be.given much importance. It is clear that the factors
responsible for differences in the number of toes among animals of the
same substrain must be practicalIy wholly non-genetic.
Returning to the total population, it is of interest to find the correlation
between parent and off spring. Tetrachoric coefficients were obtained by
formula from the totals of table 3, based on 1976 offspring but
only 190 matings. (Most of the tetrachoric correlations given in this paper
were calculated from very convenient graphs prepared by my colleagues
Prof. L. L. THURSTONE
and LEONE CHESTRE in mimeographed form.)
The assumption is again made that there is a graded scale of factor com-
binations back of the alternative categories, normal and polydactyl. Sim-
ilar correlations were obtained from each of the four subdivisions of the
data and averaged.
CORRELATION
POPULATION
AVERAQE OF
4 SWDIVISIONS
Offspring with dam
Offspring with sire
It is again brought out that there is no genetic variability within the
substrains. Even in the total population environmental differences are
clearly much more important than genetic ones.
With homozygosis within strains, a correlation of + .183 between parent
and offspring indicates that 18.3 percent of the variance of the total stock
(on the scale of factor combinations) is due to hereditary differences and
81.7 percent to environmental ones. This agrees well with the estimate of
18.5 percent of the variance as due to substrain differentiation previously
The results in the Chicago stock, not included in the above, are given
in table 4 below.
Results from different types of matings in Chicago stock.
PERCENT 4-TOE
SEWALL WRIGHT
There is a slight indication of hereditary difference between 3-toed and
4-toed animals but the number of matings is too small to attribute much
significance to it. It is interesting that the tetrachoric correlation between
dam and offspring (+.19) is here greater than that between sire and off-
spring (+.04) which is the opposite of the situation in the Beltsville stock.
The average parent-offspring correlation (+. 11) is not certainly significant
even on the basis of a standard error calculated from number of offspring.
Taken at face value, however, it would indicate about the same proportion
of the variance to be genetically determined as in the Beltsville data since
under random mating a correlation of +.11 between parent and offspring
implies 22 percent determination by heredity. We shall return to this ques-
tion later.
CORRELATION BETWEEN LITTER-MATES
Most tangible environmental factors should act alike on litter-mates.
If such factors are important there should be a tendency for litters to con-
sist wholly of 3-toed or wholly of 4-toed young. Table 5 shows an analysis
The distribution of polydactyls in litters of 2 or more in the Beltsville and Chicago stocks. The theoretical
values (Calc.) are derived from binomial expansions based on the percentage of polydactyls
in each group.
NUMBER PERCENT OF
NUMBER OF 4-TOE IN LITTER
BIZE OF LITTER
Beltsville 2
36.4 - - -
Beltsville 3
4-35.5 - -
Beltsville 4
Beltsville 5
Beltsville 6
VARIABILITY OF DIGITS IN GUINEA PIGS
of litters of 2, 3 and 4 in the Beltsville stock from this standpoint. The
litter sizes are those after deducting unclassified young (feet eaten when
found). The observed frequencies (Obs.) of litters containing no poly-
dactyls, one, two, et cetera are compared with frequencies (Calc.) expected
on the assumption of random occurrence in litters. Litters of 2 contained
35.7 percent polydactyls. If there were no tendency to concurrence in lit-
ters, the chance of occurrence of 0, 1 and 2 polydactyls (D) respectively
should be according to the terms of the expression (.643 N+.357 D)z.
Similarly in litters of 3, there were 34.2 percent polydactyls and the fre-
quency of different sorts of litter should be in accordance with the terms
of (.658 N+.342 D)3. In litters of 4 there were 25.5 percent polydactyls
and we expand (.745 N+.255 D)4 to find the expected proportions.
It will be seen that there was a marked excess of litters wholly normal or
wholly polydactyl with corresponding defect of mixed litters (except in the
case of 3 polydactyls in litters of 4).
A similar analysis is presented of the less numerous Chicago data for
litters of 2 and 3. Here again there is an excessive number of litters which
consist wholly of one or the other sort of young and a deficiency of mixed
litters. The x2 method can be used to test the significance of these differ-
ences. Two degrees of freedom are lost in each case through acceptance of
the total numbers and the total percentages of polydactyls in each size of
litter. Because of small numbers, litters with 3 and with 4 polydactyls are
combined in the case of litters of 4 in the Beltsville data.
LITTER SIE3
Beltsville
. 000 ,000
. 000 , 000
. 000 , 000
There is obviously no doubt of the reality of the tendency to concur-
rence of polydactyly in litter-mates. This contrasts with the low fraternal
correlation with respect to white spotting in the same material and the
absence of any tendency toward concurrence of otocephaly in another in-
bred family.
It is interesting to throw this result into the form of the correlation be-
twsen litter-mates. This can be done by making up 2x2 tables from the
data and calculating the tetrachoric coefficients of correlation. Standard
errors have been calculated by PEARSON’S
formula quoted by KELLEY
 multiplied by a term to allow for the repetition of indi-
SEWALL WRIGHT
viduals in litters larger than 2, namely,
where L is size of
RELTSVILLE DATA
CAICAQO DATA
SIZE OF LITTER
SIZE OF LITTER
The correlations are averaged by the formula
Thus 62 percent of the variability in the Beltsville data and 54 percent
in the Chicago data is determined by factors common to litter-mates. The
difference is not significant but as far as it goes it indicates less genetic
variability in the Chicago data. In the Beltsville data, all of the substrain
differentiation amounting to 18 percent of the total variance is of course
included in that common to litter-mates. The variance common to litter-
mates would be 54 percent . The tables below show
the relations between the left and right feet of the same animals in the
Beltsville and Chicago records; applying the grades “poor” and (‘good” to
single toes.
Correlation between right and left feet o j individuals.
CI 3 Poor 4-T
+l Good 4-T
Beltsville
On reducing these to 2x2 tables by grouping ((poor” and “good”
together, the tetrachoric correlations come out +.779 k .015 in the
Beltsville data and +.73f.05 in the Chicago data. The correlation
within a homozygous substrain of the Beltsville stock should be about
), exactly that found in the Chicago data. This is another
indication that genetic variability was practically lacking in the latter.
It is interesting to compare this correlation with that between single
hind feet of litter-mates. The data below do this for 322 litter-mates of the
Chicago data.
SEWALL WRIGHT
The correlations betzzeen single feet of litter-mates of Chicago data.
There is obviously no special tendency toward resemblance of feet of
the same side. The average, +.59, is surprisingly close to the correlation
between the two feet of the same animal (+.73). Of the factors determin-
ing the condition of one foot, 27 percent act on that foot alone, 14 percent
act on both feet of the individual but not on litter-mates, while 59 percent
act alike on litter-mates.
Correlations of +.59 between single feet of litter-mates and of +.73 be-
tween feet of the same individual imply a correlation of +.68 (=
4 x - 5 9 )
between the total factor complexes of litter-mates considered as the sum
of those for the separate feet. The observed value +.54 is smaller probably
because of lack of linearity in the relations of the factors for single toes and
the scale for individuals based on the presence of at least one extra toe.
One point that comes out of both the Beltsville and Chicago data is
the slightly greater frequency of little toes on the left side. Combining
there were 26.0 percent on the left side and 22.2 percent on the right side.
The difference is about 3 times its standard error. Both CASTLE and
found an excess number of left digits.
There is no relation to sex. In the Beltsville data the percentage of poly-
dactyls was 31.1 percent in the males and exactly the same to the first
decimal place in females. In the Chicago data, there were 41.1 percent
among the males and 42.4 percent among the females. This lack of differ-
ence contrasts with the important sex differences among otocephalic mon-
sters and in amount of white spotting.
AGE OF DAM
With a large proportion of the variability common to litter-mates and
only about half of this common to non-litter-mates from the same mating,
it should be possible to find some indication from the records of the nature
of the more important factors.
VARIABILITY OF DIGITS IN GUINEA PIGS
The most important relation to be found was one which was quite un-
expected, namely with age of mother. Table 13 gives the results by
months. The Beltsville inbred stock is here combined with
data from some selection experiments at Beltsville in which animals from
family 35 were mated inter se without regard to relationship (246 animals)
and with the Chicago data (358 animals). Figure 4 shows the percentage
of polydactyls by month to 14 months and by such groupings of months
thereafter as to keep the number in each group above 100. There is a rapid
drop from the 83 percent and 60 percent produced by 3 and 4 month old
females respectively to the 17 percent produced on the average by all
females over 15 months of age. There is no question of the statistical
significance by any method of calculation.
. .. . . . .
Furthermore, among the young which are 4-toed at all, the percentage
of good polydactyls decreases rapidly with increasing age of the mother.
It is desirable to find whether these age effects are found in subdivisions
of the family which differ markedly in total percentage of polydactyly.
Tables 14-20 show the distributions in the same four divisions of the
Beltsville inbred stock used previously, in the crossbred Beltsville stock,
and in the Chicago stock as well as in the grand total, each by four age
groups. In every case there is a significant downward trend of polydactyly
in relation to age of mother. The squared correlation eta either for the
Beltsville inbreds or the total is about .13, indicating 13 percent determina-
tion of the total variance by age of dam.
The effect has been presented as of age of mother rather than of father,
but the Beltsville data give little basis for a distinction. Almost all of the
brother-sister matings were between litter-mates and most of those in the
miscellaneous group were between animals of nearly the same age. The
exceptional cases however pointed to age of dam.
Occurrence of polydactyly in relation to age of mother. Age 3 meansfrom 3 months to 4 months, etc.
AQE OF DAM IN MONTHS
Good 4-toe
Poor 4-toe
Percent4-Toe
AGE OF DAM IN MONTH8
AQE OF DAM IN MONTHS
Poor 4-toe
Good 4-toe
VARIABILITY OF DIGITS IN GUINEA PIGS
Correlation of Polydactyly with age of mother.
Group I. Beltsville.
Group IV. Beltsville.
AGE OF DAM (MONTHS)
AQE OF DAM (MONTHS)
81.0 69.5 50.0 30.2 55.8
q = = . l l , q=.32
q2 = .20, q = .45
Group II. Beltsville.
AGE OF DAM (MONTHS)
Beltsville crossbred.
AGE OF DAM (MONTES)
34.6 28.2 21.9 12.1 21.4
57.1 26.8 13.4
q2= .07, q= .27
Group III. Beltsville.
q2=.21, q=.45
AQE OF DAM (Momna)
AGE OF DAM (MONTES)
68.4 54.4 28.9 22.0 38.4
86.4 45.2 33.3 27.0 42.5
q2=.18, q=.43
q2=.25, q = S O
SEWALL WRIGHT
Grand Total
AQE OF DAM (MONTES)
Poor 4-toe
Good 4-toe
Percent 4-toe
Percent good of 4-toe
Percent good of total
v2=.134, q=.366
In the Chicago experiments an especial effort was made to mate young
females with old males and vice versa. Table 21 shows the results classi-
fied in 4 age groups for each parent. A relation to age of mother comes out
as definitely as in the Beltsville data (7=.50). The slight downward
Occurrence of 3-toed and &oed young in relation to ages of sire and of dam. Chicago data.
AQE OF DAM
AQE OF SIRE
PERCEPFF 4-T
Percent 4-toe
trend in relation to age of sire in part reflects a slight correlation with age
of dam present even in this data. It is not statistically significant. It is
probable the entire effect is one of age of dam.
Table 22 shows the percentage of 4-toed young in each of the 4 sub-
divisions of the Beltsville data in relation to the age of the grandparents at
birth of the parents (or dam in the few cases in which the parents were not
litter-mates). There appears to be a slight downward trend of the per-
centage in the totals (next to last column) but this practically disappears
(last column) on correcting for the irregularities in distribution among the
4 groups by weighting the percentages by the totals for each group. Cor-
rection for age of dam was tried but made no appreciable change in the re-
VARIABILITY OF DIGITS IN GUINEA PIGS
Occurrence of polydactyly in relation to age of dam's parents. Beltsville
SUBSTRAIN (BELTSVILLE)
AQE OF QRANDAM
PERCENT 4-T
NUMBER PERCENT NUMBER PERCENT NUMBER PERCENT NUMBER PERCENT
sult. There is thus no reliable indication of any persistence of the effect
beyond the immediate progeny of immature females. A direct physiologi-
cal effect of age of mother on the egg or embryo is indicated.
Polydactyly (D) in relation to age of dam ( A ) and birth rank ( B ) in Beltsville data.
AQE OF DAY
212 57.5 137 45.3
- - - - - -
Total 212 57.5 137 45.3
14.2 1976 31.1
There is a possibility that the effect may be one of birth rank rather than
age of dam, since these were closely correlated. Table 23 shows the rela-
tions in the Beltsville stock. There is a somewhat closer relation of poly-
dactyly to age of dam ( V ~ A
= - .360 rt .027) than to parity (qDB = - .343
If: .027) with a correlation of +.922 f
.034 between age and parity. The cor-
relation of polydactyly with parity is reduced to the insignificant figure
- .030 If: .030 by holding age of dam constant while the correlation with
age remains significant (- .121 k .030) . It is concluded that parity has no effect
on occurrence of polydactyly by itself.
SEWALL WRIGHT
Occurrence of 3-toed and 4-toed young in relation to age and weight of dam.
AGE OF DAM (CHICAGO)
WEIGHT OF DAM
PERCENT 4-T
Percent 4-toe
It is possible that the weight of the dam is more important than her age.
The weights at the time of birth of the young were taken in the Chicago
data. The relation to polydactyly and to age of dam are shown in table 24.
It is evident from the marginal totals that the occurrence of polydactyly
is much less closely correlated (negatively) with weight (v = - .23 k .07)
than with age (v= -.53 &.OS). The correlation between weight and age
of dam is +.58 and the partial correlation of polydactyly with weight, for
constant age comes out with reversed sign +.11 f .07. On the whole it is
the heavier (and hence more rapidly growing) females of a given age class,
rather than the lighter ones which produce the highest percentage of poly-
dactyls although the relation is of doubtful significance.
The averages of variola characters at dijerent ages of the dam. The standard deviation of size of
litter was 1.01, for birth weight 16.5 reduced to 12.8 for constant sire of litters (correlation -.63), for
weaning weight 45.5 reduced to 38.5for constont size of litter (correlation -.53), and for percentage
of white 18.9 percent.
PERCENT WHITE
VARIABILITY OF DIGITS IN GUINEA PIGS
It seemed likely that a study of other effects of the age of the mothers
might throw light on the unexpected relation to percentage of polydactyly.
Table 25 presents a summary of the principal results in 6 age classes chosen
to include approximately equal numbers. Except for an equally unexpected
effect on the percentage of white in the young, there is remarkably little
indication of age effects. Size of litter is at its highest in females which are
approaching or have just reached maturity and lowest in the oldest group.
There is a decreasing percentage of stillborn young with increasing ma-
turity but a rise in the oldest group makes this difficult to relate to poly-
dactyly. Mortality between birth and weaning shows nothing significant.
The birth weight of young born alive and weaning weight show some
tendency to increase with increasing age of the mother but the trends are
slight and hardly significant.
The females do not reach full size until 15 months of age. On the whole
it appears that the offspring from immature females are at some disad-
vantage, but this is very slight. The point established by these comparisons
is that immaturity of the mother has a much greater influence on the de-
velopment of an atavistic little toe by the young than on a number of char-
acters, in which an effect would seem more likely on a priori grounds.
CORRECTIONS FOR AGE OF DAM
The important effect of age of dam makes it necessary to test whether
other apparent effects may not be merely consequences of an irregular age
distribution.
The results of dijerent types of matings classijed by age of dam. Beltsnille.
AQE OF DAM (RELTSVILLE)
NUMBER PERCENT
NUMBER PERCENT NUMBER PERCENT NUMBER PERCENT NUMBER PERCENT
PERCENT 4-T
3-toe 3-toe
16.4 1019 26.6
3-toe 4-toe
4-toe 3-toe
4-toe 4-toe
Table 26 shows that correction for age distribution in the Beltsville
stock has little effect on the production of different types of mating (last
two columns). There is some increase in the regularity of the results. In the
Chicago stock on the other hand, it happened that matings of 4-toe X4-toe
produced very few young in the last age classes. On weighting the per-
SEWALL WRIGHT
The restilts of different types of matings, classified by age of dam. Chicago.
AQE OF DAM (CHICAW)
PERCENT 4-T
NUMRER PERCENT NUMRER PERCENT NUMBER PERCENT NUMBER PERCENT
3-toe 3-toe
3-toe $-toe
4-toe 3-toe
4-toe 4-toe
115 27.0. 358 42.5
3-toeparent
4-toeparent
centage of polydactyls from each type of mating and age class by the total
number from that age class, the evidence for heredity largely disappears.
On combining males and females to increase the number it appears that 3-
toed parents produced 41.2 percent polydactyls and 4-toed parents only
slightly more, 43.5 percent, although there was some tendency to mate 3-
toe with 3-toe and 4-toe with 4-toe. The tetrachoric correlation between
parent and offspring from this data is only +.03 instead of +.11. This re-
sult, in conjunction with the reduced correlation between litter-mates and
between right and left foot in the data lead to the conclusion that genetic
variation is practically absent in this group descended from a single mating
in the 22nd generation of brother-sister mating.
SEASONAL EFFECTS
The Beltsville records of family 35 were tabulated by month of birth.
Table 28 shows the percentage of ?-toed young in each month.
Percentage of polydactyls by months of birth. Beltsville.
MONTR OF BIRTH
PERCENT 4-T
PERCENT 4-T
May-October
November-April
VARIABILITY OF DIGITS IN GUINEA PIGS
There is an unquestionably significant cycle with respect to polydactyly.
The x2 test (24 classes, 11 degrees of freedom, x2 =48) yields a probability
of .000002 that the differences can be due to random sampling with no
allowance for the grouping of signs. But in every month from May to
October there were less than 30 percent polydactyls (average 25.5 per-
cent) and in every one of the remaining 6 months there were more than
30 percent (average 37.5 percent). A difference in average is shown within
each of the four groups (table 29) into which the family has been divided
and also from dams of each age class (table 30). This seasonal cycle ac-
counts for about 3.5 percent of the total variance.
Percentage of polydactyls in two 6-mmths periods in each group of substrains. Beltsville.
GROUP3 OF SUBSTRAINS
MOWAS OF BIRTH
May-October
Percentage of polydactyls in two 6-month periods at diferent ages of the dams. Beltsville.
AGE OF DAM
MONTFI.RS OF BIRTE
May-October
It is somewhat disconcerting therefore to find that in the Chicago data
the cycle is reversed. There were 51.5 percent polydactyls born from May
to October and only 34.6 percent from November to April. This difference
is 3.2 times.its standard error on the basis of the numbers of young in the
two periods, but becomes somewhat doubtful on allowing for the intra-
litter correlation of +.54. This result can not, of course, invalidate the
significance of the Beltsville cycle but makes it clear that it is not season
per se which is responsible.
Table 31 shows the averages of a number of characters in the two 6-
month periods which are most significant for polydactyly. A tabulation by
SEWALL WRIGHT
Averages of various claaracters in two 6-month periods. Beltsville. Birthweight is of liveborn young.
PERCENT WAITE
YONTHSOFRIRTK
months indicates that this division of the year is as significant as any in the
other cases. It is remarkable that polydactyly should show a more marked
seasonal variation (in the Beltsville data) than such characters as birth
weight and percentage of stillborn (neither of which showed any appreciable
cycle during this period) or size of litter, percentage of mortality between
birth and weaning and weight at weaning. However, the litters were
smaller, the postnatal mortality higher and the weaning weight lower dur-
ing the period (November to April) in which the percentage of polydactyls
was high, as compared with the remaining 6 months. On the whole poly-
dactyly appears to be associated with unfavorable conditions. The per-
centage of white in the coat is included in table 31 as a character which
agreed with polydactyly in showing an important effect of age of dam, but
it shows no seasonal cycle in the same animals in which polydactyly shows
a marked cycle. Even size of litter and the mortality percentages give no
indication of a cycle in the Chicago data in which the cycle for polydactyly
seems to have been reversed.
The most important difference between the Beltsville and Chicago con-
ditions was probably in the green feed. There was a rather definite feeding
cycle at Beltsville: freshly cut grass and green alfalfa from late spring to
mid-fall, the period in which relatively few polydactyls were born; stored
cabbage and kale, often inadequate in quantity or quality during the rest
of the year when many polydactyls were born. Stored cabbage has been
used throughout the year at Chicago.
About all that can be said is that some environmental factor, generally
unfavorable, but with a relatively specific tendency to induce polydactyly,
varied seasonally under the conditions at one laboratory, but is not in-
evitably associated with season as shown by results in another laboratory.
SIZE OF LITTER
Table 32 shows the percentages of 4-toed young in each size of litter.
There are rather striking differences in the Beltsville data and ones which
appear to be statistically significant even if litters instead of individuals
VARIABILITY OF DIGITS IN GUINEA PIGS
Percentage of polydactyls among young born in each size of litter. Beltsville and Chicago.
BELTSVILLE
8173 OF LITTER
NUMBER YOUNG
PERCENT 4-T
NUMBER YOUNQ
PERCENT 4-T
are made the units. It is, however, difficult to interpret a high percentage
in litters of 2 and 3 and low percentages in litters of 1, 4 and 5. The Chi-
cago data do not confirm the order in the Beltsville data. About all that
can be said at present seems to be that there are relations of some sort be-
tween factors which affect size of litter and ones which affect number of
COMPARISONS OF 3-TOED AND $-TOED INDIVIDUALS
There is not much difference in the characteristics of 3-toed and 4-toed
individuals apart from digit number. The Beltsville data show a lower
percentage of 4-toed born dead than of 3-toed (15.8 percent vs. 22.9 per-
cent). Not much confidence can be placed in this, however, since it is pos-
sible that a rudimentary little toe was overlooked more frequently in the
young born dead than in those born alive in these records in which digit
numbers were recorded merely as a matter of routine in a large colony of
which family 35 constituted only a small portion. In the Chicago data the
feet were examined with the greatest care in all stillborn animals of family
35 and no significant relation was found (30.3 percent born dead among
polydactyls and 33 .O percent among normals).
The percentage of liveborn which died between birth and weaning was
higher among polydactyls in the Beltsville data (34.2 percent vs. 19.2 per-
cent). There is no reason for any systematic error in the routine records
here, since these animals were all alive when recorded. There is an indica-
tion here that the factors which determine polydactyly are otherwise un-
favorable, confirming previous indications. The parallelism in the seasonal
cycles of polydactyly and this mortality percentage of course contributes
a little (about 0.9 percent) to the above difference. The Chicago data show
no important difference between 4-toed and 3-toed in this respect (22.6
percent of the 4-toed and 21.7 percent of the 3-toed died before weaning).
The average birth weight of the 4-toed young born alive (81.2 grams)
was practically the same as for 3-toed young (81.0 grams). The 4-toed,
SEWALL WRIGHT
however, had the advantage of being born in slightly smaller litters (aver-
age 2.72) than 3-toed (2.84). Correction for the regression of - 11.3 grams
per unit change in litter size brings the birth weight of 4-toed below that of
3-toed but hardly to a significant extent (difference 1.1 grams).
The average weights at weaning show more difference: 4-toed 221.4
grams, 3-toed 228.8 grams. The difference is increased to about 10.0 grams
on allowing for the regression of -26.2 grams per unit change in litter size.
This appears to be statistically significant, having a standard error of
about 2.4 grams on the basis of a standard deviation of 38.5 grams (cor-
rected for size of litter) and the number of animals involved (848 3-toed,
392 4-toed). It is significant even on increasing some 25 percent to allow
for the intra-litter correlations of the characters involved. The parallelism
in seasonal cycle contributes very little to this difference. Again there is an
indication that the factors of polydactyly are on the whole of an injurious
sort. More important, however, is the conclusion that the physical differ-
ences between 3-toed and 4-toed representatives of family 35 are of a trivial
sort. The environmental factors determining polydactyly must be for the
most part rather specific for this character.
The recurrence of an atavistic little toe is not uncommon in strains of
guinea pigs. Among 23 inbred families, 12 never produced 4-toed young,
5 produced a few sporadics, while the remaining 6 produced percentages
ranging from 2 to 19 . A branch of one of these, derived from
a single mating in the 12th generation of brothey-sister mating produced
31 percent at Beltsville, Maryland. Subdivisions of this ranged from 9 per-
cent to 69 percent. A large random-bred group derived from a single
mating of this family in the 22nd generation, produced 42 percent (in
It is assumed that the presence or absence of the little toe depends on
whether the combination of factors exceeds or falls below a threshold. On
a scale of uniform factor effects, 18 percent of the variance of the Belts-
ville stock was genetic, due to substrain differences (squared biserial eta
.18, also parent-offspring correlation .18). There was no demonstrable
genetic variability within substrains. Genetic variability was also negligi-
ble in the Chicago stock (parent-offspring correlation .03, after correction
for other factors).
Litter-mates were determined 62 percent by common factors in the
Beltsville stock (correlation +.62). This includes the genetic factors and
54 percent of the non-genetic ones. In exact agreement is the correlation
of .54 between litter-mates in the Chicago stock.
The non-genetic factors common to litter-mates are equally divided be-
VARIABILITY OF DIGITS IN GUINEA PIGS
tween ones also common to non-litter-mates from the same mating (cor-
relation .27) and ones common only to litter-mates (Chicago stock). These
results lead to the following analysis of variability.
Hereditary differences (substrains)
Environmental differences common to
Individual
There is frequent asymmetry. The correlation between left and right
was .78 in the Beltsville data and .73 in the Chicago data. That between
single feet of litter-mates was .59 in the Chicago data. These results in
combination with the preceding lead to the following analyses of the fac-
tors responsible for digit numbers on a single foot.
Hereditary differences
Environmental differences common to
Individuals
Part of the variance assigned to the individual in the analysis of indi-
vidual variability is spurious due to non-additive effects. The analysis of
the variance of single feet is more satisfactory.
No direct evidence was obtained of the nature of the non-genetic factors
affecting whole sibships. Presumably long-continuing conditions of the
mother are involved.
The most important factor affecting whole litters is age of the mother.
This determined 13 percent of the total variance in the Beltsville stock and
(less reliably) 25 percent in the Chicago stock. Immature females produce
much higher percentages of 4-toed young than mature females. The effect
is primarily neither one of parity nor of weight of mother. Indeed the
heavier females of a given age produce slightly more polydactyls than the
lighter ones. A physiological competition for some substance between
growing mother and embryo seems the most plausible suggestion.
SEWALL WRIGHT
A seasonal cycle, high percentage of polydactyls in late fall, winter and
early spring, low the rest of the year, accounted for 3 percent of the total
variance in the Beltsville stock. That this was not an effect of season per se
was indicated by a reversal in the Chicago stock. The seasonal effect and
relation to rate of growth and death rate, indicate that unfavorable con-
ditions tend to increase the percentage of polydactyls. The 4-toed indi-
viduals are not, however, at all handicapped in prenatal growth or chances
of live birth and only slightly in postnatal growth and viability.
No direct evidence has been obtained of the nature of the individual
factors. The extremely local action of important factors is indicated by the
frequent asymmetry. In this the left foot is slightly more likely than the
right to develop a little toe. There is no relation to sex.
A recognition and evaluation of the importance of non-genetic factors
in determining the presence or absence of the little toe is a necessary
foundation for analysis of the genetic differences between different stocks.