TextBoxes++: A Single-Shot Oriented Scene Text
Minghui Liao, Baoguang Shi, Xiang Bai, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Scene text detection is an important step of scene
text recognition system and also a challenging problem. Different
from general object detection, the main challenges of scene
text detection lie on arbitrary orientations, small sizes, and
signiﬁcantly variant aspect ratios of text in natural images. In
this paper, we present an end-to-end trainable fast scene text
detector, named TextBoxes++, which detects arbitrary-oriented
scene text with both high accuracy and efﬁciency in a single
network forward pass. No post-processing other than an efﬁcient
non-maximum suppression is involved. We have evaluated the
proposed TextBoxes++ on four public datasets. In all experiments,
TextBoxes++ outperforms competing methods in terms of text localization accuracy and runtime. More speciﬁcally, TextBoxes++
achieves an f-measure of 0.817 at 11.6fps for 1024×1024 ICDAR
2015 Incidental text images, and an f-measure of 0.5591 at 19.8fps
for 768×768 COCO-Text images. Furthermore, combined with a
text recognizer, TextBoxes++ signiﬁcantly outperforms the stateof-the-art approaches for word spotting and end-to-end text
recognition tasks on popular benchmarks. Code is available at:
 plusplus.
Index Terms—Scene text detection, multi-oriented text, word
spotting, scene text recognition, convolutional neural networks.
I. INTRODUCTION
Scene text is one of the most general visual objects in
natural scenes, which frequently appears on road signs, license
plates, product packages, etc. Reading scene text facilitates
a lot of useful applications, such as image-based geolocation. Some applications of scene text detection and recognition are – . Despite the similarity to traditional OCR,
scene text reading is much more challenging due to large
variations in both foreground text and background objects,
arbitrary orientations, aspect ratios, as well as uncontrollable
lighting conditions, etc., as summarized in . Owing to
these inevitable challenges and complexities, traditional text
detection methods tend to involve multiple processing steps,
e.g. character/word candidate generation – , candidate
ﬁltering , and grouping . They often end up struggling
to get each module work properly, requiring much effort in
tuning parameters and designing heuristic rules, also slowing
down detection speed.
Inspired by the recent developments in object detection ,
 , we propose to detect text by directly predicting word
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(NSFC) (No. 61733007 and 61573160), the National Program for Support of
Top-notch Young Professionals and the Program for HUST Academic Frontier
Youth Team. (Corresponding author: Xiang Bai.)
Minghui Liao, Baoguang Shi, Xiang Bai are with the School of Electronic
Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, 430074, China. Email: {mhliao, xbai}@hust.edu.cn
 .
bounding boxes with quadrilaterals via a single neural network that is end-to-end trainable. We call it TextBoxes++.
Concretely, we replace the rectangular box representation in
conventional object detector by a quadrilateral or oriented
rectangle representation. Furthermore, to achieve better receptive ﬁeld that covers text regions which are usually long,
we design some “long” convolutional kernels to predict the
bounding boxes. TextBoxes++ directly outputs word bounding
boxes at multiple layers by jointly predicting text presence
and coordinate offsets to anchor boxes , also known as
default boxes . The ﬁnal outputs are the non-maximum
suppression outputs on all boxes. A single forward pass in
the network densely detects multi-scale text boxes all over the
image. As a result, the detector has a great advantage in speed.
We will show by experiments that TextBoxes++ achieves both
high accuracy and high speed with a single forward pass on
single-scale inputs, and even higher accuracy when performing
multiple passes on multi-scale inputs. Some text detection
examples on several challenging images are depicted in Fig. 1.
We further combine TextBoxes++ with CRNN , an
open-source text recognition module. The recognizer not only
produces extra recognition outputs but also regularizes text
detection with its semantic-level awareness, thus further boosts
the accuracy of word spotting considerably. The combination
of TextBoxes++ and CRNN yields state-of-the-art performance
on both word spotting and end-to-end text recognition tasks,
which appears to be a simple yet effective solution to robust
text reading in the wild.
A preliminary version of this study called TextBoxes was
exposed in . The current paper is an extension of ,
which extends TextBoxes with four main improvements: 1)
We extend TextBoxes, a horizontal text detector, to a detector
that can handle arbitrary-oriented text; 2) We revisit and
improve the network structure and the training process, which
leads to a further performance boost; 3) More comparative
experiments have been conducted to further demonstrate the
efﬁciency of TextBoxes++ in detecting arbitrary-oriented text
in natural images; 4) We reﬁne the combination of detection
and recognition by proposing a novel score which elegantly
utilizes both the information of detection and recognition.
The main contributions of this paper are three folded: 1)
The proposed arbitrary-oriented text detector TextBoxes++
is accurate, fast, and end-to-end trainable. As compared to
closely related methods, TextBoxes++ has a much simpler yet
effective pipeline. 2) This paper also offers some comparative
studies on some important design choices and other issues,
including bounding box representations, model conﬁgurations,
and the effect of different evaluation methods. The conclusions
 
Fig. 1: Detection results on some challenging images.
of these studies may generalize to other text reading algorithms
and give insights on some important issues. 3) We also
introduce the idea of using recognition results to further reﬁne
the detection results thanks to the semantic-level awareness of
recognized text. To the best of our knowledge, this intuitive
yet effective combination has not been exploited before.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
brieﬂy reviews some related works on object detection and
scene text detection. The proposed method is detailed in
Section III. We present in Section IV some experimental
results. A detailed comparison with some closely related
methods is given in Section V. Finally, conclusions are drawn
in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORKS
A. Object detection
Object detection is a fundamental problem in computer
vision, which aims to detect general objects in images. Recently, there are two mainstream CNN-based methods on this
topic: R-CNN based methods , , and YOLO-based
methods , .
a) R-CNN based object detection: R-CNN views
a detection problem as a classiﬁcation problem leveraging
the development of classiﬁcation using convolutional neural networks(CNN). It ﬁrst generates proposals by selective
search and then feeds the proposals into a CNN to
extract deep features based on which an SVM is applied
for classiﬁcation. Fast R-CNN improves R-CNN by
extracting deep features of the proposals from the feature
maps via RoI pooling instead of cropping from the origin
image. This signiﬁcantly simpliﬁes the pipeline of R-CNN.
Furthermore, a regression branch is also used in fast R-CNN to
get more accurate bounding boxes. Faster R-CNN further
improves the speed of fast R-CNN by introducing an
end-to-end trainable region proposal network based on anchor
boxes to generate proposals instead of using selective search.
The generated proposals are then fed into a Fast R-CNN
network for detection.
b) YOLO-based
detection:
the feature maps of the whole image. A convolutional layer
is used to predict the bounding boxes on different areas
instead of the RPN and RoI pooling used in . This results
in a signiﬁcantly reduced runtime. Another YOLO-based
method is SSD which predicts object bounding boxes
using default boxes of different aspect ratios on different
stages. The concept of default boxes is similar to anchor
boxes , which are ﬁxed as the reference systems of
the corresponding ground truths. The translation and scale
invariances for regression are achieved by using default boxes
of different aspect ratios and scales at each location, which
eases the regression problem. SSD further improves the
performance of original YOLO while maintaining its runtime.
B. Text detection
A scene text reading system is usually composed of two
main components: text detection and text recognition. The
former component localizes text in images mostly in the form
of word bounding boxes. The latter one transcripts cropped
word images into machine-interpretable character sequences.
In this paper, we cover both aspects, but more attention is paid
to detection. In general, most text detectors can be roughly
classiﬁed into several categories following two classiﬁcation
strategies based on primitive detection targets and shape of
target bounding boxes, respectively.
a) Classiﬁcation strategy based on primitive detection
targets: Most text detection methods can be roughly categorized into three categories:
1) Character-based: Individual characters or parts of the
text are ﬁrst detected and then grouped into words . A
representative example is the method proposed in which
locates characters by classifying Extremal Regions and then
groups the detected characters by an exhaustive search method.
Other popular examples of this type are the works in – ;
2) Word-based: Words are directly extracted in the similar
manner as general object detection , – . In the representative work , the authors propose an R-CNN-based 
framework, where word candidates are ﬁrst generated with
class-agnostic proposal generators followed by a random forest
classiﬁer. Then a convolutional neural network for bounding
box regression is adopted to reﬁne the bounding boxes. YOLO
network is used in which also relies on a classiﬁer
and a regression step to remove some false positives;
3) Text-line-based: Text lines are detected and then broken
into words. The works in , – are such examples.
In , the authors propose to detect text lines making use
of the symmetric characteristics of text. This idea is further
exploited in by using a fully convolutional network to
localize text lines.
b) Classiﬁcation strategy based on the shape of target
bounding boxes: Following this classiﬁcation strategy, the text
detection methods can be categorized into two categories:
1) Horizontal or nearly horizontal: These methods focus on
detecting horizontal or nearly horizontal text in images. An
algorithm based on AdaBoost is proposed in . Then, Yi
et al. propose a 3-stage framework which consists of
boundary clustering, stroke segmentation, and string fragment
classiﬁcation. Some examples which are inspired by object
detection methods are , . They all use horizontal
rectangle bounding boxes as predict targets, which is very
similar to general object detection methods. Another popular
method of this type is the work in which detects nearly
horizontal text parts and then links them together to form
word candidates. Besides, Cao et al. try to use deblurring
techniques for more robust detection results.
2) Multi-oriented: As compared to horizontal or nearly horizontal detection, multi-oriented text detection is more robust
because scene text can be in arbitrary orientations in images.
There exist several works which attempt to detect multioriented text in images. In , the authors propose two sets
of rotation-invariant features for detecting multi-oriented text.
The ﬁrst set is component level features such as estimated
center, scale, direction before feature computation. The second one is chain level features such as size variation, color
self-similarity, and structure self-similarity. Kang et al. 
build a graph of MSERs followed by a higher-order
correlation clustering to generate multi-oriented candidates.
A uniﬁed framework for multi-oriented text detection and
recognition is proposed in . They use the same features for
text detection and recognition. Finally, a texton-based texture
classiﬁer is used to discriminate text and no-text candidates.
In , , multi-oriented text bounding boxes are generated
from text saliency maps given by a dedicated segmentation
network. Recently, Shi et al. propose to detect text
with segments and links. More precisely, they ﬁrst detect a
number of text parts named segments and meanwhile predict
the linking relationships among neighboring segments. Then
related segments are linked together to form text bounding
boxes. A U-shape fully convolutional network is used in 
for detecting multi-oriented text. In this work, the authors also
introduce a PVANet for efﬁciency. Quadrilateral sliding
windows, a Monte-Carlo method, and a smooth Ln loss are
proposed in to detect oriented text, which is effective
while complicated.
C. TextBoxes++ Versus some related works
TextBoxes++ is a word-based and multi-oriented text detector. In contrast to , which consists of three detection steps
and each step includes more than one algorithm, TextBoxes++
has a much simpler pipeline. Only an end-to-end training
of one network is required. As described in Section II-B,
Tian et al. and Shi et al. propose to detect text
parts and then link them together. Both of them achieve
impressive results for long words. However, the proposed
method in has limited adaptability for oriented text due
to the single orientation of the Bidirectional Long Short-Term
Memory (BLSTM) , and the work in has two super
parameters for linking the segments, which are determined
by grid search and difﬁcult to adjust. The method in is
considered as the current state-of-the-art approach. It relies
on a U-shape network to simultaneously generate a score
map for text segmentation and the bounding boxes. Yet, an
accurate text region segmentation is challenging in itself. Besides, The extra pyramid-like deconvolutional layers involved
in text region segmentation require additional computation.
Whereas, TextBoxes++ directly classiﬁes and regresses the
default boxes on the convolutional feature maps, where richer
information is reserved as compared to the segmentation score
map. TextBoxes++ is thus much simpler, avoiding the time
consuming on pyramid-like deconvolution.
One of the most related work to TextBoxes++ is SSD , a
recent development in object detection. Indeed, TextBoxes++
is inspired by SSD . The original SSD aims to detect
general objects in images but fails on words having extreme
aspect ratios. TextBoxes++ relies on speciﬁcally designed textbox layers to efﬁciently solve this problem. This results in a
signiﬁcant performance improvement. Furthermore, SSD can
only generate bounding boxes in terms of horizontal rectangles, while TextBoxes++ can generate arbitrarily oriented
bounding boxes in terms of oriented rectangles or general
quadrilaterals to deal with oriented text.
Another closely related work to TextBoxes++ is the
method in , which proposes quadrilateral sliding windows and a Monte-Carlo method for detecting oriented text.
In TextBoxes++, we use horizontal rectangles as default
boxes, and hence have much fewer default boxes in every
region. Beneﬁting from the horizontal rectangle default boxes,
TextBoxes++ also enjoys a much simpler strategy for matching default boxes. Moreover, TextBoxes++ simultaneously
regresses the maximum horizontal rectangles of the bounding
boxes and the quadrilateral bounding boxes, which makes the
training more stable. Furthermore, we propose a novel score
by combining the detection and recognition scores to further
reﬁne the detection results.
The ultimate goal of text detection is to spot words or
recognize text in images. On the other hand, the semantic-level
awareness of spotted words or recognized words can also help
to further regularize text detection results. Following this idea,
we propose to combine a text recognizer with TextBoxes++
for word spotting and end-to-end recognition, and use the
conﬁdence scores of recognized words to regularize the detection outputs of TextBoxes++. For that, we adopt a stateof-the-art text recognizer called CRNN , which directly
outputs character sequences given input images and is also
end-to-end trainable. Other text recognizers such as are also
applicable. Such simple pipeline for word spotting and end-toend recognition is very different from the classical pipelines.
Non-maximum suppression
VGG-16 backbone
Fig. 2: The architecture of TextBoxes++, a fully convolutional network including 13 layers from VGG-16 followed by 10 extra
convolutional layers, and 6 Text-box layers connected to 6 intermediate convolutional layers. Each location of a text-box layer
predicts an n-dimensional vector for each default box consisting of the text presence scores (2 dimensions), horizontal bounding
rectangles offsets (4 dimensions), and rotated rectangle bounding box offsets (5 dimensions) or quadrilateral bounding box
offsets (8 dimensions). A non-maximum suppression is applied during test phase to merge the results of all 6 text-box layers.
Note that “#c” stands for the number of channels.
III. DETECTING ORIENTED TEXT WITH TEXTBOXES++
A. Overview
TextBoxes++ relies on an end-to-end trainable fully convolutional neural network to detect arbitrary-oriented text.
The basic idea is inspired by an object detection algorithm
SSD proposed in . We propose some special designs for
adapting SSD network to efﬁciently detect oriented text in
natural images. More speciﬁcally, we propose to represent
arbitrary-oriented text by quadrilaterals , or oriented
rectangles . Then we adapt the network to predict the
regressions from default boxes to oriented text represented by
quadrilaterals or oriented rectangles. To better cover the text
which could be dense in some area, we propose to densify
default boxes with vertical offsets. Furthermore, we adapt
the convolution kernels to better handle text lines which are
usually long objects as compared to general object detection.
These network adaptions are detailed in Section III-B. Some
speciﬁc training adaptions for arbitrary-oriented text detection
are presented in Section III-C, including on-line hard negative
mining and data augmentation by a novel random cropping
strategy speciﬁcally designed for text which is usually small.
TextBoxes++ detects oriented text at 6 different scales in
6 stages. During the test phase, the multi-stage detection
results are merged together by an efﬁcient cascaded nonmaximum suppression based on IOU threshold of quadrilaterals or oriented rectangles (see Section III-D). Finally,
we also propose an intuitive yet effective idea of using text
recognition to further reﬁne detection results thanks to the
semantic-level awareness of recognized text. This is discussed
in Section III-E.
B. Proposed network
1) Network architecture: The architecture of TextBoxes++
is depicted in Fig. 2. It inherits the popular VGG-16 architecture , keeping the layers from conv1_1 through
conv5_3, and converting the last two fully-connected layers
of VGG-16 into convolutional layers (conv6 and conv7)
by parameters down-sampling . Another eight convolutional layers divided into four stages (conv8 to conv11)
with different resolutions by max-pooling are appended after conv7. Multiple output layers, which we call text-box
layers, are inserted after the last and some intermediate
convolutional layers. They are also convolutional layers to
predict outputs for aggregation and then undergo an efﬁcient
non-maximum suppression (NMS) process. Putting all above
together, TextBoxes++ is a fully-convolutional structure consisting of only convolutional and pooling layers. As a result,
TextBoxes++ can adapt to images of arbitrary size in both
training and testing phases. Compared with a preliminary study
in of this paper, TextBoxes++ replaces the last global
average pooling layer with a convolutional layer, which is
furthermore beneﬁcial for multi-scale training and testing.
2) Default boxes with vertical offsets:
Text-box layers
are the key component of TextBoxes++. A text-box layer
simultaneously predicts text presence and bounding boxes,
conditioned on its input feature maps. The output bounding
boxes of TextBoxes++ include oriented bounding boxes {q}
or {r}, and minimum horizontal bounding rectangles {b}
containing the corresponding oriented bounding boxes. This
is achieved by predicting the regression of offsets from a
number of pre-designed horizontal default boxes at each
location (see Fig. 3 for an example). More precisely, let b0 =
(x0, y0, w0, h0) denote a horizontal default box, which can
also be written as q0 = (xq
or r0 = (xr
0), where (x0, y0) means the
center point of a default box and w0 and h0 are the width and
height of a default box respectively. The relationships among
q0, r0 and b0 are as following:
01 = x0 −w0/2, yq
01 = y0 −h0/2,
02 = x0 + w0/2, yq
02 = y0 −h0/2,
03 = x0 + w0/2, yq
03 = y0 + h0/2,
04 = x0 −w0/2, yq
04 = y0 + h0/2,
01 = x0 −w0/2, yr
01 = y0 −h0/2,
02 = x0 + w0/2, yr
02 = y0 −h0/2,
At each map location, it outputs the classiﬁcation score and
offsets to each associated default box denoted as q0 or r0 in
a convolutional manner. For the quadrilateral representation
of oriented text, the text-box layers predict the values of
(∆x, ∆y, ∆w, ∆h, ∆x1, ∆y1, ∆x2, ∆y2, ∆x3, ∆y3, ∆x4, c),
indicating that a horizontal rectangle b = (x, y, w, h) and a
quadrilateral q = (xq
4) given in the
following are detected with conﬁdence c:
x = x0 + w0∆x,
y = y0 + h0∆y,
w = w0 exp(∆w),
h = h0 exp(∆h),
0n + w0∆xq
n, n = 1, 2, 3, 4
0n + h0∆yq
n, n = 1, 2, 3, 4.
representation
rectangles
(∆x, ∆y, ∆w, ∆h, ∆x1, ∆y1, ∆x2, ∆y2, ∆hr, c),
rotated rectangle r = (xr
2, hr) is calculated as
following:
0n + w0∆xr
n, n = 1, 2
0n + h0∆yr
n, n = 1, 2
0 exp(∆hr).
In the training phase, ground-truth word boxes are matched
to default boxes according to box overlap following the
matching scheme in . As shown in Fig. 3, the minimum
bounding horizontal rectangle of a rotated rectangle or a
quadrilateral is used to match the default boxes for efﬁciency.
Note that there are a number of default boxes with different
aspect ratios at each location. In this way, we effectively divide
words by their aspect ratios, allowing TextBoxes++ to learn
speciﬁc regression and classiﬁcation weights that handle words
of similar aspect ratio. Therefore, the design of default boxes
is highly task-speciﬁc.
Different from general objects, words tend to have large
aspect ratios. Therefore, the preliminary study TextBoxes
in include ”long” default boxes that have large aspect
ratios. Speciﬁcally, for the horizontal text dataset, we deﬁned
6 aspect ratios for default boxes, including 1,2,3,5,7, and 10.
However, TextBoxes++ aims to detect arbitrary-oriented text.
Consequently, we set the aspect ratios of default boxes to
1, 2, 3, 5, 1/2, 1/3, 1/5. Furthermore, text is usually dense on
a certain area, so each default box is set with a vertical offset
to better cover all text, which makes the default boxes dense
in the vertical orientation. An example is shown in Fig. 4. In
Fig. 3: Illustration of the regression (red arrows) from a
matched default box (green dashed) to a ground truth target
quadrilateral (yellow) on a 3 × 3 grid. Note that the black
dashed default box is not matched to the ground truth. The
regression from the matched default box to the minimum
horizontal rectangle (green solid) containing the ground truth
quadrilateral is not shown for a better visualization.
Fig. 4(a), the normal default box (black dashed) in the middle
can not handle the two words close to it at the same time. In
this case, one word would be missed for detection if no vertical
offset is applied. In Fig. 4(b), the normal default boxes does
not cover the bottom word at all, which also demonstrates the
necessity of using default boxes with vertical offsets.
Fig. 4: Vertical offsets of default boxes on a 3 × 3 grid. Black
(resp. yellow) dashed bounding boxes are normal default boxes
(resp. default boxes with vertical offsets). Note that only the
default boxes of appropriate aspect ratio are shown for better
visualization.
3) convolutional layers: In the preliminary study of this
paper for horizontal text detection in , we have adopted
irregular 1 × 5 convolutional ﬁlters instead of the standard
3×3 ones in the text-box layers. This is because that words or
text lines in natural images are usually long objects. However,
these long convolutional ﬁlters are not appropriate for oriented
text. Instead, we use 3 × 5 convolutional ﬁlters for oriented
text. These inception-style ﬁlters use rectangular receptive
ﬁelds, which better ﬁt words with larger aspect ratios. The
noise signals that a square-shaped receptive ﬁeld would bring
in are also avoided thanks to these inceptions.
C. Adapted training for arbitrary-oriented text detection
1) Ground Truth representation: For the two target box
representations described in Section III-B, we adapt the ground
truth representation of oriented text as following:
a) Quadrilateral: : For each oriented text ground truth
T, let Gb = (˜xb
0) be its horizontal rectangle ground
truth (i.e., the minimum horizontal rectangle enclosing T),
where (˜xb
0) is the center of Gb, ˜wb
0 are the width
and the height of Gb respectively. This rectangle ground truth
can also be denoted as Gb = (b1, b2, b3, b4) following Eq. (1),
where (b1, b2, b3, b4) are the four vertices in clockwise order
of Gb with b1 the top-left one. We use the four vertices of
the oriented text ground truth T to represent T in terms of
a general quadrilateral denoted by Gq = (q1, q2, q3, q4) =
4). The four vertices (q1, q2, q3, q4)
are also organized in clockwise order such that the sum of Euclidean distances between four point pairs (bi, qi), i = 1, 2, 3, 4
is minimum. More precisely, let (q′
4) in clockwise
order represent the same quadrilateral Gq with q′
1 being the
top point (top-left point in case of Gq being a rectangle). Then
the relationship between q and q′ is given by:
di,∆= dE(bi, q′
(i+∆−1)%4+1), ∆= 0, 1, 2, 3
∆m = arg min
∆(d1,∆+ d2,∆+ d3,∆+ d4,∆),
(i+∆m−1)%4+1,
where dE(b, q′) is the Euclidean distance between two points,
and ∆m is the shift of points that gives the minimal sum of
distance of four pair of corresponding points between Gb and
b) Rotated rectangle: : There are several different representations for rotated rectangles. A popular one is given
by a horizontal rectangle and a rotated angle, which could
be written as (x, y, w, h, θ). However, due to the bias of the
dataset, there is usually an uneven distribution on θ, which
may make the model dataset-dependent. To ease this problem,
we propose to use another representation proposed in for
a ground truth rotated rectangle Gr: Gr = (˜xr
where (˜xr
1) and (˜xr
2) are the ﬁrst and second vertex of
the ground truth (i.e., the ﬁrst and second vertex of Gq), ˜hr
is the height of the rotated rectangle.
2) Loss function: We adopt a loss function similar to
the one used in . More speciﬁcally, let x be the match
indication matrix. For the i-th default box and the j-th ground
truth, xij = 1 means a match following the box overlap
between them, otherwise xij = 0. Let c be the conﬁdence, l
be the predicted location, and g be the ground-truth location.
The loss function is deﬁned as:
L(x, c, l, g) = 1
N (Lconf(x, c) + αLloc(x, l, g)),
where N is the number of default boxes that match groundtruth boxes, and α is set to 0.2 for quick convergence. We
adopt the smooth L1 loss for Lloc and a 2-class soft-max
loss for Lconf.
3) On-line hard negative mining: Some textures and signs
are very similar to text, which are hard for the network to
distinguish. We follow the hard negative mining strategy used
in to suppress them. More precisely, the training on the
corresponding dataset is divided into two stages. The ratio
between the negatives and positives for the ﬁrst stage is set to
3:1, and then changed to 6:1 for the second stage.
Fig. 5: Data augmentation by random cropping based on
Jaccard overlap (a-b) and object coverage constraints (c-d).
Images in (b) and (d) are the corresponding resized crops.
4) Data Augmentation: Similar to many CNN-based vision
problems, data augmentation is a classical and necessary way
to increase the limited size of a training set. For example,
a random crop augmentation based on the minimum Jaccard
overlap between crops and ground truths is applied in .
However, this strategy is not appropriate for text which is
usually small. This is because that the Jaccard overlap constraint is difﬁcult to satisfy for small objects. As depicted by an
example in Fig. 5(a-b), for a small object, even if the Jaccard
overlap is satisﬁed, the object in the resized image after data
augmentation is extremely large that almost covers the whole
image. This is not the usual case for text in natural images. To
ease this problem, we propose to add a new overlap constraint
called object coverage in addition to the Jaccard overlap. For
a cropped bounding box B and a ground truth bounding box
G, The Jaccard overlap J and object coverage C are deﬁned
as follows:
J = |B ∩G|/|B ∪G|,
C = |B ∩G|/|G|,
where | · | denotes the cardinality (i.e. area). The random
crop strategy based on object coverage C is more appropriate
for small objects such as most text in natural images. An
example is given in Fig. 5(c-d). In this paper, we use both
random crop strategies with minimum overlap or coverage
thresholds randomly set to 0, 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7 and 0.9. Note
that a threshold set to 0 implies that neither minimum Jaccard
overlap nor object coverage constraint is used. Each cropped
region is then resized to a ﬁxed size image that feeds into the
5) Multi-scale training: For the sake of training speed,
the randomly cropped regions are resized to images of a
relatively small size. However, the input images of the proposed TextBoxes++ can have arbitrary size thanks to its fully
convolutional architecture. To better handle multi-scale text,
we also use larger scale input size for the last several thousand
iterations in training phase. The training details are discussed
in Section IV-B.
D. Testing with efﬁcient cascaded non-maximum suppression
Similar to classical methods for object detection, we apply
a Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) during the test period
to extract predicted boxes of arbitrary-oriented text. Firstly,
we resize the six multi-scale prediction results to the original
size of an input image, and fusion these resized results
into one dense conﬁdence map. Then the NMS operation
is applied on this merged conﬁdence map. Since the NMS
operation on quadrilaterals or rotated rectangles is more timeconsuming than that on horizontal rectangles, we divide this
NMS operation into two steps to accelerate the speed. First,
we apply the NMS with a relatively high IOU threshold (e.g.
0.5) on the minimum horizontal rectangles containing the
predicted quadrilaterals or rotated rectangles. This operation
on horizontal rectangles is much less time-consuming and
removes many candidate boxes. Then the time-consuming
NMS on quadrilaterals or rotated rectangles is applied to a few
remaining candidate boxes with a lower IOU threshold (e.g.
0.2). The remaining boxes after this second NMS operation are
considered as the ﬁnal detected text boxes. This cascaded nonmaximum suppression is much faster than directly applying
NMS on the quadrilaterals or rotated rectangles.
E. Word spotting, end-to-end recognition, and detection reﬁning
Intuitively, a text recognizer would help to eliminate some
false-positive detection results that are unlikely to be meaningful words, e.g. repetitive patterns. Particularly, when a lexicon
is present, a text recognizer could effectively remove the
detected bounding boxes that do not match any of the given
words. Following this intuitive idea, we propose to improve
the detection results of TextBoxes++ with word spotting and
end-to-end recognition.
1) Word spotting and end-to-end recognition: Word spotting is to localize speciﬁc words that are given in a lexicon.
End-to-end recognition concerns both detection and recognition. Both tasks can be achieved by simply connecting
TextBoxes++ with a text recognizer. We adopt the CRNN
model as our text recognizer. CRNN uses CTC 
as its output layer, which estimates a sequence probability
conditioned on the input image I denoted as p(w|I), where
w represents a character sequence output. If no lexicon is
given, w is considered as the recognized word, and the
probability p(w|I) measures the compatibility of an image to
that particular word w. CRNN also supports the use of the
lexicon. For a given lexicon W, CRNN outputs the probability
that measures how the input image I matches each word
w ∈W. We deﬁne the recognition score sr in the following:
Without lexicon
w∈W p(w|I),
With lexicon W
Note that the use of lexicon is not a necessary in the proposed
method. We only use lexicons for fair comparisons with other
2) Reﬁning detection with recognition:
We propose to
reﬁne detection with recognition by integrating the recognition
score sr to the original detection sd score. In practice, the
value of recognition score is generally not comparable to the
value of detection score. For example, the threshold of the
detection score sd is usually set to 0.6, and the threshold
of recognition score sr is usually set to 0.005. A trivial
combination of these two scores would lead to a severe bias of
detection score. In this paper, we propose to deﬁne the novel
score S as following:
S = 2 × e(sd+sr)
There are two motivations in Eq. (8). First, we use the
exponential function to make the two score values comparable.
Then, a harmonic mean is adopted to get the ﬁnal combined
score. This combined score S is more convenient than applying a grid search on two scores, respectively.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
Inherited from object detection, all existing scene text
detection benchmarks rely on an IOU threshold to evaluate
the performance of text detectors. However, text detection
is quite different from object detection because the ultimate
purpose of detecting text is text recognition. A text recognizer
may yield totally different results with the same IOU. For
example, the three detection results in Fig. 6(a-c) have the
same IOU. However, the detection results in Fig. 6(a) and
Fig. 6(b) fail to correctly recognize the underlying text due
to the lack of text parts. The detection results in Fig. 6(c)
tends to give an accurate recognition result thanks to the full
text coverage. Thus, in addition to classical text detection
benchmarks, we also conduct word spotting and end-to-end
recognition experiments using the text detection results to
further demonstrate the performance of TextBoxes++.
Fig. 6: An example of recognition results (yellow text) with
different text detection results having the same IOU. The red
(resp. green) bounding box is the ground truth dataset 
and COCO-Text dataset . To further demonstrate the
versatility of TextBoxes++, we have conducted experiments
on two popular horizontal text datasets: ICDAR 2013 (IC13)
dataset and Street View Text (SVT) dataset . Besides
these benchmark datasets, the SynthText dataset is also
used to pre-train our model. A short description of all these
concerned datasets is given in the following (see the corresponding references for more details).
SynthText: The SynthText dataset contains 800k synthesized text images, created via blending rendered words with
natural images. As the location and transform of text are
carefully chosen with a learning algorithm, the synthesized
images look realistic. This dataset is used for pre-training our
ICDAR 2015 Incidental Text (IC15): The ICDAR 2015
Incidental Text dataset issues from the Challenge 4 of
the ICDAR 2015 Robust Reading Competition. The dataset
is composed of 1000 training images and 500 testing images, which are captured by Google glasses with relatively
low resolutions. Each image may contain multi-oriented text.
Annotations are provided in terms of word bounding boxes.
This dataset also provides 3 lexicons of different sizes for
word spotting and end-to-end recognition challenge: 1) strong
lexicon which gives 100 words as an individual lexicon for
each test image; 2) weakly lexicon containing hundreds of
words for the whole test set; 3) generic lexicon with 90k
COCO-Text: The COCO-Text dataset is currently the
largest dataset for scene text detection and recognition. It
contains 43686 training images and 20000 images for validation/testing. The COCO-Text dataset is very challenging since
text in this dataset are in arbitrary orientations. This difﬁculty
also holds for annotations which are not as accurate as the
other tested datasets in this paper. Therefore, even though
this dataset provides oriented annotations, its standard evaluation protocol still relies on horizontal bounding rectangles.
For TextBoxes++, we make use of both the annotations in
terms of horizontal bounding rectangles and the quadrilateral
annotations to train our model. For evaluation, we follow the
standard protocol based on horizontal bounding rectangles.
ICDAR 2013 (IC13): The ICDAR 2013 dataset consists
of 229 training images and 233 testing images in different
resolutions. This dataset contains only horizontal or nearly
horizontal text. The lexicon setting for this dataset is the same
as the IC15 dataset described before.
Street View Text (SVT): The SVT dataset is more
challenging than previous ICDAR 2013 dataset due to lower
resolutions of images. There are 100 training images and 250
testing images in the SVT dataset. The images have only
horizontal or nearly horizontal text. A lexicon containing 50
words is also provided for each image. Note that not all the
text in the dataset are labeled. As a result, this dataset is only
used for word spotting evaluation.
Evaluation Protocols: The classical evaluation protocols for
text detection, word spotting, and end-to-end recognition all
rely on precision (P), recall (R), and f-measure (F). They
are given by:
F = 2 × P × R
where TP, FP, and FN is the number of hit boxes, incorrectly
identiﬁed boxes, and missed boxes, respectively. For text
detection, a detected box b is considered as a hit box if the
IOU between b and a ground truth box is larger than a given
threshold (generally set to 0.5). The hit boxes in word spotting
and end-to-end recognition require not only the same IOU
restriction but also correct recognition results. Since there is a
trade-off between precision and recall, f-measure is the most
used measurement for performance assessment.
B. Implementation details
TABLE I: Implementation details. “lr” is short for learning
rate. The size of input image is denoted as “size”.“nr” refers
to the negative ratio in hard negative mining. “#iter” stands
for the number of training iterations.
All datasets
TextBoxes++ is trained with Adam . The whole training
process is composed of three stages as shown in Table. I.
Firstly, we pre-train TextBoxes++ on SynthText dataset for
all tested datasets. Then the training process is continued on
the corresponding training images of each dataset. Finally,
we continue this training with a smaller learning rate and a
larger negative ratio. Note also that at the last training stage, a
larger input image size is used to achieve better detections of
multi-scale text. The number of iterations for the pre-training
step is ﬁxed at 60k for all tested datasets. However, this
number differs in the second and third training stage which
are conducted on each dataset’s own training images. This
difference is decided by the different dataset size.
TABLE II: Performance comparisons on ICDAR 2015 Incidental Text dataset with different IOU threshold settings
between four variants of TextBoxes++, which use different
bounding box representation and different input scales. “RR”
stands for the rotated rectangle, and “Quad” represents the
quadrilateral. “MS” is short for using multi-scale inputs.
IOU threshold=0.5
IOU threshold=0.7
Text recognition is performed with a pre-trained CRNN
model , which is implemented and released by the authors1.
All the experiments presented in this paper are carried out
on a PC equipped with a single Titan Xp GPU. The whole
training process (including the pre-training time on SynthText
dataset) takes about 2 days on ICDAR 2015 Incidental Text
dataset, which is currently the most tested dataset.
Fig. 7: Ground truth representations in terms of quadrilaterals
in red and rotated rectangles in blue. The underlying image in
(c) and (d) is resized from the original image shown both in
(a) and (b).
C. Quadrilateral VS Rotated Rectangle
The rotated rectangle is an approximate simpliﬁcation of the
quadrilateral, which is more ﬂexible in representing arbitraryoriented text bounding box. Although both representations
may equally suit for normal text fonts and styles, the quadrilateral representation may adapt better to resized images. An example is given in Fig. 7, where the bounding boxes represented
by quadrilaterals and rotated rectangles in the original image
(see Fig. 7(a-b)) are almost the same. However, as shown in
Fig. 7(c-d), the rotated rectangles match less well the text
than quadrilaterals in the resized image. This is because that
1 
TABLE III: Text localization results on ICDAR 2015 Incidental Text dataset.
CNN MSER 
StradVision1 
StradVision2 
Zhang et al. 
Tian et al. 
Yao et al. 
Liu et al. 
Shi et al. 
EAST PVANET2x. RBOX 
EAST PVANET2x RBOX MS 
TextBoxes++
TextBoxes++ MS
TABLE IV: Text localization results on COCO-Text dataset.
Baseline A 
Baseline B 
Baseline C 
Yao et al. 
Zhou et al. 
TextBoxes++
TextBoxes++ MS
a rotated rectangle generally become a parallelogram when
resized directly, which leads to a small deviation when trying
to keep it as a rotated rectangle. In this sense, TextBoxes++
with quadrilateral representation would be more accurate than
its variant using rotated rectangles.
We have conducted experiments on the widely tested IC-
DAR 2015 Incidental Text dataset to compare these two variants of TextBoxes++; The quantitative comparison is given in
Table II. Following the standard text detection evaluation, the
TextBoxes++ using quadrilateral representation signiﬁcantly
outperforms the version using rotated rectangles with at least
2.5 percents improvements. Note also that using multi-scale
inputs would improve both versions of TextBoxes++. The
quadrilateral version still performs better especially when
the IOU threshold for matching evaluation is set to 0.7.
Besides, under such a high IOU threshold setting, the difference between quadrilateral version and rotated rectangle
version with multi-scale inputs is more signiﬁcant. This is
because a much more accurate text detector is expected for
a high IOU threshold setting. This conﬁrms that quadrilateral
representation is more accurate than the rotated rectangle
for TextBoxes++. Consequently, we choose the TextBoxes++
using the quadrilateral representation for the rest experiments
in this paper and denote it simply as TextBoxes++ when no
ambiguity is present. TextBoxes++ MS stands for this version
of TextBoxes++ with multi-scale inputs.
D. Text localization
1) Performance:
We have ﬁrst evaluated the proposed
TextBoxes++ on two popular oriented text datasets to assess its
ability of handling arbitrary-oriented text in natural images. To
further validate the versatility of TextBoxes++, we have also
tested on two widely used horizontal text datasets.
(a) Results given by Zhang et al. 
(b) Results using Shi et al. 
(c) TextBoxes++ results
Fig. 8: Qualitative comparisons of text detection results on some ICDAR 2015 Incidental text images. Green bounding boxes:
correct detections; Red solid boxes: false detections; Red dashed boxes: missed ground truths.
TABLE V: Text localization on ICDAR 2013 dataset. P, R,
and F refer to precision, recall and f-measure, respectively.
Evaluation protocol
fasttext 
MMser 
Lu et al. 
TextFlow 
He et al. 
He et al. 
FCRNall+ﬁlts 
Tian et al 
Qin et al. 
Shi et al. 
Tian et al. 
Tang et al. 
TextBoxes 
TextBoxes MS 
TextBoxes++
TextBoxes++ MS
Oriented Text Dataset: The ﬁrst tested oriented text dataset
is the widely used ICDAR 2015 Incidental text dataset. Some
qualitative comparisons are illustrated in Fig. 8. As depicted
in this ﬁgure, TextBoxes++ is more robust than the competing
methods in detecting oriented text and text of a variety of
scales. Quantitative results following the standard evaluation
protocol is given in Table. III. TextBoxes++ with single input
scale outperforms all the state-of-the-art results. More specifically, TextBoxes++ improves the state-of-the-method by
3.5 percents when single scale inputs are used in both methods.
Furthermore, the single scale version of TextBoxes++ is still
1.0 percent than the multi-scale version of . Note that a
better performance is achieved for TextBoxes++ using multiscale inputs.
TextBoxes++ also signiﬁcantly exceeds the state-of-the-art
methods on COCO-Text dataset with its latest annotations
v1.4. As depicted in Table. IV, TextBoxes++ outperforms
the competing methods by at least 16 percents with single
scale input. Furthermore, the performance of TextBoxes++ is
boosted by 2.81 percents when multi-scale inputs are used.
Horizontal
TextBoxes++ on ICDAR 2013 dataset, one of the most popular
horizontal text dataset. The comparison with some state-ofthe-art methods is depicted in Table. V. Note that there are
many methods evaluated on this dataset, but only some of
the best results are shown. TextBoxes++ achieves at least
1.0 percent improvement over other methods except for 
on this dataset. However, Tang et al. use a cascaded
architecture which contains two networks, taking 1.36 seconds
per image. Moreover, it can only detect horizontal text. We
have also compared TextBoxes++ with one state-of-the-art
general object detector SSD , which is the most related
method. The same training procedures of TextBoxes++ is used
to train SSD for this comparison. As reported in Table. V, such
a straightforward adaption of SSD for text detection does not
perform as well as the state-of-the-art methods. In particular,
we have observed that SSD fails to correctly detect the words
with large aspect ratios. TextBoxes++ performs much better
thanks to the proposed text-box layers which are speciﬁcally
designed to overcome the length variation of words. Compared
with TextBoxes , TextBoxes++ achieves almost the same
performance with a single scale, and better performance is
achieved with multi-scales, owing to the multi-scale training
strategy adopted in TextBoxes++. However, note that the
experiment on this dataset is to verify that TextBoxes++,
although dedicated to arbitrary-oriented text detection, has
no performance loss compared with the preliminary study
TextBoxes, which is speciﬁcally designed for horizontal text
detection.
TABLE VI: Runtime and performance comparison on ICDAR
2015 Incidental Text dataset. “F” is short for F-measure. See
corresponding text for detailed discussions.
Zhang et al. 
Tian et al. 
Yao et al. 
EAST PVANET 
EAST PVANET2x 
EAST VGG16 
Shi et al. el. 
TextBoxes++
1024 × 1024
TextBoxes++ MS
2) Runtime: TextBoxes++ is not only accurate but also
efﬁcient. We have compared its runtime with the state-ofthe-art methods on ICDAR 2015 Incidental Text dataset. As
shown in Table VI, TextBoxes++ achieves an F-measure of
0.817 with 11.6 fps, which has a better balance on runtime
and performance than the other competing methods. Note that
ss-600 for the method proposed by Tian et al. means
the short side of images is resized to 600. The best result
on ICDAR 2015 Incidental dataset for this method is given
by using a short edge of 2000, which would lead to a much
slower runtime for this method. For Zhang et al. , MS
means that they used three scales (i.e., 200, 500, 1000) on
MSRA-TD500 dataset . The method proposed in 
performs at 16.8 fps with PVANet , a faster backbone
compared to VGG-16. However, the performance is 6 percents
lower than TextBoxes++. To improve the performance, the
authors double the number of channels of PVANet, which
results in a runtime at 13.2 fps. TextBoxes++ has a similar
runtime but with a 3.5 percents performance improvement.
Furthermore, when the same backbone (VGG-16) is applied,
the method in is much lower and still performs less well
than TextBoxes++. For Shi et al. , the reported runtime is
tested on 768 × 768 MSRA-TD 500 images, but the reported
performance is achieved with 720 × 1280 ICDAR 2015 Incidental text images. Note that the runtime for TextBoxes++ on
768 × 768 COCO-Text images is 19.8 fps. TextBoxes++ MS
achieves about 2.3 fps with four input scales (384 × 384,
768 × 768, 1024 × 1024, 1536 × 1536).
E. Word spotting and end-to-end recognition to reﬁne text
1) Word spotting and end-to-end recognition: At the beginning of Section IV, we have discussed the limitations of the
standard text detection evaluation protocols which rely on the
classical IOU threshold setting. It is meaningless to only detect
text without correct recognition. In this sense, an evaluation
based on the ultimate purpose of text detection would further
assess the quality of text detection. For that, we have also
evaluated the proposed text detector TextBoxes++ combined
with a recent text recognizer CRNN model in the framework of word spotting and end-to-end recognition. Note that
although word spotting is similar to end-to-end recognition,
the evaluation of word spotting and end-to-end recognition
is slightly different. For word spotting, only some speciﬁed
words are required to be detected and recognized, which
implies that word spotting is generally easier than end-toend recognition. We have tested the pipeline of TextBoxes++
followed by CRNN model on three popular word spotting
or end-to-end recognition benchmark datasets: ICDAR 2015
Incidental Text dataset, SVT dataset, and ICDAR 2013 dataset.
datasets: As TextBoxes++ can detect
arbitrary-oriented text in natural images, we ﬁrst evaluate it
for word spotting and end-to-end recognition on ICDAR 2015
Incidental Text dataset. Some qualitative results are given in
Fig. 9(a). In general, the proposed pipeline correctly recognize
most oriented text. A quantitative comparison with other
competing methods is depicted in Table. VII. Note that there
are not yet published papers for the competing methods in this
table. These results are public on the ICDAR 2017 competition
website2, and only some of the best results are shown. Our
method signiﬁcantly outperforms the other methods under all
strong, weak, and generic lexicon for both word spotting and
end-to-end recognition. More speciﬁcally, for strong lexicon,
the proposed method outperforms the best competing method
by 6 percent for both tasks. For weak lexicon, the proposed
method improves the state-of-the-art results by 6 percents for
word spotting and 4 percents for end-to-end recognition. The
improvement is less signiﬁcant (2.7 percents and 1.2 percents
for the two tasks, respectively) when a generic lexicon is used.
Horizontal text datasets: We have also evaluated the
proposed method for word spotting and end-to-end recognition
on two horizontal text datasets: ICDAR 2013 dataset and SVT
dataset. Some qualitative results on ICDAR 2013 dataset are
depicted in Fig. 9. In general, TextBoxes++ achieves good
results in various occasions, regardless of the sizes, aspect
ratios, fonts, and complex backgrounds. Some quantitative
results are given in Table. VIII. Our method outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods. More speciﬁcally, on ICDAR 2013
dataset, our method outperforms the best competing method
by at least 2 percents for all the evaluation protocols listed
in Table. VIII. The performance improvement is even more
signiﬁcant on SVT dataset. TextBoxes++ outperforms the
state-of-the-art method by at least 8 percents on both
SVT and SVT-50. This is mainly because that TextBoxes++
is more robust when dealing with low-resolution images in
SVT thanks to its training on relatively low-resolution images.
Note that Jaderberg and FCRNall+ﬁlts adopt a much
smaller lexicon (50k words) than our method (90k words),
yet the proposed method still performs better. Compared with
TextBoxes , TextBoxes++ achieves better performance on
ICDAR 2013 dataset.
2 
(a) Some results on ICDAR 2013 images
(b) Some results on ICDAR 2015 Incidental text images
Fig. 9: Some examples of end-to-end recognition results represented by yellow words. Note that following the evaluation
protocol, Words less than 3 letters are ignored. The box colors have the same meaning as Fig. 8.
TABLE VII: F-measures for word spotting and end-to-end results on ICDAR 2015 Incidental Text dataset. See the corresponding
dataset description in Section IV-A for strong, weak, and generic lexicon settings. Note that the methods marked by “*” are
published on the ICDAR 2017 Robust Reading Competition website: 
IC15 word spotting
IC15 end-to-end
Megvii-Image++ *
Yunos Robot1.0*
SRC-B-TextProcessingLab*
TextProposals + DictNet*
Baidu IDL*
HUST MCLAB*
TextBoxes++
TABLE VIII: F-measures for word spotting and end-to-end results on ICDAR 2013 dataset. The lexicon settings are the same
as for ICDAR 2015 Incidental Text dataset.
end-to-end
Alsharif 
Jaderberg 
FCRNall+ﬁlts 
TextBoxes++
TABLE IX: Reﬁned detection results with recognition. The
evaluation method for ICDAR 2013 dataset is the IC13 Eval.
“Det”: TextBoxes++ MS; “Rec”: recognition without lexicon;
“Rec-lex” : recognition with the given strong lexicon in each
Det+Rec-lex
2) Reﬁning detection with recognition: We propose to use
recognition to further reﬁne detection results by integrating
recognition score into detection score with Eq. (8). We have
evaluated this idea on two datasets. As depicted in Tab. IX,
the recognition without lexicon improves detection results of
TextBoxes++ by 0.5 percent and 1.3 percents on ICDAR
2013 and ICDAR 2015 Incidental Text dataset, respectively.
This improvement is further boosted using a speciﬁed lexicon,
achieving 0.8 percent and 1.9 percents on ICDAR 2013 and
ICDAR 2015 Incidental Text dataset, respectively. Note that
the current text recognizer still has difﬁculties in dealing with
vertical text and recognizing low-resolution text. A further
performance improvement is expected with a better text recognizer.
F. Weaknesses
demonstrated
experimental
TextBoxes++ performs well in most situations. However,
Fig. 10: Some failure examples. Green bounding boxes: correct
detections; Red solid boxes: false detections; Red dashed
boxes: missed ground truths.
it still fails to handle some difﬁcult cases, such as object
occlusion and large character spacing. TextBoxes++ also
fails to detect some vertical text due to the lack of enough
vertical training data. Even with hard negative mining, some
text-like areas are still falsely detected. Another failure case
is curved text detection. Different from some part-based
methods, e.g. , TextBoxes++ is hard to ﬁt the accurate
boundary for curved texts due to the limitation of quadrilateral
representation. Note that all these difﬁculties also hold for the
other state-of-the-art methods , . Some failure cases
are shown in Fig. 10.
V. COMPARISONS WITH RECENT WORKS
We compare in detail the proposed TextBoxes++ with
EAST , one of the previous state-of-the-art method, and
one of the most related method DMPNet from two
aspects: simplicity and performance.
A. TextBoxes++ vs. EAST
1) Simplicity: EAST generates a text region map, or named
as score map, using a U-shape network . It also regresses
the oriented rectangles or quadrilaterals based on the same
feature which generates the score map. It is a combination of
segmentation and detection. In this way, it relies on pyramidlike deconvolutional layers for accurate segmentation. These
extra pyramid-like deconvolutional layers require additional
computation. However, TextBoxes++ directly classiﬁes and
regresses the default boxes on the convolutional feature maps,
which is much simpler, avoiding the time consuming on
pyramid-like deconvolution. This is evidenced by the speed
comparison shown in Tab VI, where TextBoxes++ (with a
VGG-16 backbone) has a speed of 11.6fps while the VGG16
RBOX version of EAST runs at 6.52fps.
2) Performance: EAST relies on an accurate segmentation
score map as the score of the bounding boxes. Yet, the text
region segmentation is challenging in itself. If the score map
is not accurate enough, it is difﬁcult to achieve correct results.
For example, it is possible that the partition between two
close words is predicted as text region in the segmentation
score map, in this case, it is rather difﬁcult to separate these
two words in the detection. To alleviate this problem, EAST
shrinks the text region in the ground truth of segmentation
score map. TextBoxes++ does not suffer from such limitations.
It relies on default boxes, and regresses the bounding boxes
directly from the convolutional feature maps, where richer
information is reserved as compared to the segmentation score
map. Thus, TextBoxes++ achieves higher performance (see
Table. III ). Speciﬁcally, TextBoxes++ outperforms by 3.5
percents (PVANET2x RBOX version) and 6 percents (VGG16
RBOX version) with a single scale.
B. TextBoxes++ vs. DMPNet
1) Simplicity: 1) TextBoxes++ uses horizontal rectangles
as default boxes instead of quadrilaterals with different orientations used in . In this way, we use much fewer default
boxes in every region. Furthermore, we argue that the receptive
ﬁelds of the convolutional feature map are all in terms of
horizontal rectangles, so the target quadrilaterals can be well
regressed if it matches the receptive ﬁeld. The use of oriented
rectangle default boxes adopted in is not necessary for
general scene text detection. 2) Beneﬁting from the horizontal
rectangle default boxes, TextBoxes++ enjoys a much simpler
strategy for matching default boxes and ground truth by using
the maximum horizontal rectangles instead of quadrilaterals. In
fact, computing the intersection area between two horizontal
rectangles is much easier (just using subtract operation and
multiply operation once) than computing the intersection area
between two arbitrary quadrilaterals, even though a Monte-
Carlo method is used in .
2) Performance: 1) TextBoxes++ simultaneously regresses
the maximum horizontal rectangles of the bounding boxes and
the quadrilateral bounding boxes, which makes the training
more stable than the method in . 2) As compared to the
method in , TextBoxes++ goes further study on small texts
in the images. We adopt a new scheme for data augmentation
which is beneﬁcial to small texts. 3) In this paper, we not only
focus on scene text detection, but also concern the combination
between detection and recognition. We proposed a novel score
which effectively and efﬁciently combines the detection scores
and the recognition scores.
DMPNet did not report the runtime. However, we
argue that it is slower than TextBoxes++ based on above
analysis. Moreover, TextBoxes++ outperforms DMPNet 
by 11 percents (with a single scale setting) in terms of Fmeasure on ICDAR 2015 dataset (see Tab. III).
VI. CONCLUSION
We have presented TextBoxes++, an end-to-end fully convolutional network for arbitrary-oriented text detection, which is
highly stable and efﬁcient to generate word proposals against
cluttered backgrounds. The proposed method directly predicts
arbitrary-oriented word bounding boxes via a novel regression
model by quadrilateral representation. The comprehensive
evaluations and comparisons on some popular benchmark
datasets for text detection, word spotting, and end-to-end
scene text recognition, clearly validate the advantages of
TextBoxes++. In all experiments, TextBoxes++ has achieved
state-of-the-art performance with high efﬁciency for both
horizontal text datasets and oriented text datasets. In the future,
we plan to investigate the common failure cases (e.g., large
character spacing and vertical text) faced by almost all stateof-the-art text detectors.