On Lightweight Mobile Phone Application Certiﬁcation
William Enck, Machigar Ongtang, and Patrick McDaniel
Systems and Internet Infrastructure Security Laboratory
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
{enck,ongtang,mcdaniel}@cse.psu.edu
Users have begun downloading an increasingly large number of
mobile phone applications in response to advancements in handsets and wireless networks. The increased number of applications
results in a greater chance of installing Trojans and similar malware. In this paper, we propose the Kirin security service for Android, which performs lightweight certiﬁcation of applications to
mitigate malware at install time. Kirin certiﬁcation uses security
rules, which are templates designed to conservatively match undesirable properties in security conﬁguration bundled with applications. We use a variant of security requirements engineering techniques to perform an in-depth security analysis of Android to produce a set of rules that match malware characteristics. In a sample of 311 of the most popular applications downloaded from the
ofﬁcial Android Market, Kirin and our rules found 5 applications
that implement dangerous functionality and therefore should be installed with extreme caution. Upon close inspection, another ﬁve
applications asserted dangerous rights, but were within the scope
of reasonable functional needs. These results indicate that security
conﬁguration bundled with Android applications provides practical
means of detecting malware.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.4.6 [Operating Systems]: Security and Protection
General Terms
mobile phone security, malware, Android
∗The Kirin security service described in this paper is a malware
focused revision of a similar system described in our previous
work .
†This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant No.
CNS-0721579 and CNS-
0643907. Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reﬂect the views of the National Science Foundation.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
CCS’09, November 9–13, 2009, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
Copyright 2009 ACM 978-1-60558-352-5/09/11 ...$10.00.
INTRODUCTION
Mobile phones have emerged as a topic du jour for security research; however, the domain itself is still settling. Telecommunications technology is constantly evolving. It recently reached a
critical mass with the widespread adoption of third generation (3G)
wireless communication and handsets with advanced microprocessors. These capabilities provide the foundation for a new (and much
anticipated) computing environment teeming with opportunity. Entrepreneurs have heavily invested in the mobile phone application
market, with small fortunes seemingly made overnight. However,
this windfall is not without consequence. The current mixture of information and accessibility provided by mobile phone applications
seeds emerging business and social lifestyles, but it also opens opportunity to proﬁt from users’ misfortune.
To date, mobile phone malware has been primarily destructive
and “proof-of-concept.” However, Trojans such as Viver , which
send SMS messages to premium rate numbers, indicate a change in
malware motivations. Many expect mobile phone malware to begin following PC-based malware trends of fulﬁlling ﬁnancial motivations . Users are becoming more comfortable downloading
and running mobile phone software. As this inevitably increases,
so does the potential for user-installed malware.
The most effective phone malware mitigation strategy to date has
been to ensure only approved software can be installed. Here, a certiﬁcation authority (e.g., SymbianSigned, or Apple) devotes massive resources towards source code inspection. This technique can
prevent both malware and general software misuse. For instance,
software desired by the end user may be restricted by the service
provider (e.g., VoIP and “Bluetooth tethering” applications). However, manual certiﬁcation is imperfect. Malware authors have already succeeded in socially engineering approval . In such
cases, authorities must resort to standard revocation techniques.
We seek to mitigate malware and other software misuse on mobile phones without burdensome certiﬁcation processes for each
application. Instead, we perform lightweight certiﬁcation at time
of install using a set of predeﬁned security rules. These rules decide whether or not the security conﬁguration bundled with an application is safe. We focus our efforts on the Google-led Android
platform, because it: 1) bundles useful security information with
applications, 2) has been adopted by major US and European service providers, and 3) is open source.
In this paper, we propose the Kirin1 security service for Android.
Kirin provides practical lightweight certiﬁcation of applications at
install time. Achieving a practical solution requires overcoming
multiple challenges. First, certifying applications based on security
conﬁguration requires a clear speciﬁcation of undesirable proper-
1Kirin is the Japanese animal-god that protects the just and punishes the wicked.
ties. We turn to the ﬁeld of security requirements engineering to
design a process for identifying Kirin security rules. However, limitations of existing security enforcement in Android makes practical rules difﬁcult to deﬁne. Second, we deﬁne a security language
to encode these rules and formally deﬁne its semantics. Third, we
design and implement the Kirin security service within the Android
framework.
Kirin’s practicality hinges on its ability to express security rules
that simultaneously prevent malware and allow legitimate software.
Adapting techniques from the requirements engineering, we construct detailed security rules to mitigate malware from an analysis
of applications, phone stakeholders, and systems interfaces. We
evaluate these rules against a subset of popular applications in the
Android Market. Of the 311 evaluated applications spanning 16
categories, 10 were found to assert dangerous permissions.
those 10, 5 were shown to be potentially malicious and therefore
should be installed on a personal cell phone with extreme caution. The remaining 5 asserted rights that were dangerous, but were
within the scope of reasonable functional needs (based on application descriptions). Note that this analysis ﬂagged about 1.6% applications at install time as potentially dangerous. Thus, we show
that even with conservative security policy, less than 1 in 50 applications needed any kind of involvement by phone users.
Kirin provides a practical approach towards mitigating malware
and general software misuse in Android. In the design and evaluation of Kirin, this paper makes the following contributions:
• We provide a methodology for retroﬁtting security requirements
in Android. As a secondary consequence of following our methodology, we identiﬁed multiple vulnerabilities in Android, including ﬂaws affecting core functionality such as SMS and voice.
• We provide a practical method of performing lightweight certiﬁcation of applications at install time. This beneﬁts the Android
community, as the Android Market currently does not perform
rigorous certiﬁcation.
• We provide practical rules to mitigate malware. These rules are
constructed purely from security conﬁguration available in application package manifests.
The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 overviews
the Kirin security service and software installer. Section 3 provides
background information on mobile phone malware and the Android
OS. Section 4 presents our rule identiﬁcation process and sample
security rules. Section 5 describes the Kirin Security Language
and formally deﬁnes its semantics. Section 6 describes Kirin’s implementation. Section 7 evaluates Kirin’s practicality. Section 8
presents discovered vulnerabilities. Section 9 discusses related work.
Section 10 concludes.
KIRIN OVERVIEW
The overwhelming number of existing malware requires manual
installation by the user. While Bluetooth has provided the most
effective distribution mechanism , as bulk data plans become
more popular, so will SMS and email-based social engineering.
Recently, Yxe propagated via URLs sent in SMS messages.
While application stores help control mass application distribution,
it is not a complete solution. Few (if any) existing phone malware
exploits code vulnerabilities, but rather relies on user conﬁrmation
to gain privileges at installation.
Android’s existing security framework restricts permission assignment to an application in two ways: user conﬁrmation and
signatures by developer keys. These permissions are referred to
Android Application Installer
Application
(1) Attempt
Installation
Optional Extension
Display risk ratings
to the user and
prompt for override.
Figure 1: Kirin based software installer
as “dangerous” and “signature” permissions, respectively (as discussed in Section 3.2). Android uses “signature” permissions to
prevent third-party applications from inﬂicting harm to the phone’s
trusted computing base.
The Open Handset Alliance (Android’s founding entity) proclaims the mantra, “all applications are created equal.” This philosophy promotes innovation and allows manufacturers to customize
handsets. However, in production environments, all applications
are not created equal. Malware is the simplest counterexample.
Once a phone is deployed, its trusted computing base should remain ﬁxed and must be protected. “Signature” permissions protect particularly dangerous functionality. However, there is a tradeoff when deciding if permission should be “dangerous” or “signature.” Initial Android-based production phones such as the T-
Mobile G1 are marketed towards both consumers and developers.
Without its applications, Android has no clear competitive advantage. Google frequently chose the “feature-conservative” (as opposed to “security-conservative”) route and assigned permissions
as “dangerous.” However, some of these permissions may be considered “too dangerous” for a production environment. For example, one permission allows an application to debug others. Other
times it is combinations of permissions that result in undesirable
scenarios (discussed further in Section 4).
Kirin supplements Android’s existing security framework by providing a method to customize security for production environments.
In Android, every application has a corresponding security policy.
Kirin conservatively certiﬁes an application based on its policy con-
ﬁguration. Certiﬁcation is based on security rules. The rules represent templates of undesirable security properties. Alone, these
properties do not necessarily indicate malicious potential; however,
as we describe in Section 4, speciﬁc combinations allow malfeasance. For example, an application that can start on boot, read geographic location, and access the Internet is potentially a tracker
installed as premeditated spyware (a class of malware discussed in
Section 3.1). It is often difﬁcult for users to translate between individual properties and real risks. Kirin provides a means of deﬁning
dangerous combinations and automating analysis at install time.
Figure 1 depicts the Kirin based software installer. The installer
ﬁrst extracts security conﬁguration from the target package manifest. Next, the Kirin security service evaluates the conﬁguration
against a collection of security rules. If the conﬁguration fails to
pass all rules, the installer has two choices. The more secure choice
is to reject the application. Alternatively, Kirin can be enhanced
with a user interface to override analysis results. Clearly this option is less secure for users who install applications without understanding warnings. However, we see Kirin’s analysis results as
valuable input for a rating system similar to PrivacyBird (PrivacyBird is a web browser plug-in that helps the user understand the
privacy risk associated with a speciﬁc website by interpreting its
P3P policy). Such an enhancement for Android’s installer provides
a distinct advantage over the existing method of user approval. Currently, the user is shown a list of all requested potentially dangerous
permissions. A Kirin based rating system allows the user to make
a more informed decision. Such a rating system requires careful
investigation to ensure usability. This paper focuses speciﬁcally on
identifying potential harmful conﬁgurations and leaves the rating
system for future work.
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
Kirin relies on well constructed security rules to be effective.
Deﬁning security rules for Kirin requires a thorough understanding of threats and existing protection mechanisms. This section
begins by discussing past mobile phone malware and projects classiﬁcations for future phone malware based on trends seen on PCs.
We then provide an overview of Android’s application and security
frameworks.
Mobile Phone Threats
The ﬁrst mobile phone virus was observed in 2004. While Cabir 
carries a benign payload, it demonstrated the effectiveness of Bluetooth as a propagation vector. The most notable outbreak was at
the 2005 World Championships in Athletics . More interestingly, Cabir did not exploit any vulnerabilities. It operated entirely
within the security parameters of both its infected host (Symbian
OS) and Bluetooth. Instead, it leveraged ﬂaws in the user interface.
While a victim is in range, Cabir continually sends ﬁle transfer
requests. When the user chooses “no,” another request promptly
appears, frustrating the user who subsequently answers “yes” repeatedly in an effort to use the phone .
Cabir was followed by a series of viruses and Trojans targeting the Symbian Series 60 platform, each increasing in complexity and features. Based on Cabir, Lasco additionally infects
all available software package (SIS) ﬁles residing on the phone on
the assumption that the user might share them. Commwarrior 
added MMS propagation in addition to Bluetooth. Early variants of
Commwarrior attempt to replicate via Bluetooth between 8am and
midnight (when the user is mobile) and via MMS between midnight and 7am (when the user will not see error messages resulting
from sending an MMS to non-mobile devices). Originally masquerading as a theme manager, the Skulls Trojan provided one
of the ﬁrst destructive payloads. When installed, Skulls writes nonfunctioning versions of all applications to the c: drive, overriding
identically named ﬁles in the ﬁrmware ROM z: drive. All applications are rendered useless and their icons are replaced with a
skull and crossbones. Other Trojans, e.g., Drever , ﬁght back
by disabling Antivirus software. The Cardblock Trojan embeds itself within a pirated copy of InstantSis (a utility to extract
SIS software packages from a phone). However, Cardblock sets a
random password on the phone’s removable memory card, making
the user’s data inaccessible.
To date, most phone malware has been either “proof-of-concept”
or destructive, a characteristic often noted as resembling early PC
malware. Recent PC malware more commonly scavenges for valuable information (e.g., passwords, address books) or joins a botnet . The latter frequently enables denial of service (DoS)based extortion. It is strongly believed that mobile phone malware
will move in similar directions . In fact, Pbstealer already sends a user’s address book to nearby Bluetooth devices, and
Viver sends SMS messages to premium-rate numbers, providing the malware writer with direct monetary income.
Mobile phone literature has categorized phone malware from different perspectives. Guo et al. consider categories of resulting
network attacks. Cheng et al. derive models based on infection vector (e.g., Bluetooth vs. MMS). However, we ﬁnd a taxonomy based on an attacker’s motivations to be the most useful
when designing security rules for Kirin. We foresee the following
motivations seeding future malware (the list is not intended to be
exhaustive):
• Proof-of-concept: Such malware often emerges as new infection
vectors are explored by malware writers and frequently have unintended consequences. For example, Cabir demonstrated Bluetoothbased distribution and inadvertently drained device batteries. Additionally, as non-Symbian phones gain stronger user bases , proof-of-concept malware will emerge for these platforms.
• Destructive: Malware such as Skulls and Cardblock (described
above) were designed with destructive motivations. While we
believe malware with monetary incentives will overtake destructive malware, it will continue for the time being. Future malware may infect more than just the integrity of the phone. Current phone operating systems and applications heavily depend
on cloud computing for storage and reliable backup. If malware,
for example, deletes entries from the phone’s address book, the
data loss will propagate on the next cloud synchronization and
subsequently affect all of the user’s computing devices.
• Premeditated spyware: FlexiSPY (www.flexispy.com) is
marketed as a tool to “catch cheating spouses” and is available
for Symbian, Windows Mobile, and BlackBerry. It provides location tracking, and remote listening. While malware variants
exist, the software itself exhibits malware-like behavior and will
likely be used for industrial espionage, amongst other purposes.
Such malware may be downloaded and installed directly by the
adversary, e.g., when the user leaves the phone on a table.
• Direct payoff: Viver (described above) directly compensates the
malware’s author by sending messages to premium SMS numbers. We will undoubtedly see similar malware appearing more
frequently. Such attacks impact both the end-user and the provider.
Customers will contest the additional fees, leaving the provider
with the expense. Any mechanism providing direct payment to
a third party is a potential attack vector. For example, Apple’s
iPhone OS 3.0 has in-application content sales .
• Information scavengers: Web-based malware currently scours
PCs for valuable address books and login credentials (e.g., usernames, passwords, and cookies for two-factor authentication for
bank websites) . Mobile phones are much more organized
then their PC counterparts, making them better targets for such
malware . For example, most phone operating systems include an API allowing all applications to directly access the address book.
• Ad-ware: Today’s Internet revenue model is based upon advertisements. The mobile phone market is no different, with many
developers receiving compensation through in-application advertisements. We expect malware to take advantage of notiﬁcation mechanisms (e.g., the Notiﬁcation Manager in Android);
however, their classiﬁcation as malware will be controversial.
Ad-ware on mobile phones is potentially more invasive than PC
counterparts, because the mobile phone variant will use geographic location and potentially Bluetooth communication .
• Botnet: A signiﬁcant portion of current malware activity results
in a PC’s membership into a botnet. Many anticipate the introduction of mobile phones into botnets, even coining the term
mobot (mobile bot) . Traynor predicts the existence of a
mobile botnet in 2009 . The goal of mobile botnets will
most likely be similar to those of existing botnets (e.g., providing means of DoS and spam distribution); however, the targets
Starting an Activity for a Result
Querying a Content Provider
Read/Write
Receiving an Intent Broadcast
Communicating with a Service
start/stop/bind
Figure 2: Typical IPC between application components
will change. Core telephony equipment is expected to be subject to DoS by phones, and mobot-originated SMS spam will
remove the economic disincentive for spammers, making SMS
spam much more frequent and wide spread. Finally, the phone
functionality will be used. For example, telemarketers could use
automated dialers from mobots to distribute advertisements, creating “voice-spam” .
The Android Operating System
Android is an operating system for mobile phones. However, it
is better described as a middleware running on top of embedded
Linux. The underlying Linux internals have been customized to
provide strong isolation and contain exploitation. Each application
is written in Java and runs as a process with a unique UNIX user
identity. This design choice minimizes the effects of a buffer over-
ﬂows. For example, a vulnerability in web browser libraries 
allowed an exploit to take control of the web browser, but the system and all other applications remained unaffected.
All inter-application communication passes through Android’s
middleware (with a few exceptions). In the remainder of this section, we describe how the middleware operates and enforces security. For brevity, we concentrate on the concepts and details necessary to understand Kirin. Enck et al. provide a more detailed
description of Android’s security model with helpful examples.
Application Structure
The Android middleware deﬁnes four types of inter-process communication (IPC).2 The types of IPC directly correspond to the four
types of components that make up applications. Generally, IPC
takes the form of an “Intent message”. Intents are either addressed
directly to a component using the application’s unique namespace,
or more commonly, to an “action string.” Developers specify “Intent ﬁlters” based on action strings for components to automatically
start on corresponding events. Figure 2 depicts typical IPC between
components that potentially crosses applications.
• An Activity component interfaces with the physical user via the
touchscreen and keypad. Applications commonly contain many
Activities, one for each “screen” presented to the user. The interface progression is a sequence of one Activity “starting” another, possibly expecting a return value. Only one Activity on
the phone has input and processing focus at a time.
• A Service component provides background processing that continues even after its application loses focus. Services also deﬁne
arbitrary interfaces for remote procedure call (RPC), including
2Unless otherwise speciﬁed, we use “IPC” to refer to the IPC types
speciﬁcally deﬁned by the Android middleware, which is distinct
from the underlying Linux IPC.
method execution and callbacks, which can only be called after
the service has been “bound”.
• A Content Provider component is a database-like mechanism for
sharing data with other applications. The interface does not use
Intents, but rather is addressed via a “content URI.” It supports
standard SQL-like queries, e.g., SELECT, UPDATE, INSERT,
through which components in other applications can retrieve and
store data according to the Content Provider’s schema (e.g., an
address book).
• A Broadcast Receiver component is an asynchronous event mailbox for Intent messages “broadcasted” to an action string. Android deﬁnes many standard action strings corresponding to system events (e.g., the system has booted). Developers often deﬁne
their own action strings.
Every application package includes a manifest ﬁle. The manifest speciﬁes all components in an application, including their types
and Intent ﬁlters. Note that Android allows applications to dynamically create Broadcast Receivers that do not appear in the manifest.
However, these components cannot be used to automatically start
an application, as the application must be running to register them.
The manifest also includes security information, discussed next.
Security Enforcement
Android’s middleware mediates IPC based on permission labels
using a user space reference monitor . For the most part, security
decisions are statically deﬁned by the applications’ package manifests. Security policy in the package manifest primarily consists
of 1) permission labels used (requested) by the application, and 2)
a permission label to restrict access to each component. When an
application is installed, Android decides whether or not to grant (assign) the permissions requested by the application. Once installed,
this security policy cannot change.
Permission labels map the ability for an application to perform
IPC to the restriction of IPC at the target interface. Security policy decisions occur on the granularity of applications. Put simply,
an application may initiate IPC with a component in another (or
the same) application if it has been assigned the permission label
speciﬁed to restrict access to the target component IPC interface.
Permission labels are also used to restrict access to certain library
APIs. For instance, there is a permission label that is required for
an application to access the Internet. Android deﬁnes many permission labels to protect libraries and components in core applications.
However, applications can deﬁne their own.
There are many subtleties when working with Android security
policy. First, not all policy is speciﬁed in the manifest ﬁle. The API
for broadcasting Intents optionally allows the developer to specify a
permission label to restrict which applications may receive it. This
provides an access control check in the reverse direction. Additionally, the Android API includes a method to arbitrarily insert a
reference monitor hook anywhere in an application. This feature is
primarily used to provide differentiated access to RPC interfaces in
a Service component. Second, the developer is not forced to specify a permission label to restrict access to a component. If no label
is speciﬁed, there is no restriction (i.e., default allow). Third, components can be made “private,” precluding them from access by
other applications. The developer need not worry about specifying
permission labels to restrict access to private components. Fourth,
developers can specify separate permission labels to restrict access
to the read and write interfaces of a Content Provider component.
Fifth, developers can create “Pending Intent” objects that can be
passed to other applications. That application can ﬁll in both data
and address ﬁelds in the Intent message. When the Pending Intent is sent to the target component, it does so with the permissions
granted to the original application. Sixth, in certain situations, an
application can delegate its access to subparts (e.g., records) of a
Content Provider. These last two subtleties add discretion to an
otherwise mandatory access control (MAC) system.
Most of Android’s core functionality is implemented as separate
applications. For instance, the “Phone” application provides voice
call functionality, and the “MMS” application provides a user interface for sending and receiving SMS and MMS messages. Android
protects these applications in the same way third-party developers protect their applications. We include these core applications
when discussing Android’s trusted computing base (TCB). A ﬁnal
subtlety of Android’s security framework relates to how applications are granted the permission labels they request. There are three
main “protection levels” for permission labels: a “normal” permission is granted to any application that requests it; a “dangerous”
permission is only granted after user approval at install-time; and
a “signature” permission is only granted to applications signed by
the same developer key as the application deﬁning the permission
label. This last protection level is integral in ensuring third-party
applications do not gain access affecting the TCB’s integrity.
KIRIN SECURITY RULES
The malware threats and the Android architecture introduced in
the previous sections serve as the background for developing Kirin
security rules to detect potentially dangerous application conﬁgurations. To ensure the security of a phone, we need a clear deﬁnition of a secure phone. Speciﬁcally, we seek to deﬁne the conditions that an application must satisfy for a phone to be considered
safe. To deﬁne this concept for Android, we turn to the ﬁeld of security requirements engineering, which is an off-shoot of requirements engineering and security engineering. The former is a wellknown fundamental component of software engineering in which
business goals are integrated with the design. The latter focuses on
the threats facing a speciﬁc system.
Security requirements engineering is based upon three basic concepts. 1) functional requirements deﬁne how a system is supposed
to operate in normal environment. For instance, when a web browser
requests a page from a web server, the web server returns the data
corresponding to that ﬁle. 2) assets are “...entities that someone
places value upon” . The webpage is an asset in the previous
example. 3) security requirements are “...constraints on functional
requirements to protect the assets from threats” . For example,
the webpage sent by the web server must be identical to the webpage received by the client (i.e., integrity).
The security requirements engineering process is generally systematic; however, it requires a certain level of human interaction.
Many techniques have been proposed, including SQUARE ,
SREP , CLASP , misuse cases , and security
patterns . Related implementations have seen great
success in practice, e.g., Microsoft uses the Security Development
Lifecycle (SDL) for the development of their software that must
withstand attacks , and Oracle has developed OSSA for the secure software development of their products .
Commonly, security requirements engineering begins by creating functional requirements. This usually involves interviewing
stakeholders . Next, the functional requirements are translated
into a visual representation to describe relationships between elements. Popular representations include use cases and context
diagrams using problem frames . Based on these requirements, assets are identiﬁed. Finally, each asset is considered with
respect to high level security goals (e.g., conﬁdentiality, integrity,
and availability). The results are the security requirements.
(1) Identify
Phone's Assets
(2) Identify
Functional Requirements
(4) Specify Security
Requirements
Security Enforcement
Mechanism Speciﬁcs
Stakeholder Concerns
(e.g., malware)
(3) Determine asset
security goals and threats
High-level Security goals
(e.g., conﬁdentiality)
(5) Determine Security
Mechanism Limitations
Figure 3: Procedure for requirements identiﬁcation
Unfortunately, we cannot directly utilize these existing techniques
because they are designed to supplement system and software development. Conversely, we wish to retroﬁt security requirements
on an existing design. There is no clearly deﬁned usage model or
functional requirements speciﬁcation associated with the Android
platform or the applications. Hence, we provide an adapted procedure for identifying security requirements for Android. The resulting requirements directly serve as Kirin security rules.
Identifying Security Requirements
We use existing security requirements engineering techniques as
a reference for identifying dangerous application conﬁgurations in
Android. Figure 3 depicts our procedure, which consists of ﬁve
main activities.
Step 1: Identify Assets.
Instead of identifying assets from functional requirements, we
extract them from the features on the Android platform. Google
has identiﬁed many assets already in the form of permission labels
protecting resources. Moreover, as the broadcasted Intent messages
(e.g. those sent by the system) impact both platform and application
operation, they are assets. Lastly, all components (Activities, etc.)
of system applications are assets. While they are not necessarily
protected by permission labels, many applications call upon them
to operate.
As an example, Android deﬁnes the RECORD_AUDIO permission to protect its audio recorder. Here, we consider the asset to
be microphone input, as it records the user’s voice during phone
conversations. Android also deﬁnes permissions for making phone
calls and observing when the phone state changes. Hence, call activity is an asset.
Step 2: Identify Functional Requirements.
Next, we carefully study each asset to specify corresponding
functional descriptions. These descriptions indicate how the asset interacts with the rest of the phone and third-party applications.
This step is vital to our design, because both assets and functional
descriptions are necessary to investigate realistic threats.
Continuing the assets identiﬁed above, when the user receives
an incoming call, the system broadcasts an Intent to the PHONE_
STATE action string. It also notiﬁes any applications that have
registered a PhoneStateListener with the system. The same
notiﬁcations are sent on outgoing call. Another Intent to the NEW_
OUTGOING_CALL action string is also broadcasted. Furthermore,
this additional broadcast uses the “ordered” option, which serializes
the broadcast and allows any recipient to cancel it. If this occurs,
subsequent Broadcast Receivers will not receive the Intent message. This feature allows, for example, an application to redirect
international calls to the number for a calling card. Finally, audio
can be recorded using the MediaRecorder API.
Step 3: Determine Assets Security Goals and Threats.
In general, security requirements engineering considers high level
security goals such as conﬁdentiality, integrity, and availability. For
each asset, we must determine which (if not all) goals are appropriate. Next, we consider how the functional requirements can be
abused with respect to the remaining security goals. Abuse cases
that violate the security goals provide threat descriptions. We use
the malware motivations described in Section 3.1 to motivate our
threats. Note that deﬁning threat descriptions sometimes requires a
level of creativity. However, trained security experts will ﬁnd most
threats straightforward after deﬁning the functional requirements.
Continuing our example, we focus on the conﬁdentiality of the
microphone input and phone state notiﬁcations. These goals are
abused if a malware records audio during voice call and transmits
it over the Internet (i.e., premeditated spyware). The corresponding
threat description becomes, “spyware can breach the user’s privacy
by detecting the phone call activity, recording the conversation, and
sending it to the adversary via the Internet.”
Step 4: Develop Asset’s Security Requirements.
Next, we deﬁne security requirements from the threat descriptions. Recall from our earlier discussion, security requirements are
constraints on functional requirements. That is, they specify who
can exercise functionality or conditions under which functionality
may occur. Frequently, this process consists of determining which
sets of functionality are required to compromise a threat. The requirement is the security rule that restricts the ability for this functionality to be exercised in concert.
We observe that the eavesdropper requires a) notiﬁcation of an
incoming or outgoing call, b) the ability to record audio, and c)
access to the Internet. Therefore, our security requirement, which
acts as Kirin security rule, becomes, “an application must not be
able to receive phone state, record audio, and access the Internet.”
Step 5: Determine Security Mechanism Limitations.
Our ﬁnal step caters to the practical limitations of our intended
enforcement mechanism. Our goal is to identify potentially dangerous conﬁgurations at install time. Therefore, we cannot ensure
runtime support beyond what Android already provides. Additionally, we are limited to the information available in an application
package manifest. For both these reasons, we must reﬁne our list of
security requirements (i.e., Kirin security rules). Some rules may
simply not be enforceable. For instance, we cannot ensure only
a ﬁxed number of SMS messages are sent during some time period , because Android does not support history-based policies.
Security rules must also be translated to be expressed in terms of
the security conﬁguration available in the package manifest. This
usually consists of identifying the permission labels used to protect
functionality. Finally, as shown in Figure 3, the iteration between
Steps 4 and 5 is required to adjust the rules to work within our limitations. Additionally, security rules can be subdivided to be more
straightforward.
The permission labels corresponding to the restricted functionality in our running example include READ_PHONE_STATE, PROCESS_
OUTGOING_CALLS, RECORD_AUDIO, and INTERNET. Furthermore, we subdivide our security rule to remove the disjunctive logic
resulting from multiple ways for the eavesdropper to be notiﬁed of
voice call activity. Hence, we create the following adjusted security rules: a) “an application must not have the READ_PHONE_
STATE, RECORD_AUDIO, and INTERNET permissions.” and the
nearly identical b) “an application must not have the PROCESS_
OUTGOING_CALLS, RECORD_AUDIO, and INTERNET permissions.”
Sample Malware Mitigation Rules
The remainder of this section discusses Kirin security rules we
developed following our 5-step methodology. For readability and
ease of exposition, we have enumerated the precise security rules
in Figure 4. We refer to the rules by the indicated numbers for the
remainder of the paper. We loosely categorize Kirin security rules
by their complexity.
Single Permission Security Rules
Recall that a number of Android’s “dangerous” permissions may
be “too dangerous” for some production environments. We discovered several such permission labels. For instance, the SET_
DEBUG_APP permission “. . . allows an application to turn on debugging for another application.” (according to available documentation). The corresponding API is “hidden” in the most recent SDK
environment (at the time of writing, version 1.1r1). The hidden
APIs are not accessible by third-party applications but only by system applications. However, hidden APIs are no substitute for security. A malware author can simply download Android’s source code
and build an SDK that includes the API. The malware then, for instance, can disable anti-virus software. Rule 1 ensures third party
applications do not have the SET_DEBUG_APP permission. Similar rules can be made for other permission labels protecting hidden
APIs (e.g., Bluetooth APIs not yet considered mature enough for
general use).
Multiple Permission Security Rules
Voice and location eavesdropping malware requires permissions
to record audio and access location information. However, legitimate applications use these permissions as well. Therefore, we
must deﬁne rules with respect to multiple permissions. To do this,
we consider the minimal set of functionality required to compromise a threat. Rules 2 and 3 protect against the voice call eavesdropper used as a running example in Section 4.1. Similarly, Rules 4
and 5 protect against a location tracker. In this case, the malware
starts executing on boot. In these security rules, we assume the malware starts on boot by deﬁning a Broadcast Receiver to receive the
BOOT_COMPLETE action string. Note that the RECEIVE_BOOT_
COMPLETE permission label protecting this broadcast is a “normal” permission (and hence is always granted). However, the permission label provides valuable insight into the functional requirements of an application. In general, Kirin security rules are more
expressible as the number of available permission labels increases.
Rules 6 and 7 consider malware’s interaction with SMS. Rule 6
protects against malware hiding or otherwise tampering with incoming SMS messages. For example, SMS can be used as a control channel for the malware. However, the malware author does
not want to alert the user, therefore immediately after an SMS is
received from a speciﬁc sender, the SMS Content Provider is modiﬁed. In practice, we found that our sample malware could not
remove the SMS notiﬁcation from the phone’s status bar. However, we were able to modify the contents of the SMS message in
the Content Provider. While we could not hide the control message completely, we were able to change the message to appear as
spam. Alternatively, a similar attack could ensure the user never
receives SMS messages from a speciﬁc sender, for instance PayPal
or a ﬁnancial institution. Such services often provide out-of-band
transaction conﬁrmations. Blocking an SMS message from this
(1) An application must not have the SET_DEBUG_APP permission label.
(2) An application must not have PHONE_STATE, RECORD_AUDIO, and INTERNET permission labels.
(3) An application must not have PROCESS_OUTGOING_CALL, RECORD_AUDIO, and INTERNET permission labels.
(4) An application must not have ACCESS_FINE_LOCATION, INTERNET, and RECEIVE_BOOT_COMPLETE permission labels.
(5) An application must not have ACCESS_COARSE_LOCATION, INTERNET, and RECEIVE_BOOT_COMPLETE permission labels.
(6) An application must not have RECEIVE_SMS and WRITE_SMS permission labels.
(7) An application must not have SEND_SMS and WRITE_SMS permission labels.
(8) An application must not have INSTALL_SHORTCUT and UNINSTALL_SHORTCUT permission labels.
(9) An application must not have the SET_PREFERRED_APPLICATION permission label and receive Intents for the CALL action string.
Figure 4: Sample Kirin security rules to mitigate malware
sender could hide other activity performed by the malware. While
this attack is also limited by notiﬁcations in the status bar, again,
the message contents can be transformed as spam.
Rule 7 mitigates mobile bots sending SMS spam. Similar to
Rule 6, this rule ensures the malware cannot remove traces of its
activity. While Rule 7 does not prevent the SMS spam messages
from being sent, it increases the probability that the user becomes
aware of the activity.
Finally, Rule 8 makes use of the duality of some permission labels. Android deﬁnes separate permissions for installing and uninstalling shortcuts on the phone’s home screen. This rule ensures
that a third-party application cannot have both. If an application
has both, it can redirect the shortcuts for frequently used applications to a malicious one. For instance, the shortcut for the web
browser could be redirected to an identically appearing application
that harvests passwords.
Permission and Interface Security Rules
Permissions alone are not always enough to characterize malware behavior. Rule 9 provides an example of a rule considering
both a permission and an action string. This speciﬁc rule prevents
malware from replacing the default voice call dialer application
without the user’s knowledge. Normally, if Android detects two
or more applications contain Activities to handle an Intent message, the user is prompted which application to use. This interface
also allows the user to set the current selection as default. However,
if an application has the SET_PREFERRED_APPLICATION permission label, it can set the default without the user’s knowledge.
Google marks this permission as “dangerous”; however, users may
not fully understand the security implications of granting it. Rule 9
combines this permission with the existence of an Intent ﬁlter receiving the CALL action string. Hence, we can allow a third-party
application to obtain the permission as long as it does not also handle voice calls. Similar rules can be constructed for other action
strings handled by the trusted computing base.
KIRIN SECURITY LANGUAGE
We now describe the Kirin Security Language (KSL) to encode
security rules for the Kirin security service. Kirin uses an application’s package manifest as input. The rules identiﬁed in Section 4
only require knowledge of the permission labels requested by an
application and the action strings used in Intent ﬁlters. This section
deﬁnes the KSL syntax and formally deﬁnes its semantics.
KSL Syntax
Figure 5 deﬁnes the Kirin Security Language in BNF notation.
A KSL rule-set consists of a list of rules. A rule indicates combinations of permission labels and action strings that should not be
⟨rule-set⟩::= ⟨rule⟩| ⟨rule⟩⟨rule-set⟩
⟨rule⟩::= “restrict” ⟨restrict-list⟩
⟨restrict-list⟩::= ⟨restrict⟩| ⟨restrict⟩“and” ⟨restrict-list⟩
⟨restrict⟩::= “permission [” ⟨const-list⟩“]” |
“receive [” ⟨const-list⟩“]”
⟨const-list⟩::= ⟨const⟩| ⟨const⟩“,” ⟨const-list⟩
⟨const⟩::= “’”[A-Za-z0-9_.]+“’”
Figure 5: KSL syntax in BNF.
used by third-party applications. Each rule begins with the keyword
“restrict”. The remainder of the rule is the conjunction of sets
of permissions and action strings received. Each set is denoted as
either “permission” or “receive”, respectively.
KSL Semantics
We now deﬁne a simple logic to represent a set of rules written
in KSL. Let R be set of all rules expressible in KSL. Let P be
the set of possible permission labels and A be the set of possible
action strings used by Activities, Services, and Broadcast Receivers
to receive Intents. Then, each rule ri ∈R is a tuple (2P, 2A).3
We use the notation ri = (Pi, Ai) to refer to a speciﬁc subset of
permission labels and action strings for rule ri, where Pi ∈2P and
Let R ⊆R correspond to a set of KSL rules. We construct R
from the KSL rules as follows. For each ⟨rule⟩i, let Pi be the union
of all sets of “permission” restrictions, and let Ai be the union
of all sets of “receive” restrictions. Then, create ri = (Pi, Ai)
and place it in R. The set R directly corresponds to the set of KSL
rules and can be formed in time linear to the size of the KSL rule
set (proof by inspection).
Next we deﬁne a conﬁguration based on package manifest contents. Let C be the set of all possible conﬁgurations extracted from
a package manifest. We need only capture the set of permission
labels used by the application and the action strings used by its Activities, Services, and Broadcast Receivers. Note that the package
manifest does not specify action strings used by dynamic Broadcast
Receivers; however, we use this fact to our advantage (as discussed
in Section 7). We deﬁne conﬁguration c ∈C as a tuple (2P, 2A).
We use the notation ct = (Pt, At) to refer to a speciﬁc subset of
permission labels and action strings used by a target application t,
where Pt ∈2P and At ∈2A.
3We use the standard notation 2X represent the power set of a set
X, which is the set of all subsets including ∅.
We now deﬁne the semantics of a set of KSL rules. Let fail :
C × R →{true, false} be a function to test if an application
conﬁguration fails a KSL rule. Let ct be the conﬁguration for target
application t and ri be a rule. Then, we deﬁne fail(ct, ri) as:
(Pt, At) = ct, (Pi, Ai) = ri, Pi ⊆Pt ∧Ai ⊆At
Clearly, fail(·) operates in time linear to the input, as a hash table
can provide constant time set membership checks.
Let FR : C →R be a function returning the set of all rules in
R ∈2R for which an application conﬁguration fails:
FR(ct) = {ri|ri ∈R, fail(ct, ri)}
Then, we say the conﬁguration ct passes a given KSL rule-set R if
FR(ct) = ∅. Note that FR(ct) operates in time linear to the size of
ct and R. Finally, the set FR(ct) can be returned to the application
installer to indicate which rules failed. This information facilitates
the optional user override extension described in Section 2.
KIRIN SECURITY SERVICE
For ﬂexibility, Kirin is designed as a security service running on
the mobile phone. The existing software installer interfaces directly
with the security service. This approach follows Android’s design
principle of allowing applications to be replaced based on manufacturer and consumer interests. More speciﬁcally, a new installer
can also use Kirin.
We implemented Kirin as an Android application. The primary
functionality exists within a Service component that exports an
RPC interface used by the software installer. This service reads
KSL rules from a conﬁguration ﬁle. At install time, the installer
passes the ﬁle path to the package archive (.apk ﬁle) to the RPC interface. Then, Kirin parses the package to extract the security con-
ﬁguration stored in the package manifest. The PackageManager
and PackageParser APIs provide the necessary information.
The conﬁguration is then evaluated against the KSL rules. Finally,
the passed/failed result is returned to the installer with the list of the
violated rules. Note that Kirin service does not access any critical
resources of the platform hence does not require any permissions.
EVALUATION
Practical security rules must both mitigate malware and allow
legitimate applications to be installed. Section 4 argued that our
sample security rules can detect speciﬁc types of malware. However, Kirin’s certiﬁcation technique conservatively detects dangerous functionality, and may reject legitimate applications. In this
section, we evaluate our sample security rules against real applications from the Android Market. While the Android Market does
not perform rigorous certiﬁcation, we initially assume it does not
contain malware. Any application not passing a security rule requires further investigation. Overall, we found very few applications where this was the case. On one occasion, we found a rule
could be reﬁned to reduce this number further.
Our sample set consisted of a snapshot of a subset of popular applications available in the Android Market in late January 2009. We
downloaded the top 20 applications from each of the 16 categories,
producing a total of 311 applications (one category only had 11 applications). We used Kirin to extract the appropriate information
from each package manifest and ran the FR(·) algorithm described
in Section 5.
Empirical Results
Our analysis tested all 311 applications against the security rules
listed in Figure 4. Of the 311 applications, only 12 failed to pass
Table 1: Applications failing Rule 2
Application
Description
Walki Talkie
Push to Talk
Walkie-Talkie style voice communication.
Utility to identify music tracks.
Inauguration
Collaborative journalism application.
all 9 security rules. Of these, 3 applications failed Rule 2 and 9
applications failed Rules 4 and 5. These failure sets were disjoint,
and no applications failed the other six rules.
Table 1 lists the applications that fail Rule 2. Recall that Rule 2
defends against a malicious eavesdropper by failing any application that can read phone state, record audio, and access the Internet. However, none of the applications listed in Table 1 exhibit
eavesdropper-like characteristics. Considering the purpose of each
application, it is clear why they require the ability to record audio
and access the Internet. We initially speculated that the applications stop recording upon an incoming call. However, this was not
the case. We disproved our speculation for Shazam and Inauguration Report and were unable to determine a solid reason for the
permission label’s existence, as no source code was available.
After realizing that simultaneous access to phone state and audio
recording is in fact beneﬁcial (i.e., to stop recording on incoming
call), we decided to reﬁne Rule 2. Our goal is to protect against
an eavesdropper that automatically records a voice call on either
incoming or outgoing call. Recall that there are two ways to obtain
the phone state: 1) register a Broadcast Receiver for the PHONE_
STATE action string, and 2) register a PhoneStateListener
with the system.
If a static Broadcast Receiver is used for the
former case, the application is automatically started on incoming
and outgoing call. The latter case requires the application to be
already started, e.g., by the user, or on boot. We need only consider cases where it is started automatically. Using this information, we split Rule 2 into two new security rules. Each appends an
additional condition. The ﬁrst appends a restriction on receiving
the PHONE_STATE action string. Note that since Kirin only uses
Broadcast Receivers deﬁned in the package manifest, we will not
detect dynamic Broadcast Receivers that cannot be used to automatically start the application. The second rule appends the boot
complete permission label used for Rule 4. Rerunning the applications against our new set of security rules, we found that only the
Walkie Talkie application failed our rules, thus reducing the number of failed applications to 10.
Table 2 lists the applications that fail Rules 4 and 5. Recall that
these security rules detect applications that start on boot and access
location information and the Internet. The goal of these rules is to
prevent location tracking software. Of the nine applications listed
in Table 2, the ﬁrst ﬁve provide functionality that directly contrast
with the rule’s goal. In fact, Kirin correctly identiﬁed both Accu-
Tracking and GPS Tracker as dangerous. Both Loopt and Twidroid
are popular social networking applications; however, they do in fact
provide potentially dangerous functionality, as they can be conﬁgured to automatically start on boot without the user’s knowledge.
Finally, Pintail is designed to report the phone’s location in response to an SMS message with the correct password. While this
may be initiated by the user, it may also be used by an adversary to
track the user. Again, Kirin correctly identiﬁed potentially dangerous functionality.
The remaining four applications in Table 2 result from the limitations in Kirin’s input. That is, Kirin cannot inspect how an ap-
Table 2: Applications failing Rule 4 and 5
Application
Description
AccuTracking
Client for real-time GPS tracking service
(AccuTracking).
GPS Tracker∗
Client for real-time GPS tracking service
(InstaMapper).
Geosocial networking application that
shares location with friends.
Twitter client that optionally allows automatic location tweets.
Reports the phone location in response to
SMS message.
WeatherBug
application
weather alerts.
Classiﬁeds application to aid in buying
or renting houses.
T-Mobile Hotspot
Utility to discover nearby nearby T-
Mobile WiFi hotspots.
Power Manager
Utility to automatically manage radios
and screen brightness.
* Did not fail Rule 5
plication uses information. In the previous cases, the location information was used to track the user. However, for these applications, the location information is used to supplement Internet data
retrieval. Both WeatherBug and Homes use the phone’s location to
ﬁlter information from a website. Additionally, there is little correlation between location and the ability to start on boot. On the other
hand, the T-Mobile Hotspot WiFi ﬁnder provides useful functionality by starting on boot and notifying the user when the phone is near
such wireless networks. However, in all three of these cases, we do
not believe access to “ﬁne” location is required; location with respect to a cellular tower is enough to determine a city or even a city
block. Removing this permission would allow the applications to
pass Rule 4. Finally, we were unable to determine why Power Manager required location information. We initially thought it switched
power proﬁles based on location, but did not ﬁnd an option.
In summary, 12 of the 311 applications did not pass our initial
security rules. We reduced this to 10 after revisiting our security
requirements engineering process to better specify the rules. This
is the nature of security requirements engineering, which an ongoing process of discovery. Of the remaining 10, Kirin correctly
identiﬁed potentially dangerous functionality in 5 of the applications, which should be installed with extreme caution. The remaining ﬁve applications assert a dangerous conﬁguration of permissions, but were used within reasonable functional needs based on
application descriptions. Therefore, Kirin’s conservative certiﬁcation technique only requires user involvement for approximately
1.6% of applications (according to our sample set). From this, we
observe that Kirin can be very effective at practically mitigating
Mitigating Malware
We have shown that Kirin can practically mitigate certain types
of malware. However, Kirin is not a complete solution for malware
protection. We constructed practical security by considering different malicious motivations. Some motivations are more difﬁcult
to practically detect with Kirin. Malware of destructive or proofof-concept origins may only require one permission label to carry
out its goals. For example, malware might intend to remove all
contacts from the phone’s address book. Kirin cannot simply deny
all third-party applications the ability to write to the address book.
Such a rule would fail for an application that merges Web-based
address books (e.g., Facebook).
Kirin is more valuable in defending against complex attacks requiring multiple functionalities. We discussed a number of rules
that defend against premeditated spyware. Rule 8 defends against
shortcut replacement, which can be used by information scavengers
to trick the user into using a malicious Web browser. Furthermore,
Rule 6 can help hide ﬁnancial transactions that might result from
obtained usernames and passwords. Kirin can also help mitigate
the effects of botnets. For example, Rule 7 does not let an application hide outbound SMS spam. This requirement can also be used
to help a user become aware of SMS sent to premium numbers (i.e.,
direct payoff malware). However, Kirin could be more effective if
Android’s permission labels distinguished between sending SMS
messages to contacts in the address book verses arbitrary numbers.
Kirin’s usefulness to defend against ad-ware is unclear. Many
applications are supported by advertisements. However, applications that continually pester the user are undesirable. Android does
not deﬁne permissions to protect notiﬁcation mechanisms (e.g., the
status bar), but even with such permissions, there are many legitimate reasons for using notiﬁcations. Despite this, in best case, the
user can identify the offending application and uninstall it.
Finally, Kirin’s expressibility is restricted by the policy that Android enforces. Android policy itself is static and does not support
runtime logic. Therefore, it cannot enforce that no more than 10
SMS messages are sent per hour . However, this is a limitation
of Android and not Kirin.
DISCOVERED VULNERABILITIES
The process of retroﬁtting security requirements for Android had
secondary effects. In addition to identifying rules for Kirin, we
discovered a number of conﬁguration and implementation ﬂaws.
Step 1 identiﬁes assets. However, not all assets are protected by
permissions. In particular, in early versions of our analysis discovered that the Intent message broadcasted by the system to the
SMS_RECEIVED action string was not protected. Hence, any application can create a forged SMS that appears to have come from
the cellular network. Upon notifying Google of the problem, the
new permission BROADCAST_SMS_RECEIVED has been created
and protects the system broadcast as of Android version 1.1. We
also discovered an unprotected Activity component in the phone
application that allows a malicious application to make phone calls
without having the CALL_PHONE permission. This conﬁguration
ﬂaw has also been ﬁxed. As we continued our investigation with the
most recent version of Android (v1.1r1), we discovered a number
of APIs do not check permissions as prescribed in the documentation. All of these ﬂaws show the value in deﬁning security requirements. Kirin relies on Android to enforce security at runtime.
Ensuring the security of a phone requires a complete solution, of
which Kirin is only part.
RELATED WORK
The best defense for mobile phone malware is still unclear. Most
likely, it requires a combination of solutions. Operating systems
protections have been improving. The usability ﬂaw allowing Cabir
to effectively propagate has been ﬁxed, and Symbian 3rd Edition
uses Symbian Signed (www.symbiansigned.com), which ensures some amount of software vetting before an application can
be installed. While, arguably, Symbian Signed only provides weak
security (socially engineered signatures have occurred ), it provides more protection than previous platform versions. Unfortunately, some users disable it.
Anti-virus software provides a second layer of defense against
malware. F-Secure (www.f-secure.com) is one of many security solution providers for Symbian and Windows Mobile. However, like PC anti-virus software, protection is reactive and depends on updated virus signatures. Behavior signatures considering temporal patterns of malicious behavior also show promise
and may defend against malware variants with different binary signatures. Similar to behavior signatures, multiple network-based
anomaly detection systems have been proposed . These systems report phone activity (e.g., SMS and Bluetooth usage) and
runtime features (e.g., CPU and memory usage) to a central server
that performs statistical anomaly analysis to detect mobile phone
malware epidemics.
Preventative techniques have also been proposed. Muthukumaran
et al. extend Openmoko with SELinux policies to isolate untrusted software. Zhang et al. incorporate trusted computing
and SELinux into mobile phones. Security-by-contract retroﬁts
Microsoft’s compact .NET platform by associating an application
with a “contract” of declared functionality. If the application deviates from the contractual policy, the runtime environment interrupts
execution. Kirin supplements Android’s existing security infrastructure. It infers application functionality from security conﬁguration available in the package manifest. While Android’s runtime
security enforcement is less expressive than security-by-contract,
it is signiﬁcantly lighter-weight, and Kirin provides no additional
runtime overhead.
Outside the domain of mobile phones, others have looked at certifying applications containing security conﬁguration.
al. extract security policy from Jif applications and test compliance with SELinux policy. Similarly, proof carry code provides a mechanism for a platform to check if an application behaves
in an expected way.
CONCLUSION
As users become more comfortable downloading software for
mobile phones, malware targeting phones will increase. Kirin provides lightweight certiﬁcation at install time that does not require
burdensome code inspection for each application. We have shown
that Kirin can express meaningful security rules to mitigate malware. Furthermore, we have shown that Kirin’s conservative certi-
ﬁcation technique rarely identiﬁes reasonable use of asserted rights
as potentially dangerous. This indicates that Kirin requires minimal
user interaction in practice. Future work will continue to the security requirements engineering process to discover additional rules
to defend against malware.
This work is simply the ﬁrst step in a longer journey towards
realizing practical mobile phone security. We plan to extend our
analysis of security conﬁguration included in package manifests by
enhancing the development environment to ensure applications are
distributed with proper protections.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Kevin Butler, Stephen McLaughlin, and
Trent Jaeger for their invaluable comments during the design and
formulation of this work. We also thank Adam Smith for his feedback while designing the logic. Finally, we thank the SIIS lab as a
whole for their continual feedback during the writing of this paper.