The Projector Augmented Wave Method:
ab-initio molecular dynamics with full wave
Peter E. Bl¨ochl∗, Clemens J. F¨orst∗† and Johannes Schimpl∗
∗Clausthal University of Technology,
Institute for Theoretical Physics,
Leibnizstr.10, D-38678 Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany
†Vienna University of Technology,
Institute for Materials Chemistry,
Getreidemarkt 9/165-TC, A-1060 Vienna, Austria
May 28, 2018
A brief introduction to the projector augmented wave method is given
and recent developments are reviewed. The projector augmented wave
method is an all-electron method for eﬃcient ab-initio molecular dynamics simulations with full wave functions.
It extends and combines the
traditions of existing augmented wave methods and the pseudopotential
approach. Without sacriﬁcing eﬃciency, the PAW method avoids transferability problems of the pseudopotential approach and it has been valuable
to predict properties that depend on the full wave functions.
Introduction
The main goal of electronic structure methods is to solve the Schr¨odinger equation for the electrons in a molecule or solid, to evaluate the resulting total
energies, forces, response functions and other quantities of interest. In this paper we review the Projector augmented wave (PAW) method [Bl¨ochl 1994], an
electronic structure method for ab-initio molecular dynamics with full wave functions. The main goal of this paper is not to provide a particularly complete or
detailed account of the methodology, but rather to lay out the underlying ideas.
A more rigorous description can be found in the original paper [Bl¨ochl 1994].
Density functional theory [Hohenberg et al 1964, Kohn et al 1965] maps a
description for interacting electrons onto one of non-interacting electrons in an
eﬀective potential. The remaining one-electron Schr¨odinger equation still poses
substantial numerical diﬃculties: (1) in the atomic region near the nucleus, the
kinetic energy of the electrons is large, resulting in rapid oscillations of the wave
function that require ﬁne grids for an accurate numerical representation. On
the other hand, the large kinetic energy makes the Schr¨odinger equation stiﬀ,
so that a change of the chemical environment has little eﬀect on the shape of
the wave function. Therefore, the wave function in the atomic region can be
represented well already by a small basis set. (2) In the bonding region between
the atoms the situation is opposite. The kinetic energy is small and the wave
function is smooth. However, the wave function is ﬂexible and responds strongly
to the environment. This requires large and nearly complete basis sets.
Combining these diﬀerent requirements is non-trivial and various strategies
have been developed.
• Most appealing to quantum chemists has been the atomic point of view.
Basis functions are chosen that resemble atomic orbitals. They exploit
that the wave function in the atomic region can be described by a few
basis functions, while the bonding is described by the overlapping tails of
these atomic orbitals. Most techniques in this class are a compromise of
a well adapted basis set with complex matrix elements on the one hand
and on the other hand numerically convenient basis functions such as
Gaussians, where the inadequacies are compensated by larger basis sets.
• Pseudopotentials regard an atom as a perturbation of the free electron
gas. The most natural basis functions are plane waves. Plane waves are
complete and well adapted to suﬃciently smooth wave functions.
disadvantage of the large basis sets required is oﬀset by the extreme simplicity to evaluate matrix elements.
Finite plane wave expansions are,
however, absolutely inadequate to describe the strong oscillations of the
wave functions near the nucleus.
In the pseudopotential approach the
Pauli repulsion of the core electrons is therefore described by an eﬀective
potential that expels the valence electrons from the core region. The resulting wave functions are smooth and can be represented well by plane
waves. The price to pay is that all information on the charge density and
wave functions near the nucleus is lost.
• Augmented wave methods compose their basis functions out of atom-like
partial waves in the atomic regions and a set of functions, called envelope functions, appropriate for the bonding in between. Space is divided
accordingly into atom-centered spheres, deﬁning the atomic region, and
an interstitial region for the bonds. The partial solutions of the diﬀerent regions, are matched at the interface between atomic and interstitial
The projector augmented wave method is an extension of augmented wave methods and the pseudopotential approach, which combines their traditions into a
uniﬁed electronic structure method.
After describing the underlying ideas of the various methods let us brieﬂy review the history of augmented wave methods and the pseudopotential approach.
We do not discuss the atomic-orbital based methods, because our focus is the
PAW method and its ancestors.
The augmented wave methods have been introduced in 1937 by Slater [Slater 1937]
and later modiﬁed by Korringa [Korringa 1947], Kohn and Rostokker [Kohn et al 1954].
They approached the electronic structure as a scattered electron problem. Consider an electron beam, represented by a plane wave, traveling through a solid.
It undergoes multiple scattering at the atoms. If for some energy, the outgoing scattered waves interfere destructively, a bound state has been determined.
This approach can be translated into a basis set method with energy dependent
and potential dependent basis functions. In order to make the scattered wave
problem tractable, a model potential had to be chosen: The so-called muﬃn-tin
potential approximates the potential by a constant in the interstitial region and
by a spherically symmetric potential in the atomic region.
The pseudopotential approach traces back to 1940 when C. Herring invented the orthogonalized plane wave method [Herring 1940]. Later, Phillips
[Phillips et al 1959] and Antoncik [Antoncik 1959] replaced the orthogonality
condition by an eﬀective potential, that compensates the electrostatic attraction by the nucleus. In practice, the potential was modiﬁed for example by
cutting oﬀthe singular potential of the nucleus at a certain value. This was
done with a few parameters that have been adjusted to reproduce the measured
electronic band structure of the corresponding solid.
Augmented wave and pseudopotential methods reached adulthood in the
1970s: At ﬁrst O.K. Andersen [Andersen 1975] showed that the energy dependent basis set of Slater’s APW method can be mapped onto one with energy
independent basis functions, by linearizing the partial waves for the atomic regions in energy. In the original APW approach the zeros of an energy dependent
matrix had to be determined, which is problematic, if many states lie in a small
energy region as for complex systems. With the new energy independent basis functions, however, the problem is reduced to the much simpler generalized
eigenvalue problem, which can be solved using eﬃcient numerical techniques.
Furthermore, the introduction of well deﬁned basis sets paved the way for fullpotential calculations. In that case the muﬃn-tin approximation is used solely
to deﬁne the basis set. The matrix elements of the Hamiltonian are evaluated
with the full potential.
Hamann, Schl¨uter and Chiang [Hamann et al 1979] showed in 1979 how
pseudopotentials can be constructed in such a way, that their scattering properties are identical to that of an atom to ﬁrst order in energy. These ﬁrst-principles
pseudopotentials relieved the calculations from the restrictions of empirical parameters. Highly accurate calculations have become possible. A main disadvantage of these pseudopotentials has been the large basis set size required
especially for ﬁrst-row and transition metal atoms.
In 1985 R. Car and M. Parrinello published the ab-initio molecular dynamics
method [Car et al 1985]. Simulations of the atomic motion have become possible on the basis of state-of-the-art electronic structure methods. Besides making dynamical phenomena and ﬁnite temperature eﬀects accessible to electronic
structure calculations, the ab-initio molecular dynamics method also introduced
a radically new way of thinking into electronic structure methods. Diagonalization of a Hamilton matrix has been replaced by classical equations of motion for
the wave function coeﬃcients. If one applies friction, the system is quenched to
the ground state. Without friction truly dynamical simulations of the atomic
structure are performed. Electronic wave functions and atomic positions are
treated on equal footing.
The Car-Parrinello method had been implemented ﬁrst for the pseudopotential approach. There seemed to be unsurmountable barriers against combining
the new technique with augmented wave methods. The main problem was related to the potential dependent basis set used sofar: the Car-Parrinello method
requires a well deﬁned and unique total energy functional of atomic positions
and basis set coeﬃcients. Therefore, it was one of the main goals of the PAW
method to introduce energy and potential independent basis sets that were as
accurate and numerically eﬃcient as the previously used augmented basis sets.
Other requirements have been: (1) The method should match the eﬃciency of
the pseudopotential approach for Car-Parrinello simulations. (2) It should become an exact theory when converged and (3) its convergence should be easily
controlled. We believe that these criteria have been met, which explains why
the PAW method becomes increasingly wide spread today.
We would like to point out that most of these seemingly singular developments did not come out of the blue, but the ideas seemed to have evolved
in the community. In the case of the PAW method, similar ideas have been
developed by Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt 1990] in the context of ultra-soft pseudopotentials. The ﬁrst dynamical simulations using a semiempirical electronic
structure method have been performed by Wang and Karplus [Wang et al 1973]
in 1973. The ﬁrst ab-initio pseudopotentials have been published by Zunger
[Zunger et al 1978] one year before Hamann, Bachelet and Schl¨uter [Hamann et al 1979].
Transformation theory
At the root of the PAW method lies a transformation, that maps the true wave
functions with their complete nodal structure onto auxiliary wave functions, that
are numerically convenient. We aim for smooth auxiliary wave functions, which
have a rapidly convergent plane wave expansion. With such a transformation
we can expand the auxiliary wave functions into a convenient basis set, and
evaluate all physical properties after reconstructing the related physical (true)
wave functions.
Let us denote the physical one-particle wave functions as |Ψn⟩and the auxiliary wave functions as |˜Ψn⟩. Note that the tilde refers to the representation
of smooth auxiliary wave functions. n is the label for a one-particle state and
contains a band index, a k-point and a spin index. The transformation from
the auxiliary to the physical wave functions is T .
|Ψn⟩= T |˜Ψn⟩
We use here Dirac’s Bra and Ket notation. A wave function Ψn(r) corre-
sponds to a ket |Ψn⟩, the complex conjugate wave function Ψ∗
n(r) corresponds
to a bra ⟨Ψn|, and a scalar product
n(r)Ψm(r) is written as ⟨Ψn|Ψm⟩.
Vectors in the 3-d coordinate space are indicated by boldfaced symbols.
The electronic ground state is determined by minimizing a total energy functional E[Ψn] of the density functional theory. The one-particle wave functions
have to be orthogonal.
This constraint is implemented with the method of
Lagrange multipliers. We obtain the ground state wave functions from the extremum condition for
F([Ψn], Λm,n) = E[Ψn] −
[⟨Ψn|Ψm⟩−δn,m]Λn,m
with respect to the wave functions and the Lagrange multipliers Λn,m. The
extremum condition for the wave functions has the form
where the fn are the occupation numbers and H = −¯h2
2me ∇2 + veﬀ(r) is the
eﬀective one-particle Hamilton operator.
After a unitary transformation that diagonalizes the matrix of Lagrange
multipliers Λm,n, we obtain the Kohn-Sham equations.
H|Ψn⟩= |Ψn⟩ǫn
The one-particle energies ǫn are the eigenvalues of Λn,m
Now we express the functional F in terms of our auxiliary wave functions
F([T ˜Ψn], Λm,n) = E[T ˜Ψn] −
[⟨˜Ψn|T †T |˜Ψm⟩−δn,m]Λn,m
The variational principle with respect to the auxiliary wave functions yields
T †HT |˜Ψn⟩= T †T |˜Ψn⟩ǫn.
Again we obtain a Schr¨odinger-like equation, but now the Hamilton operator
has a diﬀerent form, T †HT , an overlap operator T †T occurs, and the resulting
auxiliary wave functions are smooth.
When we evaluate physical quantities we need to evaluate expectation values
of an operator A, which can be expressed in terms of either the true or the
auxiliary wave functions.
fn⟨Ψn|A|Ψn⟩=
fn⟨˜Ψn|T †AT |˜Ψn⟩
In the representation of auxiliary wave functions we need to use transformed
operators ˜A = T †AT . As it is, this equation only holds for the valence electrons.
The core electrons are treated diﬀerently as will be shown below.
The transformation takes us conceptionally from the world of pseudopotentials to that of augmented wave methods, which deal with the full wave
functions. We will see that our auxiliary wave functions, which are simply the
plane wave parts of the full wave functions, translate into the wave functions of
the pseudopotential approach. In the PAW method the auxiliary wave functions
are used to construct the true wave functions and the total energy functional
is evaluated from the latter. Thus it provides the missing link between augmented wave methods and the pseudopotential method, which can be derived
as a well-deﬁned approximation of the PAW method.
In the original paper [Bl¨ochl 1994], the auxiliary wave functions have been
termed pseudo wave functions and the true wave functions have been termed
all-electron wave functions, in order to make the connection more evident. I
avoid this notation here, because it resulted in confusion in cases, where the
correspondence is not clear cut.
Transformation operator
Sofar, we have described how we can determine the auxiliary wave functions of
the ground state and how to obtain physical information from them. What is
missing, is a deﬁnition of the transformation operator T .
The operator T has to modify the smooth auxiliary wave function in each
atomic region, so that the resulting wave function has the correct nodal structure. Therefore, it makes sense to write the transformation as identity plus a
sum of atomic contributions SR
For every atom, SR adds the diﬀerence between the true and the auxiliary wave
function. The index R is a label for an atomic site.
The local terms SR are deﬁned in terms of solutions |φi⟩of the Schr¨odinger
equation for the isolated atoms. This set of partial waves |φi⟩will serve as a
basis set so that, near the nucleus, all relevant valence wave functions can be
expressed as superposition of the partial waves with yet unknown coeﬃcients.
|r −RR| < rc,R
The index i refers to a site index R, the angular momentum indices (ℓ, m) and an
additional index that diﬀerentiates partial waves with same angular momentum
quantum numbers on the same site. With i ∈R we indicate those partial waves
that belong to site R. RR is the position of the nucleus of site R.
Note that the partial waves are not necessarily bound states and are therefore
not normalizable, unless we truncate them beyond a certain radius rc,R. The
PAW method is formulated such that the ﬁnal results do not depend on the
location where the partial waves are truncated, as long as this is not done too
close to the nucleus.
Since the core wave functions do not spread out into the neighboring atoms,
we will treat them diﬀerently. Currently we use the frozen-core approximation
so that density and energy of the core electrons are identical to those of the
corresponding isolated atoms. The transformation T shall produce only wave
functions orthogonal to the core electrons, while the core electrons are treated
separately. Therefore, the set of atomic partial waves |φi⟩includes only valence
states that are orthogonal to the core wave functions of the atom.
For each of the partial waves we choose an auxiliary partial wave |˜φi⟩. The
(1 + SR)|˜φi⟩
|φi⟩−|˜φi⟩
deﬁnes the local contribution SR to the transformation operator. Since 1 + SR
shall change the wave function only locally, we require that the partial waves
|φi⟩and their auxiliary counter parts |˜φi⟩are pairwise identical beyond a certain
radius rc.
φi(r) = ˜φi(r)
|r −RR| > rc,R
In order to be able to apply the transformation operator to an arbitrary auxiliary wave function, we need to be able to expand the auxiliary wave function
locally into the auxiliary partial waves.
˜φi(r)⟨˜pi|˜Ψ⟩
|r −RR| < rc,R
which deﬁnes the projector functions |˜pi⟩. The projector functions probe the
local character of the auxiliary wave function in the atomic region. Examples of
projector functions are shown in Fig. 1. From Eq. 12 we can derive P
i |˜φi⟩⟨˜pi| =
1, which is valid within rc.
It can be shown by insertion, that the identity
Eq. 12 holds for any auxiliary wave function |˜Ψ⟩that can be expanded locally
into auxiliary partial waves |˜φi⟩, if
⟨˜pi|˜φj⟩= δi,j
Note that neither the projector functions nor the partial waves need to be orthogonal among themselves.
By combining Eq. 10 and Eq. 12, we can apply SR to any auxiliary wave
SR|˜φi⟩⟨˜pi|˜Ψ⟩=
|φi⟩−|˜φi⟩
Hence the transformation operator is
|φi⟩−|˜φi⟩
Figure 1: Top: projector functions of the Cl atom for two s-type partial waves,
middle: p-type, bottom: d-type.
where the sum runs over all partial waves of all atoms. The true wave function
can be expressed as
|Ψ⟩= |˜Ψ⟩+
|φi⟩−|˜φi⟩
⟨˜pi|˜Ψ⟩= |˜Ψn⟩+
|φi⟩⟨˜pi|˜Ψ⟩
|˜φi⟩⟨˜pi|˜Ψ⟩
In Fig. 2 the decomposition of Eq. 16 is shown for the example of the bonding
p-σ state of the Cl2 molecule.
To understand the expression for the true wave function, Eq. 16, let us concentrate on diﬀerent regions in space. (1) Far from the atoms, the partial waves
are, according to Eq. 11, pairwise identical so that the auxiliary wave function is
identical to the true wave function Ψ(r) = ˜Ψ(r). (2) Close to an atom, however,
the true wave function Ψ(r) = Ψ1
R(r) is built up from partial waves that contain
the proper nodal structure, because the auxiliary wave function and its partial
wave expansion are equal according to Eq. 12.
In practice the partial wave expansions are truncated. Therefore, the identity
of Eq. 12 does not hold strictly. As a result the plane waves also contribute to
the true wave function inside the atomic region. This has the advantage that
the missing terms in a truncated partial wave expansion are partly accounted
for by plane waves, which explains the rapid convergence of the partial wave
expansions.
Frequently, the question comes up, whether the transformation Eq. 15 of the
auxiliary wave functions indeed provides the true wave function. The transformation should be considered merely as a change of representation analogous to a
coordinate transform. If the total energy functional is transformed consistently,
Figure 2: Bonding p-σ orbital of the Cl2 molecule and its decomposition of the
wave function into auxiliary wave function and the two one-center expansions.
Top-left: True and auxiliary wave function; top-right: auxiliary wave function
and its partial wave expansion; bottom-left: the two partial wave expansions;
bottom-right: true wave function and its partial wave expansion.
its minimum will yield an auxiliary wave function that produces a correct wave
function |Ψ⟩.
Expectation values
Expectation values can be obtained either from the reconstructed true wave
functions or directly from the auxiliary wave functions
fn⟨Ψn|A|Ψn⟩+
fn⟨˜Ψn|T †AT |˜Ψn⟩+
where fn are the occupations of the valence states and Nc is the number of core
states. The ﬁrst sum runs over the valence states, and second over the core
states |φc
Now we can decompose the matrix elements into their individual contributions according to Eq. 16.
⟨˜Ψ|A|˜Ψ⟩+
R|A|˜Ψ −˜Ψ1
R⟩+ ⟨˜Ψ −˜Ψ1
Only the ﬁrst part of Eq. 20, is evaluated explicitly, while the second and third
parts of Eq. 20 are neglected, because they vanish for suﬃciently local operators as long as the partial wave expansion is converged: The function Ψ1
vanishes per construction beyond some augmentation region, because the partial waves are pairwise identical beyond that region.
The function ˜Ψ −˜Ψ1
vanishes inside the augmentation region, if the partial wave expansion is suﬃciently converged. In no region of space both functions Ψ1
R and ˜Ψ−˜Ψ1
simultaneously nonzero. Similarly the functions Ψ1
R from diﬀerent sites
are never non-zero in the same region in space. Hence, the second and third
parts of Eq. 20 vanish for operators such as the kinetic energy −¯h2
2me ∇2 and the
real space projection operator |r⟩⟨r|, which produces the electron density. For
truly nonlocal operators the second and third parts of Eq. 20 would have to be
considered explicitly.
The expression, Eq. 20, for the expectation value can therefore be written
⟨˜Ψn|A|˜Ψn⟩+ ⟨Ψ1
fn⟨˜Ψn|A|˜Ψn⟩+
Di,j⟨φj|A|φi⟩+
Di,j⟨˜φj|A|˜φi⟩+
where Di,j is the one-center density matrix deﬁned as
fn⟨˜Ψn|˜pj⟩⟨˜pi|˜Ψn⟩=
⟨˜pi|˜Ψn⟩fn⟨˜Ψn|˜pj⟩
The auxiliary core states, |˜φc
n⟩allow to incorporate the tails of the core wave
function into the plane wave part, and therefore assure, that the integrations of
partial wave contributions cancel strictly beyond rc. They are identical to the
true core states in the tails, but are a smooth continuation inside the atomic
sphere. It is not required that the auxiliary wave functions are normalized.
For example, the electron density is given by
n(r)˜Ψn(r) + ˜nc
j(r)φi(r) + nc,R
j(r)˜φi(r) + ˜nc,R
where nc,R is the core density of the corresponding atom and ˜nc,R is the auxiliary
core density that is identical to nc,R outside the atomic region and a smooth
continuation inside.
Before we continue, let us discuss a special point: The matrix element of
a general operator with the auxiliary wave functions may be slowly converging
with the plane wave expansion, because the operator A may not be well behaved.
An example for such an operator is the singular electrostatic potential of a
nucleus. This problem can be alleviated by adding an intelligent zero: If an
operator B is purely localized within an atomic region, we can use the identity
between the auxiliary wave function and its own partial wave expansion
⟨˜Ψn|B|˜Ψn⟩−⟨˜Ψ1
Now we choose an operator B so that it cancels the problematic behavior of the
operator A, but is localized in a single atomic region. By adding B to the plane
wave part and the matrix elements with its one-center expansions, the plane
wave convergence can be improved without aﬀecting the converged result.
Total Energy
Like wave functions and expectation values also the total energy can be divided
into three parts.
E([˜Ψn], Ri)
The plane-wave part ˜E involves only smooth functions and is evaluated on equispaced grids in real and reciprocal space. This part is computationally most
demanding, and is similar to the expressions in the pseudopotential approach.
d3r′ [˜n(r) + ˜Z(r)][˜n(r′) + ˜Z(r′)]
d3r˜n(r)ǫxc(r, [˜n]) +
d3r¯v(r)˜n(r),
where ˜Z(r) is an angular dependent core-like density that will be described in
detail below. The remaining parts can be evaluated on radial grids in a spherical
harmonics expansion. The nodal structure of the wave functions can be properly
described on a logarithmic radial grid that becomes very ﬁne near nucleus,
Di,j⟨φj|−¯h2
d3r′ [n1(r) + Z(r)][n1(r′) + Z(r′)]
d3rn1(r)ǫxc(r, [n1])
Di,j⟨˜φj|−¯h2
d3r′ [˜n1(r) + ˜Z(r)][˜n1(r′) + ˜Z(r′)]
d3r˜n1(r)ǫxc(r, [˜n1]) +
d3r¯v(r)˜n1(r)
The nuclear charge density −eZ(r) is deﬁned as a sum of δ-functions on the
nuclear sites, Z(r) = −P
R ZRδ(r −R), with the atomic numbers ZR. Note
that the self energy of a point charge is inﬁnite and must be subtracted out.
The compensation density ˜Z(r) = P
R ˜ZR(r) is given as a sum of angular
momentum dependent Gauss functions, which have an analytical Fourier transform. A similar term occurs also in the pseudopotential approach. In contrast
to the norm-conserving pseudopotential approach however, the compensation
charge is non-spherical and it is constantly adapting to the instantaneous environment. It is constructed such that the augmentation charge densities
R(r) + ZR(r) −˜n1
R(r) −˜ZR(r)
have vanishing electrostatic multi-pole moments for each atomic site.
result the sum of all one-center contributions from one atom does not produce
an electrostatic potential outside their own atomic region. This is the reason
that the electrostatic interaction of the one-center parts between diﬀerent sites
The compensation charge density as given here is still localized within the
atomic regions, but a technique similar to an Ewald summation allows to replace
it by a very extended charge density. Thus we can achieve, that all functions in
˜E converge as fast as the auxiliary density itself.
The potential ¯v, which occurs in Eqs. 27 and 29 enters the total energy in
the form of a zero described in Eq. 25
|˜pi⟩⟨˜φi|¯v|˜φj⟩⟨˜pj|
The main reason for introducing this potential is that the self-consistent potential resulting from the plane wave part is not necessarily optimally smooth. The
potential ¯v allows to inﬂuence the plane wave convergence beneﬁcially, without
changing the converged result. ¯v must be localized within the augmentation
region, where equation 12 holds.
Approximations
Once the total energy functional provided in the previous section has been
deﬁned, everything else follows: Forces are partial derivatives with respect to
atomic positions. The potential is the derivative of the potential energy with respect to the density, and the Hamiltonian follows from derivatives with respect
to wave functions. The ﬁctitious Lagrangian approach of Car and Parrinello
[Car et al 1985] does not allow any freedom in the way these derivatives are
obtained. Anything else than analytic derivatives will violate energy conservation in a dynamical simulation. Since the expressions are straightforward, even
though rather involved, we will not discuss them here.
All approximations are incorporated already in the total energy functional
of the PAW method. What are those approximations?
• Firstly we use the frozen core approximation. In principle this approximation can be overcome.
• The plane wave expansion for the auxiliary wave functions must be complete.
The plane wave expansion is controlled easily by increasing the
plane wave cutoﬀdeﬁned as EP W = 1
max. Typically we use a plane
wave cutoﬀof 30 Ry.
• The partial wave expansions must be converged. Typically we use one
or two partial waves per angular momentum (ℓ, m) and site. It should
be noted that the partial wave expansion is not variational, because the
partial wave expansion changes the total energy functional and not only
the basis set.
We do not discuss here numerical approximations such as the choice of the radial
grid, since those are easily controlled.
We mentioned earlier that the pseudopotential approach can be derived as
a well deﬁned approximation from the PAW method: The augmentation part
∆E = E1 −˜E1 is a functional of the one-center density matrix Di,j deﬁned in
Eq. 22. The pseudopotential approach can be recovered if we truncate a Taylor
expansion of ∆E about the atomic density matrix after the linear term. The
term linear to Di,j is the energy related to the nonlocal pseudopotential.
 approach [Woo et al 2000].
In order to overcome the limitations of the density functional theory several
extensions have been performed.
Bengone [Bengone et al 2000] implemented
the LDA+U approach [Anisimov et al 1991] into the CP-PAW code. Soon after
this, Arnaud [Arnaud et al 2000] accomplished the implementation of the GW
approximation into the CP-PAW code. The VASP-version of PAW [Hobbs et al 2000]
and the CP-PAW code have now been extended to include a noncollinear description of the magnetic moments. In a non-collinear description the Schr¨odinger
equation is replaced by the Pauli equation with two-component spinor wave
The PAW method has proven useful to evaluate electric ﬁeld gradients
[Petrilli et al 1998] and magnetic hyperﬁne parameters with high accuracy [Bl¨ochl et al 2000].
Invaluable will be the prediction of NMR chemical shifts using the GIPAW
method of Pickard and Mauri [Pickard et al 2001], which is based on their earlier
work [Mauri et al 1996]. While the GIPAW is implemented in a post-pseudopotential manner, the extension to a self-consistent PAW calculation should be
straightforward. An post-pseudopotential approach has also been used to evaluate core level spectra [Jayawardane et al 2001] and momentum matrix elements
[Kageshima et al 1997].
Acknowledgment
We are grateful for carefully reading the manuscript to Dr. J. Noﬀke, Dr. R. Schmidt
and P. Walther and to Prof. K. Schwarz for his continuous support. This work
has beneﬁted from the collaborations within the ESF Programme on ’Electronic
Structure Calculations for Elucidating the Complex Atomistic Behavior of Solids
and Surfaces’.