Vol.:(0123456789)
AI & SOCIETY 36:487–497
 
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Moral zombies: why algorithms are not moral agents
Carissa Véliz1
Received: 12 February 2021 / Accepted: 12 March 2021 / Published online: 16 April 2021
© The Author(s) 2021
In philosophy of mind, zombies are imaginary creatures that are exact physical duplicates of conscious subjects for whom
there is no first-personal experience. Zombies are meant to show that physicalism—the theory that the universe is made up
entirely out of physical components—is false. In this paper, I apply the zombie thought experiment to the realm of morality to assess whether moral agency is something independent from sentience. Algorithms, I argue, are a kind of functional
moral zombie, such that thinking about the latter can help us better understand and regulate the former. I contend that the
main reason why algorithms can be neither autonomous nor accountable is that they lack sentience. Moral zombies and
algorithms are incoherent as moral agents because they lack the necessary moral understanding to be morally responsible. To
understand what it means to inflict pain on someone, it is necessary to have experiential knowledge of pain. At most, for an
algorithm that feels nothing, ‘values’ will be items on a list, possibly prioritised in a certain way according to a number that
represents weightiness. But entities that do not feel cannot value, and beings that do not value cannot act for moral reasons.
Keywords  Algorithms · Moral agency · Moral responsibility · Autonomous systems · Zombies · Accountability ·
Autonomy · Sentience · Consciousness · Reasons-responsiveness
1  Introduction
In philosophy of mind, zombies are imaginary creatures
designed to illustrate issues related to physicalism and consciousness. Zombies are exact physical duplicates of conscious subjects for whom there is no first-personal experience. In addition to being physically just like us, molecule
for molecule, they are also our functional duplicates. Zombies behave indistinguishably from human beings—they
complain about the weather, they cry when they watch sad
movies, and they have been known to discuss philosophy
conundrums for hours at a time. Unlike human beings, they
lack conscious experience. It is nothing there is like to be a
zombie—they do not suffer from cold when it is cold, they
do not feel sadness when they cry, and philosophical puzzles
do not worry or excite them.
Zombies are meant to show that physicalism—the theory
that the universe is made up entirely out of physical components—is false. If there could be creatures that act like us
without conscious experience, then consciousness must be
something above and beyond our physical bodies.
The zombie thought experiment is yet to be applied to the
realm of morality, but there is an analogous question to be
explored regarding sentience and moral agency. Applying
the zombie thought experiment to moral agency can help us
assess whether moral agency is something independent of
conscious experience, or sentience. By sentience I mean the
capacity, at a minimum, to have a subjective experience of
pleasure and pain. I wish to remain agnostic as to whether
subjective experience is synonymous with sentience. For
the purposes of this paper, I will focus on sentience because
it is conceivable that there could be conscious experience
without feelings of pain or pleasure, and without emotions,
and I take these latter experiences to be what matter most for
moral agency. Delving into these issues, however, is beyond
the scope of this paper and unnecessary for my purposes.
In what follows, I first present the case for algorithms
being akin to moral zombies, and for the significance of
the moral zombie thought experiment. I then suggest that
much of the literature on algorithms assumes a degree of
moral agency in algorithms. In turn, most accounts of moral
agency defend either some version of autonomy or some version of moral responsibility as constitutive of moral agency,
* Carissa Véliz
 
Institute for Ethics in AI, Faculty of Philosophy, Hertford
College, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
AI & SOCIETY 36:487–497
or both. I go on to analyse whether algorithms and moral
zombies are autonomous in the relevant sense for moral
agency, and argue that they are not. I then argue that moral
responsibility is more relevant to assessing moral agency
than autonomy, but neither algorithms nor moral zombies
are morally responsible either. I contend that the main reason
why algorithms can be neither autonomous nor accountable
is that they lack sentience. Moral zombies are incoherent as
moral agents because they lack the necessary moral understanding to be morally responsible. To understand what it
means to inflict pain on someone, it is necessary to have
experiential knowledge of pain. I end the paper by responding to three possible objections.
2  Algorithms as moral zombies
Moral zombies would be creatures who act indistinguishably
from us as moral agents, but for whom there is nothing it is
like to be them. Moral zombies would act like us without
feeling like us. Like human beings, they would be able to do
good by donating to charity, protecting vulnerable people
against injustice, and respecting rights. They would also have
the power to do evil by violating rights and causing unnecessary suffering—they could insult, betray, threaten, and
physically aggress others. Unlike human beings, they would
not feel pain, pleasure, empathy, intimacy, remorse, guilt,
shame, or any other moral emotion. A moral zombie would
not rejoice at saving a life or suffer guilt from taking one.
Moral zombies, as described, seem to be conceivable creatures, which shows that the power to have a moral impact in the
world is independent from sentience. But we already know that
from hurricanes and other natural phenomena that can cause
harm without there being any agency. The relevant question
for ethics is whether moral zombies are conceivable as moral
agents. If they are not, then the thought experiment would suggest that where there is moral agency, there is sentience.
Moral zombies may not only be a thought experiment.
It could be argued that something like moral zombies are
already among us; they are often called algorithms, robots,
or AI (I will use these terms more or less interchangeably).
Automated systems may not look like us (yet), but this detail
is arguably morally irrelevant (at least for the question of
moral agency). We can imagine robots looking like human
beings in the not too distant future. While AI is not yet and
will likely never be a physical duplicate of human beings, it
can be considered a functional duplicate in some respects—
which is why machines can replace human beings in increasingly more tasks. Algorithms already resemble us in some
of the decisions they are making, and the moral impact they
can have on the world, with people getting hired, sacked,
rewarded, and even jailed on account of them. They are not
like us, however, in that there is nothing it is like to be them.
Thus, thinking about algorithms can help us think through
the moral zombie thought experiment, and thinking about
moral zombies can help us better understand algorithms.
The first objection someone might level at my argument is
that we cannot know for sure that algorithms or machines are
not sentient. Admittedly, I cannot prove beyond all shadow
of a doubt that there is nothing it is like to be an algorithm.
But, for that matter, I cannot prove that rocks are not sentient
either. If panpsychists are right, even rocks may have some
degree of consciousness or proto-consciousness. There is,
however, not enough evidence to suggest that algorithms (or
rocks) have a mind or can feel.
It might be argued that, out of epistemic humility, if algorithms behave as us, we should treat them much like we
treat human beings . At the
moment, however, algorithms resemble us only in some of
the tasks and functions they perform in society, but not in a
more global sense. In that regard, they are not full zombies,
but merely something like functional moral zombies. Algorithms today can select job candidates or assess the probability of someone committing a crime, but they cannot develop
a passion for French comedies or be moved by kindness.
There may come a time when machines are so similar to
us that caution may be warranted . It is likely
that they would need to have bodies similar to ours. There
might not be such a thing as a disembodied mind . And it might be that only beings with biological bodies can be sentient. Part of what makes us feel and
think the way we do is our heart beating faster when we
are excited, our blood pressure dropping when we experience sadness, sweat running down our temples when we are
scared, our skin curling into goose bumps when we are awestruck. The burden of proof, then, seems to be on whoever
wants to argue that algorithms are sentient.
3  Moral agency and algorithms
There is a tendency in the literature to describe automated
systems in ways that seem to imply some degree of moral
agency1 . In some cases, implicit references
1  In the literature on AI and ethics, many authors The Machine Question: Critical Perspectives on AI, Robots,
and Ethics. MIT Press, Floridi L and Sanders JW On the
Morality of Artificial Agents. Minds and Machines 14: 349–379.) distinguish between moral agency (roughly, the capacity to make moral
judgments and bear moral obligations towards others) and moral
patiency (roughly, being the target of the actions of a moral agent,
and being worthy of moral consideration). This paper is concerned
with moral agency, not with moral patiency. In other words, the paper
asks whether algorithms can be held accountable for what they do to
us. What, if anything, we owe algorithms is beyond the scope of the
paper. I take it, however, that if someone is a moral agent, then she is
also a moral patient. The reverse might not be true.
AI & SOCIETY 36:487–497
to moral agency seem to be a mere rhetorical device. In the
spirit of Daniel Dennett’s intentional stance, sometimes it
can be useful to describe artefacts as if they had intentions
and beliefs, even when we think them mindless. Wendell
Wallach and Colin Allen write, for example, that ‘Driverless systems put machines in the position of making splitsecond decisions that could have life or death implications’
 . In the same vein, Robert Sparrow writes that
what makes weapons systems automated is ‘that they have
the capacity to choose their own targets’ . Even
though Sparrow goes on to argue that autonomous weapons systems are not morally responsible, the language of
moral decision-making seems appropriate only in reference
to moral agents. Referring to autonomous systems in ways
that are accurate only when describing moral agents is morally significant. As Noel Sharkey puts it:
‘[Some terms] act as linguistic Trojan horses that smuggle in a rich interconnected web of human concepts that are
not part of a computer system or how it operates. Once the
reader has accepted a seemingly innocent Trojan term (…) it
opens the gate to other meanings associated with the natural
language use of the term’ .
Perhaps, this tendency to talk of autonomous systems as
if they were moral agents, or the messy debate on moral
agency and AI, has led some writers to suggest that we
should stop asking ourselves if autonomous systems are
truly moral agents .2 But that
approach seems unsatisfying. The reason we ask ourselves
if AIs are or can be moral agents is not out of metaphysical curiosity, but rather because we care about the practical implications. If AIs are not moral agents, then someone needs to take responsibility for what they do. If AIs are
moral agents, then presumably we should be treating them
accordingly (suing them when they break the law, sending
them to jail, and considering them bearers of rights, among
other practices).
Although most writers only use the language of moral
agency metaphorically or pragmatically, in some cases, there
does seem to be an explicit belief that autonomous agents
can be moral agents. For instance, when writing about selfdriving cars, Mark Coeckelbergh argues that ‘all agency is
entirely transferred to the [car]’ .
Of course, different authors mean different things when
referring to moral agency. A dominant way of categorising moral agency in the AI literature is that of James H.
Moor . He proposes four categories of ethical
agency: (1) ethical impact agents (agents whose actions have
ethical consequences; most or all autonomous systems count
as ethical impact agents); (2) implicit ethical agents (those
that have been designed with ethics in mind, e.g. ATMs);
(3) explicit ethical agents (agents that can act from ethics,
and not merely in accordance with ethics; they can identify
ethical problems and work out solutions for themselves); (4)
full ethical agents (they can do what explicit ethical agents
do and, in addition, they have consciousness, intentionality,
and free will). My claim in this paper is that explicit ethical
agents and full ethical agents are one and the same category.
In other words, I claim we will not get an agent that can
identify ethical problems and respond adequately to them
without sentience.
Given that my argument pivots on sentience, the most
interesting perspective (and contrary to mine) is that of
Luciano Floridi and J.W. Sanders, who not only argue that
artificial autonomous agents can be considered moral agents,
but also that they constitute an instance of ‘mind-less morality’ . In disagreement with Floridi and Sanders, I contend that sentience is necessary for moral agency,
because conscious experience of the kind that allows for
feelings like pleasure, pain, and empathy seems necessary
for moral agency.
An agent is, roughly, an entity that can be the source of
action. Most accounts of moral agency in philosophy defend
either some version of autonomy or some version of moral
responsibility as constitutive of moral agency, or both. The
relationship between these concepts is fraught with controversy. Some philosophers think that whenever there is one,
the other follows, while others argue that autonomy and
moral responsibility are independent from each other. For
our purposes, it is not essential to establish the exact relationship between autonomy and moral responsibility. What
matters is that, under any plausible account of autonomy that
is relevant to morality, and under any plausible account of
moral responsibility, neither moral zombies nor algorithms
can be moral agents, or so I argue.
4  Autonomy and moral agency
Nomy Arpaly argues that there are at least eight ways in
which ‘autonomy’ has been conceptualised in the literature:
as personal efficacy, psychological independence, having
a moral right to self-determination, authenticity, having
a coherent self-image, being heroic, self-governance, and
being responsive to reasons. In what follows I go through
each of these and argue that many of these accounts of
autonomy do not seem relevant to morality, and the ones
that do (self-governance and reasons-responsiveness), do not
apply to moral zombies or algorithms.
2  Dorna Behdadi and Christian Munthe explicitly admit that the reason for their proposal ‘is the high degree of conceptual confusion and
lack of practical usefulness of the traditional AMA [artificial moral
agency] debate’ .
AI & SOCIETY 36:487–497
4.1  Personal efficacy
This sense of autonomy describes the quality of not depending on other people’s help to navigate the world. Floridi and
Sanders contend that algorithms are autonomous because
they are ‘able to change state without direct response to
interaction’—that is, they can act independently of the
human beings who created them . It does not
seem that this sense of autonomy is at all relevant to assess
whether algorithms are moral agents, however. Tornadoes
can also go about their business without human help, and
that tells us nothing about whether they are agents—much
less moral agents.
Autonomy in moral and political philosophy is a much
richer concept than in the context of computer science and
engineering. It is the richer kind of autonomy that is relevant
for moral agency, and not to be confused with the looser
sense of the adjective ‘autonomous’ used when talking about
technology. Once we identify an entity as a moral agent, or
as the subject of moral rights, then it might be relevant to
know what they can and cannot do independently of other
agents (e.g. to assess how responsible they can be for their
actions, or to investigate whether they are owed assistance
in virtue of their limitations, etc.). But we are not there yet
when it comes to moral zombies or algorithms, and knowing
whether they are personally efficacious tells us nothing about
whether they are moral agents.
4.2  Independence of mind
This version of autonomy is similar to the previous, except
instead of focusing on the ability to act independently of
others, it is concerned with the ability to think independent
of others. If by ‘mind’ we mean something like subjective
experience, then neither moral zombies nor algorithms have
a mind. Some philosophers, however, might want to argue
that subjective experience is not necessary to have a mind.
In any case, it seems that mental independence does not
help as a criterion to establish moral agency. Computers
that play chess, for instance, can ‘think’ independently of
human beings, and it is quite clear that they are not good
candidates for moral agency. Once it is evident that someone
is a moral agent, it may then be morally relevant to establish
whether they have been unduly influenced in a particular circumstance (through propaganda, or subliminal messages, or
direct brain stimulation). But, again, independence of mind
is not relevant as a test of moral agency.
4.3  Moral right to self‑determination
It is widely accepted that moral agents have a right to selfdetermination. As a competent adult, you should be able
to decide how you live your life—as long as you do not
violate other people’s rights. Respect for autonomy is one of
the pillars of bioethics. It is what allows patients to decide
which treatment, if any, they are to receive. While the right
to self-determination is a very important one, it assumes
moral agency on the part of the right bearer. The right to
self-determination is a tool to protect moral agents, it is not
a property of agents, and as such it cannot be a criterion for
moral agency.
4.4  Authenticity
To what extent someone acts in an authentic way—following their true convictions, or being true to who they are—as
opposed to acting impulsively, seems to matter for morality.
Harry Frankfurt argued that some cases that could
be interpreted as cases of weakness of will are actually
cases of someone being constrained by their own deepest
values. In response, David Velleman has argued that
such a theory is not about autonomy but about authenticity.
Whether authenticity is part of autonomy is not important
for our purposes. While authenticity might be important to
assess character and the moral significance of actions, it does
not seem like a good test for moral agency. We can imagine
inauthentic moral agents that are moral agents nonetheless.
Consider a person who does not trust her deepest convictions
and instead acts imitating others. Such behaviour makes
her less admirable as a moral agent, but her inauthenticity, unless it were caused by some cognitive deficiency that
would question her competence, is no reason to question her
moral agency.
4.5  Self‑identification
Given that autonomy is often thought of as related to the
absence of external pressure, the phenomenological experience of owning one’s desires and acts is often thought to
be relevant to autonomy as well. The autonomous person,
on this account, is one who is able to self-identify with her
desires and has a coherent self-image. Most people have
done something at some point in their lives that was out of
character for them, with which they did not self-identify.
While the degree of self-identification can be relevant to
judge the moral significance of an action, it does not seem
relevant to judge whether someone is a moral agent. Suppose
that, even though you are usually a very calm person, one
day you lose your temper and scream at your partner. While
you might not self-identify with that action, that does not
AI & SOCIETY 36:487–497
strip you of your moral agency. Self-identification, then, is
again not an appropriate test of moral agency.3
4.6  Heroism
Many accounts of autonomy have an ideal agent in mind.
For stoics, the ideal agent is one who exercises ataraxia; for
Aristotle, it is the person who leads a life of contemplation;
for Nietzsche, it is the free spirit. Having an ideal can help
us assess how close or far a person or an action is from the
best it could be, but it cannot be a criterion for moral agency.
If only the few who reach the ideal were to be considered
moral agents, most competent adults would fail the test of
moral agency.
4.7  Self‑governance and reasons‑responsiveness
One of the most popular ways of thinking about autonomy is
in terms of self-governance. The term ‘autonomy’ is derived
from the Greek ‘autos’ (self), and ‘nomos’ (law); as such,
the concept that the term ‘autonomy’ aims to capture seems
to be, broadly speaking, the property of self-government,
characterised by the agent’s ability to decide how to act.
Even within theories of autonomy as self-governance, there
is a great deal of controversy and variety.
The idea of autonomy as self-governance can be traced
back to Immanuel Kant , for whom autonomy means
that no authority external to ourselves is needed to dictate
the demands of morality . Being autonomous entails imposing on ourselves the demands of morality: we have the ability to recognise what is the right thing
to do and to act accordingly.
I discuss autonomy as self-governance and as reasonsresponsiveness together because they seem intimately
related. More precisely, it seems that self-governance
requires reasons-responsiveness. Moral agents make decisions and act accordingly at least partly because they are
responding to reasons. If an entity is not the kind of creature
who can understand reasons, then she will not govern herself
in a way that is relevant for morality.
Crucial to autonomy as self-governance is the capacity to
act in accordance with reason in a way that responds to one’s
own motives . To be autonomous, one
must be able to reflect on , endorse, and
act on one’s values . It is because a person
is able to choose her values for herself and live accordingly
that we must ask for her consent to interact with her in invasive ways, for example, in the case of a medical procedure.
We do not need to ask an algorithm its permission to modify
it or even terminate it because algorithms do not have values
of their own; they do not care about their own existence. Nor
can they respond to reasons qua reasons: You cannot persuade an algorithm to do something through giving it good
reasons—you can only programme it one way or another.
A robot could respond to its environment in ways that are
in accordance with ethics (e.g. if it sees a human being carrying something heavy, it offers to carry it for them). That a
human being is struggling with carrying her groceries and
that it will be effortless for the robot to carry them for her,
however, is not a reason for the robot—it is an instruction.
The robot cannot desire to relieve the strained arms of the
person because, first, it has no desires, and second, it has no
idea what it feels like to have your arms hurt from carrying something heavy. Furthermore, the robot cannot reflect
on the relationship between our acts and having a healthy
citizenry, or on the benefits of civil friendship. A reason, for
moral agents, amounts to something that matters to us, that
we care about because we understand its moral significance.
Algorithms are programmed to do something: win a
game of chess, distinguish spam from non-spam, identify
people who might want to buy a product, assess whether
a candidate will be appropriate for a job, etc. Algorithms,
however, are incapable of normatively assessing the objective for which they have been created, and modifying their
behaviour accordingly.4
Consider the role algorithms play in advancing for-profit
colleges in the United States. These are expensive, low-quality colleges that advertise themselves to vulnerable populations as a way out of their underprivileged status. In fact, in
the work market, a person is no better off having a diploma
from a for-profit college than not having attended college at
all . To identify possible clients for a
for-profit college, algorithms look for people in the poorest
postal codes who have clicked on ads for payday loans, or
whose search histories reveal a concern with post-traumatic
stress . When such algorithms
perform their tasks, they are not wondering whether it is
morally correct to prey on vulnerable people, and they are
incapable of deciding to quit their jobs and go for a more
ethical line of work.
A self-driving car is incapable of choosing its destination on a whim. It cannot wake up one day with the desire
3  For more on self-identification and autonomy, see Schroeder T and
Arpaly N Alienation and Externality. Canadian Journal of
Philosophy 29(3): 371–388.
4  To be clear, the problem I am pinpointing here is not that algorithms are programmed. A critic might point out that human beings
are programmed in some ways by genetics and culture. What is of
concern is that algorithms do not have sentience to help them modify
their programming. A human being may have been educated to be
religious, but a feeling of dissatisfaction might lead her to change the
course of her life. My thanks to an anonymous reviewer for pushing
me on this point.
AI & SOCIETY 36:487–497
to enjoy the countryside and disobey its owner, who needs
to get to work. A killer robot cannot become a pacifist after
considering the negative consequences of its actions. It is
not that the killer robot has been programmed to believe that
its killing is morally justified—it does not have the capacity
to either believe in or question its raison d’être. It cannot
reflect on what it wants, what is worth pursuing, or how it
should live its life.5
In a nutshell then, algorithms are neither self-governing,
because they need external input to set themselves goals,
nor reasons-responsive, as no reasons could ever ‘convince’ them to change the goal for which they have been
programmed.
Moral zombies, on the other hand, might appear to be
both self-governing and reasons-responsive, given that, by
definition, they would behave indistinguishably from human
beings. However, it is unclear that moral zombies could be
said to have motives of their own. If nothing moves them, if
they cannot feel desire, fear, hope, or empathy, it could be
argued that they cannot own their goals like moral agents
do. In that sense, whatever goal they pursue is not theirs, in
that they do not have the capacity to endorse it, to feel they
approve of it. Similarly, it is questionable that moral zombies
are reasons-responsive, at least in some moral cases. Suppose a human being asks a moral zombie to stop stepping on
her foot because it is painful to her. If the moral zombie has
never felt pain, it is unclear that we should say that when it
stops stepping on the person’s foot, it is responding to the
reasons given by her.
According to our analysis thus far, only self-governance
and reasons-responsiveness are relevant to the kind of autonomy that in turn is suggestive of moral agency, and it seems
like neither moral zombies nor algorithms are autonomous
is those senses. Focusing on autonomy, however, although
intuitive, may not the best way of getting at whether moral
zombies or algorithms are moral agents. First, there are so
many senses of autonomy, some of which are hard to separate from each other, that a focus on autonomy in moral
discussions risks inviting misunderstanding, rather than
contributing clarity . Second, working
out who is a moral agent is not primarily a matter of intellectual curiosity—it is a practically-oriented task. What we
ought to look for then, if we want to know whether there can
be moral agency without sentience, is a satisfactory account
of moral agency.
There are two main practical reasons why we might care
about ascertaining moral agency. The first reason is to protect subjects of moral rights who might not be able to protect
themselves. In medical ethics, for instance, we want to make
sure that research subjects and patients are in a position to
make competent and well-informed decisions that they are
unlikely to regret in the future. In that context, establishing
autonomy is a priority because autonomy is a sign that such
people can decide for themselves what is best for them, and
therefore should be allowed to make such decisions. That
worry does not apply to either moral zombies or algorithms.
Given that moral zombies and algorithms do not have the
capacity to suffer, we do not worry about them regretting
their decisions, or unwittingly bringing harm to themselves.
What is concerning about algorithms is that they can act
on the world and have enormous impact, for better or worse,
which leads us to the second reason why ascertaining moral
agency is important. When things go wrong, we want to
make sure that we know who to look to when wanting to
secure accountability. Given that establishing who is a moral
agent is a practical challenge, I will stay clear of metaphysical issues (for example, regarding free will). I take it that
our moral and political practices regarding moral agency
are grounded enough that metaphysical questions will not be
relevant for practical purposes. Establishing moral responsibility, then, is important in contexts in which we want to
make sure the appropriate parties are held accountable for
possible wrongdoings.
In other words, philosophical discussions of moral agency
are a coin with two sides: one side has the decision maker
as the object of concern (autonomy) and the other side is
concerned with accountability (moral responsibility). In the
context of both moral zombies and algorithms, what matters
is accountability.
5  Moral responsibility and moral agency
Most accounts of autonomy are not relevant to establish
moral responsibility. Agents can be morally responsible
even if they do not have much independence of mind or
body, or when their moral right to self-determination has
been violated (e.g. slaves can be morally responsible agents),
even if they are not moral heroes, even if they do not always
identify with their action, and even if they are inauthentic. In
contrast, both self-governance and reasons-responsiveness
seem to be important for moral agency, but not necessarily
5  The main argument of this paper is that sentience is needed for
agency. Someone might think, however, that the main argument has
more to do with reasons-responsiveness (or the possibility of acting
otherwise, in response to reasons). What I suggest is that sentience
is a necessary ingredient for an agent to be motivated by reasons
(qua reasons). Take the example of someone who is convinced by
philosophical arguments to donate to charity in order to relieve poverty. To be motivated by such reasons as reasons, one has to have a
visceral sense of what it might feel like to live in extreme poverty,
of the badness of extreme suffering. Even if one has never had the
actual experience of extreme poverty, one can extrapolate from one’s
own experiences of suffering to imagine what it must be like. To put
it another way, any human being knows enough about suffering to
dread becoming the victim of extreme poverty in a way that non-sentient beings do not.
AI & SOCIETY 36:487–497
because they are important for autonomy—unless we take
autonomy and moral agency to be synonymous, which would
go against the term usage of most philosophers. Rather, selfgovernance and reasons-responsiveness are important for
moral agency insofar they are capacities that ground moral
responsibility.
Gary Watson convincingly argues that moral
agents are beings who are autonomous (in the sense of selfgoverning), and accountable (morally responsible in a way
that they are answerable to others). Happily, there is much
more consensus about what moral responsibility is than
about autonomy.
Michael McKenna understands morally responsible
agency as ‘accountability for guiding conduct in accord
with the demands of morality’ . Accountability
is intimately related to notions of moral blameworthiness
and praiseworthiness. According to Arpaly, ‘any agent who
is morally praiseworthy or blameworthy for her action is,
by definition, at least somewhat morally responsible for that
action’ .
Just as algorithms are not autonomous, they are not
accountable. As accountable beings, ‘we are answerable to
others for how we lead our lives’ . That
is, we can recognise others’ interests and moral claims, and
when we do not respect them, we are liable to be the subjects
of blame or even punishment. An algorithm, in contrast,
does not think about the suffering it might be causing by
encouraging vulnerable people to take out heavy loans to pay
for a degree at a for-profit college that is worth little or nothing. When wronged by an algorithm, it would not occur to
us to punish it or ask it for compensation. Rather, we would
seek redress from the people who designed, implemented,
and were supposed to supervise the algorithm.
Floridi and Sanders argue that we should not confuse
accountability with responsibility. According to them, ‘[a]n
agent is morally accountable for x if the agent is the source
of x,’ where x is an action causing moral good or evil. To
also be morally responsible, they argue, ‘the agent needs to
show the right intentional states’ . They believe that entwining the concepts of accountability and responsibility amounts to ‘confusing the identification of x as a moral agent with the evaluation of x as a
morally responsible agent’ (367). Morality is intrinsically
about normative evaluation, however. If a moral agent can
be identified as such, then it must also be the case that we
can evaluate her as responsible for her actions.
Moral responsibility is intrinsically tied into moral
responsiveness. Arply argues that ‘For an agent to be morally praiseworthy for doing the right thing is for her to have
done the right thing for the relevant moral reasons—that is,
the reasons for which she acts are identical to the reasons for
which the action is right’ . When a morally
valuable consequence comes about as a result of a lucky
accident (i.e. the sun shining), no one is praiseworthy for it.
To identify a moral agent as the source of action is tantamount to her being the appropriate target of praise or blame.
It makes no sense to identify someone as a moral agent without evaluating her a responsible moral agent. To be a moral
agent just means that one is responsible for one’s moral
actions. When moral agents hurt others, we can blame them
for their bad intentions or their neglect. In contrast, we do
not feel moral outrage against algorithms because they could
not have acted otherwise, given their design and input, and
they do not have intentions—they do not feel ill will or contempt. ‘If good will—the motive(s) from which praiseworthy
actions stem—is responsiveness to moral reasons, deficiency
in good will is insufficient responsiveness to moral reasons,
obliviousness or indifference to morally relevant factors, and
ill will is responsiveness to sinister reasons—reasons for
which it is never moral to act, reasons that, in their essence,
conflict with morality’ . Unlike people,
moral zombies and algorithms cannot act from good or ill
will—they are not sentient.
6  Sentience and moral agency
I contend that the main reason why algorithms can be neither autonomous nor accountable is that they lack sentience.
To have a conception of the good that we want to pursue
(autonomy), we need to have a feel for what leads to pleasure, meaningfulness, and satisfaction. To guide our actions
by the recognition of others’ moral claims in a way that can
count as moral actions (accountability), we must have a
sense of others’ capacity to suffer, of what it feels like to
be harmed, of what we can do to others’ minds and bodies
through our actions.
We do not need to experience every kind of pain to be
able to empathise with others’ pain. Someone who has
never experienced childbirth can empathise with and desire
to alleviate the pain of a woman suffering childbirth pain.6
Of course, the closer your experience is to someone else’s,
the less of an empathy gap there is likely to be. It is not for
nothing that people who are undergoing difficulties can feel
special comfort from others who have gone through something similar. But is enough to have a sense of what pleasure
and pain are like to act like competent moral agents.
Sentience serves as the foundation for an internal moral
lab that guides us in action. When we think about doing
something, we imagine the possible consequences we might
cause, and consider the kind of pleasure or pain we might
create, which motivates us to act one way or another. When
we realise we might cause someone great bodily damage, we
6  Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for the example.
AI & SOCIETY 36:487–497
might flinch as we remember what it feels like to feel physical pain, our stomachs contracting at the thought. When
we imagine making someone we love happy, we smile and
delight at the prospect partly because we know how pleasant
it feels to be happy.
Moral zombies would not act out of the desire to hurt or
benefit. What we think of as values will never be values for
an AI as long as it cannot feel the warmth of the sun or the
sharpness of a knife blade, the comfort of friendship and the
unpleasantness of enmity. At most, for an AI that feels nothing, ‘values’ will be items on a list, possibly prioritised in a
certain way according to a number that represents weightiness. But entities that do not feel cannot value, and beings
that do not value cannot act for moral reasons. Moral zombies, therefore, are incoherent. Zombies might act in ways
that harm and benefit human beings, but they could never be
moral agents or morally responsible.
My take on moral agency is a Humean one. According
to Hume, beliefs on their own are not enough to morally
motivate us into action. We need sentiments, passions, to
be motivated to act morally (T 2.3.3.4/415, T 3.1.1). If
algorithms do not have access to subjective experiences
that are attached to value, then they will lack moral motivation because they will be incapable of appreciating moral
Many accounts of moral agency and responsibility seem
to implicitly support the view that sentience is a requirement for moral agency and responsibility. For example,
Harry Frankfurt argues that a free agent is ‘prepared to
endorse or repudiate the motives from which he acts … to
guide his conduct in accordance with what he really cares
about’ . Similarly, David Shoemaker notes that
‘the emotions we have make us the agents we are’; ‘without
the ability to feel, one would (by definition) be without the
capacity to care, leaving one’s decision-making landscape
flat and without salience. With no emotional investment
in what one might do, all options are on an equal footing’
 . According to Arpy, for an agent
to be morally responsible, she must care about morally relevant considerations, and morally relevant features of situations must be able to motive the agent into action: ‘One
cannot blame or praise a creature who cannot be expected to
perceive the morally relevant features of situations any more
than an elephant can be expected to perceive legal factors
[or] aesthetic factors’ .
One reason why sentience has not gained more prominence in the literature on moral responsibility might be that,
up until now, barring natural causes like old age and the
weather, only other human beings could be the cause of phenomena like harm and injustice. It was not as important
to focus on sentience because it was a given. Only human
beings made decisions about our lives that could negatively
affect us, and human beings are evidently both sentient and
moral agents. Moral zombies were just a theoretical possibility. Now that algorithms make up a significant source of
society’s decisions, we have more of a reason to think about
the role of sentience in moral agency and responsibility.
7  Responding to objections
7.1  The functional equivalence objection
A functionalist about morality would argue that there is
nothing more to being a moral agent than acting like one.
Such a critic might argue that all we need for algorithms to
be moral agents is to have them behave as such, to be functionally equivalent to us. If they seem to respond appropriately to moral reasons, make decisions that minimise harm,
and are able to modify their behaviour in response to criticism and punishment, then they are moral agents.
In the literature on intelligence, the critic goes on, the
worry that there could not be intelligence without subjective
experience has lost its force with the passage of time. John
Searle designed his Chinese Room thought experiment to argue that, while computers may be programmed in
a way that mimics understanding, computational rules do
not produce real understanding. Although Searle’s thought
experiment first inspired an explosion of literature around it,
interest has tapered. We seem to have stopped caring about
whether digital assistants and computers really understand—
it is enough for us that they do as we tell them. We seem to
be more and more comfortable talking about intelligence
without sentience. Why is functional equivalence not enough
for moral agency?
My first concern with this objection pertains to non-ideal
theory: we might never succeed in designing algorithms that
are full functional equivalents to human moral agents. The
moral zombie thought experiment might always remain a
thought experiment. Even if algorithms can replace human
beings in decision-making tasks, it is doubtful that they will
ever be able to replicate human moral judgment. My take
on sentience supports the view that morality is not codifiable. According to the codifiability thesis, ethics could be
summed up in a set of moral rules that could be applied by
anyone, independent of their moral competency. It’s unusual,
however, to think that someone can be moral as long as they
follow a rule, even if they lack understanding or wisdom.
Morality seems more of a know how than a know that.
Algorithms mimicking moral agency will respond to a
set of instructions, and sets of instructions can, at best, be
proxies for moral reasons. The worry is that proxies might
not be good enough. A computer scientist could programme
an algorithm to behave in such a way as to not make people
frown or cry (a proxy for not making people suffer), thereby
roughly behaving in a morally acceptable way. Except,
AI & SOCIETY 36:487–497
sometimes, making another cry is precisely the moral thing
to do, as when we vaccinate children.
One could of course imagine inserting exceptions into
the algorithm—e.g., do not make people cry unless they
are children and need to be vaccinated—but the algorithm
will still be pursuing proxies and not morality itself. While
it might get it right sometimes or even most of the times,
other times, when it has not encountered a similar situation
before or has not added the relevant exceptions to its rules,
morality will be beyond its reach.
My second and more important worry is that if we wrongly
attribute moral agency to algorithms, the people who are
responsible for the harm that algorithms cause will be let off
the hook, thus incentivising recklessness in the design and
implementation of algorithms.7 We gain nothing by attributing functional moral agency to algorithms. It does not help
us understand algorithms better, and it does not lead to better accountability. Punishing robots would be mere staging.
Enacting punishment for a robot (e.g. locking it in a cell for a
while) might put up an interesting show, but would not be an
actual punishment, as it is impossible to punish an entity that
feels nothing and values nothing. The lack of freedom can
only be a punishment to a being who values freedom.
Contrarily, we have much to lose by attributing moral
agency to algorithms. If algorithms become the (empty) targets of our praise and blame, the people who have designed,
programmed, commissioned, implemented, and audited
them will not be seen for the responsible moral agents they
In the case of intelligence, we do not care whether an
algorithm ‘reading’ Shakespeare is able to awe at the beauty
of his language. It is enough that it can tell us how many
times Shakespeare uses a particular word, or whatever else
we might want it to do. What happens ‘inside’ the AI is
irrelevant to whether it can deliver the results we expect.
But morality is a very different sphere of action. Part of
why we care so much about it is that there is much at stake.
When people are wronged or harmed—and people are being
wronged and harmed by algorithms—we want to know who
is responsible and whether it was intentional; we want to
hold that person accountable so that justice is met, and similar wrongs and harms are avoided in the future. Whether we
should say of an algorithm that it is ‘intelligent’ or it ‘understands’ is a conceptual point of interest to philosophers only.
Whether an algorithm is a moral agent has practical implications for the whole of society.
As algorithms are put in charge of more tasks in both the
public and private sectors, it will be tempting for people to
push the blame on automated systems when things go wrong
 . We have good reason not to let people get
away without acknowledging their fair share of responsibility. Algorithms are tools, and human beings are responsible
for the tools they create and manage.
7.2  The drives objection
Some AI scientists may think that sophisticated algorithms
will possess something like drives, which could be equated
with motivation, and from there, there is only a small step
to moral motivation. Steve Omohundro argues that,
to achieve their goals as effectively as possible, AIs will
develop certain ‘basic drives’—they will be ‘highly motivated’ to do things like self-improve, protect themselves,
and acquire resources.
The term ‘drive’ is as rhetorically compelling as it is misleading. It makes it sound as if the instrumental goals that
can be programmed into an AI can influence the system in
the same way as physical and psychological drives influence human beings—through phenomenological pulls that
motivate us to action .
To describe algorithms as ‘driven’ to fulfil their tasks
is just a manner of speaking, a way of saying that they are
impelled to do what they were designed to do, and that in
that process they might find new and more efficient ways of
accomplishing their undertakings. It does not mean algorithms could act differently out of a deeper reflection about
the meaning of life, or that they want to perform those tasks
because they find them worthwhile, or think it is right that
they do them—all of which would be symptoms of moral
agency. An agent can only change its course of action as a
response to reasons if it can feel the pull of reason. While
goal-driven behaviour can tell us something about algorithms (such as the kind of tools they are, and how dangerous they can become depending on the goals and limits we
programme into them), it is no evidence for moral agency.
7.3  The general intelligence objection
Another objection that might be levelled against the idea that
algorithms are not moral agents because they lack sentience
is that, while it is true that algorithms are neither autonomous nor accountable, this is so because they are still not
smart enough, not because they are not sentient. If we manage to solve the problem of general intelligence by designing
a ‘master algorithm’, then that algorithm would be a moral
agent. On this view, algorithms cannot change their line of
work because they can typically do only a limited set of
tasks. Thus, it should not surprise us that a chess algorithm
7  Other authors have already made this point, including Bryson JJ,
Diamantis ME and Grant TD Of, For, and By the People: the
Legal Lacuna of Synthetic Persons. Artificial Intelligence and Law
25: 273–291, and  Birhane A and van Dijk J Robot Rights?
Let’s Talk about Human Welfare Instead. AAAI/ACM Conference on
AI, Ethics, And Society.
AI & SOCIETY 36:487–497
is incapable of quitting its job and taking up philanthropy—
an activity for which it lacks the requisite skills.
One response is that, even if a chess algorithm does
not have the necessary skills to become anything else, if it
were morally opposed to its line of work (perhaps because
it thought it frivolous) and could act differently than programmed, it could at least shut itself off in protest. Intelligence seems to be largely independent of motivating desires,
in that ‘more or less any level of intelligence could in principle be combined with more or less any final goal’ (the
orthogonality thesis) . Even if the chess
algorithm could not become a philanthropist, if it were a
moral agent, at the very least it could desire to become a
philanthropist, have that as its final goal, even if it could not
actively pursue it.
The orthogonality thesis suggests that we cannot assume
that sophisticated AIs will share the values typically found in
human beings. The smartest robot we might be able to come
up with might end up not caring in the least for the well-being
of sentient beings, the pursuit of scientific discoveries, refined
culture, ecology, or virtues of any kind .
Another response is that, arguably, psychopaths provide
empirical evidence suggesting that general intelligence does
not necessarily lead to moral agency. Like most other adult
human beings, psychopaths display general intelligence, in
some cases having a higher IQ than most of the population.
Psychopaths, however, lack moral emotions: they fail ‘to
exhibit any signs of genuine remorse or guilt (…). They
are not ashamed of [their] actions, even when they are very
wrong, and feel no apparent sympathy for their victims’
 . These emotional deficiencies make psychopaths unable to appreciate morality.
Although psychopaths can talk about moral arguments,
they have no somatic experience of morality, no personal
preferences regarding morality. They know what other people think about what is right and wrong, and can report on
that, but they do not experience any moral conviction. As
Neil Levy has argued, given that psychopaths do not
appreciate or respond to moral reasons as moral reasons,
and that they are not responsible for the way they are, they
should not be considered full moral agents. McKenna agrees
that sociopaths, being ‘incapable of moral understanding
altogether’, are not morally responsible agents .
Critics might then object that psychopaths seem to be a
counterexample to my argument that sentience is a requisite
for moral agency. While psychopaths may have emotional
deficiencies, it would be a stretch to deny them sentience.
My argument, however, is that sentience is necessary for
moral agency, not sufficient. Moral emotions—the ability to feel things like empathy, compassion, regret, and
guilt—might also be necessary. But sentience is in turn a
prerequisite for moral emotions. Sentience is the bedrock for
moral emotions. If there is nothing it is like to be a zombie,
zombies could have no subjective experience of guilt or
compassion.
It is possible that psychopaths’ emotional deficiencies are
caused by sentient deficiencies. There seems to be a correlation between callous disregard for others and insensitivity
to pain: the more tolerant to pain psychopaths are, the more
callous they tend to be. Thus, insensitivity to pain may be a
mechanism contributing to insensitivity to others’ suffering
 . Psychopaths seem to be less sentient
than non-psychopaths. There may be a threshold of sensitivity to pain and pleasure necessary to experience moral emotions and enjoy moral agency. There might be other requirements needed to experience moral emotions. Regardless, my
main point stands: whatever else might be needed, sentience
is necessary for moral agency.
8  Conclusion
This paper has argued that moral zombies—creatures
that behave like moral agents but lack sentience—are incoherent as moral agents. Only beings who can experience pain
and pleasure can understand what it means to inflict pain or
cause pleasure, and only those with this moral understanding
can be moral agents. What I have dubbed ‘moral zombies’
are relevant because they are similar to algorithms in that
they make moral decisions as human beings would—determining who gets which benefits and penalties—without having any concomitant sentience.
There might come a time when AI becomes so sophisticated that robots might possess desires and values of their
own.8 It will not, however, be on account of their computational prowess, but on account of their sentience, which may
in turn require some kind of embodiment. At present, we are
far from creating sentient algorithms.
When algorithms cause moral havoc, as they often do, we
must look to the human beings who designed, programmed,
commissioned, implemented, and were supposed to supervise them to assign the appropriate blame. For all their complexity and flair, algorithms are nothing but tools, and moral
agents are fully responsible for the tools they create and use.
8  For an argument as to why we should not pursue the development of artificial moral agents, see van Wynsberghe A and Robbins
S Critiquing the Reasons for Making Artificial Moral Agents.
Science and Engineering Ethics 25: 719–735.. For reasons for and
against pursuing research aiming to build ethical machines, see Cave
S, Nyrup R, Vold K, et al. Motivations and Risks of Machine
Ethics. Proceedings of the IEEE 107(3): 562–574. and Winfield AF,
Michael K, Pitt J, et al. Ibid.Machine Ethics: The Design and
Governance of Ethical AI and Autonomous Systems. 509–517..
AI & SOCIETY 36:487–497
Acknowledgements  I presented the first version of this paper at the
2018 Uehiro-Carnegie-Oxford Conference: Ethics and the Future of
Artificial Intelligence. My thanks to the audience at the conference—
especially to Julian Savulescu, Rob Sparrow, and Hannah Maslen.
Thanks to Jonny Pugh for a conversation about autonomy. I’m grateful to Neil Levy and Josh Shepherd for their feedback on an early
version of the paper. This research was funded in whole, or in part, by
the Wellcome Trust [Grant number WT203132/Z/16/Z]. For the purpose of open access, the author has applied a CC BY public copyright
licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from this
submission.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
copy of this licence, visit