Forthcoming in Modern Law Review
The Chinese Social Credit System: A Model for Other Countries?
Daithí Mac Síthigh* and Mathias Siems†
Abstract: Many countries know financial consumer credit ratings, and recent years have
also seen a proliferation of rating systems in relation to online platforms and in the
‘sharing economy’, such as eBay, Uber and Airbnb. In the view of many Western observers, however, the emerging Chinese Social Credit System indicates a paradigm shift
compared to these former rating systems as it aims for a comprehensive and uniform
social rating based on penalty and award mechanisms. By contrast, this article suggests
that the evolving forms of the Chinese system should be seen as a specific instance of a
wider phenomenon. Thus, it develops a framework that compares different rating systems by reference to their drafters, users, aims, scoring systems, application, use of algorithms, enforcement and accountability; it identifies shortcomings of both low and
high interventionist rating systems; and it discusses a range of regulatory approaches
and emerging issues that law makers should consider.
Keywords: Social Credit System, Chinese law, credit registries, reputation rankings,
online platforms, law and technology
‘It would be easy to assume none of this could happen here in the West.
But the 21st century is not going to work like that’.1
‘China’s dystopian tech could be contagious’2
INTRODUCTION
Since the early 2000s the Chinese government has pursued plans for the construction of
a so-called ‘Social Credit System’. Implementation is progressing quickly, and it can be
suggested that the Social Credit System will fundamentally change the life of all Chinese citizens. In a nutshell,3 the main innovation, once fully implemented, could be that
each Chinese citizen will be given a score measuring their sincerity, honesty, and integrity, and that this score will then be a major determinant for their lives, for instance,
* Queen’s University Belfast, UK.
† European University Institute, Italy, and Durham University, UK.
We thank Jiahong Chen, Zhiyu Li, Jieying Liang, Shaowei Lin, Xiangyang Qian, Shen Wei, Chuanman
You, Tianshu Zhou, Catalina Goanta, Karen Mc Cullagh, John Morison, Liav Orgad, Ole Pedersen, Isabelle Wildhaber, as well as participants at workshops in London, Florence and Oxford and two anonymous reviewers for helpful comments. The usual disclaimer applies.
All URLs were last accessed 16 March 2019.
1 J. Harris, ‘The tyranny of algorithms is part of our lives: soon they could rate everything we do’ The
Guardian 
2 A. Greenfield, ‘China’s Dystopian Tech Could Be Contagious’ The Atlantic 
 
3 For details see text to notes 95-155, below.
whether to be able to get a credit, rent a flat, or buy a plane ticket, or being given preferred access to hospitals, universities and government services.
In this Chinese government programme, the notion of ‘social credit’ serves as an extension of mere financial scoring systems from elsewhere in the world,4 given that the Chinese ‘social credit’ score will consider a wide range of personal factors.5 It also resembles, but goes further than, a range of systems that are intended to increase the prominence of reputation in relation to transactions, online platforms and in the ‘sharing
economy’. In addition, the Chinese initiative will cover both companies and individuals;
the latter is more novel (and more controversial), given the prevalence of ratings for the
former in the financial sector and in fields such as corporate social responsibility.6 Thus,
we focus here on rating systems concerning individual persons.
This article is motivated by the fact that it cannot be assumed that ‘what happens in
China, stays in China’. The Social Credit System already applies to foreign workers and
companies in China, and possibly also to all ‘overseas Chinese and ethnic Chinese’ regardless of their place of residence.7 In addition, it can be observed that China’s economic, political and ideological influence leads to a general diffusion of Chinese law;
writings about China’s Belt and Road Initiative, the ‘Beijing consensus’ of development
assistance, and the impact of Chinese investments in Africa show that China’s influence
abroad is not merely of an economic nature but that it increasingly shapes law and policy elsewhere.8
It may of course be argued that the Social Credit System is something that should be
seen as not a model but as a counter-model for other countries.9 We seek to provide a
critical but also nuanced and measured assessment, against a backdrop of typical ‘Western’ responses which simply dismiss the Social Credit System as ‘Orwellian’, and a
general lack of any critical debate on the topic in China.10 In particular, this article will
identify the many variations within the development of the Social Credit System in China,11 while also addressing debates on the importance of reputation and grading/ranking
and on the power of algorithms. We argue, therefore, that what is happening in China
can be seen as a specific instance of a wider phenomenon. Even more so, as reputationbased quantitative tools have become established in the West, the Social Credit System
4 See text to notes 13-93, below.
5 The term ‘social credit’ has also two further meanings that are outside the scope of this article, namely,
as an economic reform programme developed in the 1920s ) and as a type of ‘micro-credit aiming at fighting poverty’ (see
F.A.F. Ferreira et al, ‘A Socio-Technical Approach to the Evaluation of Social Credit Applications’
(forthcoming) Journal of the Operational Research Society DOI: 10.1080/01605682.2017.1415650).
6 Despite many differences, see eg L.C. Backer, ‘Next Generation Law: Data Driven Governance and
Accountability Based Regulatory Systems in the West, and Social Credit Regimes in China’, Working
Paper , available at 
7 See S. Hoffman, ‘Social credit: technology-enhanced authoritarian control with global consequences’,
Policy Brief Report No.6/2018.
8 See eg S. Seppänen, ‘Chinese Legal Development Assistance: Which Rule of Law? Whose Pragmatism?’ 51 Vanderbilt Journal of Transnational Law 101; W. Zhang, I. Alon and C. Lattemann
(eds), China’s Belt and Road Initiative: Changing the Rules of Globalization .
9 Or if it were to influence other countries, it may be argued that it should be seen as a ‘malicious legal
transplant’, cf M. Siems, ‘Malicious Legal Transplants’ 38 Legal Studies 103.
10 See further text to notes 127-155, below.
11 See further text to notes 95-137, below.
may tell us something about their evolution in Western countries (or even the future of
global normative orders12).
Accordingly, this article is interested in a number of overlapping research questions: to
start with, how can we understand both the multiple Chinese and Western systems by
reference to their drafters, users, aims, scoring systems, application, use of algorithms,
enforcement and accountability? Is it then the case that the Social Credit System is
based on a unique strongly interventionist logic, or could there be mixtures between the
Chinese and Western models? And if reputation and rating systems consolidate in
Western markets in a similar fashion, what opportunities, features, controversies, and
pitfalls will arise? And how could law makers intervene if this happens?
The corresponding structure of this article is as follows. The next part maps the general
debate about reputation, ranking and rating in the West (setting out salient features of its
history in credit scoring and related systems, and identifying the significance of reputation data for online business and the ‘sharing’ or peer-to-peer economy); we conclude
this part by considering certain controversies regarding such data, and setting out an initial framework for analysis. The following part explains the operation and variations of
China’s Social Credit System today as well as likely future developments. On this basis,
the subsequent part compares and evaluates both of these systems, identifying shortcomings of low and high interventionist rating systems, and assessing a range of regulatory approaches, followed by a conclusion.
REPUTATION, RANKING, AND RATING
A short history
Although the identification and dissemination of reputational information has formed an
important aspect of 21st-century e-commerce and sharing economy business models, the
concept is certainly a more established one. The best known is probably found in the
financial sector, where the ‘rating’ of the creditworthiness of companies, institutions,
individuals, and financial instruments (e.g. bonds) has a longer history,13 and has progressed beyond narrower, single-purpose origins to becoming a ‘key component of
global financial governance’.14
In Lauer’s history of the development of consumer credit reporting and scoring in the
United States since the 19th century, he emphasises the development of an information
infrastructure in finance, including shifts towards a quantitative basis throughout the
20th century, and computerisation and the application of statistical methods to risk and
creditworthiness from the 1960s onwards.15 Other significant developments include the
emphasis upon individual ‘scores’ in the late 20th century,16 and continuous monitoring
and surveillance rather than simple blacklisting17 , available at 
13 D. Marron, Consumer Credit in the United States 100.
14 B. Carruthers, ‘From Uncertainty Toward Risk: The Case of Credit Ratings’ 11 Socio-Economic
Review 525, 530.
15 J. Lauer, Creditworthy: A History of Consumer Surveillance and Financial Identity in America 40 and 183.
16 ibid 249.
17 Marron, n 13 above, 105-107; Lauer, n 15 above, 60.
21st century, the move to a ‘scored society’ in place of mere credit scores18). These developments sit within the a longer trajectory towards increased access to information
which has, since the 18th century, driven ‘fact- and theory-based approaches to issues of
finance and credit’ (in respect of individuals and companies) and attempted to neutralise
‘irrationality’ and misunderstanding19 and replace uncertainty with an assessment of
risk.20 The increased involvement of mainstream banks in credit scoring, from the 1960s
onwards, has also supported an algorithmic-led approach to risk and the likelihood of
repayment.21
Credit scoring has also developed in the UK and across Europe22 – although different
legal and cultural approaches to data protection have meant that the pace of change has
been different. Corporate transactions, such as the acquisition of Experian (formerly
TRW, a major player from the computer age in the US23) by Great Universal Stores (a
UK-based mail order retailer which had developed a successful credit scoring function
of its own24), have promoted further convergence.
These financial matters form part of a broader trend. Classification systems and the urge
to classify have deep roots in human societies, but were a major feature of scientific and
capitalist development in the 20th century; they are ubiquitous and built into every aspect of social and commercial life, and combine ‘social organization, moral order, and
layers of technical integration’.25 The late 20th century also saw the rise in popularity of
key performance indicators, ‘league tables’, and the like, as part of the New Public
Management revolution26 and a shift towards the ‘production of performance information with regulatory or quasi-regulatory purposes’27. Well-known examples include
assigning core research funding to universities in the United Kingdom 22-25. See also R. Botsman and R. Rogers, What’s Mine is
Yours: How Collaborative Consumption is Changing the Way we Live 217 (on
how the 20th-century importance of credit ratings relates to ‘consumers operating in a hyperindividualistic world’ rather than the position of individuals within a community).
19 J. Black, The Power of Knowledge: How Information and Technology Made the Modern World 193.
20 Carruthers, n 14 above, 529.
21 Lauer, n 15 above, 191.
22 T. Wainwright, ‘Elite Knowledges: Framing Risk and the Geographies of Credit’ 43 Environment & Planning A 650, 653 (highlighting the later adoption of methods in the UK, influenced by US
practices); A. Rona-Tas and A. Guseva, ‘Consumer Credit in Comparative Perspective’ 44 Annual
Review of Sociology 55, 62-64 (for a general survey).
23 Marron, n 13 above, 104.
24 N. Cope, ‘GUS shares soar on £1bn acquisition’ The Independent . Ten years later,
the (combined) credit scoring business was demerged: S. English, ‘Experian to raise new equity in demerger from GUS’ The Independent .
25 G. Bowker and S. Star, Sorting Things Out: Classification and its Consequences 33, 37 (ubiquity), 3-5 (historical understandings), 324-325 106-111; C. Hood and R. Dixon, A Government that Worked Better and Cost
Less?: Evaluating Three Decades of Reform and Change in UK Central Government ch 3; W. Nelson Espeland and M. Sauder, ‘Rankings and Reactivity: How Public
Measures Recreate Social Worlds’ 113 American Journal of Sociology 1.
27 A. Mehrpouya and R. Samiolo, ‘Performance Measurement in Global Governance: Ranking and the
Politics of Variability’ 55 Accounting, Organizations and Society 12, 13.
ly, elsewhere),28 and the evaluation of federal government programmes in the United
States.29 The economic impact of prizes for contemporary art30 and the grading of restaurants31 has been observed.
For individuals in labour markets, we see schemes such as quantitative approaches to
determining the promotion of civil servants in the European Union.32 In the last year
alone, new developments in the UK include a requirement (imposed by competition and
financial regulators) that financial institutions provide information on how likely customers would be to recommend their services to others,33 and a proposed extension of a
scheme attempting to measure the quality of university teaching beyond institutions to
individual subjects, described by the responsible Minister as akin to the financial services comparison site MoneySupermarket.34 These ‘calculative practices [which] render
previously incomparable elements visible and comparable’35, while mostly focused upon institutions rather than individuals, normalise the collection and communication of
data in this fashion, and allow for more effective methods of presentation and analysis.
As well as highlighting the benefits of an ‘objective’ approach,36 contemporary versions
of credit scoring and New Public Management also have in common a tendency to collect and analyse data at a relatively centralised level; that is, it is the credit scoring
agency or the public audit authority that is gathering data (albeit from multiple sources)
and providing advice (or at least aggregated and sometimes ranked data) on the performance, solvency, or quality of the data subjects. In other cases, however, the ‘score’
(whether concerning an individual or an institution) will simply reflect the data submitted by users of a given service – whether that be regarding the service provider or, as in
the case of certain online businesses, other service users.
28 R. van Gestel, ‘Ranking, Peer Review, Bibliometrics and Alternative Ways to Improve the Quality of
Doctrinal Legal Scholarship’ in R. van Gestel, H.-W. Micklitz and E. Rubin (eds), Rethinking Legal
Scholarship: A Transatlantic Dialogue ; M. Henkel and
M. Kogan, ‘United Kingdom’ in D. Dill and F. van Vught (eds), National Innovation and the Academic
Research Enterprise .
29 J. Gilmour, ‘Implementing OMB’s Program Assessment Rating Tool (PART): Meeting the Challenges
of Integrating Budget and Performance’ 7 OECD Journal on Budgeting 1.
30 P. Pénet and K. Lee, ‘Prize & Price: The Turner Prize as a Valuation Device in the Contemporary Art
Market’ 43 Poetics 149.
31 L. Karpik, Valuing the Unique: The Economics of Singularities 77-80.
32 eg Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Union, Regulation 259/68, OJ L 56/1 (as
amended); see further C. Ban, ‘Performance Appraisal and Promotion in the European Commission: the
Challenge of Linking Organizational and Individual Accountability’ 
 
33 Competition and Markets Authority, ‘Banks scored on quality of service’ 
 Financial Conduct Authority,
‘Making it easier to use and compare current accounts’ 
 
34 Department for Education, ‘Universities to be rated by subject quality’ 
 see Eleanor Busby,
‘University degree courses to be ranked in “MoneySuperMarket” style system, minister says’ The Independent 
35 M. Kornberger and C. Carter, ‘Manufacturing Competition: How Accounting Practices Shape Strategy
Making in Cities’ 23 Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal 325, 332.
36 As emphasised by Marron, n 13 above, 104.
From eBay to Uber and beyond
The success of eBay and related sites has long been attributed, in part, to the way in
which a platform has become ‘trusted’ by users and how well-understood information
asymmetries are handled and countered. Trust in a sales platform is said to be a combination of payment security, reliable and affordable schemes for dispute resolution, and –
of present interest – ‘trust building measures like the mutual rating system which allows
for online reputation’.37 eBay’s reputation system, where buyers and sellers rate each
other (with comments published for all to see), was added very shortly after it began
business, in order to address allegations of cheating; it became an established feature of
the site and is still in operation.38 Indeed, the different aspects of trust are interlinked as,
for instance, a failure to engage with the dispute resolution process affects the reputation
of a user.39 Moreover, a user’s ability to trade in the future will be affected by their
score and feedback and therefore by their earlier actions:40 eBay’s system has seen high
levels of participation, with traders with positive reputations found to be more likely to
succeed in selling items on the platform,41 and it also allows eBay to exclude from the
marketplace users with very low ratings.42
Present-day observers note that online trust encompasses ‘digital social capital’ and various means of certifying and validating market participants.43 Similarly, Facebook has
recently confirmed that it maintains an internal system through which all users are rated
for how ‘trustworthy’ they are,44 though its current function appears to be limited, being
only Facebook’s own use in enforcing its own rules against its users. These present-day
approaches however draw upon a longer history of identifying the reliability of individuals: Lauer highlights how credit systems which valorised character and hard work rather than social standing were an important facilitator of the emergence of US consumer
capitalism,45 while Packin and Lev-Aretz point to the more recent use of big data and
the analysis of ‘online social footprints’ as a proxy for character, which in the history of
credit scoring is seen as a reliable predictor of the ability and likelihood of repayment.46
Unsurprisingly, the overlapping developments in reputation, big data, analytics, and Internet-driven business models, lead some to conclude that we now live in a ‘reputation
economy’ where reputation is an asset.47
37 G.-P. Calliess, ‘Online Dispute Resolution: Consumer Redress in a Global Market Place’ 7
German Law Journal 647, 652.
38 C. Shirky, Cognitive Surplus: Creativity and Generosity in a Connected Age 
39 Calliess, n 37 above, 653.
40 Botsman and Rogers, n 18 above, 140.
41 P. Resnik and R. Zeckhauser, ‘Trust Among Strangers in Internet Transactions: Empirical Analysis of
eBay’s Reputation System’ in M. Baye (ed), The Economics of the Internet and E-commerce .
42 C. Lampe, ‘The Role of Reputation Systems in Managing Online Communities’ in H. Masum and M.
Tovey (eds), The Reputation Society: How Online Opinions Are Shaping The Offline World 82.
43 A. Sundararajan, The Sharing Economy: The End of Employment and the Rise of Crowd-based Capitalism 61.
44 E. Dwoskin, ‘Facebook is rating the trustworthiness of its users on a scale from zero to 1’ Washington
Post .
45 Lauer, n 15 above, 26, 33.
46 N. Geslevich Packin and Y. Lev-Aretz, ‘On Social Credit and the Right To Be Un-networked’ 
Columbia Business Law Review 339, 343.
47 M. Fertik and D. Thompson, The Reputation Economy .
As the ‘sharing economy’ or ‘collaborative economy’ emerged as the latest Internet
phenomenon (and business catchphrase) in recent years, the role of reputational systems
has also been obvious. The sharing economy purports to be based around interpersonal
relations and seeking to replace ‘functional, cold and impersonal relations engendered
by capitalism’ with authenticity and trust.48 Consequently, all major economy platforms,
such as Uber, Airbnb, and TaskRabbit, and indeed precursors such as CouchSurfing,
make use of a combination of scoring and feedback systems.49 The availability of a
community of users familiar with eBay-like feedback schemes and social media services, and the technological innovation that facilitated reputation-based services on earlier sites, is a factor in the rapid adoption of sharing economy services.50 Indeed, the
wider economic shift towards peer-to-peer provision, and indeed the reshaping of labour
markets in the ‘gig’ economy, continues to see reputational information emphasised as a
key component of the model.
How is reputational data used in these contexts? An obvious example is ridesharing services, where drivers and passengers rate each other. A driver with a comparatively low
score (the aggregate of passenger scores) can ultimately be removed from the platform
or restricted to providing a more limited range of services,51 while a passenger is more
likely to be picked up if they have a high rating from past drivers52 .53 Airbnb
feedback often includes detailed accounts of visitor experiences, with hosts having the
opportunity to add their own comments in reply; a good reputation score for a host
means that their accommodation may be returned at the top of search results.54 A good
reputation appears to be correlated with an ability to demand higher prices, though there
is variation between how the strength of reputation is measured 148.
49 Botsman and Rogers, n 18 above, 178-179 (reputation on couchsurfing.com), 217 (‘with the Web we
leave a reputation trail’, ie ‘a cumulative record of how well we collaborate and if we can be trusted’).
50 Sundararajan, n 43 above, 25; B. Stone, The Upstarts: How Uber, Airbnb and the Killer Companies of
the New Silicon Valley are Changing the World 10-11 (‘Airbnb and Uber
substituted [for older regulatory regimes] the self-policing tools pioneered by internet marketplaces like
eBay – riders graded their drivers and guests evaluated their hosts, and vice versa’); J. Klein, ‘Baby, you
can drive my car’ Time 34 (‘the key to this shift was the discovery that while we totally
distrust strangers, we totally trust people … many sharing-company founders have one thing in common:
they worked at eBay and, in bits and pieces, recreated that company’s trust and safety division … its innovation was getting both the provider and the user to rate each other’).
51 In the early service Sidecar, drivers were only eligible to use the platform if their score remained
above a required minimum: Stone, n 50 above, 197-198. Uber allows drivers with higher ratings to provide higher-priced services (Uber Exec and Uber Lux): Uber BV v Aslam and deactivates (after notices and opportunities to improve) the accounts
of drivers with low ratings – below 4.4 out of 5 (ibid, , ) – or, allegedly, below 4.7 in some situations: T. Slee, What’s Yours is Mine: Against the Sharing Economy loc 1286.
52 R. Rose, ‘The shame of my very low Uber rating’ Financial Times . On identifying reliable customers for new business models through reputation systems, see L. Gansky, The Mesh: Why the
Future of Business is Sharing 105.
53 M. Truong and R. Trivedi, ‘Updates to the rating system’ 
 
54 G. Zervas, D. Prosperio and J. Byers, ‘A First Look at Online Reputation on Airbnb, Where Every Stay
is Above Average’, Working Paper , available at
 
number of positive reviews).55 Another example of the use of reputational mechanisms
is ‘gamification’, where platforms build in tools inspired by the mechanisms developed
and perfected within the computer game sector for other purposes,56 to incentivise good
behaviour and drive active participation and engagement over a longer period.57 Such
tools (which are also being used in other sectors, such as education) include progress
between levels, the collection of points, and the availability of rewards.58
Regulating rating and reputation systems
What is the role of the state, and of various means of legal control or oversight, in the
systems discussed in the above paragraphs? In a limited number of cases, state authorities have initiated schemes that purport to ‘rate’ individuals (albeit on a simpler basis of
passing a threshold rather than a comprehensive ranking). For instance, some countries
use a point-based immigration system.59 In other cases (and more characteristic of the
development of these systems in the countries discussed in this part), the nexus between
the state and rating and reputation systems is through acquiescence and encouragement,
or through a self- or co-regulatory model, rather than the system being managed by a
public authority.60 This can be observed by reference to credit scoring and to the sharing economy.
While consumer credit scoring has predominantly been a private sector activity, it has
certainly benefitted from seemingly unrelated aspects of public administration, such as
the creation of a unique identifier for individuals in the US for social security purposes.61 Public bodies engaged with the financial system can also play a role in standardising the use of private data through the exercise of their functions.62 More generally, the
55 W. Qiu, P. Parigi and B. Abrahao, ‘More Stars or More Reviews? Differential Effects of Reputation on
Trust in the Sharing Economy’ Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems 153.
56 eg ‘taking things that aren’t games and trying to make them feel more like games’: F. Escribano, ‘Gamification As the Post-Modern Phalanstère’ in P. Zackariasson and T. Wilson (eds), The Video Game Industry: Formation, Present State, and Future 201; ‘providing us with voluntary obstacles related to our real-world activity and by giving us better feedback really can help us
make a better effort’: J. McGonigal, Reality is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better and How They Can
Change the World 148.
57 J. Hamari, M. Sjöklint and A. Ukkonen, ‘The Sharing Economy: Why People Participate in Collaborative Consumption’ 67 Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology 2047 (in
general); Slee, n 51 above, loc 1274 (Uber drivers); S. Mason, ‘High score, low pay: why the gig economy loves gamification’ The Guardian 
 (Lyft drivers).
58 eg A. DuVernet, A. Asquer and I. Krackkovskaya, ‘The Gamification Of Education and Business: A
Critical Analysis and Future Research Prospects’ in F.X. Olleros and M. Zhegu (eds), Research Handbook on Digital Transformations ; on gamification, e-learning, and
student performance, see D. Willetts, A University Education 
59 For the discussion see eg, D.G. Papademetriou and M. Sumption, ‘Rethinking Points Systems and Employer-Selected Immigration’, Report of the Migration Policy Institute , available at
 
For the Chinese point system for internal migration see n 147, below.
60 On the wide spectrum of self/co-regulatory models in relation to data and technology, see eg C.
Marsden, Internet Co-regulation: European Law, Regulatory Governance and Legitimacy in Cyberspace
 ch 2.
61 Lauer, n 15 above, 198-199.
62 Lauer, n 15 above, 249 ; Wain-
(private) rating of bonds has long played a role in public finances, including statutory
requirements.63
The nature of sharing economy business models, where there is limited regulatory engagement in many cases, leads to heavy emphasis being placed by users on the quality
of reputational information provided through the platform.64 Moreover, whether any
liability is potentially attached to the very act of ranking, reviewing, or rating is a factor;
US law generally takes the approach that a view on creditworthiness or a review (or
even scoring) of a service is an opinion protected by the First Amendment as an aspect
of freedom of speech,65 while minimising exposure to defamation claims has long been
a concern for the credit rating industry and for (non-sharing) online review sites alike.66
Where there is concern about the implications of rating, there will be the possibility of
the introduction of a regulatory regime or the application of more general provisions.
This may be correlated with the degree to which ostensibly voluntary participation by
users in a private sector market begins to become an everyday activity, which facilitates
access to other markets or displaces more conventionally regulated services. Credit
scoring, for instance, became the subject of specific regulation in the US.67 Calls for
greater regulation in other areas, on the basis of criticisms of the status quo in rating and
reputation-based systems, are discussed in the comparative part, below.68
Recent trends: algorithms and aggregation
Even the more conventional forms of reputation-based decision making have undergone
further change in light of Internet use and the availability of novel sources of data. A
subject’s use of social media or indeed of sharing economy sites can, for instance, be
used as a proxy for creditworthiness. An Australian scheme for alternative (and significantly cheaper) deposits on rented properties, Trustbond, makes use of both types of
wright, n 22 above, 655 (on the significance of financial regulator pressure on lenders to be assured of
ability to repay, and of the relative cost of different approaches, on the working methods of lenders).
63 Carruthers, n 14 above, 538.
64 S. Ranchordás, ‘Online Reputation and the Regulation of Information Asymmetries in the Platform
Economy’ 5 Critical Analysis of Law 127, 143.
65 Jefferson County School District v Moody’s Investor’s Services 988 F Supp 1341 (‘The bond market depends in large measure upon the free, open exchange of information concerning bond issues and the First Amendment is ultimately the best guarantor of the integrity of the bond rating system’); Browne v Avvo 525 F Supp 2d 1249, 1252 
(lawyer rating website); Castle Rock Remodeling v Better Business Bureau 354 SW 3d 234, 242-243 (rating of service providers by bureau on six-point scale).
66 For the former: Lauer, n 15 above, 42 (defamation in general) and 68 (historic, though now discontinued, practice of communicating sensitive information verbally and in restrictive circumstances). For the
latter: Seaton v TripAdvisor 728 F 3d 592; Clark v TripAdvisor CSIH 110; Burki v 70/30
Ltd EWHC 2151 (QB); the broader question of host liability for content posted by users (‘intermediary liability’) is also relevant here (and differs as between the general immunity in the US and the
conditional exclusions more commonly found elsewhere, including the UK).
67 Pasquale, n 18 above, 140; J. Turow, The Aisles Have Eyes: How Retailers Track Your Shopping, Strip
your Privacy, and Define your Power 262; G. Krippner, ‘Democracy Of Credit: Ownership and the Politics of Credit Access in Late Twentieth-Century’ 123
American Journal of Sociology 1; Fair Credit Reporting Act 1970, 15 USC §1681; Equal Credit Opportunity Act 1974, 15 USC §1691. For data protection in the EU see text to notes 180-209, below.
68 Text to notes 156-244, below.
data.69 A Singapore-based lender, Lenddo, claims to use ‘non-traditional data…to economically empower the emerging middle class’, which includes various social media
sources.70 A US firm, Tala, operates in developing nations in Africa and Asia, claiming
to utilise up to 10,000 ‘data points’ such as social media and smartphone use, in order to
create a new type of credit score to the advantage of lower-income customers.71
There has been a good deal of experimentation in the digital finance sector in terms of
identifying creditworthiness, especially in conjunction with expansion into less developed economies.72 However, as with more conventional forms of credit scoring, the
emphasis is often upon correlation rather than causation and can therefore introduce unintended discrimination such as regarding race.73 Observation of patent applications and
corporate announcements discloses that service providers in the social media sector,
such as Facebook, may be preparing for their own role in relation to future financial
service products and the use of social media data in this context.74
In her work on algorithms and decision-making, O’Neal distinguishes between the
‘relatively transparent’ and ‘regulated’ systems of credit scoring developed from the
1960s in the United States75 and the ‘arbitrary, unaccountable, unregulated, and often
unfair’ assessments made by lenders and others who use browsing data and other insights alongside more conventional scores in making decisions.76 It is also the case that
many reputational systems are context-specific to some extent; that is, it is one’s behaviour as a Uber driver that governs one’s ability to drive for Uber, and one’s financial
history that affects further financial activity. On the other hand, Wei et al argue that using information from social media has the potential to ‘reduce lenders’ misgivings about
engaging applicants with limited personal financial history’ and so improve, for some,
access to finance.77
69 see C. Yeates, ‘How your social media account could help you get a loan’
Sydney Morning Herald 
70 see discussion in T. Tan and T. Phan, ‘Social Media-Driven Credit Scoring:
the Predictive Value of Social Structures’ 37th International Conference on Information Systems
552; C. Hynes, ‘How Social Media Could Help The Unbanked Land A Loan’ Forbes.com 
71 C. Cheney, ‘How Alternative Credit Scoring Is Transforming Lending In The Developing World’
Devex 
72 A. Costa, A. Deb and M. Kubzansky, Big Data, Small Credit: The Digital Revolution and its Impact on
Emerging Market Consumers 
73 S. Lohr, ‘Creditworthy? Let’s Consider Capitalization’ New York Times A1; see
further text to notes 187-194, below.
74 Packin and Lev-Aretz, n 46 above, 344-345; as one analysis puts it, ‘Facebook could be the next FICO’
(referring to Fair Isaac & Co. scores used in the United States): V. Mayer-Schönberger and K. Cukier, Big
Data: A Revolution That Will Transform How We Live, Work and Think 
92; more sceptically, A. Mukherjee, The Internet Trap: Five Costs of Living Online 67 (‘imagine if Facebook were to combine their records with commercially available data from credit card companies, credit rating agencies, and census databases: they would have more
information about us than our closest friends and family’).
75 See notes 13-36 above and accompanying text.
76 C. O’Neal, Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases Inequality and Threatens Democracy 142-145.
77 Y. Wei, P. Yildirim, C. Van den Bulte and C. Dellarocas, ‘Credit Scoring with Social Network Data’
 35 Marketing Science 234, 249.
Aggregation is perhaps the most significant promised development, though again it can
be seen as an obvious stage in the development of an information infrastructure, as occurred in relation to financial information in earlier decades. The exploration of the predictive value of credit scores (alone or in combination with consumer data) for noncredit questions, such as health, has also been noted,78 as has the use of credit scores in
dating services79 and in a wide range of other contexts, including ‘auto insurance assessments, cell phone contracts, residential rentals and even hiring decisions’.80 In an
optimistic account of the potential for the sharing economy published in 2010, Botsman
and Rogers suggested that there would soon be ‘some form of network that aggregates
your reputation capital across multiple forms of collaborative consumption’.81 Some
services now emphasise the analysis of reputational information originally gathered for
a single or more limited purpose. A leading player in this area, Traity (which was also a
partner in the above-mentioned Trustbond scheme in Australia) explains its role as assisting users to ‘gather … reputation from different data sources so that [they] can control it, own it, and leverage [it]’.82 Other projects have sought to provide cross-platform
indications of influence; examples include Sociota (a paid service which seeks to measure ‘reach’ and ‘engagement’ of a presence on social media)83 and Klout .84
As more work takes place in respect of aggregation, the argument that these singlepurpose reputational systems are limited in significance becomes less compelling. Aggregated reputational information has, however, the potential to address some of the
known issues with the reliance of platforms upon their own reputation systems. One
such criticism is that single-site systems disadvantage new users without a reputational
history on that platform85), and discourage ‘switching’ between services.86 It takes effort
for users (providers and customers) of sharing economy and similar services to build
reputation through, for instance, positive ratings, or to understand how reputation is
handled within a service.87 This can be a disincentive to switching, owing to the need to
rebuild reputation or one’s understanding of trust and risk after such a switch.88 Separately, innovations in e-commerce and social media have included the use of social media logins for third party sites 42 Historical Social Research
81 Botsman and Rogers, n 18 above, 219.
82 see Sundararajan, n 43 above, 98.
83 
84 A. Rao, N. Spasojevic, Z. Li and T. D’Souza, ‘Klout Score: Measuring Influence Across Multiple Social Networks’ IEEE International Conference on Big Data 2282; J. Kelly, ‘Soon, Nobody Will
Have Any Klout’ Financial Times 
 
85 On the need for a critical mass of active users, see P. Hausemer, ‘Exploratory study of consumer issues
in online peer-to-peer platform markets’ , 86-87, available at
 
86 V. Hatzopoulos, The Collaborative Economy and EU Law 197.
87 OECD, ‘Protecting Customers in Peer-Platform Markets’ OECD Digital Economy Papers No.
88 K. Sipp, ‘Portable Reputation in the On-Demand Economy’ in T. Scholz and N. Schneider (eds), Ours
To Hack and To Own: the Rise of Platform Cooperativism 59-61; on the
relationship between platform models, users, and data, see eg N. Srnicek, Platform Capitalism 95, 110.
and applicable laws, may provide direct access to further data or indirect access as a
consequence of identification), the involvement of platforms in other fields (such as
Snapchat’s interest in wearable technology and image recognition89) and the crossreferencing of merchant or ecommerce data with records obtained from data brokers
(including those who have historically assigned credit scores).90
Developing a conceptual framework
The previous sections have shown that there is a considerable range of approaches to
rating systems, but that some common themes are emerging. Tables 1 and 2 of this section develop a framework that enables us to compare such systems at the descriptive
level. Thus, the aim is to identify a short (and inevitably non-exhaustive) list of general
topics which can then also be used to facilitate the understanding of the Chinese Social
Credit System, as discussed below.91
Table 1: Degree of interventionism in rating systems
1) Drafter
Co-drafting
Strong incentive
Socio-economic
4) Scoring
Main and sub-indicators
5) Application
Comply or explain
6) Algorithm
Transparency
Controlled transparency
7) Enforcement
Stages of enforcement
8) Accountability
Oversight body
Review possible
Table 1 displays eight topics. The first two criteria relate to the drafter and user of the
system: first, is it initiated and drafted by a private entity or state authority, and, second,
is it mandatory for individuals (users) to participate in the system, or do they have
choice? Thirdly, we ask whether the scheme has a single, specific aim, or a broader set
of objectives across a number of functions or context. The fourth and fifth questions relate to the specific operation of the scheme: does it use multiple scores or a single score,
and is a result indicative or definitive (e.g. a precise number)? The sixth and seventh
criteria ask how transparent the scheme is, and the responsibility for enforcing it. Finally, rating systems vary according to their degree of accountability, in particular how far
a separate oversight body92 monitors the design and operation of the system.
89 See eg B. Gallagher, How To Turn Down A Billion Dollars: The Snapchat Story 230, 247-251; S. Liao, ‘Snapchat is working on a feature that can find products you
snap on Amazon’ The Verge A. Pardes, ‘Why Snap needs its spectacles’ Wired 
 
90 Turow, n 67 above, 155-157.
91 See Table 3, below. Given this descriptive function, these criteria should not be seen as a normative
benchmark; for policy considerations see discussion in text to notes 179-244, below.
92 eg the UK’s Financial Conduct Authority monitors the credit scoring operated by private companies.
With these criteria, Table 1 also conceptualises how a rating system can have a low,
medium or high degree of interventionism, which to some extent relates to the involvement of the state but also incorporates other substantive and procedural issues. For example, it can be seen that a system drafted by a private entity on a specific issue that is
flexible in its application is at the lower end of interventionism, while a comprehensive
system drafted and enforced by a public authority is more interventionist. The table also
indicates that intermediate models are possible, for example, as far as rating systems are
co-drafted or applied with a ‘comply or explain’ mechanism.
Table 2: Interventionism in selected rating systems
Credit ratings in
many countries
UK research excellence framework
Sharing economy
1) Drafter
Low/Medium
4) Scoring
Medium/High
5) Application
Medium/High
6) Algorithm
Low/Medium
7) Enforcement
8) Accountability
Table 2 shows that this model can be further explained by applying it to a number of the
schemes discussed above. For instance, sharing economy and other peer-to-peer platforms often use their own reputation system, with a specific aim of supporting transactions on that platform, and enforced by the market that the platform has instigated. Applying the system is relatively inflexible, though; as discussed above, an Uber driver’s
entitlement to use the platform will be affected by her rating. It should also be noted that
some observations are tentative, in the absence of full disclosure by private parties as to
how their systems operate93 – a point which we will return to below.
Overall, it can be seen that these rating systems combine different elements of low, medium and high interventionism. It is also noteworthy that none of these ratings have a
high degree of interventionism in the fields ‘user’, ‘aim’, ‘algorithm’, ‘enforcement’ and
‘accountability’: this is potentially different in the emerging Chinese system as it is said
to shift from ‘reputation society’ to the ‘reputation state’94 and thus to a more formalised model where reputation matters not only through societal forces (or as a selfcontained aid to the use of a particular service) but as a tool of decision-making. Yet,
the Chinese model also contains a number of nuances, to which we turn now.
93 For example, while it can be assumed that a displayed rating is the mean of submitted scores (with or
without explanatory comments or sub-scores), a service provider can choose to apply a weighting system
which, for instance, controls for timeliness or the reliability of the person providing the rating: see further
L. Pettersen, ‘Rating Mechanisms Among Participants in Sharing Economy Platforms’ 22(12)
First Monday DOI: 10.5210/fm.v22i12.7908 .
94 X. Dai, ‘Toward a Reputation State: The Social Credit System Project of China’ Working Paper , available at 
CHINA: SOCIAL CREDIT SYSTEM AND REPUTATION RATINGS
Preliminary considerations
The websites mentioned in the previous part are rarely used in mainland China: Airbnb
is available; yet, eBay and Uber have been unsuccessful in entering the Chinese market
and many social media sites are blocked (e.g., Twitter and Facebook).95 Thus, Chinese
citizens rely on the specific Chinese providers, which also implies that the Chinese government may in principle be able to get access to the corresponding user data.
The previous part also discussed the use of financial credit rating systems in Europe and
North America. The People’s Bank of China (ie the Chinese central bank) has established the Credit Reference Centre96 which provides both commercial and consumer
credit reporting, based on credit information made available by banks and state institutions (e.g., regarding social welfare payments). The resulting reports are important for
anyone who applies for a bank loan. Yet, these reports do not provide an actual rating of
the creditworthiness of businesses and consumers, though this may change in the future
due to the developments discussed in this part.
The Chinese Social Credit System has received extensive coverage in the Western
press, where it is often described as a big-data-driven comprehensive rating of all Chinese citizens.97 However, this is a misleading characterisation of the current situation.
At present, three different models operate: China-wide blacklists, compliance scores by
pilot cities, and social credit scores by financial institutions. The three main sections of
this part will explain these forms of social control. Subsequently, this part will reflect on
future developments and relate those to Western comments made about the Chinese
The Social Credit System and the use of China-wide blacklists
The introduction of the Social Credit System by the central government has a potentially far-reaching effect; yet, the China-wide measures that implement it are, so far, rather
specific – namely, using blacklists – as this section explains.
The Social Credit System aims to address not only the financial creditworthiness of individuals and companies but also their sincerity, honesty, and integrity.98 The initial discussions of the early 2000s put this in the context of the objective of supporting the
transition to a market economy after China’s accession to the WTO, for example, the
need to combat commercial fraud and IP infringements.99 A 2011 decision then also re-
95 L. Yuan, ‘A Generation Grows Up in China Without Google, Facebook Or Twitter’ New York Times 
Some other countries seem to follow, see ‘Beijing Wants to Rewrite the Rules of the Internet’ The Atlantic 
96 See (available in English) and with access to
the information (available in Chinese only).
97 See text to notes 139-155, below.
98 See R. Creemers, ‘China’s Social Credit System: An Evolving Practice of Control’ Working Paper , available at noting in footnote 13 that the Mandarin term
for ‘credit’ (xinyong) cognates with terms for ‘sincerity, honesty, and integrity’; similar Dai, n 94 above,
16 (also on the use of the word ‘social’).
99 See M. Chorzempa, P. Triolo and S. Sacks, ‘China’s Social Credit System: A Mark of Progress or a
Threat to Privacy?’, Peterson Institute for International Economics, Policy Brief 18-14 3;
Creemers, n 98 above, 3.
ferred to ‘matters of social and political morality’ as points of concern.100 In 2014 this
was followed by the State Council’s ‘Notice concerning Issuance of the Planning Outline for the Construction of a Social Credit System ’,101 which forms the
basis of the development of the Social Credit System today. This document mentions
the aim to promote ‘integrity in government affairs’, ‘commercial sincerity’, ‘social integrity’ and ‘judicial public trust’ which shows that these measures are targeted at individuals (the focus of this article), as well as companies, judicial organs, and other governmental authorities. It also explains that the ultimate goal is a uniform social credit
system based on penalty and award mechanisms, presenting this idea in a general sense,
with no references to quantitative measures and the collection of online data.102
The specific penalty mechanisms that are already operational aim to enforce the blacklists of persons who have violated the law. They are implemented and enforced by different government authorities. The process started with a decision of the Supreme People’s Court on public blacklists of persons who defied legally binding judgments,103 but
there are now also many further blacklists compiled by other authorities, for example,
the Ministry of Culture and Tourism lists those who have violated transport rules, such
as smoking or carrying prohibited items.104 Subsequently, a degree of centralisation has
taken place. A central website makes the names of the blacklisted persons publicly
available.105 There is also now a system in place that requires cooperation of authorities
in their sanctions (the Joint Punishment System).106 This means that a violation of the
law can lead to a variety of sanctions; it may start with a fine, but the perpetrator may
subsequently be banned from flying or using high speed trains. It is also possible that
these blacklists have implications for private-law relationships: while Chinese businesspersons may merely care about their own profits (and therefore be willing to do business with everyone), the recognition of blacklists by financial institutions can mean that
blacklisted persons may not be able to use the funds on their current accounts in order to
purchase a car or other luxury items.107
Given the severe consequences of these blacklists, it is provided that individuals need to
be notified in advance. There are also some internal review proceedings: for example,
100 Central Committee, 18 October 2011 as translated at
 
101 English translation available at 
102 As also noted by Creemers, n 98 above, 13.
103 Interpretation No. 17 of the Supreme People’s Court, English translation available at
www.lawinfochina.com/Display.aspx?lib=law&Cgid=207020&EncodingName=gb2312. Search functions are available at 
104 See eg and
 
105 See Credit China, www.creditchina.gov.cn/ and, for companies, the National Enterprise Credit Information Publicity System, www.gsxt.gov.cn/. For empirical research on these blacklists (as well as the
corresponding ‘redlists’ for good behaviour) see S. Engelmann et al, ‘Clear Sanctions, Vague Rewards:
How China’s Social Credit System Currently Defines “Good” and “Bad” Behavior’ Proceedings
of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency 69.
106 State Council Guiding Opinions concerning Establishing and Perfecting Incentives for Promisekeeping and Joint Punishment Systems for Trust-Breaking, and Accelerating the Construction of Social
Sincerity, English translation available at 
107 For the latter point see also text to notes 117-125, below.
the State Administration of Taxation, which has its own system of blacklists, has a
‘credit repair mechanism’ that provides correction of or relief from the blacklist under
certain conditions.108 Moreover, in principle, there is also a right to appeal to the courts,
although observers have been sceptical as to how far these legal safeguards are effective.109
Pilot cities issuing compliance scores
In addition to the China-wide implementation of the Social Credit System, the Chinese
government has authorised over forty pilot cities to experiment with forms of social
credit. The following will provide some representative examples. These local schemes
also have to be seen in the wider context of the ways that Chinese regions and cities
have developed elaborated tools of state surveillance and supervision. For example, in
the provinces of Xinjiang and Tibet, there are particularly extensive monitoring of internet use as well as elaborate registration and ID card requirements.110 More generally,
CCTV cameras see widespread use in China, including forms of public shaming (e.g.,
publicly listing jaywalkers caught by facial recognition cameras in Shenzhen).111
Two of the most extensive examples of regional pilots are from Suining in Jiangsu and
Rongcheng in Shandong province. In both of these pilots, each citizen started with 1000
points. They could then lose points for a variety of infringements, such as traffic light
violations, drunk driving, or having a child without the necessary administrative permission, but they could also re-gain points by ‘good’ actions, such as caring for elderly
family members. The resulting points were then translated into a rating from A to D
which could influence the individual in a positive or negative way in their dealing with
the local government. For example, someone with a high rating would get preferential
access to government subsidies, while someone with a low rating would be restricted in
applications for housing, social welfare, business licenses, and public procurement.112
There are also forms of public shaming and appraisal, for example, as billboards in
some of the main squares display the names and pictures of citizens who have recently
won or lost social credit points, and the city of Rongcheng makes some of this data
available via a website.113
Other pilot cities have comparable schemes. All of these are underpinned by provincial
and municipal pieces of legislation. Some of those rules have been translated into English,114 and it is fairly straight-forward to understand their main aims and limitations.
For example, the 56 articles of the Shanghai Social Credit Regulations 2017 are structured according to the headings (i) General provisions, (ii) Social credit information,
108 See eg www.chinatax.gov.cn/eng/n2367751/c3633676/content.html.
109 Creemers, n 98 above, 19. For judicial review in China see also text to notes 206-209, below.
110 See eg ‘Twelve Days in Xinjiang: How China’s Surveillance State Overwhelms Daily Life’ Wall
Street Journal 
111 See eg ‘Inside China’s surveillance state’ FT Magazine ; Creemers, n 98 above, 18 (for
the jaywalking example).
112 See eg ‘Discipline and Punish: The Birth of China’s Social-Credit System’ The Nation ‘Life Inside China’s Social Credit
Laboratory’ Foreign Policy Creemers, n 98 above, 10.
113 ‘China’s rewards and punishments’ Le Monde diplomatique 
 and see www.rccredit.gov.cn.
114 For an overview with links to translations into English see 
(iii) Credit incentives and restrictions, (iv) Protection of information subjects’ rights and
interests, (v) Regulating and advancing the development of the credit services industry,
(vi) The establishment of a social credit environment, (vii) Legal responsibility, and
(viii) Supplemental provisions, with a noticeable desire to provide legal certainty to anyone affected by the Social Credit System. However, this is apparently also done in a
way that does not limit the possible actions of the state authorities, as wide general
sanctions such as ‘restrict entry into relevant markets and industries’ and ‘restrict enjoyment of relevant public policies’ show.115
Shanghai is also a good example of the use of incentives through the so-called Honest
Shanghai scheme. Honest Shanghai is a voluntary smartphone app that asks users to enter their state ID number and then returns a rating as ‘very good’, ‘good’ or ‘bad’. This
rating is apparently based on data the Shanghai government has collected about each
citizen; details of the algorithm are however not transparent.116 This use of incentives
and algorithms can also be seen in the next category, namely the social credit scores developed by financial institutions.
Financial institutions providing social credit scores
Financial institutions have also been allowed to create schemes implementing the Social
Credit System. Many of these pilots consider a wide range of information, including
social network data. Thus, here in particular, it may be justified to talk about schemes
measuring ‘social credit’ (and not simply questions of ‘financial credit’).
The most influential of these schemes has been Sesame Credit (also spelled Zhima
Credit in English), developed by Alibaba’s subsidiary Ant Financial Group.117 It evaluates the creditworthiness of firms and individuals with a model of ‘smart business’
which captures information automatically and then evaluates it with algorithmic tools in
real time.118 In detail, Sesame Credit scores each user on a scale of 350 to 950 points,
based on five sets of information: (i) financial credit records, (ii) behavioural trends in
commercial transactions, (iii) available assets and personal information, (iv) behaviour
and preferences and (v) social relationships. As Sesame Credit is a smartphone app,
linked to Alibaba’s mobile payment system Alipay, it is clear that it accesses the phones
of its users for information gathering.
However, beyond this general information, it is not transparent which tools and algorithms are used. In particular, this applies to the broad categories (iv) and (v) where rumours are that factors are considered such as: excessively playing video games, cheating in online video games, and a frequent change of address (negative) and donations to
charity, having friends with high Sesame Credit ratings, and polite behaviour on social
media (positive).119 This potential use of a wide range of information can also be seen in
other examples. For instance, the company Tencent at p 12.
117 See (in Chinese).
118 Thus, this differs from conventional credit assessments: for details see M. Zeng, Smart Business: What
Alibaba’s Success Reveals About the Future of Strategy .
119 See eg Creemers, n 98 above, 22-23; R. Botsman, ‘Big data meets Big Brother as China moves to rate
its citizens’ Wired ‘The odd reality of life under China’s all-seeing credit score system’ Wired 
Alibaba and Baidu, seen as the trio of most powerful Chinese technology companies) is
not only the developer of the social media app WeChat, installed by a billion users, but
has also been one of the companies involved in the development of a social credit system. Thus, naturally, all information accumulated via the WeChat app may be used for
ratings of its WeChat Pay Score; yet, details remain undisclosed.120
The consequences of a high Sesame Credit rating are far-reaching. To start with, as this
rating is provided by a financial institution, users with higher scores have better access
to easy forms of credit. In addition, many other companies also consider the Sesame
Credit rating through an agreement with Alibaba: for example, a high rating may mean
that such users do not need to pay a deposit for renting a flat, a car or a bicycle,121 get
faster check-in at hotels and airlines, and are displayed more prominently on dating
websites (and users may also disclose a high score as a status symbol elsewhere, which
apparently many do). The Chinese state is also not completely unconnected to the Sesame Credit rating and Alipay. On the one hand, for example, a high rating can make it
easier to secure priority access in hospitals or a visa for overseas travel. On the other
hand, Alibaba forwards non-compliance of payment obligations to the government,
while also contributing to the implementation of China-wide blacklists through blocking
certain transactions using Alipay.122
In early 2018, however, the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) decided to withhold a renewal of the licences for these private social credit scores. There is some speculation
about the reasons for this decision, for example, that Alibaba and others may have got
too powerful, that they have stated collecting too much personal and social information
about their users, and that they may face conflicts of interest as they also benefit commercially from their customers.123 It also seems that the PBOC now believes that it is a
good time to design a new consolidated credit rating – called Baihang Credit score – to
be developed by a public-private partnership between the PBOC and eight private financial institutions.124
Some financial institutions have started sharing credit data with the Baihang Credit system.125 However, further details are not yet clear. For example, it seems that Sesame and
other ratings may continue for non-credit purposes, such as the bike rentals, visa approvals and dating websites mentioned above. It is also too early to say whether the new
120 See ‘WeChat Pay pilots credit-scoring rival to Alibaba’s Sesame’ EJ Insights ,
 
(also noting its previous scheme ‘Tencent Credit’).
121 As also trialled in Australia; see text to note 69, above.
122 See text to note 107, above.
123 Dai, n 94 above, 17-18; Ohlberg et al, n 116 above, 12; ‘Here’s why China is concerned about Tencent
and Alibaba’s credit scoring efforts’ Business Insider 
 But see
also ‘Alibaba and Tencent have become China’s most formidable investors’ Economist 
 (‘being able to manage a handful of established private players with long-standing
links to the Communist Party, with their tentacles in many young firms, makes the whole tech industry
easier to control’).
124 See ‘Baihang and the Eight Personal Credit Programmes: A Credit Leap Forward’ What’s on Weibo
 On the significance of public-private collaboration for the design of the Social Credit System more generally, see F. Liang, V. Das, N. Kostyuk, and M.M. Hussain, ‘Constructing a Data‐
Driven Society: China’s Social Credit System as a State Surveillance Infrastructure’ 10 Policy &
Internet 415.
125 See 
Baihang Credit score will be more focussed on financial credit, as the PBOC’s involvement in the Credit Reference Centre126 may indicate, or whether it will incorporate
the wide ‘social credit’ approach of Sesame Credit and other commercial ratings.
Future perspectives and reception in China
The previous sections have shown that it would be premature to talk about ‘the’ Social
Credit System in China. Rather there are three different systems at the moment (with
further sub-groupings possible) which follow somehow different logics. Table 3 maps
those systems based on the distinction between high, medium, and low interventionist
models, explained earlier in this article.127
Table 3: Degree of interventionism in the Social Credit System (so far)
China-wide
blacklists
Pilot cities
Financial institutions
1) Drafter
4) Scoring
5) Application
6) Algorithm
7) Enforcement
8) Accountability
It can be seen that all three existing systems have only some elements of a highly interventionist model: the China-wide blacklists due to the state influence in drafting, enforcement and lack of accountability (leading to a high degree of interventionism) as
well as their mandatory and uniform application; the scores developed by pilot cities
due to their belonging to the state, as well as their mandatory nature, single scoring
mechanisms and protected algorithms; and the ratings by financial institutions due to
their relatively general scope (often going well beyond financial credit information) as
well as their single scoring mechanisms and protected algorithms.
This complex status quo raises the question whether the different elements will soon be
consolidated into a ‘state-run meta social-credit system’?128 So, in the framework of the
three models, will the future be a full interventionist system in all eight categories?
Such further evolution would assume that the current experience with the Social Credit
System is a largely positive one. Two recent empirical studies find some evidence that
this is indeed the case 7, available at
 
fully open answers).129 The Chinese media mentions the way the Social Credit System
can create a ‘culture of integrity’, solve economic problems and improve governance.130
More specifically, reports in Chinese newspapers most frequently emphasise its benefit
for commerce and rural welfare. In particular, the argument is here that this system enables honest but poor persons (including small businesses) to obtain financial credit
which otherwise would not be available.131 With respect to the Sesame Credit score, it is
also said that it may give citizens more control over the impact of their actions than previously,132 and that the ‘gamification’ of the Sesame Credit score as a reward system
may be one of its practical advantages.133 And even the blacklisting system can be seen
as beneficial for individuals as far as it induces their debtors (e.g., contractual counterparties) to comply with court judgments.134
There has also been some public criticism of the emerging ratings in China – reflecting
the well-established interest in privacy (or the related concept of reputation) across societies,135 despite differences in legal and human rights protection. As regards the pilot
cities, the Suining experiment was criticised by the official state media comparing it
with the system of Good Citizen Cards used by the Japanese during the occupation of
China during the Second World War.136 Similarly, an academic from the Shanghai
Academy of Social Sciences argues that social credit should not cover any violation of
moral behaviour, but that it needs to be defined in a narrow way as failure of compliance with legal and contractual obligations.137 There have also been discussions in Chinese media about problems of information security, data privacy and flaws in the technical design, in particular with respect to the ratings by financial institutions.138 Yet, of
course, applying a comparative ‘Western’ perspective, the assessment may even be
more critical, as will be seen in the next section.
The Social Credit System and ‘Western values’
Most Western commentators resolutely reject the Chinese Social Credit System. The
words frequently used are that it is a ‘tool for totalitarian surveillance’,139 an invention
129 See eg G. Kostka, ‘China’s Social Credit Systems and Public Opinion: Explaining High Levels of Approval’ (forthcoming) New Media & Society DOI: 10.1177/1461444819826402 (based on an online survey); M. Maurtvedt, The Chinese Social Credit System. Surveillance and Social Manipulation: A Solution
to “Moral Decay”? (based on interviews).
130 Ohlberg et al, n 116 above, 5-7.
131 S. Shahin and P. Zheng, ‘Big Data and the Illusion of Choice: Comparing the Evolution of India’s
Aadhaar and China’s Social Credit System as Technosocial Discourses’ (forthcoming) Social Science
Computer Review DOI: 10.1177/0894439318789343, 12-14.
132 Botsman, n 119 above, citing a blogger based in Shanghai.
133 Z. Ramadan, ‘The Gamification of Trust: The Case of China’s “Social Credit”’ 36 Marketing
Intelligence & Planning 93.
134 cf Creemers, n 98 above, 1 (Social Credit System as a substitute for weak law enforcement).
135 See eg J. Cannataci, ‘Privacy, Technology Law and Religions across Cultures’ Journal of Information, Law, and Technology For China, see Maurtvedt,
n 129 above, 40.
136 Creemers, n 98 above, 10.
137 L. Yu, ‘Use Social Credit Cautiously and in Accordance with the Law’ Working Paper , available at 
138 ‘Sesame Credit apologizes for alleged Alipay privacy violation’ Global Times 
 Ohlberg et al, n 116 above, 7; Maurtvedt, n 129
above, 36-37. See also text to note 123, above (for the intervention of the PBOC).
139 Ohlberg et al, n 116 above, 12.
of ‘the digital totalitarian state’,140 that it is ‘worse than an Orwellian nightmare’,141 a
meeting of ‘big data’ with ‘Big Brother’,142 or indeed a meeting of Orwell’s 1984 with
Pavlov’s dogs: ‘act like a good citizen, be rewarded and be made to think you’re having
fun’.143 However, understanding the Social Credit System as ‘merely’ a tool of state
surveillance144 misunderstands the diversity of the current system, in terms of management but more importantly in terms of functions, as outlined in the previous sections.
Still, as a more moderate form of criticism, we may also identify problems such as the
confusion between conflicting objectives (and corresponding problems of construct validity), problems of data reliability (in particular as regards the measurement of soft factors) and the risks of a monopolist system lacking competition (with corresponding risks
of corruption).145
Another frequent reaction is that the Chinese Social Credit System is incompatible with
Western political and cultural values. For example, it has been suggested that it may be
suitable for an authoritarian political system, but not a liberal democracy: only the former system can be openly paternalistic, as inherent in the Social Credit System,146 and it
may also be linked to other forms of control of personal behaviour used by the Chinese
government, and associated with a Leninist idea of ‘social management processes’, such
as the records about the performance and attitudes of citizens (dang’an) and the household registration system (hukou).147 Another factor may be that there is widespread
scepticism how far China has embraced the rule of law;148 thus, as far as this is doubted,
it can be said that the Social Credit System would be problematic in the rule-of-law societies of the West as it lacks transparency, as it disrespects the divide between law and
politics,149 and as it is not needed due to more effective law enforcement anyway.150
Cultural differences may also be relevant. As some of the mechanisms of the Social
Credit System use forms of ‘shaming’, it may matter that in China shame is said to be
an effective means of social control due to the desire to maintain harmony in relation-
140 ‘China invents the digital totalitarian state’ The Economist 
 
141 D. Galeon, ‘China’s “Social Credit System” Will Rate How Valuable You Are as a Human’ Futurism
 See also ‘Orwell’s
Nightmare: China’s Social Credit System’ Asian Institute for Policy Studies 
 J. Horsley, ‘China’s Orwellian Social Credit Score Isn’t Real’ Foreign Policy 
 
142 Botsman, n 119 above.
144 Liang et al, n 124 above.
145 See eg D. Williamson, ‘China’s Online Consumerism: Managing Business, Moral Panic and Regulation’ Working Paper , 15-17, available at 
146 Creemers, n 98 above, 26.
147 S. Hoffman, ‘Managing the state: social credit, surveillance and the CCP’s plan for China’, China
Brief, Jamestown Foundation, 17 August 2017, 17(11), 21; Botsman, n 119 above. The latter also uses a
point system, see L. Zhang, ‘Economic Migration and Urban Citizenship in China: The Role of Points
Systems’ 38 Population and Development Review 503; for point-based systems of international
migration see text to note 59, above.
148 Or how far China has its unique version: see eg J. Garrick and Y. Chang Bennett (eds), China’s Socialist Rule of Law Reforms Under Xi Jinping ; Y. Wang, Tying the Autocrat’s
Hands: The Rise of the Rule of Law in China .
149 Creemers, n 98 above, 5.
150 See also text to notes 99 and 130, above.
ships, as opposed to the rights focus of Western countries.151 As Western societies have
lower thresholds as regards the feeling of ‘intrusion’,152 and as in China there is lower
trust towards strangers (with corresponding higher trust in close networks of guanxi), a
trust-building instrument such as the Social Credit System also seems to fit better with
Chinese culture.153 This may also be seen in existing legal rules: the concern regarding
data collection by states (or the use by states of data collected by others) highlighted in
20th century abuses, has long informed the development of robust data protection legislation in the West, especially in the European Union,154 whereas data protection and
privacy legislation in China is fragmentary at best.155
However, this critical perspective should not be our final word on the comparative assessment of the Social Credit System. The following will therefore discuss how far, despite this criticism and despite these differences, something can be gained from comparing the model of Social Credit System with its Western counterparts.
COMPARISON, EVALUATION AND REGULATION
Should we compare?
Some argue that, for scholars from Western countries, Chinese law remains a ‘mystery’
that they cannot apprehend – and that any sense of understanding may be a mere illusion that tells us more about the Western legal culture than about the Chinese one.156
Thus, at least, authors from the West ought to be cautious in the way they can assess
Chinese law. However, China has also transplanted a large number of legal concepts
from Western countries in recent years.157 Thus, it can also be noted that contemporary
Chinese law may, in many respects, not be fundamentally different from its Western
counterpart, and that in both China and the West we have to understand how legal rules
coevolve with political, social, economic and cultural factors in order to understand how
‘law works’.158
For rating systems, a similar dialectic line of reasoning can be applied. On the one hand,
as we have seen, the rating systems developed in the West have limits in their ‘interventionism’159 and might be seen as (largely) optional activities from which users can withdraw, while it is possible that in China a fully ‘interventionist’ system will be implemented in the near future.160 Thus, it seems that, in comparison, this ‘unification of the
151 O. Bedford and K.-K. Hwang, ‘Guilt and Shame in Chinese Culture: A Cross‐cultural Framework
from the Perspective of Morality and Identity’ 33 Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour 127,
133. See also S. Sheikh, ‘Cultural Variations in Shame’s Responses: A Dynamic Perspective’ 18
Personality and Social Psychology Review 384.
152 Backer, n 128 above, 14.
153 For the relevance of ‘trust’ see also Y.-J. Chen, C.-F. Lin and H.-W. Liu, ‘“Rule of Trust”: The Power
and Perils of China’s Social Credit Megaproject’ (forthcoming) Columbia Journal of Asian Law.
154 eg D. Cole and F. Fabbrini, ‘Bridging the Transatlantic Divide? The United States, the European Union, and the Protection of Privacy Across Borders’ 14 International Journal of Constitutional Law
220, 225-226; Mayer-Schönberger and Cukier, n 74 above, ch 8.
155 See text to notes 206-209, below.
156 See the discussion in T. Zhou and M. Siems, ‘Contentious Modes of Understanding Chinese Commercial Law’ 6 George Mason Journal of International Commercial Law 177.
157 ibid (with examples from contract law and company law).
158 D. Chen, S. Deakin, M. Siems and B. Wang, ‘Law, Trust and Institutional Change in China: Evidence
from Qualitative Fieldwork’ 17 Journal of Corporate Law Studies 257.
159 See text to notes 91-94, above.
160 See text to notes 127-138, above.
various elements, and their seamless operation would be a great innovation’,161 or in any
case ‘unique’ as compared to anything that is happening in the West.162
On the other hand, this should not lead to the conclusion that the Social Credit System
and its Western counterparts are incommensurable. Some of the aspects of the Chinese
system are not part of the Western rating systems; yet, they are not completely alien to
the West. For example, it was explained that, as part of the Social Credit System, China
uses blacklists of persons who have violated the law in order to exclude them with the
help of data sharing from many aspects of social life.163 Chorzempa et al relate this to
the use of background checks and ‘no-fly lists’ in the US;164 in Israel, codes (based on
various data) are assigned to passengers as part of a distinctive ‘risk-based’ security system.165 In many countries, criminal records and details of insolvent debtors are collected
and may be shared more or less widely in a number of European states.166 Other instances include the system of control of football spectators in the UK (‘football banning
orders’), which includes the temporary holding of passports during relevant periods (international fixtures) to prevent travel,167 and the growing use of ‘penalty points’ systems
in road traffic law,168 which can in turn be used as an indication of the ‘reputation’ of
the data subject,169 even by car hire companies when deciding whether to rent to a driver.170 Even in respect of private sector services (eg in the sharing economy), a poor reputation can exclude individuals from these emerging markets, with consequences for
their financial position and their participation in certain aspects of urban life.
It can also be shown that the design and regulation of today’s rating systems are already
clear examples of policy diffusion.171 The Chinese system partly derives from its Western counterparts: the financial credit scoring systems of Western countries have been an
explicit source of influence,172 and more recent tools such as the Sesame Credit scores
may be seen as an example of the ‘gamification’ of rating systems in recent times.173 As
161 Backer, n 128 above, 15.
162 Dai, n 94 above, 1.
163 See text to notes 98-109, above.
164 Chorzempa et al, n 99 above, 4 and 7.
165 S. Bennett, ‘Risk-based Aviation Security – Designing-out Terror’ in A. Masys (ed), Security by Design ; T. Jonathan-Zamir, B. Hasisi and Y. Margalioth, ‘Is It the What or the
How? The Roles of High-Policing Tactics and Procedural Justice in Predicting Perceptions of Hostile
Treatment: The Case of Security Checks at Ben-Gurion Airport, Israel’ 50 Law & Society Review
608, 616-617.
166 For criminal records see eg for the UK: Police Act 1997, Pt 5; for Germany: Bundeszentralregistergesetz 1971 (as amended). For debtors see eg for the UK: for Ireland: for Germany: Zivilprozessordnung, s 882b
(delegating this task to local courts).
167 Football Spectators Act 1989; see further 
168 See J.I. Castillo-Manzano and M. Castro-Nuño, ‘Driving Licenses Based on Points Systems: Efficient
Road Safety Strategy or Latest Fashion in Global Transport Policy? A Worldwide Meta-Analysis’ 
21 Transport Policy 191.
169 M. Dodge and R. Kitchin, ‘The Automatic Management of Drivers and Driving Spaces’ 38
Geoforum 264, 268; J. Rule, Private Lives and Public Surveillance .
170 See eg 
171 For the general literature on this topic see eg E.R. Graham, C.R. Shipan and C. Volden, ‘Review Article: The Diffusion of Policy Diffusion Research in Political Science’ 43 British Journal of Political Science 673.
172 See references to statements by Chinese scholars and policy makers in A. Knight, ‘Credit: The God of
China’s Big Data Era’, ECFR China Analysis October 2018, 7.
173 See text to note 133 as well as text to notes 56-58, above.
these systems develop, we see some attempts made to emphasise how users are granted
agency and can utilise the data in varying ways. In return, the growing global influence
of China174 can mean that the Social Credit System may well be a regulatory tool which
could inspire the West: the Social Credit System may show that China now ‘appears to
have ascended to the position of principal global driving force in political theory and
action’,175 with ‘the potential to change law and government as we know them in China
and beyond’.176 And while Pasquale highlights the shift towards a ‘scored society’ beyond the narrower functions of the 19th and 20th century, recent developments in China
suggest, as noted above, a shift from ‘reputation society’ to ‘reputation state’.177
Thus, the question arises how such a future development should be assessed: in other
words, if reputation and rating systems consolidate in Western markets in a similar fashion, what opportunities and controversies will arise – and how should law makers intervene? How is what Rule calls the ‘seductive appeal of mass surveillance’ which becomes feasible following technological advances to be addressed alongside a greater
understanding of dangers?178 Will rating systems have different impacts on different
groups of people, especially if there is a shift away from opt-in systems (where there
may be incentives for participation) to systems that are (perhaps de facto if not yet de
jure) universal?
A simplified normative framework
Evaluating rating systems is complex as much will depend on their precise substance
and context. Thus, it could be suggested that mutual learning between such systems is
likely to work best if they are based on a broadly similar design. It may also be helpful
to move away from generalised criticisms or concerns towards a more precise identification of shortcomings of particular implementations. In addition, it is worth considering how far the reasons for and against systems with very different designs may stimulate mutual learning. Here, at the level of some generality, it is possible to identify possible shortcomings of systems that are either based on a low or a high level of intervention (or to put it in another way, the advantages of either of those systems), following
the categories developed earlier in this article.179
174 See text to note 8, above.
175 Backer, n 128 above, 2.
176 Dai, n 94 above, 1.
177 See text to note 94, above.
178 Rule, n 169 above, 358.
179 See text to notes 91-94 and 127-138, above.
Table 4: Typical shortcomings of low and high interventionist rating systems
1) Drafter
Private drafters may disregard public interest, with
limited opportunities for
State’s monopoly may be
abused, with limited checks
and balances including through
competition
Giving users choice enables
them to enter and exit the
system in a strategic way
Mandatory system may disregard interests of users and become unresponsive
Specific systems may be
biased towards narrow interests
General systems may lead to
disproportionate control of behaviour, or violate data protection concepts such as purpose
limitation
4) Scoring
Multiple scores may lead to
conflicting incentives
Single score may disregard
complexities of social reality
5) Application
Flexible use may open door
to corruption and biases
Uniform application may neglect fairness of individual case
6) Algorithm
Transparency may harm operation through gameplaying
Protected algorithm may disregard need for accountability
7) Enforcement
Markets may lack effective
means of enforcement
State may respond with overly
harsh and rigid sanctions
8) Accountability
Constant interventions by
oversight body may harm
the operation of system
System which cannot be challenged may lead to the proliferation of biases
As the overview in Table 4 illustrates, a priori, it does not seem justified to regard either
a low or a high interventionist system as superior. Indeed, it can be seen that in many
circumstances the advantages of one of the systems are the disadvantages of the other
one, and vice versa. For example, when a high interventionist system is inflexible, it
may also be said that it is effective; and when a low interventionist system is biased towards narrow interests, a high interventionist system may be overly diffuse.
Thus, a possible response could be that a medium level of interventionism (as included
in Tables 1 to 3, above) may be a good compromise. Notably, it may follow that a ‘softening’ of the highly interventionist approach of the Chinese Social Credit System with
tools developed elsewhere may achieve the ‘best of both worlds’. It is therefore worth
examining how far legal and regulatory tools from the West (but possibly also elsewhere) can address some of the shortfalls of rating systems but also retain their benefits.
In the next sections, we therefore review some of the current debates regarding regulation, before returning to the Chinese system, now considered as a part of global trends.
The complexities of regulating ratings
The Chinese Social Credit System has been accompanied by a large volume of legislation and other policy documents: for example, a recent article lists 15 pages of documents produced by the central government and other public authorities,180 and there are
also many provincial and municipal pieces of legislation.181 The majority of those rules
are about the technical operation of the Social Credit System, which is not the main focus of this article. Thus, before returning to aspects of the current Chinese law at the end
of this section, we start with the way some of the more general policy considerations
have been addressed in Europe and elsewhere in the West. We identify here the benefits
of data (for consumer protection and law enforcement), and then outline certain concerns regarding the possibility of discrimination and the protection of privacy.
Law enforcement authorities have long recognised the valuable role played by records
gathered in the private sector: consumer credit agencies in the US often provided cooperation,182 and present day intelligence and policing functions make use of data collected for private sector Internet purposes (whether for an Internet connection or an
online service)183 or obtain it through interception,184 all of which typically goes beyond
what a state can gather through its own resources.185 Less controversially, rating and
review systems are pointed to (eg by the European Commission) as an important safeguard for sharing or collaborative economy platforms, especially in the absence of the
relevant information or, in some circumstances, the inapplicability of consumer protection rules.186
The extent to which the reliance upon rating and reputation may have a disparate impact
on some groups and constitute a form of (albeit possibly unintended) discrimination,187
and how ‘neutral’ systems, even where there is no evidence of consumer discrimination,
can still produce unequal outcomes on vectors such as gender pay,188 has been highlighted. Although the specific area of credit benefits from explicit prohibitions on the
use of certain data, even this area sees the use of alternative data sources that may aid in
discrimination in practice.189 Some argue, however, that reputation-led approaches
180 Liang et al, n 124 above, 25-39.
181 See text to notes 110-116, above.
182 Lauer, n 15 above, 179, 212-213, 220-221, 244.
183 For the former see eg Directive 2006/24/EC on the retention of data generated or processed in connection with the provision of publicly available electronic communications services or of public communications networks and amending Directive 2002/58/EC OJ L105/54. For the latter see eg Investigatory Powers Act 2016, Pt 7 (‘bulk personal dataset’ warrants); see also, regarding China, M. LaForgia and
G.J.X. Dance, ‘Facebook Gave Chinese Giants Access to Data’ New York Times 
 
184 P. Bernal, Internet Privacy Rights: Rights to Protect Autonomy 108.
185 L. Austin, ‘Technological Tattletales and Constitutional Black Holes: Communications Intermediaries
and Constitutional Constraints’ 17 Theoretical Inquiries in Law 451. See further Dai’s argument
that various approaches, ‘conceptually quite interventionist as they may appear’, have already been used
by public authorities in the US: Dai, n 94 above, 10-12.
186 European Commission, ‘A European agenda for the collaborative economy’, COM 356, p 10.
187 B. Edelman and M. Luca, ‘Digital Discrimination: The Case of Airbnb.com’, Harvard Business School
Working Paper 14-054, 2014.
188 C. Cook, R. Diamond, J. Hall, J.A. List and P. Oyer, ‘The Gender Earnings Gap in the Gig Economy:
Evidence from over a Million Rideshare Drivers’, NBER Working Papers 24732, June 2018.
189 Marron, n 13 above, 157.
could still displace existing discrimination,190 or flag an open question as to whether
algorithmic approaches could make hidden discrimination visible and create further
problems of discrimination anew.191 A recent decision of an equality tribunal in Finland
highlighted how automated decisions made by credit entities through statistical profiling
can violate anti-discrimination provisions of national law.192 Both data collected from
users (possibly including browsing history)193 and credit records194 can be used as an aid
to price differentiation, which is also controversial ,196 building upon what was first
promulgated in individual states and then through a Council of Europe Convention197
and EU Directive,198 provides a partial framework for the regulation of rating and reputational data.
Data protection laws provide further detail on the conditions under which the processing
of personal data is lawful. Such rules may begin to provide a framework where problems of validity and reliability, which have been the subject of warnings both in the
West and in China,199 can be addressed. Data protection concerns were also at the core
of the criticism of services like Peeple, a proposed service that would have allowed individuals to ‘rate’ others whether they used the service or not. Thus, it was subsequently
190 See eg L.J. Strahilevitz, ‘Less Regulations, More Reputation’ in H. Masum and M. Tovey (eds), The
Reputation Society: How Online Opinions Are Shaping The Offline World 68 University of Toronto Law Journal (supp 1) 12, 30.
192 Svea Ekonomi AB 
 (translation). See also J. Cobbe, ‘Administrative Law and the
Machines of Government: Judicial Review of Automated Public-Sector Decision-Making’ Working Paper , 37-39, available at 
193 Office of Fair Trading, Personalised Pricing: Increasing Transparency To Improve Trust ; Neil Howe, ‘A Special Price Just for You’ Forbes 
 
194 Marron, n 13 above, 133-134.
195 Smith v United Kingdom App no 54357/15 .
196 Regulation 2016/679/EU on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal
data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC, OJ L119/1 (‘General Data Protection Regulation’).
197 Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data
(CETS 108).
198 Directive 95/46/EC on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and
on the free movement of such data, OJ L281/31.
199 Criticisms ranging from fake reviews 
 to a skewing upwards of scores where there is a personal context or reciprocity (Slee, n 51
above, loc 1751ff); for China, see text to notes 139-155, above.
launched as a more limited service in light of such concerns,200 though somewhat similar projects are also being developed by others, especially regarding online dating.201
One constraint upon rating systems is the need to ensure that data can be updated and
challenged in light of its accuracy (article 5(1)(d) GDPR). Automatic deletion of negative information after a set period has been a feature of some credit recording systems,202 and the famed challenge to Google’s indexing of an old news report on the
forced sale of property on foot of an unpaid debt succeeded on the basis of data protection law203 even before it was strengthened in the GDPR in the more explicit right to
erasure (article 17 GDPR).
Further attention is also likely to be paid to the rights set out in article 22 GDPR – not
(in some circumstances) to be subject to a decision with legal or similar effects based
solely on automated processing,204 and the possibility, in other circumstances where automated decision-making is lawful, to receive an explanation and an opportunity to
challenge.205 Nonetheless, there will continue to be situations (expressly provided for in
GDPR) where consent is not required (as other legal bases are available), which supports the development of powerful, potentially universal systems – although the right to
object to processing carried out under certain (non-consent) legal bases, under article 21
GDPR, could constrain the development of such systems.
Although influenced by earlier Western laws,206 Chinese law on privacy and data protection remains fragmented and drafted in reaction to specific problems rather than as an
overarching framework;207 this ‘sectoral’ approach is also a feature of US law, as compared with the general approach in the EU. In China, the relevance of access and correction rights under privacy and data protection law is said to be affected by the limitations
on actions against public authorities in Chinese law.208 Even as far as judicial review of
public authorities is feasible, the issue remains how far Chinese courts can be said to be
independent enough in deciding cases that involve the state on the one side and private
parties on the other.209 It is beyond the scope of this article to discuss this general issue
about courts in China in detail – and, to the best of our knowledge, there have not yet
been any judicial challenges in matters concerning the Social Credit System in China.
200 Botsman, n 119 above 
2015/10/06/technology/yelp-for-people-app-founder-says-it-wont-be-shamed-into-submission.html.
201 and see S. Fishwick, ‘The new dating app that’s like a “TripAdvisor for people”’ Evening Standard 
202 Lauer, n 15 above, 225.
203 Case C-131/12 Google Spain v AEPD.
204 General Data Protection Regulation, n 196 above, art 22(1).
205 ibid, recital 71 and art 22(3). See further S. Wachter, B. Mittelstadt and L. Floridi, ‘Why a Right to
Explanation of Automated Decision-Making Does Not Exist in the General Data Protection Regulation’
 7 International Data Privacy Law 76.
206 C. Jingchun, ‘Protecting the Right to Privacy in China’ 36 Victoria University of Wellington
Law Review 645, 660-664.
207 Y. Chen and A.S.Y. Cheung, ‘The Transparent Self under Big Data Profiling: Privacy and Chinese
Legislation on the Social Credit System’ 12 Journal of Comparative Law 356, 357; see also Dai, n
94 above, 23.
208 Chen and Cheung, n 207 above, 373.
209 W. Cui, J. Cheng and D. Wiesner, ‘Judicial Review of Government Actions in China’ , available at See also text to notes 139-155, above,
for references to the discussion about the rule of law in China.
From a policy perspective, however, we suggest that judicial review should be provided
as a way of protecting individual rights but also as a means of ensuring checks and balances in the design and operation of the Social Credit System.
The Social Credit System in a global context
Key to understanding the history of rating in the West and the controversy over the Social Credit System in China is the recognition that all systems are based on a certain
combination of inputs and outputs, which may have strong normative or behavioural
dimensions. As argued in an early account of the developing Social Credit System,
drawing explicit links between developments in the West and in China, ‘in both Silicon
Valley and in Beijing, there is this notion that we can use technology to shape and reshape incentives in such a way that people will behave better’.210 In this section, therefore, we situate the Social Credit System in a broader context, first identifying character,
information systems, and participation as core concerns, before turning to explore the
degree to which reputation-based systems can be regulated. In so exploring the prospects for regulation, we draw again upon historical antecedents and developments in
cognate areas (eg the power of online ‘platforms’ more generally), highlighting the implications of the complexity discussed in the previous section.
The history of credit registries and scores identifies a long-running ‘character’ dimension, including the desired impact upon consumer behaviour, the framing of a good
credit score as a moral virtue, the use of data (via informants or otherwise) on personal
character, and attempts to incorporate factors such as ‘honesty’ and ‘clean living’ into
scoring.211 Sesame Credit may be novel if it makes use of video game playing as a signal,212 though American credit rating pioneers were well ahead of Alibaba in making
careful note of alcohol consumption and gambling habits.213 The ways in which systems
in China – or indeed experiments like Lenddo, using carefully chosen proxies214 – address these issues is therefore not a difficult leap from this American history of scoring.
Moreover, the linguistic similarities of the Mandarin terms discussed above (eg sincerity, honesty)215 emphasise a point also understood in the West (where credit – and indeed
credibility – derive from the Latin ‘credere’, for trust or belief, with the Christian
‘Creed’ taking its English name from its Latin opening words, ‘credo in unum Deum’
(I believe in one God).
Furthermore, both the relatively uniform approach being worked up in China and the
less obviously interconnected developments in the West can be understood as part of the
continuing reverberations of how information systems now operate – that is, the mainstreaming of digital technologies and the vast amounts of data that are created (not just
by institutions but by individuals). Such data can come through deliberate disclosure (eg
on social media or by agreeing to take part in a loyalty scheme), but also through their
data trails (eg browsing history, location data collected by an app) and through the actions of other individuals, and may be governed by data protection laws where in force.
210 R. Creemers, quoted in C. Clover, ‘When big data meets big brother’ Financial Times 
211 Rona-Tas and Guseva, n 22 above, 61-62; see also Lauer, n 15 above, 4 (behaviour), 127 (virtue), 163
(informants), 172 (honesty etc).
212 See text to notes 117-119, above.
213 Lauer, n 15 above, 106, 161.
214 Hynes, n 70 above.
215 See text to note 98, above.
The initiatives in China are influenced by a systems theory approach to information,
paying special attention to flows and loops as an emerging modality of governance.216
Unsurprisingly, some analysts of the Social Credit System ask questions about how the
availability and reuse of reputational data, especially at the level of big data, affects the
regulatory state itself217 – just as developments in information processing and management, and theoretical consideration of systems theory approaches, informed Western
approaches to governance during the post-1945 period218 and are at the heart of debate
on the degree to which the Internet itself can be governed.219 The arguments that performance management schemes have become normalised and so now require the analysis of mission, commensuration, and vision,220 and that classifications embedded in information infrastructures require political and ethical study,221 are surely capable of application to the various systems we discuss here, including those still in development.
Finally, it can be noted that the centrality of ratings and reputation poses questions
about the relationship between technology and representative democracy. In Europe and
North America, one such iteration is speculation regarding whether new deployments of
information technologies could support new or revitalised forms of public participation.222 As explained in the discussion of novel forms of credit scoring,223 the hypothesis
that better use of a broader range of data democratises access to resources and markets
is clearly present in the arguments of developers. In the case of China, although there is
speculation whether China will democratise,224 this seems rather unlikely in the near
future. So, while the Social Credit System may give Chinese citizens more control over
the impact of their actions than previously,225 in China technology may rather be seen as
an alternative to representative democracy. In other words, it is suggested that the Social
Credit System can be one of the means used by ‘the center of figuring out what’s going
on at lower levels and across society’ instead of relying on electoral feedback and related forms of civil activism.226
With these points in mind, we now turn to broader questions of how the technologies in
use might be the subject of regulation. The innovation associated with recent developments in China provides a useful set of sub-questions that will inform the debate on how
reputation-based systems ought to be regulated in the West. With key differences between conventional Western credit scoring and the Social Credit System including the
use of a broader set of data, the enforcement of outcomes, and the use of devices and
sensors to add real-time data,227 and the clear echoes of each of these points in the historical evolution of credit and reputation schemes in the West 96.
220 Mehrpouya and Samiola, n 27 above, 28.
221 Bowker and Star, n 25 above, 321.
222 See eg J. Morison, ‘Gov 2.0: Towards a User Generated State?’ 73 Modern Law Review 551;
M. Hindman, The Myth of Digital Democracy .
223 See text to notes 69-90, above.
224 See eg A.J. Nathan, L. Diamond and M.F. Plattner (eds), Will China Democratize? .
225 See the discussion in text to 129-134, above.
226 C. Larson, ‘Who needs democracy when you have data?’ MIT Technology Review 
 
227 Ohlberg et al, n 116 above, 4.
erisation, or the link between reputation and continued use of a platform), these go beyond theoretical questions. Indeed, critiques of innovation both in the established credit
sector and in social media228 demonstrate the types of concerns that will inform debate
on the regulatory approach to reputation in the very near future. If these systems
‘spread’ to other spheres of interaction and governance, lessons learned from earlier implementations of reputation-led approaches will form an important part of the design
A tension between centralised and distributed or fragmented reputation and rating systems is evident both in China and in the West. An overt form of centralisation appears
more likely in the former (where private systems may be permitted limited autonomy
within the context of an overarching system) than in the latter (where single systems of
data are the subject of particular criticism, even where the same effect is achieved by
less direct means).229 On the other hand, both the approach to development in China
(which allows for regional and municipal variation)230 and the fashion for city- or subcity based experimentation with data collection and analysis in Western ‘smart city’ initiatives231 pose more difficult questions. Should the spread of reputation-based systems
be seen as a type of policy diffusion?232 If so, could spatially limited initiatives avoid
the worst effects of mass surveillance and allow for the impact of variations in design
and implementation to be tested? Or are Western cities, as Greenfield argues, setting out
the ‘material conditions … for Chinese-style social credit to spread’?233 To what extent
does data protection law, even as updated, constrain such spreading?
Although we have sought to explain the impact of intervention across a number of subcategories, it may be the case that a recommendation independent of context is not possible. Instead, the degree of intervention may be determined in light of overriding questions. What are the means by which accountability can be best secured? Is competition
(and the pressure that it might create towards accuracy and relevance) appropriate? How
can a system remain responsive (for instance, adaptable and flexible in light of technological developments or attempts to exploit a system inappropriately)?
The primary locus of intervention is likely to be the provider of the rating system. In
some cases, this will be a service provider or the administrator of a platform through
which others provide services; in other cases, the platform may manage a rating system
but not be involved in the delivery of a specific service. In both situations, the provider
is likely to be a ‘data controller’ for the purposes of data protection law.
228 Most famously disclosed by the controversy regarding political microtargeting, see eg J. Cobbe, ‘Reining in Big Data’s Robber Barons’ New York Review of Books 
 and by developments in
advertising, see eg J. Ryan, ‘Risks in IAB Europe’s proposed consent mechanism’ PageFair 
229 Backer, n 128 above, 8.
230 See generally L. Liu and B.R. Weingast, ‘Taobao, Federalism, and the Emergence of Law, Chinese
Style’ 102 Minnesota Law Review 1563; Y. Li and F. Wu, ‘The Transformation of Regional Governance in China: The Rescaling of Statehood’ 78 Progress in Planning 55. For the pilot cities of
the Social Credit System see text to notes 110-116, above.
231 R. Kitchin, ‘The Promise and Perils of Smart Cities’ 26(2) Computers and Law; S. Latre et al,
‘City of Things: An Integrated and Multi-Technology Testbed for IoT Smart City Experiments’ 
IEEE International Smart Cities Conference DOI: 10.1109/ISC2.2016.7580875; L. Bliss, ‘How Smart
Should a City Be? Toronto Is Finding Out’ CityLab 
 
232 See text to note 171, above.
233 Greenfield, n 2 above.
In the specific area of reputation systems, it has been recognised that the initial position
that the ‘abundant information’ available makes intervention unnecessary has come under challenge, especially on the grounds of transparency and accountability.234 The continuing evolution of data-driven approaches to reputation also requires further study of
the impact of measurement upon behaviour, including the creation of perverse incentives and non-productive attempts to ‘game’ systems.235
We have already seen a refocusing of regulatory efforts in the European Union towards
platforms of various sorts, which provides some guidance on possible approaches for
rating systems. A good example is online dispute resolution, where a Regulation and
Directive of 2013 sets standards for approved dispute resolution providers (ie expertise,
independence and impartiality; transparency; effectiveness; fairness; legality; liberty)
and requires others to link to or cooperate with approved providers.236 More recent
scoping work by the European Commission identifies a broad category of ‘platforms’
which have increasing significance and influence, for which existing legal tools in fields
such as competition and liability may alone be suboptimal.237 Similarly, there is a lively
debate on the regulation of emerging applications of artificial intelligence,238 going beyond the specific issues of automation dealt with (to some extent) by existing law and
overlapping with calls for accountability and transparency regarding the use of algorithms,239 which without attention may make ‘decisions … inscrutable and thereby incontestable’.240 These developments recognise a preference for co-regulatory models,
relying upon the setting of standards, the involvement of industry but also public authorities, and the pursuit of broad objectives rather than a prescriptive approach. Note
too that much of the legal complexity of the developing system in China is found in the
interaction between different emanations of the state and between state and non-state
entities.241
In concluding this contextual analysis of reputation systems, it is helpful to recall a recent debate in the field of law and development − the rapid economic development of
China and the possible role of Western-style law in promoting it.242 Here then the Social
234 Ranchordás, n 64 above, 129; Dai, n 94 above, 7-8.
235 Exploring this point in the context of institutional rankings: Espeland and Sauder, n 26 above, 29-31;
updated in W.N. Espeland and M. Sauder, Engines of Anxiety: Academic Rankings, Reputation, and Accountability .
236 P. Cortes, ‘A New Regulatory Framework for Extra-Judicial Consumer Redress: Where We Are and
How to Move Forward’ 35 Legal Studies 114, 119-120; Regulation 524/2013/EU of 21 May 2013
on online dispute resolution for consumer disputes, OJ L165/1, art 14; Directive 2013/11/EU of 21
May 2013 on alternative dispute resolution for consumer disputes, OJ L165/63, arts 5-11.
237 European Commission, ‘Online Platforms and the Digital Single Market: Opportunities and Challenges for Europe’, COM 288; see also COM 356, n 186 above. For an alternative approach,
favouring a public utilities model instead of regulation, yet beyond the surveillance state, see Srnicek, n
88 above, 128.
238 See eg House of Lords Select Committee on Artificial Intelligence, AI in the UK: ready, willing and
able? .
239 House of Commons Science and Technology Committee, Algorithms in decision-making (HC 351,
240 Hildebrandt, n 191 above, 28.
241 Chen and Cheung, n 207 above, 367-369.
242 See eg D. Kennedy and J. Stiglitz (eds), Law and Economics with Chinese Characteristics: Institutions
for Promoting Development in the Twenty-First Century ; G. Xu,
Does Law Matter for Economic Growth? A Re-examination of the ‘Legal Origin’ Hypothesis ; G. Yu, The Roles of Law and Politics in China’s Development ; G. Yu (ed), Rethinking Law and Development: The Chinese Experience (London: Routledge,
Credit System may indicate a paradigm shift in both aspects of this causal relationship:
it challenges us to move beyond Western-style law and it poses the question how a system that also promotes social development can be designed. Shaming, to give one example, is a powerful feature of Internet communications, whether in a formal sense as
under development in China243 or for all users, especially of social media.244 The
presentation of the Social Credit System as farfetched or as an exemplar of State control
of information is not just complacent; it ignores the longer history of reputational information in various Western contexts, and the degree to which similar phenomena have
taken on significance, albeit with different levels of intervention, in transnational ecommerce and sharing platforms (and in the most recent attempts to reuse or merge data). For example, the unfinished business of whether new approaches to reputation promote access to finance for the 21st century ‘honest but poor’ of China or the 19th century
hardworking immigrant to the United States, or constitute a new threat of further discrimination – or both – requires a less complacent approach. Consideration of what is
underway in China can therefore, for instance, prompt productive discussion of the adequacy and focus of existing regulatory mechanisms in the West – especially at a time of
unprecedented scrutiny of the ethics of Silicon Valley and the implications of the digital
revolution.
CONCLUSION
In English-language newspapers a common frame of discussing the Chinese Social
Credit System is an episode of the science fiction series ‘Black Mirror’.245 This episode,
Nosedive, imagines a future society in which every citizen has a rating from ‘0’ to ‘5’
which derives from the subjective assessments made by everyone else using a mobile
phone app. This rating then has a social function (in the episode: who gets invited to a
wedding party), but it also determines commercial decisions (in the episode, for example, the type of car you can hire or neighbourhood in which you can live) and access to
public services (in the episode: in prioritising medical treatment). At its extreme, the
rights of the individual are at stake; the episode closes with the main character’s score
dropping to zero, and so removed from the ‘platform’ – through the removal of the
lenses that provide, in the style of augmented reality, real-time access to data – and, apparently, imprisoned.
The intuitive parallel to the Chinese system is that, here too, individuals are rated with a
single score and that this score can have a variety of consequences. However, there are
some profound differences. The most obvious one is that the Social Credit System is not
based on the subjective ratings of other citizens. Indeed, it may be said that this subjectivity is closer to the contemporary Western ratings such as Uber and Airbnb than the
more objective (and more algorithmic) emerging Chinese one. Moreover, from a normative perspective, a recent newspaper article notes: ‘No, China isn’t Black Mirror – social
credit scores are more complex and sinister than that’ given that in ‘China and elsewhere, the implied threat isn’t the tyranny of the crowd, but state and corporate power’.246 In support of this mere acceptance of contemporary Western ratings, it could also
243 See text to notes 98-116, above, as well as text to note 151 (for cross-cultural differences in shame
response).
244 eg J. Ronson, So You’ve Been Publicly Shamed .
245 A combined Google News search for ‘social credit system’ and ‘black mirror’ leads to 872 hits as of
16 March 2019.
246 ‘No, China isn’t Black Mirror – social credit scores are more complex and sinister than that’ New
Statesman 
be said that it is just a normal feature of human societies that we depend on the subjective judgments of others, regardless whether this is quantified or not.
Yet, this negative comparative assessment of the Social Credit System may not be a
matter of course. Ratings initiated by the state or companies may be designed in such a
way that they provide targeted incentives (not simply ‘being nice’ as in the Black Mirror episode – which is silent on how the system came about or who controls it). It may
also be an advantage that ‘interventionist’ or centrally planned rating systems can more
easily be shaped and controlled by law and regulation. This is relevant for the Chinese
context as the Social Credit System is in a transitional stage with its current mix of China-wide blacklists and ratings by pilot cities and financial institutions. It is also relevant
for Western countries where, at present, public authorities are more likely to engage
with rating and reputation systems through acquiescence or encouragement, and only
sometimes through regulation, which may be indirect.
Thus, in this article, we argue that the Chinese models (not model) of new approaches to
credit should be studied in the West, not as a template or even a counter-model, but as
illustrations of the implications of today’s emphasis upon quantification and reputation
across a range of domains, personal and official. Such illustrations can also inform lawmaking efforts in the West. Specifically, this article addressed some of the core general
issues that law makers should consider. We discussed eight aspects where regulatory
differences can be observed: drafters, users, aims, scoring systems, application, use of
algorithms, enforcement and accountability. We also indicated that law making in this
field can be either through the introduction of a new regulatory regime or the application of general requirements to a particular context. It may also be unlikely that there
will be a single ‘law on ratings’ given the relevance of many overlapping policy considerations and corresponding fields of law, such as e-commerce law, privacy and data protection law, anti-discrimination law, tort law, competition law, sector specific regulations on financial services, and so forth.
Finally, we suggest that where there is a need for regulation, the first focus should be on
the provider of the rating system. This should also incorporate means by which accountability can be best secured, such as forms of online dispute resolution but also the
availability of conventional judicial scrutiny. Importantly, any law making in this field
also needs to be done with full understanding of the technological and behavioural aspects of the rating systems under consideration: for example, we have noted problems
of validity, reliability and responsiveness, including attempts to ‘game’ systems. Thus,
this calls for not only a comparative but also an interdisciplinary perspective, as we also
aspired to in this article. Rating systems have been commercially and socially important
in different ways in China and elsewhere, and so questions of regulation require not just
attention to the systems currently used in one context (or on an apparently voluntary
basis), but to the ways in which they are likely to develop, through taking on additional
functions or more ambitious types of aggregation.
mirror-social-credit-scores-are-more-complex-and-sinister. On how the Social Credit System ought to
prompt a wider reassessment of surveillance and power, see eg K. Kühnreich, ‘Soziale Kontrolle 4.0?
China’s Social Credit Systems’ 7 Blätter für deutsche und internationale Politik 63.