MITSUBISHI ELECTRIC RESEARCH LABORATORIES
 
Audio Analysis for Surveillance Applications
Regunathan Radhakrishnan, Ajay Divakaran, Paris Smaragdis
TR2005-139
October 2005
We propose a time series analysis based approach for systematic choice of audio classes for detection of crimes in elevators in 1. Since all the different sounds in a surveillance environment
cannot be anticipated, a surveillance system for event detection cannot complete rely on a supervised audio classiﬁcation framework. In this paper, we propose a hybrid solution that consists
two parts; one that performs unsupervised audio analysis and another that performs analysis using an audio classiﬁcation framework obtained from off-line analysis and training. The proposed
system is capable of detecting new kinds of suspicious audio events that occur as outliers agains
a background of usual activity. It adaptively learns a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) to model
the background sounds and updates the model incrementally as new audio data arrives. New
types of suspicious events can be detected as deviants from this usual background model. The
results on elevator audio data are promising.
WASPAA 2005
This work may not be copied or reproduced in whole or in part for any commercial purpose. Permission to copy in whole or in part
without payment of fee is granted for nonproﬁt educational and research purposes provided that all such whole or partial copies include
the following: a notice that such copying is by permission of Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories, Inc.; an acknowledgment of
the authors and individual contributions to the work; and all applicable portions of the copyright notice. Copying, reproduction, or
republishing for any other purpose shall require a license with payment of fee to Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories, Inc. All
rights reserved.
Copyright c⃝Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories, Inc., 2005
201 Broadway, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
MERLCoverPageSide2
2005 IEEE Workshop on Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics
October 16-19, 2005, New Paltz, NY
AUDIO ANALYSIS FOR SURVEILLANCE APPLICATIONS
Regunathan Radhakrishnan, Ajay Divakaran and Paris Smaragdis
Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs
201 Broadway
Cambridge, MA, USA
 , , 
We proposed a time series analysis based approach for systematic choice of audio classes for detection of crimes in elevators in
 . Since all the different sounds in a surveillance environment
cannot be anticipated, a surveillance system for event detection
cannot completely rely on a supervised audio classiﬁcation framework. In this paper, we propose a hybrid solution that consists two
parts; one that performs unsupervised audio analysis and another
that performs analysis using an audio classiﬁcation framework obtained from off-line analysis and training. The proposed system is
capable of detecting new kinds of suspicious audio events that occur as outliers against a background of usual activity. It adaptively
learns a Gaussian Mixture Model(GMM) to model the background
sounds and updates the model incrementally as new audio data arrives. New types of suspicious events can be detected as deviants
from this usual background model. The results on elevator audio
data are promising.
1. INTRODUCTION
Past work on event detection from surveillance data has mostly
concentrated on video analysis. In this paper, we focus on audio
analysis for the same. Audio analysis can take us closer to semantics than video analysis could and also is computationally more
efﬁcient. This motivates us to detect events in surveillance based
on an audio classiﬁcation framework that classiﬁes every time segment of audio into one of a set of trained audio classes. Since certain sound classes (e.g banging and screaming sounds) are indicative of suspicious events, such an audio classiﬁcation framework
can be used to detect suspicious events. In , we proposed a time
series analysis framework for the systematic choice of these audio
classes for the framework.
A surveillance system based on an audio classiﬁcation framework (with supervised models learned for sound classes obtained
off-line), would only be able to detect known kinds of suspicious
activity (e.g the ones that are accompanied by banging sounds and
screaming).
However, it is also important to detect suspicious
events that the system has not seen before. Towards that end, we
propose a hybrid solution that consists two parts; one that performs
unsupervised audio analysis and another that performs analysis using an audio classiﬁcation framework obtained from off-line analysis and training. The unsupervised audio analysis is motivated by
the observation that suspicious events happen as outliers against
a background of usual sounds. A GMM is used to parameterize
the distribution of sound features that characterize the usual background sounds. As new audio data arrives, its likelihood under the
current model of the background is used to ﬂag a suspicious event.
In the absence of a suspicious event, the current GMM is updated
incrementally. The audio classiﬁcation framework that is obtained
from off-line analysis and training, is used to ﬂag known suspicious activity and to suppress known false alarms (e.g. outliers
that are not interesting from the standpoint of the application).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we describe the proposed hybrid solution for surveillance
based on audio analysis. In section 3, we describe the time series
analysis and training procedure for the audio classiﬁcation framework. In section 4, we describe the adaptive background modelling
procedure that uses newly arrived audio data to incrementally update the current GMM. In section 5, we present the experimental
results with elevator surveillance data before we conclude in section 6.
2. PROPOSED FRAMEWORK
The proposed framework for suspicious event detection is shown
in Fig. 1. The framework has two parts: one that analyzes the
training audio data off-line and another that analyzes the real time
audio data. Let us ﬁrst describe the role of each of the off-line
analysis blocks.
• Feature extraction: In this step, low-level features are extracted from the input content in order to generate a time
series from which events are to be discovered. For example, the extracted features from the audio stream, could be
Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefﬁcients (MFCC) or any other
spectral/cepstral representation of the input audio.
• Detection of subsequences that are outliers in time series: In this step, we detect outlier subsequences from the
time series of low-level features. It is motivated by the observation that “suspicious” events are unusual events in a
background of “usual” events. For instance, there is a burst
of screaming sounds in the vicinity of a suspicious event in
an otherwise relatively silent background.
• Clustering of detected outliers The output of the previous
analysis block not only gives an inlier/outlier based temporal segmentation of the content but also distinguishable
sound classes for the chosen low-level features in terms
of distinct backgrounds and outlier sound classes. Then,
by examining individual clusters from the detected outliers
one can identify consistent patterns in the data that correspond to the events of interest and build supervised statistical learning models.
The aforementioned off-line analysis of the training data for surveillance helps in the systematic choice of audio classes. The chosen audio classes can be further grouped into one of the follow-
2005 IEEE Workshop on Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics
October 16-19, 2005, New Paltz, NY
Figure 1: Proposed Framework for suspicious event detection using audio analysis
ing two types: Type 1:“classes that are NOT indicative of suspicious events” and Type 2:“classes that are indicative of suspicious
Now, let us look at the analysis blocks that work with real-time
audio data.
• Feature extraction: The features extracted for online analysis are same as those extracted for off-line analysis.
• Buffer: This is the buffer from which a background model
is estimated initially and determines the reliability of the
estimated background model.
• Adaptive background model estimation: As in the case
of time series outlier detection block in off-line analysis,
the goal of this analysis block also is to detect a burst of
time series observations that are not from the usual process. However, now the outlier subsequence detection has
to work with only causal data. Towards that end, a model of
background sounds is adaptively learned from a window of
data stored in the buffer. The likelihood of new audio data
under the current background model is compared against
a threshold to ﬂag an outlier. In the case of an inlier, the
background model is updated. In the case of an outlier, it
is checked to see if it belongs to Type 1: or Type 2:. Type
1: implies it is a known false alarm to be suppressed and
Type 2: implies it is a known suspicious event. When encountered with a new type of outlier that has a small likelihood under the models for Type 1: and Type 2: classes,
end user’s feedback is sought to create a model for the new
type of outlier.
• Domain knowledge: This analysis refers to the audio classiﬁcation framework which tries to determine whether a detected outlier belongs to Type 1: or Type 2:.
In the following section, we describe the off-line analysis and training procedure for the audio classiﬁcation framework.
3. OFF-LINE ANALYSIS FOR THE CHOICE OF AUDIO
Given a large collection of surveillance audio data for training,
the volume of data and lack of domain knowledge rule out the
option of selecting these audio classes based on intuition. There
is a deﬁnite need for a framework to systematically select these
audio classes to characterize the domain to be able to detect events
successfully.
We proposed one such framework to systematically acquire
domain knowledge to arrive at the audio classes that would characterize the different sounds in a given domain. We treat the lowlevel audio features as a multivariate time series and use the time
series analysis framework proposed in to perform an inlier/outlier
based temporal segmentation of the audio content. The analysis
framework in models suspicious events as “unusual” events in
a background of “usual” events. Then, by performing an automatic
clustering on the detected outliers, we identify consistent patterns
for which we can train supervised detectors.
Since these sound classes were obtained as distinguishable
sounds from the data, we already know what features and supervised learning method are to be used for modelling them. Hence,
we use a GMM to model the distribution of low-level features for
2005 IEEE Workshop on Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics
October 16-19, 2005, New Paltz, NY
each of the chosen sound class. The low-level features that we extracted were 12 MFCC coefﬁcients for every 8ms frame of audio.
Let us represent this vector of 12 dimensions by a random vector
Y whose distribution is to be modelled by a GMM. Let M denote
the dimensionality of Y and let K denote the number of Gaussian
mixtures, and we use the notation π, µ, and R to denote the parameter sets {πk}K
k=1, {µk}K
k=1, and {Rk}K
k=1, respectively, for
mixture coefﬁcients, means, and variances. The complete set of
parameters are then given by K and θ = (π, µ, R). The log of the
probability of the entire sequence Y = {Yn}N
n=1 is then given by
log py(y|K, θ) =
pyn|xn(yn|k, θ)πk
The objective is then to estimate the parameters K and θ ∈Ω(K).
The maximum likelihood (ML) estimate is given by
ˆθML = arg max
θ∈Ω(K) log py(y|K, θ)
the estimate of K is based on the minimization of the expression
MDL(K, θ) = −log py(y|K, θ) + 1
2L log(NM) ,
where L is the number of continuously valued real numbers required to specify the parameter θ. In this application,
1 + M + (M + 1)M
Notice that this criterion has a penalty term on the total number
of data values NM, suggested by Rissanen called the MDL estimator. Let us denote the parameter learning of GMMs using the
MDL criterion MDL-GMM.
While the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm can be
used to update the parameter θ, it does not provide a solution to the
problem of how to change the model order K. Our approach will
be to start with a large number of clusters, and then sequentially
decrement the value of K. For each value of K, we will apply
the EM update until we converge to a local minimum of the MDL
functional. After we have done this for each value of K, we may
simply select the value of K and corresponding parameters that
resulted in the smallest value of the MDL criterion.
The question remains of how to decrement the number of clusters from K to K −1. We will do this by merging two closest clusters to form a single cluster. More speciﬁcally, the two clusters l
and m are speciﬁed as a single cluster (l, m) with prior probability,
mean and covariance given by
(l,m) = ¯πl + ¯πm
(l,m) = ¯πl¯µl + ¯πm¯µm
(l,m) = ¯πl
¡ ¯Rl + ( ¯µl −µ(l,m))( ¯µl −µ(l,m))t¢
¡ ¯Rm + (¯µm −µ(l,m))(¯µm −µ(l,m))t¢
Here the ¯π, ¯µ, and ¯R are given by the EM update of the two
individual mixtures before they are merged. Finally, once we have
trained MDL-GMMs for each sound class, to classify a given a
test clip we use maximum likelihood criterion using the learned
models. For more details on the audio classiﬁcation framework,
please see .
4. ADAPTIVE BACKGROUND MODELLING USING
INCREMENTAL LEARNING OF GMMS
In this section, we present a brief description of the online background modelling for event detection. The proposed framework is
motivated by the observation that “suspicious” events in surveillance audio happen sparsely in a background of usual or “uninteresting” events. For instance, there is a burst of screaming noise
following a suspicious event in a relatively silent background. This
motivates us to formulate the problem of detecting “suspicious”
events online as that of detecting the onset outlier subsequences
that are not from the usual background process.
Let p1 represent a realization of the “usual” process (P1) which
can be thought of as the background process. Let p2 represent a
realization of the “unusual” process P2 which can be thought of
as the foreground process. Given any causal time sequence of observations or low-level audio features from the two the classes of
events (P1 and P2), such as
...p1p1p1p1p1p1p1p2p2p2p2...
then the problem is to ﬁnd the onset and times of occurrences
of realizations of P2 without any a priori knowledge about P1 or
Given a causal time series of audio features, we estimate the
background process P1 by training a GMM from a window of WL
observations,{O1, O2, ...OWL}. The number of mixtures for this
model is obtained by using minimum description length principle.
Let us represent this GMM as Gb. Then, for every subsequent WS
observations, {O1, O2, ...OWS}, we compute its deviation from
the background process as:
d = log(P({O1, O2, ...OWL}/Gb))−
log(P({O1, O2, ...OWS}/Gb))
When there is a burst of observations of from P2, the value of d
would be large indicating the onset of the burst or the “foreground”
event. On the other hand, when the burst of observations is from
the same background process, P1, one would like to update the
current background model (Gb) with the new information. In order
to perform this incremental update we perform the following steps:
• Step 1:Estimate a Minimum Description Length GMM from
observations ({O1, O2, ...OWS}). Let us represent this as
• Step 2:Assign each Oi from ({O1, O2, ...OWS}) to a mixture component in Gf by ﬁnding the component that has
maximum posterior probability.
• Step 3:For each component k in Gf, search for a matching
mixture component in Gb by ﬁnding the most likely component in Gb that could have generated the observations
assigned to component k in the previous step. If a match is
found (say component j in Gb) merge component k from
Gf and j from Gb as given below:
µ = WLπjµj + WSµk
Σ = WLπjΣj + WSΣk
+ WLπjµjµT
j + WSµkµT
2005 IEEE Workshop on Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics
October 16-19, 2005, New Paltz, NY
Table 1: Recognition Matrix (Confusion Matrix) on a 90% training/10% testing split of a data set composed of 6 audio classes :
Banging; : Footsteps; : non-neutral; : normal speech;
π = WLπj + WS
where µ, Σ and π are updated parameters of the background model; µj, Σj and πj are parameters of component
j in Gb; µk, Σk and πk are parameters of component k in
For each component k in Gf that doesn’t have a match in
Gb, create a new component with mean equal to µk and
covariance equal to Σk with component weight
Similarly, for each component j in Gb that does not have
a match in Gf, create a new component with mean equal
to µj and covariance equal to Σj with component weight
These update rules follow those derived in . For details,
please see .
In the following section, we present some results of the proposed framework.
5. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The results presented in this section are from audio surveillance
data in elevators. It consists of 126 clips (2 hours of content) with
suspicious events and 4 clips (40 minutes of content) that are without events. We extract low-level features from 61 clips (1 hour
of content) of all the suspicious event clips and 4 clips of normal
activity in the elevators (40 minutes of content). The low-level
features were 12 MFCC features extracted for 8ms frame of audio.
Then, for each of the clips we perform inlier/outlier based segmentation with the proposed framework to detect outlier subsequences.
A subsequent clustering of the detected outliers gave us the following four audio classes, namely, Banging, Footsteps, non-neutral
speech, normal speech. Banging and non-neutral speech belong to
Type 2: outlier category whereas the other two belong to Type 1:.
Table 1 summarizes the results of audio classiﬁcation framework for which the audio classes were systematically obtained
through the ofﬂine time series analysis proposed in .
Now, let us look at the results of online adaptive background
modelling on the elevator surveillance data. Figure 2 shows the
deviation measure for every WS = 20s of audio for a 8 min clip
with a suspicious event in the vicinity of 4 mins. The initial background model was learnt from WL = 120s of audio. There are two
thresholds involved in the online adaptive background modelling
described earlier: one on the value of d to determine foreground
audio objects (consequently to decide whether or not to update
the background model) and the second threshold on the likelihood
value to determine whether a component from GMMf is statistically equivalent to a component in GMMb. With the same threshold settings, we were able to detect suspicious events in most of
the clips.
time in mins
initial background
learning time
suspicious
Figure 2: Deviation (d) from adaptive background model for a clip
with suspicious event
6. CONCLUSIONS
We proposed a hybrid audio analysis framework for surveillance
that consists two parts; one that performs unsupervised audio analysis and another that performs analysis using an audio classiﬁcation framework. The audio classes for the classiﬁcation framework are obtained from off-line time series analysis of cepstral
features and training. It also adaptively learns a Gaussian Mixture Model(GMM) to model the background sounds and updates
the model incrementally as new audio data arrives and has been
shown to detect suspicious events effectively.
The adaptive background modelling algorithm used in the proposed framework ﬁrst estimates a GMM from WS observations
and then updates the parameters of statistically equivalent components in the background GMM. An alternative approach proposed
in , which is analogous to background modelling in computer
vision, updates the background model for every new incoming data
vector. Our future work would compare these two approaches for
audio background modelling.
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Dr. Ziyou Xiong for his experiments on MDL criterion for learning GMMs.
8. REFERENCES
 R.Radhakrishnan and A.Divakaran, “Systematic acquisition
of audio classes for elevator surveillance,” Proc. of SPIE,
 Z. Xiong, R. Radhakrishnan, and A. Divakaran, “Effective and
efﬁcient sports highlights extraction using the minimum description length criterion in selecting gmm structures,” Proc.
of ICME, June 2004.
 Mingzhou Song and Hongbin Wang, “Highly efﬁcient incremental estimation of gmms for online data stream clustering,”
Proc. of SPIE Conference on Intelligent Computing, 2005.
 M.Cristani, M.Bicego and V.Murino, “Online adaptive background modelling for audio surveillance,” Proc. of ICPR,