STATE-OF-THE-ART SPEECH RECOGNITION
WITH SEQUENCE-TO-SEQUENCE MODELS
Chung-Cheng Chiu, Tara N. Sainath, Yonghui Wu, Rohit Prabhavalkar, Patrick Nguyen,
Zhifeng Chen, Anjuli Kannan, Ron J. Weiss, Kanishka Rao, Ekaterina Gonina,
Navdeep Jaitly, Bo Li, Jan Chorowski, Michiel Bacchiani
Google, USA
{chungchengc,tsainath,yonghui,prabhavalkar,drpng,zhifengc,anjuli
ronw,kanishkarao,kgonina,ndjaitly,boboli,chorowski,michiel}@google.com
Attention-based encoder-decoder architectures such as Listen, Attend,
and Spell (LAS), subsume the acoustic, pronunciation and language
model components of a traditional automatic speech recognition
(ASR) system into a single neural network. In previous work, we
have shown that such architectures are comparable to state-of-theart ASR systems on dictation tasks, but it was not clear if such
architectures would be practical for more challenging tasks such as
voice search. In this work, we explore a variety of structural and
optimization improvements to our LAS model which signiﬁcantly
improve performance. On the structural side, we show that word
piece models can be used instead of graphemes. We also introduce a
multi-head attention architecture, which offers improvements over the
commonly-used single-head attention. On the optimization side, we
explore synchronous training, scheduled sampling, label smoothing,
and minimum word error rate optimization, which are all shown to
improve accuracy. We present results with a unidirectional LSTM
encoder for streaming recognition. On a 12, 500 hour voice search
task, we ﬁnd that the proposed changes improve the WER from 9.2%
to 5.6%, while the best conventional system achieves 6.7%; on a
dictation task our model achieves a WER of 4.1% compared to 5%
for the conventional system.
1. INTRODUCTION
Sequence-to-sequence models have been gaining in popularity in the
automatic speech recognition (ASR) community as a way of folding
separate acoustic, pronunciation and language models (AM, PM, LM)
of a conventional ASR system into a single neural network. There
have been a variety of sequence-to-sequence models explored in the
literature, including Recurrent Neural Network Transducer (RNN-
T) , Listen, Attend and Spell (LAS) , Neural Transducer ,
Monotonic Alignments and Recurrent Neural Aligner (RNA) .
While these models have shown promising results, thus far, it is not
clear if such approaches would be practical to unseat the current
state-of-the-art, HMM-based neural network acoustic models, which
are combined with a separate PM and LM in a conventional system.
Such sequence-to-sequence models are fully neural, without ﬁnite
state transducers, a lexicon, or text normalization modules. Training
such models is simpler than conventional ASR systems: they do
not require bootstrapping from decision trees or time alignments
generated from a separate system. To date, however, none of these
models has been able to outperform a state-of-the art ASR system
on a large vocabulary continuous speech recognition (LVCSR) task.
The goal of this paper is to explore various structure and optimization
improvements to allow sequence-to-sequence models to signiﬁcantly
outperform a conventional ASR system on a voice search task.
Since previous work showed that LAS offered improvements
over other sequence-to-sequence models , we focus on improvements to the LAS model in this work. The LAS model is a single
neural network that includes an encoder which is analogous to a
conventional acoustic model, an attender that acts as an alignment
model, and a decoder that is analogous to the language model in a
conventional system. We consider both modiﬁcations to the model
structure, as well as in the optimization process. On the structure side,
ﬁrst, we explore word piece models (WPM) which have been applied
to machine translation and more recently to speech in RNN-T 
and LAS . We compare graphemes and WPM for LAS, and ﬁnd
modest improvement with WPM. Next, we explore incorporating
multi-head attention , which allows the model to learn to attend
to multiple locations of the encoded features. Overall, we get 13%
relative improvement in WER with these structure improvements.
On the optimization side, we explore a variety of strategies as
well. Conventional ASR systems beneﬁt from discriminative sequence training, which optimizes criteria more closely related to
WER . Therefore, in the present work, we explore training
our LAS models to minimize the number of expected word errors
(MWER) , which signiﬁcantly improves performance. Second,
we include scheduled sampling (SS) , which feeds the previous label prediction during training rather than ground truth. Third,
label smoothing helps to make the model less conﬁdent in its
predictions, and is a regularization mechanism that has successfully
been applied in both vision and speech tasks . Fourth,
while many of our models are trained with asynchronous SGD ,
synchronous training has recently been shown to improve neural
systems . We ﬁnd that all four optimization strategies allow
for additional 27.5% relative improvement in WER on top of our
structure improvements.
Finally, we incorporate a language model to rescore N-best lists in
the second pass, which results in a further 3.4% relative improvement
in WER. Taken together, the improvements in model structure and
optimization, along with second-pass rescoring, allow us to improve
a single-head attention, grapheme LAS system, from a WER of 9.2%
to a WER of 5.6% on a voice search task. This provides a 16%
relative reduction in WER compared to a strong conventional model
baseline which achieves a WER of 6.7%. We also observe a similar
 
trend on a dictation task.
In Sections 2.2.1 and 2.4, we show how language models can be
integrated. Section 2.2.2 further extends the model to multi-head attention. We explore discriminative training in Sections 2.3.1 and 2.3.2,
and synchronous training regimes in Section 2.3.3. We use unidirectional encoders for low-latency streaming decoding.
2. SYSTEM OVERVIEW
In this section, we detail various structure and optimization improvements to the basic LAS model.
2.1. Basic LAS Model
Fig. 1: Components of the LAS end-to-end model.
The basic LAS model, used for experiments in this work, consists
of 3 modules as shown in Figure 1. The listener encoder module,
which is similar to a standard acoustic model, takes the input features,
x, and maps them to a higher-level feature representation, henc. The
output of the encoder is passed to an attender, which determines
which encoder features in henc should be attended to in order to
predict the next output symbol, yi, similar to a dynamic time warping
(DTW) alignment module. Finally, the output of the attention module
is passed to the speller (i.e., decoder), which takes the attention
context, ci, generated from the attender, as well as an embedding
of the previous prediction, yi−1, in order to produce a probability
distribution, P(yi|yi−1, . . . , y0, x), over the current sub-word unit,
yi, given the previous units, {yi−1, . . . , y0}, and input, x.
2.2. Structure Improvements
2.2.1. Wordpiece models
Traditionally, sequence-to-sequence models have used graphemes
(characters) as output units, as this folds the AM, PM and LM into
one neural network, and side-steps the problem of out-of-vocabulary
words . Alternatively, one could use longer units such as word
pieces or shorter units such as context-independent phonemes .
One of the disadvantages of using phonemes is that it requires having an additional PM and LM, and was not found to improve over
graphemes in our experiments .
Our motivation for looking at word piece models (WPM) is a
follows. Typically, word-level LMs have a much lower perplexity
compared to grapheme-level LMs . Thus, we feel that modeling word pieces allows for a much stronger decoder LM compared
to graphemes. In addition, modeling longer units improves the effective memory of the decoder LSTMs, and allows the model to
potentially memorize pronunciations for frequently occurring words.
Furthermore, longer units require fewer decoding steps; this speeds
up inference in these models signiﬁcantly. Finally, WPMs have shown
Projected source
Projected source
Projected source
Encoded source
Projected source
Fig. 2: Multi-headed attention mechanism.
good performance for other sequence-to-sequence models such as
RNN-T .
The word piece models used in this paper are sub-word
units, ranging from graphemes all the way up to entire words. Thus,
there are no out-of-vocabulary words with word piece models. The
word piece models are trained to maximize the language model likelihood over the training set. As in , the word pieces are “positiondependent”, in that a special word separator marker is used to denote
word boundaries. Words are segmented deterministically and independent of context, using a greedy algorithm.
2.2.2. Multi-headed attention
Multi-head attention (MHA) was ﬁrst explored in for machine
translation, and we extend this work to explore the value of MHA
for speech. Speciﬁcally, as shown in Figure 2, MHA extends the
conventional attention mechanism to have multiple heads, where
each head can generate a different attention distribution. This allows
each head to have a different role on attending the encoder output,
which we hypothesize makes it easier for the decoder to learn to
retrieve information from the encoder. In the conventional, singleheaded architecture, the model relies more on the encoder to provide
clearer signals about the utterances so that the decoder can pickup the
information with attention. We observed that MHA tends to allocate
one of the attention head to the beginning of the utterance which
contains mostly background noise, and thus we hypothesize MHA
better distinguish speech from noise when the encoded representation
is less ideal, for example, in degraded acoustic conditions.
2.3. Optimization improvements
2.3.1. Minimum Word Error Rate (MWER) Training
Conventional ASR systems are often trained to optimize a sequencelevel criterion (e.g., state-level minimum Bayes risk (sMBR) )
in addition to CE or CTC training. Although the loss function that
we optimize for the attention-based systems is a sequence-level loss
function, it is not closely related to the metric that we actually care
about, namely word error rate. There have been a variety of methods explored in the literature to address this issue in the context of
sequence-to-sequence models . In this work, we focus
on the minimum expected word error rate (MWER) training that we
proposed in .
In the MWER strategy, our objective is to minimize the expected
number of word errors. The loss functon is given by Equation 1,
where W(y, y∗) denotes the number of word errors in the hypothesis,
y, compared to the ground-truth label sequence, y∗. This ﬁrst term
is interpolated with the standard cross-entropy based loss, which we
ﬁnd is important in order to stabilize training .
LMWER = EP (y|x)[W(y, y∗)] + λLCE
The expectation in Equation 1 can be approximated either via sampling or by restricting the summation to an N-best list of decoded
hypotheses as is commonly used for sequence training ; the latter
is found to be more effective in our experiments . We denote by
NBest(x, N) = {y1, · · · , yN}, the set of N-best hypotheses computed using beam-search decoding for the input utterance x.
The loss function can then be approximated as shown in Equation 2,
which weights the normalized word errors from each hypothesis by
the probability bP(yi|x) concentrated on it:
yi∈NBest(x,N)
[W(yi, y∗) −c
W] bP(yi|x) + λLCE (2)
where, bP(yi|x) =
yi∈NBest(x,N) P (yi|x), represents the distribution
re-normalized over just the N-best hypotheses, and c
W is the average
number of word errors over all hypotheses in the N-best list. Subtracting c
W is applied as a form of variance reduction since it does
not affect the gradient .
2.3.2. Scheduled Sampling
We explore scheduled sampling for training the decoder. Feeding
the ground-truth label as the previous prediction (so-called teacher
forcing) helps the decoder to learn quickly at the beginning, but
introduces a mismatch between training and inference. The scheduled
sampling process, on the other hand, samples from the probability
distribution of the previous prediction (i.e., from the softmax output)
and then uses the resulting token to feed as the previous token when
predicting the next label. This process helps reduce the gap between
training and inference behavior. Our training process uses teacher
forcing at the beginning of training steps, and as training proceeds,
we linearly ramp up the probability of sampling from the model’s
prediction to 0.4 at the speciﬁed step, which we then keep constant
until the end of training. The step at which we ramp up the probability
to 0.4 is set to 1 million steps and 100, 000 steps for asynchronous
and synchronous training respectively (See section 2.3.3).
2.3.3. Asynchronous and Synchronous Training
We compare both asynchronous and synchronous training .
As shown in , synchronous training can potentially provide faster
convergence rates and better model quality, but also requires more
effort in order to stabilize network training. Both approaches have
a high gradient variance at the beginning of the training when using
multiple replicas , and we explore different techniques to reduce
this variance. In asynchronous training we use replica ramp up:
that is, the system will not start all training replicas at once, but
instead start them gradually. In synchronous training we use two
techniques: learning rate ramp up and a gradient norm tracker. The
learning rate ramp up starts with the learning rate at 0 and gradually
increases the learning rate, providing a similar effect to replica ramp
up. The gradient norm tracker keeps track of the moving average of
the gradient norm, and discards gradients with signiﬁcantly higher
variance than the moving average. Both approaches are crucial for
making synchronous training stable.
2.3.4. Label smoothing
Label smoothing is a regularization mechanism to prevent
the model from making over-conﬁdent predictions. It encourages the
model to have higher entropy at its prediction, and therefore makes
the model more adaptable. We followed the same design as by
smoothing the ground-truth label distribution with a uniform distribution over all labels.
2.4. Second-Pass Rescoring
While the LAS decoder topology is that of neural language model
(LM), it can function as a language model; but it is only exposed to
training transcripts. An external LM, on the other hand, can leverage
large amounts of additional data for which we only have text (no
audio). To address the potentially weak LM learned by the decoder,
we incorporate an external LM during inference only.
The external LM is a large 5-gram LM trained on text data from
a variety of domains. Since domains have different predictive value
for our LVCSR task, domain-speciﬁc LMs are ﬁrst trained, then
combined together using Bayesian-interpolation .
We incorporate the LM in the second-pass by means of log-linear
interpolation. In particular, given the N-best hypotheses produced by
the LAS model via beam search, we determine the ﬁnal transcript y∗
y∗= arg max
log P(y|x) + λ log PLM(y) + γlen(y)
where, PLM is provided by the LM, len(y) is the number of words
in y, and λ and γ are tuned on a development set. Using this criterion, transcripts which have a low language model probability will
be demoted in the ﬁnal ranked list. Additionally, the the last term
addresses the common observation that the incorporation of an LM
leads to a higher rate of deletions.
3. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
Our experiments are conducted on a ∼12,500 hour training set consisting of 15 million English utterances. The training utterances are
anonymized and hand-transcribed, and are representative of Google’s
voice search trafﬁc. This data set is created by artiﬁcially corrupting
clean utterances using a room simulator, adding varying degrees of
noise and reverberation such that the overall SNR is between 0dB
and 30dB, with an average SNR of 12dB. The noise sources are from
YouTube and daily life noisy environmental recordings. We report
results on a set of ∼14.8K utterances extracted from Google trafﬁc,
and also evaluate the resulting model, trained with only voice search
data, on a set of 15.7K dictation utterances that have longer sentences
than the voice search utterances.
All experiments use 80-dimensional log-Mel features, computed
with a 25ms window and shifted every 10ms. Similar to , at
the current frame, t, these features are stacked with 3 frames to the
left and downsampled to a 30ms frame rate. The encoder network
architecture consists of 5 long short-term memory (LSTM) layers.
We explored both unidirectional and bidirectional LSTMs, where
the unidirectional LSTMs have 1, 400 hidden units and bidirectional
LSTMs have 1, 024 hidden units in each direction (2, 048 per layer).
Unless otherwise stated, experiments are reported with unidirectional
encoders. Additive attention is used for both single-headed
and multi-headed attention experiments. All multi-headed attention
experiments use 4 heads. The decoder network is a 2-layer LSTM
with 1, 024 hidden units per layer.
All neural networks are trained with the cross-entropy criterion
(which is used to initialize MWER training) and are trained using
TensorFlow .
4. RESULTS
4.1. Structure Improvements
Our ﬁrst set of experiments explore different structure improvements
to the LAS model. Table 1 compares performance for LAS models
given graphemes (E1) and WPM (E2). The table indicates that WPM
perform slightly better than graphemes. This is consistent with the
ﬁnding in that WPM provides a stronger decoder LM compared to
graphemes, resulting in roughly a 2% relative improvement in WER
Second, we compare the performance of MHA with WPM, as
shown by experiment E3 in the table. We see MHA provides around
a 11.1% improvement. This indicates that having the model focus
on multiple points of attention in the input signal, which is similar
in spirit to having a language model passed from the encoder, helps
signiﬁcantly. Since models with MHA and WPM perform best, we
explore the proposed optimization methods on top of this model in
the rest of the paper.
Table 1: Impact of word piece models and multi-head attention.
4.2. Optimization improvements
We explore the performance of various optimization improvements
discussed in Section 2.3. Table 2 shows that including synchronous
training (E4) on top of the WPM+MHA model provides a 3.8%
improvement. Furthermore, including scheduled sampling (E5) gives
an additional 7.8% relative improvement in WER; label smoothing
gives an additional 5.6% relative improvement. Finally, MWER
training provides 13.4%. Overall, the gain from optimizations is
around 27.5%, moving the WER from 8.0% to 5.8%.
We see that synchronous training, in our conﬁguration, yields a
better converged optimum at similar wall clock time. Interestingly,
while scheduled sampling and minimum word error rate are both
discriminative methods, we have observed that their combination
continues to yield additive improvements. Finally, regularization with
label smoothing, even with large amounts of data, is proven to be
beneﬁcial.
Table 2: Sync training, scheduled sampling (SS), label smoothing
(LS) and minimum word error rate (MWER) training improvements.
4.3. Incorporating Second-Pass Rescoring
Next, we incorporate second-pass rescoring into our model. As can
be see in Table 3, second-pass rescoring improves the WER by 3.4%,
from 5.8% to 5.6%.
4.4. Unidirectional vs. Bidirectional Encoders
Now that we have established the improvements from structure, optimization and LM strategies, in this section we compare the gains
WPM + MHA + Sync + SS + LS + MWER
Table 3: In second pass rescoring, the log-linear combination with a
larger LM results in a 0.2% WER improvement.
on a unidirectional and bidirectional systems. Table 4 shows that the
proposed changes give a 37.8% relative reduction in WER for a unidirectional system, while a slightly smaller improvement of 28.4% for
a bidirectional system. This illustrates that most proposed methods
offer improvements independent of model topology.
Table 4: Both unidirectional and bidirectional models beneﬁt from
cumulative improvements.
4.5. Comparison with the Conventional System
Finally, we compare the proposed LAS model in E8 to a state-ofthe-art, discriminatively sequence-trained low frame rate (LFR) system in terms of WER. Table 5 shows the proposed sequence-tosequence model (E8) offers a 16% and 18% relative improvement
in WER over our production system (E9) on voice search (VS) and
dictation (D) task respectively. Furthermore, comparing the size of
the ﬁrst-pass models, the LAS model is around 18 times smaller than
the conventional model. It is important to note that the second pass
model is 80 GB and still dominates model size.
1st pass Model Size
Conventional
0.1 GB (AM) + 2.2 GB (PM)
LFR system
+ 4.9 GB (LM) = 7.2GB
Table 5: Resulting WER on voice search (VS)/dictation (D). The
improved LAS outperforms the conventional LFR system while being
more compact. Both models use second-pass rescoring.
5. CONCLUSION
We designed an attention-based model for sequence-to-sequence
speech recognition. The model integrates acoustic, pronunciation, and
language models into a single neural network, and does not require
a lexicon or a separate text normalization component. We explored
various structure and optimization mechanisms for improving the
model. Cumulatively, structure improvements (WPM, MHA) yielded
an 11% improvement in WER, while optimization improvements
(MWER, SS, LS and synchronous training) yielded a further 27.5%
improvement, and the language model rescoring yielded another 3.4%
improvement. Applied on a Google Voice Search task, we achieve a
WER of 5.6%, while a hybrid HMM-LSTM system achieves 6.7%
WER. Tested the same models on a dictation task, our model achieves
4.1% and the hybrid system achieves 5% WER. We note however,
that the unidirectional LAS system has the limitation that the entire
utterance must be seen by the encoder, before any labels can be
decoded (although, we encode the utterance in a streaming fashion).
Therefore, an important next step is to revise this model with an
streaming attention-based model, such as Neural Transducer .
6. REFERENCES
 A. Graves, “Sequence transduction with recurrent neural networks,” CoRR, vol. abs/1211.3711, 2012.
 W. Chan, N. Jaitly, Q. V. Le, and O. Vinyals, “Listen, attend
and spell,” CoRR, vol. abs/1508.01211, 2015.
 N. Jaitly, D. Sussillo, Q. V. Le, O. Vinyals, I. Sutskever, and
S. Bengio, “An Online Sequence-to-sequence Model Using
Partial Conditioning,” in Proc. NIPS, 2016.
 C. Raffel, M. Luong, P. J. Liu, R.J. Weiss, and D. Eck, “Online and Linear-Time Attention by Enforcing Monotonic Alignments,” in Proc. ICML, 2017.
 H. Sak, M. Shannon, K. Rao, and F. Beaufays, “Recurrent
Neural Aligner: An Encoder-Decoder Neural Network Model
for Sequence to Sequence Mapping,” in Proc. Interspeech,
 R. Prabhavalkar, K. Rao, T. N. Sainath, B. Li, L. Johnson, and
N. Jaitly, “A Comparison of Sequence-to-sequence Models for
Speech Recognition,” in Proc. Interspeech, 2017.
 Y. Wu, M. Schuster, and et. al., “Google’s neural machine translation system: Bridging the gap between human and machine
translation,” CoRR, vol. abs/1609.08144, 2016.
 K. Rao, R. Prabhavalkar, and H. Sak, “Exploring Architectures,
Data and Units for Streaming End-to-End Speech Recognition
with RNN-Transducer,” in Proc. ASRU, 2017.
 William Chan, Yu Zhang, Quoc Le, and Navdeep Jaitly, “Latent
Sequence Decompositions,” in ICLR, 2017.
 A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N.
Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention Is All You
Need,” CoRR, vol. abs/1706.03762, 2017.
 B. Kingsbury, “Lattice-Based Optimization of Sequence Classiﬁcation Criteria for Neural-Network Acoustic Modeling,” in
Proc. ICASSP, 2009.
 R. Prabhavalkar, T. N. Sainath, Y. Wu, P. Nguyen, Z. Chen,
C. Chiu, and A. Kannan, “Minimum Word Error Rate Training
for Attention-based Sequence-to-sequence Models,” in Proc.
ICASSP (accepted), 2018.
 S. Bengio, O. Vinyals, N. Jaitly, and N. Shazeer, “Scheduled
Sampling for Sequence Prediction with Recurrent Neural Networks,” in Proc. NIPS, 2015, pp. 1171–1179.
 C. Szegedy, V. Vanhoucke, S. Ioffe, J. Shlens, and Z. Wojna,
“Rethinking the inception architecture for computer vision,” in
Proc. of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2016.
 J. K. Chorowski, D. Bahdanau, D. Serdyuk, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Attention-Based Models for Speech Recognition,” in
Proc. NIPS, 2015.
 J. K. Chorowski and N. Jaitly, “Towards Better Decoding and
Language Model Integration in Sequence to Sequence Models,”
in Proc. Interspeech, 2017.
 J. Dean, G.S. Corrado, R. Monga, K. Chen, M. Devin, Q.V. Le,
M.Z. Mao, M. Ranzato, A. Senior, P. Tucker, K. Yang, and A.Y.
Ng, “Large Scale Distributed Deep Networks,” in Proc. NIPS,
 P. Goyal, P. Doll´ar, R. B. Girshick, P. Noordhuis, L. Wesolowski,
A. Kyrola, A. Tulloch, Y. Jia, and K. He, “Accurate, large
minibatch SGD: training imagenet in 1 hour,”
CoRR, vol.
abs/1706.02677, 2017.
 T.N. Sainath, R. Prabhavalkar, S. Kumar, S. Lee, D. Rybach,
A. Kannan, V. Schogol, P. Nguyen, B. Li, Y. Wu, Z. Chen, and
C. Chiu, “No need for a lexicon? evaluating the value of the
pronunciation lexica in end-to-end models,” in Proc. ICASSP
(accepted), 2018.
 A. Kannan, Y. Wu, P. Nguyen, T. N. Sainath, Z. Chen, and
R. Prabhavalkar, “An Analysis of Incorporating an External
Language Model into a Sequence-to-Sequence Model,” in Proc.
ICASSP (accepted), 2018.
 M. Schuster and K. Nakajima, “Japanese and Korean voice
search,” 2012 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing, 2012.
 D. Bahdanau, J. Chorowski, D. Serdyuk, P. Brakel, and Y. Bengio, “End-to-End Attention-based Large Vocabulary Speech
Recognition,” in Proc. ICASSP, 2016.
 M. Ranzato, S. Chopra, M. Auli, and W. Zaremba, “Sequence
level training with recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. ICLR,
 D. Povey and P. C. Woodland, “Minimum phone error and
I-smoothing for improved discriminative training,” in Proc.
ICASSP. IEEE, 2002, vol. 1, pp. I–105.
 I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V. Le, “Sequence to sequence
learning with neural networks,” in Proc. NIPS, 2014.
 C. Allauzen and M. Riley, “Bayesian language model interpolation for mobile speech input,” Interspeech, 2011.
 H. Sak, A. Senior, K. Rao, and F. Beaufays, “Fast and Accurate Recurrent Neural Network Acoustic Models for Speech
Recognition,” in Proc. Interspeech, 2015.
 G. Pundak and T. N. Sainath,
“Lower Frame Rate Neural
Network Acoustic Models,” in Proc. Interspeech, 2016.
 S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long Short-Term Memory,”
Neural Computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, Nov 1997.
 M. Schuster and K. K. Paliwal, “Bidirectional recurrent neural
networks,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 45,
no. 11, pp. 2673–2681, Nov 1997.
 D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Neural Machine Translation by Jointly Learning to Align and Translate,” in Proc. ICLR,
 M. Abadi et al., “TensorFlow: Large-Scale Machine Learning on Heterogeneous Distributed Systems,” Available online: 
 T. N. Sainath, C. Chiu, R. Prabhavalkar, A. Kannan, Y. Wu,
P. Nguyen, , and Z. Chen, “Improving the Performance of
Online Neural Transducer models,” in Proc. ICASSP (accepted),