Open Access Series of Imaging
Studies: Longitudinal MRI Data in
Nondemented and Demented Older Adults
Marcus, Daniel S., Anthony F. Fotenos, John G. Csernansky, John C. Morris, and Randy L.
Buckner. 2010. “Open Access Series of Imaging Studies: Longitudinal MRI Data in
Nondemented and Demented Older Adults.” Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 22 (12). MIT
Press - Journals: 2677–84. doi:10.1162/jocn.2009.21407.
Published version
 
 
Terms of use
This article was downloaded from Harvard University’s DASH repository, and is made
available under the terms and conditions applicable to Other Posted Material (LAA), as set
 
Accessibility
 
Share Your Story
The Harvard community has made this article openly available.
Please share how this access benefits you. Submit a story
Open Access Series of Imaging Studies: Longitudinal MRI
Data in Nondemented and Demented Older Adults
Daniel S. Marcus1, Anthony F. Fotenos1, John G. Csernansky2,
John C. Morris1, and Randy L. Buckner3,4,5,6
■The Open Access Series of Imaging Studies is a series of
neuroimaging data sets that are publicly available for study and
analysis. The present MRI data set consists of a longitudinal collection of 150 subjects aged 60 to 96 years all acquired on the same
scanner using identical sequences. Each subject was scanned
on two or more visits, separated by at least 1 year for a total of
373 imaging sessions. Subjects were characterized using the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) as either nondemented or with very
mild to mild Alzheimerʼs disease. Seventy-two of the subjects were
characterized as nondemented throughout the study. Sixty-four
of the included subjects were characterized as demented at the
time of their initial visits and remained so for subsequent scans,
including 51 individuals with CDR 0.5 similar level of impairment
to individuals elsewhere considered to have “mild cognitive
impairment.” Another 14 subjects were characterized as nondemented at the time of their initial visit (CDR 0) and were subsequently characterized as demented at a later visit (CDR > 0). The
subjects were all right-handed and include both men (n = 62) and
women (n = 88). For each scanning session, three or four individual T1-weighted MRI scans were obtained. Multiple withinsession acquisitions provide extremely high contrast to noise,
making the data amenable to a wide range of analytic approaches
including automated computational analysis. Automated calculation of whole-brain volume is presented to demonstrate use of
the data for measuring differences associated with normal aging
and Alzheimerʼs disease. ■
INTRODUCTION
The Open Access Series of Imaging Studies (OASIS) is a
project aimed at making neuroimaging data sets of the
brain freely available to the scientific community. By compiling and freely distributing neuroimaging data sets, we hope
to facilitate future discoveries in basic and clinical neuroscience similar to other initiatives such as the Alzheimerʼs
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. The initial OASIS set of
cross-sectional MRI data included over 400 demented and
nondemented individuals across the adult lifespan .Here we describe alongitudinal sample of
MRI data from older adults, with and without Alzheimerʼs disease (AD). The preparation and release of the dataset follows
the rigor established with the initial release: careful quality
control, detailed documentation, example of postprocessed
images, full anonymization, multiple access methods, ongoing support, and liberal data usage requirements .
The data set includes longitudinal MRI data from 150 individuals age 60 to 96 years, including 64 individuals with
very mild to moderate AD as diagnosed clinically and characterized using the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scale
 at their initial visit. Another
14 of the individuals were characterized as nondemented
at the time of one or more scans and then clinically determined to have AD at the time of a subsequent scan. All
data were acquired on the same scanner using identical
procedures. Subjects were screened to eliminate individuals with psychiatric and neurological conditions that
might contribute to dementia but, where possible, variation
typical of advanced aging was included. Thus, many of the
older adults had age-related increases in blood pressure
and a small percentage treated diabetes. Sample characteristics were similar between the individuals with and without AD.
Longitudinal brain imaging has proven useful in studying
normal and diseased aging. Whole-brain volume decline
as measured from longitudinally acquired MRI has been
shown to evolve at a near 0.5% per year in nondemented older adults, somewhat
greater than that observed in younger adults . The volumes of the whole-brain
and structures associated with memory have been shown
to atrophy at a significantly greater rate in mild cognitive impairment and early AD . Longitudinal analysis of measures derived from
advanced computational methods, including nonlinear
deformations and shape analysis, have also revealed ageand disease-associated changes in the brain . Longitudinal measures of brain structure are emerging as tools for tracking
progression of disease and as adjunct outcome measures
in clinical trials . The OASIS longitudinal data
set is being made openly available to encourage continued
investigation into aging and disease processes and to support development of improved methods for studying these
processes.
Subjects aged 60 to 96 years were selected from a larger
database of individuals who had participated in MRI studies
at Washington University on the basis of the availability of at
least two separate visits in which clinical and MRI data were
obtained, at least three acquired T1-weighted images per
imaging session, and right-hand dominance. Subjects were
obtained from the longitudinal pool of the Washington
University Alzheimer Disease Research Center (ADRC).
The ADRCʼs normal and cognitively impaired subjects were
recruited primarily through media appeals and word of
mouth, with 80% of subjects initiating contact with the center and the remainder being referred by physicians. All
subjects participated in accordance with guidelines of the
Washington University Human Studies Committee. Approval for public sharing of the anonymized data was also
specifically obtained.
All subjects were screened for inclusion in this release.
Each subject underwent the ADRCʼs full clinical assessment
as described below. Subjects with a primary cause of dementia other than AD (e.g., vascular dementia, primary
progressive aphasia), active neurologic or psychiatric illness (e.g., major depression), serious head injury, history
of clinically meaningful stroke, and use of psychoactive
drugs were excluded, as were subjects with gross anatomical abnormalities evident in their MRI images (e.g., large
lesions, tumors). However, subjects with age-typical brain
changes (e.g., mild atrophy, leukoaraiosis) were accepted.
MRI acquisitions typically were obtained within 1 year before
or after a subjectʼs clinical assessment (mean = 111 days,
range = 0–352 days). Twelve subjects with AD were scanned
after a somewhat longer duration (mean = 653 days, range =
374–924 days) but were included because each had several previous clinical assessments with CDR scores greater
than 0. Two subjects without dementia were scanned somewhat longer than 1 year before a clinical assessment (392
and 431 days) but were included because their subsequent
clinical assessments continued to indicate no signs of dementia. Each subject was scanned on two or more separate occasions, with an average delay of 719 days (range =
183–1707 days) between visits. The final data set includes
150 subjects and 373 imaging sessions.
Portions of the clinical, demographic, and longitudinal
image data obtained from subjects in this release have
been used in previous publications . Many of the subjects
were part of the cross-sectional OASIS data set but have been
assigned new random identifiers.
Clinical Assessment
Dementia status was established and staged using the CDR
scale. The determination of AD or nondemented control
status is based solely on clinical methods, without reference to psychometric performance, and any potential alternative causes of dementia (known neurological, medical,
or psychiatric disorders) must not contribute to dementia.
The diagnosis of AD is based on clinical information (derived primarily from a collateral source) that the subject
has experienced gradual onset and progression of decline
in memory and other cognitive and functional domains.
Specifically, the CDR is a dementia-staging instrument that
rates subjects for impairment in each of six domains: memory, orientation, judgment and problem solving, function
in community affairs, home and hobbies, and personal
care. On the basis of the collateral source and subject interview, a global CDR score is derived from individual ratings
in each domain. A global CDR of 0 indicates no dementia
and a CDR of 0.5, 1, 2, and 3 represent very mild, mild, moderate, and severe dementia, respectively. These methods
allow for the clinical diagnosis of AD in individuals with a
CDR of 0.5 or greater on the basis of standard criteria that
is confirmed by histopathological examination in 93% of
the individuals , even for those in the
earliest symptomatic stage (CDR 0.5) of AD who elsewhere may be considered to represent “mild cognitive
impairment” .
Image Acquisition
For each subject, three to four individual T1-weighted
magnetization prepared rapid gradient-echo (MP-RAGE)
images were acquired on a 1.5-T Vision scanner (Siemens,
Erlangen, Germany) in a single imaging session. Head
movement was minimized by cushioning and by a thermoplastic face mask. Headphones were provided for communication. A vitamin E capsule was placed over the left
forehead to provide a reference marker of anatomic side.
Positioning was low in the head coil (toward the feet) to
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
Volume 22, Number 12
optimize imaging of the cerebral cortex. MP-RAGE parameters were empirically optimized for gray-white contrast
(Table 1). The scanner and the sequences were maintained
across the duration of the study so the present data are not
influenced by hardware upgrades or other instrument
differences.
Postprocessing
For each subject, the individual scan files were converted
from Siemens proprietary IMA format into 16-bit NiFTI1
format using a custom conversion program. Header fields
with identifying information (patient ID, experiment date)
were left blank. The images were then corrected for interscan head movement and spatially warped into the atlas
space of Talairach and Tournoux using a rigid transformation that differs in process from the original piecewise
scaling. The resulting transformation nonetheless places
the brains in the same coordinate system and bounding
box as the original atlas. The template atlas used here consisted of a combined young-and-old target previously generated from a representative sample of young (n = 12) and
nondemented old (n = 12) adults. The use of a combined
template has been shown to minimize the potential bias of
an atlas normalization procedure to overexpand atrophied
brains . Given the age range of the
present sample, an old-only atlas target could have been
used. We chose to retain the young-and-old target to becomparable to our earlier report .
For registration, a 12-parameter affine transformation
was computed to minimize the variance between the first
MP-RAGE image and the atlas target. The remaining
MP-RAGE images were registered to the first (in-plane
stretch allowed) and resampled via transform composition
into a 1-mm isotropic image in atlas space. The result was a
single, high-contrast, averaged MP-RAGE image in atlas
space. Subsequent steps included skull removal by application of a loose-fitting atlas mask and correction for intensity
inhomogeneity because of nonuniformity in the magnetic
field. Intensity variation was corrected across contiguous
regions on the basis of a quadratic inhomogeneity model
fitted to data from a phantom.
Estimated Total Intracranial Volume and
Normalized Whole-brain Volume
The procedures used for measuring intracranial and wholebrain volumes have been described previously and are identical to our
earlier OASIS data release . Estimated total intracranial volume (eTIV) was computed by
scaling the manually measured intracranial volume of the
atlas by the determinant of the affine transform connecting
each individualʼs brain to the atlas. This method is minimally influenced and proportional to manually measured
total intracranial volume.
Normalized Whole-brain Volume (nWBV) was computed
using the FAST program in the FSL software suite (www.
fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl). The image was first segmented to classifybrain tissue as cerebral spinal fluid, gray, or white matter.
The segmentation procedure iteratively assigned voxels to
tissue classes on the basis of maximum likelihood estimates
of a hidden Markov random field model. The model used
spatial proximity to constrain the probability with which
voxels of a given intensity are assigned to each tissue class.
Finally, nWBV was computed as the proportion of all voxels
within the brain mask classified as tissue (either gray or
white matter). The unit of normalized volume is percent,
which represents the percentage of the total white and
gray matter voxels within the eTIV .
To calculate atrophy rates, we estimated the slope of the
line connecting nWBV measurements within each individual, divided by baseline nWBV, expressed as percent change
per year. For example, in a participant with two scans, atrophy rate was computed as nWBV at Scan 2 minus nWBV at
Scan 1, divided by the interval between measurements, divided by nWBV at Scan 1, times 100. ANCOVA was again
used to test for differences in atrophy rate on the basis of
age, sex, and dementia status.
Quality Control
All images in the data set were carefully screened for artifacts, acquisition problems, and processing errors. During
the screeningprocess, each image was viewed on a per-slice
basis along the axis of acquisition. Typical flaws visible in the
images included electronic noise resulting in bright lines
through multiple slices, motion artifacts appearing as hazy
bands across the image, poor head positioning resulting
in wraparound artifacts, distortions from dental work, and
limited image contrast. Images with severe flaws were excluded from the data set. A number of borderline images
remain in the distribution, providing tool builders and
testers with a realistic range of acquisition quality. In cases
where individual scans were deemed unusable, the single
scan was removed from the data set but the remainder
Table 1. MR Image Acquisition Details
Flip angle
Orientation
Thickness, gap (mm)
Slice number
Resolution
256 × 256 (1 × 1 mm)
Marcus et al.
of the subjectʼs scans was included. Overall, 25 imaging
sessions were excluded from the final release because of
poor image quality.
Overview of the Data Set
The current data set consists of 150 subjects (88 women)
aged 60 to 96 years (Table 2). At the time of their initial
visit, 86 had a CDR score of 0, indicating no dementia, and
64 had a CDR score greater than 0 (52 subjects, CDR = 0.5;
13 subjects, CDR = 1; 0 subject, CDR = 2), indicating a
diagnosis of very mild to moderate AD. Of the subjects
who were initially determined to be nondemented, 14 were
later determined to be demented (CDR > 0) at the time of a
subsequent imaging visit. Additional demographics and
clinical characteristics of the subjects are shown in Table 3.
Anatomic Characteristics
Whole-brain volumes for each of the subjects in the data
set are plotted by age at each visit in Figure 1. Marked decreases in nWBV are apparent with age, and nWBV is significantly impacted by dementia status (Figure 2). Differences
in nWBV between nondemented (CDR 0), very mild dementia (CDR 0.5), and mild dementia (CDR 1) are all significant ( p < .01). Whole-brain atrophy rates are shown in
Figure 3 (top). The atrophy rate in nondemented individuals was −0.49% (SD = 0.56) per year. The atrophy rate
in individuals with DAT was −0.87% (SD = 0.99) per year,
a significant increase compared with nondemented individuals ( p < .01). For the 14 individuals who declined
from an initial CDR 0 to a CDR 0.5 at the time of their last
scan, the atrophy rate fell between nondemented individuals and those who entered with AD (−0.69% per year,
SD = 0.62).
Table 2. Age and Diagnosis Characteristics of Subjects at the Time of Their Initial Visit
Nondemented
The Convert column indicates individuals who were determined to have AD on a subsequent visit. CDR = Clinical Dementia Rating, with 0, 0.5, and 1
corresponding to nondemented, very mild, and AD, respectively. CDR 0.5 individuals may be considered to represent those elsewhere labeled as
“mild cognitive impairment” (MCI).
Table 3. Sample Characteristics of Subjects
Female/male
Age (years)
75.8 ± 8.2 (60–93)
74.8 ± 6.3 (62–90)
75.7 ± 8.7 (61–96)
Education (years)
15.2 ± 2.7 (8–23)
13.6 ± 2.8 (6–20)
14.0 ± 3.2 (8–20)
29.1 ± 0.8 (27–30)
26 ± 3.1 (17–30)
23.0 ± 3.3 (19–30)
Prescriptions (n)
2.9 ± 2.1 (0–9)
3.2 ± 2.4 (0–11)
2.5 ± 2.4 (0–7)
Systolic BP (mmHg)
135.5 ± 20.3 (98–192)
143.5 ± 19.4 (118–188)
143.4 ± 24.9 (90–188)
Diastolic BP (mmHg)
72.8 ± 10.2 (50–100)
77.1 ± 10.1 (58–98)
76.9 ± 9.2 (60–88)
Reported HBP (%)
Diabetes (%)
The sample consisted of 150 individuals (72 nondemented, 64 with AD, and 14 who converted over the course of the study). Clinical measures in the
above table were obtained at the clinical assessment closest in date to the initial imaging session, except in 39 cases where these values were not
available until a later visit. Values are presented as mean ± SD. Values in parentheses represent the range. Compared with the nondemented adults,
the older adults with dementia had lower scores on the MMSE ( p < .001) and slightly fewer years of education ( p < .001).
CDR = Clinical Dementia Rating, with 0, 0.5, and 1 corresponding to nondemented, very mild, and mild AD, respectively; MMSE = Mini-Mental State
Examination where scores range from 30 (best) to 0 (worst); HBP = high blood pressure.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
Volume 22, Number 12
Figure 1. Longitudinal plot of nWBV; lines connect nWBV at
baseline and follow-up scans (or the best fit, for participants with
multiple follow-ups), such that the slope of each line as a proportion
of baseline nWBV represents an individualʼs atrophy rate.
Figure 2. Mean cross-sectional nWBV for all individuals separated
by Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) (0, 0.5, and 1) at the individualsʼ
initial visit. All differences are significant.
Figure 3. (A) Longitudinal
atrophy rates, expressed in
nWBV loss per year relative
to baseline, are separated by
CDR status at first and last
session. Atrophy rate was
significantly greater for the
group entering the experiment
with very mild dementia
(CDR 0.5 →0.5/1) than
the group entering without
dementia that remained stable
(CDR 0 →0), whereas the rate
for the group that manifested
the earliest signs of AD during
the experiment (CDR 0 →0.5)
fell between those with no
dementia and those who
entered with dementia.
(B) Individual atrophy rates
plotted by age and CDR score.
The trendline is plotted for
Marcus et al.
Obtaining and Using the Data
OASIS data can be obtained at 
Requests for DVD distributions of the data can besubmitted
at the Web site. For convenience, we also provide the data
using the open-source Extensible Neuroimaging Archive
Toolkit . It provides tools to
search, to visualize, and to download the data. Before downloading and requesting data, users are asked to abide by the
OASIS Data Usage Agreement.
OASIS data are distributed in GNU zip archive files, which
can be uncompressed using freely available software. All
images are distributed in NIFTI1 format ( 
nih.gov), which can be visualized and processed using many
common commercial and open source image viewing applications, including Neurolens, ImageJ, Slicer, and MRIcro.
For each imaging session, the following image files are included in the distribution: three to four individual scan
images; an image in which the individual scans have been
aligned and coregistered, an image that has been gain fieldcorrected and registered to the Talairach and Tournoux
atlas (T88); a masked T88 image in which the intensity of
all nonbrain voxels has been set to zero; and a segmented
T88 image in which each voxel has been labeled as gray
matter, white matter, or cerebral spinal fluid. Demographic,
clinical, and derived imaging measures (Table 4) are available in XML and spreadsheet formats. Additional details of
the directory structure, file naming scheme, and image
characteristics can be found at 
org/longitudinal_facts.html.
DISCUSSION
The present data set includes longitudinally acquired
T1-weighted MRI data from 150 individuals aged 60 to
96 years, including 64 individuals initially determined to
have AD and 14 who were diagnosed with AD at a return
visit. Repeated within-visit acquisitions are included for
each subject allowing extremely high contrast properties
after image averaging. The data have been anonymized,
carefully screened for image quality, and postprocessed
to generate common anatomic measures. The data are
available under a liberal usage policy that allows free access
and unrestricted usage to all interested parties.
The image files included in this OASIS set differ from the
previous OASIS set in two substantive ways meant to improve overall usability. First, the files are in the NiFTI 1 image format, which is now widely supported and preferred
for its more explicit specification of voxel ordering. Second,
the images have not been altered to remove facial features.
This ensures that fiducial markers placed on the left temple
are always present in raw scan images. It also removes hard
edges that may cause difficulty in some segmentation
algorithms.
The specific anatomical measure of nWBV included
here illustrates a common approach to analyzing anatomical characteristics of the brain in MRI images, particularly in relation to aging. Unsurprisingly, our findings
are in agreement with those described in previous studies
using portions of these data . In
particular, nWBV was shown to decline significantly with
increasing age and by AD status as previously reported by
Fotenos et al. and others . Similarly, the rate of nWBV decline was
significantly greater for the AD group than for the nondemented group.
These findings are representative of the types of analyses
that have been reported in the literature and are not intended to be comprehensive or the final word on how to
approach these data. Such issues as the interplay between
imaging markers, AD, and other diseases (e.g., hypertension, diabetes) remain open avenues for further investigation. Similarly, alternative image processing and statistical
methods may yield additional findings. We hope that the
description and open release of these data will encourage
Table 4. Measures Included in the Data Set
Age at time of image acquisition (years)
Sex (M or F)
Years of education
Socioeconomic status as assessed by the Hollingshead Index of Social Position and classified
into categories from 1 (highest status) to 5 (lowest status) 
Mini-Mental State Examination score (range is from 0 = worst to 30 = best) 
Clinical Dementia Rating (0 = no dementia, 0.5 = very mild AD, 1 = mild AD, 2 = moderate AD) 
Atlas scaling factor (unitless). Computed scaling factor that transforms native-space brain and
skull to the atlas target (i.e., the determinant of the transform matrix) 
Estimated total intracranial volume (cm3) 
Normalized whole-brain volume, expressed as a percent of all voxels in the atlas-masked image that
are labeled as gray or white matter by the automated tissue segmentation process 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
Volume 22, Number 12
ongoing exploration of the data, leading to improvements
in the diagnosis and treatment of AD.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank the Washington University ADRC and the
Conte Center for clinical assistance and participant recruitment;
Elizabeth Grant for assistance with data preparation; Susan Larson,
Amy Sanders, Laura Williams, Jamie Parker, and Glenn Foster for
assistance with MRI data collection; Avi Snyder for development of
analytic techniques; and Tim Olsen, Mohana Ramaratnam, Kevin
Archie, and Mikhail Milchenko for development of database and
Web tools. Anders Dale assisted with the original selection of
imaging parameters. The acquisition of this data and the support
for data analysis and management were provided by the National
Institutes of Health grant nos. P50 AG05681, P01 AG03991, R01
AG021910, P20 MH071616, RR14075, RR 16594, and BIRN002;
the Alzheimerʼs Association; the James S. McDonnell Foundation;
the Mental Illness and Neuroscience Discovery Institute; and the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute.
Reprint requests should be sent to Daniel S. Marcus, Department
of Radiology, Campus Box 8225, Washington University School
of Medicine, 4525 Scott Ave., St. Louis, MO 63110, or via e-mail:
 .