This is the accepted manuscript made available via CHORUS. The article has been
published as:
Inferring core-collapse supernova physics with gravitational
J. Logue, C. D. Ott, I. S. Heng, P. Kalmus, and J. H. C. Scargill
Phys. Rev. D 86, 044023 — Published 17 August 2012
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevD.86.044023
Inferring Core-Collapse Supernova Physics with Gravitational Waves
J. Logue,1, 2, ∗C. D. Ott,3, 4, 5, † I. S. Heng,1, ‡ P. Kalmus,2, 3, § and J. H. C. Scargill6, 2, ¶
1SUPA, Institute for Gravitational Research, School of Physics and Astronomy,
University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ Scotland, United Kingdom
2LIGO Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
3TAPIR, MC 350-17, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
4Institute for the Physics and Mathematics of the Universe (IPMU), The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Japan
5Center for Computation and Technology, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, USA
6New College, Oxford, OX1 3BN, UK
Stellar collapse and the subsequent development of a core-collapse supernova explosion emit bursts
of gravitational waves (GWs) that might be detected by the advanced generation of laser interferometer gravitational-wave observatories such as Advanced LIGO, Advanced Virgo, and LCGT.
GW bursts from core-collapse supernovae encode information on the intricate multi-dimensional
dynamics at work at the core of a dying massive star and may provide direct evidence for the yet
uncertain mechanism driving supernovae in massive stars. Recent multi-dimensional simulations
of core-collapse supernovae exploding via the neutrino, magnetorotational, and acoustic explosion
mechanisms have predicted GW signals which have distinct structure in both the time and frequency
domains. Motivated by this, we describe a promising method for determining the most likely explosion mechanism underlying a hypothetical GW signal, based on Principal Component Analysis and
Bayesian model selection. Using simulated Advanced LIGO noise and assuming a single detector
and linear waveform polarization for simplicity, we demonstrate that our method can distinguish
magnetorotational explosions throughout the Milky Way (D ≲10 kpc) and explosions driven by
the neutrino and acoustic mechanisms to D ≲2 kpc. Furthermore, we show that we can diﬀerentiate between models for rotating accretion-induced collapse of massive white dwarfs and models of
rotating iron core collapse with high reliability out to several kpc.
PACS numbers: 04.30.Tv, 04.80.Nn, 05.45.Tp, 97.60.Bw
INTRODUCTION
Almost eighty years after the proposal by Baade &
Zwicky that (core-collapse) supernovae represent the
transition of an ordinary massive star into a neutron star
 , we still lack a complete understanding of this phenomenon. In particular, we do not know with certitude
how the supernova mechanism operates and converts the
necessary fraction of gravitational energy of collapse into
kinetic energy and light of the explosive outﬂow.
The basic story line of core collapse goes as follows
(see for detailed reviews): At the end of a massive
star’s (8 −10 M⊙≲M ≲130 M⊙at zero-age main sequence [ZAMS]) life, nuclear burning has ceased in its
core, which is then composed primarily of iron-group nuclei (or O-Ne nuclei at the lower end of the mass range)
and supported against gravity by the pressure of relativistically degenerate electrons. Eventually, the core exceeds its eﬀective Chandrasekhar mass and dynamical
collapse sets in. The collapsing core separates into subsonically infalling homologous (v ∝r) inner core and supersonically collapsing outer core . When the inner
∗Electronic address: 
†Electronic address: 
‡Electronic address: 
§Electronic address: 
¶Electronic address: 
core reaches nuclear density, the repulsive core of the nuclear force leads to a stiﬀening of the nuclear equation of
state (EOS). The inner core, suddenly supported by the
stiﬀsupernuclear EOS, overshoots its new equilibrium,
then bounces back into the still infalling outer core. A
shock wave forms at the sonic point between inner and
outer core at an enclosed baryonic mass of ∼0.5 M⊙. It
quickly moves out in radius and mass, but must do work
in breaking up infalling iron-group nuclei. This and neutrino losses from electron capture in the region behind
the shock sap its might. The shock succumbs to the ram
pressure of the outer core, stalls, and turns into an accretion shock.
The shock must be re-energized to drive a core-collapse
supernova explosion and, in the canonical scenario, leave
behind a neutrino-cooling and contracting protoneutron
star. This shock revival must, depending on progenitor
star structure, occur within ∼0.5 −3 s, otherwise accretion will push the protoneutron star over its maximum
mass, leading to collapse and black hole formation .
Understanding the supernova mechanism, which must robustly revive the stalled shock in supernovae from massive stars that are observed on a daily basis, is the principle current challenge of core-collapse supernova theory.
Observational clues for the supernova mechanism are
few. Electromagnetic waves are emitted in optically thin
regions far from the core and thus yield only secondhand information about the supernova mechanism. Yet,
observations of ejecta morphology, spatial distributions
of nucleosynthetic yields and pulsar kicks are indicative
of aspherical (i.e., multi-dimensional) processes bearing
relevance in the explosion dynamics (e.g., and references therein). Neutrinos, on the other hand, are emitted
deep inside the core and can provide crucial thermodynamic, structural, and, to some extent, dynamical information on what occurs in the core . The few
neutrinos captured from supernova 1987A have
impressively conﬁrmed the very basic picture of core collapse outlined in the above.
Gravitational waves (GWs), like neutrinos emitted
from dense regions impenetrable by photons, carry dynamical information about their source. Since their emission occurs at lowest order by accelerated quadrupole
motions, GWs are direct probes of multi-dimensional dynamics in the core that may play a crucial role in the
supernova mechanism .
Stellar collapse has long been considered a promising source of GWs for detectors on Earth (see the historical overview in ) and much eﬀort has gone into
understanding the GW signature of stellar collapse and
the subsequent evolution towards a core-collapse supernova explosion. This has led to the identiﬁcation of a
range of emission processes, including rotating collapse
and core bounce, nonaxisymmetric rotational instabilities, aspherical outﬂows, convection/turbulence in the
protoneutron star and in the region immediately behind
the shock, instabilities of the standing accretion shock,
pulsations of the protoneutron star, asymmetric emission
of neutrinos, and magnetic stresses (see for recent
The most recent set of simulations suggest that GWs from the average core-collapse supernova may be visible throughout the Milky Way for
the second generation of laser interferometer GW observatories, including Advanced LIGO, Advanced Virgo,
and LCGT .
Extreme emission scenarios may
allow detection throughout the local group of galaxies,
including the Andromeda galaxy , but thirdgeneration detectors such as the Einstein Telescope 
might hope to observe more distant events.
If it was possible to associate an explosion mechanism with particular multi-dimensional dynamics that
leads to a characteristic GW signal, then the detection
or non-detection of such a signal from the next galactic core-collapse supernova could conﬁrm or rule out this
mechanism. To realize such an GW-observational test of
the explosion mechanism, one must separate the signal
from detector noise and determine its parameters, e.g., by
matching, in some way, to signal predictions from simulations.
The most straightforward method for signal
extraction and parameter estimation is matched ﬁltering (e.g., ), which looks for a match of detector data
with waveform templates from simulations. Matched ﬁltering requires exact knowledge of the expected signal,
which is possible, e.g., for the inspiral phase of compact
binaries, since the parameter space of binary systems is
limited, all relevant physics is understood (at least in
the black-hole – black-hole binary case) and numerical
relativity simulations can predict essentially exact waveform templates (i.e., limited only by numerical error).
However, building waveform catalogs with exact predictions for matched ﬁltering is impossible for GWs from
core-collapse supernovae. On the one hand, there is unknown physics (e.g., the nuclear EOS) and many unconstrained parameters (e.g., the details of the precollapse
conﬁguration are poorly known) in the stellar collapse
This alone would require extensive parameter studies to build up template databases covering the
poorly constrained parameter space. On the other hand,
all expected GW emission processes in core-collapse supernovae are inﬂuenced or dominated by turbulent ﬂow.
Hence, their GW signals have a stochastic component
that is impossible to predict, even if all initial conditions
and physics were known exactly. Matched ﬁltering is not
applicable to such GW bursts. To extract the GW signal
from the next galactic core collapse event and determine
source physics such as the explosion mechanism, an approach to signal extraction/reconstruction, model selection, and parameter estimation is needed that can handle
the stochastic nature of the expected GW signals.
The reconstruction of both polarizations of a GW signal requires coincident observations of two detectors; linearly polarized signals can be reconstructed from data
of just one detector and adding a third detector overdetermines the problem, permitting the source position on
the sky to be determined . GW signal reconstruction
was pioneered by G¨ursel & Tinto with a maximum
likelihood approach, variants of which have been
incorporated into search pipelines for GW bursts .
Summerscales et al. were the ﬁrst to study signal reconstruction and parameter estimation for the GW
burst from rotating core collapse and bounce based on
waveforms of Ott et al. . They injected signals into
real detector noise of early LIGO science runs and used
a maximum entropy approach to reconstruct the signal
using data from two detectors without any a priori knowledge of the signal shape. Cross-correlation of the reconstructed signal with signal predictions of was then
used to determine source parameters.
Incorporating GW signal information from core collapse simulations into detection and signal reconstruction approaches was ﬁrst considered by Brady & Ray-
Majumder , who realized that the GW burst from
rotating collapse and bounce, while being unpredictable
in detail, has robust features that can be isolated mathematically. They created an orthonormal vectorspace of
waveforms from using Gram-Schmidt orthonormalization and isolated a subspace of essential features
most common to all waveforms. Heng also considered waveforms from rotating core collapse and bounce
and utilized the more recent waveform catalog of Dimmelmeier et al. . He performed Principal Component
Analysis (PCA; e.g., ), which transforms a correlated,
multi-dimensional data set into a set of orthogonal components by determining the eigenvectors and eigenvalues
of the covariance matrix of the data set. The principal
component (PC) vectors are the eigenvectors ranked ac-
cording to their corresponding eigenvalue, with the ﬁrst
PC being the eigenvector with the largest eigenvalue.
Cannon et al. have also utilised this method for GW
signals from compact binary coalescence.
R¨over et al. went a step further and combined PCA
with Bayesian inference using the Markov-Chain Monte
Carlo technique for computing marginalization integrals
(see, e.g., for a pedagogical introduction to Bayesian
methods). They considered linearly-polarized waveforms
from rotating core collapse and bounce and were able to
reconstruct signals from modeled noise in a single detector and infer key parameters, e.g., the nuclear EOS used
in the simulation that led to a given trial waveform.
In this paper, we present a proof-of-principle study
to demonstrate that the core-collapse supernova explosion mechanism can be inferred from the GW signal of
a galactic core-collapse supernova observed with secondgeneration GW observatories such as Advanced LIGO,
Advanced Virgo, and LCGT. We consider the neutrino
mechanism (e.g., ), the magnetorotational mechanism
(e.g., ), and the acoustic mechanism , discuss
their essentials, and argue that they bear distinct GW
signatures as ﬁrst pointed out by Ott , which is
a prerequisite for our study. We follow the approach of
R¨over et al. and, for simplicity, restrict ourselves to
a single detector, linearly polarized signals, and a Gaussian noise model at the noise level of Advanced LIGO in
broadband mode. Like R¨over et al., we adopt a Bayesian
approach and use PCA, but, for the ﬁrst time, apply it to
multiple waveform catalogs. We associate each waveform
catalog with one of the three mechanisms and calculate
Bayes evidence ratios using the nested sampling algorithm to determine what mechanism’s PCs match
best with a given injected signal. We demonstrate that
this approach can identify any of the considered explosion
mechanisms with high conﬁdence for core collapse events
occurring at distances of up to ∼2 kpc. The magnetorotational explosion mechanism can even be inferred throughout the Milky Way (D ≳10 kpc). In addition to studying
the explosion mechanism, we also consider the problem of
determining whether a core collapse event is a rapidly rotating ordinary iron core collapse or an accretion-induced
collapse (AIC) of a massive white dwarf. These two processes are governed by the same physics and diﬀerences
in their waveforms are subtle , but our approach is
still capable of telling them apart.
This article is structured as follows: Section II reviews
the set of considered candidate core-collapse supernova
mechanisms, their individual GW signatures, and the
GW signal catalogs that we draw model waveforms from.
In Section III, we introduce our method for model selection via PCA and nested sampling. The results of our
study are presented and discussed in detail in Section IV.
We summarize and conclude in Section V.
SUPERNOVA MECHANISMS AND THEIR
GRAVITATIONAL WAVE SIGNATURES
In this study, we consider the neutrino mechanism, the
magnetorotational mechanism, and the acoustic mechanism for core-collapse supernova explosions and describe
them and their characteristic GW signal features in the
following sections. Variations of these mechanisms and
alternatives have been discussed elsewhere (e.g., ).
Neutrino Mechanism
The gravitational collapse of the iron core and the subsequent evolution of the nascent hot puﬀed-up protoneutron star to a cold compact neutron star release of order
300 B (1 Bethe = 1051 erg) of energy, ∼99% of which is
emitted in the form of neutrinos of all ﬂavors . If only
a small fraction of the energy released in neutrinos is reabsorbed behind the stalled shock, leading to net heating,
an explosion could be launched and endowed with the energy to account for the observed range of asymptotic explosion energies of 0.1-1 B of garden-variety core-collapse
supernovae . This is the gist of the neutrino mechanism of core-collapse supernovae, which, in its early form
was proposed by Arnett and Colgate & White ,
and in its modern form by Bethe & Wilson .
Despite its appealing simplicity, the neutrino mechanism, in its purest, spherically-symmetric (1D) form, fails
to revive the shock in all but the lowest-mass massive
stars with O-Ne cores . There is now strong evidence from axisymmetric (2D) and ﬁrst 3D
 simulations that the breaking of spherical
symmetry is key to the success of the neutrino mechanism. In 2D and 3D, neutrino-driven convection in the
region of net heating behind the shock, and the standingaccretion-shock instability (SASI) increase the ef-
ﬁciency of the neutrino mechanism .
Leaving rapid rotation aside for a moment,
dominant multi-dimensional GW-emitting dynamics in
neutrino-driven core-collapse supernovae are convection
in the protoneutron star (e.g., ) and SASImodulated convection in the region behind the stalled
shock. GW emission from convection and SASI has been
extensively studied in simulations in 2D and
to some extent in 3D . The top panel in
Fig. 1 shows a typical example waveform drawn from the
catalog of Murphy et al. . Right after core bounce,
an initial burst of GWs is emitted by strong, so-called
prompt convection , driven by the negative entropy
gradient left behind by the stalling shock. Subsequently,
the GW signal settles at lower amplitudes, then picks
up again as the SASI reaches its non-linear phase and
high-velocity accretion downstreams penetrate deep into
the region behind the shock, where they are decelerated,
leading to pronounced spikes in the wave signal . The
secular rise in the signal amplitude towards the end of the
waveform is due to the onset of an aspherical explosion
t −tbounce [s]
h+ [10−22]
Murphy et al. 2009, 12 M⊙Lν = 3.2
Model 12 3.2
Neutrino Mechanism
t −tbounce [ms]
h+ [10−22]
Dimmelmeier et al. 2008
Model s15A2O09 shen
Magnetorotational Mechanism
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4
t −tbounce [s]
h+ [10−22]
Model s15.0WHW02
Acoustic Mechanism
FIG. 1: Linearly polarized GW signal predictions for a core
collapse event located at 10 kpc from matter dynamics in axisymmetric simulations that can be associated with the neutrino mechanism (top panel, taken from ), the magnetorotational mechanism (center panel, taken from ), and the
acoustic mechanism (bottom panel, taken from ). Note
the varying ranges of the time and strain axes.
that the simulations of did not include magnetic ﬁelds,
since the GW signal from core bounce in magnetorotational
explosions is due to rapid rotation and not inﬂuenced by magnetic ﬁelds. This, however, did not allow them to capture the
expected secular rise of the waveform expected to occur once
an explosion sets in . See text for further discussion.
 , but occurs at too low characteristic frequencies to be visible to Advanced LIGO-class detectors. Not
included in the top panel of Fig. 1 is the contribution to
the GW signal from anisotropic neutrino emission , which can dominate in amplitude, but, like the contribution from aspherical outﬂow, occurs on timescales
too long to lead to emission at frequencies detectable
by the upcoming generation of ground-based detectors
 .
Overall, the detectable GW signal from a neutrinodriven nonrotating or slowly rotating core-collapse supernova will have random polarization, a broadband spectrum from ∼100 −1000 Hz and typical strain amplitudes
|h| of order 10−22 (D/10 kpc)−1, with individual peaks
reaching 10−21 (D/10 kpc)−1 .
The typical duration of emission is the time from core bounce to the
launch of the explosion, 0.3 −1 s, but convection inside
the cooling protoneutron star can continue to emit GWs
at lower amplitudes and higher frequencies for many seconds afterwards . Typical total emitted GW energies are in the range 10−11 −10−9 M⊙c2 .
The eﬀects of rotation on the neutrino mechanism and
its GW signature are not yet fully understood (see, e.g.,
 ) and it cannot be excluded that
contributions from rotational dynamics may modify the
GW signal of neutrino-driven core-collapse supernovae.
However, results from the systematic rotating core collapse studies of suggest that once rotation
rates become suﬃciently high to alter the dynamics, the
explosion is actually more likely to occur via the magnetorotational mechanism discussed in §II B. This, however, is under the provision that the magnetorotational
instability (e.g., ) works robustly and builds up
the required strong magnetic ﬁelds to drive an explosion.
Keeping the above caveats in mind, for the purpose of
this study, we make the assumption that the GW signature of neutrino-driven core-collapse supernovae is unaffected by rotational eﬀects.
GW Signal Catalogs
In this study, we use the catalog of Murphy et al. ,
which is available for download from .
The Murphy et al. catalog (in the following, we refer to waveforms from this catalog as Mur waveforms) encompasses
16 waveforms that were extracted via the quadrupole
formula (e.g., ) from Newtonian axisymmetric core
collapse simulations that used a parameterized scheme
for electron capture and neutrino heating/cooling and
included only the monopole component of the gravitation potential as described in . The Murphy et al.
simulations are nonrotating and the parameter space covered is spanned by progenitor ZAMS mass ({12, 15, 20,
and 40} M⊙) and by the dialed-in total electron and antielectron neutrino luminosity.
Yakunin et al. performed self-consistent axisymmetric Newtonian (with an approximate-GR monopole
term of the gravitational potential ) radiationhydrodynamics
simulations
neutrino-driven
corecollapse supernovae. They provide three waveforms at
 , obtained from simulations using progenitors of (12,
15, and 25) M⊙. We use the Yakunin waveforms (denoted, in the following, as Yak waveforms) to test the
robustness of our supernova mechanism determination
algorithm, which uses the PCs of the Mur waveforms.
Since we are limiting ourselves to one detector in this
proof-of-principle study, we are considering only linearly
polarized signals. Gravitational waveforms with + and
× polarizations from 3D simulations of neutrino-driven
core-collapse supernovae will be considered in
future work.
Magnetorotational Mechanism
The conservation of angular momentum in core collapse to a protoneutron star leads to a spin-up by a factor of ∼1000 . Starting from a precollapse angular
velocity distribution that may be expected to be more
or less uniform in the inner core (e.g., ), homologous
collapse preserves the uniform rotation of the inner core
while the supersonic collapse of the outer core leads to
strong diﬀerential rotation in the outer protoneutron star
and in the region between protoneutron star and shock
A rapidly spinning precollapse core with a period of
order 1 s results in a ms-period protoneutron star, with a
rotational energy of order 10 B, which is about ten times
greater than the typical core-collapse supernova explosion energy. If only a fraction of this energy was tapped,
a strong explosion could be triggered.
Theory and simulations (e.g., ) have
shown that magnetorotational processes are eﬃcient at
extracting spin energy and can drive collimated outﬂows,
leading to energetic bipolar jet-like explosions. Recent
work suggests that magnetic ﬁelds of the
order of 1015 G with strong toroidal components are required to yield the necessary magnetic stresses to drive
a strong bipolar explosion. If 1015 G ﬁelds were to arise
from ﬂux compression in collapse alone, precollapse core
ﬁelds would have to be of order 1012 G , which
is about 3 orders of magnitude larger than predicted by
stellar evolution models (e.g., ). It is more likely
that the most signiﬁcant ampliﬁcation occurs after core
bounce via rotational winding of poloidal into toroidal
ﬁeld (a linear process), the non-linear magnetorotational
instability (MRI, which is not yet fully understood in the
core collapse context ). Both processes operate
on the free energy stored in diﬀerential rotation, which
is abundant in the outer core.
For the magnetorotational mechanism to work, precollapse spin periods ≲4 −5 s appear to be required
 . Such rapid rotation leads to a strongly centrifugallydeformed inner core with a large quadrupole moment
(ℓ= 2; due to its oblateness), which rapidly changes
during core bounce, leading to a strong burst of GWs.
The GW signal from rotating collapse and bounce has
been studied extensively and the most recent generalrelativistic simulations have shown it to be of rather
generic morphology with a single strong peak at bounce
and a subsequent ringdown as the protoneutron star core
settles into its new equilibrium .
A typical example GW signal taken from the catalog of Dimmelmeier et al. is shown in the center panel of
Fig. 1. The core collapse and bounce phase proceeds essentially axisymmetrically even in very rapidly spinning
cores and its GW signal is linearly polarized with vanishing amplitude seen by an observer located along the symmetry axis and maximum amplitude
for an equatorial observer. Typical emission durations for
the linearly polarized GWs from core bounce are of order 10 ms and peak GW amplitudes for rapidly spinning
cores that may lead to magnetorotational explosions are
of order 10−21 −10−20 at 10 kpc with most of the energy
being emitted around 500 −800 Hz in cores that reach
nuclear density and bounce due to the stiﬀening of the
nuclear EOS. Cores with initial spin periods shorter than
∼0.5−1 s experience a slow bounce at sub-nuclear densities strongly inﬂuenced or dominated by the centrifugal
force. They emit most of the GW energy at frequencies
below ∼200 Hz . Typical emitted GW energies
are in the range 10−10 −10−8 M⊙c2.
The GW signal
from rotating collapse and core bounce is unlikely to be
aﬀected by MHD eﬀects, since the build up to dynamically relevant ﬁeld strengths occurs only after bounce
 .
Due to the strong rotational deformation of the protoneutron star, neutrinos decouple from the matter at
smaller radii and hotter temperatures in polar regions
than near the equator.
This leads to the emission of
a larger neutrino ﬂux with a harder neutrino spectrum
in polar regions (e.g., ).
This globally asymmetric neutrino emission results in a secularly rising lowfrequency GW signal . Similar low-frequency contributions will come from the bipolar outﬂow characteristic for a magnetorotational explosion and from magnetic
stresses . The low-frequency waveform components are not shown in the center panel of Fig. 1 and
are not detectable by the upcoming second-generation
earthbound GW observatories.
Also associated with rapid rotation and the magnetorotational mechanism are rotational instabilities that may
lead to nonaxisymmetric deformations of the protoneutron star whose “bar-mode” (m = 2) components may
emit elliptically polarized GWs for tens to hundreds of
milliseconds . However, these instabilities,
and in particular their interplay with magnetic ﬁelds and
the MRI (see, e.g., ), are not yet fully understood.
Since we are considering only linearly polarized signals
and are limited to one detector, we do not include GW
signals from these nonaxisymmetric instabilities in this
GW Signal Catalogs
We employ the large (128 waveforms) GW signal catalog of Dimmelmeier et al. (Dim in the following), who performed 2D GR simulations of rotating iron
core collapse for (11.2, 15, 20, and 40) M⊙progenitors
and two diﬀerent nuclear EOS, varying initial rotation
rate and degree of diﬀerential rotation. They approximated the eﬀects of electron capture during collapse by
parametrizing the electron fraction Ye as a function of
density, which yields inner core sizes that are very close
to those obtained with full neutrino transport . The
inner core size determines the amount of mass and angular momentum that can be dynamically relevant during
core bounce and, hence, is a determining factor in the
GW signal . The Dim catalog was also used by the
previous parameter estimation work of R¨over et al. .
For testing, we use the three additional Dim waveforms
computed for that are not part of the original Dim
catalog and were used to test their algorithm. We label
this set of extra waveforms as DimExtra.
robustness
mechanismdetermination approach, we draw gravitational waveforms of rotating models from the catalog of Scheidegger et al. , (Sch in the following) who performed
3D Newtonian-MHD rotating iron core collapse calculations with a spherical approximate-GR gravitational potential and employed the same EOS and electron capture
treatment as Dimmelmeier et al. , but used diﬀerent
progenitor models.
Furthermore, we use the GW signal catalog of Abdikamalov et al. (Abd in the following) who used the
same numerical code as Dimmelmeier et al. , but studied the rapidly spinning accretion-induced collapse (AIC)
of massive white dwarfs to neutron stars. This process
yields a GW signal very similar to rotating iron core collapse and explosions in AIC may occur also via the magnetorotational mechanisms . We include this catalog
of 106 waveforms to see if our algorithm can diﬀerentiate between rotating iron core collapse and rotating AIC
assuming the Dim and Abd catalogs correctly predict the
respective GW signals.
Acoustic Mechanism
The core-collapse supernova evolution in the acoustic
mechanism proposed by Burrows et al. is initially identical to the one expected for the neutrino mechanism. Neutrino heating, convection and the SASI set
the stage, but no explosion is triggered for ≳500 ms after
bounce. At this point, the SASI is in its highly non-linear
phase and modulates high-velocity accretion downﬂows
that impact on the protoneutron star and excite core pulsations (primarily ℓ= {1, 2} g-modes). Over hundreds of
milliseconds, these pulsations reach large amplitudes and
damp via the emission of strong sound waves. Traveling
down the steep density gradient in the region behind the
shock, the sound waves steepen to shocks and dissipate
their energy behind and in the shock. This mechanism is
robust in the simulations by Burrows et al. ,
but requires ≳1 s to develop, thus leads to massive NSs,
and tends to yield explosion energies on the lower side of
what is observed.
The GW signature of the acoustic mechanism is dominated by the strong emission from the quadrupole components of the protoneutron star core pulsations that are
quasi-periodic (their frequency shifts secularly along with
the changing protoneutron star structure) and become
very strong ≳800 −1000 ms after core bounce .
The lower panel of Fig. 1 depicts a typical example waveform from Ott et al. , who studied the GW signature of the acoustic mechanism based on the simulations of Burrows et al. . At early times, the GW
signal is essentially the same as expected for the neutrino mechanism, but once the protoneutron star core
pulsations grow strong, they are hard to miss. The simulations of Burrows et al. were axisymmetric and the resulting GW signals are linearly polarized,
though in 3D, one would expect oscillation power also in
non-axisymmetric components. Typical maximum strain
amplitudes are of order few × 10−21 −10−20 and multiple modes with frequencies between ∼600 −1000 Hz
contribute to the emission. Since the pulsations last for
many cycles, the emitted GW energies may be large and
are predicted to be of order 10−8 −10−7M⊙c2 and extreme models reach few × 10−5M⊙c2 .
There are multiple caveats associated with the acoustic
mechanism that must be mentioned. Most importantly,
the acoustic mechanism has been found in simulations of
only one group with a single simulation code, but others have not yet ruled out the possibility of strong protoneutron star pulsations at late times (e.g., ).
a non-linear perturbation study, Weinberg & Quataert
 found that the protoneutron star pulsation amplitudes may be limited by a parametric instability involving high-order modes that damp eﬃciently via neutrino
emission and are not presently resolved in numerical simulations. This would limit the protoneutron star pulsations to dynamically insigniﬁcant amplitudes. Moreover,
the simulations of Burrows et al. were axisymmetric and
nonrotating or only very slowly rotating. It is not clear to
what amplitudes individual protoneutron star pulsation
modes would grow in 3D. Rapid rotation, due to its stabilizing eﬀect on convection and SASI , may likely
inhibit the growth of pulsations. Both 3D and rotational
eﬀects remain to be explored.
GW Signal Catalogs
We employ the set of 7 waveforms from the models of
 analyzed by Ott and available at . We refer
to this set as the Ott catalog in the following and use
them to compute PCs for the acoustic mechanism’s GW
signature. All waveforms were computed on the basis of
the Burrows et al. simulations and diﬀer only
in the employed progenitor model, covering a range in
ZAMS mass from 11.2 to 25 M⊙.
Three additional waveforms of an earlier study of
Ott et al. are available . We label this small set
OttExtra and use them for testing our method’s capability of correctly identifying them as coming from stars
exploding via the acoustic mechanism.
DATA ANALYSIS
The three example gravitational waveforms shown in
Fig. 1 that are associated with the three supernova mechanisms are clearly diﬀerent. Provided the assumptions
made in associating these signals with the various mechanisms are correct, a GW signal detected from a corecollapse supernova should, in principle, allow to determine the explosion mechanism. To do so in practice, two
problems most be overcome: (i) The exact waveform of
an incident signal is impossible to predict in advance.
(ii) Real GW detectors are noisy instruments (see, e.g.,
 for a discussion of detectors and noise sources) and
any GW signal will be contaminated by detector noise.
In other words, it is necessary to develop a data analysis algorithm that is capable of distinguishing between
underlying physical models (e.g., supernova mechanisms)
on the basis of a noisy signal whose detailed shape cannot
be predicted exactly.
In the following subsections, we describe the components of a Bayesian data analysis algorithm which classi-
ﬁes detected GW signals from core-collapse supernovae as
belonging to one of a set of signal catalogs, representing,
e.g., diﬀerent explosion mechanisms. A block diagram
of the analysis algorithm, which we call the Supernova
Model Evidence Extractor (SMEE), is shown in Fig. 2.
SMEE is implemented in MATLAB1.
In a ﬁrst step, SMEE performs Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) via singular value decomposition (SVD)
on the waveforms in each catalog to create sets of orthogonal basis vectors, the Principal Components (PCs),
which are ordered according to their prevalence in their
catalog. In other words, the ﬁrst PC represents the most
common feature of all signals in the catalog, the second
PC represents the second most common feature, and so
on. Using a complete set of PCs, each waveform can be
reconstructed as a linear combination of PCs for the corresponding catalog, allowing each waveform to be simply
parameterized by the PC coeﬃcients in the linear combination. However, since PCs are expected to span the
parameter space deﬁned by each catalog of waveforms
eﬃciently, catalog waveforms may be reconstructed with
good accuracy already with a set of PCs that is signiﬁcantly smaller than the number of waveforms in the catalog. Moreover, non-catalog waveforms (i.e., real signals)
may be identiﬁed as belonging to the same class of signals as catalog waveforms if they can be approximately
matched with the ﬁrst few PCs of a catalog.
SMEE then uses Bayesian model selection and computes the logarithm of the Bayes factor to distinguish between GW signal classes. The Bayes factor is the ratio of
 
catalog M1
plus Noise
catalog M2
signal from
catalog M1
signal from
catalog M2
FIG. 2: Block diagram of the Supernova Model Evidence Extractor (SMEE). A desired core-collapse supernova gravitational wave signal is injected into noise, and the algorithm
compares it to the principal components (PCs) of a given
waveform catalog representing a particular model. The PCs
are constructed via singular value decomposition (SVD). The
sign of the log Bayes factor between two PC sets indicates
which model is favored by the data.
the evidences for two competing hypotheses and, for the
purpose of our analysis, we weigh the evidence that the
observed data supports the presence of a GW signal consistent with signals from one of any two competing catalogs. This requires summing up the likelihood function
times the prior across all possible signal parameters (in
our case, values of PC coeﬃcients) to determine the evidence (also called the marginal likelihood) for two diﬀerent signal models to be tested. SMEE accomplishes this
eﬃciently via the Nested Sampling algorithm .
Bayesian Model Selection
In our analysis, we employ Bayesian Model Selection,
similar to that described in . Speciﬁcally, we use the
Bayes factor to compare the probabilities of two competing models. In general terms, the Bayes factor Bij can
be written as the ratio of the evidences p(D|M),
Bij = p(D|Mi)
where Mi and Mj are two competing models tested
using the data D. The evidence for each model is obtained by integrating the product of its likelihood function, p(D|θ, M), and prior, p(θ|M), across all model parameter values θ, such that,
p(θ|M)p(D|θ, M) dθ .
This eﬀectively calculates the likelihood averaged over
all parameter values. The distribution of the prior re-
ﬂects our bias for or against particular parameter values.
For the analysis discussed in this article, we adopt a ﬂat,
uniform prior over all parameter values which means that
we do not favour any particular portion of the parameter
The evidence will be greater for a model that is supported by the data. Therefore, the Bayes factor indicates
which of the two competing models is preferred by the
data. It is often more convenient to compare models by
using the natural logarithm of the Bayes factor,
log Bij = log p(D|Mi) −log p(D|Mj) .
In this case, log Bij > 0 means Mi is the preferred
model whereas log Bij < 0 will point to Mj being favored.
Nested Sampling Algorithm
For evaluating log Bij, we ﬁrst need to calculate the
evidences p(D|Mi) and p(D|Mj) for the two models Mi
and Mj. From Eq. 2 we see that the evidence is the sum
of the likelihood times the prior determined for all possible parameter values of the desired model. An exhaustive, brute-force approach to computing the evidence by
calculating the likelihood values for every choice of parameter values is computationally prohibitive. It is also
an ineﬃcient way of determining the evidence since the
likelihood values will be most signiﬁcant, and therefore
contribute most to the evidence, for a small subset of parameter values which constructs a waveform that closely
resembles the data. For most other combinations of the
model’s parameters, the likelihood will be insigniﬁcant
and do not contribute to the evidence.
Therefore, we choose to follow the approach of Veitch
et al. and employ Nested Sampling to eﬃciently calculate the evidence integral. The Nested Sampling algorithm determines the evidence integral by calculating the likelihood for sample values of the desired
model’s parameters. Initially, the model’s parameter values are randomly selected. The algorithm then iterates
over diﬀerent sets of the model’s parameter values, calculating the likelihood for each set of parameter values.
With each iteration, the smallest likelihood value obtained is compared with that calculated for a randomly
chosen set of new parameter values. Only parameter values which lead to a larger likelihood value than the smallest obtained in the previous iteration are kept. Therefore, as the algorithm stochastically samples the parameter space, it iteratively converges on the set of parameter
values that produce the most signiﬁcant likelihood values.
The nested sampling algorithm is similar to the
Markov-Chain Monte Carlo approach (e.g., ) except
that the primary output of the Nested Sampling algorithm is the evidence, which can be immediately obtained
by summation whereas the posterior distribution is only
found as a by-product. To ﬁnd the evidence, a set of “live
points” are found through creating a stochastic sampling
of the prior distribution to generate a set of N samples
which are denoted as θi, where i = 1 . . . N. In context
of the analysis presented in later in this article (see section III E), θi corresponds to βi which is the i-th sample
of the principal component coeﬃcient for which we calculate the signal likelihood. The evidence integral (Eq. 2)
is then written as
p(θ|M)p(D|θ, M) dθ ,
p(D|θi, M)wi ,
where the weight,
wi = p(θi|M)dθi ,
is the fraction of the prior distribution represented by
the i-th sample and Li is its likelihood. It is this weighted
likelihood that is calculated by the Nested Sampling algorithm and subsequently used to obtained the evidence.
More details on the Nested Sampling algorithm can be
found in .
Principal Component Analysis via Singular
Value Decomposition
Each core-collapse supernova waveform catalog consists of a number of GW signals obtained for diﬀerent
initial conditions and simulation parameters (e.g., progenitor star mass, EOS, rotational conﬁguration etc.).
While individual waveforms of one catalog are diﬀerent
in detail, they generally exhibit strong common general
features. This can be exploited by principal component
analysis (PCA) , which isolates the most common
features of waveforms in linearly independent principal
components (PCs) ordered by their relevance. The ﬁrst
few PCs may already be suﬃcient to eﬃciently span their
entire catalog, as was shown in and for the Dim
catalog (see Sect. II B 1).
The PCs are obtained via singular value decomposition
(SVD) (e.g., ) of time-domain waveforms from each
catalog. To perform SVD on a catalog with m waveforms,
a matrix A is created such that each of its columns corresponds to a waveform of uniform length n from the
The n × m waveform matrix A is factored so that
A = UΣVT ,
where U is an n×n matrix whose columns correspond
to the eigenvectors of AAT . Similarly, the columns of
the m × m matrix V correspond to the eigenvectors of
AT A and Σ is an n×m diagonal matrix whose elements
correspond to the square root of the corresponding eigenvalues.
Since AAT is the covariance matrix of A, the eigenvectors in U are eﬀectively an orthonormal basis which
span the m-dimensional parameter space deﬁned by the
catalog of waveforms used to construct A. Note that, in
practice, n ≫m and it is impractical to determine the
eigenvectors in U directly. Instead, the smaller V and
its corresponding eigenvalues in Σ are ﬁrst determined
which are subsequently used to derive U.
The orthonormal eigenvectors of U are the PCs and
are ranked by their corresponding eigenvalues. The PC
with the largest corresponding eigenvalue is referred to
as the ﬁrst PC and consists of the most signiﬁcant common features of all waveforms in the catalog. It follows
that the PC with the second largest corresponding eigenvalue is the second PC and consists of the second most
signiﬁcant common features and so on.
The waveforms in A can be reconstructed by taking a
linear combination of PCs,
where hi is the desired waveform from the catalog, Uj
is the jth PC from the U matrix and βj is the corresponding PC coeﬃcient, which can be obtained by projection of hi onto Uj. The sum of k PCs produces an
approximation of the desired waveform since k ≤m.
Signal and Noise Models
For the analysis described here, two types of models
are considered. The signal model Ms tests the presence
of a signal waveform h(β) in the data. Here, PCA is performed for each catalog (using SVD; see section III D)
and each waveform is parameterized by its PC coeﬃcients (β). The Gaussian likelihood function for the signal model is
p(D|β, Ms) =
−(Di −hi(β))2
where σi is the standard deviation of the noise, hi(β)
is the desired waveform reconstructed from the PCs and
N is the length of the data with a corresponding index i. The evidence for the signal model is determined
by performing the integral in Eq. 2 numerically, using
uniformly-distributed priors over a chosen range for β.
On the other hand, the noise model Mn tests the data’s
consistency with Gaussian noise. The likelihood function
for the noise model is the same as that in Eq. 8, but with
h(β) = 0. From this, it is straightforward to perform the
integration in Eq. 2 and obtain an analytic form for the
noise evidence function,
In both Eq. 8 and 9, the standard deviation of the noise
is a function of each sample in the data, because the simulated noise is designed to correspond to the expected
sensitivity of Advanced LIGO, which varies as a function
of frequency (see Sec. III F). To handle the frequencydependent noise, the signal and noise evidences are calculated in the frequency domain with Di, hi(β) and σi corresponding to data, reconstructed waveform, and noise
in the i-th frequency bin respectively. In particular, each
reconstructed waveform is obtained by taking a linear
combination of the Fourier transforms of its corresponding PCs.
The natural logarithm of the Bayes factor used to compare the signal model to the noise model is then simply
log BSN = log[p(D|Ms)] −log[p(D|Mn)].
Generation of Simulated Noise
We generate Gaussian colored noise, assuming a single Advanced LIGO detector in the proposed broadband
conﬁguration (the so-called “zero detuning, high-power”
mode). We employ the data ﬁle ZERO DET high P.txt
provided by , which contains
S(f), the square root
of the one-sided detector noise power spectral density in
units of (Hz)−1/2. An open-source implementation for
MATLAB of what we describe in the following can be found
The real discrete time-domain noise n(tj), where tj denotes the j-th discrete time interval of size ∆t, is obtained
Dim Catalog
(Magnetorotational Mechanism)
0.980 0.985 0.990 0.995 1.000 1.005 1.010
Mur Catalog
(Neutrino Mechanism)
Ott Catalog
(Acoustic Mechanism)
FIG. 3: The ﬁrst three Principal Components (PCs) of the waveforms from the Dimmelmeier (Dim) , Murphy (Mur) , and Ott catalogs, which we take to be representative of the magnetorotational, neutrino and acoustic mechanisms,
respectively (see Secs. II A, II B and II C). In creating the PCs, the waveforms of each catalog are placed in a systematic way
in a 3 s interval and padded left and right by zeros. The vertical axis is a dimensionless scale which represents the amplitude,
which we have normalized by the maximum amplitude over all 3 PCs of each catalog shown here.
by inverse discrete Fourier transform from the complex
frequency-domain noise ˜n(fk), where fk denotes the kth discrete frequency interval of size ∆f = 1/(Nt∆t),
where Nt is the number of intervals in the time domain.
Since the time-domain noise is real and has zero mean,
the frequency-domain noise must obey
˜n(−f) = ˜n∗(f) ,
˜n(f = 0) = ˜n(f = fNyq) = ˜n(f = −fNyq) = 0.(12)
Here, fNyq = 1/(2∆t) is the Nyquist frequency. If Nt is
the even number of equally spaced bins in time of width
∆t, then Nf = Nt/2 −1 is the number of independent
frequency bins fk in the frequency domain of width ∆f.
The frequency variable fk assumes values from −fNyq to
|˜n(fk)| =
˜n(fk)˜n∗(fk) is a two-sided amplitude spectral density. We generate ˜n(fk) by sampling the standard
normal distribution (zero mean, variance one) weighted
by the noise transfer function T(fk) =
real and imaginary parts of ˜n(fk) are then given for each
fk ∈(0, fNyq) by
R(˜n(fk)) =
2 T(f) RANDN ,
I(˜n(fk)) =
2 T(f) RANDN ,
where RANDN is a random number sampled from the standard normal distribution. The remaining ˜n(fk) are then
obtained via Eqs. 11 and 12.
The inverse discrete Fourier transform of ˜n(fk) to time
domain noise n(tj) will preserve its Gaussian character
in the time domain in the limit of small sampling interval . Speciﬁcally, we use the following deﬁnition
of the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) for transform-
ing noise from the frequency to the time domain when
n(tj)exp(−2πi jk/N) ,
˜n(fk)exp(2πi jk/N) .
For convenience, we deﬁne the matched ﬁlter signalto-noise ratio (SNR) of a GW signal h as
where S(f) is the one-sided noise power spectral density.
The factor ∆t2 is applied to correct the dimensions of
˜h(f), which we obtain via the DFT deﬁned by Eq. 15.
Application in SMEE
GW Signal Preparation and PCA
Before carrying out PCA and injecting signals into
noise, all waveforms are buﬀered with zeros to be of
length n, which we choose to correspond to 3 s at a sampling rate of 4096 Hz, allowing us to comfortably accommodate the longest available core-collapse supernova GW
signals. The Advanced LIGO sampling rate is 16 kHz.
The reduced sampling rate we choose saves computation
time and is suﬃcient to capture the frequency content of
the core-collapse supernova waveforms considered here,
which have most of their power at ∼50 −1000 Hz.
We align waveforms from the Dim catalog at their maximum (the spike at core bounce). Waveforms from the
Mur and Ott catalogs are aligned so that the onsets of
emission coincide. All waveforms are shifted so that they
are aligned to the 4000-th point in the SMEE input data
ﬁle, corresponding to about the 1 s mark in the 3 s interval, to leave ample space left and right of the waveform.
In Fig. 3, we present the ﬁrst three PCs computed for
the Dim (magnetorotational mechanism; left panel), Mur
(neutrino mechanism; center panel), and Ott (acoustic
mechanism; right panel) catalogs. Before generating PCs
for the Mur catalog we ﬁlter out the secular low-frequency
drifts present in the Mur waveforms (see Fig. 1) by highpassing the signal above 30 Hz. Since the low-frequency
components are hidden in detector noise even when the
source is nearby, dropping them improves the eﬃciency of
our subsequent Bayesian analysis and signal reconstruction. We apply the same high-passing to trial waveforms
for the neutrino mechanism before injecting them into
Signal Injection and Model Selection
We inject trial GW signals into simulated Gaussian
Advanced LIGO noise and use SMEE to determine which
signal model (e.g., what core-collapse supernova explosion mechanism) a given injected signal belongs to via
the evaluation of the logarithmic Bayes factors log BSN
(Eq. 10) for an injected signal for each signal model S
and the noise model N. Comparing two signal models
i and j is then accomplished by computing log Bij =
log BiN −log BjN.
SMEE’s model selection operates in the frequency domain. Trial GW signal and the PCs belonging to the signal model under consideration are transformed into the
frequency domain via DFT and the trial GW signal is
added to the complex frequency-domain noise, retaining
phase information.
The Nested Sampling algorithm is
then invoked to marginalize the PC coeﬃcients βk. The
prior for each coeﬃcient is ﬂat and uniform. The prior
range for each βk is determined by ﬁrst reprojecting all
waveforms of a given catalog back onto the PCs to compute ˆβkl for each PC k and waveform l of the catalog.
The range of expected possible values of βk is then found
by taking the minimum and maximum of ˆβkl over all l
and adjusting these numbers by 10% down and up to add
a margin of error to account for uncertainty due to the
noise, motivated by the ﬁndings of .
Keeping the noise model ﬁxed, the results of SMEE’s
computations will depend on the SNR of the signal, i.e.
the distance to the core collapse event, and on the amount
of information we can provide to SMEE about expected
signals in the form of PCs.
The maximum number of PCs at SMEE’s disposal is
limited by the number of waveforms used to determine
the set of PCs. While each catalog used in this study has
a diﬀerent number of waveforms, we choose to simplify
our analysis by using the same number of PCs for all catalogs. Hence, the maximum number of PCs we use here is
7 and is set by the number of waveform in the Ott catalog
(see §II C 1). Using 7 PCs gives SMEE complete information about signals belonging to the Ott catalog and
signiﬁcant, but incomplete information about waveforms
from the Dim, Mur, and Abd catalogs. We also carry out
SMEE runs with less than 7 PCs to study the dependence
on the number of PCs employed. Using only a small subset of a catalog’s PCs limits SMEE’s ability to precisely
reconstruct injected catalog waveforms, but it represents
the real-life situation that the a priori information about
a detected signal is severely limited. Our goal here is not
to ideally reconstruct signals but to show that determining the underlying physical model of an observed signal
is possible with limited advance knowledge.
Response to Gaussian Noise
For interpreting the results of SMEE’s Bayesian model
selection on the basis of Eq. 3, it is necessary to quantify and understand SMEE’s response to pure Gaussian
detector noise without a signal being present. To this
end, we run SMEE on 10,000 randomized instances of
Advanced LIGO detector noise (generated as described
in §III F) without injecting signals and compute log BSN
(Eq. 10) in the absence of a signal for each signal model
S. The results, shown in Fig. 4, follow a Gaussian distribution with a mean corresponding to the expected value
i , where N is the number of PCs employed
(see §III E). The average logarithmic Bayes factors obtained for 10,000 instances of noise indicate that noise,
or any signal fully consistent with noise, is most likely to
have a logarithmic Bayes factor of −54.0 when SMEE
is run with 7 PCs of the Dim catalog.
For the Ott,
Mur, and Abd catalogs, the expected logarithmic Bayes
factors for pure Gaussian noise and 7 PCs are −52.1,
−52.3, and −53.0, respectively. The observed expectation value are very comparable to those calculated for the
Dim (−53.9), Ott (−52.2), Mur (−52.3), and Abd (−52.9)
catalogs, respectively, verifying that SMEE is operating
as expected. We have repeated this experiment for the
case when only 3 PCs are used and also in this case ﬁnd
that SMEE closely reproduces the predicted expectation
values, which are near −26 in the 3-PC case.
Since the logarithmic Bayes factors follow a Gaussian
distribution, we can set a threshold using the standard
deviations as an indicator for the expected false alarm
rate. Ideally, for the Dim catalog, a 1% false alarm rate
would correspond to a threshold that is ∼2.6 times the
standard deviation, corresponding to ∼0.44 above the
mean. However, we note that the expected logarithmic
Bayes factor value varies between diﬀerent catalogs and,
for a ﬁxed false alarm rate, we would require a diﬀerent
threshold for each catalog.
This variation can be address by re-normalising all Bayes factors so that they are
the same for all catalogs when there is only noise. But,
since the focus of our work here is to distinguish between
diﬀerent waveforms and not to perform a study on the
detection eﬃciency of GW signals, we choose to take the
more conservative approach of simply setting a higher
threshold. Therefore, we conservatively choose to identify a signal as being distinct from noise if its log BSN is
greater than −47 (in cases in which we use 3 PCs, this
number is −21). When comparing two signal models Mi
and Mj, we conservatively identify model Mi as favored
if log Bij ≥5 (and vice versa).
log BSN for S = 0
# of outcomes / (bin width) / 10000
SMEE on pure noise
10000 randomized noise instances
FIG. 4: Results from running SMEE with 7 PCs of the Dim
catalog and without an injected signal on 10,000 randomized
instances of Gaussian Advanced LIGO noise, generated as
described in Sec. III F. A signal consistent with noise is most
likely to have a logarithmic Bayes factor of ∼−54.0. The red
line plots a Gaussian distribution with a mean of −53.96 and
a standard deviation σ = 0.17.
TABLE I: Minimum SNR at which the injected waveform will
give a log BSN above the threshold deﬁned in §IV A. This is
shown for 5 representative waveforms from the Dim, Mur, and
Ott catalogs, which we take to be representative of the magnetorotational, neutrino, and acoustic mechanisms, respectively.
We provide results from SMEE runs with 3 and 7 PCs.
Minimum SNR
s11a1o01 Shen
s11a3o09 Shen
s20a3o05 LS
s40a3o07 LS
s40a3o13 Shen
s15.0WHW02
s20.0WHW02
s25.0WHW02
Signal vs. Noise
The minimal GW signal strength required for SMEE to
be able to select the core-collapse supernova mechanism
is an important question. The primary prerequisite for
an incident GW signal to be useful for model selection
is that SMEE can distinguish it from detector noise, i.e.,
TABLE II: log BSN with respect to the Dim, Mur, and Ott PCs computed for representative injected waveforms from the
Dim, Mur, and Ott catalogs, which we take to be representative of the magnetorotational, neutrino, and acoustic explosion
mechanism, respectively. Results for source distances of 0.2, 2, and 10 kpc are given. Each table entry shows the results for 3
PCs (to the left of the vertical divider |) and the 7-PC result (to the right of the divider). log BSN < −47 when 7 PCs are used
and log BSN < −21 when 3 PCs are used indicates that the injected signal is likely consistent with noise while larger values
suggests that the signal belongs to the signal model whose PCs were used in the analysis.
s11a1o01 Shen 38982|48686
9178|25647
s11a3o09 Shen 5×106|5×106 52403|54505 2071|2129 36170|58531
s20a3o05 LS
3×106|3×106 25738|26859 1005|1023
4139|29285
s40a3o07 LS
1×107|1×107 1×105|1×105 4737|5411 47029|1×105
s40a3o13 Shen 2×107|2×108 2×105|2×105 8174|8302 2×105|4×105 1830|3968 48|109
4205|10631
59264|4×105
4×105|5×105 4198|4981143|149
7450|10699
23744|29439
8×105|8×105 7672|7812282|262
32145|7×106
s15.0WHW02
6×107|6×107 6×105|6×105 24653|24655
s20.0WHW02
4×107|4×107 4×105|4×105 17975|17957
s25.0WHW02
1×108|1×108 1×106|1×106 45853|45829
we must ﬁnd the minimum signal strength (i.e., SNR) so
that log BSN > −47 (when 7 PCs are used; Eq. 10 and
In order to determine the range of minimum SNR required across and within core-collapse supernova GW signal types, we draw 5 representative waveforms from the
Dim, Mur, and Ott catalogs and run them through SMEE
at varying SNR, using 7 PCs generated from the catalog to which each injected waveform belongs. We choose
the waveforms in such a way to capture the full range
of variation within each catalog. The result of this exercise is shown in Fig. 5 and summarized in Tab. I. Generally, an SNR ≳4 −5 is required for SMEE to ﬁnd
log BSN > −47 in the idealized setting that we consider
here. In a real fully blind search, unknown arrival times
and non-Gaussianity of real detector noise will generally
require an SNR in excess of 8 for a detection statement
(e.g., ).
In Fig. 5, the waveforms associated with the acoustic mechanism (Ott catalog) require the smallest SNR,
followed by those of the neutrino mechanism (Mur catalog) and the magnetorotational mechanism (Dim catalog).
This hierarchy in minimum SNR, however, is not fundamental, but a consequence of the fact that we have chosen
to carry out this test using 7 PCs for each waveform catalog. Since the Ott catalog comprises only 7 waveforms,
the set of 7 PCs completely spans it and allows perfect
reconstruction, maximizing p(D|Ms) (Eq. 8). In the case
of less than perfect knowledge of the signal, the minimum
SNR will always be greater. This is why the Dim and Mur
catalogs, which have many more than 7 waveforms, require larger minimum SNR than the Ott waveforms.
The situation is somewhat diﬀerent, when we recalculate log BSN using only 3 PCs. The Ott catalog is
very small and rather diverse in the time domain. Its ﬁrst
few PCs do not eﬃciently span the catalog and, when
only the ﬁrst 3 PCs are used, the minimum SNRs for
waveforms poorly reconstructed with these PCs increases
dramatically, as shown for the Ott waveforms nomoto13
and nomoto15 in Tab. I. Some of the Mur waveforms also
exhibit increased minimum SNRs, indicating that there is
signiﬁcant time-domain variation that is not captured by
the ﬁrst 3 PCs. The large Dim catalog, on the other hand,
is very eﬃciently spanned already by its ﬁrst few PCs,
as previously pointed out by , and the minimum
SNR for waveforms from this catalog remains practically
unchanged when going from 7 to 3 PCs in our analysis.
Determining the Core-Collapse Supernova
Explosion Mechanism
The basic assumption of this study is that the neutrino,
magnetorotational, and acoustic core-collapse supernova
explosion mechanism have robustly distinct GW signatures. In this section, we test this assumption by inject-
Mechanism (Ott)
Mechanism (Mur)
Magnetorotational
Mechanism (Dim)
FIG. 5: Mean log BSN as a function of signal-to-noise ratio (SNR; Eq. 18) for 5 representative waveforms from the
Mur, Ott and Dim catalogs that encapsulate the variations
within each catalog using 7 Principal Components (PC).
The shaded areas represent the standard error in the mean
value of log BSN for each waveform catalog computed as
σ = ±N −1(Σi(¯x −xi)2)1/2, where ¯x is the mean and xi are
the individual SNRs and N is the number of waveforms. Values of log BSN below −47 in the 7-PC ase and below −21 in
the 3-PC case indicate that the algorithm considers it more
likely that there is no signal detectable in the noise. Table I
summarizes numerical results for the minimum SNR for which
log BSN ≥−47.
ing waveforms into simulated noise and running SMEE
on the data using PCs of waveform catalogs representative of the neutrino, magnetorotational, and acoustic
mechanisms. If our assumption is correct and the GW
signatures of these mechanisms are truly distinct, then
SMEE should (i) yield the largest value of log BSN when
the set of PCs is used that corresponds to the mechanism
the waveform is representative of, and, (ii) log Bij (Eq. 3)
should be positive (and larger than ∼5; see §IV A) if the
injected waveform is most consistent with mechanism i,
negative if it is most consistent with mechanism j, and
near zero if the result is inconclusive.
We carry out our SMEE calculations for events located
at 0.2 kpc, 2 kpc, and 10 kpc and with 3 and 7 PCs. Betelgeuse (α Orionis), a red supergiant star of 15 −20 M⊙
 , is located 197 ± 45 pc from Earth and will
eventually explode as a Type II-P core-collapse supernova. Hence, studying a potential event at 0.2 kpc will
tell us what we can learn from the observation of GWs
from Betelgeuse’s collapse and supernova. 2 kpc is still
nearby on the galactic scale, but the Galactic volume out
to this radius already contains hundreds of supergiants,
one of which may make the next galactic supernova .
Finally, 10 kpc is the ﬁducial Galactic distance scale and
we consider it to state what could be inferred throughout
the Milky Way. As in Sec. IV B, we carry out SMEE runs
with 3 and 7 PCs to study the sensitivity of the results
on the amount of knowledge about the injected waveform
we grant SMEE.
Table II summarizes the results from log BSN calculations for ﬁve representative waveforms from the Mur (neutrino mechanism), Dim (magnetorotational mechanism),
and Ott (acoustic mechanism) catalogs. The larger the
value of log BSN, the greater the conﬁdence that the data
contain a signal consistent with the employed set of PCs.
log BSN ≤−47 (for the 7-PC case; −21 in the 3-PC case)
indicates that the signal is more consistent with noise.
The results show that it is indeed possible to clearly associate any injected waveform with its catalog and, thus,
select the explosion mechanism for a core-collapse supernova out to at least 2 kpc. However, at the galactic scale
(10 kpc), a signiﬁcant fraction of waveforms representative of the neutrino mechanism, due to their intrinsically
low GW amplitudes, can be told apart from noise only
marginally or are even most consistent with noise. Typical magnetorotational explosions and explosions driven
by the acoustic mechanism are still clearly identiﬁable at
10 kpc. However, when the reduced set of 3 PCs is used,
the Ott catalog, which is not well spanned by only 3 PCs,
suﬀers most and two out of the ﬁve representative Ott
waveforms are not or only marginally identiﬁable with
the 3 ﬁrst Ott PCs at 10 kpc.
Provided that there is conﬁdence that a signal has been
detected, we can compute log Bij (Eq. 3) to study if the
signal is more likely to be consistent with mechanism i or
mechanism j. Since we know log BSN for all signal models, we can simply compute log Bij = log BiN −log BjN
from the data for representative waveforms provided in
Tab. II. We use 7 PCs for these calculations.
In Fig. 6, we show results of injection studies of all
waveforms from the Dim, Mur, and Ott catalogs run
through SMEE and analyzed with the Dim, Mur, and Ott
PCs at a source distance of 10 kpc. The full numerical results on whose basis Fig. 6 was generated are available online . The left panel depicts the log BDimMur result for
injected waveforms from the Dim and Mur catalogs, that
we take to be representative of the magnetorotational
and neutrino mechanism, respectively.
Even at 10 kpc
the vast majority of waveforms characteristic for magnetorotational explosions are clearly identiﬁed as belonging
to this mechanism. For the neutrino mechanism, the evidence is generally signiﬁcantly weaker and only ∼44% of
the Mur waveforms are identiﬁed with log BDimMur < −100
and none have log BDimMur < −1000, while ∼19% are in
the inconclusive regime of −5 < log BDimMur < 5.
In the center panel of Fig. 6, we show results for
log BDimOtt for injected waveforms corresponding to the
magnetorotational (Dim) and the acoustic (Ott) mechanism.
The case is clear cut and most waveforms are
correctly identiﬁed as most likely belonging to their re-
spective catalog/mechanism. Finally, the right panel of
Fig. 6 presents log BMurOtt for waveforms representative
of the neutrino (Mur) and acoustic (Ott) mechanism. As
in the previous panel, SMEE associates the waveforms
corresponding to the acoustic mechanism with high con-
ﬁdence to the Ott catalog. The evidence suggesting correct association of the neutrino mechanism waveforms is
considerably less strong, but log BMurOtt is still conclusive
for ∼88% of the Mur waveforms.
Figure 7 shows the results for log BDimMur, log BDimOtt,
and log BMurOtt obtained by SMEE with 7 PCs at a source
distance of 2 kpc.
Here, all acoustic mechanism waveforms (Ott catalog), all magnetorotational mechanism
waveforms (Dim call), and all neutrino mechanism waveforms (Mur catalog) are correctly identiﬁed as belonging
to their respective catalog and explosion mechanism.
Deciding Between Rotating Accretion-Induced
Collapse and Rotating Iron Core Collapse
The waveforms of the Dim catalog are representative of the GW signal emitted by rotating collapse and
bounce of iron cores of massive stars with ZAMS masses
≳8 −10 M⊙. In the accretion-induced collapse (AIC)
of rapidly rotating O-Ne white dwarfs, very similar dynamics occurs and the corresponding GW signals, as predicted by Abdikamalov et al. , share many of the basic features of the rotating iron core collapse and bounce
waveforms of, e.g., the Dim catalog (see the discussion in
Sec. IV.C. of ). Hence, it is interesting to see if our
SMEE model selection algorithm can tell them apart.
We compute the PCs for the Abd catalog in the same
fashion as done previously for the Dim, Mur, and Ott catalogs and inject all Abd and Dim waveforms into simulated
Advanced LIGO noise. Since the Abd and Dim catalogs
are very similar, the results found for Dim waveforms in
Sec. IV B carry over directly to Abd waveforms. SMEE
is then run with 7 PCs to calculate log BAbdDim. The result is shown in Fig. 8 for source distances of 10 kpc and
2 kpc. Full numerical results are available on-line .
In spite of the strong general similarity of rotating iron
core collapse and rotating AIC waveforms, SMEE correctly identiﬁes the vast majority of injected waveforms
as most likely being emitted by a rotating iron core collapse or by rotating AIC. However, for a source at 10 kpc
(left panel of Fig. 8), ∼6% of the Dim and ∼5% of the Abd
are incorrectly identiﬁed as belonging to the respective
other catalog. For an additional 2% of the Dim waveforms
and 14% of the Abd waveforms, the evidence is inconclusive.
At a source distance of 2 kpc (right panel of Fig. 8),
88% of the AIC (Abd) and 93% of the rotating core collapse (Dim) waveforms are correctly identiﬁed.
If one placed trust in the reliability of less dominant
and more particular features of waveforms in the underlying catalogs, one could use a larger number of PCs in the
analysis. In order to study the eﬀect of using an increased
number of PCs, we re-run the Abd vs. Dim comparison
with 14 PCs and ﬁnd that the result is signiﬁcantly worse
than with 7 PCs: ∼61% of the Abd waveforms and ∼23%
of the Dim catalog are now incorrectly attributed to the
respective other catalog at 10 kpc. This counter intuitive
and at ﬁrst surprising result is readily explained by the
overall great similarity of the AIC and iron core collapse
waveforms and the nature of PCA and SMEE’s Bayesian
model selection. The most robust features of each waveform catalog are encapsulated in its ﬁrst few PCs. The
ﬁrst Dim and Abd PCs are indeed signiﬁcantly diﬀerent,
but subsequent Abd and Dim PCs exhibit rather similar secondary features. Since each PC carries the same
weight in SMEE’s evidence calculation, including a larger
number of PCs dilutes SMEE’s judgment in this case and
leads to the observed false identiﬁcations.
Testing Robustness with Unknown Waveforms
In the previous sections,
we have demonstrated
SMEE’s ability to identify an injected trial GW signal as
belonging to a particular physical model (i.e., emission
mechanism and/or explosion mechanism). In this, however, we have drawn the injected waveforms directly from
the catalogs used to generate the PCs. In other words,
we have given SMEE (limited) advance knowledge about
the injected waveforms.
Here, we carry out a much more stringent test of
SMEE’s ability to select between models of the corecollapse supernova mechanism by injecting waveforms
that were not employed in the initial PC generation
and/or stem from completely independent catalogs.
Magnetorotational Mechanism
For the magnetorotational mechanism, we employ
three additional Dim waveforms (DimExtra, Sec. II B 1)
that were not included in the calculation of the Dim PCs.
Furthermore, we inject waveforms from rotating models of the Sch catalog of Scheidegger et al. 
(see Sec. II B 1). The results of the log BSN calculation
for the magnetorotational, neutrino, and acoustic mechanism signal models are summarized in Tab. III. DimExtra
waveforms are identiﬁed as being most consistent with
the Dim catalog and, hence, the magnetorotational mechanism. This is true with high conﬁdence when 3 or 7 PCs
are used and for all DimExtra signals out to distances
The Sch waveforms were generated with a completely
diﬀerent numerical code and thus allow for a truly independent test of our approach in SMEE. Also, unlike the
Dim waveforms, the Sch waveforms are based on 3D simulations. Hence, they are not linearly polarized. For consistency with our current approach, we neglect h× and
inject only h+ as seen by an equatorial observer.
Results of SMEE log BSN calculations for all injected Sch
D = 10 kpc
log(BDimMur)
Fractional Count
Magnetorotational
Mechanism (Dim)
Mechanism (Mur)
D = 10 kpc
log(BDimOtt)
Fractional Count
Magnetorotational
Mechanism (Dim)
Mechanism (Ott)
D = 10 kpc
log(BMurOtt)
Fractional Count
Mechanism (Mur)
Mechanism (Ott)
FIG. 6: Histograms describing the outcome of signal model comparisons by means of the Bayes factors log Bij = log p(D|Mi)−
log p(D|Mj), where i ̸= j and Mi and Mj are signal models described by the Dim (magnetorotational mechanism), Mur (neutrino
mechanism), and Ott (acoustic mechanism) waveform catalogs. The Bayes factors are computed with 7 PCs and for a source
distance of 10 kpc. A positive value log Bij indicates that the injected waveform most likely belongs to model Mi, while a
negative value suggest that model Mj is the more probable explanation. The bars are color-coded according to the type of
injected waveform. The results are binned into ranges of varying size from < −10000 to > 10000 and the height of the bars
indicates what fraction of the waveforms of a given catalog falls into a given bin of log Bij. We consider the range of (−5, 5) of
log Bij as inconclusive evidence (see §IV A).
log(BDimMur)
Fractional Count
Magnetorotational
Mechanism (Dim)
Mechanism (Mur)
log(BDimOtt)
Fractional Count
Magnetorotational
Mechanism (Dim)
Mechanism (Ott)
log(BMurOtt)
Fractional Count
Mechanism (Mur)
Mechanism (Ott)
FIG. 7: Same as Fig. 6, but computed for a source distance of 2 kpc.
waveforms are summarized in Tab. III. SMEE correctly
identiﬁes all injected Sch waveforms as indicative of magnetorotational explosions at a source distance of 2 kpc.
At 10 kpc, still 91% of the injected Sch waveforms are
attributed to the magnetorotational mechanism, which
is an indication of the robustness of the GW signal associated with rapid rotation and magnetorotational explosions. The very few Sch waveforms that SMEE is not able
to clearly associated with the magnetorotational mechanism have such weak SNRs that they are more consistent
with noise than with any of the catalogs at 10 kpc.
Acoustic Mechanism
We test SMEE’s ability to identify core-collapse supernovae exploding via the acoustic mechanism by injecting
the three OttExtra waveforms (see Sec. II C 1). The results of this test are again summarized in Tab. III. They
suggest that the a-priori unknown OttExtra waveforms
can be identiﬁed as belonging to the acoustic mechanism
out to 2 kpc with great conﬁdence when 7 PCs are used in
the analysis. At 10 kpc, the waveforms are still correctly
attributed to the acoustic mechanism, but the evidence
is much weaker in the 7-PC case while the waveforms
are more consistent with noise when the analysis is performed with only 3 PCs.
The OttExtra 3 waveform,
which is clearly identiﬁed at 10 kpc, has an extreme SNR
of ∼2530 at this distance, while the two other waveforms
have SNRs of ∼50. SMEE’s diﬃculty is illustrated in the
right panel of Fig. 9, which indicates that the OttExtra
waveforms reach the threshold of log BSN ≥−47 only
for SNRs ≳35, whereas Ott waveforms are identiﬁed already at SNRs ≳4, if the full set of 7 PCs is used. This
is a strong indication that the range of possible waveform features associated with the acoustic mechanism is
D = 10 kpc
log(BAbdDim)
Fractional Count
Iron Core Collapse (Dim)
log(BAbdDim)
Fractional Count
Iron Core Collapse (Dim)
FIG. 8: Outcome of the SMEE analysis of injected rotating iron core collapse (Dim catalog) and rotating accretion-induced
collapse (AIC, Abd catalog) waveforms. The left panel shows results for a source distance of 10 kpc and the right panel depicts
the results for a distance of 2 kpc. The Bayes factors log BAbdDim are computed on the basis of 7 PCs from the Abd and Dim
catalog. A positive value of log BAbdDim indicates that an injected waveform is most likely associated with rotating AIC and a
negative value suggests it to be more consistent with rotating iron core collapse. The results are binned into ranges of varying
size from < −10000 to > 10000 and the height of the color-coded bars indicates what fraction of the waveforms of a given
catalog falls into a given bin of log BAbdDim. We consider the range of (−5, 5) of log Bij as inconclusive evidence (see §IV A).
Magnetorotational
Mechanism (Sch)
Magnetorotational
Mechanism (DimExtra)
Mechanism (MurRem)
Mechanism (OttExtra)
Mechanism (Yak)
FIG. 9: Mean and 1-σ range of log BSN as a function of signal-to-noise ratio SNR comparing signal with noise evidence.
The horizontal lines mark the threshold values of log BSN above which we consider an injected waveform to be distinct from
Gaussian noise. Left panel: Results for the Sch and DimExtra. These two were both reconstructed with 7 Dim PCs. Right
panel: Results for the Yak, MurRem and OttExtra waveforms as reconstructed with 7 Mur for the ﬁrst two and 7 Ott PCs for
the latter. The Dim PCs very eﬃciently reconstruct the Sch and DimExtra waveforms at moderate SNRs while the Yak and
OttExtra require very high SNRs to be distinguished from noise by the Mur and Ott PCs, respectively.
not eﬃciently covered by the 7 PCs generated from the
Ott catalog. This could simply be attributed to the very
small number of waveforms in this catalog.
when studying the Ott and OttExtra waveforms, one
immediately notes that the time between the ﬁrst peak
(associated with core bounce) and the second peak (the
global maximum, associated with the non-linear phase
of the protoneutron star pulsations) varies signiﬁcantly
between waveforms. Since we compute PCs in the time
domain, such large-scale features are imprinted onto the
PCs and make it diﬃcult to identify waveforms whose
two peaks are separated by signiﬁcantly diﬀerent intervals. An alternative method that may work much better
for waveforms of this kind is to compute PCs based on
TABLE III: log BSN for gravitational waveforms that were not included in the catalogs used for PC computation. The DimExtra,
Sch, OttExtra, and Yak waveforms are discussed in §II. The MurRem waveforms are three randomly selected waveforms from the
Mur catalog that were removed before re-computation of the Mur PCs. Results are shown for source distances of 0.2 kpc, 2 kpc,
and 10 kpc and for evaluations using 3 PCs (to the left of the vertical divider |) and 7 PCs (to the right of the divider). Larger
values indicate stronger evidence that the waveform is matched to the model catalog from which the PCs were constructed.
log BSN < −47 when 7 PCs are used and log BSN < −21 when 3 PCs are used indicates that the injected signal is likely
consistent with noise while larger values suggests that the signal belongs to the signal model whose PCs were used in the
DimExtra 
s20a1o05 shen
3×106|3×106
28269|31142
1×105|2×105
s15a1o03 LS
8×106|9×106
89606|95070
2×105|3×105
s40a1o10 LS
2×107|2×107
2×105|2×105
3×105|1×106
2624|14076
20861|32817
11631|13694
19285|25307
27629|46426
8304|10006
4×105|4×105
4×105|4×105
8×105|8×105
3×106|4×106
28195|37420
7418|13743
2×106|3×106
19227|25641
10361|11138
2×106|3×106
20652|30427
7590|13598
2×106|3×106
20722|30537
10102|18050
2×106|3×106
24203|27271
4575|12516
3×106|4×106
33975|39403
5×106|5×106
47277|50486
13231|17583
9×106|1×107
87917|1×105
15672|26725
5×107|6×107
5×105|6×105 21092|22361 8×105|3×106
7543|31753 277|1220
8×106|8×107
75553|82557
15653|31961
4×107|4×107
4×104|4×105 16017|17730 3×105|5×105
8×106|1×107
83536|97750
16402|21202
9×106|1×107
94188|1×105
45510|63122
1310|37004
7×106|8×106
70290|78739
36378|45202
OttExtra 
1056|39024
7455|-50221
2×105|4×105
1×105|1×107 1075|1×105 18|5236
MurRem 
15668|22046
7905|14088
7450|10699
10862|17337
s12 matter
s15 matter
s25 matter
waveform power spectra, which would remove any potentially problematic phase information.
Neutrino Mechanism
We test SMEE’s ability to identify GW signals emitted by core-collapse supernovae exploding via the neutrino mechanism in two ways.
First, we remove three
randomly selected Mur waveforms (Mur waveforms 20 3.4,
12 3.4, and 15 3.2, labeling this set as MurRem) from the
Mur catalog, recompute the PCs without these 3 waveforms, then run SMEE to compute log BSN for the three
MurRem waveforms. The results, listed in Tab. III, show
that SMEE is able to correctly identify MurRem waveforms as GW signals consistent with the Mur catalog with
strong evidence out to a distance of ∼2 kpc and even
at 10 kpc two out of three MurRem waveforms are picked
out of the noise (though with relatively weak evidence).
This is consistent with the overall results for waveforms
belonging to the Mur catalog discussed in Sec. IV C.
However, a comparison of the right panel of Fig. 9 with
Fig. 5 shows that the MurRem waveforms require an SNR
that is more than twice as high to reach values of log BSN
at which we can consider them to be distinct from Gaussian noise. This is most likely due to the rather large
diversity of Mur waveforms. Components of relevance to
the MurRem waveforms are apparently not captured in the
ﬁrst 7 PCs when these waveforms are not included in the
A yet more stringent test is enabled by the waveforms
of the Yak catalog (see Sec. II A 1) that were obtained
with a completely diﬀerent numerical code.
the three available Yak waveforms into Advanced LIGO
noise and run SMEE on them to compute log BSN. We
list the results in Tab. III. SMEE correctly and clearly associates the Yak waveforms with the Mur PCs at 0.2 kpc.
At 2 kpc, the association is still possible, but at 10 kpc the
Yak waveforms appear to be most consistent with noise
for SMEE. The right panel of Fig. 9 shows that the Yak
waveforms require an SNR to be clearly associated with
the neutrino mechanism that is ≳7 times higher than for
MurRem waveforms and more than ∼17 times higher than
for Mur waveforms. This rather disappointing result can
be explained as follows: While the Yak waveforms are
qualitatively very similar to the Mur waveforms, they differ signiﬁcantly in quantitative aspects. The Yak waveforms are generally only half as long (∼1 s for Mur and
0.5 s for Yak, whose models explode much earlier than
the Mur models). Furthermore, the Yak waveforms have
considerably more power at frequencies above ∼800 Hz
and their energy spectra peak at ∼1000 Hz while most
of the emission in the Mur waveforms occurs at or below
∼400 Hz. This may be due to the more simpliﬁed treatment of gravity and neutrino microphysics and transport
in the study of Murphy et al. underlying the Mur
catalog compared to the work of Yakunin et al. that
led to the Yak catalog.
SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION
In this article, we have described the Supernova Model
Evidence Extractor (SMEE), a novel Bayesian approach
to inferring physical information from observations of
GW bursts emitted in stellar collapse and core-collapse
supernovae.
SMEE decomposes catalogs of simulated
GW signals into their principle components and employs
the Nested Sampling algorithm to compute the evidence
that a trial signal injected into GW detector noise belongs to a given catalog.
It is evident that core-collapse supernovae are powered by the release of gravitational energy in gravitational collapse, but the central unsolved problem of corecollapse supernova theory is by what mechanism this energy is transferred from the collapsed core to the stellar mantle to drive the explosion. Simulations show that
multi-dimensional GW-emitting dynamics is a crucial ingredient to all potential explosion mechanisms. Hence,
GWs could be ideal probes for the core-collapse supernova mechanism, provided that diﬀerent mechanism
models have clearly distinct GW signatures. In this paper, we have considered (i) the neutrino mechanism, (ii)
the magnetorotational mechanism, and (iii) the acoustic mechanism for core-collapse supernova explosions and
have treated mechanism as equally probable (i.e., having
the same prior probability). The primary and dominant
multi-dimensional dynamics and GW emission processes
of these mechanisms are, ordered in the above order
of mechanisms, (i) convection/turbulence and accretion
downstreams, (ii) rapid rotation, and (iii) protoneutron
star core pulsations, respectively.
Using GW signal catalogs based on simulations representative of these three mechanisms, we have applied
SMEE to infer the explosion mechanism underlying trial
waveforms injected into simulated Advanced LIGO noise.
Our results show that our Bayesian approach is capable of
identifying any of the considered explosion mechanisms
with high conﬁdence for core collapse events occurring
out to a distance of ∼2 kpc even with only rudimentary
knowledge of the precise shape of the expected signal.
Magnetorotational explosions, leading to particularly
strong GW signals with very robust common features,
can be clearly identiﬁed throughout the Milky Way
(D ≳10 kpc).
Our results also suggest that it is
possible to further distinguish between rapidly rotating
accretion-induced collapse of massive white dwarfs and
rapidly rotating iron core collapse for events occurring
in the galaxy, provided that the diﬀerences between the
GW signals predicted by current simulations of rotating
accretion-induced collapse and rotating iron core collapse
are reliable.
GW signals emitted by neutrino-driven explosions have
systematically lower amplitudes and, hence, are harder to
distinguish from detector noise. Moreover, GW emission
from convection/turbulence and accretion downstreams
has not been as extensively studied, the available number
of model waveforms is an order of magnitude smaller, and
the currently predicted GW signals are not as reliable as
in the case of rapidly rotating collapse. This reduces the
eﬃcacy of the principal component decomposition and,
combined with the overall weakness of the signals, limits SMEE’s robust reach for the neutrino mechanism to
≲2 kpc for the currently available set of model waveforms
and Advanced LIGO in broadband conﬁguration.
The GW signals from core-collapse supernovae driven
by the acoustic mechanism are strong and would likely
be detectable by Advanced LIGO throughout the Milky
Way. However, the set of available model waveforms for
this signal type is very limited and individual waveforms
diﬀer signiﬁcantly at large scales in the time domain
while having similar frequency content.
The inclusion
of phase information (by computing PCs in the time domain and using their full complex Fourier transforms) in
the current incarnation of SMEE is sub-optimal for such
signals and the PCs only ineﬃciently span the space of
possible waveforms. This makes it diﬃcult for SMEE to
clearly identify the acoustic mechanism for core collapse
events occurring at distances signiﬁcantly greater than
This study is the ﬁrst systematic attempt at inferring
core-collapse supernova physics from observations of GW
bursts emitted by multiple diﬀerent underlying mechanisms. While this is a signiﬁcant step beyond previous
work that focused only on GWs from rotating core collapse , our present study still suﬀers from a number of simplifying assumptions: We have considered only
a single detector, Gaussian noise, and linearly polarized,
optimally oriented GW emission. Real core-collapse supernovae will emit in both GW polarizations and will
have arbitrary, generally non-optimal orientation with respect to observatories on Earth. Advanced LIGO class
GW detectors will operate as networks and observations
will be coincident between three or even four detectors,
and the noise backgrounds of these detectors will not be
stationary and Gaussian, but non-stationary and glitchy.
We have also been agnostic with regard to the prior probability of the three considered core-collapse supernova
mechanisms. Input from astronomical observations and
theory could be used to generate (approximate) prior
probabilities for each mechanism, which could then be
included in a future analysis.
Near future work on SMEE will be directed towards
incorporating detector networks, variations in detector
conﬁgurations and sensitivities, both GW polarizations,
non-Gaussian noise, arbitrary source–detector orientations, and improved principal component analysis with
and without reliance on the signal phase. However, even
with these improvements, successful extraction of physics
from core-collapse supernova GW signals will crucially
depend on the availability of extensive catalogs of reliable
predictions for both h+ and h×. These must be provided
by the core-collapse supernova modeling community on
the basis of full 3D simulations.
Acknowledgments
We thank the Basel, MPA Garching, ORNL, and
Princeton core-collapse supernova modeling groups for
making their gravitational waveforms publicly available.
We are happy to acknowledge helpful exchanges with
E. Abdikamalov, A. Burrows, Y. Chen, D. Chernoﬀ,
N. Christensen, T. Loredo, J. Murphy, J. Nordhaus,
L. Santamaria, B. Schutz, M. Vallisneri, A. Weinstein,
S. Wesolowski and the core-collapse supernova working
group of the LIGO Scientiﬁc Collaboration and the Virgo
collaboration.
CDO is supported in part by the Sherman Fairchild
Foundation and by the National Science Foundation under grant number PHY-0904015.
Some of the results
presented in this article were obtained through computations on the Caltech compute cluster “Zwicky” (NSF
MRI award No. PHY-0960291), on the NSF Teragrid under grant TG-PHY100033, on machines of the Louisiana
Optical Network Initiative under grant loni numrel07,
and at the National Energy Research Scientiﬁc Computing Center (NERSC), which is supported by the Oﬃce of
Science of the US Department of Energy under contract
DE-AC02-05CH11231.
ISH and JL gratefully acknowledge the support of the
UK Science and Technology Facilities Council and the
Scottish Universities Physics Alliance (SUPA).
 W. Baade and F. Zwicky. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 20:259,
 H. A. Bethe. Rev. Mod. Phys., 62:801, 1990.
 H.-T. Janka, K. Langanke, A. Marek, G. Mart´ınez-
Pinedo, and B. M¨uller. Phys. Rep., 442:38, 2007.
 P. Goldreich and S. V. Weber. Astrophys. J., 238:991,
 A. Yahil. Astrophys. J., 265:1047, 1983.
 E. O’Connor and C. D. Ott. Astrophys. J., 730:70, 2011.
 L. Wang and J. C. Wheeler. Ann. Rev. Astron. Astroph.,
46:433, 2008.
 N. Smith, S. B. Cenko, N. Butler, J. S. Bloom, M. M.
Kasliwal, A. Horesh, S. R. Kulkarni, N. M. Law, P. E.
Nugent, E. O. Ofek, D. Poznanski, R. M. Quimby,
B. Sesar, S. Ben-Ami, I. Arcavi, A. Gal-Yam, D. Polishook, D. Xu, O. Yaron, D. A. Frail, and M. Sullivan.
Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc., 420:1135, 2012.
 T. Lund, A. Marek, C. Lunardini, H.-T. Janka, and
G. Raﬀelt. Phys. Rev. D, 82:063007, 2010.
 T. D. Brandt, A. Burrows, C. D. Ott, and E. Livne.
Astrophys. J., 728:8, 2011.
 K. Hirata, T. Kajita, M. Koshiba, M. Nakahata, and
Y. Oyama. Phys. Rev. Lett., 58:1490, 1987.
 C. D. Ott. Class. Quantum Grav., 26:063001, 2009.
 K. Kotake. submitted to a special issue of Comptes Rendus Physique ”Gravitational Waves (from detectors to
astrophysics)”, ArXiv:1110.5107, 2011.
 B. M¨uller, H.-T. Janka, and A. Marek. Submitted to the
Astrophys. J. ArXiv:1202.0815, 2012.
 E. M¨uller, H.-T. Janka, and A. Wongwathanarat. Astron. Astrophys., 537:A63, 2012.
 K. Kotake, W. Iwakami Nakano, and N. Ohnishi. Astrophys. J. in press; arXiv:1106.0544, 736:124, 2011.
 H. Dimmelmeier, C. D. Ott, A. Marek, and H.-T. Janka.
Phys. Rev. D, 78:064056, 2008.
 T. Takiwaki and K. Kotake. Astrophys. J., 743:30, 2011.
 A. Marek and H.-T. Janka. Astrophys. J., 694:664, 2009.
 B. P. Abbott et al. (LIGO Scientiﬁc Collaboration).
Rep. Prog. Phys., 72:076901, 2009.
 K. Kuroda and LCGT Collaboration. Class. Quantum
Grav., 27:084004, 2010.
 C. D. Ott, A. Burrows, L. Dessart, and E. Livne. Phys.
Rev. Lett., 96:201102, 2006.
 C. D. Ott, C. Reisswig, E. Schnetter, E. O’Connor,
U. Sperhake, F. L¨oﬄer, P. Diener, E. Abdikamalov,
I. Hawke, and A. Burrows. Phys. Rev. Lett., 106:161103,
 C. Fryer and K. C. B. New. Liv. Rev. Rel., 14:1, 2011.
 M. Punturo et al. Class. Quantum Grav., 27:194002,
 B. J. Owen and B. S. Sathyaprakash. Phys. Rev. D, 60:
022002, 1999.
 A. C. Searle, P. J. Sutton, and M. Tinto. Class. Quantum Grav., 26:155017, 2009.
 Y. G¨ursel and M. Tinto. Phys. Rev. D, 40:3884, 1989.
 ´E. ´E. Flanagan and S. A. Hughes. Phys. Rev. D, 57:
4566, 1998.
 S. Klimenko, S. Mohanty, M. Rakhmanov, and G. Mitselmakher. Phys. Rev. D, 72:122002, 2005.
 S. Klimenko, I. Yakushin, A. Mercer, and G. Mitselmakher. Class. Quantum Grav., 25:114029, 2008.
 T. Z. Summerscales, A. Burrows, L. S. Finn, and C. D.
Ott. Astrophys. J., 678:1142, 2008.
 C. D. Ott, A. Burrows, E. Livne, and R. Walder. Astrophys. J., 600:834, 2004.
 P. R. Brady and S. Ray-Majumder.
Class. Quantum
Grav., 21:1839, 2004.
 T. Zwerger and E. M¨uller. Astron. Astrophys., 320:209,
 I. S. Heng. Class. Quantum Grav., 26:105005, 2009.
 K. V. Mardia, J. T. Kent, and J. M. Bibby. Multivariate
analysis. Academic Press, London, UK, 1979.
 K. Cannon, A. Chapman, C. Hanna, D. Keppel, A. C.
Searle, and A. J. Weinstein. Phys. Rev. D, 82:044025,
 C. R¨over, M.-A. Bizouard, N. Christensen, H. Dimmelmeier, I. S. Heng, and R. Meyer.
Phys. Rev. D,
80:102004, 2009.
 D. S. Sivia and J. Skilling. Data Analysis: A Bayesian
Tutorial. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, second
edition, 2006.
 A. Burrows, L. Dessart, E. Livne, C. D. Ott, and J. Murphy. Astrophys. J., 664:416, 2007.
 A. Burrows, E. Livne, L. Dessart, C. D. Ott, and J. Murphy. Astrophys. J., 640:878, 2006.
 A. Burrows, E. Livne, L. Dessart, C. D. Ott, and J. Murphy. Astrophys. J., 655:416, 2007.
 C. D. Ott. Class. Quantum Grav., 26:204015, 2009.
 J. Skilling. Nested Sampling. In R. Fischer, R. Preuss,
& U. V. Toussaint, editor, AIP Conference Proceedings:
24th International Workshop on Bayesian Inference and
Maximum Entropy Methods in Science and Engineering,, volume 735, page 395, 2004.
 E. B. Abdikamalov, C. D. Ott, L. Rezzolla, L. Dessart,
H. Dimmelmeier, A. Marek, and H.-T. Janka.
Rev. D, 81:044012, 2010.
 C. D. Ott, E. P. O’Connor, and B. Dasgupta. Proceedings of the HAνSE 2011 conference. ArXiv:1111.6282,
 M. Hamuy. Astrophys. J., 582:905, 2003.
 W. D. Arnett. Canadian Journal of Physics, 44:2553,
 S. A. Colgate and R. H. White. Astrophys. J., 143:626,
 H. A. Bethe and J. R. Wilson. Astrophys. J., 295:14,
 M. Liebend¨orfer, M. Rampp, H.-T. Janka, and A. Mezzacappa. Astrophys. J., 620:840, 2005.
 M. Rampp and H.-T. Janka. Astron. Astrophys., 396:
361, 2002.
 T. A. Thompson, A. Burrows, and P. A. Pinto. Astrophys. J., 592:434, 2003.
 F. S. Kitaura, H.-T. Janka, and W. Hillebrandt. Astron.
Astrophys., 450:345, 2006.
 R. Buras, H.-T. Janka, M. Rampp, and K. Kifonidis.
Astron. Astrophys., 457:281, 2006.
 Y. Suwa, K. Kotake, T. Takiwaki, S. C. Whitehouse,
M. Liebend¨orfer, and K. Sato. Pub. Astr. Soc. Jap., 62:
L49, 2010.
 K. N. Yakunin, P. Marronetti, A. Mezzacappa, S. W.
Bruenn, C.-T. Lee, M. A. Chertkow, W. R. Hix, J. M.
Blondin, E. J. Lentz, O. E. Bronson Messer, and
S. Yoshida. Class. Quantum Grav., 27:194005, 2010.
 C. D. Ott, A. Burrows, L. Dessart, and E. Livne. Astrophys. J., 685:1069, 2008.
 J. W. Murphy and A. Burrows. Astrophys. J., 688:1159,
 C. L. Fryer and M. S. Warren. Astrophys. J., 601:391,
 J. Nordhaus, A. Burrows, A. Almgren, and J. Bell. Astrophys. J., 720:694, 2010.
 T. Kuroda, K. Kotake, and T. Takiwaki. Submitted to
the Astrophys. J.; arXiv:1202.2487, 2012.
 W. Iwakami, K. Kotake, N. Ohnishi, S. Yamada, and
K. Sawada. Astrophys. J., 700:232, 2009.
 T. Takiwaki, K. Kotake, and Y. Suwa. Submitted to the
Astrophys. J., arXiv:1108.3989, 2011.
 F. Hanke, A. Marek, B. M¨uller, and H.-T. Janka. Submitted to the Astrophys. J., arXiv:1108.4355, 2011.
 J. M. Blondin, A. Mezzacappa, and C. DeMarino. Astrophys. J., 584:971, 2003.
 T. Foglizzo, P. Galletti, L. Scheck, and H.-T. Janka.
Astrophys. J., 654:1006, 2007.
 T. Foglizzo, L. Scheck, and H.-T. Janka. Astrophys. J.,
652:1436, 2006.
 L. Scheck, H.-T. Janka, T. Foglizzo, and K. Kifonidis.
Astron. Astrophys., 477:931, 2008.
 J. W. Murphy, C. D. Ott, and A. Burrows. Astrophys.
J., 707:1173, 2009.
 E. M¨uller, M. Rampp, R. Buras, H.-T. Janka, and D. H.
Shoemaker. Astrophys. J., 603:221, 2004.
 A. Marek, H.-T. Janka, and E. M¨uller. Astron. Astrophys., 496:475, 2009.
 K. Kotake, N. Ohnishi, and S. Yamada. Astrophys. J.,
655:406, 2007.
 C. L. Fryer, D. E. Holz, and S. A. Hughes. Astrophys.
J., 609:288, 2004.
 K. Kotake, W. Iwakami, N. Ohnishi, and S. Yamada.
Astrophys. J. Lett., 697:L133, 2009.
 R. Epstein. Astrophys. J., 223:1037, 1978.
 A. Burrows and J. Hayes. Phys. Rev. Lett., 76:352, 1996.
 E. M¨uller and H.-T. Janka.
Astron. Astrophys., 317:
140, 1997.
 C. L. Fryer and A. Heger. Astrophys. J., 541:1033, 2000.
 R. Walder, A. Burrows, C. D. Ott, E. Livne, I. Lichtenstadt, and M. Jarrah. Astrophys. J., 626:317, 2005.
 S. A. Balbus and J. F. Hawley. Astrophys. J., 376:214,
 M. Obergaulinger, P. Cerd´a-Dur´an, E. M¨uller, and
M. A. Aloy. Astron. Astrophys., 498:241, 2009.
 URL Ott et
al. Gravitational Wave Catalog.
 K. S. Thorne. In S. W. Hawking and W. Israel, editors, 300 Years of Gravitation, Cambridge, UK, 1987.
Cambridge University Press.
 A. Marek, H. Dimmelmeier, H.-T. Janka, E. M¨uller, and
R. Buras. Astron. Astrophys., 445:273, 2006.
 
ORNL/FAU Gravitational Wave Signal Catalog.
 C. D. Ott, A. Burrows, T. A. Thompson, E. Livne, and
R. Walder. Astrophys. J. Suppl. Ser., 164:130, 2006.
 A. Heger, S. E. Woosley, and H. C. Spruit. Astrophys.
J., 626:350, 2005.
 J. C. Wheeler, I. Yi, P. H¨oﬂich, and L. Wang. Astrophys.
J., 537:810, 2000.
 G. S. Bisnovatyi-Kogan. Astron. Zh., 47:813, 1970.
 K. Kotake, S. Yamada, K. Sato, K. Sumiyoshi, H. Ono,
and H. Suzuki. Phys. Rev. D, 69:124004, 2004.
 M. Obergaulinger, M. A. Aloy, H. Dimmelmeier, and
E. M¨uller. Astron. Astrophys., 457:209, 2006.
 M. Shibata, Y. T. Liu, S. L. Shapiro, and B. C.
Stephens. Phys. Rev. D, 74:104026, 2006.
 L. Dessart, A. Burrows, E. Livne, and C. D. Ott. Astrophys. J. Lett., 673:L43, 2008.
 P. Cerd´a-Dur´an, J. A. Font, L. Ant´on, and E. M¨uller.
Astron. Astrophys., 492:937, 2008.
 S. E. Woosley and A. Heger.
Astrophys. J., 637:914,
 H. Dimmelmeier, C. D. Ott, H.-T. Janka, A. Marek,
and E. M¨uller. Phys. Rev. Lett., 98:251101, 2007.
 C. D. Ott, H. Dimmelmeier, A. Marek, H.-T. Janka,
I. Hawke, B. Zink, and E. Schnetter. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
98:261101, 2007.
 hydro/
wave catalogue.shtml.
MPA Garching Gravitational
Wave Signal Catalog.
 S. Scheidegger, T. Fischer, S. C. Whitehouse, and
M. Liebend¨orfer. Astron. Astrophys., 490:231, 2008.
 S. Scheidegger, R. K¨appeli, S. C. Whitehouse, T. Fischer, and M. Liebend¨orfer. Astron. Astrophys., 514:A51,
 M. Shibata and Y.-I. Sekiguchi.
Phys. Rev. D, 71:
024014, 2005.
 M. Rampp, E. M¨uller, and M. Ruﬀert. Astron. Astrophys., 332:969, 1998.
 W. Fu and D. Lai. Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc., 413:
2207, 2011.
 M. Liebend¨orfer. Astrophys. J., 633:1042, 2005.
 
gw data. Basel GW Signal Catalog.
 L. Dessart, A. Burrows, E. Livne, and C. D. Ott. Astrophys. J., 669:585, 2007.
 N. N. Weinberg and E. Quataert. Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc., 387:L64, 2008.
 M. Pitkin, S. Reid, S. Rowan, and J. Hough. Liv. Rev.
Rel., 14(5), 2011.
 W. Del Pozzo, J. Veitch, and A. Vecchio. Phys. Rev. D,
83:082002, 2011.
 J. Veitch and A. Vecchio. Phys. Rev. D, 81:062003, 2010.
 David Shoemaker. Advanced ligo anticipated sensitivity curves. Technical Report LIGO-T0900288-v3, LIGO
Scientiﬁc Collaboration, 2010.
 
MatApps/packages/stochastic/trunk/PreProcessing/
detectorNoise.m.
Collaboration
MatApps Package – noise generation code.
 J. Abadie et al. (LIGO and VIRGO Scientiﬁc Collaborations). Class. Quantum Grav., 27:173001, 2010.
 N. Smith, K. H. Hinkle, and N. Ryde. Astron. J., 137:
3558, 2009.
 G. M. Harper, A. Brown, and E. F. Guinan. Astron. J.,
135:1430, 2008.
 M. M. Hohle, R. Neuh¨auser, and B. F. Schutz. Astron.
Nachr., 331:349, 2010.
 URL Supernova
Model Evidence Extractor (SMEE) Supplemental Data.