USING CYCLEGANS FOR EFFECTIVELY REDUCING IMAGE VARIABILITY ACROSS OCT
DEVICES AND IMPROVING RETINAL FLUID SEGMENTATION
⋆Philipp Seeb¨ock1,2, ⋆David Romo-Bucheli1, Sebastian Waldstein1, Hrvoje Bogunovic1,
Jos´e Ignacio Orlando1, Bianca S. Gerendas1, Georg Langs1,2, Ursula Schmidt-Erfurth1
1 Christian Doppler Laboratory for Ophthalmic Image Analysis, Department of Ophthalmology,
Medical University of Vienna, Austria
2 Computational Imaging Research Lab, Department of Biomedical Imaging and Image-guided Therapy,
Medical University Vienna, Austria
Optical coherence tomography (OCT) has become the most
important imaging modality in ophthalmology. A substantial amount of research has recently been devoted to the development of machine learning (ML) models for the identi-
ﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of pathological features in OCT
Among the several sources of variability the ML
models have to deal with, a major factor is the acquisition
device, which can limit the ML model’s generalizability. In
this paper, we propose to reduce the image variability across
different OCT devices (Spectralis and Cirrus) by using CycleGAN, an unsupervised unpaired image transformation algorithm. The usefulness of this approach is evaluated in the
setting of retinal ﬂuid segmentation, namely intraretinal cystoid ﬂuid (IRC) and subretinal ﬂuid (SRF). First, we train a
segmentation model on images acquired with a source OCT
device. Then we evaluate the model on (1) source, (2) target and (3) transformed versions of the target OCT images.
The presented transformation strategy shows an F1 score of
0.4 (0.51) for IRC (SRF) segmentations. Compared with traditional transformation approaches, this means an F1 score
gain of 0.2 (0.12).
Index Terms— covariate shift, optical coherence tomography, generative adversarial networks, image segmentation
1. INTRODUCTION
Automated methods are being developed for medical image analysis to solve clinical tasks, such as segmentation of
anatomical structures or classiﬁcation of normal/pathological
cases. In the last decade, machine learning (ML) techniques
The ﬁnancial support by the Christian Doppler Research Association, the
Austrian Federal Ministry for Digital and Economic Affairs and the National
Foundation for Research, Technology and Development and by the Austrian
Science Fund (FWF I2714-B31) is gratefully acknowledged. A TitanX used
for this research was donated by the NVIDIA Corporation.
⋆Contributed equally (order was deﬁned by ﬂipping a coin)
have been showing an increasing ability to solve these problems. In particular, deep neural networks (DNN) have obtained impressive results in several medical imaging tasks
 . Nevertheless, these models can still under-perform in
“deployment” datasets.
One important factor explaining
the difference in the performance of ML models is covariate shift .
Covariate shift is a phenomenon observed
“when the data is generated according to a model P(y|x) and
where the distribution P(x) changes between training and
test scenarios” .
Among the different medical imaging modalities, optical
coherence tomography (OCT) provides high-resolution 3D
volumes of the retina, is non-invasive and the most important
diagnostic modality in ophthalmology. A single OCT volume is composed of multiple cross-sectional images known
as B-scans. Current treatment and diagnosis guidelines rely
on the examination of these B-scans to inform clinical decisions . Several machine learning techniques have recently
been proposed help identify and quantify retinal pathological features . Unfortunately, ML models are often susceptible to covariate shift when training on data from a speciﬁc
vendor, meaning that differences in the intensity distribution,
resolution and noise level can affect the generalization ability
of the model. For instance, signiﬁcant differences between
OCT acquisition devices in retinal ﬂuid segmentation performance or automated layer thickness measurements 
have been reported. A common strategy to deal with image
variability across multiple devices is training vendor-speciﬁc
models. For instance, De Fauw et al. proposed a twostage deep learning approach for diagnosis and referral in
retinal disease, using scans from two OCT vendors. Timeconsuming manual annotations are needed for each vendor
to successfully (re-)train the segmentation model and hence
achieve device independence. In contrast, our approach does
not require additional manual annotations.
In this work, we present a strategy based on Cycle-
GANs to reduce the covariate shift between different
OCT acquisition devices, and consequently to improve the
 
robustness of ML ﬂuid segmentation models.
2. MATERIALS
The OCT volumes used in this work were either acquired
using Spectralis OCT instruments (Heidelberg Engineering,
GER) with voxel dimensions of 496 × 512 × 49, or Cirrus HD-OCT (Carl Zeiss Meditec, Dublin, CA, USA) with
voxel dimensions of 1024 × 512 × 128 or 1024 × 200 ×
200. For both instruments, the volumes were centered at the
fovea of the retina and covered a physical volume of approximately 2µm × 6µm × 6µm. Besides different voxel resolutions within B-scans, Spectralis OCT volumes contain a
lower number of B-scans (49) than Cirrus (128). At the same
time, due to B-scan averaging performed by Spectralis devices1, which is not conducted in Cirrus, the signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) in Spectralis OCTs is usually better and retinal
structures are easier to identify both for human observers and
automated methods . All Cirrus OCTs are resampled to
obtain a 496 × 512 × 49 volume using nearest-neighbor interpolation. A visual comparison between a Cirrus and Spectralis B-scan is presented in Figure 1.
Fig. 1. Spectralis B-scan (a) and Cirrus B-scan (b) with a corresponding close-up of the retinal layers. Both B-scans were
acquired from the same patient at approximately the same
time and retinal location. The difference in intensity values
and noise level is noticeable. (c) Spectralis B-scan region with
manual delineation of IRC (blue) and SRF (orange).
2.1. Retinal cross-domain dataset
A total set of 1, 179 OCT volumes (57, 771 B-scans after resampling Cirrus OCTs) comprised the retinal cross-domain
dataset. From these, 587 (592) OCT volumes were acquired
with a Spectralis (Cirrus) device. Each Spectralis (Cirrus)
OCT volume was associated with a retinal disease: 195 (192)
retinas with age-related macular degeneration (AMD), 197
(196) with retinal vein occlusion (RVO) and 200 (199) with
diabetic macular edema (DME).
1The Spectralis OCT scans with 49 B-scans are usually acquired with a
default of 16 averaged frames per B-scan.
2.2. Retinal ﬂuid-segmentation dataset
The retinal ﬂuid-segmentation dataset consisted of 228 OCT
volumes with a total of 11, 172 B-scans (66 Heidelberg Spectralis and 162 Zeiss Cirrus volumes). The Spectralis (Cirrus) set contained 59(62) pathological retinas with AMD and
7(100) with RVO. Manual pixel-wise annotations of the existing two different retinal types of ﬂuid, intraretinal cystoid
ﬂuid (IRC) and subretinal ﬂuid (SRF), were used for all 228
volumes, as shown in the far right panel of Figure 1. The
annotation was performed by experienced graders of the Vienna Reading Center, supervised by retinal expert ophthalmologists following a standardized annotation protocol.
3. METHODS
In this section we present the components used in our experiments. Traditional and unpaired image transformation algorithms were used to transform images. The segmentation
model was used to evaluate the effectiveness of transformations.
3.1. Baseline transformation algorithms
Many image preprocessing techniques are used to enhance
and reduce the variability in OCT images. In this work, we
followed the pre-processing pipeline in to deﬁne two
suitable transformations from Cirrus to Spectralis OCT volumes. The ﬁrst transformation strategy (T1) uses an initial
median ﬁltering operation (with 3 × 3 kernel size) followed
by a second median ﬁltering operation across B-scans, with a
1×1×3 kernel size. The second transformation (T2) performs
an initial histogram matching step using a random Spectralis
OCT volume as a template and subsequently, the same ﬁltering operations as described for T1 are applied.
3.2. Unsupervised unpaired transformation algorithm
Cycle generative adversarial networks (CycleGANs) allow a
suitable transformation function between different image domains to be discovered in an unsupervised way . The CycleGAN uses two discriminator-generator pairs (G1-D1, G2-
D2) which are implemented as deep neural networks. G1 is
fed with an image from the source domain and transforms
it into the target domain. Then, G2 transforms the image
back from the target to the source domain. D1 (D2) is trained
to distinguish between real samples from the target (source)
domain and the transformed images. Additionally, the cycle
consistency and the identity loss are used as regularizers
to avoid trivial solutions and obtain a meaningful mapping.
3.3. Segmentation model
In this work, we performed the segmentation task in 2D, Bscan wise. Given an OCT B-scan I ∈Ra×b and a corresponding target label map S ∈Ra×b, the segmentation model
aims at ﬁnding the function h : I →S. The U-Net was
used as the segmentation model, which is composed of an
encoding and a decoding part. The encoder consists of convolution blocks followed by max-pooling layers, which contracts the input and uses the context for segmentation. The decoder counterpart performs up-sampling operations followed
by convolution blocks to enable precise localization.
4. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
In our experiments we evaluated if the image transformation
algorithms improved the generalization ability of a trained
model on a new unseen domain.
4.1. Unsupervised image transformation details
For the unsupervised unpaired image transformation task, the
CycleGAN models were trained by using the cross-domain
dataset (Section 2.1). For each vendor, the data was randomly
split into training (90%) and validation sets (10%), with no
patient overlap between these two sets.
Four different CycleGAN models were trained with image
patches cropped within B-scans in sizes of 64, 128, 256, and
460. For each conﬁguration, the models were trained for 20
epochs with a batch size of 1. The generator and discriminator were stored at the end of each epoch. A model selection
procedure found the best performing model out of 20 to compensate for the instability of the adversarial loss during training. To select one generator model, we used the pool of 20
generators to create 20 transformed validation sets. For each
transformed set, we applied all 20 discriminators and used
the maximum adversarial loss as the selection score.
model with the lowest selection score was chosen. This resulted in four pairs of generator models (Cirrus-to-Spectralis,
Spectralis-to-Cirrus), one for each patch size conﬁguration
(CGAN-64, CGAN-128, CGAN-256, CGAN-460).
4.2. Segmentation model details
Following the original U-Net architecture, we used ﬁve levels
of depth, the number of channels going down from 64 in the
ﬁrst to 1024 in the bottleneck layer. Each convolutional block
consisted of two 3×3 convolutions, each followed by a batchnormalization layer and a rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU). While
2 × 2 max-pooling was used for downsampling, upsampling
was performed using nearest-neighbor interpolation.
We used the negative log-likelihood loss in all our segmentation experiments. Kaiming initialization , Adam optimization , and a learning rate of 0.0001 which was decreased by half every 15 epochs were used. We trained our
networks for 80 epochs and selected the model with the best
average F1-score on the validation set. We used a random
Fig. 2. Qualitative results of the image transformation algorithms. An original Cirrus OCT B-scan (a) was transformed
to the Spectralis domain using T2 (b), and CGAN-460 (c).
The corresponding original Spectralis B-scan (d) acquired
from the same patient at approximately the same time and
retinal location is also shown. The image generated in (c)
has intensity values and an image noise level similar to those
observed in the original Spectralis image (d).
separation of training (70%), validation (10%) and test set
(20%) on patient-distinct basis for all experiments.
4.3. Model generalization to a different domain
The good SNR of Spectralis OCT volumes (described in Section 2) facilitates the manual annotation of retinal structures.
Hence, a typical use-case of the presented strategy would be
to collect manual annotations and train a segmentation model
on Spectralis scans but apply the model both on Spectralis
and transformed Cirrus scans. Accordingly, this experiment
involved training the segmentation model on a source dataset
(Spectralis) and evaluating it on a target dataset (Cirrus). We
applied common transformation techniques (Section 3.1) as
well as CycleGAN transformations (Section 3.2) to convert
OCTs from the Cirrus into the Spectralis domain. The underlying assumption is that a higher segmentation performance
indicates a more effective transformation. We used a segmentation model, trained on the target domain, as an upper bound
for our performance.
5. RESULTS
The transformation algorithms were used to generate different
versions of the target dataset (Cirrus). Qualitative results are
illustrated in Figure 2. Initial evaluation of the Spectralis segmentation model on the Spectralis test set yields a precision,
recall and F1-score for the IRC (SRF) of 0.73 (0.75), 0.64
(0.74), 0.69 (0.75). The quantitative results of the Spectralis
model on the Cirrus test set, comparing different transformation strategies, as well as results of the Cirrus model (*Cirruson-Cirrus) are shown in Table 1.
Transformation
*Cirrus-on-Cirrus
Table 1. Performance of the Spectralis segmentation model
applied on different “versions” of the Cirrus test set. The last
row corresponds to the performance of the Cirrus model applied on the non-transformed Cirrus test set. (Pr=Precison,
Rec=Recall)
A few insights can be extracted from Table 1. First, the
Spectralis DL segmentation model performance drops dramatically when directly applied on the Cirrus target dataset.
The effect of the covariate shift in the model is evident.
Secondly, the histogram-based combined with the ﬁltering
operations in T2 perform better than no transformation at
all. Thirdly, the best cross-vendor segmentation performance
is obtained with a CycleGAN-based transformation strategy
(trained with a 460 × 460 patch size). The performance was
certainly lower than those observed in Spectralis B-scans, but
was closer to the performance a Cirrus model would obtain on
the Cirrus B-scans. More precisely, while a direct application
of the segmentation model on non-transformed data yields a
F1-score close to 0, the CGAN-460 approach yielded a 0.40
(0.52) F1-score for IRC (SRF) segmentations. With respect
to the best traditional transformation technique, a 0.2 (0.12)
F1-score gain was observed.
6. CONCLUSIONS
We present a CycleGAN-based strategy to reduce the image
variability across OCT acquisition devices. The results show
that the transformation algorithm improves the performance
of a ﬂuid segmentation model on a target dataset, thus effectively reducing the covariate shift (i.e difference between the
target and source datasets). This ﬁnding is relevant as automated ﬂuid segmentation could potentially be part of routine diagnostic workﬂows and affect therapy of millions of
patients. In this scenario, the presented approach would reduce device dependency of ML algorithms and therefore allow more clinicians to use them on their speciﬁc OCT device. Recently, it has been shown that the CycleGAN algorithm could induce misleading diagnosis in medical images,
and hence the transformed images are not recommended for
direct visualization and interpretation by a clinician . This
is prominent when the distribution of pathologies differs between the two domain sets. We carefully selected OCTs from
the two devices, containing similar distribution of pathological and healthy retina. Therefore, we expect most of the difference to arise from image intensity properties and the SNR
of the devices. Furthermore, in this work we use CycleGAN
only as a pre-processing step for facilitating automated segmentation. Future work will be focused on evaluating the
presented strategy in other ML tasks.
7. REFERENCES
 Geert Litjens, Thijs Kooi, Babak Ehteshami Bejnordi,
et al., “A survey on deep learning in medical image analysis,” MED IMAGE ANAL, vol. 42, pp. 60–88, 2017.
 Amos J. Storkey, Dataset Shift in Machine Learning,
chapter When training and test sets are different: characterising learning transfer, pp. 3–28, The MIT Press,
 James Fujimoto and Eric Swanson, “The development,
commercialization, and impact of optical coherence tomography,” INVEST OPHTH VIS SCI, vol. 57, no. 9,
pp. OCT1–OCT13, 2016.
 Ursula Schmidt-Erfurth, Amir Sadeghipour, Bianca S.
Gerendas, et al.,
“Artiﬁcial intelligence in retina,”
PROG RETIN EYE RES, 2018.
 Thomas Schlegl, Sebastian M. Waldstein, Hrvoje Bogunovic, et al., “Fully automated detection and quantiﬁcation of macular ﬂuid in oct using deep learning,”
Ophthalmology, vol. 125, no. 4, pp. 549 – 558, 2018.
 Louise Terry, Nicola Cassels, Kelly Lu, et al.,
“Automated retinal layer segmentation using spectral domain optical coherence tomography: evaluation of intersession repeatability and agreement between devices,”
PloS one, vol. 11, no. 9, pp. e0162001, 2016.
 Jeffrey De Fauw, Joseph R Ledsam, Romera-Paredes,
et al., “Clinically applicable deep learning for diagnosis
and referral in retinal disease,” NATURE MED, vol. 24,
no. 9, pp. 1342–1350, 2018.
 J. Zhu, T. Park, P. Isola, et al.,
“Unpaired image-toimage translation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks,” in Proc. of IEEE ICCV, 2017, pp. 2242–2251.
 Eva Smretschnig, Ilse Krebs, Sarah Moussa, et al., “Cirrus oct versus spectralis oct: differences in segmentation in ﬁbrovascular pigment epithelial detachment,”
GRAEF ARCH CLIN EXP, pp. 1693–1698, 2010.
 Ruwan Tennakoon, Amirali K Gostar, Reza Hoseinnezhad, et al., “Retinal ﬂuid segmentation in oct images using adversarial loss based convolutional neural
networks,” in Proc. of the IEEE 15th ISBI. IEEE, 2018,
pp. 1436–1440.
 Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox,
“U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image
segmentation,” in Proc. of MICCAI. Springer, 2015, pp.
 Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, et al.,
“Delving deep into rectiﬁers: Surpassing human-level
performance on imagenet classiﬁcation,”
in Proc. of
IEEE ICCV, 2015, pp. 1026–1034.
 Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba,
method for stochastic optimization,”
arXiv preprint
 
 Joseph Paul Cohen, Margaux Luck, and Sina Honari,
“Distribution matching losses can hallucinate features in
medical image translation,” in Proc. of MICCAI, 2018,
pp. 529–536.