Evaluation of Cost Functions for Stereo Matching
Heiko Hirschm¨uller
Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics Oberpfaffenhofen
German Aerospace Center (DLR)
 
Daniel Scharstein
Middlebury College
Middlebury, VT, USA
 
Stereo correspondence methods rely on matching costs
for computing the similarity of image locations. In this paper we evaluate the insensitivity of different matching costs
with respect to radiometric variations of the input images.
We consider both pixel-based and window-based variants
and measure their performance in the presence of global
intensity changes (e.g., due to gain and exposure differences), local intensity changes (e.g., due to vignetting, non-
Lambertian surfaces, and varying lighting), and noise. Using existing stereo datasets with ground-truth disparities as
well as six new datasets taken under controlled changes of
exposure and lighting, we evaluate the different costs with a
local, a semi-global, and a global stereo method.
1. Introduction and Related Work
All stereo correspondence algorithms have a way of
measuring the similarity of image locations. Typically, a
matching cost is computed at each pixel for all disparities under consideration. The simplest matching costs assume constant intensities at matching image locations, but
more robust costs model (explicitly or implicitly) certain
radiometric changes and/or noise.
Common pixel-based
matching costs include absolute differences, squared differences, sampling-insensitive absolute differences , or
truncated versions, both on gray and color images. Common window-based matching costs include the sum of absolute or squared differences (SAD / SSD), normalized crosscorrelation (NCC), and rank and census transforms .
Some window-based costs can be implemented efﬁciently
using ﬁlters. For example, the rank transform can be computed using a rank ﬁlter followed by absolute differences of
the ﬁlter results. Similarly, there are other ﬁlters that try to
remove bias or gain changes, e.g., LoG and mean ﬁlters.
More complicated similarity measures are possible, including mutual information and approximative
segment-wise mutual information as used in the layered
stereo approach of Zitnick et al. .
Recent stereo surveys and the Middlebury online
evaluation compare state-of-the-art stereo methods on
test data with complex geometries and varied texture. Other
evaluations focus on certain aspects like aggregation methods for real-time matching . However, the insensitivity
of matching costs is not evaluated since the stereo test sets
are typically pairs of radiometrically very similar images.
The term radiometrically similar means that pixels that
correspond to the same scene point have similar or ideally
the same values in the images. Radiometric differences can
be caused by the camera(s) due to slightly different settings,
vignetting, image noise, etc. Further differences may be due
to non-Lambertian surfaces, which make the amount of re-
ﬂected light dependent on the viewing angle. Finally, the
strength or positions of the light sources may change when
images of a static scene are acquired at different times, as
is the case when matching aerial or satellite images. In all
cases, methods are required that can handle radiometric differences.
The scope of this paper is the evaluation and comparison of some widely used stereo matching costs on images
with several common radiometric differences. The focus
is on matching costs that explicitely or implicitly handle
radiometric differences.
This excludes popular methods
like the correlation-based weighting according to proximity and color similarity , as this is an aggregation approach that uses the truncated absolute difference as matching cost. Furthermore, only methods that work on a single
stereo pair with unknown radiometric distortions and light
sources are evaluated, according to the considered applications. This excludes methods that explicitly handle non-
Lambertian surfaces by taking at least two stereo images
with different illuminations or methods that require calibrated light sources.
2. Matching Costs and Stereo Methods
It is important to distinguish between matching costs and
methods that use these costs. In this paper we compare 6
costs and 3 stereo methods. We consider all possible combinations to fully evaluate the insensitivity of each cost.
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA, June 18-23, 2007.
2.1. Matching Costs
Our ﬁrst cost function is the commonly-used absolute
difference, which assumes brightness constancy for corresponding pixels, and which serves as a baseline performance measure of our evaluation. Local stereo methods
usually aggregate the sum of absolute differences (SAD)
over a window, while global methods use the differences
pixel-wise. In both cases we use the sampling-insensitive
calculation of Birchﬁeld and Tomasi (BT) .
Our next three cost functions can be implemented as ﬁlters that are applied separately to the input images. The
transformed images are then matched using the absolute difference. The ﬁrst ﬁlter is the Laplacian of Gaussian (LoG),
which is often used in local methods for removing noise and
changes in bias . Here we use a LoG ﬁlter with a
standard deviation of 1 pixel, which is applied by convolution with a 5×5 kernel. The second ﬁlter is the rank ﬁlter,
which replaces the intensity of a pixel with its rank among
all pixels within a certain neighborhood. It was originally
proposed for robustness to outliers within the neighborhood, which typically occur near depth discontinuities
and leads to blurred object borders. Since the method only
depends on the ordering of intensities and not their values,
it compensates for all radiometric distortions that preserve
this ordering. Here we use a rank ﬁlter with a square window of 15×15 pixels centered at the pixel of interest. While
there are other rank-based matching methods , we
chose the rank transform since it can be efﬁciently implemented as ﬁlter, without changing the stereo method itself.
The third ﬁlter is a mean ﬁlter, which aims to compensate
a change in bias by subtracting the mean intensity of a certain neighborhood. We again use a square window of size
15×15 that is centered at the pixel of interest.
Our next matching cost is mutual information (MI), a
powerful method for handling complex radiometric relationships between two images . The MI of two images
is calculated by summing the entropy of the histograms of
the overlapping parts of each image and subtracting the entropy of the joint histogram of pixel-wise correspondences.
The MI value directly expresses how well images are registered. This follows from the observation that the joint histogram of well-registered images has just a few high peaks
in contrast to poorly registered images where the joint histogram is rather ﬂat. Thus, for well-registered images, the
entropy of the joint histogram is low, while the entropy of
the individual histograms changes little. MI has been used
for local and global stereo methods. In the latter case, its calculation is changed by Taylor expansion for
getting a pixel-wise matching cost. The costs are stored
for each combination of intensities in a cost matrix. This
lookup table is required for matching, but can only be created from known correspondences. The solution is an iterative design in which the disparity image of the previous loop
serves for creating the cost matrix for matching intensities
in the next loop . The process is started with a random
disparity image and requires typically only 3 to 4 iterations.
In this paper we use the efﬁcient Hierarchical MI (HMI)
method of , which works as follows. First, both input
images are downscaled by factor 16 and MI is calculated
by matching the stereo images using a random disparity image. The process is iterated a few times before the disparity
is upscaled for serving as initial guess for matching at 1
the full resolution. Upscaling and matching is repeated until the full resolution is reached. It should be noted that the
disparity image of the lower-resolution level is used only
for calculating the matching costs of the higher-resolution
level, but not for restricting the disparity range. The hierarchical calculation has a runtime overhead of just 14% if
the runtime of the stereo method depends linearly on the
number of pixels and disparities .
Finally, we also include normalized cross-correlation
(NCC) in our evaluation. NCC is a standard method for
matching two windows around a pixel of interest. The normalization within the window compensates differences in
gain and bias. NCC is statistically the optimal method for
compensating Gaussian noise. However, NCC tends to blur
depth discontinuities more than many other matching costs,
because outliers lead to high errors within the NCC calculation. MNCC has been introduced as a common variant
by Moravec . We selected the standard NCC as MNCC
gave slightly inferior results in our experiments. In contrast
to all other matching costs we consider here, NCC can only
be used with local methods due to its window-based design.
In all of the above costs, we only use the image intensity
(luminance) and not the color for matching. The reason is
that several of the considered costs (e.g., rank and MI) are
naturally deﬁned on intensity images, and for fairness we
want to compare all costs on the same input data. However,
we also found that that those costs that easily extend to color
only perform marginally better on our data sets. Clearly,
future research is needed on robust color matching.
To summarize, we compare six costs:
samplinginsensitive absolute differences (BT), three ﬁlter-based
costs (LoG, Rank, and Mean), hierarchical mutual information (HMI), and normalized cross-correlation (NCC).
2.2. Stereo Algorithms
The performance of a matching cost can depend on the
algorithm that uses the cost. We thus consider three different stereo algorithms: a local, correlation-based method
(Corr), the semi-global method of (SGM), and a global
method using graph cuts (GC). We implemented each
of the six matching costs for each stereo method, except for
NCC which is only used with the local method.
Our local stereo method (Corr) is a simple window-based
approach . After aggregating the matching cost
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA, June 18-23, 2007.
Figure 1. The left images of the Tsukuba, Venus, Teddy, and Cones stereo pairs.
with a square window of 9×9 pixels, the disparity with the
lowest aggregated cost is selected (winner-takes-all). This is
followed by subpixel interpolation, a left-right consistency
check for invalidating occlusions and mismatches, and invalidation of disparity segments smaller than 160 pixels .
Invalid disparity areas are ﬁlled by propagating neighboring
small (i.e., background) disparity values. The reason we
perform these post-processing steps, as opposed to comparing the “raw” results, is to reduce the overall errors, which
in turn yields improved discrimination between costs.
Our second stereo algorithm is the semi-global matching (SGM) method . We selected it as an approach inbetween local and global matching. There are other approaches in this category, e.g., dynamic programming (DP),
but SGM outperforms DP and yields no streaking artefacts.
SGM aims to minimize a global 2D energy function E(D)
by solving a large number of 1D minimization problems.
Following , the actual energy used is
P1T[|Dp −Dq| = 1]
P2T[|Dp −Dq| > 1]
The ﬁrst term of (1) calculates the sum of a pixel-wise
matching cost C(p,Dp) (as deﬁned in Section 2.1) for all
pixels p at their disparities Dp. The function T[] is deﬁned
to return 1 if its argument is true and 0 otherwise. Thus, the
second term of the energy function penalizes small disparity differences of neighboring pixels Np of p with the cost
P1. Similarly, the third term penalizes larger disparity steps
(i.e., discontinuities) with a higher penalty P2. The value of
P2 is adapted to the local intensity gradient by P2 =
for the neighboring pixels p and q. This results in sharper
depth discontinuities as they mostly coincide with intensity
variations.
SGM calculates E(D) along 1D paths from 8 directions
towards each pixel of interest using dynamic programming.
The costs of all paths are summed for each pixel and disparity. The disparity is then determined by winner-takes-all.
Subpixel interpolation is performed as well as a left-right
consistency check. Disparity segments below the size of
20 pixels are invalidated for getting rid of small patches of
outliers. Invalid disparities are again interpolated.
Finally, we use a graph-cuts (GC) stereo algorithm as a
representative of a global method . Our implementation is based on the MRF library provided by . We
tried to use the same energy function E(D) as for SGM.
However, we found that for GC it gives better results to
adapt the cost P2 not linearly with the intensity gradient, but
rather to double the value of P2 for gradients below a given
threshold. Like SGM, GC only approximates the global
minimum of E(D), but it utilizes the full 2D connectivity
for the smoothness term in contrast to SGM, which optimizes separately along 1D paths. Our GC implementation,
unlike Corr and SGM, neither includes subpixel interpolation nor accounts for occlusions.
We manually tuned the smoothness parameters of SGM
and GC individually for each cost using images without radiometric differences. After the tuning phase, all parameters were kept constant for all images and experiments. This
approach allows to concentrate on the performance of the
matching cost rather than the stereo method.
3. Evaluation
We tested all combinations of all matching costs with the
local, semi-global, and global stereo algorithms on images
with simulated and real radiometric changes.
3.1. Simulated Radiometric Changes
For our ﬁrst set of experiments, we use the standard Middlebury stereo datasets Tsukuba, Venus, Teddy, and Cones
 . Figure 1 shows the left images of each set. All
images were carefully taken in a laboratory with the same
camera settings and under the same lighting conditions.
Therefore radiometric changes are expected to be minimal.
We used a disparity range of 16 pixels for Tsukuba, 32 pixels for Venus and 64 pixels for Teddy, and Cones.
The ﬁrst experiments consist of artiﬁcially changing
the global brightness linearly (i.e., gain change) and nonlinearly (e.g., gamma change). Only the right stereo images
were changed, while leaving the left images untouched.
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA, June 18-23, 2007.
Furthermore, we applied a local brightness change that
mimics a vignetting effect, i.e., the brightness decreases
proportionally with the distance to the image center. This
transformation was performed on both stereo images. Finally, we contaminated both stereo images with different
levels of Gaussian noise.
After computing disparity images for all transformations
and all combinations of matching costs and stereo algorithms, we evaluate the results by counting the number of
pixels with disparities that differ by more than 1 from the
ground truth. In our statistics we ignore occluded areas because the GC implementation does not consider occlusions
(in contrast to Corr and SGM). For the correlation results
we also ignore an area of 4 pixels (half of the correlation
window) at the image border. Our ﬁnal error measure is the
mean error percentage over all four datasets. Figure 2 plots
these errors as a function of the amount of intensity change
for each combination of matching cost and stereo method.
We now discuss the individual results.
Figure 2a compares the matching costs when used with
correlation on images with decreasing brightness. The errors of BT increase very quickly with decreasing brightness. This can be expected, because the absolute difference
is based on the assumption that corresponding pixels have
the same values, which is violated. The Mean and LoG ﬁlters can compensate some of the differences, but degrade
quickly when s < 0.5. Both ﬁlters are designed for compensating a bias (i.e., constant offset), but not a gain (i.e.,
scale) change. NCC, HMI and Rank show a quite constant
performance, until the errors suddenly increase. Theoretically, all three methods should be able to fully compensate
the brightness change. The reason for the increased error
is that the transformed images are stored into 8 bits. Thus,
there is also an information loss, with low values of s.
Moving on to the next two plots, one can see that SGM
and GC (Figure 2b–c) generally perform better than correlation. The relative performance of the different matching
costs remains similar, although for SGM the LoG cost is
now slightly better than Rank on the non-transformed images (i.e., for a scale factor of 1). A more important observation is that HMI performs worse than Rank with correlation, but much better with SGM and GC. The likely
reason is that Rank also reduces the effect of outliers near
depth discontinuities. This is important for a window-based
method, but less so for pixel-based methods like SGM and
GC. It is interesting that on the non-transformed images,
HMI performs better than BT, especially for SGM and GC
(Figure 2b–c). One might assume that BT should be best
for images without any radiometric differences. However,
even though the images have been taken under controlled
conditions, some radiometric differences are inherent and
surfaces are not Lambertian, and the brightness constancy
assumption is still violated. HMI relaxes this assumption
and only expects a globally consistent mapping.
The next three plots (Figure 2d–f) show the effect of a
gamma change as an example of a non-linear change of
brightness. The results are similar to the case of a linear
change, although the performance of NCC degrades with
increasing gamma changes.
The artiﬁcial vignetting effect (Figure 2g–i) gives very
similar curves compared to the global brightness changes,
except for HMI. The reason for the rather bad performance
of HMI is that its cost is explicitly based on the assumption of a complex, but global radiometric transformation.
The vignetting effect locally changes the brightness. The
ﬁlter solutions LoG and Mean also assume global changes,
but only inside their rather small windows. Furthermore,
Rank only requires an unchanged order, which is maintained. Therefore, the ﬁlter solutions and especially Rank
are best in case of strong local radiometric variations.
Finally, the results for additive Gaussian noise with varying signal-to-noise ratios (SNR) are shown in the last three
plots (Figure 2j–l). Higher SNR numbers mean lower noise.
For correlation the different costs perform quite similar,
probably since summing over a ﬁxed window acts like averaging, which reduces the effect of Gaussian noise. The
situation is different for SGM and GC, where LoG, Rank,
and Mean perform even worse than BT. HMI performs consistently best for SGM and GC on all noise levels.
To summarize the above experiments, Rank appears to
be the best matching cost for correlation based methods.
HMI appears to be best for pixel-based matching methods like SGM and GC in the presence of global brightness
changes and noise. In the case of local brightness variations such as vignetting, Rank and LoG appear to be better
alternatives than HMI.
3.2. Real Exposure and Light Source Changes
As noted in the introduction, existing stereo test datasets
are unusually radiometrically “clean” and do not require robust matching costs necessary for real-world stereo applications (unless, as in the previous section, changes are introduced synthetically). To remedy this situation we have created several new stereo datasets with ground truth using the
structured lighting technique of , which are available at
 In this paper we use the six datasets shown in Figure 3: Art, Books,
Dolls, Laundry, Moebius, and Reindeer. Each dataset consists of 7 rectiﬁed views taken from equidistant points along
a line, as well as ground-truth disparity maps for viewpoint
2 and 6. In this paper we only consider binocular methods, so we use images 2 and 6 as left and right input images. Also, we downsample the original images to one third
of their size, resulting in images of roughly 460×370 pixels with a disparity range of 80 pixels. When creating the
datasets, we took each image using three different expo-
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA, June 18-23, 2007.
Errors in unoccluded areas [%]
Scale factor s
(a) Global scale change (Corr)
Errors in unoccluded areas [%]
Scale factor s
(b) Global scale change (SGM)
Errors in unoccluded areas [%]
Scale factor s
(c) Global scale change (GC)
Errors in unoccluded areas [%]
Gamma factor g
(d) Global gamma change (Corr)
Errors in unoccluded areas [%]
Gamma factor g
(e) Global gamma change (SGM)
Errors in unoccluded areas [%]
Gamma factor g
(f) Global gamma change (GC)
Errors in unoccluded areas [%]
Scale factor at image border s
(g) Vignetting (Corr)
Errors in unoccluded areas [%]
Scale factor at image border s
(h) Vignetting (SGM)
Errors in unoccluded areas [%]
Scale factor at image border s
(i) Vignetting (GC)
Errors in unoccluded areas [%]
Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) [dB]
(j) Adding Gaussian noise (Corr)
Errors in unoccluded areas [%]
Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) [dB]
(k) Adding Gaussian noise (SGM)
Errors in unoccluded areas [%]
Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) [dB]
(l) Adding Gaussian noise (GC)
Figure 2. Effect of applying radiometric changes or noise on the Tsukuba, Venus, Teddy, and Cones datasets. The columns correspond to
the three stereo methods, while each row examines a different type of intensity change.
sures and under three different conﬁgurations of the light
sources. We thus have 9 different images from each viewpoint that exhibit signiﬁcant radiometric differences. Figure
4 shows both exposure and lighting variations of the left image of the Art dataset.
We tested all combinations of matching costs and stereo
algorithms over all 3×3 combinations of exposure and light
changes. The total matching error is calculated as before as
the mean percentage of outliers (disparity error > 1) over all
six datasets. The resulting curves are shown in Figure 5. It
should be noted that our new images are more challenging
than the images used in Section 3.1, due to the increased
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA, June 18-23, 2007.
Figure 3. The new Art, Books, Dolls, Laundry, Moebius, and Reindeer stereo test images with ground truth.
Figure 4. The left image of the Art dataset with three different exposures and under three different light conditions.
Errors in unoccluded areas [%]
3x3 left/right image combinations
(a) Different exposure (Corr)
Errors in unoccluded areas [%]
3x3 left/right image combinations
(b) Different exposure (SGM)
Errors in unoccluded areas [%]
3x3 left/right image combinations
(c) Different exposure (GC)
Errors in unoccluded areas [%]
3x3 left/right image combinations
(d) Different lighting (Corr)
Errors in unoccluded areas [%]
3x3 left/right image combinations
(e) Different lighting (SGM)
Errors in unoccluded areas [%]
3x3 left/right image combinations
(f) Different lighting (GC)
Figure 5. Matching 3×3 left/right image combinations that differ in exposure or lighting conditions. Given is the mean error.
disparity range, lack of texture, and the more complicated
scene geometry. This is reﬂected in the higher matching
errors: the best methods now have errors of about 10%, as
opposed to about 3% before.
Figure 5a shows the result of using all matching costs
with correlation on pictures with different exposure settings.
The change of exposure is a global transformation, which is
similar to a global change of brightness. It is therefore not
surprising that the observations are similar to that of Figures 2a and 2d, i.e., Rank and HMI perform best, while
LoG and Mean have a bit more problems since they were
not designed for compensating gain changes. The main difference is the bad performance of NCC. The performance
of the matching costs with SGM and GC is shown in Figure 5b–c. In contrast to Section 3.1, Rank performs slightly
better than HMI, especially in combinations with the same
exposure settings. Furthermore, the performance of Rank in
case of correlation is just slightly worse than Rank in com-
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA, June 18-23, 2007.
(a) BT, Corr
(b) LoG, Corr
(c) Rank, Corr
(d) Mean, Corr
(e) HMI, Corr
(f) NCC, Corr
(g) BT, SGM
(h) LoG, SGM
(i) Rank, SGM
(j) Mean, SGM
(k) HMI, SGM
(l) BT, GC
(m) LoG, GC
(n) Rank, GC
(o) Mean, GC
(p) HMI, GC
(q) Ground truth
Figure 6. Disparity images of the Teddy pair without radiometric transformations.
bination with global methods. The reason is probably that
the robustness of Rank against outliers helps in both cases
for these challenging scenes.
Changing the position of light sources results in many
local radiometric differences. The correlation results (Figure 5d) conﬁrm that all matching costs have problems with
these severe changes. However, Rank and LoG are again
best, while HMI is only better than BT. This is essentially
the same ﬁnding as from the artiﬁcial vignetting effect (Figure 2g). The situation is similar for SGM and GC (Figure
5e–f), where also Rank and LoG are the best-performing
HMI has obviously more problems with changed
lighting which results in local brightness changes that cannot be expressed as a global transformation.
3.3. Qualitative Evaluation
We noted in Section 3.1 that there are performance differences among the matching costs even on the original
images without any additional radiometric transformations.
For a qualitative analysis of these differences we examined
the disparity maps of all combinations of matching costs
and algorithms on all image pairs.
Due to space limitations we show the complete set of
disparity maps only for the Teddy image pair (Figure 6).
At ﬁrst glance, all correlation results appear similar (Figure
6a–f). However, a few more errors are visible in the BT result. Furthermore, Rank and HMI seem to cause less distortions at depth discontinuities when observing the chimney.
This conﬁrms the ﬁndings of Section 3.1 that Rank and HMI
perform best. For SGM, the differences are higher (Figure
6g–k). BT and HMI produce the best object borders, while
the LoG, Rank, and especially the Mean ﬁlter cause distortions at object borders. The effect is similar for GC (Figure
6l–p). Recall that the GC implementation does not include
a treatment for occlusions; thus, errors left to object borders
should be ignored. We found similar behavior on the other
image pairs.
3.4. Runtime
Many applications demand not only accurate disparities,
but also fast runtime. Table 1 gives the runtime of the LoG,
Rank, and HMI computation (excluding the runtime of the
stereo method) for the Teddy image pair. All methods were
measured on a Pentium 4 with 2.8 GHz. The Teddy images
have a size of 450×375 pixels. A 5×5 kernel was used for
the LoG ﬁlter and a 15×15 window for the Rank ﬁlter. The
runtime of 100 ms of HMI includes the time for upscaling
and downscaling the images as well as the MI calculations
on all hierarchical levels, starting with
16th of the full image size. Additionally, the stereo method needs to be run
not only on the full resolution images, but also for downscaled images. For Corr and SGM, the overhead has been
measured with about 15% of their runtime at full resolution.
Table 1. Runtime of cost computation on Teddy images.
≈100ms+15%
Implementation
The times required for applying the Mean ﬁlter or NCC
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA, June 18-23, 2007.
are not included since these methods were implemented in
Java and were not optimized.
4. Conclusion
We compared several different cost functions for stereo
matching on radiometrically different images. Each cost
was evaluated with three different stereo algorithms: a local
correlation method, a semi-global matching method, and a
global method using graph cuts. We found that the performance of a matching cost function depends on the stereo
method that uses it. On images with simulated and real radiometric differences, the Rank transform appeared to be
the best cost for correlation-based methods. In tests with
global radiometric changes or noise, hierarchical mutual information performed best for pixel-based global matching
methods like SGM and GC. In the presence of local radiometric variations Rank and LoG performed better than HMI
for SGM and GC.
A qualitative evaluation of the disparity images from images without radiometric transformations indicated that the
ﬁlter-based costs (LoG, Rank and Mean) tend to blur object
boundaries. This does not affect the results of correlation as
the ﬁxed-sized correlation window leads to blurred discontinuities anyway. On the contrary, these ﬁlters can actually
remedy this problem, in particular the Rank ﬁlter, which reduces the weight of outliers near discontinuities. However,
the blurring effect is clearly visible for pixel-based matching methods such as SGM and GC. For such methods, the
results of BT and HMI appeared best.
None of the matching costs we compared was very successful at handling strong local radiometric changes caused
by changing the location of the light sources. It would be
nice if the advantages of the different costs could be combined to get a matching cost that is able to handle local
radiometric transformations like Rank and LoG while still
maintaining sharp depth discontinuities like HMI.
Future work includes testing other matching costs that
can handle radiometric differences, e.g., the census transform and the approximation of MI of Zitnick et al. .
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Anna Blasiak and Jeff Wehrwein
for their help in creating the data sets used in this paper.