Play and Prune: Adaptive Filter Pruning for Deep Model Compression
Pravendra Singh , Vinay Kumar Verma , Piyush Rai and Vinay P. Namboodiri
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kanpur, India
{psingh, vkverma, piyush, vinaypn}@cse.iitk.ac.in
While convolutional neural networks (CNN) have
achieved impressive performance on various classiﬁcation/recognition tasks, they typically consist
of a massive number of parameters. This results
in signiﬁcant memory requirement as well as computational overheads.
Consequently, there is a
growing need for ﬁlter-level pruning approaches
for compressing CNN based models that not only
reduce the total number of parameters but reduce
the overall computation as well.
We present a
new min-max framework for ﬁlter-level pruning of
CNNs. Our framework, called Play and Prune (PP),
jointly prunes and ﬁne-tunes CNN model parameters, with an adaptive pruning rate, while maintaining the model’s predictive performance. Our framework consists of two modules: (1) An adaptive ﬁlter pruning (AFP) module, which minimizes the
number of ﬁlters in the model; and (2) A pruning
rate controller (PRC) module, which maximizes the
accuracy during pruning. Moreover, unlike most
previous approaches, our approach allows directly
specifying the desired error tolerance instead of
pruning level. Our compressed models can be deployed at run-time, without requiring any special
libraries or hardware. Our approach reduces the
number of parameters of VGG-16 by an impressive
factor of 17.5X, and number of FLOPS by 6.43X,
with no loss of accuracy, signiﬁcantly outperforming other state-of-the-art ﬁlter pruning methods.
Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) have been used
widely for object recognition and various other computer vision tasks. After the early works based on standard forms
of deep convolutional neural networks [LeCun et al., 1998;
Krizhevsky et al., 2012], recent works have proposed and investigated various architectural changes [Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015; Chollet, 2017; He et al., 2016] to improve
the performance of CNNs. Although these changes, such as
adding more layers to the CNN, have led to impressive performance gains, and they have also resulted in a substantial
increase in the number of parameters, as well as the computational cost. The increase in model size and computations have
made it impractical to deploy these models on embedded and
mobile devices for real-world applications. To address this,
recent efforts have focused on several approaches for compressing CNNs, such as using binary or quantized [Rastegari
et al., 2016] weights. However, these require special hardware or pruning of unimportant/redundant weights [Han et
al., 2015a; Han et al., 2015b; Alvarez and Salzmann, 2016;
Wen et al., 2016], and give rather limited speedups.
As most of the CNN parameters reside in the fully connected layers, a high compression rate with respect to the
number of network parameters can be achieved by simply
pruning redundant neurons from the fully connected layers.
However, this does not typically result in any signiﬁcant reduction in computations (FLOPs based speedup), as most
of the computations are performed in convolutional layers.
For example, in case of VGG-16, the fully connected layers contain 90% of total parameters but account for only 1%
of computations, which means that convolutional layers, despite having only about 10% of the total parameters, are responsible for 99% of computations. This has led to considerable recent interest in convolutional layer ﬁlter pruning approaches. However, most existing pruning approaches [Han
et al., 2015a; Han et al., 2015b] result in irregular sparsity
in the convolutional ﬁlters, which requires software specifically designed for sparse tensors to achieve speed-ups in
practice [Han et al., 2015a].
In contrast, some other ﬁlter pruning approaches [Luo et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017;
He et al., 2017] are designed to directly reduce the feature
map width by removing speciﬁc convolutional ﬁlters via ℓ2
or ℓ1 regularization on the ﬁlters, and effectively reducing
the computation, memory, and the number of model parameters. These methods result in models that can be directly used
without requiring any sparse libraries or special hardware.
In this work, we propose a novel ﬁlter pruning formulation. Our formulation is based on a simple min-max game
between two modules to achieve an adaptive maximum pruning with minimal accuracy drop. We show that our approach,
dubbed as Play-and-Prune (PP), results in substantially improved performance as compared to other recently proposed
ﬁlter pruning strategies while being highly stable and efﬁcient
to train. We refer to the two modules of our framework as an
Adaptive Filter Pruning (AFP) and Pruning Rate Controller
Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)
(PRC). The AFP is responsible for pruning the convolutional
ﬁlter, while the PRC is responsible for maintaining accuracy.
Unlike most previous approaches, our approach does not
require any external ﬁne-tuning. In each epoch, it performs
an adaptive ﬁne-tuning to recover from the accuracy loss
caused by the previous epoch’s pruning. Moreover, while
previous approaches need to pre-specify a pruning level for
each layer, our approach is more ﬂexible in the sense that it
directly speciﬁes an error tolerance level and, based on that,
decides which ﬁlters to prune, and from which layer(s).
Through an extensive set of experiments and ablation studies on several benchmarks, we show that Play-and-Prune provides state-of-the-art ﬁlter pruning, and signiﬁcantly outperforms existing methods.
Related Work
Among one of the earliest efforts on compressing CNNs
by pruning unimportant/redundant weights, [Rastegari et al.,
2016; Chen et al., 2015] includes binarizing/quantizing the
network weights.
These approaches [Zhou et al., 2016;
Han et al., 2015b] learn sparse network weights, where
most of the weights are zero, and consequently can lead to
very small model sizes.
However, despite sparsity of the
weights, the pruned models are still not computationally ef-
ﬁcient at run-time. Moreover, these models require special
library/hardware for sparse matrix multiplication because activation/feature maps are still dense, which hinders practical
In [Li et al., 2017], the authors proposed ﬁlter pruning by
ranking ﬁlters based on their sum of absolute weights. They
assumed that if the sum of absolute weights is sufﬁciently
small, the corresponding activation map will be weak. Similarly, [Luo and Wu, 2017] use a different approach to rank
the ﬁlter importance, based on the entropy measures. The
assumption is that high entropy ﬁlters are more important.
Alternatively, [Hu et al., 2016] use a data-driven approach to
calculate ﬁlter importance, that is based on the average percentage of zeros in the corresponding activation map. Less
important ﬁlters have more number of zeros in their activation
map. Recently, [Molchanov et al., 2017] proposed improving
run time by using a Taylor approximation. This approach
estimates the change in cost by pruning the ﬁlters. Another
work [Luo et al., 2017] uses pruning of ﬁlters based on the
next layer statistics. Their approach is based on checking the
activation map of the next layer to prune the convolution ﬁlters from the current layer. In a recent work [He et al., 2017]
used a similar approach as in [Luo et al., 2017] but used lasso
regression.
Proposed Approach
We assume we have a CNN model M with K convolutional
layer. Layer i is denoted as Li and consists of ni ﬁlters denoted as FLi = {f1.f2. . . . , fni}. We assume that the unpruned model M has the accuracy of E and, post-pruning,
the error tolerance limit is ϵ.
Figure 1: The ﬁgure shows the complete architecture. Here AFP
minimizes the number of ﬁlter in model while PRC maximizes the
accuracy during pruning. Here λt, Wt and Ft are the regularization parameter, weight-threshold and remaining ﬁlters in the model
respectively at tth pruning iteration.
Our deep model compression framework is modeled as a minmax game between two modules, Adaptive Filter Pruning
(AFP) and Pruning Rate Controller (PRC). The objective of
the AFP is to iteratively minimize the number of ﬁlters in the
model, while PRC iteratively tries to maximize the accuracy
with the set of ﬁlters retained by AFP. The AFP will prune
the ﬁlter only when the accuracy drop is within the tolerance
limit (ϵ). If accuracy drop is more than ϵ then pruning stops
and the PRC tries to recover the accuracy by ﬁne-tuning the
model. If PRC’s ﬁne-tuning is unable to bring the error within
the tolerance level ϵ, the AFP will not prune the ﬁlter from the
model and game converges.
Let us denote the AFP by P and the PRC by C. Our objective function can be deﬁned as follows:
P (FL1, FL2, . . . FLK)
As shown in the above objective, the AFP (P) minimizes
the number of ﬁlters in the network, and the PRC (C) optimizes the accuracy given that the number of ﬁlters. Here #w
is the number of remaining ﬁlters after pruning by AFP.
An especially appealing aspect of our approach is that the
pruning rates in each iteration are decided adaptively based
on the performance of the model. After each pruning step,
the controller C checks the accuracy drop (see Fig. 1). If the
accuracy drop is more than ϵ, then the pruning rate is reset to
zero, and the controller C tries to recover the system performance (further details of this part are provided in the section
on PRC). Eq. 1 converges when C(#w) performance drop is
more than the tolerance limit, and it is unable to recover it.
In such a case, we rollback the current pruning and restore
the previous model. At this point, we conclude that this is
an optimal model that has the maximal ﬁlter pruning within ϵ
accuracy drop.
Convolutional Filter Partitioning
The pruning module P ﬁrst needs to identify a candidate set
of ﬁlters to be pruned. For this, we use a ﬁlter partitioning
scheme in each epoch. Suppose the entire set of ﬁlters of the
Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)
model M is partitioned into two sets, one of which contains
the important ﬁlters while the other contains the unimportant
ﬁlters. Let U and I be the set of unimportant and important
ﬁlters, respectively, where
U = {UL1, UL2, . . . , ULK} and I = {IL1, IL2, . . . , ILK}
Here ULi and ILi are set of unimportant and important ﬁlters,
respectively, in layer Li. ULi, selected as follows:
top α% (sort({|f1|, |f2|, . . . , |fni|}))
Eq. 3 sorts the set in increasing order of |fj|, σ is the select operator and selects the α% ﬁlters with least importance. The remaining ﬁlters on Li belongs to set ILi. Here
|fj| is the sum of absolute values of weights in convolutional ﬁlter fj and can be seen as the ﬁlter importance. A
small sum of absolute values of ﬁlter coefﬁcients implies
less importance. Our approach to calculate ﬁlter importance
uses their ℓ1 norm (Eq. 3), which has been well-analyzed
and used in prior works [Li et al., 2017; Ding et al., 2018;
He et al., 2018]. Our approach isn’t however tied to this criterion, and other criteria can be used, too. We are using this
criterion because of its simplicity.
Weight Threshold Initialization
After obtaining the two sets of ﬁlters U and I, directly removing U may result in a sharp and potentially irrecoverable
accuracy drop. Therefore we only treat U as a candidate set
of ﬁlters to be pruned, of which a subset will be pruned eventually. To this end, we optimize the original cost function for
the CNN, subject to a group sparse penalty on the set of ﬁlters in U, as shown in Eq. 4. Let C(Θ) be the original cost
function, with Θ being original model parameters. The new
objective function can be deﬁned as:
Θ = arg min
(C(Θ) + λA||U||1)
Here λA is the ℓ1 regularization constant. This optimization
penalizes U such that |fj| (sum of absolute weights of coefﬁcients in each ﬁlter fj) tends to zero, where fj ∈ULi
∀i ∈{1, 2, . . . , K}. This optimization also helps to transfer the information from U to the rest of the model. If a ﬁlter fj has approximately zero sum of absolute weights then
it is deemed safe to be pruned. However, reaching a closeto-zero sum of absolute weights for the whole ﬁlter may
require several epochs.
We therefore choose an adaptive
weight threshold (Wγi) for each layer Li, such that removing ∀fj ∈ULis.t.|fj| ≤Wγi results in negligible (close to 0)
accuracy drop.
We calculate the initial weight threshold (Wγi) for Li as
follows: optimize Eq. 4 for one epoch with λA = λ, where λ
is the initial regularization constant, which creates two clusters of ﬁlters (if we take the sum of the absolute value of ﬁlters) as shown in Fig 2. On left cluster (right plot) using the
binary search ﬁnd the maximum threshold Wγi for Li such
that accuracy drop is nearly zero.
Figure 2: Histogram of the sum of absolute value of convolutional
ﬁlters for CONV5 1 in VGG-16 on CIFAR-10. Where left plot is
for original ﬁlters and the right plot shows the sum of the absolute
value of ﬁlters after optimization.
Adaptive Filter Pruning (AFP)
The objective of the AFP module is to minimize the number
of ﬁlters in the model. Initially, based on the sparsity hyperparameter λ, we calculate the weight thresholds W. Now instead of using the constant pruning rate, we change the pruning rate adaptively given by the pruning rate controller (PRC;
described in the next section) in each epoch. This adaptive
strategy helps to discard the ﬁlter in a balanced way, such
that we can recover from the accuracy drop. In each epoch,
from the current model, we select α% of the ﬁlter of lowest
importance from each layer, partition them into U and I, and
perform optimization using Eq. 4, where λA is given by PRC.
The optimization in Eq. 4 transfers the knowledge of unimportant ﬁlters into the rest of the network. Therefore some
ﬁlter from the U can be safely discarded. This removal of the
ﬁlter from the model is done based on the threshold (WA)
given by the PRC module. Now, from each layer, the ﬁlters below the adaptive threshold WA are discarded. In each
epoch, the weight thresholds and regularization constant is
updated dynamically by the PRC module, and a subset of U
is pruned. Hence, in the same epoch, we can recover from the
accuracy drop from the previous epoch’s pruning, making the
model ready to prune ﬁlters in the current epoch.
The objective of the AFP module can be deﬁned as:
C(Θ′) + λA
Here Θ′ is the collection of remaining ﬁlters after pruning, and σ is the select operator. #w is the collection of all
the ﬁlter from each layer Li that has a sum of absolute value
greater than the Wγi. From Eq.-5, it is clear that it minimizes the number of the ﬁlters based on Wγi ∈WA, ∀i ∈
{1, 2, . . . , K}.
Pruning Rate Controller (PRC)
Let W = [Wγ1, Wγ2, . . . , WγK] denote the initial weight
thresholds for the K layers (described in Weight Threshold
Initialization section). Now the adaptive thresholds WA are
calculated as follows:
WA = δw × Tr × W
C(#w) −(E −ϵ)
: C(#w) −(E −ϵ) > 0
: Otherwise
Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)
where C(#w) is the accuracy with #w remaining ﬁlters, E
is the accuracy of the unpruned network, and the number
C(#w)−(E −ϵ) denotes how far we are from tolerance error
level ϵ. Here, δw is a constant used to accelerate or decrease
the pruning rate. The regularization constant λA in Eq. 4 also
adapted based on the model performance after pruning and its
updates are given as follows
(C(#w) −(E −ϵ)) × λ
: C(#w) −(E −ϵ) > 0
: Otherwise
Form Eq. 8 it is clear that we set the regularizer constant to
zero if our pruned model performance is below the tolerance
limit. Otherwise, it is proportional to the accuracy above the
tolerance limit. λ is the initial regularization constant.
The PRC module essentially controls the rate at which the
ﬁlters will get pruned. In our experiments, we found that if
the pruning rate is high, there is a sharp drop in accuracy after pruning, which may or may not be recoverable. Therefore pruning saturates early, and we are unable to get the high
pruning rate. Also if the pruning rate is too slow, the model
may get pruned very rarely and spends most of its time in ﬁnetuning. We, therefore, use a pruning strategy that adapts the
pruning rate dynamically. In the pruning process, if in some
epoch, the system performance is below the tolerance limit,
we reset the pruning rate to zero. Therefore the optimization
will focus only on the accuracy gain until the accuracy is recovered to be again within the tolerance level ϵ. Note that the
adaptive pruning rate depends on model performance. When
the model performance is within ϵ, the pruning depends on
how far we are from ϵ. From Eq 6, it is clear that the WA
depends on the performance of the system over the #w ﬁlters
in the model. In this way, by controlling the pruning rate, we
maintain a balance between ﬁlter pruning and accuracy. This
module tries to maximize accuracy by reducing pruning rate.
The objective function of PRC can be deﬁned as:
Θ′ C (Θ′, D)
Here C calculates the performance, i.e., accuracy. It is the
function of all the convolutional ﬁlters Θ′ that remain after pruning, and D is the validation set used to compute the
model accuracy.
In addition to dynamically controlling the pruning rate, the
PRC offers several other beneﬁts, discussed next.
Iterative Pruning Bounds Accuracy Drop
Eq. 7 and Eq. 8 ensure that compressed model will not go
beyond error tolerance limit, which is controlled by the PRC.
Experimentally we found that, in a non-iterative one round
pruning, if model suffers from a high accuracy drop during
pruning then pruning saturates early and ﬁne tuning will not
recover accuracy drop properly. We have shown an ablation
study which shows the effectiveness of iterative pruning over
the single round pruning to justify this fact.
Pruning Cost
The cost/effort involved in pruning is mostly neglected in
most of the existing ﬁlter pruning methods. Moreover, most
of the methods perform pruning and ﬁne-tuning separately.
In contrast, we jointly prune and ﬁne-tune the CNN model
Input Size
Total parameters
1.13M (13.3×)
0.86M (17.5×)
Model Size
4.6 MB (13.0×)
3.5 MB (17.1×)
54.0M (5.8×)
48.8M (6.43×)
Table 1: Layer-wise pruning results and pruned models (PP-1, and
PP-2) statistics for VGG-16 on CIFAR-10.
parameters, with an adaptive pruning rate, while maintaining
the model’s predictive performance. Therefore, in a given
epoch, we can recover from the accuracy drop suffered due to
the previous epoch’s pruning and making the model ready to
prune ﬁlters in the current epoch.
Layer Importance
Most previous methods [Ding et al., 2018; He et al., 2017;
Li et al., 2017; He et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2018] use userspeciﬁed desired model compression rate but ﬁnding optimal
compression rate is not so easy and involves many trials. In
CNNs, some layers are relatively less important, and therefore we can prune many more ﬁlters from such layers. In
contrast, if we prune a large number of ﬁlters from important
layers, then this might result in an irrecoverable loss in accuracy. Our approach is more ﬂexible since it directly speciﬁes
an error tolerance level ϵ and, based on that, adaptively decides which ﬁlters to prune, and from which layer(s), using
Eq. 6 to determine layer-speciﬁc pruning rates.
Experiments and Results
To show the effectiveness of the proposed approach, we
have conducted extensive experiments on small as well as
large datasets, CIFAR-10 [Krizhevsky and Hinton, 2009] and
ILSVRC-2012 [Russakovsky et al., 2015].
Our approach
yields state-of-art results on VGG-16 [Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015], and RESNET-50 [He et al., 2016] respectively.
For all our experiments, we set λ = 0.0005 (set initially but
later adapted), δw = 1 and α = 10%. We follow the same
parameter settings and training schedule as [Li et al., 2017;
He et al., 2017; He et al., 2018]. We also report an ablation
study for various values of α.
VGG-16 on CIFAR-10
We experimented with the VGG-16 on the CIFAR-10 dataset.
We follow the same parameter settings and training schedule as [Li et al., 2017]. Table 1 shows the layer-wise pruning statistics for PP-1 (ﬁrst pruned model), and PP-2 (second
pruned model). We compare our results with the recent works
Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)
Figure 3: Our ResNet pruning strategy, where we pruned only ﬁrst
two convolutional layers in each block.
on ﬁlter pruning. Our approach consistently performs better
as compared to Li-pruned [Li et al., 2017], SBP [Neklyudov
et al., 2017], AFP [Ding et al., 2018] as shown in Table 2.
Ablation Study for VGG-16 on CIFAR-10
This section shows a detailed analysis of the effect on the
different component in the proposed approach.
Ablation Study on the Hyper-parameter α
We did an ablation study on the hyper-parameter α, i.e., how
many ﬁlters are selected for partitioned U. We experimented
with α = 5, 10, 20, 30%. We found that if we take the lower
value, it will not degrade the performance only it takes more
epochs to prune. While if we take high α (say 30%) value,
it starts degrading the performance of model early, hence we
are unable to get high pruning rate. In our case, we ﬁnd α =
10% is a moderate value and at this rate, we can achieve a
high pruning rate. This rate we set across all architecture like
ResNet-50, VGG.
Pruning Iterations Vs Error
In Fig. 4 (left) we have shown that if we do the pruning in
1 shot, it has signiﬁcant accuracy drop (8.03%) as compared
to PP-2 on the same FLOPs pruning (84.5%). While if we
prune the model iteratively, we have less error rate for the
same FLOPs pruning.
Filter Importance Vs Layer Importance
Most of the previous approach [Ding et al., 2018; Li et al.,
2017; Yu et al., 2018] focus on the How to prune (ﬁlter importance/ranking), while it is also important for the better pruning rate to decide Where to prune. Our approach also decides
the where to prune by considering layer importance. In the
ﬁgure-4 (right) we are showing the ablation on our approach’s
capability to decide the layers importance. In ﬁgure-4 (right)
we are showing the error rate on the similar FLOPs pruning
without/with considering layer importance for the four compressed model search (S1,S2,S3,S4) with our approach (PP-
2) using same ﬁlter importance criteria.
Params Pruned(%)
Pruned FLOPs(%)
Li-pruned [Li et al., 2017]
SBP [Neklyudov et al., 2017]
AFP-E [Ding et al., 2018]
AFP-F [Ding et al., 2018]
PP-1 (Ours)
PP-2 (Ours)
Table 2: Comparison of pruning VGG-16 on CIFAR-10 (the baseline accuracy is 93.49%).
Alpha value
Parameters
1.12 × 106
1.13 × 106
1.15 × 106
1.27 × 106
Table 3: Ablation study over the α values. Experimentally we found
that α = 10 is the most suitable.
Figure 4: (a) Left ﬁgure shows the effectiveness of iterative pruning
(b) Right ﬁgure shows effect of layer importance on error for the
same FLOPs pruning (84.5%)
ResNet-56 on CIFAR-10
We follow the same parameter settings and training schedule as [Li et al., 2017; He et al., 2018]. Our approach signiﬁcantly outperforms various state-of-the-art approaches for
ResNet-56 on CIFAR-10. The results are shown in Table 4.
We achieve high pruning rate 68.4% with the 6.91% error
rate, while AFP-G [Ding et al., 2018] has the error rate of
7.06% with only 60.9% pruning.
VGG-16 On ILSVRC-2012
To show the effectiveness of our proposed approach, we
also experimented with the large-scale dataset ILSVRC-2012
[Russakovsky et al., 2015]. It contains 1000 classes with 1.5
million images. To make our validation set, randomly 10 images (from the training set) are selected from each class. This
is used by PRC to calculate validation accuracy drop for adjusting the pruning rate. In this experiment, α is the same
as the previous experiment. We follow the same setup and
settings as [He et al., 2017].
Our large-scale experiment for VGG-16 [Simonyan and
Zisserman, 2015] on the ImageNet [Russakovsky et al., 2015]
shows the state-of-art result over the other approaches for
model compression. Channel-pruning (CP) [He et al., 2017]
has the 80.0% model FLOPs compression with the top-5 ac-
Pruned FLOPs(%)
Li-B [Li et al., 2017]
NISP [Yu et al., 2018]
CP [He et al., 2017]
SFP [He et al., 2018]
AFP-G [Ding et al., 2018]
PP-1 (Ours)
Table 4: Comparison of pruning ResNet-56 on CIFAR-10 (the baseline accuracy is 93.1%).
Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)
Top-5 Accu.(%)
Pruned FLOPs(%)
RNP (3X)[Lin et al., 2017a]
ThiNet-70 [Luo et al., 2017]
CP [He et al., 2017]
PP-1 (Ours)
Table 5: Comparison of pruning VGG-16 on ImageNet (the baseline
accuracy is 90.0%).
Top-5 Accu.(%)
Parameters
Pruned FLOPs(%)
ThiNet [Luo et al., 2017]
SFP [He et al., 2018]
PP-1 (Ours)
CP [He et al., 2017]
PP-2 (Ours)
Table 6: Comparison of pruning ResNet-50 on ImageNet (the baseline accuracy is 92.2%).
curacy 88.2%, while we have same FLOPs pruning (80.2%)
with the top-5 accuracy 89.81%. Refer to table-5 for the detail comparison results. Our compressed model (PP-1) is obtained after 38 epochs.
ResNet-50 ON ILSVRC-2012
In ResNet, there exist restrictions on the few layers due to
its identity mapping (skip connection). Since for output =
f(x) + x we need to sum two vector, therefore we need x
and f(x) should have same dimension. Hence we cannot
change the output dimension freely. Hence only two convolutional layers can be pruned for each block (see Fig-3). Unlike
the previous work [Luo et al., 2017] where they explicitly
set p=q, we have not imposed any such restriction which results in more compression with better accuracy. We prune
ResNet-50 from block 2a to 5c continuously as described in
the proposed approach. If the ﬁlter is pruned, then the corresponding channels in the batch-normalization layer and all
dependencies to that ﬁlter are also removed. We follow the
same settings as [He et al., 2017].
Our results on ResNet are shown in Table 6. We are iteratively pruning convolutional ﬁlters in each epoch as described
earlier. PP-1 is obtained after 34 epochs. Similarly, PP-2 is
obtained after 62 epochs. We have experimentally shown that
our approach reduces FLOPs and Parameters without any signiﬁcant drop in accuracy.
Practical Speedup
The practical speedup is sometimes very different by the result reported in terms of FLOPs prune percentage. The practical speedup depends on the many other factors, for example, intermediate layers bottleneck, availability of data (batch
size) and the number of CPU/GPU cores available.
Avg. Precision, IoU:
F-RCNN original
trainval35K
F-RCNN pruned
trainval35K
Table 7: Generalization results on MS-COCO. Pruned ResNet-50
(PP-2) used as a base model for Faster-RCNN.
Figure 5: Speedup corresponding to CPU (i7-4770 )
and GPU (GTX-1080) over the different batch size for VGG-16 on
For VGG-16 architecture with the 512 batch size, we have
4.02X practical GPU speedup, while the theoretical speedup
is 6.43X (ﬁgure-5). This gap is very close on the CPU, and
our approach gives the 6.24X practical CPU speedup compare
to 6.43X theoretical (Fig. 5).
Generalization Ability
To show the generalization ability of our proposed approach,
we also experiment on the object detection architecture. In
this experiment we have taken the most popular architecture
Faster-RCNN [Ren et al., 2015] on MS-COCO [Lin et al.,
2014] dataset.
Compression for Object Detection
The experiments are performed on COCO detection datasets
with 80 object categories [Lin et al., 2014]. Here all 80k
train images and a 35k val images are used for training (trainval35K) [Lin et al., 2017b]. We are reporting the detection
accuracies over the 5k unused val images (minival). In this
ﬁrst, we trained Faster-RCNN with the ImageNet pre-trained
ResNet-50 base model. The results are shown in table-7. In
this experiment we used our pruned ResNet-50 model (PP-2)
as given in Table-6 as a base network in Faster-RCNN. We
found that the pruned model shows similar performances in
all cases. In the Faster-RCNN implementation, we use ROI
Align and use stride 1 for the last block of the convolutional
layer (layer4) in the base network.
Conclusion
We proposed a Play and Prun Filter Pruning (PP) framework
to prune CNNs. Our approach follows a min-max game between two modules (AFP and PRC). Since our approach can
prune the entire convolution ﬁlter, there is a signiﬁcant reduction in FLOPs and the number of model parameters. Our
approach does not require any special hardware/software support, is generic, and practically usable. We evaluated it on
various architectures like VGG and Resnet. Our approach
can also be used in conjunction with pruning methods such
as binary/quantized weights, weight pruning, etc.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)