RESEARCH ARTICLE
Open Access
Teaching differential diagnosis in primary care
using an inverted classroom approach: student
satisfaction and gain in skills and knowledge
Stefan Bösner1*, Julia Pickert2 and Tina Stibane2
Background: Differential diagnosis is a crucial skill for primary care physicians. General practice plays an increasing
important role in undergraduate medical education. Via general practice, students may be presented with an
overview of the whole spectrum of differential diagnosis in regard to common symptoms encountered in primary
care. This project evaluated the impact of a blended learning program (using the inverted classroom approach) on
student satisfaction and development of skills and knowledge.
Methods: An elective seminar in differential diagnosis in primary care, which utilized an inverted classroom design,
was offered to students. Evaluation followed a mixed methods design: participants completed a pre- and post-test,
a questionnaire, and a focus group discussion. Interviews were transcribed verbatim and answers were grouped
according to different themes. Test results were analysed using the Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-ranks test.
Results: Participants (n = 17) rated the course concept very positively. Especially the inverted classroom approach
was appreciated by all students, as it allowed for more time during the seminar to concentrate on interactive and
practice based learning. Students (n = 16) showed a post-test significant overall gain in skills and knowledge of 33%.
Conclusions: This study showed a positive effect of the inverted classroom approach on students’ satisfaction and
skills and knowledge. Further research is necessary in order to explore the potentials of this approach, especially the
impact on development of clinical skills.
Keywords: E-learning, Inverted classroom, General practice, Differential diagnosis, Blended learning
Background
One of the essential skills of the clinician is the ability to
make an accurate diagnosis. Especially in the field of primary care the process of making a differential diagnosis
is a challenging and sometimes daunting task. Diseases
often present at an early stage and sometimes in an
atypical form, therefore primary care physicians use a
broad range of diagnostic strategies . Medical students
are usually taught differential diagnosis in the high
prevalence setting of a university hospital. In addition,
differential diagnosis of disease symptoms with a broad
underlying aetiology (e.g. dizziness) will be split among
different disciplines (such as neurology, ENT and internal
medicine). However, many students will later work as physicians in the low prevalence context of primary care,
where they will have to deal with the diagnostic uncertainty that is connected with seeing patients with a broad
range of symptoms . General practice/family medicine,
which plays an increasingly important role in undergraduate medical education throughout Europe , is in an excellent position to give students an overview of the whole
spectrum of differential diagnosis in regard to common
symptoms encountered in primary care.
Nowadays, e-learning is an integral part of medical
education, and has been shown to be most effective
when combined with face-to-face teaching, facilitating
the so-called blended learning approach . Students
increasingly use mobile devices like smartphones for
learning purposes, and appreciate being able to utilise
multimedia materials like video clips or podcasts 
* Correspondence: 
1Department of Family Medicine, University of Marburg,
Karl-von-Frisch-Strasse 4, 35043 Marburg, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2015 Bösner et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License ( which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver ( applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.
Bösner et al. BMC Medical Education 15:63
DOI 10.1186/s12909-015-0346-x
for the preparation or revision of course content. Undergraduate medical students highly value the use of e-learning,
especially when integrated into a blended approach .
While blended learning approaches are well established in
the postgraduate education of primary care providers
 , there are fewer examples in the field of undergraduate medical education in primary care .
The ‘inverted’ or ‘flipped classroom’ approach takes
blended learning one step further, as it offers all traditional lectures exclusively via e-learning, and uses the
face-to-face sessions for interactive exercises and critical
reflection . This concept is already widely used in
other disciplines, for example in the social sciences. Different theoretical foundations to justify the inverted
classroom approach derive from the literature on studentcentered learning including Piaget’s theory of cognitive
conflict and Kolb’s theory of experiential learning . It
has been shown that this approach positively influences
students’ openness for cooperative learning and innovative
teaching methods . While students still preferred live
lectures to video lectures, they valued the interactive class
time higher than in-person lectures .
Inverted classroom education has just started to be
incorporated into medical education , and there are
so far only few published examples , however
none of these in the field of primary care. In contrast,
we consider especially the field of primary care learning
as highly suitable for an inverted classroom approach.
Primary care includes a broad range of complaints and
diseases that can be well taught via e-learning. Class
time can then be effectively used to teach the complex
process of medical decision making in patients with a
broad range of symptoms, the typical setting of primary
care, and to explore ways how to deal with the connected uncertainty.
We redesigned a seminar on differential diagnosis in primary care for undergraduate students, using an inverted
classroom approach. In this study we wished to address
the following questions:
1. Will students appreciate this approach for studying
differential diagnosis in primary care?
2. What will the gain in skills and knowledge of
students learning with the inverted classroom
approach be?
Participants and setting
All participants of this elective seminar were in their
fourth or fifth year of undergraduate medical studies.
The different modules consist of interdisciplinary clinical
pictures derived from the everyday routine of primary
care. Contrary to other clinical specialties, where students are also presented with very rare diseases which
they may rarely -if ever- encounter during their medical
career, we primarily concentrated on common underlying aetiologies for lead symptoms such as chest pain,
dyspnoea, abdominal pain, or vertigo/dizziness. A special
focus was put on the diagnostic accuracy of symptoms
and signs in regard to the different underlying disease
aetiologies of a given clinical picture. The seminar comprises of 42 hours of face-to-face teaching altogether,
divided over 3 hours per week respectively, and closes
with an objective structured clinical examination (OSCE).
The whole seminar takes place at an interactive skills lab
attached to the Marburg University Hospital and utilizes
trained simulation patients and different models. Further
details of seminar content and underlying didactic considerations have been published elsewhere .
One year ago, we redesigned the whole seminar, using
the inverted classroom approach . At the faculty
of medicine, our seminar is currently the only taught
medical course using the inverted classroom design. To
our knowledge, this method is so far also not used by
other primary care departments in Germany and in general not yet widely established in medical education at
German Universities.
E-learning modules are hosted on the web based learning platform ‘K-Med’ (knowledge in medical education)
of the faculty of medicine, University of Marburg. Each
seminar session is structured as follows:
– Preparation: Several video and audio lectures giving
introductory information and key knowledge
content are available on the web-based learning
– Face-to-face teaching, which takes place in the
interactive skills lab: several didactic approaches,
such as simulation patients, training models,
interactive small group work, and quiz exercises
– Follow-up: Additional video and audio lectures
present more detailed information in regard to
the single leading symptom and its underlying
etiologies. Supplementary facultative reading
material (e.g. original research on the accuracy of
symptoms and signs for a given disease) is also
offered via the web-based learning platform.
Study design
We used a mixed methods design in order to investigate
our study questions.
Student satisfaction (research question 1) was measured
using information from different sources. The first source
was a standardized questionnaire that is used by the
University of Marburg to evaluate seminars. The questionnaire utilizes a rating scale ranging from 1 point (“agree
not at all”) to 5 points (“completely agree”) and additional
Bösner et al. BMC Medical Education 15:63
 
free text answers, and covers four main areas (seminar
concept and presentation, interaction with students, level
of interest/relevance and difficulty/quantity/speed). It is
filled out anonymously and analysed by the university’s
evaluation department.
In addition, after the 8th out of 14 course sessions, an
evaluation consisting of a focus group discussion and a
short questionnaire that was handed out after the focus
group were conducted. Topics of the interview and the
questionnaire included the perception of the seminar
content, a critical reflection of the inverted classroom
approach (usefulness of video and audio sessions, connection/synthesis with the face to face sessions) and the
individual learning experience of the students. We concentrated on the learning experience of the course participants, with a special focus on how the inverted classroom
approach is perceived. For the quantitative evaluation of
gain in skills and knowledge (research question 2) we designed a questionnaire consisting of extended matching
items (13 items), and key-feature tests (20 items). Both
examination formats can measure the process of clinical
reasoning, and help to assess clinical decision making
skills . They are used to test the second level of
clinical competence in “Miller’s Pyramid” (“Knows how”)
 . We found the extended matching questions suitable
for testing which clinical findings from the patient’s history and physical examination had the highest diagnostic
Together, both question formats covered all major
seminar content. Questions were pre-tested on another
group of students with comparable pre-existing knowledge. After the pre-test we replaced two key feature
cases that were too easy and one extended matching
question that was too difficult and in addition modified
one key feature question that was misleading. During
the seminar, students were asked to complete the pre-test
at the beginning of the first session, and the post-test after
the last session before starting to learn for the OSCE that
was conducted one week later. Tests were completed by
students using an unique identifier that allowed the anonymous matching of pre- and post-tests at an individual
student level.
Additional file 1 shows example questions of the
questionnaire.
For the 4 variables of the standardized questionnaire for
student satisfaction means and standard deviations were
calculated and plotted.
Results (average in percentage of maximal test score
that could be gained) of the pre- and post-test were
compared for statistically significant differences using
the Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-ranks test. Error
probability with a p-value less than 0.05 was considered
significant. Statistical analysis was performed using the
GraphPad PRISM (Version 6 Graphpad Software, Inc).
The focus group discussion was taped and transcribed
verbatim. For data analysis we utilised a deductive approach based on the questions of the focus group guideline and of the short written questionnaire. Analysis was
performed by SB and results discussed among all authors.
Responses from the focus groups and the free text answers
from the evaluation questionnaires were grouped under
different themes.
The entire here presented data are part of the routine
evaluation of courses at our faculty. Ethical approval was
therefore not required.
Altogether, 17 students applied and were all enrolled in
the seminar. One student did not participate in the pretest. All 17 students took part in the focus group and the
final evaluation.
Student satisfaction
Figure 1 shows the summary of results concerning the
four areas investigated in the quantitative evaluation.
The inverted classroom concept of the seminar reached
the highest possible marks. Interaction with students
and the relevance of the course contents were rated accordingly. The quantity of material offered, and the complexity of course content were rated as completely
Answers from the focus group discussion and the
evaluation questionnaires can be grouped under the following themes:
Seminar content
All students appreciated the symptom-oriented approach, which was seen to reflect the reality of daily
“Usually you learn from a disease-oriented point
of view…but the patient usually presents with a
symptom. This is what usually lacks (in other
seminars or lectures)… it is difficult to remember all
the differential diagnoses, because you have to screen
all diseases that you know in order to see whether
these contain the symptom… here (in this seminar)
it is the other way around.”.
Most students mentioned that the seminar helped to
understand the importance of epidemiological knowledge for the diagnostic process and the integration of
this knowledge into the process of clinical decision
Bösner et al. BMC Medical Education 15:63
 
“Epidemiology was a topic which I considered as
totally uninteresting, but now its importance has
become clearer to me.”
“There is a much more frequent reference to
epidemiology (in comparison to other seminars/
lectures), which I consider good, as it helps to build a
much stronger hierarchy of differential diagnoses.”
Inverted classroom approach
The blended learning design of the seminar using an
inverted classroom approach was appreciated by all students, as it gave more time during the seminar to concentrate on interactive and practice based learning.
“The things (seminar content) that are in the videos
can be outsourced very easily and there is no necessity
to cover them here (during the face to face lessons).”
“The summaries of different diseases in the preparatory
lessons are very good. The immediate application with
the help of simulation patients is very practical.”
Some students criticized the fact that key information
of the preparation videos was repeated during the faceto-face sessions.
“One can be even more radical; we have already seen
the video and you then don’t need the slides anymore.”
Acquisition of further key competencies
Several students mentioned the positive impact of teamwork during the seminar – a key competence that was
also considered as important for later professional life.
“It is very good that we have the opportunity to reason
together as a team…to brainstorm together in order to
consolidate what we have heard.”
“It is also good to get ideas from others. I think that
this is also important for being a doctor later, to learn
this capacity for teamwork.”
For some students the seminar was also a trigger
for meta-learning, as they reflected their own learning
experience.
“I learn best when I need to apply my previous
knowledge to unknown new situations that I
consider difficult. Then I am most creative and it
(the knowledge) remains in the long-term memory.”
Gain in skills and knowledge
There was a significant (p < 0.01) overall absolute gain in
skills and knowledge of 33%. Gain of fourth year students was slightly higher at 34% than that of fifth year
students (31%). Students showed a higher gain at 42% in
the key feature questions compared to extended matching questions (19% gain). Figure 2 shows overall results
and results stratified by test format.
Figure 3 presents results of individual students that
showed a large heterogeneity and ranged between 13-48%.
Discussion
We aimed to give a first account of the effects of a
blended learning program in primary care with this
study. To our best knowledge the above presented seminar is the first to teach differential diagnosis in primary
care for undergraduate students using an inverted classroom approach. Our evaluation showed both a high satisfaction rate and a significant gain in skills and knowledge.
When planning to introduce a new e-learning program
it is crucial to evaluate participants’ reception of the
chosen teaching approach . The high approval of
our blended learning approach is consistent with the available literature. While most studies show a positive effect
of blended learning on students’ satisfaction , not
all students necessarily appreciate and use multimedia
materials such as video clips .
A recently conducted Delphi study on the development
of a technology-mediated teaching strategy, the authors
called for teaching activities that are “learner-centred,
interactive, integrated, reflective and that promote engagement” ; the inverted classroom approach was mentioned among others as one possible strategy to achieve
Concept and presentation
Interaction with students
Level of interest/relevance
Difficulty/quantity/speed
(best mark = 3)
Figure 1 Global results of the summative evaluation (n = 17). 5 points are the best possible result; the category ‘difficulty/quantity/speed’ has
3 points as the best possible result. Red bars reflect mean values and horizontal bars reflect standard deviations.
Bösner et al. BMC Medical Education 15:63
 
this goal. Our finding of high student satisfaction with this
approach especially, is supported by the – presently
sparse- literature in the field of medical education. While
we could not identify evaluations of other primary care
programs that use the inverted classroom model, there
have been programs in teaching palliative care skills ,
cardiovascular, respiratory and renal physiology , renal
pharmacotherapy and perfusion skills . All of the
above mentioned programs used the inverted classroom
approach and were positively evaluated, which supports
our own findings.
An additional finding in our focus group discussion
was that the new learning experience during the seminar
also triggered part of the participants to critically reflect
on their own learning. Biggs refers to this process as
‘metacognition’ which includes the awareness of the own
cognitive processes together with exerting control over
them. He encourages a deep approach to learning which
includes the promotion of guided self-questioning, using
other students as a resource or to derive own heuristics
to suit a given task . All these mentioned elements
can be found in our course and it is interesting to note
that an innovative and unusual teaching approach can
trigger this kind of critical self-reflection, which we consider an important prerequisite for later professional life.
While a broad acceptance of participating students is
surely a precondition for establishing a successful blended
learning program , there should also be a positive
impact on clinical skills. In one study students rated elearning just as highly as alternative traditional methods
of clinical skills teaching . However, the effectiveness of
blended learning is often difficult to quantify . We observed a gain in skills and knowledge of the participating
students in the course of our seminar, but cannot judge
what additional effect the blended learning/inverted classroom approach had in comparison to usual face-to-face
teaching. In addition, the results of a systematic review on
the role of blended learning in the clinical education of
health-care students, which identified only a few high
quality studies on this topic, provided only rudimentary
evidence that technology-enhanced teaching improves
clinical competencies .
There are strengths, but also several limitations to our
study. The chosen mixed methods study design is an appropriate way to evaluate a blended learning program,
taking qualitative and quantitative information into account . We not only evaluated student satisfaction,
but also tried to quantify gain in skills and knowledge at
both a group and at an individual level. One limitation is
the relatively small number of participants included in
Figure 2 Overall absolute gain in skills and knowledge and test
results stratified according to test format (n = 16). KF = Key
feature questions, EMQ = Extended Matching Questions. Upper part:
Overall results of the written pre- and post-test including confidence
intervals. Percentages of the total number of possible points are
presented indicating absolute gain in skills and knowledge. Students
showed significant improvement (p < 0.01). Lower part: Results of
the written pre- (black color) and post-test (grey color) stratified by
test format. For both formats a significant improvement could be
demonstrated (p < 0.01).
test results [%]
Pre-test results
Gain of knowledge
Figure 3 Individual gain of participating students (n = 16). Gain
in skills and knowledge of each individual course participant.
Bösner et al. BMC Medical Education 15:63
 
the study. As the seminar is highly interactive, consisting
mainly of work in small groups with tutors and simulation patients, no more than 18 students can be enrolled.
This is also one of the reasons why we could not compare the inverted classroom approach with a second
group taught using traditional methods. This would have
been desirable from a methodological point of view;
however it was not feasible to divide the small group of
participants any further. As we do not have long term
follow up results (e.g. repetition of the post-test after
6 months), we cannot say how much knowledge was
retained by the students. Both examination formats that
we used can only test the second level of clinical competence according to “Miller’s Pyramid”. It would have
been desirable to perform an OSCE as pre- and posttest. However, from a practical point of view we did not
consider it appropriate to confront students with the
complex challenges of an OSCE at the start of the seminar. In this instance we had to balance methodological
considerations versus the danger of frustrating the
participating students right at the beginning of this
elective course with an OSCE they would not at all be prepared for.
Conclusions
This study shows that an inverted classroom model is
well suited to teach the complex topic of differential
diagnosis in primary care. While we perceived high student satisfaction, we could not prove whether the
inverted classroom approach leads to a higher gain in
skills and knowledge than traditional face-to-face teaching.
Future research on our presented concept should therefore aim for a direct comparison of these two teaching
approaches on gain in skills and knowledge, ideally in the
form of a randomized controlled trial with an OSCE as
test format.
Additional file
Additional file 1: Example questions.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
SB, JP and TS designed the study. SB and JP collected the data. SB, JP and TS
analyzed and interpreted the results. SB drafted the article, JP and TS revised
it critically. All authors approved the submitted version to be published.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank all students that participated in the seminar.
Author details
1Department of Family Medicine, University of Marburg,
Karl-von-Frisch-Strasse 4, 35043 Marburg, Germany. 2Marburg Interactive Skills
Lab (MARIS), Faculty of Medicine, University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
Received: 30 April 2014 Accepted: 16 March 2015