www.eurosurveillance.org
Detection of 2019 novel coronavirus by
real-time RT-PCR
Victor M Corman¹, Olfert Landt², Marco Kaiser³, Richard Molenkamp⁴, Adam Meijer⁵, Daniel KW Chu⁶, Tobias Bleicker¹, Sebastian
Brünink¹, Julia Schneider¹, Marie Luisa Schmidt¹, Daphne GJC Mulders⁴, Bart L Haagmans⁴, Bas van der Veer⁵, Sharon van den
Brink⁵, Lisa Wijsman⁵, Gabriel Goderski⁵, Jean-Louis Romette⁷, Joanna Ellis⁸, Maria Zambon⁸, Malik Peiris⁶, Herman Goossens⁹,
Chantal Reusken⁵, Marion PG Koopmans⁴, Christian Drosten¹
1. Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin Institute of Virology, Berlin, Germany and German Centre for Infection Research (DZIF),
Berlin, Germany
2. Tib-Molbiol, Berlin, Germany
3. GenExpress GmbH, Berlin, Germany*
4. Department of Viroscience, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands
5. National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven, the Netherlands
6. University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
7. Universite d Aix-Marseille, Marseille, France
8. Public Health England, London, United Kingdom
9. Department of Medical Microbiology, Vaccine and Infectious Diseases Institute, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium
Correspondence: Christian Drosten ( )
Citation style for this article:
Corman Victor M, Landt Olfert, Kaiser Marco, Molenkamp Richard, Meijer Adam, Chu Daniel KW, Bleicker Tobias, Brünink Sebastian, Schneider Julia, Schmidt Marie
Luisa, Mulders Daphne GJC, Haagmans Bart L, van der Veer Bas, van den Brink Sharon, Wijsman Lisa, Goderski Gabriel, Romette Jean-Louis, Ellis Joanna, Zambon
Maria, Peiris Malik, Goossens Herman, Reusken Chantal, Koopmans Marion PG, Drosten Christian. Detection of 2019 novel coronavirus by real-time
RT-PCR. Euro Surveill. 2020;25(3):pii=2000045. 
Article submitted on 21 Jan 2020 / accepted on 22 Jan 2020 / published on 23 Jan 2020
Background: The ongoing outbreak of the recently
emerged novel coronavirus poses a challenge for public health laboratories as virus isolates
are unavailable while there is growing evidence that
the outbreak is more widespread than initially thought,
and international spread through travellers does
already occur. Aim: We aimed to develop and deploy
robust diagnostic methodology for use in public health
laboratory settings without having virus material available. Methods: Here we present a validated diagnostic
workflow for 2019-nCoV, its design relying on close
genetic relatedness of 2019-nCoV with SARS coronavirus, making use of synthetic nucleic acid technology.
Results: The workflow reliably detects 2019-nCoV,
and further discriminates 2019-nCoV from SARS-CoV.
Through coordination between academic and public
laboratories, we confirmed assay exclusivity based
on 297 original clinical specimens containing a full
spectrum of human respiratory viruses. Control material is made available through European Virus Archive
– Global (EVAg), a European Union infrastructure project. Conclusion: The present study demonstrates the
enormous response capacity achieved through coordination of academic and public laboratories in national
and European research networks.
Introduction
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), the
WHO China Country Office was informed of cases of
pneumonia of unknown aetiology in Wuhan City, Hubei
Province, on 31 December 2019 . A novel coronavirus
currently termed 2019-nCoV was officially announced
as the causative agent by Chinese authorities on
7 January. A viral genome sequence was released
for immediate public health support via the community online resource  virological.org  on 10 January
(Wuhan-Hu-1, GenBank accession number MN908947
 ), followed by four other genomes deposited on 12
January in the viral sequence database curated by the
Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID).
The genome sequences suggest presence of a virus
closely related to the members of a viral species termed
severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)-related CoV,
a species defined by the agent of the 2002/03 outbreak
of SARS in humans . The species also comprises a
large number of viruses mostly detected in rhinolophid
bats in Asia and Europe.
As at 20 January 2020*, 282 laboratory-confirmed
human cases have been notified to WHO . Confirmed
cases in travellers from Wuhan were announced on 13
and 17 January in Thailand as well as on 15 January in
Japan and 19 January in Korea. The extent of humanto-human transmission of 2019-nCoV is unclear at the
time of writing of this report but there is evidence of
some human-to-human transmission.
Among the foremost priorities to facilitate public health
interventions is reliable laboratory diagnosis. In acute
respiratory infection, RT-PCR is routinely used to detect
causative viruses from respiratory secretions. We have
previously demonstrated the feasibility of introducing
robust detection technology based on real-time RT-PCR
in public health laboratories during international
www.eurosurveillance.org
health emergencies by coordination between public
and academic laboratories . In all of these situations, virus isolates were available as the primary
substrate for establishing and controlling assays and
assay performance.
In the present case of 2019-nCoV, virus isolates or
samples from infected patients have so far not become
available to the international public health community.
We report here on the establishment and validation
of a diagnostic workflow for 2019-nCoV screening and
specific confirmation, designed in absence of available
virus isolates or original patient specimens. Design
and validation were enabled by the close genetic relatedness to the 2003 SARS-CoV, and aided by the use of
synthetic nucleic acid technology.
Clinical samples and coronavirus cell culture
supernatants for initial assay evaluation
Cell culture supernatants containing typed coronaviruses and other respiratory viruses were provided by
Charité and University of Hong Kong research laboratories. Respiratory samples were obtained during
2019 from patients hospitalised at Charité medical
centre and tested by the NxTAG respiratory pathogen
panel (Luminex, S´Hertogenbosch, The Netherlands)
or in cases of MERS-CoV by the MERS-CoV upE
assay as published before . Additional samples
were selected from biobanks at the Rijksinstituut
voor Volksgezondheid en Milieu (RIVM), Bilthoven,
at Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam,
at Public Health England (PHE), London, and at the
University of Hong Kong. Samples from all collections
comprised sputum as well as nose and throat swabs
with or without viral transport medium.
Faecal samples containing bat-derived SARS-related
CoV samples (identified by GenBank accession
numbers) were tested: KC633203, Betacoronavirus
BtCoV/Rhi_eur/BB98–98/BGR/2008;
Betacoronavirus BtCoV/Rhi_eur/BB98–92/BGR/2008;
KC633201, Betacoronavirus BtCoV/Rhi_bla/BB98–22/
BGR/2008; GU190221 Betacoronavirus Bat coronavirus BR98–19/BGR/2008; GU190222 Betacoronavirus
coronavirus
BM98–01/BGR/2008;
Betacoronavirus Bat coronavirus BM98–13/BGR/2008.
All synthetic RNA used in this study was photometrically quantified.
RNA extraction
RNA was extracted from clinical samples with the
MagNA Pure 96 system (Roche, Penzberg, Germany)
and from cell culture supernatants with the viral RNA
mini kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany).
Real-time reverse-transcription PCR
A 25 μL reaction contained 5 μL of RNA, 12.5 μL of
2 × reaction buffer provided with the Superscript III
one step RT-PCR system with Platinum Taq Polymerase
(Invitrogen, Darmstadt, Germany; containing 0.4 mM
of each deoxyribont triphosphates (dNTP) and 3.2 mM
magnesium sulphate), 1 μL of reverse transcriptase/
Taq mixture from the kit, 0.4 μL of a 50 mM magnesium sulphate solution (Invitrogen), and 1 μg of nonacetylated bovine serum albumin (Roche). Primer and
probe sequences, as well as optimised concentrations are shown in  Table 1. All oligonucleotides were
synthesised and provided by Tib-Molbiol based on the final reaction mix, e.g. 1.5 µL of a 10 µM primer stock solution per
25 µL total reaction volume yields a final concentration of 600 nM as indicated in the table.
www.eurosurveillance.org
Germany). Thermal cycling was performed at 55 °C for
10 min for reverse transcription, followed by 95 °C for
3 min and then 45 cycles of 95 °C for 15 s, 58 °C for 30
s. Participating laboratories used either Roche Light
Cycler 480II or Applied Biosystems ViiA7 instruments
(Applied Biosystems, Hong Kong, China).
Protocol options and application notes
Laboratories participating in the evaluation used the
TaqMan Fast Virus 1-Step Master Mix (Thermo Fisher)
with the same oligonucleotide concentrations and
cycling conditions. The QIAGEN One-Step RT-PCR Kit
was also tested and found to be compatible.
The intended cross-reactivity of all assays with viral
RNA of SARS-CoV allows us to use the assays without
having to rely on external sources of specific 2019nCoV RNA.
For a routine workflow, we recommend the E gene assay
as the first-line screening tool, followed by confirmatory testing with the RdRp gene assay. Application of
the RdRp gene assay with dual colour technology can
discriminate 2019-nCoV (both probes positive) from
SARS-CoV RNA if the latter is used as positive control.
Alternatively, laboratories may choose to run the RdRp
assay with only the 2019-nCoV-specific probe.
Ethical statement
The internal use of samples for diagnostic workflow
optimisation was agreed under the medical ethical
rules of each of the participating partners.
Before public release of virus sequences from cases of
2019-nCoV, we relied on social media reports announcing detection of a SARS-like virus. We thus assumed
that a SARS-related CoV is involved in the outbreak.
We downloaded all complete and partial (if > 400 nt)
SARS-related virus sequences available in GenBank by
1 January 2020. The list (n = 729 entries) was manually
checked and artificial sequences (laboratory-derived,
synthetic, etc), as well as sequence duplicates were
removed, resulting in a final list of 375 sequences.
These sequences were aligned and the alignment was
used for assay design (Supplementary Figure S1). Upon
release of the first 2019-nCoV sequence at virological.
org, three assays were selected based on how well
they matched to the 2019-nCoV genome (Figure 1). The
alignment was complemented by additional sequences
released independently on GISAID ( 
gisaid.org), confirming the good matching of selected
primers to all sequences. Alignments of primer binding domains with 2019-nCoV, SARS-CoV as well as
selected bat-associated SARS-related CoV are shown
in Figure 2.
Assay sensitivity based on SARS coronavirus
To obtain a preliminary assessment of analytical sensitivity, we used purified cell culture supernatant
containing SARS-CoV strain Frankfurt-1 virions grown
on Vero cells. The supernatant was ultrafiltered and
thereby concentrated from a ca 20-fold volume of cell
culture supernatant. The concentration step simultaneously reduces the relative concentration of background nucleic acids such as not virion-packaged viral
RNA. The virion preparation was quantified by realtime RT-PCR using a specific in vitro-transcribed RNA
quantification standard as described in Drosten et al.
 . All assays were subjected to replicate testing in
order to determine stochastic detection frequencies
at each assay’s sensitivity end point (Figure 3A and
B). All assays were highly sensitive, with best results
obtained for the E gene and RdRp gene assays (5.2 and
3.8 copies per reaction at 95% detection probability,
respectively). These two assays were chosen for further
evaluation. One of the laboratories participating in the
external evaluation used other basic RT-PCR reagents
(TaqMan Fast Virus 1-Step Master Mix) and repeated
the sensitivity study, with equivalent results (E gene:
3.2 RNA copies/reaction (95% CI: 2.2–6.8); RdRP: 3.7
RNA copies/reaction (95% CI: 2.8–8.0). Of note, the N
gene assay also performed well but was not subjected
Relative positions of amplicon targets on the SARS coronavirus and the 2019 novel coronavirus genome
15,361–15,460
NC_004718 SARS-CoV
26,141–26,253
28,555–28,682
MN908947 W uhan-Hu-1
E: envelope protein gene; M: membrane protein gene; N: nucleocapsid protein gene; ORF: open reading frame; RdRp: RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase gene; S: spike protein gene.
Numbers below amplicons are genome positions according to SARS-CoV, GenBank NC_004718.
www.eurosurveillance.org
to intensive further validation because it was slightly
less sensitive (Supplementary Figure S2)
Sensitivity based on in vitro-transcribed RNA
identical to 2019 novel coronavirus target
Although both assays detected 2019-nCoV without
polymorphisms at oligonucleotide binding sites (Figure
2), we additionally generated in vitro-transcribed RNA
standards that exactly matched the sequence of 2019nCoV for absolute quantification and studying the limit
of detection (LOD). Replicate reactions were done at
concentrations around the detection end point determined in preliminary dilution experiments. The resulting LOD from replicate tests was 3.9 copies per reaction
for the E gene assay and 3.6 copies per reaction for the
RdRp assay (Figure 3C and D). These figures were close
to the 95% hit rate of 2.9 copies per reaction, according
to the Poisson distribution, expected when one RNA
molecule is detected.
Discrimination of 2019 novel coronavirus from
SARS coronavirus by RdRp assay
Following the rationale that SARS-CoV RNA can be
used as a positive control for the entire laboratory procedure, thus obviating the need to handle 2019-nCoV
RNA, we formulated the RdRp assay so that it contains
two probes: a broad-range probe reacting with SARS-
CoV and 2019-nCoV and an additional probe that reacts
only with 2019-nCoV. By limiting dilution experiments,
we confirmed that both probes, whether used individually or in combination, provided the same LOD for
each target virus. The specific probe RdRP_SARSr-P2
detected only the 2019-nCoV RNA transcript but not the
SARS-CoV RNA.
Detection range for SARS-related
coronaviruses from bats
At present, the potential exposure to a common environmental source in early reported cases implicates
the possibility of independent zoonotic infections with
increased sequence variability . To show that the
assays can detect other bat-associated SARS-related
viruses, we used the E gene assay to test six batderived faecal samples available from Drexler et al.
 und Muth et al. . These virus-positive samples
stemmed from European rhinolophid bats. Detection
of these phylogenetic outliers within the SARS-related
CoV clade suggests that all Asian viruses are likely to
be detected. This would, theoretically, ensure broad
sensitivity even in case of multiple independent acquisitions of variant viruses from an animal reservoir.
Specificity testing
Chemical stability
To exclude non-specific reactivity of oligonucleotides among each other, causing artificial fluorescent
Partial alignments of oligonucleotide binding regions, SARS-related coronaviruses (n = 9)
WH-Human_1|China|2019-Dec
BetaCoV/Wuhan/IPBCAMS-WH-01/2019|EPI_ISL_402123
BetaCoV/Wuhan/IVDC-HB-01/2019|EPI_ISL_402119
BetaCoV/Wuhan/IVDC-HB-04/2020|EPI_ISL_402120
BetaCoV/Wuhan/IVDC-HB-05/2019|EPI_ISL_402121
BetaCoV/Wuhan/WIV04/2019|EPI_ISL_402124
MG772933 Bat SARSbat-SL-CoVZC45
related CoV (
-related CoV (e.g. Frankfurt-1)
NC_014470 Bat
BM48-31/BGR/2008
SARS-related CoV 
NC_014470 Bat
BM48-31/BGR/2008
SARS-related CoV 
NC_014470 Bat
BM48-31/BGR/2008
SARS-related CoV as well as the most distant member within the SARS-related bat CoV
clade, detected in Bulgaria (GenBank accession number NC_014470). Dots represent identical nucleotides compared with the WH_Human_1
sequence. Nucleotide substitutions are specified. Blue arrows: oligonucleotides as specified in Table 1. More comprehensive alignments can
be found in the Supplement.
www.eurosurveillance.org
Determination of limits of detection based on SARS coronavirus genomic RNA and 2019 novel coronavirus-specific in vitro
transcribed RNA
Fraction positive
Copies per reaction
Fraction positive
Copies per reaction
Fraction positiv
Copies per reaction
Fraction positive
Copies per reaction
A. E gene assay vs SARS-CoV: 5.2 c/r (95% CI: 3.7–9.6)
B. RdRp gene assay vs SARS-CoV: 3.8 c/r (95% CI: 2.7–7.6)
C. E gene assay vs 2019-nCoV IVT RNA: 3.9 c/r (95% CI: 2.8–9.8)
D. RdRp assay vs 2019-nCoV IVT RNA: 3.6 c/r (95%: 2.7–11.2)
CI: confidence intervals; c/r: copies per reaction; IVT: in vitro-transcribed RNA.
A: E gene assay, evaluated with SARS-CoV genomic RNA. B: RdRp gene assay evaluated with SARS-CoV genomic RNA. C: E-gene assay,
evaluated with 2019-nCoV-specific in vitro-transcribed RNA standard. D: RdRp gene assay evaluated with 2019-nCoV-specific in vitrotranscribed RNA standard.
The x-axis shows input RNA copies per reaction. The y-axis shows positive results in all parallel reactions performed, squares are
experimental data points resulting from replicate testing of given concentrations (x-axis) in parallels assays (eight replicate reactions per
Technical limits of detection are given in the panels headings. The inner line is a probit curve (dose-response rule). The outer dotted lines are
www.eurosurveillance.org
signals, all assays were tested 120 times in parallel
with water and no other nucleic acid except the provided oligonucleotides. In none of these reactions was
any positive signal detected.
Cross-reactivity with other coronaviruses
Cell culture supernatants containing all endemic human
coronaviruses (HCoV)229E, NL63, OC43 and HKU1 as
well as MERS-CoV were tested in duplicate in all three
assays (Table 2). For the non-cultivable HCoV-HKU1,
supernatant from human airway culture was used. Viral
RNA concentration in all samples was determined by
specific real-time RT-PCRs and in vitro-transcribed RNA
standards designed for absolute quantification of viral
load. Additional undiluted (but not quantified) cell culture supernatants were tested as summarised in Table
2. These were additionally mixed into negative human
sputum samples. None of the tested viruses or virus
preparations showed reactivity with any assay.
Exclusivity of 2019 novel coronavirus based on clinical
samples pre-tested positive for other respiratory viruses
Using the E and RdRp gene assays, we tested a total
of 297 clinical samples from patients with respiratory
disease from the biobanks of five laboratories that
provide diagnostic services (one in Germany, two in
the Netherlands, one in Hong Kong, one in the UK). We
selected 198 samples from three university medical
centres where patients from general and intensive care
wards as well as mainly paediatric outpatient departments are seen (Germany, the Netherlands, Hong
Kong). The remaining samples were contributed by
national public health services performing surveillance
studies (RIVM, PHE), with samples mainly submitted
by practitioners. The samples contained the broadest
range of respiratory agents possible and reflected the
general spectrum of virus concentrations encountered
in diagnostic laboratories in these countries (Table 2).
In total, this testing yielded no false positive outcomes.
In four individual test reactions, weak initial reactivity
was seen but they were negative upon retesting with
the same assay. These signals were not associated
with any particular virus, and for each virus with which
initial positive reactivity occurred, there were other
samples that contained the same virus at a higher concentration but did not test positive. Given the results
from the extensive technical qualification described
above, it was concluded that this initial reactivity was
not due to chemical instability of real-time PCR probes
but most probably to handling issues caused by the
rapid introduction of new diagnostic tests and controls
during this evaluation study.
Discussion
The present report describes the establishment of a
diagnostic workflow for detection of an emerging virus
in the absence of physical sources of viral genomic
nucleic acid. Effective assay design was enabled by the
willingness of scientists from China to share genome
information before formal publication, as well as the
availability of broad sequence knowledge from ca 15
years of investigation of SARS-related viruses in animal
reservoirs. The relative ease with which assays could
be designed for this virus, in contrast to SARS-CoV in
2003, proves the huge collective value of descriptive
studies of disease ecology and viral genome diversity
 .
Real-time RT-PCR is widely deployed in diagnostic virology. In the case of a public health emergency, proficient diagnostic laboratories can rely on this robust
technology to establish new diagnostic tests within
their routine services before pre-formulated assays
become available. In addition to information on
Tests of known respiratory viruses and bacteria in clinical
samples and cell culture preparations for cross-reactivity
in 2019 novel coronavirus E and RdRp gene assays (n =
Clinical samples with known
Influenza A(H1N1)pdm09
Influenza A(H3N2)
Influenza A (untyped)
Influenza A(H5N1)
Influenza A(H7N9)
Influenza B (Victoria or
Rhinovirus/enterovirus
Respiratory syncytial virus (A/B)
Parainfluenza 1 virus
Parainfluenza 2 virus
Parainfluenza 3 virus
Parainfluenza 4 virus
Human metapneumovirus
Adenovirus
Human bocavirus
Legionella spp.
Mycoplasma spp.
Total clinical samples
a For samples with multiple viruses detected, the virus with highest
concentration is listed, as indicated by real-time PCR Ct value.
b Directly quantified or spiked in human negative-testing sputum.
c 1 × 105 RNA copies/mL, determined by specific real-time RT-PCR.
Isolated from human airway epithelial culture.
d 1 × 1010 RNA copies/mL, determined by specific real-time RT-PCR
of one isolate. The other isolate was not quantified but spiked in
human negative-testing sputum.
e 4 × 109 RNA copies/mL, determined by specific real-time RT-PCR.
f 3 × 109 RNA copies/mL, determined by specific real-time RT-PCR
of one isolate. The other isolate was not quantified spiked in
human negative-testing sputum.
g 1 × 108 RNA copies/mL, determined by specific real-time RT-PCR.
www.eurosurveillance.org
reagents, oligonucleotides and positive controls, laboratories working under quality control programmes
need to rely on documentation of technical qualification of the assay formulation as well as data from
external clinical evaluation tests. The provision of control RNA templates has been effectively implemented
by the EVAg project that provides virus-related reagents from academic research collections . SARS-
CoV RNA was retrievable from EVAg before the present
outbreak; specific products such as RNA transcripts
for the here-described assays were first retrievable
from the EVAg online catalogue on 14 January 2020
( 
qualification data based on cell culture materials and
synthetic constructs, as well as results from exclusivity testing on 75 clinical samples, were included in the
first version of the diagnostic protocol provided to the
WHO on 13 January 2020. Based on efficient collaboration in an informal network of laboratories, these
data were augmented within 1 week comprise testing
results based on a wide range of respiratory pathogens
in clinical samples from natural infections. Comparable
evaluation studies during regulatory qualification of in
vitro diagnostic assays can take months for organisation, legal implementation and logistics and typically
come after the peak of an outbreak has waned. The
speed and effectiveness of the present deployment
and evaluation effort were enabled by national and
European research networks established in response
to international health crises in recent years, demonstrating the enormous response capacity that can be
released through coordinated action of academic and
public laboratories . This laboratory capacity not
only supports immediate public health interventions
but enables sites to enrol patients during rapid clinical
research responses.
*Author’s correction
The sentence As at 20 January 2020, 282 laboratory-confirmed human cases have been notified to WHO was originally published with a wrong date .
This mistake was corrected on 8 April 2020.
On 29 July 2020 the correct affiliation of Marco Kaiser was
added and the remaining affiliations were renumbered.
**Addendum
The Conflict of interest section was updated on 29 July 2020.
***Erratum
In the second half of Table 1, nM (nanomolar) was misspelled
as nm when this article was published. This mistake was corrected on 4 February 2021. We apologise for any inconvenience this typo may have caused.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by European Union DG Research
through projects Prepare (GA602525), Compare (GA643476),
and EVAg (GA653316); by European Union DG SANCO
through EVD-LabNet, as well as by the German Ministry
of Research through projects RAPID (01KI1723A) and DZIF
(301-4-7-01.703).
We gratefully acknowledge the authors, the originating and
submitting laboratories for their sequence and metadata
shared through GISAID, on which this research is based.
All authors of data may be contacted directly via www.gisaid.org: National Institute for Viral Disease Control and
Prevention, China CDC (Wenjie Tan, Xiang Zhao, Wenling
Wang, Xuejun Ma, Yongzhong Jiang, Roujian Lu, Ji Wang,
Weimin Zhou, Peihua Niu, Peipei Liu,Faxian Zhan, Weifeng
Shi, Baoying Huang, Jun Liu, Li Zhao, Yao Meng, Xiaozhou
He, Fei Ye, Na Zhu, Yang Li, Jing Chen, Wenbo Xu, George
F. Gao, Guizhen Wu); Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences (Peng Zhou, Xing-Lou Yang, Ding-Yu
Zhang, Lei Zhang, Yan Zhu, Hao-Rui Si, Zhengli Shi); Institute
of Pathogen Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
and Peking Union Medical College (Lili Ren, Jianwei Wang,
Qi Jin, Zichun Xiang, Yongjun Li, Zhiqiang Wu, Chao Wu,
Yiwei Liu); and National Institute for Communicable Disease
Control and Prevention (ICDC), China CDC (Zhang Y-Z, Wu, F,
Chen Y-M, Pei Y-Y, Xu L, Wang W, Zhao S, Yu B, Hu Y, Tao Z-W,
Song Z-G, Tian J-H, Zhang Y-L, Liu Y, Zheng J-J, Dai F-H, Wang
Q-M, She J-L and Zhu T-Y)
We thank Marta Zuchowski, Sigrid Kersten, and Joerg
Hofmann for help with sample logistics. In vitro-transcribed
control RNA for the E gene assay can be acquired from author
C. D. through the European Virus Archive platform (www.european-virus-archive.com),
Conflict of interest **
Olfert Landt is CEO of Tib-Molbiol; Marco Kaiser is senior researcher at GenExpress and serves as scientific advisor for
Tib-Molbiol.
Authors’ contributions
VMC: Planned and conducted experiments, conceptualised
the laboratory work
OL: Planned and conducted experiments, conceptualised the
laboratory work
MK: Planned and conducted experiments
RM: Planned and conducted experiments, conceptualised
the laboratory work
AM: Planned and conducted experiments, conceptualised
the laboratory work
DKWC: Planned and conducted experiments
TB: Planned and conducted experiments
SB: Planned and conducted experiments
JS: Planned and conducted experiments
MLS: Planned and conducted experiments
DGJCM: Planned and conducted experiments
BLH: Planned and conducted experiments
www.eurosurveillance.org
BvdV: Planned and conducted experiments
SvdB: Planned and conducted experiments
LW: Planned and conducted experiments
GG: Planned and conducted experiments
JLR: Contributed to overall study conceptualization
JE: Planned and conducted experiments, conceptualised the
laboratory work
MZ: Planned laboratory work, contributed to overall study
conceptualization
MP: Planned laboratory work, contributed to overall study
conceptualization
HG: Contributed to overall study conceptualization
CR: Planned experiments, conceptualised the laboratory
MPGK: Planned experiments, conceptualised the laboratory
CD: Planned experiments, conceptualised the laboratory
work, conceptualised the overall study, wrote the manuscript