Self-Regulated Learning: The Educational Legacy of Paul R. Pintrich
By: Dale H. Schunk
Schunk, D. H. . Self-regulated learning: The educational legacy of Paul R. Pintrich. Educational
Psychologist, 40, 85-94.
Made available courtesy of Taylor and Francis: 
***Reprinted with permission. No further reproduction is authorized without written permission from
Taylor and Francis. This version of the document is not the version of record. Figures and/or pictures
may be missing from this format of the document.***
Paul R. Pintrich was a leading figure in the field of self-regulated learning. This article discusses some of Paul’s
major contributions: (a) formulating a conceptual framework for studying self-regulated learning comprising
phases (forethought, planning, activation; monitoring; control; reaction, reflection) and areas for self-regulation
(cognition, motivation, behavior, context); (b) emphasizing the role of motivation in self-regulation; (c)
conducting research linking learning, motivation, and self-regulation; (d) exploring the development of and
interventions to enhance self-regulatory processes; (e) investigating how the complexities of classrooms and
schools affect self-regulation; and (f) helping to develop the MSLQ to assess self-regulated learning, cognition,
and motivation. Paul’s writings provide ideas for future research on self-regulated learning. Paul Pintrich left a
rich legacy through his theoretical elaboration, exemplary research, dissemination and advocacy, and personal
and professional friendships.
Self-regulated learning, or self-regulation, is ―an active, constructive process whereby learners set goals for
their learning and then attempt to monitor, regulate, and control their cognition, motivation, and behavior,
guided and constrained by their goals and the contextual features in the environment‖ .
Research on academic self-regulated learning began as an outgrowth of psychological investigations into selfcontrol among adults and its development in children . Much early self-regulation research
was therapeutic in nature; researchers taught participants to alter dysfunctional behaviors such as aggression,
addictions, and behavioral problems. Researchers now apply self-regulatory principles to academic studying
and other forms of learning, such as social and motor skills .
Part of the impetus for studying academic self-regulated learning came from research showing that learners’
skills and abilities did not fully explain student achievement , which suggested that factors
such as self-regulation and motivation were important. Applying self-regulation to education also broadened its
scope beyond the historical emphasis of performance of previously learned actions to actual learning. Selfregulated learning is seen as a mechanism to help explain achievement differences among students and as a
means to improve achievement.
For many years Paul R. Pintrich was a leading theorist, researcher, and advocate of self-regulated learning in
education. His sudden passing on July 12, 2003, left a deep void in educational psychology and was a severe
personal blow for his colleagues and friends. This article discusses some of his major contributions to the field
of self-regulated learning: a conceptual framework for studying self-regulation; emphasis on motivational
processes; research on learning, motivation, and self-regulation; the development of and interventions to
enhance self-regulated learning; the complexity of self-regulation in educational contexts; and the Motivated
Strategies for Learning Questionnaire (MSLQ). Within these areas research by Pintrich and colleagues (and by
others where appropriate) is described. Pintrich’s suggestions for future research on self-regulation are
provided, and the article concludes with a summary of his legacy to self-regulated learning and education.
MAJOR CONTRIBUTIONS TO SELF-REGULATED LEARNING
Conceptual Framework
Without question one of the major contributions Paul Pintrich made to the field of self-regulated learning was
the conceptual framework he formulated. In developing this model he drew from his work and that of other
theorists. The model may be thought of as a social-cognitive framework, although it incorporates elements from
other theories The following is an abbreviated description; more-complete coverage may
be found in Pintrich .
Pintrich believed that self-regulatory activities mediated the relations between learners and their environments
and influenced learners’ achievements . His model comprises four
phases of self-regulation and, for each phase, four possible areas for self-regulation (Table 1). This model
specifies the possible range of activities; it does not necessitate them. The full range of areas may not be
amenable to self-regulation, and within any area some activities may require little if any self-regulation. The
model does not presume that the phases are linearly ordered; they may occur at any time during task
engagement. There are learning situations in which learners may engage in some but not all of the phases.
Phases also are interactive in that individuals may simultaneously engage in more than one.
Forethought, planning, and activation. Cognitions that can be self-regulated during this phase include goals,
prior content knowledge, and metacognitive knowledge. Goals involve setting and modifying task-specific
goals that serve as criteria against which to gauge progress. Activation of relevant content knowledge may
occur without conscious awareness, but self-regulated learners often activate knowledge in a planful way
through prompting and self-questioning (e.g., ―What do I know about this?‖). Activation of metacognitive
knowledge, which also can occur automatically or through deliberate conscious control, includes declarative
knowledge (e.g., of learning strategies such as rehearsal and note taking), procedural knowledge (how to
implement these strategies), and conditional knowledge (when and why to use different strategies).
Motivational processes subject to self-regulation during this phase include goal orientations, self-efficacy,
perceptions of difficulty and ease of learning, task value, and interest. Goal orientations—a central construct in
the model—are the reasons learners engage in tasks; for example, why they want to earn a high grade in a
course or perform their best during a concert. Self-efficacy refers to individuals’ beliefs about their capabilities
to learn or perform actions at designated levels . Learners’ ease of learning/task difficulty
judgments concern how easy or hard they believe the material will be to learn. Task value beliefs include
perceptions of the relevance, importance, and usefulness of the learning. Interest denotes the degree of liking
students have for the content area or topic being learned.
Behaviors that can be self-regulated are time and effort planning and planning for self-observation of behavior.
Time and effort planning (time management) involves creating study schedules and allotting time for different
activities. Planning for self-observation involves determining what methods one will use to assess progress and
regulate behaviors; for example, counting pages of written text produced and keeping records.
Contextual regulation factors include students’ perceptions of the task and context. Pintrich noted that,
although these perceptions are cognitions, their focus is on the context and not on the individual’s selfperceptions. These might include perceptions about classroom features that may help or hinder learning, types
of tasks to be completed, grading practices, and classroom climate factors (e.g., helpfulness of the teacher).
Monitoring. The second phase is monitoring, or attention and awareness of one’s actions and their outcomes.
Pintrich viewed cognitive monitoring as including dynamic metacognitive judgments of learning and
metacognitive awareness (feeling of knowing). Judgments of learning involve beliefs about what one knows
and what one does not understand. Feeling of knowing occurs when students believe they have some
understanding of material, perhaps because they previously studied it. They may not be able to recall the
information (e.g., the ―tip-of-the-tongue‖ phenomenon) but it seems familiar.
Motivational monitoring refers to being aware of one’s self-efficacy, values, attributions (perceived causes of
outcomes), interests, and anxieties. Monitoring of behaviors includes time and effort management and adjusting
based on assessments of their effects (e.g., redoubling effort when material is judged as difficult). Contextual
monitoring refers to monitoring task conditions to determine whether they are changing.
Control. During this phase learners attempt to control their cognitions, motivation, behaviors, and contextual
factors based on their monitoring with the goal to enhance learning. Cognitive control and regulation include
cognitive and metacognitive activities that learners use to adapt and change their cognitions .
Through cognitive monitoring learners assess their goal progress. They continue to use strategies that are
deemed effective or alter or replace them if they believe better strategies are needed. Various cognitive and
learning strategies (e.g., outlining, summarizing, note taking) may be involved .
Motivational control and regulation processes include self-efficacy through positive self-talk (e.g., ―I can do
this‖). Learners also may make positive outcomes contingent on academic performance (e.g., rewarding oneself
with a movie after studying), and they may attempt to control their anxiety, such as by not ruminating on test
questions that they cannot answer.
Behavioral control includes persisting, expending effort, and seeking help when needed. Good self-regulators
do not seek help indiscriminately but rather selectively to understand a particular point and from a source they
believe will be helpful. Contextual control includes strategies to make the context more conducive to learning.
These may include efforts to eliminate or reduce distractions as well as attempts to renegotiate task
requirements. For example, students may ask a teacher whether they can work fewer problems or read fewer
pages when assignments seem lengthy. Students exert contextual control by choosing peers to work with and
settings in which to work and by departing a situation if it appears antithetical to learning.
Reaction and reflection. Learners’ reactions and reflections include judgments, attributions, and selfevaluations of performance . Learners’ assess their performances, and these assessments form
the basis for other efforts to regulate motivation, behavior, and context. Motivational reactions include efforts to
enhance motivation when learners judge that their motivation has slackened. These may include attributing low
performance to insufficient effort rather than low ability. Motivational reactions also can involve emotions, as
when learners feel pride after succeeding or anger when they fail. Consequences of emotions have been studied
extensively by attribution researchers .
Behavioral reaction and reflection include cognitions about one’s behaviors, such as whether one has used time
effectively or exerted sufficient effort. Contextual reaction and reflection refer to evaluations of task demands
and contextual factors. Good self-regulation requires that learners evaluate whether they will able to accomplish
the task, whether the environment is conducive to learning, and what changes are needed for better learning.
This model shares some assumptions that are common to other models of self-regulation . First, learners are active and constructive participants in learning rather than
passive recipients. A second assumption is that learners have some choices or the potential for control over key
activities. Third, many models of self-regulation assume that learners have a goal or criterion level of
performance against which they can assess progress. Finally, most models assume that self-regulatory processes
mediate the relation between personal factors and performance outcomes.
Pintrich stated that this framework was intended to serve as a heuristic to help researchers think about
self-regulation and investigate the operation of component processes. Pintrich and his colleagues have
conducted much re search on self-regulated learning—primarily on cognitive and motivational processes—and
some of this research is summarized in sections that follow. The framework is ideal for investigating selfregulated learning in educational settings because it includes factors associated with schooling and addresses the
complexities of self-regulation outside of laboratory settings. It has served to stimulate much educational
research on self-regulated learning.
Motivational Processes
A second major way that Paul Pintrich contributed to self-regulated learning is through his emphasis on the
importance of motivational processes to self-regulation. He made motivation a key factor that, notwithstanding
its position as a separate area of self-regulation, is infused throughout all phases. Motivational variables interact
with cognitive, behavioral, and contextual factors to affect self-regulation . This decidedly motivational flavor stands in contrast to many other self-regulation
models, which tend to stress cognitive or behavioral factors .
Research on motivation and on the interaction of cognitive and motivational processes formed the focus of selfregulated learning research by Pintrich and his colleagues. In general, the motivational variables highlighted by
Pintrich have been shown to be critical for self-regulation. Studies comparing good with poor self-regulators
have found that they differ in several motivational processes . Selfregulated learners set hierarchical goals, and may simultaneously hold process (e.g., understanding content and
strategies for solving problems) and product goals .
Self-regulated learners are more self-efficacious for learning than are students with poorer self-regulatory skills;
the former believe that they can use their self-regulatory skills to help them learn . Selfregulated learners engage in self-evaluation when they compare progress against goals. These self-evaluative
judgments substantiate their self-efficacy for learning and motivate them to persist. Better self-regulators also
form positive attributions during periods of self-reflection by attributing success to ability and effort and
difficulty to use of ineffective strategies .
Research also shows that interest and value relate to self-regulation. Students with greater personal interest in a
topic and those who view the activity as important or useful are more likely to use adaptive self-regulatory
strategies . Research is needed to explore the process whereby these effects occur. We
might expect that because interest and value relate positively to perceptions of competence that these students
are more likely to set goals and assess their learning progress, which builds self-efficacy and furthers learning.
Students’ goal orientations play a key role in Pintrich’s model of self-regulation . In the
literature on goal orientations, a general distinction is drawn between mastery and performance goals. Mastery
goals reflect a focus on the acquisition of knowledge, skill, and competence relative to one’s prior performance;
performance goals involve a striving to demonstrate competence by outperforming peers .
Pintrich adopted a multiple goals perspective on
motivation by crossing this mastery-performance dimension with an approach-avoid dimension according to
whether students were attempting to approach or avoid the goals. Mastery-approach goals concern working on
tasks to develop skills. Mastery-avoid goals might involve avoiding the possibility of not meeting high
standards. Performance-approach goals include a focus on outperforming others. Performance-avoid goals
entail a concern with avoiding the demonstration of low ability. This journal issue provides further discussion of
Pintrich’s contributions to the work on goal orientations.
Research has identified self-regulatory benefits of mastery-approach goals. Students with a mastery orientation
demonstrate better cognitive monitoring and use of learning strategies . Mastery-approach
goals also relate to students’ use of better (deeper) cognitive processing strategies while engaged in academic
learning. Mastery goals also relate positively to many motivational indexes such as self-efficacy and positive
attributions.
Pintrich summarized research on the relation of goal orientations to self-regulatory processes. For
example, students who adopt mastery goals are more likely to report monitoring and attempting to control their
cognition with various learning and cognitive strategies, and to seek ways to increase their awareness of their
understanding and learning. Mastery-approach goals also are negatively associated with the use of less effective
or surface processing strategies, whereas performance goals relate negatively to use of deep processing
strategies. Mastery-approach goals are positively related to self-efficacy, task value, interest, positive attributions, and affect. Research also shows that mastery-approach goals relate positively to students’ attempts to
manage their time and effort and to their adaptive help seeking. To date there has been little research conducted
on mastery-avoid goals, and this clearly is an area in need of exploration.
More research also is needed on performance goals, and a debate continues in the field about the relative merits
of performance approach goals . Existing research presents conflicting results with respect to performance
goals’ relations to self-regulation and different motivational variables. Wolters, Yu, and Pintrich found
that among junior high students an approach performance goal of outperforming others related positively to
self-efficacy and use of cognitive and self-regulatory strategies. Wolters and Rosenthal also found that
performance goals related to adaptive motivational regulation strategies. Kaplan and Midgley , however,
found no correlation between approach performance goals and adaptive learning strategies among junior high
students, but did find a positive relation between approach performance goals and surface processing strategies.
Wolters showed that performance-approach goals did not relate to use of cognitive or metacognitive
strategies. Researchers undoubtedly will continue to explore the conditions under which performance approach
goals may have beneficial effects on motivation and self-regulation.
One of Pintrich’s recent interests was the relation of affect to self-regulation. Linnenbrink and Pintrich presented a model in which students’ moods about school and learning influence their classroom goals.
Students who feel positively are apt to adopt approach goals, whereas those who feel negatively may be more
inclined toward avoidance goals; however, the approach–avoidance goals may be either mastery or
performance. Thus, students who believe that they have the resources to attain outcomes may be more likely to
adopt goals of learning or of demonstrating competence relative to others, and similarly for avoidance goals.
Linnenbrink and Pintrich also postulated that achievement goals influenced students’ specific
emotions, which are typically short in duration and over time fade into more general mood states. Approach
goals may be associated with elation (as one approaches a goal) or sadness (when one is not approaching a
goal). Avoidance goals may be associated with relief (when the goal is avoided) or anxiety (when the goal is not
avoided). Approach mastery goals should lead to an increase in positive emotions and a decrease in negative
emotions, whereas performance approach goals may be unrelated to positive emotions and increase negative
Initial research on this topic has yielded complex results . Research relating
positive and negative affect to mathematics learning shows positive effects for effort and cognitive selfregulation but not for learning. Similarly, in science positive affect has been shown to be unrelated to
conceptual change but moderately associated with adaptive strategy use and cognitive processing. From this
initial research we might conclude that positive affect increases effort and strategy use, but the relation is undoubtedly complex and further research is needed.
Research on Learning, Motivation, and Self-Regulation
The Pintrich model and research conducted by him and his colleagues support the hypothesized links between
learning, motivation, and self-regulation . The general conclusion is that students
who display more adaptive self-regulatory strategies demonstrate better learning and higher motivation for
learning .
For example, Pintrich and De Groot examined relations among self-regulation (use of metacognitive and
effort management strategies), cognitive strategy use (rehearsal, elaboration, and organizational strategies), and
motivation for learning and performing well in class among seventh graders in science and English. Using the
MSLQ, they found that self-efficacy, intrinsic value (interest in and perceived importance of the learning),
cognitive strategy use (e.g., rehearsal, organization, elaboration), and self-regulation (effort management,
metacognition) were positively correlated and predicted achievement. Test anxiety related negatively to self-efficacy. Regression analyses revealed that self-efficacy, self-regulation, and test anxiety predicted performance,
whereas intrinsic value did not directly affect performance.
Pintrich, Anderman, and Klobucar worked with fifth-grade students, some of whom had been identified
by the school system as having learning disabilities. Children with learning disabilities showed lower
metacognitive knowledge and reading comprehension, but did not differ from students without learning
disabilities on measures of self-efficacy, anxiety, or intrinsic orientation (reflecting a focus on learning and
mastery and interest in reading). Relative to students without disabilities, students with disabilities were more
likely to attribute success and failure to external causes (luck, task difficulty, teacher assistance). Differences in
motivational and cognitive variables cut across learning disability categories; about equal numbers of students
with and without learning disabilities showed low intrinsic motivation but average metacognition, attributional
style, and comprehension.
Additional evidence comes from research by Pintrich, Roeser, and De Groot . The authors administered
the MSLQ to seventh graders to assess motivational beliefs (intrinsic value, self-efficacy, text anxiety) and selfregulated learning (cognitive strategy use, self-regulation). Positive motivational beliefs related to higher levels
of self-regulated learning. The authors also assessed students’ perceptions of classroom experiences (i.e.,
productive classroom work, teacher effectiveness, cooperative work). Intrinsic value later in the school year was
related to classroom experience more strongly than intrinsic value early in the year. Self-efficacy, cognitive
strategy use, and self-regulation related positively to classroom experience. The results support the idea that
motivation and self-regulated learning bear a complex reciprocal relation to each other.
The relation between motivation and self-regulated learning is seen clearly in research by Wolters et al. 
with junior high students. Regression analyses across three subject areas (English, social studies, mathematics)
yielded a positive pattern of motivational beliefs for a mastery-approach goal and a performance-approach
(relative ability) goal orientation to include adaptive levels of self-efficacy, task value, and test anxiety, along
with higher levels of cognitive strategy use, self-regulation, and academic performance. In contrast, an extrinsic
goal orientation reflecting a desire to obtain good grades was linked with maladaptive motivational and
cognitive outcomes.
Taken together, much research by Pintrich and his colleagues reviewed here and research by others supports the
predictions of the conceptual framework by showing linkages between motivation, self-regulation, and
academic learning . This linkage is significant not only for theoretical reasons but also
for classroom practices, because it suggests that motivational and cognitive factors interact in complex ways to
lead to learning.
Complexities of Educational Contexts
A fourth major contribution of Paul Pintrich to self-regulated learning was his emphasis on testing predictions
of theories and exploring relations among variables in actual classroom contexts. This emphasis derives from
his belief that school contexts contained many complexities, the effects of which had to be determined to know
how self-regulation occurred. Schools with children are complex places and much different from controlled
laboratory settings with adults. These differences affect self-regulatory processes.
This emphasis on complexity is seen in many of the studies by Pintrich and his colleagues summarized earlier in
this article . Myriad social, instructional,
and contextual factors can affect how self-regulatory strategies operate. As Pintrich and Zusho note,
―Self-regulation is not just afforded or constrained by personal cognition and motivation, but also privileged,
encouraged, or discouraged by the contextual factors‖ (p. 279).
A clear example of this complexity is seen in research on help seeking, which is an important self-regulation
strategy . All students require assistance at times, to understand material and when
confused about what to do. Seeking help from others (e.g., teachers, peers, parents) seems like a natural
response; yet wide individual differences occur in students’ frequency, amount, and type of help seeking. These
differences suggest a complex interplay between social and motivational factors.
Ryan, Pintrich, and Midgley discussed possible reasons why students might avoid seeking help. Some
students may be reluctant because they believe peers will interpret it to mean that they lack competence.
Students who feel less socially competent may be more apt to avoid seeking help, fearing negative
consequences. Ryan and Pintrich found that adolescents who felt more socially competent were more
likely to seek help and that this relation operated independently of the relation between perceived cognitive
competence and help seeking.
Another possible cause involves goal orientations . Students who hold a mastery goal
orientation should be more likely to seek help than those with a performance goal orientation, because the latter
are more concerned about how others evaluate them. This relation is complex, however, and may depend on
academic competence. Thus, performance goal students whose grades are declining and who are not achieving
their goal may be especially vulnerable to negative social perceptions and more likely to avoid seeking help.
Lower achieving students may generally feel less inclined to seek help when needed.
Ryan, Gheen, and Midgley found that classrooms differed in how much help students sought, which
suggests differences in classroom goal structures. Students’ perception of a classroom mastery goal structure
was associated with more help seeking; the perception of a performance goal structure was associated with
more help avoidance.
Pintrich’s multiple goals perspective on motivation has been substantiated by research showing that
academic and social goals interact in classrooms to produce achievement patterns not easily predicted by
academic variables alone. Further, many personal, social, and contextual variables influence motivation and
self-regulated learning, as discussed earlier . Exploring how these interact with social and
instructional factors to affect self-regulated learning remains a challenge for educational researchers.
Development of and Interventions to Enhance Self-Regulation
Paul Pintrich wrote about the development of students’ self-regulatory capabilities and interventions to enhance
self-regulation. With respect to developmental processes, much research shows that students become more
strategic with development and cognitively capable of using both basic and more complex cognitive and
metacognitive strategies . Another point is that, regardless of age, novice users of a
strategy typically show less benefit from using the strategy than more experienced or knowledgeable users.
Thus, in the course of development we see both production and utilization deficiencies described by
developmental psychologists . For one, with development students are better able to set goals, assess progress toward their goals, and
change strategies as needed. For another, development helps to improve the speed and efficiency of selfregulatory processes (e.g., storage and retrieval of information from memory).
Self-regulation also is affected by developmental influences on epistemological and motivational factors.
Epistemological factors involve the theories that students hold about the nature of knowledge and knowing,
such as the certainty and simplicity of knowledge, the role of authority in creating knowledge, and justifications
for knowing . Students’ epistemological theories become more sophisticated with
development, with a trend away from more objectivity (e.g., one right answer) and toward more relativity (e.g.,
possibility of more than one right answer). A similar developmental trend exists with respect to motivational
factors. Relative to younger children, older students are more likely to assess self-efficacy more accurately,
determine the value of learning, and set goals and evaluate goal progress. These developmental advances
heighten the complexity of self-regulation among older students.
Several researchers have used the variables identified by Pintrich and others to help advance students’
self-regulation skills through interventions. Research supports the idea that students’ self-regulatory processes
can be enhanced and that better self-regulation results in higher academic performance. Beneficial effects on
self-regulation have been obtained from interventions designed to improve students’ goal orientations, learning
strategies, self-monitoring and self-evaluations .
For example, research shows that changing students’ goal orientations can lead to better self-regulation and
achievement. During science lessons, Meece, Blumenfeld, and Hoyle found that students who
emphasized task-mastery goals reported more active cognitive engagement (e.g., reviewing material not
understood). Elliott and Dweck gave children feedback indicating they had high or low ability, along
with instructions highlighting a learning goal of developing competence or a performance goal of appearing
competent. Learning-goal children sought to increase competence by choosing challenging tasks and using
problem-solving strategies. Performance-goal children who received high-ability feedback persisted at the task
but also avoided challenging tasks that might have entailed public errors. Performance goal children given lowability feedback selected easier tasks, did not persist to overcome mistakes, and displayed negative affect.
Pintrich and his colleagues developed the Learning to Learn intervention for college students . Learning to Learn is an undergraduate course designed to teach
students basic concepts of cognition and motivation, develop a repertoire of learning strategies, and have them
apply these to improve their self-regulated learning. Students attend lectures and participate in laboratories.
Topics include principles of information processing, note taking, test preparation and taking, goal setting, and
time management. Assessment of the course’s effectiveness continues, but evidence suggests that the course
increases students’ mastery goals, self-efficacy, and interest and value for the course and decreases test anxiety.
There also are reported gains in self-regulatory strategy use. Students’ motivational beliefs (mastery goals, selfefficacy, interest, value) relate positively to their use of learning strategies .
The Motivated Strategies for Learning Questionnaire (MSLQ)
Last, I mention the MSLQ, a measure developed by Pintrich and his colleagues . The MSLQ is a self-report instrument used by students to rate themselves on various cognitive and
motivational items.
Although different versions of the MSLQ have been used over the years, the instrument always has included
motivational and self-regulated learning items. Motivational items assess intrinsic orientation (e.g., interest and
challenge of course work), task value (importance and value of material to be learned), control beliefs (how
much effort helps), and expectancy for success (self-efficacy). Cognitive strategies include the extent that the
student uses rehearsal, elaboration, and organization strategies. Metacognitive activities assessed include
planning, monitoring, and self-regulation. Resource management strategies included are time management,
study environment, effort management, and help seeking. For each category students rate themselves on
multiple items according to how well the item describes them. Total score and subscale scores (e.g., motivation,
cognitive strategies) can be used in analyses and related to other variables.
The MSLQ reflects the central thrust of Pintrich’s work on self-regulation—the interaction of cognitive,
motivational, and behavioral–contextual elements. The scales have good internal reliability and demonstrate
moderate correlations with academic performance . Pintrich and his colleagues have used it in
much research, and it has been widely employed by other researchers. The instrument has stimulated much
research on self-regulated learning, because it provides researchers with a valid and reliable measure, is easy to
administer, and can be used with students of different ages. It is likely to continue as a commonly used
instrument as investigators explore new research directions.
PINTRICH’S SUGGESTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH ON SELF-REGULATION
Paul Pintrich was an outstanding theorist and researcher, and in his publications and presentations he discussed
issues in self-regulated learning that needed to be addressed and provided suggestions for future research. It
would be impossible here to summarize all of his recommendations. He also wrote extensively about future
directions for motivation research and educational psychology .
Some general areas he suggested that self-regulated learning researchers address were the definition and
measurement of goals and self-regulatory processes, examination of personal characteristics and potential
moderator relations, and the roles of control, regulation, intentionality, and automaticity . He
also emphasized the following areas.
There is a clear need for more cross-cultural research and research with ethnically diverse populations. As with
much achievement research, most self-regulation research has been conducted in North American settings.
Pintrich noted, ―The emphasis on the individual and the self is certainly paramount in models of selfregulation‖ (p. 493). To the extent that North American values are not as widespread in non-Western cultures,
self-regulation research results may not generalize. Research shows, for example, that meanings of causes of
achievement outcomes differ among cultures . Different relations may exist among goal
orientations and self-regulation outcomes as a function of cultural background. More research is needed on how
self-regulated learning might be moderated by ethnicity .
This issue also is important from a practical perspective. The increasing diversity in American schools—
especially the influx of Asian American and Hispanic American children—requires that teachers understand
cultural and ethnic differences. Research on diverse populations will help to inform teachers on ways to
improve their students’ self-regulatory capabilities.
Curricular Integration
Research is needed on contextual influences on self-regulation and especially in different content areas.
Principles of self-regulation are assumed to generalize across contexts, but contexts affect students’ choices and
thus the amount and type of self-regulation possible. Research is needed on self-regulation in content areas such
as science, mathematics, and language arts. More research that examines the operation of self-regulatory
processes across content areas, such as that conducted by Wolters et al. , is necessary to advance our
understanding.
Such research also would have practical benefits because it would show whether certain content areas (e.g.,
history where lectures are common) are more constraining than others (e.g., sciences with laboratories). Such
knowledge would be useful in designing curricula and classrooms that allow for greater self-regulation. Further,
because self-regulatory processes may vary depending on the content area, students could learn how to modify
processes to fit different content areas.
Developmental Changes
Research is needed on the development of self-regulatory processes and especially on developmental changes in
how the component processes merge to affect self-regulated learning. There is an extensive literature on
cognitive development but far less on the development of motivation as cognitive expertise increases . Zimmerman and Kitsantas , for example, found that different types of goals produced better
performance depending on learners’ expertise. Research has shown that motivation often declines with
development and advancement in school , which creates the paradox that as students
become more cognitively competent their motivation and self-regulation decline .
This type of research will help us better understand when students are most at risk and the factors that may
protect motivation and self-regulation . It also will suggest school and classroom design features
that can promote adaptive academic functioning among learners of all ages.
THE LEGACY OF PAUL PINTRICH
Paul Pintrich accomplished much more in his abbreviated life than can be summarized in a short article. He left
a broad legacy to the field of education along several fronts.
Theoretical Elaboration
Through his scholarship Pintrich provided much theoretical elaboration of self-regulatory processes. He
formulated a framework that serves as the basis for research and interventions. By describing the various areas
in which self-regulation can occur and how self-regulated learning processes can interact—especially
motivation and cognition—he highlighted the complexity of self-regulation.
Especially noteworthy was his emphasis on motivational processes. Most theory and research on self-regulation
has focused on cognitions and behaviors. Pintrich made motivational self-regulation a focus area, infused
motivation throughout all phases of self-regulation, and investigated how motivational processes interact with
other types of self-regulation. His emphasis on motivation heightened interest in self-regulation among
researchers and practitioners.
Exemplary Research
Paul Pintrich was a prolific researcher and scholar. His vita lists over 120 publications, many of which report
original research. His research represents a model program. He carefully linked research hypotheses with
theory, specified measurement qualities of variables, competently designed and conducted studies, used
appropriate data analysis methods, reported results clearly, discussed them in light of theory and prior research,
and stated implications of the results for education. The MSLQ has become a standard instrument in selfregulation and motivation research. By conducting such high-quality research he set a standard for scholars to
Dissemination and Advocacy
Paul Pintrich strongly advocated for the importance of self-regulation in educational achievement. Through
publications and presentations, his work reached an audience numbering into many thousands. He developed an
international reputation and gave talks all over the world. Few others have done as much as he has in spreading
news about self-regulation to audiences worldwide.
Pintrich helped to stimulate growth in the field by showing ways that self-regulation could enhance
achievement (e.g., Learning to Learn). It is not an overstatement to say that a good part of the current surge of
interest in self-regulation among educators stems from his advocacy.
Paul Pintrich was a friend of many people and also a friend of education. He gave willingly of himself to help
others. He mentored numerous students—many of whom have coauthored publications with him—and had
close professional colleagues in all parts of the world. In addition to his numerous personal friendships, he was
a friend of education. He spoke forcefully and eloquently for education and gladly served the profession at
numerous levels: university, state, national, international. He felt a deep sense of gratitude toward many
individuals, and he used his expertise and talents to further education by helping others.
Paul Pintrich’s legacy will endure because it offers so much. Educators can help to continue his legacy by
honoring him through their research, scholarship, teaching, and giving to others what they have received from