HAL Id: hal-03800559
 
Submitted on 6 Oct 2022
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Transfer learning for time series classification
Hassan Ismail Fawaz, Germain Forestier, Jonathan Weber, Lhassane
Idoumghar, Pierre-Alain Muller
To cite this version:
Hassan Ismail Fawaz, Germain Forestier, Jonathan Weber, Lhassane Idoumghar, Pierre-Alain Muller.
Transfer learning for time series classification. IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data),
Dec 2018, Seattle, United States. pp.1367-1376, ￿10.1109/bigdata.2018.8621990￿. ￿hal-03800559￿
Transfer learning for time series classiﬁcation
Hassan Ismail Fawaz, Germain Forestier, Jonathan Weber, Lhassane Idoumghar and Pierre-Alain Muller
IRIMAS, Universit´e de Haute-Alsace, Mulhouse, France
Email: { }
Abstract—Transfer learning for deep neural networks is the
process of ﬁrst training a base network on a source dataset, and
then transferring the learned features (the network’s weights) to
a second network to be trained on a target dataset. This idea
has been shown to improve deep neural network’s generalization
capabilities in many computer vision tasks such as image recognition and object localization. Apart from these applications, deep
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have also recently gained
popularity in the Time Series Classiﬁcation (TSC) community.
However, unlike for image recognition problems, transfer learning techniques have not yet been investigated thoroughly for the
TSC task. This is surprising as the accuracy of deep learning
models for TSC could potentially be improved if the model is
ﬁne-tuned from a pre-trained neural network instead of training
it from scratch. In this paper, we ﬁll this gap by investigating how
to transfer deep CNNs for the TSC task. To evaluate the potential
of transfer learning, we performed extensive experiments using
the UCR archive which is the largest publicly available TSC
benchmark containing 85 datasets. For each dataset in the
archive, we pre-trained a model and then ﬁne-tuned it on the
other datasets resulting in 7140 different deep neural networks.
These experiments revealed that transfer learning can improve or
degrade the models predictions depending on the dataset used for
transfer. Therefore, in an effort to predict the best source dataset
for a given target dataset, we propose a new method relying on
Dynamic Time Warping to measure inter-datasets similarities.
We describe how our method can guide the transfer to choose
the best source dataset leading to an improvement in accuracy
on 71 out of 85 datasets.
Index Terms—Transfer learning, time series classiﬁcation, deep
learning, Dynamic Time Warping
©2018 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or
reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. DOI: 
I. INTRODUCTION
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have recently been
shown to signiﬁcantly outperform the nearest neighbor approach coupled with the Dynamic Time Warping (DTW)
algorithm (1NN-DTW) on the UCR archive benchmark 
for the Time Series Classiﬁcation (TSC) problem . CNNs
were not only able to beat the 1NN-DTW baseline, but they
also reached results that are not signiﬁcantly different than
COTE - which is an ensemble of 37 classiﬁers. However,
despite the high performance of these CNNs, deep learning
models are still prone to overﬁtting. One example where these
neural networks fail to generalize is when the training set
of the time series dataset is very small. For example, while
the accuracy of the Fully Convolutional Neural Networks
(FCN) is 30% on the DiatomSizeReduction dataset (whose
training set is the smallest in the UCR archive ), the 1NN-
DTW classiﬁer reaches 96% on the same dataset with the
same train-test split . We attribute this huge difference in
accuracy to the overﬁtting phenomena, which is still an open
area of research in the deep learning community . This
problem is known to be mitigated using several techniques
such as regularization, data augmentation or simply collecting
more data , . Another well-know technique is transfer
learning , where a model trained on a source task is then
ﬁne-tuned on a target dataset. For example in Fig. 1, we trained
a model on the ElectricDevices dataset and then ﬁnetuned this same model on the OSULeaf dataset , which
signiﬁcantly improved the network’s generalization capability.
model's loss
Source: ElectricDevices - Target: OSULeaf
generalization
transfer learning
generalization
transfer learning
train without transfer
test without transfer
test with transfer
train with transfer
Fig. 1: Evolution of model’s loss (train and test) with and
without the transfer learning method using ElectricDevices as
source and OSULeaf as target datasets. (Best viewed in color).
Transfer learning is currently used in almost every deep
learning model when the target dataset does not contain
enough labeled data . Despite its recent success in computer
vision , transfer learning has been rarely applied to deep
learning models for time series data. One of the reasons for
this absence is probably the lack of one big general purpose
dataset similar to ImageNet or OpenImages but for time
series. Furthermore, it is only recently that deep learning was
proven to work well for TSC and there is still much to
be explored in building deep neural networks for mining time
series data .
Since transferring deep learning models, between the UCR
archive datasets (the largest benchmark currently available), have not been thoroughly studied, we decided to investigate this area of research with the ultimate goal to determine
in advance which dataset transfers could beneﬁt the CNNs and
improve their TSC accuracy.
The intuition behind the transfer learning approach for time
series data is also partially inspired by the observation of
Cui et al. , where the authors showed that shapelets 
(or subsequences) learned by the learning shapelets approach are related to the ﬁlters (or kernels) learned by
the CNNs. We hypothesize that these learned subsequences
might not be speciﬁc to one dataset and could occur in other
unseen datasets with un/related classiﬁcation tasks. Another
observation for why transfer learning should work for time
series data is its recent success in computer vision tasks .
Indeed, since time series data contain one temporal dimension
(time) compared to two dimensions for images (width and
height), it is only natural to think that if ﬁlters can successfully
be transferred on images , they should also be transferable
across time series datasets.
To evaluate the potential of transfer learning for TSC, we
performed experiments where each pair of datasets in the
UCR archive was tested twice: we pre-trained a model for
each dataset, then transferred and ﬁne-tuned it on all the
other datasets (a total of more than 7140 trained models).
Fig. 2 illustrates the architecture of our proposed framework
of transfer learning for TSC on two datasets. The obtained
results show that time series do exhibit some low level features
that could be used in a transfer learning approach. They also
show that using transfer learning reduces the training time
by reducing the number of epochs needed for the network to
converge on the train set.
Motivated by the consensus that transferring models between similar datasets improves the classiﬁer’s accuracy ,
we used the DTW algorithm as an inter-datasets similarity
measure in order to quantify the relationship between the
source and target datasets in our transfer learning framework.
Our experiments show that DTW can be used to predict the
best source dataset for a given target dataset. Our method can
thus identify which datasets should be considered for transfer
learning given a new TSC problem.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows, in Section II
we review the existing work on deep and transfer learning for
time series analysis. We then detail our proposed framework
in Section III. In Section IV, we present the setups for our
experimentations followed by the corresponding results and
discussions in Section V. Finally, in Section VI, we conclude
the work presented in this paper while proposing directions
for future research.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
In this section, we start by giving a formal deﬁnition for
the TSC problem. We then present some recent successful
applications of deep neural networks for the TSC task. Finally,
we give a summary of transfer learning and some of its
applications for time series data mining problems.
A. Time Series Classiﬁcation
Deﬁnition 1: A time series X = [x1, x2, ...xT ] is an ordered
set of real values. The length of X is equal to the number of
real values T.
transferred model
fine-tuned model
Original task
Target task
Fig. 2: General deep learning training process with transfer
learning for time series classiﬁcation. In this example, a
model is ﬁrst pre-trained on Car (source dataset) and then the
corresponding weights are ﬁne-tuned on CBF (target dataset).
Deﬁnition 2: A dataset D = {(X1, Y1), . . . , (XN, YN)} is
a collection of pairs (Xi, Yi) where Xi is a time series with
Yi as its corresponding label (or class) vector.
The task of TSC consists in training a classiﬁer on a dataset
D in order to map from the space of possible inputs Xi to a
probability distribution over the class variable values Yi.
B. Deep learning for Time Series Classiﬁcation
Since AlexNet won the ImageNet competition in 2012,
deep learning has seen a lot of successful applications in
many different domains such as reaching human level
performance in image recognition problems as well as
different natural language processing tasks , . Motivated by this success of deep neural networks in many different
domains, deep learning has been recently applied for the TSC
problem , .
In , a three layers Fully Convolutional Neural Network
has been designed for the TSC problem and validated on the
UCR archive . The FCN architecture contains convolutional
layers without any sub-sampling layer, followed by a global
average pooling layer before a traditional softmax classiﬁer
as the ﬁnal layer. The network’s architecture is presented in
Fig. 3 and explained in details in Section III. Given that this
network is currently the state of the art deep learning model
for the TSC problem, we chose it as our main network for
exploring transfer learning.
Other deep learning models have been also validated on
the UCR archive . In , a deep CNN was designed and
trained from scratch to classify time series. In order to avoid
the overﬁtting problem, the authors proposed different data
augmentation techniques that warped and split the time series.
In , the authors took the FCN model and modiﬁed the
cost function in order to take into account the imbalanced
classiﬁcation of time series.
Outside the UCR archive , deep learning has reached
state of the art performance on several datasets in different
domains . For spatio-temporal series forecasting problems,
such as meteorology and oceanography, deep neural networks
were proposed in . For human activity recognition from
wearable sensors, deep learning is replacing the feature engineering approaches where features are no longer handdesigned but rather learned by deep learning models trained
through back-propagation. One other type of time series data
is present in Electronic Health Records, where a recent generative adversarial network with a CNN was trained for
risk prediction based on patients historical medical records.
In short, deep learning is being applied to time series
data with very successful results in several different domains.
In fact, the convolutional neural network’s ability to learn
temporal invariant features is one of main the reasons behind
its recent success, as well as the availability of big data across
different domains .
Given the nature of time series data in many real-life applications, a question arises: Could the knowledge discovered in a
certain dataset, be leveraged in order to boost the performance
of deep neural networks on another completely unrelated time
series dataset ?
C. Transfer learning for Time Series Classiﬁcation
Before getting into the details of the recent applications for
transfer learning, we give a formal deﬁnition of the latter .
Deﬁnition 3: Transfer learning for deep neural networks, is
the process of ﬁrst training a base network on a source dataset
and task, and then transfer the learned features (the network’s
weights) to a second network to be trained on a target dataset
Throughout this paper, we will refer to source dataset as the
dataset we are transferring the pre-trained model from, and to
target dataset as the dataset we are transferring the pre-trained
Now that we have established the necessary deﬁnitions, we
will dive into the recent applications of transfer learning for
time series data mining tasks. In fact, transfer learning is sometimes confused with the domain adaptation approach ,
 . The main difference with the latter method is that the
model is jointly trained on the source and target datasets .
The goal of using the target instances during training, is
to minimize the discrepancy between the source’s and target’s instances. In , a domain adaptation approach was
proposed to predict human indoor occupancy based on the
carbon dioxide concentration in the room. In , hidden
Markov models’ generative capabilities were used in a domain
adaptation approach to recognize human activities based on a
sensor network.
For time series anomaly detection, a transfer learning approach was used to determine which time series should be
transferred from the source to the target dataset to be used
with a 1-NN DTW classiﬁer . Similarly, in the authors
developed a method to transfer speciﬁc training examples from
the source dataset to the target dataset and hence compute
the dissimilarity matrix using the new training set. As for
time series forecasting, a transfer learning approach for an
auto-encoder was employed to predict the wind-speed in a
farm . The authors proposed ﬁrst to train a model on the
historical wind-speed data of an old farm and ﬁne-tune it using
the data of a new farm. In restricted Boltzmann machines
were ﬁrst pre-trained for acoustic phoneme recognition and
then ﬁne-tuned for post-traumatic stress disorder diagnosis.
Perhaps the recent work in is the closest to ours in
terms of using transfer learning to improve the accuracy of
deep neural networks for TSC. In this work, the authors
designed a CNN with an attention mechanism to encode the
time series in a supervised manner. Before ﬁne-tuning a model
on a target dataset, the model is ﬁrst jointly pre-trained on
several source datasets with themes that are different
from the target dataset’s theme which limits the choice of
the source dataset to only one. Additionally, unlike , we
take a pre-designed deep learning model without modifying
it nor adding regularizers. This enabled us to solely attribute
the improvement in accuracy to the transfer learning feature,
which we describe in details in the following section.
III. METHOD
In this section, we present our proposed method of transfer learning for TSC. We ﬁrst introduce the adopted neural
network architecture from . We then thoroughly explain
how we adapted the network for the transfer learning process.
Finally, we present our DTW based method that enabled us
to compute the inter-datasets similarities, which we later use
to guide the transfer learning process.
A. Architecture
The network architecture which we have selected for the
transfer learning approach, is a one dimensional Fully Convolutional Neural Network (FCN). Note that our transfer
learning method is independent of the chosen network architecture, and that we have chosen this latter architecture for its
robustness as it has already achieved state of the art results on
44 datasets from the UCR archive .
The input of the network is a time series of variable
length. The network’s output is a probability distribution over
the C possible classes in the dataset. The ﬁrst, second and
third layers are convolutional layers with the Rectiﬁed Linear
Unit (ReLU) as activation function. Each convolutional layer
is followed by a batch normalization operation . More
precisely, the ﬁrst convolutional layer is composed of 128
ﬁlters of length 8. The second convolution is composed of
256 ﬁlters of length 5. The last convolutional layer contains
128 ﬁlters of length 3 and the three convolutions have a stride
equal to 1.
Each convolutional layer takes as input a time series and
perform some non-linearities to transform it into a multivariate
time series whose dimensions are inferred from the number
of ﬁlters in each layer. The fourth layer is composed of a
global average pooling operation which takes the input of the
third convolution and averages each time series over the time
axis. This averaging operation reduces drastically the number
of parameters in a deep model while enabling the use of a
class activation map which allows an interpretation of
the learned features . The output of layer four is then fed
to a softmax classiﬁcation layer whose number of neurons is
fully-connected
convolution
Fig. 3: Architecture of the one dimensional Fully Convolutional Neural Network adopted for our transfer learning process.
The input to the network is a time series of variable length. The output layer is a softmax fully-connected classiﬁer with C
neurons equal to the number of classes in the dataset. (Best viewed in color).
equal to the number of classes C in the dataset. The rest of
the network’s hyperparameters are shown in Table I.
Similarly to the hyperparameters, the architecture depicted
in Fig. 3 is exactly identical to the architecture proposed in .
This enabled us to solely test the effect of transfer learning
when ﬁtting a deep learning model for the TSC task. We
should also note that for ﬁne-tuning and training from scratch,
we are using the same network architecture with the same
hyper-parameters, except for the last fully-connected layer
whose adaptation is explained in the following subsection.
B. Network adaptation
After training the previously described network on the 85
datasets in the archive, we obtain 85 different neural networks.
The only difference between these 85 neural network architectures lies in the output layer. The rest of the layers have
the same number of parameters but with different values. In
fact the last layer, which is a softmax classiﬁer, depends on
the number of classes in the dataset.
Thus, given a source dataset Ds and a target dataset Dt, we
ﬁrst train the network on Ds. We then remove the last layer and
replace it with another softmax layer whose number of neurons
is equal to the number of classes in the target dataset Dt.
The added softmax layer’s parameters are initialized randomly
using Glorot’s uniform initialization . This new network
is then re-trained (ﬁne-tuned) on Dt.
We chose to ﬁne-tune the whole network instead of training
only the last newly added output layer. We tried to limit backpropagating the gradient to the last layer, but found that the
network failed to converge. This is in compliance with the
transfer learning literature , where re-training the whole
network almost always leads to better results.
Finally, we should add that one of the advantages of using a
global average pooling layer is that we do not need to re-scale
the input time series when transferring models between time
series of different length.
C. Inter-datasets similarity
One of the main challenges with transfer learning is choosing the source dataset. In , it was demonstrated that a
Hyperparameter
Original 
Batch size
Learning rate
First moment
Second moment
Loss function
Cross-entropy
Cross-entropy
TABLE I: Table showing the same hyperparameters for both
approaches: with or without transfer learning.
learning algorithm trained with a certain source domain will
not yield an optimal performance if the marginal distributions
of the datasets’ input are different. In our case, the total
number of datasets in the UCR archive is 85. Therefore
for each target dataset in the archive, we have 84 potential
source datasets. This makes the trial and error based approach
for transfer learning very costly in terms of computational
resources. Hence, we propose to use the DTW distance to
compute the similarities between the datasets, thus guiding
the choice of a source dataset for a given target dataset.
Note that it is practically impossible to directly estimate
the performance of a model learned on a source dataset by
applying it on a target dataset’s train set since the last layer of
the network is speciﬁc to the classes of the source dataset.
In order to compute the similarities between the datasets,
we ﬁrst reduce the number of time series for each dataset
to one time series (or prototype) per class. The per class
prototype is computed by averaging the set of time series
in the corresponding class. We used the well-known DTW
Barycenter Averaging (DBA) method to the average a set
of time series . The latter summarizing function was
proposed and validated as an averaging method in the DTW
induced space. In addition, DBA has been recently used as a
data reduction technique where it was evaluated in a nearest
centroid classiﬁcation schema . Therefore, to generate the
similarity matrix between the UCR datasets, we computed a
distance between each pair of datasets. Finally, for simplicity
and since the main goal of this paper is not the inter-datasets
similarity, we chose the distance between two datasets to be
equal to the minimum distance between the prototypes of their
corresponding classes.
Algorithm 1 shows the different steps followed to compute
the distance matrix between the UCR datasets. The ﬁrst part
of the algorithm (lines 1 through 7) presents the data reduction
technique similar to . For the latter step, we ﬁrst go
through the classes of each dataset (lines 1, 2 and 3) and
then average the set of time series for each class. Following
the recommendations in , the averaging method (DBA)
was initialized to be equal to the medoid of the time series
selected set (line 4). We ﬁxed the number of iterations for the
DBA algorithm to be equal to 10, for which the averaging
method has been shown to converge .
After having reduced the different sets for each time series
dataset, we proceed to the actual distance computation step
(lines 8 through 22). From line 8 to 10, we loop through every
possible combination of datasets pairs. Lines 13 and 14 show
the loop through each class for each dataset (at this stage
each class is represented by one average time series thanks
to the data reduction steps). Finally, lines 15 through 19 set
the distance between two datasets to be equal to the minimum
DTW distance between their corresponding classes.
One ﬁnal note is that when computing the similarity between the datasets, the only time series data we used came
from the training set, thus eliminating any bias due to having
seen the test set’s distribution.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
A. Datasets
We evaluate our developed framework thoroughly on the
largest publicly available benchmark for time series analysis:
the UCR archive , which consists of 85 datasets selected
from various real-world domains. The time series in the
archive are already z-normalized to have a mean equal to zero
and a standard deviation equal to one. During the experiments,
we used the default training and testing set splits provided by
UCR. For pre-training a model, we used only the train set of
the source dataset. We also ﬁne-tuned the pre-trained model
solely on the target dataset’s training data. Hence the test sets
were only used for evaluation purposes.
B. Experiments
For each pair of datasets (D1 and D2) in the UCR archive
we need to perform two experiments:
• D1 is the source dataset and D2 is the target dataset.
• D1 is the target dataset and D2 is the source dataset.
Which makes it in total 7140 experiments for the 85 dataset
in the archive. Hence, given the huge number of models that
need to be trained, we ran our experiments on a cluster of
60 GPUs. These GPUs were a mix of three types of Nvidia
graphic cards: GTX 1080 Ti, Tesla K20, K40 and K80. The
total sequential running time was approximately 168 days, that
is if the computation has been done on a single GPU. But by
leveraging the cluster of 60 GPUs, we managed to obtain the
Algorithm 1 Inter-datasets similarity
Input: N time series datasets in an array D
Output: N × N datasets similarity matrix
Initialization : matrix M of size N × N
data reduction step
1: for i = 1 to N do
C = D[i].classes
for c = 1 to length(C) do
avg init = medoid(C[c])
C[c] = DBA(C[c], avg init)
7: end for
distance calculation step
8: for i = 1 to N do
Ci = D[i].classes
for j = 1 to N do
Cj = D[j].classes
for ci = 1 to length(Ci) do
for cj = 1 to length(Cj) do
cdist = DTW(Ci[ci], Cj[cj])
dist = minimum(dist, cdist)
M[i, j] = dist
21: end for
22: return M
results in less than one week. We implemented our framework
using the open source deep learning library Keras with
the Tensorﬂow back-end. For reproducibility purposes, we
provide the 7140 trained Keras models (in a HDF5 format) on
the companion web page of the paper1. We have also published
the raw results and the full source code of our method to
enable the time series community to verify and build upon
our ﬁndings2.
V. RESULTS
The experiments described in the previous section yielded
interesting yet hard-to-understand results. In this section, we
ﬁrst present the result of the 85×84 experiments in a form of a
matrix (displayed as a heat map in Fig. 4). We then empirically
show how choosing the wrong source dataset for a given target
dataset could decrease the network’s performance. Therefore,
we provide a DTW based solution to choose the best source
dataset for a given target dataset. Finally, we detail a few
interesting case studies where the behavior of the proposed
method has a signiﬁcant impact on the transfered model’s
1 
2 
DiatomSizeReduction
InlineSkate
InsectWingbeatSound
RefrigerationDevices
WordsSynonyms
MiddlePhalanxTW
ScreenType
uWaveGestureLibrary_Y
ElectricDevices
uWaveGestureLibrary_Z
MiddlePhalanxOutlineAgeGroup
WormsTwoClass
HandOutlines
ShapeletSim
uWaveGestureLibrary_X
DistalPhalanxTW
MedicalImages
Earthquakes
SmallKitchenAppliances
DistalPhalanxOutlineCorrect
MiddlePhalanxOutlineCorrect
ProximalPhalanxTW
ProximalPhalanxOutlineAgeGroup
PhalangesOutlinesCorrect
UWaveGestureLibraryAll
ChlorineConcentration
DistalPhalanxOutlineAgeGroup
CinC_ECG_torso
Two_Patterns
LargeKitchenAppliances
ToeSegmentation2
ProximalPhalanxOutlineCorrect
MoteStrain
NonInvasiveFatalECG_Thorax1
NonInvasiveFatalECG_Thorax2
Strawberry
SonyAIBORobotSurface
ToeSegmentation1
ItalyPowerDemand
StarLightCurves
SwedishLeaf
SonyAIBORobotSurfaceII
synthetic_control
ECGFiveDays
TwoLeadECG
BirdChicken
DiatomSizeReduction
InlineSkate
InsectWingbeatSound
RefrigerationDevices
WordsSynonyms
MiddlePhalanxTW
ScreenType
uWaveGestureLibrary_Y
ElectricDevices
uWaveGestureLibrary_Z
MiddlePhalanxOutlineAgeGroup
WormsTwoClass
HandOutlines
ShapeletSim
uWaveGestureLibrary_X
DistalPhalanxTW
MedicalImages
Earthquakes
SmallKitchenAppliances
DistalPhalanxOutlineCorrect
MiddlePhalanxOutlineCorrect
ProximalPhalanxTW
ProximalPhalanxOutlineAgeGroup
PhalangesOutlinesCorrect
UWaveGestureLibraryAll
ChlorineConcentration
DistalPhalanxOutlineAgeGroup
CinC_ECG_torso
Two_Patterns
LargeKitchenAppliances
ToeSegmentation2
ProximalPhalanxOutlineCorrect
MoteStrain
NonInvasiveFatalECG_Thorax1
NonInvasiveFatalECG_Thorax2
Strawberry
SonyAIBORobotSurface
ToeSegmentation1
ItalyPowerDemand
StarLightCurves
SwedishLeaf
SonyAIBORobotSurfaceII
synthetic_control
ECGFiveDays
TwoLeadECG
BirdChicken
% of accuracy variation after transfer
Fig. 4: The variation in percentage over the original accuracy when ﬁne tuning a pre-trained model. The rows’ indexes
correspond to the source datasets and the columns’ indexes correspond to the target datasets. The red color shows the extreme
case where the chosen pair of datasets (source and target) deteriorates the network’s performance. Where on the other hand, the
blue color identiﬁes the improvement in accuracy when transferring the model from a certain source dataset and ﬁne-tuning on
another target dataset. The white color means that no change in accuracy has been identiﬁed when using the transfer learning
method for two datasets. The matrix actually has a size of 85 × 85 (instead of 85 × 84) for visual clarity with its diagonal left
out of the analysis. (Best viewed in color).
A. Transfer learning accuracy variation matrix
In order to have a fair comparison across the datasets,
we illustrate the variation in the transferred model’s accuracy
based on the percentage of variation compared to the original
accuracy (without transfer learning). For example, consider the
original accuracy (equal to 74.6%) when training the neural
network from scratch on the target dataset HandOutlines.
Then instead of training the model from scratch (with random
initializations) we obtain a 86.5% accuracy when initializing
the network’s weights to be equal to the weights of a pretrained network on the source dataset MedicalImages. Hence,
the percentage of accuracy variation with respect to the original value is equal to 100 × (86.5 −74.6)/74.6 ≈+16%.
Thus negative values (red in Fig. 4) indicate a decrease
in performance when using the transfer learning approach.
Whereas, a positive percentage (blue in Fig. 4) indicates an
increase in performance when ﬁne-tuning a pre-trained model.
When observing the heat map in Fig. 4, one can easily see
that ﬁne-tuning a pre-trained model almost never hurts the
performance of the CNN. This can be seen by the dominance
of the white color in the heat map, which corresponds to
almost no variation in accuracy.
On the other hand, the results which we found interesting
are the two extreme cases (red and blue) where the use of
transfer learning led to high variations in accuracy. Interestingly for a given target dataset, the choice of source dataset
could deteriorate or improve the CNN’s performance as we
will see in the following subsection.
B. Naive transfer learning
While observing the heat map in Fig. 4, we can easily see
that certain target datasets (columns) exhibit a high variance
of accuracy improvements when varying the source datasets.
Therefore, to visualize the worst and best case scenarios when
ﬁne-tuning a model against training from scratch, we plotted
in Fig. 5 a pairwise comparison of three aggregated accuracies
{minimum, median, maximum}.
For each target dataset Dt, we took its minimum accuracy
among the source datasets and plot it against the model’s
accuracy when trained from scratch. This corresponds to the
red dots in Fig. 5. By taking the minimum, we illustrate how
one can always ﬁnd a bad source dataset for a given target
dataset and decrease the model’s original accuracy when ﬁnetuning a pre-trained network.
On the other hand, the maximum accuracy (blue dots in
Fig. 5) shows that there is also always a case where a source
dataset increases the accuracy when using the transfer learning
As for the median (yellow dots in Fig. 5), it shows that on
average, pre-training and then ﬁne-tuning a model on a target
dataset improves without signiﬁcantly hurting the model’s
performance.
One extreme case, where the choice of the source dataset
had a huge impact on the model’s accuracy, is the OliveOil
dataset. Precisely the accuracy decreased from 93.3% to 16.7%
without transfer learning
with transfer learning
Aggregated accuracies with or without transfer
no transfer learning
works better here
transfer learning
works better here
Fig. 5: The three aggregated accuracies (minimum, median
and maximum) of the Convolutional Neural Networks with
the transfer learning approach against no transfer learning.
when choosing respectively MALLAT and FaceFour as source
This analysis showed us that blindly and naively using
the transfer learning approach could drastically decrease the
model’s performance. Actually, this is largely due to the fact
that the initial weights of the network have a signiﬁcant impact
on the training . This problem has been identiﬁed as
negative transfer learning in the literature, where there still
exists a need to quantify the amount of relatedness between the
source and target datasets and whether an attempt to transfer
knowledge from the source to the target domain should be
made . Therefore in the following subsection, we show
how our similarity based solution can quantify this relatedness
between the source and the target, thus enabling us to predict
the best source dataset for a given target dataset.
C. Smart transfer learning
In order to know in advance which source dataset is suited
for which target dataset, we propose to leverage the similarity
between two datasets. Our method is designed speciﬁcally for
time series data without any previous domain knowledge about
the datasets. Using the method we described in Section III, we
managed to compute a nearest neighbor for a target dataset and
set this nearest neighbor to be the chosen source dataset for
the current target dataset in question.
The results showed that this proposed DTW based method
will help in achieving what is called positive transfer . As
opposed to negative transfer, positive transfer learning means
that the learning algorithm’s accuracy increases when ﬁnetuning a pre-trained model compared to a training from scratch
approach .
Fig. 6 shows a pairwise accuracy plot for two approaches:
a random selection process of the source dataset against a
“smart” selection of the source dataset using a nearest neighbor
algorithm with the distance calculated in algorithm 1. In order
to reduce the bias due to the random seed, the accuracy
for the random selection approach was averaged over 1000
iterations. This plot shows that on average, choosing the
most similar dataset using our method is signiﬁcantly better
than a random selection approach (with p < 10−7 for the
Wilcoxon signed-rank test). Respectively our method wins,
ties and loses on 71, 0 and 14 datasets against randomly
choosing the source dataset. We should also note that for
the two datasets DiatomSizeReduction and Wine, the nearest
neighbor is not always the best choice. Actually, we found that
the second nearest neighbor increases drastically the accuracy
from 3.3% to 46.7% for DiatomSizeReduction and from 51.9%
to 77.8% for Wine (see the 2nd NN dots in Fig. 6). This
means that certain improvements could be incorporated to our
inter-datasets similarity calculation such as adding a warping
window or changing the number of prototypes for each
class which we aim to study in our future work.
Random source
Similar source (DTW)
Accuracy with transfer learning
our method
is better here
random method
is better here
DiatomSizeReduction
Win / Tie / Loss
71 / 0 / 14
p-value < 10-7
Fig. 6: The accuracy of a ﬁne-tuned model for two cases: (x
axis) when the source dataset is selected randomly; (y axis)
when the source dataset is selected using our Dynamic Time
Warping based solution.
Therefore, since in Fig. 6 the most similar dataset is the only
one that is considered as a potential source for a given target,
another interesting study would be to analyze the accuracy on
a given target dataset as a function of how dissimilar the source
dataset is. However due to the huge number of datasets in the
UCR archive compared to the space limitation, we chose to
only study the most interesting cases where the results can be
visually interpreted. The analysis for the whole 85 datasets is
however included in the companion web page.
D. Interesting case studies
In this ﬁnal analysis we chose to work with three interesting
target datasets: ShapeletSim, HandOutlines and Meat. These
datasets were chosen for different reasons such as the small
size of the training set, the relatedness to shapelets and the
transfer learning’s accuracy variation.
ShapeletSim contains one of the smallest training sets in
the UCR archive (with 20 training instances). Additionally,
this dataset is a simulated dataset designed speciﬁcally for
shapelets which makes it interesting to see how well CNNs can
ﬁne-tune (pre-learned) shapelets when varying the source
dataset. Fig. 7 shows how the model’s accuracy decreases as
we go further from the target dataset. Precisely the average
accuracy for the top 3 neighbors reaches 93% compared to
the original accuracy of 76%. Actually, we found that the
closest dataset to ShapeletSim is the RefrigerationDevices
dataset which contains readings from 251 households with
the task to identify three classes: Fridge, Refrigerator and
Upright Freezer. This is very interesting since using other
background knowledge one cannot easily predict that using
RefrigerationDevices as a source for ShapeletSim will lead
to better accuracy improvement. To understand better this
source/target association, we investigated the shapes of the
time series of each dataset and found that both datasets exhibit
very similar spiky subsequences which is likely the cause for
the transfer learning to work between these two datasets.
ShapeletSim
with transfer
without transfer
RefrigerationDevices
ShapeletSim
Fig. 7: The ﬁne-tuned model’s accuracy variation on the target
dataset ShapeletSim with respect to the chosen source dataset
neighbor (smoothed for visual clarity - best viewed in color).
HandOutlines is one of the datasets where ﬁne-tuning a
pre-trained model almost never improves the accuracy. Unlike
ShapeletSim, this dataset contains enough labeled data for
the learning algorithm to learn from (with 1000 time series
in the training set). Surprisingly, we found that one could
drastically increase the model’s performance when choosing
the best source dataset. Fig. 8 shows a huge difference (10%)
between the model’s accuracy when ﬁne-tuned using the most
similar source dataset and the accuracy when choosing the
most dissimilar source dataset. HandOutlines is a classiﬁcation
problem that uses the outlines extracted from hand images.
We found that the two most similar datasets (50words and
WordsSynonyms) that yielded high accuracy improvements,
are also words’ outlines extracted from images of George
Washington’s manuscripts.
HandOutlines
without transfer
with transfer
WordsSynonyms
HandOutlines
Fig. 8: The ﬁne-tuned model’s accuracy variation on the target
dataset HandOutlines with respect to the chosen source dataset
neighbor (smoothed for visual clarity - best viewed in color).
Meat is one of the smallest datasets (with 20 training
instances) where the transfer learning approach was almost
always beneﬁcial. However, we would like to examine the
possibility of improving the accuracy even for the case where
the transfer learning seems to be positive for any choice of
source dataset. Fig. 9 shows that the accuracy reaches almost
95% for the top 3 closest datasets and then decrease the less
similar the source and target datasets are. While investigating
these similarities, we found the top 1 and 3 datasets to be
respectively Strawberry and Beef which are all considered
spectrograph datasets . As for the second most similar
dataset, our method determined it was 50words. Given the
huge number of classes (ﬁfty) in 50words our method managed
to ﬁnd some latent similarity between the two datasets which
helped in improving the accuracy of the transfer learning
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigated the transfer learning approach
on a state of the art deep learning model for TSC problems.
Our extensive experiments with every possible combination of
source and target datasets in the UCR archive, were evidence
that the choice of the source dataset could have a signiﬁcant
impact on the model’s generalization capabilities. Precisely
when choosing a bad source dataset for a given target dataset,
the optimization algorithm can be stuck in a local optimum.
This phenomena has been identiﬁed in the transfer learning
literature by negative transfer learning which is still an active
area of research . Thus, when deploying a transfer learning
approach, the big data practitioner should give attention to the
relationship between the target and the chosen source domains.
These observations motivated us to examine the use of the
well known time series similarity measure DTW, to predict
the choice of the source dataset when ﬁne-tuning a model
on a time series target dataset. After applying this transfer
without transfer
with transfer
Strawberry
Fig. 9: The ﬁne-tuned model’s accuracy variation on the
target dataset Meat with respect to the chosen source dataset
neighbor (smoothed for visual clarity - best viewed in color).
learning guidance, we concluded that transferring deep CNNs
on a target dataset works best when ﬁne-tuning a network that
was pre-trained on a similar source dataset. These ﬁndings
are very interesting since no previous observation made the
link between the space induced by the classic DTW and the
features learned by the Convolutional Neural Networks.
Our results should motivate the big data practitioners to no
longer train models from scratch when classifying time series,
but instead to ﬁne-tune pre-trained models. Especially because
CNNs, if designed properly, can be adapted across different
time series datasets with varying length.
In our future work, we aim again to reduce the deep neural
network’s overﬁtting phenomena by generating synthetic data
using a Weighted DTW Barycenter Averaging method ,
since the latter distance gave encouraging results in guiding a
complex deep learning tool such as transfer learning.
Finally, with big data repositories becoming more frequent,
leveraging existing source datasets that are similar to, but not
exactly the same as a target dataset of interest, makes a transfer
learning method an enticing approach.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank NVIDIA Corp. for the GPU
Grant and the M´esocentre of Strasbourg for providing access
to the GPU cluster.