Extracting Hidden Information from Knowledge Networks
Sergei Maslov(1,2), Yi-Cheng Zhang2
1 Department of Physics, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, USA
2 Institut de Physique Th´eorique, Universit´e de Fribourg, CH-1700, Fribourg, Switzerland
 
We develop a method allowing us to reconstruct individual tastes of customers from a sparsely connected network of their opinions on products, services, or each other. Two distinct phase transitions
occur as the density of edges in this network is increased: above the ﬁrst - macroscopic prediction of tastes becomes possible, while above the second - all unknown opinions can be uniquely
reconstructed. We illustrate our ideas using a simple Gaussian model, which we study using both
ﬁeld-theoretical methods and numerical simulations.
We point out a potential relevance of our
approach to the ﬁeld of bioinformatics.
89.75.Hc, 89.20.Hh, 87.15.Kg, 89.65.Gh, 05.40.-a
Mainstream economics maintains that human tastes
reﬂected in consumer preferences are sovereign, i.e not
subject to discussion or study. It postulates that consumer’s choice of products or services is the outcome of
a complete and thorough optimization among all possible options, and, therefore, his/her satisfaction cannot
be further improved. Such a doctrine, though often challenged from both within and outside of economics, is
still dominant. However, recently many business practitioners started to exploit the aﬃnity in people’s tastes
in order to predict their personal preferences and come
up with individually-tailored recommendations. Our basic premise is that people’s consumption patterns are
not based on the complete optimization over all possible choices.
Instead, they constitute just a small revealed part of the vast pool of “hidden wants”. These
hidden wants, if properly exploited, can lead to much
better matches between people and products, services,
or other people. In the economy of the past such opportunities were hardly exploitable. Things have changed in
the course of the current information revolution, which
both connected people on an unprecedented scale, and
allowed for easy collection of the vast amount of information on customer’s preferences. In just a few years
the internet has already changed much of our traditional
perceptions about human interactions, both commercial
and social. We believe that technical advances in wireless
and other network interfaces are imminent of being able
to capture the necessary information virtually free and
to put this theory to use.
Our aim is to predict yet unknown individual consumer preferences, based on the pattern of their correlations with already known ones. Predictive power obviously depends on the ratio between the known and yet
unknown parts.
When the fraction of known opinions
p is too small, only occasional predictions are possible.
When it surpasses the ﬁrst threshold, that we refer to as
p1, almost all unobserved preferences acquire some degree of predictability.
Finally, for p above the second
higher threshold p2, all these unobserved preferences can
be uniquely reconstructed. In what follows we describe
a simple model of how customer’s opinions are formed
and spell out in some details basic algorithms allowing
for their prediction.
To make this discussion somewhat less abstract let
us consider a matchmaker or an advisor service which
already exists on many book-selling websites that personally recommends new books to each of their customers.
In order for such recommendation to be successful one needs to assume the existence of some “hidden metrics” in the space of reader’s tastes and book’s
In other words, the matchmaking is possible only if opinions of two people with similar tastes
on two books with similar features are usually not too
far from each other.
In this work we use the simplest realization of this hidden metrics. We assume that
each reader is characterized by an M-dimensional array
r = (r(1), r(2), . . . , r(M)) of his/her tastes in books, while
each book has the corresponding list of M basic “features” b = (b(1), b(2), . . . , b(M)) .
An opinion of a
reader on a book is given simply by an overlap (scalar
product) Ωof reader’s vector of tastes, and book’s vector of features: Ω= r · b = PM
α=1 r(α)b(α). The matchmaker has some incomplete knowledge about opinions of
his customers on the books they have read, and he uses
it to reconstruct yet unknown opinions (overlaps) and to
recommend books to its customers.
The central position of our matchmaker with respect
to its customers makes its services dramatically diﬀerent from those of the so-called “smart agents” , whose
goal is to anticipate and predict tastes of their individual owners.
Indeed, the scope of recommendations of
a smart agent is severely limited by the fact that each
of them serves its own master, so that others would not
cooperate. On the other hand, our matchmaker is a completely neutral player in an economic game, who is able
to synergistically use the knowledge collected by all players/agents to everybody’s advantage (including his own).
The information about who-read-what is best visualized as a bipartite undirected graph in which vertices
corresponding to readers are connected by edges to vertices corresponding to books each of them has read and
reported opinion to the matchmaker. Similar graphs (or
networks) were recently drawn to the center of attention
of the statistical physics community under a name
“small world networks”. For example, statistical properties of a bipartite graph of movie actors connected to
ﬁlms they appeared in were studied in , while that
of scientists and papers which they co-authored - in .
In this paper we go beyond empirical studies or simple
growth models of such graphs. The new feature making
the graphs introduced in this work richer than ordinary
undirected graphs is that in our graphs each vertex has
a set of M “hidden” internal degrees of freedom. Consequently, each edge carries a real number Ω, representing
the similarity or overlap between these internal degrees of
freedom on two vertices it connects. In our case this number quantiﬁes the matchmaker’s knowledge of an opinion
that a given customer has on a given product. Therefore,
we would refer to such graphs as knowledge or opinion
In the most general case any two vertices in the knowledge network can be connected by an edge. It is realized
for instance if vectors r1, r2, . . . rN stand for strings of
individual “interests” in a group of N people. The overlap Ωij = ri · rj measures the similarity of interests for a
given pair of people and can be thought of as the “quality
of the match” between them. The matchmaker’s goal is
to analyze this information and to recommend to a customer i another customer j, whom he has not met yet,
and who is likely to have a large positive overlap with
his/her set of interests. Mutual opinions can be conveniently stored in an N × N symmetric matrix of scalar
products bΩ. In the above case any element of this matrix can be in principle “reported” to the matchmaker.
Diﬀerent restrictions imposed on this most general scenario describe other versions of our basic model such as:
1) An advisor service recommending Nb products to Nr
customers (e.g.
our model of books and readers from
the introduction). In this case the square matrix bΩhas
Nr + Nb rows and columns, while all entries known to
the matchmaker are restricted to the Nr × Nb rectangle,
corresponding to opinions of customers on products. 2)
A real matchmaking service recommending Nm men and
Nw women to each other. Here we assume that each man
and woman can be characterized by two M-dimensional
vectors: the ﬁrst one is the vector q of his/her own “qualities”, while the second one d represents the set of his/her
“desires”, i.e. desired ideal qualities that he/she is seeking in his/her partner. The opinion of a person i on a
person j is then given by a scalar product di · qj, while
the opposite opinion has in general a completely diﬀerent
value dj ·qi. The full (2Nm +2Nw)×(2Nm +2Nw) overlap matrix is still symmetric but only two small sectors,
containing Nm × Nw elements each, are accessible to the
matchmaker.
With a small modiﬁcation this last scenario can be
applied to a completely diﬀerent problem, namely that
of physical interactions between in a set of biological
molecules such as proteins. It is known that high speci-
ﬁcity of such interactions is achieved by the virtue of
the “key-and-lock” matching of features on their surfaces.
Given the space of possible shapes of locks and keys, each
molecule can be described by two vectors li, ki of 0’s and
1’s which determine which keys and locks are present on
its surface. Provided that the key kα uniquely ﬁts to the
lock lα, the strength of the interaction between these two
molecules is determined by Ωij = ki · lj + kj · li.
In the rest of the paper we concentrate only on the
most general non-bipartite case of an N × N matrix
of overlaps of interests in a group of N customers and
leave other more restricted situations for future work .
The matchmaker always has only partial and noisy information about the matrix bΩdue to several factors:
1) First and most importantly, the matchmaker knows
only some of the opinions Ωij of his customers on each
other, which he uses to guess the rest.
2) In real life
the overlap could never be precisely measured. In the
simplest case of an extremely narrow information channel customers report to the matchmaker only the sign of
their overlap with other customers. One can also imagine
a somewhat wider channel, where the matchmaker asks
his customers to rate their satisfaction by a grade system,
the ﬁner the better. 3) The loss of information due to
a narrow channel between the matchmaker and its customers can be further complicated by a random noise in
reporting, which would inevitably be present in real life
situations. Indeed, we are far from assuming that the
scalar product of tastes and features completely determines the customer satisfaction with a product, or that
similarity of interests is all that matters when two people form an opinion about each other. One should always
leave room for an idiosyncratic reaction, which does not
result from any logical weighting of features. Our hope is
that strong mutually reinforcing correlations due to the
redundance of information stored in an idealized matrix
bΩwould manifest themselves in a large enough group
of customers even when they are masked by a substantial amount of idiosyncratic noise. In principle all these
three sources of noise and partial information are present
simultaneously. However, in this work we will treat them
separately and restrict ourselves only to the case where
the matchmaker knows the exact values of all overlaps,
reported to him. It is easy to see how correlations between matrix elements allow the matchmaker to succeed
in his goal of prediction of yet unknown overlaps. For example, the known values of Ω12 = r1·r2, and Ω23 = r2·r3
somewhat restrict the possible mutual orientation of vectors r1 and r3, and, therefore, contain information about
the value of the yet unknown overlap Ω23.
will demonstrate that the predictability of an overlap between two points that are already connected by a chain of
known overlaps of length L is proportional to M −(L−1)/2
and, therefore, exponentially decays with L for M > 1.
Hence, an appreciable prediction becomes only possible
when two points are connected by exponentially many
mutually reinforcing paths.
The amount of information collected by the matchmaker on its customers can be conveniently characterized
by either the number K or the density p = 2K/N(N −1)
of known overlaps among all N(N −1)/2 oﬀ-diagonal
elements of the matrix. For very small K all edges of
the knowledge network are disconnected and no prediction is possible. As more and more edges are randomly
added to the network, the chance that a new edge would
join two previously connected points, i.e the probability
to form a loop in the network, increases. It is exactly in
this situation the matchmaker had some predictive power
about the value of the new overlap before it was observed.
However, this excess information would disappear in the
thermodynamic limit N →∞until the density of edges
reaches the ﬁrst threshold p1 = 1/(N −1). This threshold is nothing else but a percolation transition, above
which the Giant Connected Component (GCC) appears
in a random graph. For p > p1 the fraction of nodes
in the GCC rapidly grows, exponentially approaching
100%. It means that already for a moderate ratio p/p1
almost every new edge added to the graph would join two
previously connected points. This transition would also
manifest itself in the behavior of the entropy of the joint
probability distribution of unknown overlaps .
One has to remember though that the predictive power
of the matchmaker is exponentially small for long loops.
That means that while the typical diameter of the graph
is still large, the loop correlation is too weak to signiﬁcantly bias most of the unknown overlaps. The reliable
prediction becomes possible only for much higher values
of p. Let us calculate p2 - the point of the second phase
transition, above which the values of all unknown overlaps are completely determined by the information contained in known ones. Using a geometrical language at
this point the knowledge network undergoes a “rigidity
percolation” phase transition, at which relative orientations of vectors ri become ﬁxed. Such transition is possible only for N > M since only in this case bΩcontains
redundant information about components of all vectors
ri. The position of the second phase transition p2 can
be determined by carefully counting the degrees of freedom. For N > M the overlap matrix bΩhas very special
spectral properties: it has precisely N −M zero eigenvalues, while the remaining eigenvalues are strictly positive. An easy way to demonstrate this is to recall that
the overlap matrix can be written as bΩ= bR bR†, where
bR is the N × M rectangular matrix formed by vectors
= Riα. The Singular Value Decomposition (SVD)
technique allows one to “diagonalize” bR (N > M), that
is to ﬁnd an M × M orthogonal matrix bV , (bV bV † = 1),
an M × M positive diagonal matrix bD, and an N × M
matrix bU formed by M orthonormal N-dimensional vectors, such that bR = bU bD bV . Now it is easy to see that
bΩ= bU bD2 bU † has precisely M positive eigenvalues equal
to squares of the elements of the diagonal matrix bD, and
N −M zero eigenvalues. The number of degrees of freedom of bΩis equal to the NM degrees of freedom of R
minus M(M −1)/2 of the “gauge” degrees of freedom
of the orthogonal matrix V , which have no inﬂuence on
elements of bΩ. Once the number of known elements K
exceeds the total number of degrees of freedom of bΩ, the
remaining unknown elements of bΩcan be in principle
reconstructed.
Therefore, the second phase transition
happens at
p2 = M(2N −M + 1)
Here the ≃sign corresponds to the limit N ≫M.
Practically however, in order to calculate the set of
unknown overlaps one needs to solve a system of nonlinear equations with a huge number of unknown variables,
which is a daunting task. To this end we came up with
a simple and eﬃcient iterative numerical algorithm, that
uses the special spectral properties of bΩ: (1) Construct
the initial approximation bΩa to bΩby substituting 0 for all
its unknown elements; (2) Diagonalize bΩa, and construct
the matrix bΩ′
a by keeping the M largest (positive) eigenvalues and eigenvectors of bΩa, while setting the remaining
N −M eigenvalues to zero. (3) Construct the new reﬁned
approximate matrix bΩa by copying all unknown elements
a, while resetting the rest to their exactly known
values. (4) Go to the step (2). As shown in Fig. 1 for
p > p2 bΩa converges to bΩexponentially fast in the number of iterations n. Numerical simulations also indicate
that the rate of this exponential convergence scales as
(p−p2)2 above the second phase transition (see the inset
in Fig. 1).
Below p2 this algorithm performs rather poorly and
the error may even grow with the number of iteration
steps. This is to be expected since in this region there is
more than one solution for the bΩ, consistent with a set
of constraints, imposed by K known matrix elements.
While our iterative algorithm always converges to one of
such solutions, barring an unlikely accident, this solution
is far from the set of “true” values of unknown matrix
elements. In this situation the best thing that a matchmaker can do is to calculate the average value ⟨Ωpq⟩of
each unknown element in the ensemble of all matrices,
consistent with a given set of K constraints. We have
succeeded in estimating ⟨Ωpq⟩analytically. This calculation involves rather heavy algebra and will be reported
elsewhere .
In the above discussion the parameter M was treated
as ﬁxed and known property of the system. However, in
real life one usually does not know a priori the number
of relevant components of an idealized vector of tastes or
features. Here we want to propose a criterion on how to
optimally choose it. If the number of known overlaps K is
small, it would be useless to try to model the matrix using
a high-dimensional space of tastes. Indeed, all the free
play allowed by a large M would not give the matchmaker
much of a prediction power anyway. This leads us to a
conjecture that the optimal way for a matchmaker to
select an eﬀective number of internal degrees of freedom
Meﬀis to do it in such a way that the system is balanced
precisely at or near the critical threshold p2. In other
words, given K and N one should solve the equation
NMeﬀ−Meﬀ(Meﬀ−1)/2 = K to ﬁnd Meﬀ= [N +1/2−
(N + 1/2)2 −2K] ∼= K/N.
Finally we introduce a particularly simple analytically tractable example of an knowledge network, where
each component rα
of a hidden vector ri is independently drawn from a normal distribution.
probability
distribution
1)/2 elements of the (symmetric) overlap matrix bΩ
is then given by a multidimensional integral P(bΩ) =
i≤j δ(Ωij−
). Using the standard integral representation for the δ-function, δ(x) = R ∞
−∞exp(iλx) dλ/(2π),
and calculating exactly the path integral, now quadratic
, one arrives at a remarkably elegant and compact
expression :
2π exp(iλijΩij)
det(ˆ1 + ibΛ)−M
The matrix ˆ1 is the N × N unity matrix, while bΛ is
a symmetric matrix with elements 2λii on the diagonal
and λij oﬀthe diagonal. This expression is the multidimensional Fourier transform of the joint probability
distribution P(bΩ), so that Φ(bΛ) = det(ˆ1 + ibΛ)−M/2 is
nothing else but the generating function of this distribution!
As usual, Taylor expansion of the generating
function in powers of λij around bΛ = 0 allows one to calculate any imaginable correlation between integer powers
of Ωij. It is more convenient to work with irreducible correlations, generated by the Taylor expansion of φ(bΛ) =
ln(Φ(bΛ)) = −(M/2) ln(det(ˆ1 + ibΛ)) = −(M/2)Tr[ln(ˆ1 +
A surprising consequence of the above exact expression for φ(bΛ) is that all irreducible correlations of
matrix elements are proportional to M.
In particular, the expansion φ(bΛ) = (M/2) P∞
L=1 Tr[(−ibΛ)L]/L.
allows one to calculate any correlation of the type
⟨⟨Ωi1i2Ωi2i3 . . . ΩiL−1iLΩiLi1⟩⟩= M, corresponding to a
given non self-intersecting loop on the network. The presence of such cyclic correlations indicates that signs of matrix elements are weakly correlated. Taking into account
that each |Ωij| ∼
M and using scaling arguments it is
straightforward to demonstrate that the predictability of
one of the overlaps in the loop of length L based on the
knowledge of others scales as M −(L−1)/2.
In this letter we have described a general framework allowing one to predict elements from the unobserved part
of an knowledge network based on the observed part.
Prediction power was shown to strongly depend on the
ratio between these two parts. While our original motivation was to model a commercial matchmaking service
in the internet age, the implications go well beyond. We
would like to point out that our general framework, developed for knowledge networks, could be also of much
importance in the ﬁeld of bioinformatics, where crosscorrelations, mutual interactions, and functions of large
sets of biological entities such as proteins, DNA binding
sites, etc., are only partially known.
It is conceivable
that a similar approach applied to e.g. a large matrix of
protein-protein interactions would prove to be fruitful.
We have beneﬁtted from conversations with T. Hwa,
M. Marsili, C. Tang, Y. Yu and A. Zee.
Brookhaven National Laboratory was carried out under
Contract No. DE-AC02-98CH10886, Division of Material Science, U.S. Department of Energy. This work was
sponsored in part by Swiss National Foundation under
Grant 20-61470.00.
 See e.g. K. Lancaster, Jrnl of Political Economy 74(2) 132-
155, .
 For a discussion on pros and cons of smart agents see e.g.
www.shirky.com/writings/bots.html
 D.J. Watts and S.H. Strogatz, Nature (London) 393, 440
 A.-L. Barabasi, R. Albert, Science 286, 509 .
 M.E. Newman,Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 404 ;
cond-mat/0011144.
 S. Maslov, Y.-C. Zhang, work in progress.
 As was demonstrated by J. Wishart in 1928 for M
N the following integral can
be calculated exactly to give P(bΩ) = det(bΩ)(M−N−1)/2
exp(−Tr(bΩ)/2)/Norm. However, for M < N, which is our
case, this problem turns out to be much harder.
 P. Uetz, et al., Nature 403, 623 ; T. Ito, et al. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 4569 .
number of iterations
FIG. 1. The average error in the value of unknown matrix
elements of bΩas a function of the number of iterations. All
are independent Gaussian random numbers. The parameters of the model are M = 9, N = 50, corresponding to
p2 = 0.34. The inset shows the scaling of an exponential convergence rate as a function of p −0.34. The solid line has the