Deep ensemble learning for Alzheimer’s disease classification
School of Computer and Information
Hefei University of Technology
Hefei, China
 
Huitong Ding
School of Computer and Information
Hefei University of Technology
Hefei, China
School of Medicine, Boston University
Boston, USA
 
Jiaoyun Yang†
School of Computer and Information
Hefei University of Technology
Hefei, China
 
Schools of Medicine & Public Health
Boston University
Boston, USA
 
Ting Fang Alvin Ang
School of Medicine
Boston University
Boston, USA
 
Ensemble1learning use multiple algorithms to obtain better predictive
performance than any single one of its constituent algorithms could.
With growing popularity of deep learning, researchers have started to
ensemble them for various purposes. Few if any, however, has used
the deep learning approach as a means to ensemble algorithms. This
paper presents a deep ensemble learning framework which aims to
harness deep learning algorithms to integrate multisource data and
tap the ‘wisdom of experts’. At the voting layer, a sparse autoencoder
is trained for feature learning to reduce the correlation of attributes
and diversify the base classifiers ultimately. At the stacking layer, a
nonlinear feature-weighted method based on deep belief networks is
proposed to rank the base classifiers which may violate the
conditional independence. Neural network is used as meta classifier.
At the optimizing layer, under-sampling and threshold-moving are
used to cope with cost-sensitive problem. Optimized predictions are
obtained based on ensemble of probabilistic predictions by similarity
calculation. The proposed deep ensemble learning framework is used
for Alzheimer’s disease classification. Experiments with the clinical
dataset from national Alzheimer’s coordinating center demonstrate
that the classification accuracy of our proposed framework is 4%
better than 6 well-known ensemble approaches as well as the
standard stacking algorithm. Adequate coverage of more accurate
diagnostic services can be provided by utilizing the wisdom of
averaged physicians. This paper points out a new way to boost the
primary care of Alzheimer’s disease from the view of machine
†Corresponding author
Tel.: +86 13866719116
Fax: +86 055162901990
Email: 
Address: Hefei Tunxi Road 193, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, 230009, China
Classification,
Alzheimer’s disease, Primary care
1 INTRODUCTION
Ensemble learning utilizes a group of decision making system which
applies various strategies to combine classifiers to improve prediction
on new data. Stacking is a well-known approach among the
ensembles in which the predictions of a collection of models are given
as inputs to a second-level learning algorithm. It has been employed
successfully on a wide range of problems, such as chemometrics ,
spam filtering , signal processing , and healthcare . But the
correlation of base classifiers is hard to eliminate. Currently, most
methods are focusing on the diversity among the members of a team
of classifiers. For example, different learning algorithms and training
data sets have been used for this purpose . But few efforts have
been made to reduce the correlation of base classifiers in the secondlevel algorithm of stacking.
The restricted boltzmann machine (RBM) is a representative
example of deep learning which has become a major tool in several
applications over the last decades, including image recognition ,
bioinformatics and natural language processing . It is a
probabilistic model that uses a layer of hidden binary variables or
units to model the distribution of a visible layer of variables. As a
generative model, it has been used for analyzing different types of
data including labeled or unlabeled images , and acoustic data .
RBM does not require the independent of input components . It is
indeed an advantage to fuse the predictions of base classifiers even
they might dependent with each other.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a chronic neurodegenerative disorder,
which makes up more than 60% of all dementia cases . Age is
the major risk factor for AD. With a rapidly aging world population,
diagnosis services in many middle-income countries strive to meet
actual demand and are largely confined to tertiary care hospitals in
major population centers . Deep learning with some variants has
been used for AD prediction in previous works , but lacked the
generalization capability needed for application by medical
Ning.An et al.
practitioners owing to insufficient data and the inherent physicians’
bias clinical judgement. Making full use of limited resources to
improve AD diagnostic accuracy poses a severe challenge in
improving healthcare. Hence there is an increasing need for new
methods that can enhance the primary care of AD.
The diagnosis of AD is generally based on history-taking, clinical
presentation and behavioral observations. Specialists working in
memory clinics sometimes show surprisingly low levels of diagnostic
agreement with each other , making it hard to obtain objective
and reproducible diagnose. Alternatively, more opinions should be
sought from the primary care services because of the lack of AD
specialists in many parts of the world. Therefore, it is important to
find ways to better leverage the wisdom of experts . Our
framework is an effective strategy to assist existing or new health
professionals, who have insufficient AD related training, in making
clinical diagnosis.
We regard the clinical decision making of physician as a learning
algorithm that searches a hypothesis space about AD outcome for the
best one. Without sufficient data or expertise, the learning algorithm
or physician may derive different AD outcome hypotheses in
hypothesis space that all result in the same level of predictive
accuracy. By constructing an ensemble of these classifiers or
physicians, the algorithm can average decisions and reduce the risk of
reliance on the wrong classifier or physician. Many learning
algorithms perform local searches for outcome hypothesis that are
constrained in local optima. Similarly, physicians may have more
expertise in a specific disease and thus their diagnoses are often
biased to what they are most familiar with. An ensemble may provide
a better approximation to the true unknown outcome than any
individual classifier. Wu et al. combined three different classifiers
using weighted and unweighted schemes to improve AD prediction
 , but they only use the 11C-PIB PET image data and did not
consider the diversity of base classifiers. In other word, the base
classifiers may dependent with each other. There have been recent
works on how to combine ensemble learning with deep learning
systems to achieve greater prediction accuracy .
Most of the existing frameworks for AD prediction tend to achieve
lower error rates by assuming the same loss for any misclassification.
Beheshti developed a novel computer-aided diagnosis system that
uses feature ranking and genetic algorithms to analyze structural
magnetic resonance imaging data . Using this system, the
conversion of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to AD is predicted.
However, different mistakes may lead to significantly different
clinical consequences. For example, failing to detect AD has more
potentially significant consequence than a false positive prediction.
Cost-sensitive learning provides a solution to this problem by
considering misclassification costs in the learning process .
Although using automated computer tools to facilitate medical
analysis and prediction is a promising and important area , most
existing classification methods only use one individual modality of
biomarkers for AD prediction and the data collection process is
subject to variability, which may affect the overall classification
performance. For example, voxel wise tissue probability, cortical
thickness, and hippocampal volumes are all neuroimaging features
often used for AD classification . There are, however, also a
number of biological and/or genetic biomarkers that have been
identified as well as being significantly related to increased risk of AD.
Actually, different measures provide complementary information,
which in combination may significant increase AD prediction
performance. The uniform data set (UDS) collected by national
Alzheimer’s coordinating center (NACC) includes detailed clinical
information
participants,
neuropsychological test results and family history, as well as
neuroimaging indices of neurodegeneration . It is a valuable
resource which has promoted a wealth of Alzheimer's disease
research findings .
Based on this multi-dimensional data, we propose a deep ensemble
learning framework (DELearning) to leverage clinical expertise of
averaged physicians to obtain more accurate AD prediction. It could
be used in primary care settings in which there are limited accesses to
specialists. DELearning is a three-layer framework with five stages.
Firstly, to fuse multi-source data and reduce the correlation of original
features, sparse auto-encoder (SAE) is used for feature learning to
construct three feature spaces. Secondly, extensive classifiers are built
by using different learning algorithms and feature spaces. Multiple
hypotheses that can be likened to different physician opinions are
generated through this kind of manipulation of training data. Thirdly,
a new dataset composed of prediction values of classifiers is fed to a
deep belief network (DBN) which uses the stacking method to tackle
violations of conditional independence of the base classifiers. Fourthly,
three neural networks (NNs) are constructed based on a backpropagation algorithm and several cost sensitive methods, such as
under sampling and threshold moving. Finally, probabilistic
predictions of these models are mapped in a three-dimensional space.
Prototypes of different categories were extracted based on mean
values. Discrimination was carried out based on the similarity
between individuals and the prototypes.
The contributions of this paper are as follows.
We propose a new nonlinear stacking method based on deep
learning to cope with the dependence of base classifiers in
the second-level learning algorithm.
A deep ensemble learning framework is proposed to classify
AD outcome. In this framework, base classifiers served as
surrogates to physicians with different clinical expertise.
DELearning can evaluate different experts and integrate
their diagnosis outcome through a contrastive divergence
learning procedure . It can utilize both dichotomizing
and probabilistic opinions of physicians to make a more
accurate diagnosis.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
presents the learning methods of DELearning. Section 3 discusses the
empirical results and some observations. Section 4 presents the
conclusion and future work.
In this paper, we focus on two outcomes: probable and possible AD
(AD) and non-demented control (NDC). Probable and possible AD is
terminology used in all clinical settings . Suppose we are given a
group of participants {x1, x2, …, xn}, where the sample size is denoted
by n. They are n independently identically distribution samples from a
distribution p(x, y) defined on R, with the label y ϵ {AD, NDC}. We
refer to Xi ϵ {+1, -1}d as the predictions of d physicians or base
classifiers for the subject xi. Each physician or classifier Ci gets n
subjects to predict. Subjects will be predicted by all physicians. In this
paper, we consider the case where there are physicians with less
expertise or weak classifiers and try to address the question of how to
obtain high prediction accuracy based on these poorer sources of
information. Refer to Figure 1 for the framework of DELearning
which composes of three ensemble layers.
Figure 1. Framework of DELearning
Voting layer
First, SAE is used for feature learning to fuse multisource sparse data
and to construct three feature spaces with reduced correlation of
attributes . Next, base classifiers are built by different learning
algorithms and feature subsets to generate multiple diverse diagnosis
hypotheses. Finally, the participants are quantified by the predictions
of these classifiers.
Stacking layer
DBN is trained on the quantized participants as the ensemble method
to tackle dependence of the base classifiers. As a meta-classifier, DBN
combines the predictions of base classifiers in a weighted manner. It is
a probabilistic generative model comprised of multiple layers of
stochastic and latent variables and restricted boltzmann machine
(RBM). Uri Shaham et al. has validated that all classifiers are
conditionally independent, is equivalent to a RBM with a single
hidden node.
Optimizing layer
Three back-propagation NNs are built by cost-sensitive method and
assembled to optimize the prediction. NN1 is trained on the prediction
of base classifiers with threshold moving. NN2 are initialized by the
parameters of trained DBN model and trained on the same dataset as
NN1. NN3 is trained on the dataset which distribution is adjusted by
over-sampling. Then, we map the probabilistic diagnosis of these NNs
in a 3-dimensional space and choose the mean values vector as the
prototypes of AD and NDC. The similarities between participant and
the 2 prototypes are calculated by Euclidean distance. Finally, the
outcome of prototype which is closest to the participant is selected as
the final diagnosis.
2.1 Datasets
The data comes from the national Alzheimer’s coordinating center
(NACC) which founded in 1999 and maintains a cumulative database
consisting of various types of clinical data such as clinical evaluations,
brain MRI imaging and neuropathology. Many researchers have been
making use of this resource to get valuable findings . 23,165
samples and 100 attributes are extracted from NACC UDS . There
are 6 groups of category variables are selected including medical
history (MH), history of hachinski ischemic score (HIS) and
cerebrovascular disease (CVD), unified Parkinson’s disease rating
scale (UPDRS), neuropsychiatric inventory questionnaire (NPIQ),
geriatric depression scale (GDS) and functional assessment (FS). Refer
to Table 1 for the details.
Table 1. Six groups of measures selected from NACC UDS.
CVCHF, CVOTHR, CBSTROKE, CBTIA, CBOTHR, PD,
DIABETES, B12DEF, THYROID, INCONTU, INCONTF
HIS and CVD
HXSTROKE, FOCLSYM, FOCLSIGN, HACHIN, CVDVOG,
CVDIMAG3, CVDIMAG4
SPEECH, FACEXP, TRESTFAC, TRESTRHD, TRESTLHD,
RIGDNECK, RIGDUPRT, RIGDUPLF, RIGDLORT, RIGDLOLF,
TAPSRT, TAPSLF, HANDMOVR, HANDMOVL, HANDALTR,
HANDALTL, LEGRT, LEGLF, ARISING, POSTURE, GAIT,
POSSTAB, BRADYKIN
DEL, HALL, AGIT, DEPD, ANX, ELAT, APA, DISN, IRR, MOT,
NITE, APP.
SATIS, DROPACT, EMPTY, BORED, SPIRITS, AFRAID,
HAPPY, HELPLESS, STAYHOME, MEMPROB, WONDRFUL,
WRTHLESS, ENERGY, HOPELESS, BETTER
BILLS, TAXES, SHOPPING, GAMES, STOVE, MEALPREP,
EVENTS, PAYATTN, REMDATES, TRAVEL
Total number
sample: 23165; outcome: 2 ; measure: 100
2.2 Voting layer
Due to heterogeneous nature of 6 groups of attributes, single classifier
has difficulty in sufficiently leveraging multisource information to
obtain a satisfied performance on AD classification no matter the
amount of available data. More specifically, the clinical decision
boundary that discriminate participants from different outcomes may
linear for some attributes while non-linear for another part. It may lie
outside the space of functions that can be implemented by the chosen
classifier. Even though the single classifier could achieve satisfied
classification performance on the available data, it might not
generalize for another data sources.
Ning.An et al.
Figure 2. Voting layer of DELearning.
As shown in Figure 2, DELearning constructs different feature
spaces and trains multiple classifiers with diverse learning algorithms
on it to increase the generalization ability and diversify the decision
boundaries. These classifiers consist bayes network, filtered classifier,
hoeffding tree, iterative classifier optimizer, J48, logistic regression,
logitboost, multiclass classifier, random committee, random forest,
random subSpace, REPTree, AdaBoostM1, multilayer perception,
naïve bayes, stacking, voted perceptron, vote. Here we illustrate three
Logistic regression is a well-behaved classification algorithm
especially when the features to be studied can be treated as roughly
linear or the problem is linearly separable . Feature engineering
technologies can transform most non-linear features into linear ones.
This method is also robust to noise and can avoid overfitting. It even
can be applied in the field of feature selection by using L1 or L2
regularization.
Tree ensembles are combination of a bunch of decision trees .
One dominant advantage of tree ensemble is that they do not presume
linear features for data. So they are quite suitable for handling
categorical features.
The Bayes classifier is probabilistic classifier which applying
Bayes' theorem with strong independence assumptions between the
features . If the conditional independence assumption is true, the
Bayes classifier will converge faster than discriminative models e.g
logistic regression. So it needs less training data. And even if the
assumption fails, the Bayes classifier still performs beyond
expectations in testing.
Various indicators have been utilized for quantitative assessment of
diversity. Q-statistic is a measure to assess the similarity of two
classifiers’ predictions . It is formulated as
where Nab is the number of participants which has outcome a but
recognized as outcome b.
We define a discrete random variable E taking values from
. It denotes the proportion of classifiers in set D
that correctly classify participant x randomly selected from the cohort.
To estimate the probability mass function of E, we run the L classifiers
in D on the data set. We can capture the distribution shape by using
the variance of E. The difficulty θ is defined as variances of E .
We treat the trained classifiers as physicians from different fields
with different clinical expertise. For a participant, the prediction of
the classifier is the diagnosis of corresponding physician.
In addition to the various learning algorithms of base classifiers,
resampling of the training data is another way to increase the
diversity of the ensemble. The clinical measures extracted from NACC
are sparse, which affects the performance of most classifiers. With the
purpose of improving the diversity of stacking layer and reduce the
sparsity of data, SAE is used in voting layers to automatically learn
different features space defined by the activations of its hidden nodes.
Refer to Figure 3 for the details of SAE structure. The most important
advantage of feature learning by SAE is that the correlation of
transformed features is greatly reduced. Thereby, trained on these
feature spaces, the diversity of base classifiers is increased to a greater
extent. Suppose we have only an unlabeled sample set x={x1, x2, ..., xn},
where xi belongs to Rn. An auto-encoder neural network is an
unsupervised learning algorithm that applies backpropagation, setting
the target values to be equal to the inputs.
The SAE tries to learn an approximation to the identity function,
so that output x is similar to x. By constraining the network, such as
limiting the number of hidden units, we can discover interesting
structures about the data. Informally, assuming a sigmoid function,
we will regard a neuron as being active if its output value is close to 1,
or as being inactive if its output value is close to 0.
(2) is the activation of hidden unit j in the SAE. This notation
does not clearly show the input value of x that led to that activation.
Thus, when the network is given a specific input x, we will modify aj
to better denote the activation of this hidden unit as aj
(2)(x). Further,
be the average activation of hidden unit j over the training set. We
would like to enforce the constraint
where is sparsity parameter. We compare various commonly used
values and chose
in DELearning, as shown in Figure 7.
Figure 3. The SAE for feature learning. Features are extracted
by sequentially propagating 7 groups of clinical measures for
each participant through the hidden layer of the SAE.
2.3 Stacking layer
Figure 4. Stacking layer of DELearning
Stacking is an ensemble technique in which the predictions of a group
of classifiers are given as inputs to a second-level learning algorithm.
Then, the second-level algorithm is trained to obtain an optimization
decision. RBM is a probabilistic model that uses unobserved random
variables to model the distribution of observed data. Typically, an
RBM is trained in an unsupervised manner to model the distribution
of the inputs. The most outstanding strength of RBM is that the
hidden units are conditionally independent given the visible units .
We can reduce the correlation of prediction of base classifiers or
physicians by the data transformation in RBM. As shown in Figure 4,
we propose a stacking method based on deep learning which can be
achieved by three steps. First, we train the DBN with the prediction
of base classifiers. Then, the accumulation weight of each input nodes
is used to rank the base classifiers or physicians and initialize the
same configuration neural network. Finally, this network is trained to
obtain the preliminary probabilistic prediction.
2.4 Optimizing layer
Figure 5. Optimizing layer of DELearning
Two challenges in AD primary care are that the amount of patients is
fewer than healthy people and the cost of missed diagnosis is greater
than that of misdiagnosis. Cost-sensitive learning is a suitable tool for
learning from imbalanced dataset and learning when costs are
unequal or unknown. DELearning adapts over-sampling, threshold
moving and soft ensemble to train NNs and ensemble their
probabilistic predictions.
Assuming there are W outcomes for a disease, Ni participants in ithe outcome. Let Cost[i, j] (i, j {1, 2, …, W}) be the cost of diagnose a
participant that is i-th outcome as the w-th outcome (Cost[i, i] = 0).
Cost[i] is the cost of the i-th outcome. We presume that the outcome
is ordered. In other word, if i < j then Cost[i] < Cost[j], or Cost[i] =
Cost[j] and i
. Cost[i] is generally obtained from Cost[i, j] as
Cost i j . In DELearning, W=2 represents
there are two outcomes, AD and NDC.
The k-th outcome will have
individuals after resampling
according to .
The -th outcome which has the fewest participants to be
resampling is identified.
, we sample Nk* - Nk participants in k-th outcome
randomly with replacement.
Besides over-sampling, we adjust the threshold of output unit in
NN toward inexpensive outcome in order that participant with higher
misclassification costs are difficult to be neglected.
Specifically, let
O be the real-valued outputs of neural network,
where i {1, 2, …, W}. In DELearning the prediction outcome is
which is calculated according to equation 6 .
There are three types of cost matrices defined in . In our AD
classification task, these cost matrices are the same and fall into one
of the three types. Without loss of generality, we impose the
following unity condition and design a cost matrix as follows:
. At least one Hi = 1.0. Under this
condition, various cost matrices are compared in terms of Geometric
mean of NNs.
Since under-sampling discards potentially useful training samples,
the performance of the resulting classifier may be degraded.
DELearning uses over-sampling for training NN in optimizing layer.
The effectiveness of over-sampling has been proved in former study
Ning.An et al.
After training cost-sensitive NNs through over-sampling and
threshold-moving, we combine NNs into an ensemble. The process
can be found in Figure 5. We map the participants into the threedimensional space composed by probabilistic predictions of NNs. The
mean values are chose as the prototypes of AD and NDC. As
predictions of new participant the three NNs come in, we mapped
them in the three-dimensional space and computed the Euclidean
distance between them and the prototypes of AD and NDC. The
category with the smallest distance was selected as the final optimized
prediction result.
The DELearning algorithm is shown in Table 2.
Table 2. Proposed DELearning Algorithm.
Input: Study population D with clinical measures and
Output: Prediction of AD outcome
Voting Layer
Normalize the original data set D, get D1
Train SAEs on D1
Derive the optimal structure of SAE based on
lowest mean square error (MSE)
Construct feature spaces, D2 and D3, by activation
values of hidden layer in SAE
Train various classifiers on D1, D2 and D3, such as
multilayer
perceptron
Generate data D4, which is composed of the
predictions for all participants outcome of all
classifiers on D1, D2 and D3
Stacking Layer
Train DBN on D4 with minimum reconstruction
Evaluate classifiers via accumulating weights of
input nodes to hidden nodes in DBN.
Use back-propagation neural network as metaclassifier to search a blended prediction function.
Optimizing Layer
Initialize neural networks NN1, NN2, NN3 with
the parameters of DBN
Train NN1 on D4
Identify the cost matrixes in NN1 with highest
geometric mean
Accumulate output of NN1 with the cost and
predict strategy is set to biggest value
Train NN2 using the following steps:
Initialize D5 by D4
Resample (NNDC-NAD) participants from D5
which is AD and put them in D5
Train NN2 using D5
Train NN3 using D4
Produce probabilistic outputs P1 of NN1 and
multiply them with misclassification costs
Produce probabilistic outputs P2 of NN2
Produce probabilistic outputs P3 of NN3
Formulate study population with (P1, P2, P3)
Generate prototypes for 2 outcomes
Calculate the similarity between participants and
prototypes
Treat the outcome of prototype which is most
similar with participant as the final diagnosis; if
the similarity is equal for 2 prototypes, then the
final diagnosis is the outcome with the biggest
misclassification cost
2.4 Performance measures
A confusion matrix that contains the actual outcome and predicted
outcome is used to evaluate the performance of AD classification.
Table 3 presents an example of confusion matrix for AD classification
with two outcomes. TP is the number of AD patients that are
correctly classified as AD. FP is the number of NDC participants that
are diagnosis as AD. FN is the number of AD patients that are
incorrectly classified as NDC. TN is the number of NDC participants
that are classified correctly. We use the following four measures to
evaluate the AD classifiers. The higher accuracy, precision, recall rate
and F-measure, the better the constructed classifier.
Table 3: Confusion Matrix for AD Prediction
Diagnosis outcome
Accuracy is the probability of correctly diagnosis of the outcome
for each participant. It is formulated as the follows.
Precision denotes the proportion of predicted AD cases that are
correctly real AD.
Precision= TP
Recall is the proportion of AD participants that are correctly
classified. Its desirable feature is that it reflects how many of the
relevant participants predicted positive rule of the classifier picks up.
In a medical context, recall is regarded as primary measure, as the aim
is to identify all real positive cases.
F-measure provides a way to integrate precision and recall into a
single measure. It takes value from 0 to 1. And if the F-measure of a
classifier equals to 1, the classifiers can correctly classify all
participants.
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.1 Feature learning
DELearning utilizes SAE as a feature learning method to obtain more
discriminative features compared with the original set. In order to
determine the optimal dimension of transformed space and reduce
data sparsity, we trained three-layer SAE models with 100 input units
and 10, 20, 30 hidden units respectively. The activation function was
sigmoid. Visible biases and weights were initialized to zero and
random numbers sampled from a zero-mean normal distribution with
standard deviation 0. Momentum was set to 0.5. The model was
trained for 200 epochs. As shown in Figure 6, the mean square error
(MSE) of models with 20, 30 hidden units are much smaller than the
model with 10 hidden units. Thus we determine the number of hidden
units of SAEs is 20, 30 for the transformation of feature space.
Figure 6. The comparison of SAE with 10, 20, 30 hidden units.
The x-axis is the number of epoch. The y-axis is the MSE in
corresponding epoch.
As shown in Figure 7, we compared the MSE of SAEs with to
determine the sparsity parameter ρwith commonly used values 0.01,
0.05, 0.1, 0.15. The best performance was observed at ρ= 0.05. So we
setρ=0.05 in DELearning.
Figure 7. The MSEs of SAEs with sparsity represented by
colored line.
Figure 8. Visualization of 100 participants in 3 dimensions
selected in original space (a), feature space learned by SAE with
20 hidden units (b) and feature space learned by SAE with 30
hidden units (c). The circle represents participant. The color of
circle indicates the outcomes, orange for AD, blue for NDC.
The samples after feature transformation are easier to distinguish.
Figure 8 is the visualization of 100 randomly-selected participants in
3 randomly-selected attributes of 3 feature spaces. In the original
space, most participants with different outcomes are overlap with
each other. With the transformed features, the boundary between AD
and NDC is relatively obvious, which intuitively indicates that the
transformed feature spaces are not only reduced but also more adept
at representing the two outcome groups.
Figure 9 shows the correlation matrices of features in different spaces
we constructed. It demonstrates that our framework reduces the
dependence of attributes in the original dataset. Consequently, new
feature spaces tend to approximate low to no collinearity. It helps to
improve the performance of base classifiers such as accuracy and
Ning.An et al.
Figure 9. Correlation matrix of three feature spaces, original
space (a), 20-dimensional feature space transformed by SAE (b)
and 30-dimensional feature space transformed by SAE (c). The
shaded rectangular tiling represents the correlation value of
corresponding two attributes. It uses a color scale ranging from
bule (low correlation value) to red (high correlation value). It
clearly indicates that most of the features in original space are
not conditionally independent of each other. The features in
20-dimensional and 30-dimensional feature spaces are
approximately uncorrelated.
3.2 Construction and evaluation of classifiers
In this section, we show the AD classification performance of base
classifiers on original UDC and two transformed datasets. Here are
some details of the classifiers. The structure learning method of our
Bayes network is hill climbing search for optimal Bayes score.
Maximum likelihood estimates method for the parameter learning
with obtained structure. Filtered classifier is a combination of J48
decision tree and MDL discretization method . The minimum
number of participants in the leaf is set to 2. 3-fold of participants is
used for pruning with the confidence factor is 0.25. The rest is used
for growing the tree. Hoeffding tree is an incremental, anytime
decision tree induction algorithm. The splitting criterion is gini index.
The leaf prediction strategy is set to majority class. REPTree is a
decision tree using information gain and prune with reduced-error
pruning with backfitting. Random subspace is consists of multiple
REPTree constructed systematically by randomly selecting 50%
components of the all features. The activation function of Multilayer
Perception is sigmod function. The number of hidden units is set to 51,
11 and 16 for the models in 3 different feature spaces. The learning
rate is set to 0.3. Momentum is 0.2.
Table 4 to Table 7 show that the performance of base classifiers in
the reduced feature spaces, namely 20 and 30 dimensional spaces
learned by SAE, are comparable with the original feature space. It
indicates that our feature learning method not only greatly reduces
the correlation of clinical measures but also retains the useful
information. At the same time, physicians in different fields have been
imitated by these classifiers.
Table 4. Accuracy of base classifiers in three feature spaces,
normalized original space (A), 20-dimensional space learned by
SAE (B) and 30-dimensional space learned by SAE (C).
Classifier
Feature space
Bayes Nets
Filtered classifier
Hoeffding tree
Iterativeclassifieroptimizer
Logistic Regression
Logit Boost
Random committee
Random forest
Random SubSpace
AdaBoostM1
Multilayer Perception
Naïve Bayes
Voted Perceptron
Table 5. Precision of base classifiers in three feature spaces,
normalized original space (A), 20-dimensional space learned by
SAE (B) and 30-dimensional space learned by SAE (C).
Classifier
Feature space
Bayes Nets
Filtered classifier
Hoeffding tree
Iterativeclassifieroptimizer
Logistic Regression
Logit Boost
Random committee
Random forest
Random SubSpace
AdaBoostM1
Multilayer Perception
Naïve Bayes
Voted Perceptron
Table 6. Recall rate of base classifiers in three feature spaces,
normalized original space (A), 20-dimensional space learned by
SAE (B) and 30-dimensional space learned by SAE (C).
Classifier
Feature space
Bayes Nets
Filtered classifier
Hoeffding tree
Iterativeclassifieroptimizer
Logistic Regression
Logit Boost
Random committee
Random forest
Random SubSpace
AdaBoostM1
Multilayer Perception
Naïve Bayes
Voted Perceptron
Table 7. F-measure of base classifiers in three feature spaces,
normalized original space (A), 20-dimensional space learned by
SAE (B) and 30-dimensional space learned by SAE (C).
Classifier
Feature space
Bayes Nets
Filtered classifier
Hoeffding tree
Iterativeclassifieroptimizer
Logistic Regression
Logit Boost
Random committee
Random forest
Random SubSpace
AdaBoostM1
Multilayer Perception
Naïve Bayes
Voted Perceptron
Through the different learning algorithms and feature data, the
diversity of these base classifiers or physicians has been maximized.
Here is an example to validate it.
Table 8 is the classification results of logistic regression (LR) and
REPTree (RT) in the 20-dimensional feature space. N11 and N00 are the
number of participants which are correctly and wrongly recognized
by these two classifiers. N10 is the number of participants who were
correctly diagnosed by LR but wrongly diagnosed by RT, and N01 vice
versa. The Q statistics of LR and RT is 0.86<1. This shows that these
two classifiers tend to recognize the same individuals correctly.
Table 8. A 2×2 table of the relationship between logistic
regression and REPTree in AD classification on 20-dimensional
feature space.
correct(1)
LR correct(1)
LR wrong(0)
14354175 1055716
14354175 1055716
Let X is a discrete random variable taking values in
and representing the number of base classifiers
that correctly identify a participant. The variance of X is a measure of
diversity based on the distribution of difficulty. Figure 10(a) shows
that all classifiers in the group made the correct predictions for
around 4500 samples in the test dataset. All base classifiers which are
trained by different learning algorithms and feature spaces achieved
relatively high performance. Diverse groups of classifiers will have
smaller variance of X. Here, X = 1.1751e+06. As shown in Figure
10(b), after using our classifier ranking method in stacking layer, we
observed that the base classifiers No. 3 and 5, have the highest score
whose prediction accuracy are concurrently higher. Therefore,
DELearning can evaluate classifiers or physicians automatically.
Figure 10. (a) Patterns of difficultyθfor classifiers group with L
= 35, N = 11500 and p> 0.7. The histograms show the number of
samples which are correctly diagnosis by i of the 35 classifiers.
The x-axis is the number of correct classifiers. (b) The
important score of base classifiers calculated by DELearning.
The x-axis indicates classifier number. The y-axis is the score
of corresponding classifier.
3.3 Stacking by deep learning
We formulated each participant as a vector composing of the
predictions of these base classifiers. DBN was trained to ensemble
these opinions from base classifiers with a greedy layer-wise
unsupervised method in a mini-batch size of 100 cases . Visible
biases and weights were initialized to 0 and random numbers obeyed
a zero-mean normal distribution with standard deviation 0.01.
Momentum was set as 0.5. We ran 100 epochs with a learning rate of
0.002. At present, there is no golden rule for the selection of optimal
number of hidden units. It depends on the types and structures of
datasets. With a few units, the training of networks can be speed up
but result in poor performance. Numerous units may cause overfitting and slow learning process. Here, we compared different
settings of number of hidden units from 3 to 9. Refer to Figure 11 for
the details. The DBN with 6 hidden units has the lowest error and is
selected as the best . The pre-trained DBN were used to initialize
artificial neural networks. The other hyperparameters were derived
from the process of DBN fine-tuning.
Figure 11. Errors with different sizes of hidden layer
3.4 Optimization for the final decision
We compared 9 cost matrixes with integer values between 1.0 and
10.0. Each matrix was required to have at least one non-diagonal
element to be equal to 1. From Figure 12 we can see that Geometric
mean of cost 2 is highest; the cost matrix we used are shown in Table
Ning.An et al.
Figure 12. The performance of NNs with different cost matrixes.
Table 9. Cost matrix in DELearning.
Specifically, after all the parameters were determined in
DELearning, we compared it with 6 ensemble learning methods,
including Logiboost , Bagging , Random forest ,
AdaBoostM1 , Stacking , Vote . Four algorithms were used
to generate individual committees including ZeroR, decision table,
Naïve Bayes and multilayer perception. As shown in Figure 13, the
prediction accuracy of DELearning improved by more than 4%
compared with these other approaches on the NACC dataset.
Figure 13. The performance comparison of DELearning with 6
representative ensemble learning methods on NACC UDC.
4 CONCLUSIONS
The unsurmountable challenge of Alzheimer’s disease classification
leads us to leverage the wisdom of experts and integrate multisource
data to come up with better outcome prediction modality that could
be used in primary care. In this paper, we propose DELearning, a
three-layer framework for AD classification that uses the deep
learning approach to ensemble at each layer.
Using the clinical measures from NACC UDC, we compared the
performance of DELearning with 6 representative ensemble learning
experimental
DELearning
outperforms the other methods in terms of AD prediction accuracy. It
provides a data-driven solution to aid AD primary care, particularly
where access to AD expertise is limited.
DELearning can also be applied to other scenarios including
medical image tagging where it may be not feasible or too expensive
to obtain objective and reliable labels. DELearning can collect
subjective labels from multiple experts or annotators and find
meaningful yet hidden labels.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by the National Key R&D Program
of China under Grant No. 2018YFB1003204, National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant No. 71661167004, No. 61502135, the
Anhui Key Project of Research and Development Plan under Grant No.
1704e1002221, the Foshan Science and Technology Innovation Project
under Grant No. 2015IT100095, and the Program of Introducing
Talents of Discipline to Universities (“111 Program”) under Grant No.
B14025. The NACC database is funded by NIA/NIH Grant U01
AG016976. NACC data are contributed by the NIA-funded ADCs: P30
AG019610 (PI Eric Reiman, MD), P30 AG013846 (PI Neil Kowall, MD),
P50 AG008702 (PI Scott Small, MD), P50 AG025688 (PI Allan Levey,
MD, PhD), P50 AG047266 (PI Todd Golde, MD, PhD), P30 AG010133
(PI Andrew Saykin, PsyD), P50 AG005146 (PI Marilyn Albert, PhD),
P50 AG005134 (PI Bradley Hyman, MD, PhD), P50 AG016574 (PI
Ronald Petersen, MD, PhD), P50 AG005138 (PI Mary Sano, PhD), P30
AG008051 (PI Thomas Wisniewski, MD), P30 AG013854 (PI M. Marsel
Mesulam, MD), P30 AG008017 (PI Jeffrey Kaye, MD), P30 AG010161
(PI David Bennett, MD), P50 AG047366 (PI Victor Henderson, MD,
MS), P30 AG010129 (PI Charles DeCarli, MD), P50 AG016573 (PI Frank
LaFerla, PhD), P50 AG005131 (PI James Brewer, MD, PhD), P50
AG023501 (PI Bruce Miller, MD), P30 AG035982 (PI Russell Swerdlow,
MD), P30 AG028383 (PI Linda Van Eldik, PhD), P30 AG053760 (PI
Henry Paulson, MD, PhD), P30 AG010124 (PI John Trojanowski, MD,
PhD), P50 AG005133 (PI Oscar Lopez, MD), P50 AG005142 (PI Helena
Chui, MD), P30 AG012300 (PI Roger Rosenberg, MD), P30 AG049638
(PI Suzanne Craft, PhD), P50 AG005136 (PI Thomas Grabowski, MD),
P50 AG033514 (PI Sanjay Asthana, MD, FRCP), P50 AG005681 (PI John
Morris, MD), P50 AG047270 (PI Stephen Strittmatter, MD, PhD).