Improving Coevolutionary Search for Optimal Multiagent Behaviors
Liviu Panait
Department of Computer Science
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030
 
R. Paul Wiegand
Krasnow Institute
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030
 
Department of Computer Science
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030
 
Evolutionary computation is a useful technique for
learning behaviors in multiagent systems. Among
the several types of evolutionary computation, one
natural and popular method is to coevolve multiagent behaviors in multiple, cooperating populations. Recent research has suggested that coevolutionary systems may favor stability rather than
performance in some domains.
In order to improve upon existing methods, this paper examines
the idea of modifying traditional coevolution, biasing it to search for maximal rewards. We introduce
a theoretical justiﬁcation of the improved method
and present experiments in three problem domains.
We conclude that biasing can help coevolution ﬁnd
better results in some multiagent problem domains.
Introduction
Multi-agent learning is an area of intense research, and is
challenging because the problem dynamics are often complex and fraught with local optima. These difﬁculties have
made evolutionary computation (EC) an attractive approach
to learning multiagent behaviors . This work has led to
interesting research questions in applying EC in a multiagent
setting, including communication, representation, generalization, teamwork, and collaboration strategies.
As it is very general (and relatively knowledge-poor), evolutionary computation is particularly useful in problems that
are of high dimensionality, are non-Markovian, or yield few
heuristic clues about the search space that otherwise would
make reinforcement learning or various supervised learning
methods good choices. We believe that multiagent learning
problem domains often exhibit such features. These problem
domains are often complex and “correct” actions cannot be
known beforehand in a given situation. Further, even relatively simple problems can require large numbers of external
and, even more challenging, internal state variables. Last,
many such problems exhibit changing environments, even
ones that adapt to make the problem harder for the learner
(due to the presence of co-learning opponents).
EC ﬁts nicely with multiagent systems because it is already
population-oriented: it searches over a set of multiple agents
(the individuals). Further, an EC population may be broken
down into distinct subpopulations, each yielding agents to be
tested together in a multiagent environment, with each subpopulation “evolving” in parallel. This notion of separately
evolving, interacting populations of agents is known as coevolution.
Coevolution has proven a useful technique for
multiagent problems where the quality of agent is typically
assessed in the context of competing or cooperating peers.
But coevolution is no panacea. Recent research has shown
that a coevolutionary system does not necessarily search
for better teams of agents, but can instead search for agent
populations that represent stable equilibria in the cooperative search space [Ficici and Pollack, 2000; Wiegand et al.,
2002b]. This paper will explore this problem, then introduce
a method for biasing coevolution so that the search for stability coincides with optimization for improvement.
We continue this paper with a brief description of coevolution and present an experimental and a theoretical framework. We then suggest a method for biasing the coevolutionary process, describe a theoretical investigation on how
biasing modiﬁes the search space, and discuss experimental
results on three problem domains. The paper ends with a set
of conclusions and directions for future work.
Evolutionary Computation and Coevolution
Evolutionary computation is a family of techniques, known
as evolutionary algorithms, widely used for learning agent
behaviors. In EC, abstract Darwinian models of evolution
are applied to reﬁne populations of agents (known as individuals) representing candidate solutions to a given problem.
An evolutionary algorithm begins with an initial population
of randomly-generated agents. Each member of this population is then evaluated and assigned a ﬁtness (a quality assessment). The EA then uses a ﬁtness-oriented procedure
to select agents, breeds and mutates them to produce child
agents, which are then added to the population, replacing
older agents. One evaluation, selection, and breeding cycle
is known as a generation. Successive generations continue to
reﬁne the population until time is exhausted or a sufﬁciently
ﬁt agent is discovered.
Coevolutionary algorithms (CEAs) represent a natural approach to applying evolutionary computation to reﬁne multiagent behaviors. In a CEA, the ﬁtness of an individual is
based on its interaction with other individuals in the population: thus the ﬁtness assessment is context-sensitive and subjective. In competitive systems, agents beneﬁt at the expense
of other agents; but in cooperative systems, agents succeed
or fail together in collaboration. The focus of this paper is in
cooperative coevolutionary algorithms. Interesting CEA issues include communication [Bull et al., 1995], teamwork,
and collaboration [Bull, 1997].
A standard approach [Potter, 1997] to applying cooperative coevolutionary algorithms (or CCEAs) to an optimization problem starts by identifying a static decomposition of
the problem representation into subcomponents, each represented by a separate population of individuals. For example,
if a task requires two agents whose collaboration must be optimized, one might choose to use two populations, one per
agent in the task. The ﬁtness of an individual in a population is then determined by testing the individual in collaboration with one or more individuals from the other population. Aside from this collaborative assessment, each population follows its own independent evolution process in parallel
with other populations.
Formalizing the CCEA
An appealing abstract mathematical model for this system
comes from the Biology literature: Evolutionary Game Theory (EGT) [Maynard Smith, 1982; Hofbauer and Sigmund,
1998]. EGT provides a formalism based on traditional game
theory and dynamical systems techniques to analyze the limiting behaviors of interacting populations under long-term
evolution. For speciﬁcs about applying EGT to the analysis of
multi-population cooperative coevolutionary algorithms, see
[Wiegand et al., 2002a].
In this paper, we consider only two-population models. In
such a model, a common way of expressing the rewards from
individual interactions is through a pair of payoff matrices.
We assume a symmetric model such that when individuals
from the ﬁrst population interact with individuals from the
second, one payoff matrix A is used, while individuals from
the second population receive rewards deﬁned by the transpose of this matrix (AT). In our theoretical exploration of
EGT in this paper, we will use an inﬁnite population: thus
a population can be thought of not as a set of individuals,
but rather as a ﬁnite-length vector ⃗x of proportions, where
each element in the vector is the proportion of a given individual conﬁguration (popularly known as a genotype or, as
we will term it, a strategy) in the population. As the proportions in a valid vector must sum to one, all legal vectors
make up what is commonly known as the unit simplex, denoted ∆n, where n here is the number of distinct strategies
possible,⃗x ∈∆n : xi ∈ ,∑n
i=1xi = 1.
Formally we can model the effects of evaluation and proportional selection over time using a pair of difference equations, one for each population. The proportion vectors for the
two populations are ⃗x and ⃗y respectively. Neglecting the issue of mutation and breeding and concentrating only on the
effects of selection, we can deﬁne the dynamical system of a
two-population cooperative coevolutionary algorithm as:
...where ⃗x′ and ⃗y′ represent the new population distributions
for the next generation. Here it is assumed that an individual’s ﬁtness is assessed through pair-wise collaborations with
every member of the cooperating population. We call this
idea complete mixing. The equations above describe a twostep process. First, the vectors ⃗u and ⃗w are derived; these
represent the ﬁtness assessments of strategies in the generations ⃗x and ⃗y respectively. Note that an inﬁnite population
model considers the ﬁtness assessment for a strategy, and not
for a particular instance of that strategy (an individual). Then
selection is performed by computing the proportion of the ﬁtness of a speciﬁc strategy over the sum ﬁtness of the entire
population.
Optimization versus Balance
CCEA researchers apply these algorithms hoping to optimize
the collaborations between the populations, but it isn’t clear
that this system is meant to do this. In fact, the system seeks
a form of balance between strategies, which may not correspond with what we, as external viewers of the system, would
consider optimal. In the context of a payoff matrix, an optimal position is the pair of strategies that yield the highest
payoff for the cooperating agents. This position is a stable
attracting ﬁxed point of such a system; but it is also the case
that there are other suboptimal points, which can also attract
trajectories [Wiegand et al., 2002b]. Indeed, it is possible that
most, if not all, trajectories can be pulled toward suboptimal
spots. These points correspond to Nash equilibria: suboptimal combinations of strategies where if any one strategy is
changed, the net reward for both agents will decrease.
As a result, individuals in a CCEA are not necessarily re-
ﬁned to be the optimal subcomponent of the optimal component; instead they are reﬁned to be jacks-of-all-trades that
dovetail nicely with the current individuals from the other
population. What does this mean for practitioners wanting
to coevolve “optimal” (or perhaps, even “good”) cooperative
strategies using a coevolutionary algorithm? It means that
CEAs are not necessarily optimizers in the sense that one
might intuitively expect them to be. Something must be done
to modify the existing algorithms or our expectations of what
these algorithms really do.
Biasing for Optimal Cooperation
One reason CCEAs tend toward ”balance” is that an individual’s ﬁtness is commonly assessed based on how well it performs with immediate individuals from the other population.
To ﬁnd optimal cooperation, the search process may need to
be more optimistic than this: assessing ﬁtness based more
on the highest-reward interactions between an individual and
various members of the other population. A previous investigation in this direction is reported in [Wiegand et al., 2001]:
c penalty 0
Joint reward matrixes for the Climb (left) and
Penalty (right) domains.
assessing an individual’s ﬁtness based on its maximum performance with other agents in a collaborative domain was shown
to yield better results than when using the mean or minimum
performance. The idea presented in this paper is relatively
simple: base an individual’s ﬁtness on a combination of its
immediate reward while interacting with individuals in the
population, and on an estimate for the reward it would have
received had it interacted with its ideal collaborators. The
fraction of reward due to the immediate (as opposed to the
ideal) interaction changes during the course of the run.
We note that this notion of bias towards maximum possible
reward has also been used in the reinforcement learning literature in subtly different ways than we use it here. For example,
maximum reward was used by [Claus and Boutilier, 1998] to
modify the exploration strategy of the agent, and by [Lauer
and Riedmiller, 2000] to modify the update rule for the Q table. To some extent, the “Hall of Fame” method introduced
by [Rosin and Belew, 1997] for competitive coevolution is
also related to biased cooperative coevolution.
We justify the use of such a bias in a CCEA as follows.
Recall that if an individual’s ﬁtness is based on its immediate
interaction with individuals from the other population, then
⃗u = A⃗y and ⃗w = AT⃗x, as described in equations 1 and 2. Now,
let us consider a function maxA that returns a column vector
corresponding to the maximum value of each row in matrix
A. Now, if an individual’s ﬁtness is based on its maximum
possible performance in conjunction with any individual from
the other population, then we may modify equations 1 and 2
to be⃗u = maxAT and ⃗w = maxAT T.
In this modiﬁed system, the tendency to optimize performance is clear. At each iteration of the model, the ﬁtness of
each strategy will be its best possible ﬁtness. If there is a
unique maximum, that result will have the highest ﬁtness and
so the proportion of the corresponding strategy will increase
in the next step. When the global maxima are not unique, the
resulting ﬁxed point is a mixed strategy, with weights split
between those maxima.
The reason for this is straightforward: the problem has lost
the dimensionality added due to the nature of the interactions
between the agents. Without this, the problem reduces to a
simple evolutionary algorithm: regardless of the content of
the opposing population, the ﬁtness measure for a given strategy is the same. As shown in [Vose, 1999], an inﬁnite population model of this reduced evolutionary algorithm will converge to a unique global maximum.
But it is difﬁcult to imagine how a real CCEA algorithm
would know the maximum possible reward for a given individual a priori. One approach is to use historical information
during the run to approximate the maximum possible collabo-
Prob. of Max.
penalty = −30
penalty = −300
penalty = −3000
penalty = −30000
Figure 1: Probability of converging to the optimum as the
bias parameter δ is varied between 0 and 1.
rative ﬁtness for an individual. However, if the approximation
is too large (or has too strong an effect on the overall ﬁtness),
and if it appears too early in the evolutionary run, then it can
deform the search space to drive search trajectories into suboptimal parts of the space from which they cannot escape. On
the other hand, if the approximation affects the ﬁtness measurement very weakly, and too late in the run, then it may not
be of much help, and the system will still gravitate towards
“balance”.
To better see this tradeoff, we again alter equations 1
and 2, this time adding a bias weight parameter δ.
⃗u = (1−δ)·A⃗y+δ·maxAT and ⃗w = (1−δ)·AT⃗x+δ·maxAT T.
Varying δ between 0 and 1 will control the degree to which
the model makes use of the bias. Consider the Climb payoff
matrix on the left side of Table 1. We select 500 initial points
of the dynamical system uniformly at random from ∆n ×∆m,
and iterate the system until it converges. While convergence
is virtually guaranteed in traditional two-matrix EGT games
[Hofbauer and Sigmund, 1998], it is not necessarily guaranteed in our modiﬁed system. In our experimental results,
however, we obtained convergence in all cases to within some
degree of machine precision. Figure 1 shows the probability,
for various levels of δ, of the dynamical system converging
to the optimum when the penalty is set to −30, −300, −3000
or −30000. Notice that, as the penalty worsens, the transition
between optimal and suboptimal convergence becomes more
severe. This suggests that for some problems, any beneﬁts
provided by this type of bias may be quite sensitive to the
degree of bias.
Experiments
While this theoretical discussion helps justify our intuition
for including a performance bias in ﬁtness evaluation, it is
not immediately applicable to real problems. In a more realistic setting, simplifying model assumptions such as inﬁnite
populations, lack of variational operators, complete mixing,
and a priori knowledge of the maximum payoff are not possible. To convert theory into practice, we have adopted an
approximation to the performance bias that is based on historical information gathered during the evolutionary run. We
also decreased the bias through the course of a run to take advantage of the fact that initial partners are likely to be weak,
while later partners are stronger.
We performed several experiments to compare simple co-
Figure 2: Joint reward in the continuous Two Peaks domain
evolution (SC) with biased coevolution (BC) in three problem domains detailed later. Both SC and BC base ﬁtness on
the immediate performance of an individual in the context of
individuals from one other cooperating population. BC additionally includes a bias factor: part of the ﬁtness is based
on an approximation of what an individual’s ﬁtness would be
were it to cooperate with its ideal partners.
We compared these two techniques in combination with
two approaches to representing an individual. In the Pure
Strategy Representation (PSR), an individual represented a
single strategy. PSR individuals stored a single integer representing the strategy in question. A PSR individual bred children through mutation: a coin was repeatedly tossed, and the
individual’s integer was increased or decreased (the direction
chosen at random beforehand) until the coin came up heads.
In the Mixed Strategy Representation (MSR), an individual
represented not a single strategy but a probability distribution over all possible strategies. When evaluating an MSR
individual with a partner agent, 50 independent trials were
performed, and each time each agent’s strategy was chosen
at random from the the agent’s probability distribution. MSR
individuals used one-point crossover, followed by adding random Gaussian noise (µ = 0,σ = 0.05) to each of the distribution values, followed by renormalization of the distribution.
Observe that using MSR creates a potentially more difﬁcult
problem domain than using PSR, for reasons of search space
size and stochasticity of the ﬁtness result.
We chose a common approach to cooperative coevolution
ﬁtness assessment. An individual is assessed twice to determine ﬁtness: once with a partner chosen at random, then once
partnered with the individual in the other population that had
received the highest ﬁtness in the previous generation. An individual’s ﬁtness is set to the maximum of these two assessments. During a ﬁtness assessment, an individual receives
some number of rewards for trying certain strategies in the
context of partners. For a PSR individual, the assessment was
simply the single reward it received for trying its strategy with
its partners. As an MSR individual tried ﬁfty strategies, its assessment was the mean of the ﬁfty rewards it received.
SC and BC differ in that BC adds into the reward a bias
term, that is, Reward ←(1 −δ) · Reward + δ · MaxReward,
where δ is a decreasing bias rate that starts at 1.0 and linearly decreases until it reaches 0 when 3/4 of the maximal run
length has passed. Ideally, the MaxReward bias factor would
be the highest possible reward received for trying that partic-
SC+MSR 21% 7.58
BC+MSR 100% 10.6 100% 10.0 100% 9.17
SC+PSR 100% 11.0 100% 11.0 100% 11.0 100% 11.0
BC+PSR 100% 11.0 100% 11.0 100% 11.0 100% 11.0
Table 2: Proportion of runs that converged to global optimum
and average best individual ﬁtness, Climbing Domain
SC+MSR 100% 9.69
BC+MSR 100% 9.71 100% 9.40 100% 8.99 100% 3.36
SC+PSR 100% 10.0 100% 10.0 100% 10.0 100% 10.0
BC+PSR 100% 10.0 100% 10.0 100% 10.0 100% 10.0
Table 3: Proportion of runs that converged to global optimum
and average best individual ﬁtness, Penalty Domain
ular strategy, over all possible partner strategies. In the experiments in this paper, we chose to approximate MaxReward by
setting it to the maximum reward seen so far in the run for the
given strategy.
In all experiments, the most ﬁt individual survived automatically from one generation to the next. To select an individual for breeding, we chose two individuals at random
with replacement from the population, then selected the ﬁtter
of the two. Each experiment was repeated 100 times. The
experiments used the ECJ9 software package [Luke, 2002].
Problem Domains
We experimented with three different single-stage game domains: two simpler ones (Climb and Penalty) introduced in
[Claus and Boutilier, 1998], and a more complex artiﬁcial
problem (Two Peaks). Evolutionary runs in the Climb and
Penalty problem domain lasted 200 generations and used 20
individuals per population. Runs in the Two Peaks domain
lasted 500 generations and used populations of 100 individuals each.
The joint reward matrices for the Climb and the Penalty
domains are presented in Table 1. The domains are difﬁcult
because of the penalties associated with miscoordinated actions and the presence of suboptimal collaborations that avoid
penalties. Figure 2 presents a continuous version of a the Two
Peaks coordination game, where the x and y axes represent the
continuous range of actions for the two agents, and the z axis
shows the joint reward. The reward surface has two peaks,
one lower but spread over a large surface, and the other one
higher but covering a small area. Because an agent’s strategy
space is continuous over , we discretized it into increasingly difﬁcult sets of 8, 16, 32, 64 or 128 strategies. The
discretizations result in slightly different optimal values.
Tables 2–4 present the proportion (out of 100 runs) that converged to the global optimum, plus the mean ﬁtness of the
best individuals in the runs. MSR individuals were considered optimal if and only if the optimal strategy held over 50
Discretization Level (Number of Actions)
SC+PSR 100% 11.0 41% 11.6 32% 11.5 42% 12.1 48% 12.4
BC+PSR 100% 11.0 71% 12.8 72% 13.4 61% 13.0 70% 13.0
Table 4: Proportion of runs that converged to global optimum
and average best individual ﬁtness, Two Peaks Domain
Distance to Max
Generations
Figure 3: Distance from best-of-generation individuals to optimal strategy for the 8 actions Two Peaks domain using SC
(top) and BC (bottom).
percent of the distribution (in fact, most optimal MSR individuals had over 90 percent).
Biased coevolution consistently found the global optima
as often as, or more often than, standard coevolution. The
only times where standard coevolution held its own was in
the Climbing and Penalty domains, where PSR individuals
found the optimum 100% of the time, as well as in the harder
Two Peaks domain, where no MSR individuals found the optimum. For those problems when individuals found the optimum less than 100% of the time, we also compared differences in mean best ﬁtness of a run, using a two-factor
ANOVA with repetitions, factored over the method used and
the problem domain.
The ANOVA results allow us to state with 95% conﬁdence that biased coevolution is better than simple coevolution when MSR is used in the Climbing domain, and also
in the Two Peaks domain when PSR is used; the tests give
only a 90% conﬁdence for stating that BC+MSR is better than
SC+MSR in the Penalty domain.
In order to better understand what happens when using
MSR in the Two Peaks domains, we plotted the average euclidian distance from the best individual per generation to the
known global optima (Figures 3 and 4). The graphs present
the 95% conﬁdence interval for the mean of the ﬁtnesses. Investigations showed that SC converged to suboptimal interactions (the lower, wider peak in Figure 2) in all cases. On the
other hand, the trajectories of the search process are radically
different when using BC. Let’s take a closer look as to why
this might be so.
As we learned from our discussion surrounding Figure 1,
Distance to Max
Generations
Figure 4: Distance from best-of-generation individuals to optimal strategy for the 32 actions Two Peaks domain using SC
(top) and BC (bottom).
successful applications of this biasing method are tied to successfully determining the appropriate degree of bias to apply.
Due to MSR’s increased difﬁculty, it may be more challenging to ﬁnd an appropriate balance for the bias. Figure 3 suggests exactly this. Notice that, in the early part of the run
(when δ is strong), the algorithm tends towards the optimal
solution; however, as the bias is reduced, it becomes overwhelmed and the trajectories are eventually drawn toward the
suboptimal local attractor. Moreover, as the problem becomes
larger (i.e., Figure 4, as well as others not shown), this failure
occurs earlier in the run. This suggests more careful attention
is needed to set the parameters and to adjust the bias rate when
using MSR versus PSR. Indeed, by running longer and allowing for more interactions during evaluation, we were able to
obtain convergence to the global optimum when using MSR
(not shown).
Conclusions and Future Work
Although cooperative coevolution has been successfully applied to the task of learning multiagent behaviors, as research about these algorithms advances, it becomes increasingly clear that these algorithms may favor stability over optimality for some problem domains. In this paper, we develop
a very simple idea: improve coevolution through the use of
a maximum reward bias. We introduce a theoretical justiﬁcation for the idea, then present experimental evidence that
conﬁrms that biasing coevolution can yield signiﬁcantly better results than standard coevolution when searching for optimal collaborations. Our work further reveals that domain
features greatly inﬂuence the levels of biasing necessary for
convergence to optima: for some problems the performance
changes slowly when the level of bias is modiﬁed, while for
other domains there is a rapid degradation in results. This
suggests that, while adding some kind of maximum reward
bias can be helpful, there is still work to be done in understanding how best to apply this bias in different problem domains.
Our initial experimental results in this paper suggest that
it is effective to use a history as an approximation to the true
maximal collaborative reward for a given strategy. For future
work we intend to extend these experiments to problem domains with search spaces much larger than the ones used in
these experiments. In such domains, the number of strategies may be very large, even inﬁnite. Keeping an effective
history of strategies may thus be infeasible in certain circumstances; we intend to explore ways to sample the space or
cache the most signiﬁcant strategy results. Repeated games,
such as the Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma, or stochastic games,
may also require different approaches to biasing coevolution.
Understanding these issues, we hope, can lead to signiﬁcant
improvements in cooperative coevolution’s effectiveness as a
multi-agent optimization technique.
Acknowledgements
This research was partially supported through a gift from
SRA International and through Department of Army grant
DAAB07-01-9-L504.