Probabilistic Mid- and Long-Term Electricity Price
Forecasting
Florian Ziel, Universit¨at Duisburg-Essen, Berliner Platz 6-8, 45127 Essen, Germany
Rick Steinert, Europa-Universit¨at Viadrina, Große Scharrnstraße 59, 15230 Frankfurt (Oder), Germany
May 18, 2018
The liberalization of electricity markets and the development of renewable energy sources has
led to new challenges for decision makers. These challenges are accompanied by an increasing
uncertainty about future electricity price movements. The increasing amount of papers, which aim
to model and predict electricity prices for a short period of time provided new opportunities for
market participants. However, the electricity price literature seem to be very scarce on the issue of
medium- to long-term price forecasting, which is mandatory for investment and political decisions.
Our paper closes this gap by introducing a new approach to simulate electricity prices with hourly
resolution for several months up to three years. Considering the uncertainty of future events we are
able to provide probabilistic forecasts which are able to detect probabilities for price spikes even
in the long-run. As market we decided to use the EPEX day-ahead electricity market for Germany
and Austria. Our model extends the X-Model which mainly utilizes the sale and purchase curve
for electricity day-ahead auctions. By applying our procedure we are able to give probabilities for
the due to the EEG practical relevant event of six consecutive hours of negative prices. We ﬁnd
that using the supply and demand curve based model in the long-run yields realistic patterns for the
time series of electricity prices and leads to promising results considering common error measures.
Keywords: electricity prices; probabilistic forecasting; supply and demand; long-term; negative
prices; renewable energy
Abbreviations: ACE, average coverage error; AIC, Akaike information criterion; AMAPE, adapted MAPE; ANEM,
Australian National Electricity Market; ANN, artiﬁcial NN; ANOVA, analysis of variance; AWPI, average width of PIs;
ARMAX, autoregressive moving average model with exogenous inputs; ARX, autoregressive model with exogenous inputs;
BNetzA, German Federal Network Agency; BS, Brier Score; CRPS, continuous ranked probability score; CT, Christoffersen test; CWC, coverage width-based criterion; DC, direct current; DWD, German Meteorological Ofﬁce; ECP, empirical coverage probability; ECR, evaluation criterion of resolution; EEG, German Renewable Energy Sources Act; ELM,
extreme learning machine; ENTSO-E, European Network of Transmission System Operators; EPEX, European Power
Exchange; EUPHEMIA, Pan-European Hybrid Electricity Market Integration Algorithm; GAMLSS, generalized additive models for location, scale and shape; GARCH, generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity; GDP, gross
domestic product; GME, Gestore dei Mercati Energetici; k-NN, k nearest neighbor; Lasso, least absolute shrinkage and
selection operator; LS, logarithmic scores; LSSVM, least-squares SVM; MAE, mean absolute error; MAPE, mean absolute
percentage error; MLP, multi-layer perceptron; MPIW, mean prediction interval width; MSE, mean squared error; MSPE,
mean squared percentage error; NN, neural network; NLPD, average negative log predictive density; NMPIW, normalised
MPIW; OLS, ordinary least squares; OMIE, OMI-Polo Espa˜nol; PBS, pinball score/loss; PCA, principal component analysis; PCR, Price Coupling of Regions; PI, prediction interval; PICP, PI coverage probability; PINAW, PI normalised average
width; PITS, probability integral transform scores; PJM, Pennsylvania-New Jersey-Maryland Interconnection; RBF, radial
basis function; RE, reliability evaluation criterion; RMSE, root MSE; SARIMAX, seasonal autoregressive integrated moving average with exogenous inputs; SE, sharpness criterion/score; SVM, support vector machine; UK, United Kingdom;
US, United States; VEC, vector error correction model; WNN, weighted nearest neighbor; WS, Winkler score;
 
Introduction and Motivation
Introduction and Motivation
The past decades in electricity price research were characterized by the rapid liberalization process of
several electricity markets across the world and the increasing development of renewable energy. Either
voluntarily or by regulation, many institutions in the ﬁeld of electricity contributed to an continuously
improving transparency and quality of mostly freely available information on electricity prices and
related time series. This in turn has helped researchers and practitioners to understand the mechanics
of the price formation and lead to a large amount of papers which focus on electricity price forecasting.
According to Weron, there was only a negligible amount of papers published before the year 2000,
whereas in 2005 and 2006 the amount of papers reached their ﬁrst peak point followed up by its
hitherto maximum in 2009 .
Research in electricity price forecasting originates from many different ﬁelds of science, e.g. engineering or statistics, which led to a manifold structure of different approaches. However, most of
these approaches have in common that they focus on forecasting electricity prices in the short-term,
speciﬁcally up to one day ahead with an hourly resolution or Weron
 for a literature review on electricity price forecasting). In contrast to this, electricity price
forecasting methods which consider a longer period of time are rare . A
large proportion of research for that time horizon originates from fundamental models, which capture
the dynamics of the system, e.g. the estimated cost functions of the market participants . These model types often lack to use realistic time series of prices and related data and therefore cannot provide a realistic hourly resolution of price predictions, which is typically the case in
day-ahead markets.
Nevertheless, there are some models which are able to capture the hourly behavior of electricity
price and provide mid- to long-term forecasts. Even though the literature is not consentaneous on this
issue, we refer to the time horizon of one month to one year as mid-term and to the time horizon of
more than one year as long-term. The model of Barqu´ın et al. for instance consists of a hybrid
approach using fundamental and econometric, e.g. autoregressive, modeling techniques. They are able
to utilize the hourly day-ahead electricity price series of Spain to forecast the whole year 2005. Yan
and Chowdhurry were able to use data mining techniques, e.g. support vector machines (SVM), to
study the PJM market in 2013 and 2015. In 2013 they show by a forecasting study that combining a
least squares support vector machine with an ARMAX model yields promising results when the hourly
forecast of one month is considered. For their setup they use training data of one year, e.g. 2009, to
forecast the month of July 2010 . Applying a two-stage SVM in 2015 they
extend their model to be able to capture severe price peaks, which they describe as extremely difﬁcult
to model in a mid-term forecasting setting . As in their previous paper,
they forecast one month with hourly resolution.
Another important limitation of most electricity price forecasting models is their focus on speciﬁc
moments of the distribution, particularly the mean and the variance. Also machine learning techniques
commonly concentrate on point forecasts - which is a comparable counterpart to forecasting the mean
in an econometric setting. Even though it seems most important at ﬁrst glance to get point or mean
forecasts for the electricity price, it is often the uncertainty of prices which has the highest impact
for market participants. Achieving a precise point forecast may provide a solid basis for ﬂexible investment decisions, but cannot account for the likelihood of possible extreme events, which can have
tremendous consequences for the business as a whole. However, some researchers tackle this issue
by analyzing and modeling the variance as well. But the concept of variance alone is not enough
to quantify uncertainty in the case of electricity prices, as they usually tend to have non-symmetric
heavy-tailed distributions which also vary over time. Hence, a possible solution for this issue can be to
model the whole time-dependent distribution function of prices. This ﬁeld of research was considered
in electricity price forecasting especially in recent years. It can be summarized under the discipline
of probabilistic forecasting. One of the early papers covering probabilistic forecasts in terms of interval forecasts originated in 2006 by Misiorek et al. . They utilize well-known point forecasting
models like ARX with GARCH components to construct interval forecasts for the hourly electricity
Introduction and Motivation
price of the California Power Exchange. Later contributions, which explicitly focus on probabilistic
forecasting emerged from econometric as well as machine learning approaches. For instance, Kou et
al. were able to achieve day-ahead probabilistic forecasts for several electricity markets by combining
machine learning with a variational heteroscedastic Gaussian process . A common
approach during the recent years for econometric probabilistic forecasting was constructing prediction intervals by quantile regression. A basic introduction for this topic can be found in Nowotarski
and Weron , among others. Extensions include for instance the Factor Quantile Regression
Averaging of Maciejowska et al. or lasso-based approaches as done by Gaillard et al. .
A recent review done by Nowotarski and Weron focused on the raising awareness of probabilistic forecasting in electricity price forecasting. They support their argument of an increased necessity of these methods by quantifying the development of published articles from the year 2003, where
the ﬁrst related article was published by Zhang et al. and the year 2016. Given their numbers
they show that probabilistic electricity price forecasting gained a tremendous increase in 2016, when
the amount of published papers almost quadrupled from 3 in 2015 to 11 in the year 2016 by the time
of their study.
Another important direction of electricity price models originates from fundamental or structural
electricity price models. For these models the electricity price is considered as an equilibrium of supply
and demand , Dillig et al. , Pape et al. ). Here the major price drivers
are the fundamental inputs like the load and the merit order curve and especially the marginal cost of
the available power plant portfolio. These models are popular for long term forecasting of electricity
prices as impacts of regulative changes, for example the closing of a certain power plant or a newly
installed wind farm, can be easily drawn. However, these models usually only model the equilibrium
price, e.g. the mean electricity price at a certain time point, but not the full underlying distribution.
Even though new approaches in this direction like Nahmmacher et al. try to overcome this
problem particularly by providing a representative fundamental market situation, the general problem
that no temporal dependency information is used remains unsolved.
Many researchers who conduct a review study seem to mainly focus on the difference in models
and try to compare them by presenting overviews or their popularity over time ;
Nowotarski and Weron ; Weron ; among others). This focus resembles a point of view
where the method is of utmost importance and not necessarily the purpose of modeling. However, from
a practical standpoint it could be argued that the way how electricity prices are modeled is not as much
important as the goal the modeling strategy actually pursues. For instance, if an electricity company is
interested in building a new power plant, they will mainly be interested in long term electricity price
forecasts over the whole lifetime of the plant, rather than to focus on a short-term horizon. Comparing
different model strategies however may prove not to be too useful in this situation as it requires deep
knowledge about properties and limitations of these models. Therefore we decided to present a brief
review of the literature with the focus of the actual purpose of modeling rather than the model itself.
This review part can therefore be considered as an update to e.g. Nowotarski and Weron with
taking a new point of view on the issue. Hence, we will continue with a review of the recent and
practical relevant topics of forecasting horizon and probabilistic forecasting.
For our study we divided these two categories in the following sub-categories. Forecasting horizon
was divided into mid-term and long-term forecasting as well as a category which accumulates over all
horizons. This last category was chosen to easily determine the relative amount of mid- and long-term
forecasting compared to all price forecasting horizons. Probabilistic forecasting is a binary category
which acknowledges a paper as probabilistic forecasting whenever the full density of prices is forecasted. This speciﬁcally excludes papers which only forecast mean or variance. To analyze the amount
of papers published in this ﬁeld, we used Scopus as it is not only a well-known and reliable source
for papers but also has an user-friendly interface for reﬁned queries. To achieve rigour we geared the
applied keywords towards the study of Nowotarski and Weron with minor changes. These keywords were combined by logical links to create the database-syntax speciﬁc queries for Scopus with
the requirements for our categories. Hence, we needed to conduct six different queries, one for all
Introduction and Motivation
electricity price forecasting papers,1 one for mid-term forecasting,2 another one for long-term forecasting3 and three queries for the before mentioned sets but with the restriction of only probabilistic
forecasting.4 After running each query we reﬁned our search results by manually selecting only articles, books, book chapters, proceedings and editorials written in English. The results, ordered by our
speciﬁc category subsets are presented in Figure 1.
This ﬁgure displays the amount of published papers in a speciﬁc category as bars, divided horizontally by the forecasting horizon. If a paper used probabilistic forecasting methods, the corresponding
vertical area of the bar was dyed into a dark color of the same color as the associated forecasting horizon. This helps visually depicting the binary character of the usage of probabilistic forecasts. Using
this color scheme it is easily obtainable that the overall amount of probabilistic forecasts compared to
non-probabilistic forecasts is quite scarce. Only around 7.2% of all 710 published papers we detected
in our study were related to probabilistic forecasting. However, the amount of published papers with
mid- or long-term forecasting was not much higher, resulting in a relative share of only 8%. Given
these two numbers it is of no surprise that the percentage of mid- or long-term forecasting papers with
probabilistic forecasting is only 0.6%. As can be concluded by examining Figure 1 these papers were
only published in 2016 and 2017 respectively and only concerned mid-term forecasting. After investigating these papers in detail, we found that every of these papers was published by the same team of
authors, with slightly changing co-authors .
In order to grant a detailed insight into the most recent research for mid- and long-term probabilistic
forecasting, we present the research articles of the seven most recent years in tables 1,2
1 (TITLE(((((”electric*” OR ”energy market” OR ”power price” OR ”power market” OR ”power system” OR pool OR
”market clearing” OR ”energy clearing”) AND (price OR prices OR pricing)) OR lmp OR ”locational marginal price”)
AND (forecast OR forecasts OR forecasting OR prediction OR predicting OR predictability OR ”predictive densit*”)) OR
(”price forecasting” AND ”smart grid*”)) OR TITLE-ABS(”electricity price forecasting” OR ”forecasting electricity price”
OR ”day-ahead price forecasting” OR ”day-ahead mar* price forecasting” OR (gefcom2014 AND price) OR ((”electricity
market” OR ”electric energy market”) AND ”price forecasting”) OR (”electricity price” AND (”prediction interval” OR
”interval forecast” OR ”density forecast” OR ”probabilistic forecast”))) AND NOT TITLE (”unit commitment”)) AND
(EXCLUDE(AU-ID,”[No Author ID found]” undeﬁned))
2Query of footnote 1 combined with: AND ( TITLE(”mid-term”) OR TITLE(”mid term”) OR TITLE(”mediumterm”) OR TITLE(”medium term”) OR TITLE(”long-term”) OR TITLE(”long term”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY(”mid-term
electric*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY(”mid term electric*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY(”medium-term electric*”) OR TITLE-
ABS-KEY(”medium term electric*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY(”long-term electric*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY(”long term
electric*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY(”mid-term price*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY(”mid term price*”) OR TITLE-ABS-
KEY(”medium- term price*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY(”medium term price*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY(”weeks-ahead”) OR
TITLE-ABS-KEY(”weeks ahead”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY(”month-ahead”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY(”month ahead”) OR
TITLE-ABS-KEY(”mid term* horizon”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY(”mid-term* horizon”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY(”medium
term* horizon”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY(”medium-term* horizon”) )
3Query of footnote 1 combined with:
AND ( TITLE(”long-term”) OR TITLE(”long term”) OR TITLE-ABS-
KEY(”long-term electric*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY(”long term electric*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY(”long-term price*”) OR
TITLE-ABS-KEY(”long term price*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY(”year-ahead”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY(”year ahead”) OR
TITLE-ABS-KEY(”long term* horizon”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY(”long-term* horizon”) )
4Queries of footnotes 1 to 3 each combined with: AND (TITLE( (”probabilistic” AND ”forecasting”) OR interval OR
density) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY(”probabilistic forecast*” OR ”interval forecast*” OR ”density forecast*” OR ”prediction
interval*”))
5The author uses yearly data.
6The authors published several papers regarding the same market in 2013 and 2014, using an SVM in all articles.
7The authors use monthly data.
8The authors use yearly data.
Introduction and Motivation
Figure 1: Amount of published papers up to 2017, categorized by forecasting horizon and whether the
forecast was probabilistic or not.
The tables categorize these papers into the four possible categories for mid-term versus long-term
forecasting in combination with probabilistic versus not probabilistic modeling respectively. It also
contains the category of all forecasting papers focusing on probabilistic modeling in the short-term
horizon. We compare the papers by their selected market, the chosen input factors, the utilized model
and the used measures for the accuracy of their approach. We tried to standardize terms as much as
possible and renamed them if they were at least very similar to each other. Examples include terms
like electricity demand and load or relative frequency and empirical coverage which were harmonized
to load and empirical coverage respectively.
Overall it can be seen that non-probabilistic modeling approaches in the mid- and long-run are
quite homogeneous in their choice of accuracy measure. The vast majority measures quality by means
of absolute deviation, mostly in term of MAE or MAPE. This ﬁnding is especially intriguing as most
of these authors use quadratic optimization functions in lieu of absolute functions in order to estimate
their models. Thus, most models forecast the mean where strictly proper evaluation ) requires the (R)MSE instead of the MAE which is optimal for median forecasts.
Furthermore, the MAPE is not a recommended evaluation criteria in general due to problems with
zero and close to zero prices and resulting troubles in the signiﬁcance analysis, see Franses .
The model approaches among researchers in these two categories are quite diverse. However, two
model types, the SVM and the linear regression most certainly stand out, even though they are often
complemented by various other approaches. For the inputs a manifold amount of regressors have been
introduced. Input factors like electricity load and speciﬁc calendar or weekdays are the most popular
choices, the ladder especially due to their long-term deterministic structure. Providing reliable and
authentic forecasts for electricity prices in the mid- and long-run requires the researcher to establish a
model for most of the regressors as well, as most of them are random and therefore unknown in the
future. We ﬁnd that this in turn refrains some of the authors to chose highly correlated but yet hardly
predictable regressors to be included into the model.
The overall picture for probabilistic models shows that for all categories authors pursue very different ideas. Even the measure for quality is tremendously diverse. It is obtainable that each author
seems to have its favorite choice of measure and usually sticks to the choice, if several papers are
published. The employed models also range from an enormous variety of approaches, e.g. machine
Introduction and Motivation
Medium-term paper not probabilistic 2011-2017
Yan et al. 
Electricity load, natural gas price,
SVM and LSSVM
monthly averaged spot prices,
hour of the day and month
Mohamed and El-Hawary 
New England
Calendar day, fuel prices,
MAPE, RMSE, R2
electricity load, weather condition,
import and export
Cheng et al. 
China Yunnan
Electricity production,
Grey prediction model
electricity load, export,
number of generation/consumption
Chakravarty et al. 
New England, Ontario,
Spot prices
Evolutionary-improved
MAPE, RMSE
PJM, California,
cuckoo search
Nord Pool, Spain
Maciejowska and Weron 
Spot prices, natural gas price,
AR, ARX, PCA
MAPE, RMSE
electricity load,
coal prices, CO2 prices
Kossov 
25 countries
GDP per capita, oil spot price,
Linear regression
national currency to USD,
share of hydraulic and nuclear power,
climate, year index5
Yan and Chowdhury 6
Spot prices, electricity load,
natural gas price, price zones,
month and hour of the day
Voronin et al. 
Nord Pool Finland
Spot prices, electricity load,
electricity supply, temperature,
k-NN, MLP,
congestion, weekdays, holidays
SARIMAX-GARCH
Torbaghan et al. 
Nord Pool, Ontario
Spot prices, electricity load,
temperature, hydro data,
month index, holidays7
Medium-term paper probabilistic 2011-2017
Bello et al. 
Spot prices, wind, hydro,
import and export, load, net load,
Quadratic equilibrium model,
Percentage of
natural gas prices, coal prices,
Monte-Carlo,
Improvement,
CO2 prices, power plant unavailabilities,
Quantile regression,
power plant speciﬁc costs
Spatial interpolation
Bello et al. 
Spot prices, hydro, electricity load,
Logistic regression, MLP
wind, power plant speciﬁc costs
Monte-Carlo, Decision tree,
natural gas prices, CO2 prices, coal prices,
Spatial interpolation,
power plant unavailabilities,
Markov Regime-Switching,
weekdays, holidays
Quadratic equilibrium model,
Bello et al. 
Spot prices, hydro, electricity load,
wind, power plant speciﬁc costs,
Quadratic equilibrium model,
natural gas prices, CO2 prices, coal prices,
Monte-Carlo,
power plant unavailabilities,
Spatial interpolation
weekdays, holidays
Bello et al. 
Spot prices, wind, hydro,
import and export, load, net load,
Quadratic equilibrium model,
fuel prices,
Monte-Carlo,
power plant unavailabilities,
Quantile regression,
power plant speciﬁc costs
Spatial interpolation
Long-term paper not probabilistic 2011-2017
de Marcos et al. 
Spot prices, future prices,
Cointegration, VEC
oil spot prices, oil future prices,
electricity load, wind generation
Kotur and ˇZarkovi´c 
UK, Serbia
Spot prices, electricity production,
electricity import and export,
seasonal and daytime indicators
Azadeh et al. 
Electricity load,
ANN, ANOVA,
powerhouse efﬁciency,
Linear regression,
inﬂation, fuel price8
Fuzzy linear regression,
Long-term paper probabilistic 2011-2017
This paper
Germany/Austria
Spot prices, temperature, wind,
Lasso, Bootstrap
solar, nuclear, lignite, coal
natural gas, water,
electricity load, auction data,
day/week/season/holiday dummies
Table 1: Detailed comparison of probabilistic and mid- to long-term electricity price articles published
between 2011 and 2017.
learning, autoregression, quantile regression and simulation. Compared to not probabilistic modeling
the set of input factors is usually sparse. This is very likely due to the higher intricacy of probabilistic
approaches and the resulting issues of e.g. estimation/training time. Among the input factors besides
historical prices, load data is most popular. Here the authors usually directly take load forecasts as an
Introduction and Motivation
Probabilistic paper not medium- or long-term 2015-2017
Raﬁei et al. 
Spot prices
ELM, Wavelet preprocessing
ECP, ACE, WS
Ontario, Australia ANEM
Improved clonal selection algorithm
Tahmasebifar et al. 
New South Wales
Spot prices, electricity load
Wavelet transformation
ACE, PINAW, WS
Bootstrap, Mutual Information
Ji et al. 
none, simulated
Spot prices, electricity load
DC Optimal Power Flow
operation and contingency constraints
Raﬁei et al. 
Ontario, Australia ANEM
Spot prices, electricity load
Generalized ELM
Wavelet neural networks,
Wavelet preprocessing, Bootstrap
Wan et al. 
Spot prices
ECP, ACE, AWPI
Pareto optimal
prediction interval construction
Ziel and Steinert 
Germany/Austria
Spot prices, auction data,
electricity production, wind and solar
Moreira et al. 
Spot prices, electricity load
Hilbert Kernel Quantile regression
ACE, PINAW
wind power, generation, wind speed,
Quantile boosting, Quantile ANN
precipitation, temperature, solar irradiation
Spot prices
ECP, ACE, WS
Raﬁei et al. 
Ontario, Australia ANEM
Wavelet preprocessing, Bootstrap
Maciejowska et al. 
Spot prices, electricity load
Factor quantile regression
PCA, Forecast combination
Juban et al. 
US (GEFCom2014)
Spot prices, electricity load
Quantile regression with ∥· ∥2-penalty
Dudek 
US (GEFCom2014)
Spot prices, electricity load
Bayesian ANN
Maciejowska and Nowotarski 
US (GEFCom2014)
Spot prices, electricity load, holidays
Pre-ﬁltering, Forecast combination
Linear regression, Quantile regression
Post-processing
Gaillard et al. 
US (GEFCom2014)
Spot prices, electricity load, holidays
Generalized additive models
Forecast combination
Kernel based quantile regression
Nowotarski and Weron 
Spot prices, temperature
Forecast combination,
Quantile regression
Shrivastava et al. 
Spot prices
Support vector regression
ECP, ACE, CWC
Shrivastava and Panigrahi 
Spot prices, electricity load
Support vector regression
ECP, ACE, WS
with multi-objective optimisation
Kou et al. 
New South Wales
Spot prices, electricity load
Variational heteroscedastic
ACE, WS, NLPD
Gaussian process
with active learning
Ji et al. 
none, simulated
Spot prices, electricity load
DC Optimal Power Flow
operation and contingency constraints
Table 2: Detailed comparison of probabilistic and mid- to long-term electricity price articles published
between 2011 and 2017.
input or use a separate model for the load. The table also shows the beforementioned facts that there is
only one group of authors so far working on medium-term probabilistic forecasts. In addition to that
there is no manuscript, except for this article, which introduced a long-term probabilistic model.
Moreover, we also want to point out that the number of papers in the table does not necessarily
match the number of papers shown in Figure 1. Even though we used the same syntax and database,
we manually decided to drop out some of the papers. The reason for that is twofold.
Firstly, some of the papers were actually false ﬂags, as they used our keywords inside their abstract
but still did not forecast exchange electricity prices in the mid- or long-term. For instance Nowotarski
and Weron , who only forecast the long-term seasonal component of prices, but not the electricity
prices in the long-run themselves. Another example is Raskin and Rudakov , who focus on
classiﬁcation schemes for speciﬁc days for long-term forecasting but yet do not forecast the price.
Secondly, we decided to not list all papers of authors, if the published works were extremely similar
to each other. This usually happens when authors publish their works at a conference and later in a
modiﬁed version at a journal, see also footnote 6 for an example.
Introduction and Motivation
Probabilistic paper not medium- or long-term 2011-2014
J´onsson et al. 
Spot prices, electricity load and wind power
Conditional m-GARCH model,
Quantile regression
Nowotarski and Weron 
Spot prices
Quantile regression,
Forecast combination
Spot prices, electricity load
Support vector regression
ECP, PINAW,
Shrivastava et al. 
with multi-objective optimisation
Wan et al. 
New South Wales
Spot prices, electricity load
ELM, Bootstrap
ECP, ACE, WS
Shrivastava and Panigrahi 
Spot prices
ELM, Wavelets
ACE, PINAW, CWC
Sharma and Srinivasan 
Ontario, California
Spot prices
Recurrent Neural Network
and coupled excitable system
New South Wales, Spain
Wu et al. 
New England
Spot prices
Recursive dynamic factor analysis,
Kalman Filter
Khosravi et al. 
Victoria, New York City
Spot prices
ANN, GARCH, Bootstrap
ECP, PINAW, CWC
Khosravi et al. 
Victoria, New York City
Spot prices
ECP, PINAW, CWC
Klæboe et al. 
Nordpool Norway
Spot prices,
Markov model, SARMA
balancing prices and volumes,
production volume
Ji et al. 
none, simulated
Spot prices, electricity load
DC Optimal Power Flow,
Markov model
Huurman et al. 
Nordpool Oslo,
Spot prices,
ARIMAX-GARCHX
Denmark East
temperature, precipitation and wind speed
Bo and Li 
none, simulated
Spot prices, electricity load
Alternating current
optimal power ﬂow
Chen et al. 
Queensland
Spot prices, electricity load
ELM, Bootstrap
Serinaldi 
California
Spot prices, electricity load
Generalized additive models
Alonso et al. 
Spot prices
Seasonal dynamic factor analysis
Table 3: Detailed comparison of probabilistic and mid- to long-term electricity price articles published
between 2011 and 2017.
Summarizing these ﬁndings, we observe that electricity price forecasting approaches rarely focus on models, which are able to produce long-term forecasts with hourly resolution. By adding the
important perspective of probabilistic forecasting there is no single paper known to us, which can account for all three components. Possible reasons for that are for instance computational burdens due to
high-dimensional datasets and too restrictive modeling perspectives. However, the recently developed
X-Model, which considers the price as a function of supply and demand, provides a promising basis to
meet all the requirements for probabilistic long-term modeling with hourly resolution. The model was
proposed by Ziel and Steinert and focuses on the hourly sale and purchase curves for electricity,
as illustrated in Figure 2. By analyzing the bidding behavior of market participants, the model is able
to predict not only impending heavy price movements but also the whole time-dependent distribution
function, including the stylized fact of price clusters. To construct forecasts the model utilizes the main
source of price formation, e.g. the expectations of market participants about the key drivers of electricity prices. These expected or planned time series of conventional generation, wind and solar power are
shown in Figure 2. Using these time series qualiﬁes the model in general to incorporate possible shocks
on the electricity market, e.g. the outage of power plants. Extending this model to a long-term forecast
horizon will therefore also grant insights for the electricity price in long-term scenario analysis, when
for instance the expansion of renewables is considered.
Moreover, electricity producers or consumers need accurate forecasts for future events to reduce
Introduction and Motivation
Price in EUR/MWh / Power in GW
Fri Sat SunMon Tue Wed Thu Fri Sat SunMon Tue Wed Thu
electricity price
planned conv. generation
planned wind
planned solar
Volume in GW
Tue 24.03.2015 20:00
intersection line
Mon 30.03.2015 04:00
intersection line
Figure 2: Electricity prices with the corresponding planned generation by conventional power plants
as well as wind and solar power (left) and the sale and purchase curves for two selected auctions and
hours (right) with the corresponding intersection lines as equilibrium price.
business risk. For instance, renewable energy producers in Germany can get subsidies according to
the German Renewable Energy Sources Act 2014 . However, due to §24 of the EEG 2014
these subsidies are curtailed, if the electricity price is negative for at least six hours in a row. Those
events where the electricity price is negative for six hours in a row are extremely difﬁculty to forecast,
especially if they are far in the future. One reason for that is that these events are usually very rare and
therefore only a few observations to learn from are present. Moreover, to successfully predict such an
event the dependency structure between the electricity prices must be forecasted. Standard techniques
that give an hourly price forward curve as well as so called probabilistic forecasting methods like
quantile regression are not able to do so. The statistical reason behind it is that quantile regression only
allows the evaluation of the marginal distribution of the electricity price at a certain time point, but
ignores the dependency structure that is relevant for events like the six consecutive hours of negative
prices. This paper presents a modeling methodology that allows for forecasting and estimating the
probability of these events even far in the future.
The approach we will establish within this paper will therefore start with the basic X-Model and
aims to amplify it to long-term forecasting. We will therefore elaborate a scheme which maps real
observations of electricity production into market expectations. We will follow up with a rigorous
presentation of the full density of up to a few years ahead forecasted electricity prices and present
information on the important probability for six consecutive hours of negative prices. Hence, our paper
is organized as follows. In section 2 we will describe the neccessary model setup, the dataset and the
market conditions of the EPEX SE for the auction of the day-ahead electricity spot price of Germany
and Austria. Section 3 provides a brief introduction to the X-model and will continue with a detailed
description of the changes necessary to adjust the model to a long-term forecasting horizon. In the
following we will describe our forecasting procedure brieﬂy. The outcome of our forecasting study
is presented in section 5 which will also cover the results of the analysis for the likelihood of hours
with negative prices. We will evaluate our approach by a common error measure for probabilistic
forecasting and will provide a critical reﬂection of our work. Section 6 concludes our ﬁndings.
Market Model
Model for physical market situation
Day-ahead expectations of market situation
Bids for supply and demand
Market coupling price
Figure 3: Structure of modeling approach.
Market Model
The model for the hourly German and Austrian EPEX day-ahead spot price is constructed in several
Assume we want to estimate the electricity price of a day d. As we model a day-ahead market were
the auction is every day at 12:00 for the 24 hours (from 0:00 to 23:00) of the next day we have to take
into account that traders on the market must make their bidding decision based on expectation for the
next complete day. Thus their bid relies heavily on the expectations of relevant input variables, such as
the load or the wind power net feed-in of the next day. These expectations are in general quite good,
but still suffer from uncertainty. Note that the predictions of many input variables used for making the
bid decisions, such as wind power net feed-in, tend to have larger uncertainty for later hours. So the
wind-power forecast for the 0:00 hour is usually much closer to the true value than the 23:00 hour.
This is simply because of the fact that the latter event is further in the future and meteorologic models
get worse precision with increasing forecast horizon. To tackle this issue we invented a speciﬁc model
setup which uses four different steps. These steps, which are also illustrated in Figure 3, consist of:
1. The physical market situation of a certain day, e.g. the actual load or wind power production, is
simulated and considered as real observed time series.
2. Based on the simulated physical market we construct the expected values of these time series, as
if market participants would estimate the planned capacity for e.g. their power plants.
3. Given the planned processes we utilize the expectations to construct the bidding behavior for the
supply and the demand side of the market by using the X-Model.
4. All the bids are aggregated and yield the sell and purchase curves of the market for which the
intersection represents the market clearing price.
This model setup will be explained in detail in the following sections.
The physical market situation model objects
The physical market situation is described by a multivariate process of relevant hourly inputs.
These considered market information contains several processes. For our model setup they are
the electricity generation of power plants of speciﬁc types, like nuclear, lignite, hard coal, natural gas
and pump storage, where each energy source has its own time series. Moreover, we added the joint
production of conventional power plants larger than 100 MW installed capacity as one single time
series, the electricity consumption, the temperature and the wind and solar power net feed-in. For the
Market Model
temperature we consider only the temperature of Frankfurt(Main) which is a city in Germany, relatively
close to the center. Even though we consider the German/Austrian market, all these processes cover
only German information due to a lack of availability of the considered data for Austria. Nonetheless,
the electricity consumption of Austria is only about 10% of the German electricity consumption. All
production data originates from the EEX transparency database and the temperature data is downloaded
from the Deutscher Wetterdienst (German Meteorological Ofﬁce) climate data center.
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
Power in GW
natural gas
pump storage
consumption
Figure 4: Snapshot of different time series which describe the relevant physical market situation from
20 March to 02 April 2015.
In Figure 4 all the considered relevant processes, except for the temperature, are illustrated for the
same period of time as used in Figure 2. Note that the considered power generation does not always
sum up to the full consumption for two reasons. The ﬁrst one is that some electricity sources are
ignored in the study, for example biomass and hydro power, mainly because of the data quality not
being sufﬁcient. The second reason is that electricity imports and exports of electricity are ignored.
As Germany is usually an electricity exporting country, it happens that the sum of the considered
generation sources is larger than the consumption even though not all power sources are included.
For the considered processes we assume a speciﬁc relationship. For example the temperature in-
ﬂuences the electricity consumption, but not the other way around. Furthermore, we decided to adjust
the wind and solar power feed-in by the installed capacity. The main reason for this is that we wanted
to smooth these time series to increase predictability. This procedure also guarantees that we take the
increased production over the years into account. We deﬁne the capacity adjusted wind and solar generation process to be the wind and solar net feed-in divided by the installed capacity of this time point.
This process is more or less boiled down to the wind and sunshine effects. The installed capacity data
originates from the Bundesnetzagentur (German Federal Network Agency).
As the processes evolve over time we consider an autoregressive model for Yt that is able to capture
all relevant known stylized facts , see e.g. Paraschiv et al. or Ziel et al. . These processes
can be partitioned into two groups. The ﬁrst one contains processes that are mainly driven by human
impact, the other one are mainly driven by meteorologic inﬂuence. In our situation, only the temperature, the wind and solar processes fall into the meteorologic class. All other inputs fall into the ﬁrst
class where we have clear human impact, especially weekend effects and public holiday effects.
Market Model
Day-ahead expectations on the physical market situation
In order to determine the correct bid price, market participants have to make their expectations about
all the before mentioned time series. Due to the day-ahead market structure, they have to do this for
a time horizon of 24 hours of the next day. To determine a market price participants cannot know
the physical market setting which corresponds to the day-ahead price they trade, as this information
concerns the future. It is therefore necessary, to transfer the physical market setting towards the market
participants expectations, before we can directly implement them into the X-model.
For the 3-dimensional process of real produced electricity Ygen.,t, Ywind,t, Ysolar,t, for which gen
represents the generation of all conventional power plants, we observe the corresponding expectations for these time series one day in advance as planned production, as they are published by the
EEX transparency. Hence, we denote the corresponding planned or day-ahead expected processes
of Ygen.,t, Ywind,t, Ysolar,t by Yexp. gen.,t, Yexp. wind,t, Yexp. solar,t as expectation for the physical market situation. To extend the notation from t to a more detailed day and hour representation we will use
Yexp. gen.,d,h, Yexp. wind,d,h, Yexp. solar,d,h, where d is the day of time t and h is the corresponding hour of
the day. As we can match the real production time series from the physical market setting with the
expectations represented by the planned production we can learn from the decision making process
over time and create our own expectation generating process using the physical market setting. The
exact way this is done is described in section 3.
Market model objects
To map the expectations into the actual electricity price, we make use of the X-model of Ziel and
Steinert . To utilize this model, we need to analyze and model the sale and purchase curves of
the market.
The market clearing price is the result of an auction that takes place every day at 12:00 for the next
day. For the German and Austrian EPEX spot price the EUPHEMIA algorithm is used since February
2014. This is a very complex algorithm developed from markets participating in the Price Coupling of
Regions Initiative (PCR) like EPEX SPOT, Nord Pool, GME or OMIE. We use a simple but efﬁcient
approximation, that models the bids on the supply and demand side. By market regulation the price is
deﬁned to be between -500 and 3000 EUR/MWh. Market participants can give their bid in this price
span, where the minimal volume unit is 0.1 MWh and minimum price difference is 0.1 EUR/MWh.
There are several different order products available, for example simple orders, block orders and smart
orders, which are not included into our model setting. We approximate the market by regarding every
bid as a simple order. Therefore we take the reported aggregated sale and purchase curve of the EPEX,
and compute the bid volume at each price and each time point as if there were no block products. For
a minimum price difference of 0.1 EUR/MWh on a possible price range of -500 to 3000 EUR/MWh
this leads to 35001 possible volumes on the given price grid. To reduce the dimension we use the
grouping approach from Ziel and Steinert . Here we create groups for the bidding behavior at
the supply and demand side such that every bidding group contains in average about 1000 MWh of
the bid volume. So e.g. there could be a group ranging from 10.0 EUR/MWh to 15.3 EUR/MWh that
contains all bid on the demand side. Note that for the supply side this usually results in a different
restriction.
Every group is now considered a single time-series which is dependent on the expectations of the
market participants regarding the distinct energy sources. Please note that the physical market situation
therefore only has an indirect impact on the model, as we only use the expectations transitioned from
the physical market and not the physical time series itself. From the different groups we are able to
approximately reconstruct the original sale and purchase curves. For the exact description on how this
is done, we refer to Ziel and Steinert .
The time series models
The time series models
As mentioned, we can divide the process into two classes. The physical market, that evolves over time
and the bidding processes which consists of the expectations for the market situation one day ahead.
We usually have 24 hourly prices every day, except for the last Sunday in March, where only 23 hours
are traded and the last Sunday in October, where 25 values are traded. As we want to exclude this
effect, which is induced by the clock change we interpolate the missing hour in March and average the
two 2 a.m. hours in October.
Model for physical market situation
For the processes of the ﬁrst class we consider a model that captures the autoregressive impact, the
daily, weekly and annual seasonal behavior and public holidays effects as well as interaction effects.
The general construction of the models follows mainly the probabilistic load and temperature forecasting model of Ziel and Liu . It proved high forecasting accuracy in forecasting competitions for
short and long term forecasting, see Hong et al. .
In general, for all processes the assumed model is given by
ψi,kUk,t +
φi,j,kYj,t−k + εi,t
for each i ∈{1, . . . , D} where ψi,k and φi,j,k are parameters, Uk,t are external regressors and εi,t
the error term. The ﬁrst sum contains dummy information, such as seasonal cycles or public holiday
impacts. In detail, the index sets Ii describe the active dummy information. The index sets Ji,j specify
the autoregressive dependency structure. So it gives the lags of time series j that have a potential
impact on the time series i.
Furthermore, for each time series we distinguish between two different types of modeling: If Y
depends on X such that Yt depends on Xt−1, Xt−2, . . . we call this dependency autoregressive. If Y
depends on X such that Yt depends on Xt, Xt−1, Xt−2, . . ., e.g. it uses the actual value of Xt, we
call the dependency causal autoregressive. The dependency concerning the causally autoregressive
characterization of the involved processes of the market situation is illustrated and given in Figure (5).
The black solid arrow characterizes a causal autoregressive relationship. All components within a box
of Figure (5) depend on each other autoregressively, e.g. the meteorologic components and the consumption/production based components. Note that the meteorologic components do not depend on the
consumption/production time series, so for instance the temperature does not depend on the electricity
consumption but obviously the consumption depends on the temperature. The dashed arrows illustrates
the capacity transformation of the wind and solor power, which we receive easily by multiplying the
seasonal adjusted wind and solar processes with the installed capacity at time t. In detail, if a relationship between i and j in model equation (1) is autoregressive we have Ji,j = {1, . . . , 360} and if it is
causally autoregressive we use Ji,j = {0, . . . , 360}. Hence, we allow for a possible memory of 360
historic hours which corresponds to 15 days.
The external regressors Uk,t are made of several components as similarly used in Ziel and Liu
 . The full matrix Ut is given by
Ut =((U daily
k,t )k∈Idaily, (U weekly
)k∈Iweekly, (U annual
)k∈Iannual,
(U sm. annual
)k∈Ism. annual, (U d:sa
k,t )k∈Id:sa, (U ph-ﬁx
)k∈Iph-ﬁx, (U ph-vary
)k∈Iph-vary)
where we have daily, weekly, annual, smooth annual, daily-smooth annual interaction, ﬁxed date holidays and varying date holidays effects. For the meteorologic components we only consider daily,
smooth annual and daily-annual interaction effects, as the other ones are clearly human driven due to
week or holiday pattern.
The time series models
capacity adjusted wind
capacity adjusted solar
temperature
meteorologic
components
load/consumption
generation (fuels)
natural gas
pump storage
conventional
generation
consumption and
production based
components
Figure 5: Dependency structure of the physical market situation components. The solid arrows represent a causal autoregressive relationship, the dashed arrows represent a functional relationship due to
a capacity adjustment.
The daily and weekly components are deﬁned by U daily
= k ≤Ddaily(k) where Idaily = {0, . . . , 23}
and U weekly
= k ≤Dweekly(k) where Iweekly = {0, . . . , 167} and U annual
= k ≤Dannual(k) where
Iannual = {0, . . . , 365}. The functions Ddaily(k), Dweekly(k), Dannual(k) give the hour of the day (0, . . . , 23)
and week (0, . . . , 167) and the day of the year (1, . . . , 365) of hour k where the 29 February is considered as 28 February (both are considered as day 59 of the year). For the smooth annual basis U sm. annual
with corresponding index set Ism. annual we consider simply sine and cosine functions with a period of
365.24 and 365.24/2. The interactions are deﬁned by a multiplication of each daily component of
with the smooth annual component U sm. annual
. This multiplication term is denoted by U d:sa
corresponding index set Id:sa and allows for changes of the daily pattern over the year. This is usually very distinct for meteorologic components, as the length of the night is shorter in summer in the
northern celestial sphere than in winter.
The most complex external regressors concern the public holidays. Here we distinguish between
ﬁxed date and varying date public holidays, as considered in Hong or Ziel and Liu , and
deﬁne the holiday dummies U ph-ﬁx
and U ph-vary
with index sets Iph-ﬁx and Iph-vary. Fixed date public holidays are every year at the same date, so e.g. 1 January (New Years Day) or 25 December (Christmas).
Here the weekday when the public holiday occurs changes from year to year. Therefore the human
impact is likely to change as well from year to year, thus the modeling is quite complicated. For the
dates with varying holidays the date changes over the year. In Germany this affects Easter related holidays. Still, here the weekday of the public holiday is ﬁxed, e.g. Black Friday is on a Friday or Easter
Monday is on Monday. Hence, it makes sense to assume that the effects are similar every year. A more
detailed deﬁnition of the used external regressors Uk,t is presented in Ziel and Liu . As public
holidays we consider all ofﬁcial public holidays of Germany, such as the important regional public
holidays Corpus Christi, Epiphany, All Saints as well as Christmas Eve and New Years day.
Model for day-ahead expectations of the physical market and bid processes
As we are aiming to forecast the electricity price up to three years by forecasting the different bid price
groups we need to forecast the expectations for the physical market also for up to three years. As this
cannot be done by simply estimating and forecasting these time series of expectations with 365 or 366
days ahead, we had to create a speciﬁc update scheme for the expectations.
This procedure is illustrated as an example in Figure 6. There we assume that the current time is
at day d and h = 18 and we are interested in a three days ahead forecast, so d + 3. For the day d + 3
The time series models
the auction takes place at d + 2 and h = 12. At day d 18:00 we can create a model for the physical
market components as described in section 3.1. Given such a model we can simulate many wind power
production paths power productions paths, which characterize the space of possible market situation
outcomes. All these simulation paths are equally likely. In the ﬁgure there are two possible paths for
the wind power generation given. A market participant could have observed e.g. the path 1 in cyan.
On auction day d+2 at 12:00 the market participants have to make up their expectations on the market
situation for all 24 hours of the next day d + 3. These expectations are conditional expectations of all
available data up to the day d + 2 at h = 12 where the day-ahead auction takes place. A real market
participant would now make a forecast for the planned production based on the available information
set up to that day and hour. However, as we already stated, the time series of market participants
expectations was modeled so that it incorporates the real production value of the future. Given the
simulation path 1 for the wind production we can now use this information additionally to create a
smooth day-ahead expectation time series of the market participants, simply by treating this simulated
path as real future path of wind production. Please note, that these expectations are not necessarily
unbiased. The same explanation applies to the second simulated wind path in pink, which seems to
shift in a slightly different direction.
Wind Power in GW
observed wind
simulated wind path 1
expected wind of path 1 at d+3
simulated wind path 2
expected wind of path 2 at d+3
day−ahead auction at d+2
actual time
Figure 6: Different simulated wind production paths for a three days ahead forecast. The solid bold
print lines in red and blue show the forecasted time series of expectations of the market participants
given the simulated wind path right before the auction for the third day starts. These expectations are
formulated on the assumption that these simulated paths were the real observable wind production.
Given the true market situation we can infer the expectations from the actual market situation.
Therefore we use the available planned process Zt which is the planned process of Yt. Zt is assumed
to be available to the market participants one day in advance. Remember that the auction is every
day at 12:00 and the day-ahead forecasts Zt are available for the full next day at this time point.
Similarly we have the grouped bids as a 24-dimensional process. Therefore we model these day-ahead
expected processes by the 24 individual submodels. The general modeling approach is similar to Ziel
and Steinert .
Let Zd,h denote the planned process at day d and hour h, we can model Zi,d,h for every time series
Estimation and Forecasting
ψi,h,kVk,d +
φi,j,l,kYj,d−k,l +
ϕi,j,l,kZj,d−k,l + εi,d,h
Similarly as for the physical market situation we consider a speciﬁc autoregressive relationship. So
the planned processes of wind and solar generation depend only on the true values of the future, so
that the forecasting behavior of the planned processes is well mapped. This helps the model to learn
from the expectation formation process given the true production process. When the out-of-sample
forecasting is done for the physical market we are able to map the expectations from the forecast
values as if they were the true values of the production process. In contrast, the bidding groups depend
on the physical market expectations, e.g. the day-ahead expectations of wind, solar and conventional
generation, in a causal autoregressive way. Additionally these day-ahead market bids also depend in a
standard autoregressive way on their own history.
In detail we assume for a autoregressive relationship between i at hour h and j at hour l that
Ji,j,h = Ki,j,h =
{0, 1, . . . , 36}
, i = j and h = l
{0, 1, . . . , 8}
, (i ̸= j and h = l) or (i = j and h ̸= l)
, i ̸= j and h ̸= l
and the autoregressive relationship
Ji,j,h = Ki,j,h =
{1, . . . , 36}
, i = j and h = l
{1, . . . , 8}
, (i ̸= j and h = l) or (i = j and h ̸= l)
, i ̸= j and h ̸= l
Hence, the potential memory of e.g. the supply bids at -500 EUR/MWh at day d and hour h = 2 can
depend on the past 35 days of the bids at -500 EUR/MWh at hour h = 2. Additionally it can depend
on up to the past 8 days of the bids at -500 EUR/MWh at other hours j (so j ̸= h = 2) and the past
8 days of supply or demand bids at other price groups at hour h = 2. Finally, we allow that a bid at
-500 EUR/MWh at hour h = 2 can depend on all other bids of an arbitrary hour of the previous day.
This complex speciﬁcation allows us to capture the most relevant dependency structure between the
bids. The external regressors Vi,h contain as in Ziel and Steinert only week-day dummies which
correspond to U weekly
from the previous section.
Estimation and Forecasting
We conducted an estimation and forecasting study based on data from 1. November 2012 to 19.
April 2015. We estimate the physical market model (1), the day-ahead expectations on the market
model (3), and the electricity market bids (3) using lasso. The lasso estimation techniques introduced
by Tibshirani can handle highly parameterized linear models efﬁciently using the coordinate
descent estimation algorithm of Friedman et al. . For a linear model given by Y = β′X + ε
where the elements of X have the same variance the lasso estimator is given by
bβ = arg min
where λ ≥0 is a tuning parameter and ∥· ∥1 and ∥· ∥2 are the standard L1 and L2 norms. In this study
we chose the optimal tuning parameter by minimizing the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) as in
Ziel and Liu or Ziel and Steinert .
Given the data we perform a three year ahead (3×365 = 1095 days) forecasting study. The forecast
is performed using residuals based bootstrap as in Ziel and Liu . The residuals are sampled
Empirical Results and Discussion
from all daily 24-dimensional residual vectors of all relevant processes9. Using the autoregressive
formulation of all relevant time series (see (1) and (3)) we can easily simulate sample paths for the
physical market situation, the corresponding day-ahead expectations as well as the supply and demand
bids. Given the simulated supply and demand bids of a simulated day we compute the forecasted
market clearing price for a speciﬁc day of a simulation path by calculating the intersection of the
supply and demand curves. In total we are using N = 10000 sample paths for forecasting.
For computing the wind and solar power after simulating the capacity adjusted wind and solar
power time series we require an assumption on the newly installed capacity. For the simulation study
we considered the governmental plan for new installed capacities at the time when the forecast started.
In detail the assumptions are based on the German Renewable Energy Sources Act from 2014 . Within that Act, the installed solar power was planned to be increased by 2.5-3.5GWh annually,
so we considered a linear annual growth of 3GWh. Similarly, for the wind power the plan was to
annually increase the capacity by 2.4GWh to 2.6GWh on-shore and 0.75 GWh off-shore. Hence, we
assume a linear wind power capacity growth of 3.25GWh per year.
Empirical Results and Discussion
The model design allows us to estimate probabilities of basically all possible events or distributional
characteristics. For probabilities of certain events, the relative frequencies in the N sample paths can
be used. For distributional characteristics like moments or quantiles we can use their sample estimates
of the N simulated paths to receive a suitable estimator. For illustration purpose we present some
interesting results given the N = 10000 simulated paths.
In Figure 7 we show the probabilistic forecasting results for the electricity consumption and the
electricity price. The graphs show the 99 percentile estimates, e.g. the quantiles for 1%, 2%, . . ., 99%,
for both processes from the 1 November 2015 to the 10 January 2016. As the forecasts starts at the 20
April 2015 this time frame corresponds to the seventh to ninth month of the forecasting horizon. Note
that the forecasted winter period has usually a relatively high electricity consumption, except for the
holiday period around Christmas and New Years Day. In both graphs, 7a and 7b, the quantile estimates
are displayed using colored prediction bands. The median estimate (50% quantile) is given by the
blue colored center. Rare events, e.g. the 1% and 99% quantile, are reddish colored. The observed
consumption and price values are added to the graphs using a black line. The day of the week as well
as the considered (public) holidays are shown at the top of each picture.
For the consumption we see that the overall behavior is well captured. The estimated daily and
weekly seasonalities match clearly the observed pattern. However, at the working days around Christmas the consumption is overestimated. Still, on the holidays and weekends during this period it is
relatively well captured, even though the available past information is limited. Note that even the
effect of the regional public holiday Epiphany on 6 January is appropriately estimated.
For the electricity prices in 7b we observe similar daily and weekly seasonal patterns as for the consumption in 7a. The electricity price tends to be smaller during night than during the day, and smaller
on the weekend than during the standard weekday. In general it seems that the overall price behavior
is well captured, as most of the realized prices fall into the colored areas. We see that working days in
November and beginning of December had a reasonable chance for a relatively high electricity price
greater than 70 EUR/MWh. Indeed, on Monday, the 23 November, and Thursday, the 26 November,
prices larger than 70 EUR/MWh occurred. Furthermore, we can see that the model for the electricity
prices estimates a small chance for negative prices. The highest likelihood is during the Christmas and
New Years Days holiday period. Similarly, we observed negative prices for the 22 December and the
26 December. In general, the price model seems to struggle for the winter holiday period not as much
as the consumption model as illustrated in 7a. Still, the electricity prices tend to be overestimated
within this period. However, by eyeballing Figure 7b, the long term electricity price forecasts seems to
capture the relevant behavior well.
9The univariate residual processes are transformed to a daily 24-dimensional process ﬁrst
Empirical Results and Discussion
Consumption in GW
(a) Consumption forecast
Electricity price in EUR/MWh
(b) Price forecast
Figure 7: Forecasts for the electricity consumption and the electricity price for the 99 percentiles
(colored) with observed values (black) from 1 November 2015 to 10 January 2016. The corresponding
weekdays and public holidays are highlighted.
As motivated in the introduction, renewable energy producers that get subsidies according to the
EEG 2014 have a natural interest in forecasts of negative prices. As the subsidies get cut if the electricity price is 6 times in a row negative they are interested in the probability of those events. Therefore
we call an event where the electricity price is negative for c hours in a row, a ch-price≤0 event. For
instance, at time t a 6h-price≤0 event occurs if the electricity price at time t and the ﬁve prices before t
are negative. As mentioned above we can easily estimate the probabilities of these events by evaluating
relative frequencies of the N events. In Figure 8 the probabilities for the 1h-price≤0 and 6h-price≤0
events are presented for the time period of the 1 November 2015 to the 10 January 2016. For comparison purpose this is the same time range as used in Figure 7. In this ﬁgure the 24 different hours when
such an event occurred are highlighted by different colors.
We observe that in general the probabilities for these negative price events are small. Obviously,
the probability for 1h-price≤0 events is larger than for 6h-price≤0 events. For 6h-price≤0 events the
probability is estimated always below 3% and usually even below 1%. We observe that the highest
probabilities for such events usually occur during the early morning hours h = 4, h = 5 and h = 6.
These probabilities are even higher on Monday’s early morning. In contrast, the probability for one
negative price, e.g. an 1h-price≤0 event, is usually the highest during the night hours h = 24, h = 1,
Empirical Results and Discussion
. . ., h = 5. This ﬁnding can be explained by the fact that for 6h-price≤0 events the ﬁrst ﬁve prices
need to be negative and as we receive that prices start being negative at hours around h = 24 the ﬁrst
consecutive six hours of negative prices can be found at around h = 5, which matches our ﬁnding for
the 6h-price≤0 events. Furthermore, we see in Figure 8a and 8b that the probabilities for 1h-price≤0
and 6h-price≤0 events are larger on weekend nights than during the working week. Another very
distinct observable feature is that during the winter holiday period the probability is clearly higher than
during weeks for both events. The 27 December 2016, which is a Sunday followed by the Christmas
holidays, seems to exhibit the highest probability for these negative price events. By comparing the
probabilities for negative price events with the real prices in Figure 7b we can conclude that during
the days for which the probabilities seem to increase are also the days which had the most amount of
negative prices in reality.
Note, that at the time when the study is conducted we only had real data up to the 30 November
2016 available, as the remaining time-frame of the 3-year ahead forecasts is still in the future. Thus,
we do any following evaluation based on the ﬁrst 1.5 years (about 13000 out-of-sample observations)
of our forecasts.
For the purpose of comparison we add the forecasting results of a simple but very competitive
benchmark for short- and mid-term forecasting, as used in Ziel et al. and Ziel and Weron
 . This forecasting model is the autoregressive time series model (AR-HoW) with weekly mean,
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
Probability of 1h−price<0 event in %
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGG
Probability of 6h−price<0 event in %
Figure 8: Forecasted probabilities of ch-price≤0 events.
Empirical Results and Discussion
formally deﬁned as
φk(Yt−k −µt) + εt.
where µt is the weekly mean, which we estimate by the sample mean for each hour of the week. The
autoregressive parameters φk are estimated by solving the Yule-Walker equations. The order p is selected between 1, . . . , pmax = 2520 (= potential memory of 15 weeks) such that the Akaike information
criterion (AIC) is minimized. We simulate the residuals non-parametrically using bootstrap.
In Table 4 we see the average forecasted probabilities, measured as relative frequencies, of the X-
Model and the AR-HoW of ch-price≤0 events for the out-of-sample range from 20 April 2015 to 30
November 2016 as well as the observed relative frequency of negative price events. We see that overall
the forecasted probability for a negative price is about 0.77% for the X-Model whereas the observed
prices exhibit a relative frequency of 0.88% which is with a relative error of about 10% remarkably
close for such a long forecasting horizon. In contrast the AR-HoW has a forecasted probability of
1.61% for the 1h-price≤0 event. This is about 80% higher than the observed relative frequency.
Obviously, the forecasted probabilities and their observed counterpart decrease in c. For the important
6h-price≤0 event the X-Model forecasted an average probability of about 0.09% but observed this
event with a probability of 0.16%, which is still quite good for a complex event and long forecasting
Table 4: Observed and forecasted probabilities of ch-price≤0 events in % for the out-of-sample range
from 20 April 2015 till 30 November 2016.
We have seen in Table 4 that the observed frequency of negative prices is close to the forecasted
probabilities of the considered model in the out-of-sample range. However, by this table it cannot be
concluded that such an event happened when we actually forecasted a high probability. Therefore we
created Figure 9, which provides information on the relative frequencies of negative prices for the 1hprice≤0 event plotted against its forecasted probabilities, categorized in groups. For instance, there is a
group of hours where the forecasted probability for negative prices ranged from about 9.1% to 10.9%.
So we expect that in total about 10% of the hours that fall into that category had a negative price and
90% did not have a negative price. If our probabilities were correct, the red bar, which represents the
relative frequency of prices within that category which were not negative, would be exactly 0.9 and the
stacked green bar would start from 0.9 and end at 1.0, representing 10% of the whole distance. For the
9.1% to 10.9% group this is almost the case, which means that the probabilities seem to be properly
forecasted. In Figure 9 we also added a black line, which represents the theoretical relationship of
relative frequencies with the forecasted probabilities if all estimations were perfect. In this case, the
center of the top of the red bars would be the points through which the line runs. The blue dashed
line however is the line which provides the true ﬁt given our forecasted probabilities, estimated via
weighted OLS regression where the weights are chosen as number of observations within each group.
The high R2 value of 91.4% shows a high forecasting prediction power of the model for these events.
Overall it can be stated, that the higher the forecasted probability for a speciﬁc price, the more likely it
was for this price to exhibit a negative value, exhibiting an almost perfect relationship.
As the X-model is tailor-made for probabilistic forecasting, it is suitable to perform a statistical
based evaluation of the forecasting accuracy for the whole prediction interval. Therefore, we evaluate
the coverage probability of the quantile estimates. In detail we consider the 99 percentile estimates
as used in Figure 7. The estimated coverage probabilities of the full available time range is given in
Figure 10. The colors of the bars in the histogram 10 match the prediction band colors of Figure 7 for
easier comprehension. Each bar represents the relation of how many real values were in that speciﬁc
Empirical Results and Discussion
Probabilities in %
Relative frequency
Theoretical
Forecasted (R2=0.914)
(a) Results for X-Model
Probabilities in %
Relative frequency
Theoretical
Forecasted (R2=0.171)
(b) Results for AR-HoW
Figure 9: Relative frequencies of observed negative prices (1h-price≤0 event) for different forecasted
probabilites of the X-Model and the AR-HoW.
estimated quantile to the amount of theoretical values that should be in that quantile. This means that
if we have an empirical coverage of more than 1 for a quantile we can conclude that in reality more
prices fell into this estimated quantile than expected. In the optimal case the colored distribution in
the histogram should not be distinguishable from the uniform distribution which is highlighted by the
dashed line. Clearly this is not the case here, which indicates that some systematical errors may still
be present in the modeling approach. The lower quantiles till 35% seem to be overrepresented by
around 30%, which means that our model underestimated the probability for low prices. The quantiles
around 50% to 95% seem to be underrepresented which means that our model estimated the likelihood
of higher prices too high. Similarly as in the short term model in Ziel et al. the extreme upper
quantiles (98% and 99%) are overrepresented as well. However, as we are comparing the forecasting
results of around 1.5 years ahead with hourly resolution, we still consider these results as promising.
Nevertheless, our modeling approach still leaves room for improvements. For instance, adjustment
methods as discussed in e.g. Bello et al. for electricity price forecasting may help to reduce
the bias even further.
From the modeling perspective there are many areas where single model components can be improved and increase the overall accuracy, this holds for the statistical modeling perspective but also for
the fundamental model perspective. Also the capacity assumptions can be improved, additional plans
for speciﬁc shut-downs of other power plants could be incorporated into the model. Moreover, other
Conclusion
economic variables, like fuel prices, especially coal and natural gas as well as CO2-costs or GDPgrowth can be integrated into the model to capture associated dependencies and uncertainty. Moreover the X-model itself that is used to describe the bidding behavior relationships can be improved.
Similarly we could incorporate price information from the future market into the day-ahead market
expectations for the future. Finally the market coupling and cross-border aspects as well as political
risks were excluded from the model. An incorporation of these effects could likely improve the overall
performance. A possible way of implementing these effects may be done via scenario analysis, where
different target values of governments policy plans are considered.
Conclusion
In this research study we proposed an innovative modeling methodology for mid- and long-term forecasting of electricity prices. The approach includes a complete modeling of the electricity market structure, including modeling components like electricity consumption and power generation of renewable
energy like wind and solar. Furthermore, it takes the detailed day-ahead market bidding structure into
account by modeling the market bids for the supply and demand side.
Empirical coverage
(a) Results for X-Model
Empirical coverage
(b) Results for AR-HoW
Figure 10: Pit plot with uniform distribution as benchmark as dashed line for the X-Model and the
References
By an extensive literature review about different forecasting horizons and probabilistic electricity
price forecasting we detected that there was no single article published which considered long-term
forecasting as well as probabilistic forecasting within its model approach. However our results show
that the application of path based electricity price forecasting is possible even in the long run. By
simulating many possible physical market situations with the resulting day-ahead expectations and the
corresponding bids on the day-ahead market we are able to get a realistic map of the future electricity
prices. This includes not only the mean and variance behavior, but also the path dependent interactions.
We show that the estimation of probabilities of complex events even far in the future is feasible. Regarding this, we provide information on probabilities for the occurrence of at least one negative price
and the practical relevant event of six consecutive negative prices. Due to the comprehensive modeling
of the physical market situation, it is also possible to implement market instabilities like outages of
speciﬁc power plants or extreme weather events. The X-model we used can easily map their impacts
into the market relevant sell and purchase curves. So if an agent who uses this model is certain about
a speciﬁc event to happen, it could be easily included into the forecasting results. However, due to
the simulation strategy we pursued, these instabilities are automatically and randomly included as the
model has learned from such events in the past.
As we are able to forecast them up to three years in advance, this may help practitioners for their
investment decisions, e.g. concerning the construction of new wind power plants. Another more
trading based application could be the detection of possible speculative opportunities. As the EEX also
offers a wide range of long term derivatives, e.g. futures, our model could provide a decision support
for the important decision of buying a future or wait until the settlement period has arrived and buy
the spot product at that time instead. By forecasting the whole probabilistic density of prices we can
support the risk management of electricity companies in their decision making even in the long-run.
A backtesting study for about 1.5 years showed that our model is able to capture the full behavior of
the electricity price quite well, given the long time horizon. We further demonstrate, that econometric
models are eligible to long-term forecasting horizons, if the whole market situation is considered in
the model structure. Therefore, we reduce the gap between econometric modeling approaches and
fundamental market approaches even further.
Acknowledgement
We thank the European Power Exchange (EPEX SPOT SE), European Network of Transmission System Operators (ENTSO-E), German Meteorological Ofﬁce (DWD) and the German Federal Network
Agency (BNetzA) for providing the datasets we have used in this article.
References
Aggarwal, S. K., Saini, L. M., and Kumar, A. . Electricity price forecasting in deregulated
markets: A review and evaluation. International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems,
31(1):13–22.
Alonso, A. M., Garc´ıa-Martos, C., Rodr´ıguez, J., and Jes´us S´anchez, M. . Seasonal dynamic
factor analysis and bootstrap inference: application to electricity market forecasting. Technometrics,
53(2):137–151.
Azadeh, A., Moghaddam, M., Mahdi, M., and Seyedmahmoudi, S. . Optimum long-term electricity price forecasting in noisy and complex environments. Energy Sources, Part B: Economics,
Planning, and Policy, 8(3):235–244.
Barqu´ın, J., Juli´an, G.-G., and Due˜nas, P. . A hybrid approach for modeling electricity price
series in the medium term. Proceedings of the Power Systems Computation Conference.
References
Bello, A., Bunn, D., Reneses, J., and Mu˜noz, A. . Parametric density recalibration of a fundamental market model to forecast electricity prices. Energies, 9(11):959.
Bello, A., Bunn, D. W., Reneses, J., and Mu˜noz, A. . Medium-term probabilistic forecasting of
electricity prices: A hybrid approach. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 32(1):334–343.
Bello, A., Reneses, J., and Mu˜noz, A. . Medium-term probabilistic forecasting of extremely
low prices in electricity markets: Application to the spanish case. Energies, 9(3):193.
Bello, A., Reneses, J., Mu˜noz, A., and Delgadillo, A. . Probabilistic forecasting of hourly
electricity prices in the medium-term using spatial interpolation techniques. International Journal
of Forecasting, 32(3):966–980.
Bo, R. and Li, F. . Probabilistic lmp forecasting under ac optimal power ﬂow framework: Theory
and applications. Electric Power Systems Research, 88:16–24.
Chakravarty, S., Mohapatra, P., and Dash, P. K. . Evolutionary extreme learning machine for
energy price forecasting. International Journal of Knowledge-based and Intelligent Engineering
Systems, 20(2):75–96.
Chen, X., Dong, Z. Y., Meng, K., Xu, Y., Wong, K. P., and Ngan, H. . Electricity price forecasting with extreme learning machine and bootstrapping. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems,
27(4):2055–2062.
Cheng, C., Luo, B., Miao, S., and Wu, X. . Mid-term electricity market clearing price forecasting
with sparse data: a case in newly-reformed yunnan electricity market. Energies, 9(10):804.
de Marcos, R. A., Reneses, J., and Bello, A. . Long-term spanish electricity market price forecasting with cointegration and vec models. In Probabilistic Methods Applied to Power Systems
(PMAPS), 2016 International Conference on, pages 1–7. IEEE.
Dillig, M., Jung, M., and Karl, J. . The impact of renewables on electricity prices in germany–an
estimation based on historic spot prices in the years 2011–2013. Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, 57:7–15.
Dudek, G. . Multilayer perceptron for gefcom2014 probabilistic electricity price forecasting.
International Journal of Forecasting, 32(3):1057–1060.
Franses, P. H. . A note on the mean absolute scaled error. International Journal of Forecasting,
32(1):20–22.
Friedman, J., Hastie, T., H¨oﬂing, H., and Tibshirani, R. . Pathwise coordinate optimization. The
Annals of Applied Statistics, 1(2):302–332.
Gaillard, P., Goude, Y., and N´edellec, R. . Semi-parametric models and robust aggregation for
gefcom2014 probabilistic electric load and electricity price forecasting. working paper, submitted to
International Journal of Forecasting.
Gaillard, P., Goude, Y., and Nedellec, R. . Additive models and robust aggregation for gefcom2014 probabilistic electric load and electricity price forecasting. International Journal of forecasting, 32(3):1038–1050.
Gneiting, T. and Raftery, A. E. . Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction, and estimation. Journal
of the American Statistical Association, 102(477):359–378.
Hirth, L. . The market value of variable renewables: The effect of solar wind power variability
on their relative price. Energy economics, 38:218–236.
References
Hong, T. . Short term electric load forecasting. North Carolina State University.
Hong, T., Pinson, P., Fan, S., Zareipour, H., Troccoli, A., and Hyndman, R. J. . Probabilistic
energy forecasting: Global energy forecasting competition 2014 and beyond. International Journal
of Forecasting, 32(3):896–913.
Huurman, C., Ravazzolo, F., and Zhou, C. . The power of weather. Computational Statistics &
Data Analysis, 56(11):3793–3807.
Ji, Y., Kim, J., Thomas, R. J., and Tong, L. . Forecasting real-time locational marginal price:
A state space approach. In Signals, Systems and Computers, 2013 Asilomar Conference on, pages
379–383. IEEE.
Ji, Y., Thomas, R. J., and Tong, L. . Probabilistic forecast of real-time lmp via multiparametric
programming. In System Sciences (HICSS), 2015 48th Hawaii International Conference on, pages
2549–2556. IEEE.
Ji, Y., Thomas, R. J., and Tong, L. . Probabilistic forecasting of real-time lmp and network
congestion. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 32(2):831–841.
J´onsson, T., Pinson, P., Madsen, H., and Nielsen, H. A. . Predictive densities for day-ahead
electricity prices using time-adaptive quantile regression. Energies, 7(9):5523–5547.
Juban, R., Ohlsson, H., Maasoumy, M., Poirier, L., and Kolter, J. Z. . A multiple quantile
regression approach to the wind, solar, and price tracks of gefcom2014. International Journal of
Forecasting, 32(3):1094–1102.
Khosravi, A., Nahavandi, S., and Creighton, D. . A neural network-garch-based method for
construction of prediction intervals. Electric Power Systems Research, 96:185–193.
Khosravi, A., Nahavandi, S., and Creighton, D. . Quantifying uncertainties of neural networkbased electricity price forecasts. Applied energy, 112:120–129.
Klæboe, G., Eriksrud, A. L., and Fleten, S.-E. . Benchmarking time series based forecasting
models for electricity balancing market prices. Energy Systems, 6(1):43–61.
Kossov, V. . Medium-term forecasting of demand prices on example of electricity prices for
industry. Studies on Russian Economic Development, 25(5):456–466.
Kotur, D. and ˇZarkovi´c, M. .
Neural network models for electricity prices and loads short
and long-term prediction. In Environment Friendly Energies and Applications (EFEA), 2016 4th
International Symposium on, pages 1–5. IEEE.
Kou, P., Liang, D., Gao, L., and Lou, J. . Probabilistic electricity price forecasting with variational heteroscedastic gaussian process and active learning. Energy Conversion and Management,
89:298–308.
Maciejowska, K. and Nowotarski, J. . A hybrid model for gefcom2014 probabilistic electricity
price forecasting. International Journal of Forecasting, 32(3):1051–1056.
Maciejowska, K., Nowotarski, J., and Weron, R. . Probabilistic forecasting of electricity spot
prices using factor quantile regression averaging. International Journal of Forecasting (in press).
Maciejowska, K., Nowotarski, J., and Weron, R. . Probabilistic forecasting of electricity spot
prices using factor quantile regression averaging. International Journal of Forecasting, 32(3):957–
References
Maciejowska, K. and Weron, R. . Short-and mid-term forecasting of baseload electricity prices
in the uk: The impact of intra-day price relationships and market fundamentals. IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems, 31(2):994–1005.
Misiorek, A., Trueck, S., and Weron, R. . Point and interval forecasting of spot electricity prices:
Linear vs. non-linear time series models. Studies in Nonlinear Dynamics & Econometrics, 10(3).
Article 2.
Mohamed, A. and El-Hawary, M. . Mid-term electricity price forecasting using svm. In Electrical and Computer Engineering (CCECE), 2016 IEEE Canadian Conference on, pages 1–6. IEEE.
Moreira, R., Bessa, R., and Gama, J. . Probabilistic forecasting of day-ahead electricity prices
for the iberian electricity market.
In European Energy Market (EEM), 2016 13th International
Conference on the, pages 1–5. IEEE.
Nahmmacher, P., Schmid, E., Hirth, L., and Knopf, B. . Carpe diem: A novel approach to select
representative days for long-term power system modeling. Energy, 112:430–442.
Nowotarski, J. and Weron, R. . Computing electricity spot price prediction intervals using
quantile regression and forecast averaging. Computational Statistics, pages 1–13.
Nowotarski, J. and Weron, R. . Merging quantile regression with forecast averaging to obtain
more accurate interval forecasts of nord pool spot prices. In European Energy Market (EEM), 2014
11th International Conference on the, pages 1–5. IEEE.
Nowotarski, J. and Weron, R. .
Computing electricity spot price prediction intervals using
quantile regression and forecast averaging. Computational Statistics, 30(3):791–803.
Nowotarski, J. and Weron, R. . On the importance of the long-term seasonal component in
day-ahead electricity price forecasting. Energy Economics, 57:228–235.
Nowotarski, J. and Weron, R. . Recent advances in electricity price forecasting: A review of
probabilistic forecasting. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews.
Pape, C., Hagemann, S., and Weber, C. . Are fundamentals enough? explaining price variations
in the german day-ahead and intraday power market. Energy Economics, 54:376–387.
Paraschiv, F., Erni, D., and Pietsch, R. . The impact of renewable energies on eex day-ahead
electricity prices. Energy Policy, 73:196–210.
Raﬁei, M., Niknam, T., and Khooban, M. H. . A novel intelligent strategy for probabilistic
electricity price forecasting: Wavelet neural network based modiﬁed dolphin optimization algorithm.
Journal of Intelligent & Fuzzy Systems, 31(1):301–312.
Raﬁei, M., Niknam, T., and Khooban, M. H. . Probabilistic electricity price forecasting by improved clonal selection algorithm and wavelet preprocessing. Neural Computing and Applications,
28(12):3889–3901.
Raﬁei, M., Niknam, T., and Khooban, M.-H. . Probabilistic forecasting of hourly electricity
price by generalization of elm for usage in improved wavelet neural network. IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics, 13(1):71–79.
Raskin, A. and Rudakov, P. . Typical day detection for long term price forecasting. Energy
Procedia, 75:2677–2682.
Serinaldi, F. . Distributional modeling and short-term forecasting of electricity prices by generalized additive models for location, scale and shape. Energy Economics, 33(6):1216–1226.
References
Sharma, V. and Srinivasan, D. . A hybrid intelligent model based on recurrent neural networks
and excitable dynamics for price prediction in deregulated electricity market. Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 26(5-6):1562–1574.
Shrivastava, N. A., Khosravi, A., and Panigrahi, B. K. . Prediction interval estimation for electricity price and demand using support vector machines. In Neural Networks (IJCNN), 2014 International Joint Conference on, pages 3995–4002. IEEE.
Shrivastava, N. A., Khosravi, A., and Panigrahi, B. K. . Prediction interval estimation of electricity prices using pso-tuned support vector machines. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,
11(2):322–331.
Shrivastava, N. A. and Panigrahi, B. K. . Point and prediction interval estimation for electricity
markets with machine learning techniques and wavelet transforms. Neurocomputing, 118:301–310.
Shrivastava, N. A. and Panigrahi, B. K. . Prediction interval estimations for electricity demands
and prices: a multi-objective approach. IET Generation, Transmission & Distribution, 9(5):494–
Tahmasebifar, R., Sheikh-El-Eslami, M. K., and Kheirollahi, R. . Point and interval forecasting
of real-time and day-ahead electricity prices by a novel hybrid approach. IET Generation, Transmission & Distribution, 11(9):2173–2183.
Tibshirani, R. . Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 58(1):267–288.
Torbaghan, S. S., Motamedi, A., Zareipour, H., et al. . Medium-term electricity price forecasting.
In North American Power Symposium (NAPS), 2012, pages 1–8. IEEE.
Voronin, S., Partanen, J., and Kauranne, T. . A hybrid electricity price forecasting model for the
nordic electricity spot market. International Transactions on Electrical Energy Systems, 24(5):736–
Wan, C., Niu, M., Song, Y., and Xu, Z. . Pareto optimal prediction intervals of electricity price.
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 32(1):817–819.
Wan, C., Xu, Z., Wang, Y., Dong, Z. Y., and Wong, K. P. . A hybrid approach for probabilistic
forecasting of electricity price. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 5(1):463–470.
Weron, R. . Electricity price forecasting: A review of the state-of-the-art with a look into the
future. International Journal of Forecasting, 30(4):1030–1081.
Wu, H., Chan, S., Tsui, K., and Hou, Y. . A new recursive dynamic factor analysis for point and
interval forecast of electricity price. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 28(3):2352–2365.
Yan, X. and Chowdhury, N. A. . Mid-term electricity market clearing price forecasting: A hybrid
LSSVM and ARMAX approach.
International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems,
53(0):20–26.
Yan, X. and Chowdhury, N. A. .
Mid-term electricity market clearing price forecasting: a
multiple svm approach. International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems, 58:206–214.
Yan, X. and Chowdhury, N. A. . Midterm electricity market clearing price forecasting using
two-stage multiple support vector machine. Journal of Energy, 2015.
Yan, X., Song, Y., and Chowdhury, N. A. . Performance evaluation of single svm and lssvm
based forecasting models using price zones analysis. In Power and Energy Engineering Conference
(APPEEC), 2016 IEEE PES Asia-Paciﬁc, pages 79–83. IEEE.