Journal of Artificial Intelligence for Medical Sciences
Vol. 2(1-2), 2021, pp. 76–84
DOI: eISSN: 2666-1470
 
Research Article
Exploring Medical Students’ and Faculty’s Perception on
Artificial Intelligence and Robotics. A Questionnaire Survey
Leandros Sassis1, Pelagia Kefala-Karli1, Marina Sassi2, Constantinos Zervides1,*
1University of Nicosia, School of Medicine, 21 Ilia Papakyriakou Street, 2414, Engomi, Nicosia, Cyprus
2Biotypos Medical Diagnostic Center, 2 Andrea Papandreou, 15127, Melissia, Athens, Greece
ARTIC L E I N F O
Article History
Received 18 Jan 2021
Accepted 02 Jun 2021
Artificial intelligence
Medical students
Medical faculty
Medical education
Over the last decade, the emerging fields of artificial intelligence (AI) and robotics have been introduced in medicine, gaining
much attention. This study aims to assess the insight of medical students and faculty regarding AI and robotics in medicine. A
cross-sectional study was conducted among medical students and faculty of the University of Nicosia. An online questionnaire
was used to evaluate medical students’ and faculty’s prior knowledge and perceptions toward AI and robotics. Data analysis
was carried out using SPSS software, and the statistical significance was assumed as p value < 0.05. Three hundred eighty-seven
medical students and 23 faculty responded to the questionnaire. Students who were “familiar” with AI and robotics stated that
these breakthrough technologies make them more enthusiastic about working in their speciality of interest (p value = 0.012).
Also, students (59.9%) and faculty (47.8%) agreed that physician’s opinion should be followed when doctors’ and AI’s judgment
differ and that the doctor in charge should be liable for possible AI’s mistakes (38.8% students: 47.7% faculty). Although the most
significant drawback of AI and robotics in healthcare is the dehumanization of medicine (54.5% students; 47.8% faculty), most
participants (77.6% students; 78.2% faculty) agreed that medical schools should include in their curriculum AI and robotics by
offering relevant courses (39.5% students; 52.2% faculty). Medical students and faculty are not anxious about the advancements
of AI and robotics in medicine. Medical schools should take the lead and introduce AI and robotics in undergraduate medical
curricula because the new era needs fully aware healthcare providers with better insight regarding these concepts.
© 2021 The Authors. Published by Atlantis Press B.V.
This is an open access article distributed under the CC BY-NC 4.0 license ( 
1. INTRODUCTION
The breakthrough technology of artificial intelligence (AI) has been
increasingly infiltrating into many aspects of people’s everyday life
since John McCarthy described the term in 1955 as “the science and
engineering of making intelligent machines” . Current advances
in technologies such as computers and informatics make possible
the utilization of AI and, in particular, deep learning systems in
the field of medicine . AI has been introduced dynamically in
various specialties of medicine such as radiology and neurology
 , pathology , dermatology , ophthalmology
 , gastroenterology , cardiology , surgery and
molecular medicine and genetics .
Concurrently, advances in engineering lead to the introduction of
robots in medicine. AI and medical robots work synergistically to
improve surgical outcomes by enhancing precision, decreasing the
possibility of human errors, and approaching each patient based on
his/her unique profile . Although the use of fully autonomous
robots in the context of complex surgical interventions is not
feasible yet , in 2016, Shademan et al. showed that the Smart
Tissue Autonomous Robot (STAR), under experimental conditions,
*Corresponding author. Email: 
managed to complete a porcine intestinal anastomosis successfully,
exceeding surgeons’ performance .
The integration of AI and robotics in medicine will shape the future
of healthcare; however, this dynamic incorporation has raised contradictory perspectives. Indeed, there is a belief that AI and robotics
will be a valuable tool in healthcare, supporting physicians’ role in
diagnosis, planning, and intervention . Recent research demonstrated that medical students agree that AI will improve medicine.
In contrast, they disagree that AI will replace human physicians in
the near future, with males being more confident and interested in
AI than females . On the other hand, there is a view that physicians will be marginalized by AI and fully autonomous robotic systems in several aspects of healthcare, giving rise to legal and ethical
considerations . Studies showed that medical students are discouraged from choosing certain specialities as a career due to the
advancements in AI and are concerned about the replacement of
various specialities by AI .
The pathways of current undergraduate medical students and AI
and robotics will be intersected in the foreseeable future. Therefore, faculty in medical schools need to embrace these technological advancements to prepare students for the new era. There is no
other study exploring both faculty’s and medical students’ attitude
L. Sassis et al. / Journal of Artificial Intelligence for Medical Sciences 2(1-2) 76–84
toward AI and robotics in medicine to the best of our knowledge.
This study aims to narrow the existing gap in the literature by evaluating the perspectives of medical students and faculty regarding
the importance of AI and robotics in medicine and their effect on
the course of healthcare in the imminent future.
2. METHODS
2.1. Study Setting
A cross-sectional study was designed and carried out among (a) the
students of the MBBS program (4-year duration), which is delivered
in partnership by the St. George’s University of London and the University of Nicosia at Nicosia, (b) the students of the MD program
(6-year duration) of the University of Nicosia and (c) the faculty
of the University of Nicosia Medical School. The participants were
recruited between the October 5, 2020 and the October 17, 2020
via email invitations, which included the anonymous questionnaire
link. Participation in this survey was voluntary, and it was ensured
that all responses were anonymous. The sample size of this study
included a total of 959 participants; 896 were medical students and
63 were faculty.
Ethical approval of this study was obtained by the Cyprus National
Bioethics Committee (CNBC).
2.2. Questionnaire
A web-based questionnaire was developed utilizing Google Forms
to assess the attitude of medical students and faculty toward the
importance of AI and robotics in medicine and their potential
outcomes in healthcare in the foreseeable future. The questionnaire (available on supplementary material) was designed based on
recent references and was evaluated by an AI expert to
ensure the clarity and validity of the questions. More specifically, it
was comprised of seventeen items collectively, and it was divided
into two sections. The first section referred to the participants’
demographic features and included three multiple-choice questions
regarding participants’ gender, age and status; a student of the MD
program, a student of the MBBS program or a member of the university’s faculty. The question concerning participants’ status led to
two sub-questions; depending on their choice, participants also had
to select either the year of study (multiple-choice question) or fill in
their field of expertise (open-ended question). The second section
consisted of fourteen items; nine multiple-choice questions and five
5-point Likert scale items. The questions were about the following topics: familiarity with AI and robotics, the impact of AI and
robotics in the present and the imminent future in healthcare, the
legal and moral issues which could arise from this technology, the
principal benefits and drawbacks resulting from the integration of
AI and robotics in the medical field, and the integration of AI and
robotics in the undergraduate medical curricula.
2.3. Data Analysis
The data were analyzed using the IBM SPSS software, V26 .
For statistical analysis, the categories “very familiar” and “familiar” were summarized as “familiar,” and the categories “moderately
familiar” and “slightly familiar” were summarized as “slightly/moderately familiar.” The chi-squared test (two-sided) was utilized for
binary or nominal variables, the nonparametric Mann–Whitney
U test (two-sided) was used to compare categorical or continuous
variables between two independent groups, and the nonparametric Kruskal–Wallis ANOVA test (two-sided) was utilized to compare categorical or continuous variables between three independent
groups. The statistical significance level was set to p value < 0.05.
3. RESULTS
A total of 410 participants completed the questionnaire; 387 were
medical students and 23 were faculty. Regarding the medical students, most of them (N = 302) belonged to the age group 18–24,
and there were 146 males and 241 females. Out of the 23 faculty
participants, 22 were aged above 35 years old, and there were 11
males and 12 females. The analytic demographic characteristics are
shown in Table 1. Concerning the level of familiarity with AI and
robotics in medicine, almost 2/3 (65.4%) of the students and more
than 3/4 (82.6%) of the faculty responded that they are slightly/moderately familiar with these concepts. A statistically significant
difference (p value = 0.005) was noted only among the responses of
the male and the female faculty participants where all the females
characterized themselves as “slightly/moderately familiar,” whereas
64% and 36% of the males considered themselves “slightly/moderately familiar” and “familiar,” respectively. The vast majority of
the students (62.8%) stated that AI and robotics had been dynamically integrated into medical practice nowadays. In contrast, a significant percentage (69.6%) of the faculty had the opposite opinion
(p value = 0.002). Regarding the above statement, there is a statistically significant difference (p value = 0.003) between the responses
of male and female students, with 68.5% of females supporting
that AI and robotics have been dynamically integrated in medical
practice today; in contrast, only 53.4% of male students shared the
same opinion. There was no statistically significant difference in the
responses of the participants when they were categorized as “familiar,” “slightly/moderately familiar,” and “not at all familiar” with AI
and robotics in medicine.
Both students (43.4%) and faculty (69.6%) agreed that surgery has
the most applications in AI and robotics nowadays, leaving in second place radiology. Regarding the future, both students (42.4%)
and faculty (52.2%) believed that surgery would still be the field
Demographic characteristics of the participants.
Students (%)
Faculty (%)
146 (37.7)
241 (62.3)
10 (43.5%)
L. Sassis et al. / Journal of Artificial Intelligence for Medical Sciences 2(1-2) 76–84
Students’experience/beliefs regarding AI and robotics in medicine.
Mean Likert
Score (95% CI)
(Familiar vs.
Slightly/Moderately Familiar vs.
Not At All
How familiar are you with
artificial intelligence and
robotics in medicine?a
(2.25–2.45)
How will the advancements
of artificial intelligence and
robotics impact your
decision of being involved
in a specialty?b
(3.23–3.42)
The diagnostic ability of
artificial intelligence is
superior to the diagnostic
ability of a human doctor.c
(2.48–2.68)
I would trust my medical
care in artificial intelligence
and robotics.c
(2.50–2.70)
Medical schools should
include in their curriculum
artificial intelligence and
robotics medical practice
(3.97–4.15)
(a) 1: Not at all familiar; 2: Slightly familiar; 3: Moderately familiar; 4: Familiar; 5: Very familiar; (b) 1: Much less enthusiastic; 2: Less enthusiastic; 3: No impact; 4: More enthusiastic; 5:
Much more enthusiastic; (c) 1: Strongly disagree; 2: Disagree; 3: Undecided; 4: Agree; 5: Strongly agree.
Faculty’s experience/beliefs regarding AI and robotics in medicine.
Mean Likert
Score (95%
(Familiar vs.
Slightly/Moderately Familiar
vs. Not At All
How familiar are you
with artificial
intelligence and robotics
in medicine?a
(2.18–2.95)
How will the
advancements of
artificial intelligence and
robotics impact your
decision of being
involved in a specialty?b
(2.77–3.4)
The diagnostic ability of
artificial intelligence is
superior to the
diagnostic ability of a
human doctor.c
(2.09–2.87)
I would trust my medical
care in artificial
intelligence and
robotics.c
(2.22–2.99)
Medical schools should
include in their
curriculum artificial
intelligence and robotics
medical practice
(3.41–4.15)
(a) 1: Not at all familiar; 2: Slightly familiar; 3: Moderately familiar; 4: Familiar; 5: Very familiar; (b) 1: Much less enthusiastic; 2: Less enthusiastic; 3: No impact; 4: More enthusiastic; 5: Much
more enthusiastic; (c) 1: Strongly disagree; 2: Disagree; 3: Undecided; 4: Agree; 5: Strongly agree.
L. Sassis et al. / Journal of Artificial Intelligence for Medical Sciences 2(1-2) 76–84
of medicine in which AI and robotics would be mostly implemented. There was no statistically significant difference in the
participants’ responses regarding their gender and their level of
familiarity with AI and robotics for the above results. Near half of
the students (47.5%) and the majority of faculty (73.9%) agreed that
AI’s and robotics’ advancements would not impact their decision to
be involved in a speciality of their interest (p value = 0.21). However, the “familiar” with the AI and robotics students stated that
the advancements of AI and robotics in medicine make them more
enthusiastic about working in their field of interest when compared
to the “slightly/moderately familiar” and “not at all familiar,” whom
decision is not influenced (p value = 0.012). No other statistically
significant difference was noted concerning gender.
Of all participants, a significant percentage of both students (87.3%)
and faculty (91.3%) shared the opinion that AI and robotics would
be integrated into medical care and supervised or operated by
specialized personnel in the foreseeable future. However, there was
a statistically significant difference between the responses of male
and female students (p value = 0.027); nearly a double percentage of
males believed that physicians would be replaced by AI and robotics
(7.5% vs 3.7%) or that AI and robotics would have the same role in
medical care as they have today (11% vs 5.4%). No other statistically
significant difference was noticed regarding the participants’ level
of familiarity with AI and robotics.
In the case that physician’s and AI’s judgment differ, the majority
of students (59.9%) and almost half of the faculty (47.8%) agreed
that the physician’s opinion should be followed, whereas 35.7% of
students and 43.5% of faculty stated that this should be a patient’s
choice. Indeed, a significant percentage of the responders disagreed
with the statements that the diagnostic ability of AI is superior to the
diagnostic ability of a human doctor (53.8% of the students; 60.9%
of the faculty) and that they would trust their medical care solely in
AI and robotics (42.9% of the students; 47.8% of the faculty). Also,
38.8% and 32.8% of the students and 47.7% and 30.4% of the faculty agreed that the doctor in charge or the company created the
AI should be liable for possible AI’s mistakes, respectively. In none
of these four cases was observed statistically significant difference
regarding gender and participants’ level of familiarity with AI and
Both students (60.5%) and faculty (73.9%) agreed that the main
beneficial gain of integrating AI and robotics in modern medicine is
the assistance for more precise surgical interventions. Also, students
(54.5%) and faculty (47.8%) shared the opinion that the dehumanization of medicine is the most significant drawback of integrating
AI and robotics in modern medicine. For both questions, statistically, significant differences were noted regarding gender (p value
= 0.001; p value = 0.032), whereas no other statistically significant
differences were observed.
More than 3/4 of students (77.6%) and faculty (78.2%) agreed that
medical schools should include in their curriculum AI and robotics;
a statistically significant difference was observed regarding students’ gender (p value = 0.032). Most of the responders believed that
the most critical initiatives to help students make an informed decision regarding the impact of AI and robotics are to invite experts
Participants’ responses regarding the impact of AI and robotics in medicine nowadays.
p–Value (Familiar
vs. Slightly/-
Moderately
Familiar vs. not
at all Familiar)
p–Value (Familiar vs. Slightly/Moderately
Familiar vs. Not
At All Familiar)
Have AI and robotics been
dynamically integrated in
medical practice nowadays?
243 (62.8%)
144 (37.2%)
16 (69.6%)
In which of the following
field of medicine have
AI and robotics the most
applications nowadays?
Biopharmaceutical
research and development
64 (16.5%)
Cardiology
Dermatology
Endocrinology
Histopathology
Internal medicine
Nephrology
Ophthalmology
67 (17.3%)
168 (43.4%)
16 (69.6%)
L. Sassis et al. / Journal of Artificial Intelligence for Medical Sciences 2(1-2) 76–84
to provide lectures regarding the impact of AI (34.1% of students;
30.4% of faculty) and to offer courses on AI and robotics (39.5% of
students; 52.2% of faculty). No statistically significant differences
were noticed.
More information regarding the results is demonstrated in
Tables 2–8.
4. DISCUSSION
The integration of AI and robotics in the medical field will influence the progress of medicine in general . In this study, it is
shown that although most of the medical students and faculty were
slightly/moderately familiar with the concept of AI and robotics,
Participants’ responses regarding the impact of AI and robotics in future medicine.
p–Value (Familiar
vs. Slightly/-
Moderately
Familiar vs. Not
At All Familiar)
p–Value (Familiar
vs. Slightly/-
Moderately
Familiar vs. Not
At All Familiar)
vs. Faculty)
In your opinion, in the
Physicians will be
replaced by AI and
AI and robotics will be
integrated into medical
care and supervised/operated by specialized
338 (87.3%)
21 (91.3%)
AI and robotics will have
the same role in medical
care as they have today
In which of the following
field of medicine will AI
and robotics have the most
applications in the future?
Biopharmaceutical
research and development
48 (12.4%)
Cardiology
Dermatology
Endocrinology
Histopathology
Internal medicine
Nephrology
48 (12.4%)
Ophthalmology
164 (42.4%)
12 (52.2%)
Participants’ responses regarding the legal liability issues which could arise from AI and robotics.
p–Value (Familiar
vs. Slightly/Moderately Familiar vs.
Not At All
p–Value (Familiar
vs. Slightly/-
Moderately
Familiar vs. Not
At All Familiar)
vs. Faculty)
If the physician’s and the
AI’s judgments differ,
which should be followed?
Physician’s opinion
232 (59.9%)
11 (47.8%)
AI’s opinion
Patient’s choice
138 (35.7%)
10 (43.5%)
L. Sassis et al. / Journal of Artificial Intelligence for Medical Sciences 2(1-2) 76–84
Participants’ responses regarding the legal liability issues which could arise from AI and robotics. (Continued)
p–Value (Familiar
vs. Slightly/Moderately Familiar vs.
Not At All
p–Value (Familiar
vs. Slightly/-
Moderately
Familiar vs. Not
At All Familiar)
vs. Faculty)
Who do you think will be
liable for legal problems
which might be caused by
AI’s mistakes?
Doctor in charge of
patient care
150 (38.8%)
11 (47.8%)
Company that created the
127 (32.8%)
Patient who consented to
follow AI’s input
Independent AI agency
56 (14.4%)
Participants’ responses regarding the major benefits and drawbacks resulting from the integration of AI and robotics in the medical field.
p–Value (Familiar
vs. Slightly/Moderately Familiar vs.
Not At All
p–Value (Familiar
vs. Slightly/-
Moderately
Familiar vs. Not
At All Familiar)
vs. Faculty)
What is the most beneficial gain of integration of
AI and robotics in modern
Assist physicians for more
accurate diagnosis
105 (27.1%)
Assist surgeons for more
precise surgical interventions
234 (60.5%)
17 (73.9%)
Reduction of physician
Reduction of administration burden
What is the most significant drawback of the integration of AI and robotics
in modern medicine?
Dehumanization of
211 (54.5%)
11 (47.8%)
Privacy violations of sensitive medical data
No standardized evaluation of the effect of
artificial intelligence and
robotics on healthcare
70 (18.1%)
Lack of legal framework
in case a physician accepts
or rejects the recommendation of the algorithm.
they were confident that in the foreseeable future, these technologies would not replace human physicians. Moreover, the students
and the faculty would not hesitate to be involved in a speciality in
which advancements in AI and robotics would be profound. Even
though these findings are consistent with a recent study conducted
in Germany , other studies demonstrated the opposite results.
More specific, almost 50% of medical students in a UK study ,
48% of medical students in a Canadian study and 44% of medical students in a US study stated that they were reluctant to
choose radiology as a speciality because they were concerned that
AI would sometime displace them. Interestingly, this study showed
that the innovations of AI and robotics in medicine make students
L. Sassis et al. / Journal of Artificial Intelligence for Medical Sciences 2(1-2) 76–84
Participants’ responses regarding the integration of AI and robotics in the undergraduate medical curricula.
p–Value (Familiar
vs. Slightly/Moderately Familiar
vs. Not At All
p–Value (Familiar
vs. Slightly/-
Moderately
Familiar vs. Not
At All Familiar)
What is the most important initiative to help
medical students make an
informed decision regarding the impact of AI and
Invite experts to provide
lectures regarding the
impact of AI
132 (34.1%)
Discuss AI advancements
in preclinical radiology
44 (11.4%)
Offer courses on AI and
153 (39.5%)
12 (52.2%)
Create radiology research
projects involving AI
Provide resources regarding AI
who were familiar with this concept more enthusiastic about working in specialities that would integrate these advancements in the
near future.
In general, males are considered to be more interested in AI and
robotics. Indeed, in the European Union, only 54% of females had
a favorable view toward AI compared to 67% of males . This
is also the case in the United States, where 30% of males and 44%
of females were more suspicious towards newer technologies and
characterized AI as an unsafe practice . These results agree with
Pintos de Santos et al. , who showed that males had a more positive attitude, confidence and interest regarding the benefits of AI in
medical practice . However, contrary to these results, our study
showed that when a statistically significant difference was noted
between gender, males were more concerned about the impact of
AI and robotics in medicine.
In this study’s cohort, a significant proportion of the students and
the faculty believed that most applications of AI and robotics are
and would be in the field of surgery and predicted that in the future,
AI and robotics would be integrated into medical care and would be
supervised/operated by specialized personnel. However, in a recent
UK study nearly half of the students had the belief that AI would
replace specific specialties in the future .
The integration of AI and robotics in healthcare will introduce legal
liability issues . This study demonstrated that all participants,
whether they were students or faculty, believed that in case of AI’s
mistakes, the doctor in charge of patient care or the company, which
created the AI, should be liable for legal issues. In the event that
physician’s and AI’s judgment diverges, there were contradictory
perspectives. Although most students and a significant part of the
faculty reported that physician’s opinion should be followed, there
was a notable percentage of them who stated that this decision
should be made by patients.
According to this survey’s results, the main advantage of integrating AI and robotics in medical care is the aid that they offer to the
surgeon for more accurate interventions. In contrast, the main disadvantage is the dehumanization of medicine. Also, nearly half of
all responders in this survey would not trust their healthcare solely
in AI and robotics, considering that AI’s diagnostic ability is not
superior to that of the human physician. Accordingly, Pinto dos
Santos et al. demonstrated that slightly more than 50% of the
participants did not feel that AI could make a conclusive diagnosis
from radiological examinations .
Although more than half of the students in this study reported
that AI and robotics have already been dynamically incorporated
in medicine, nearly 2/3 of the faculty indicated that this is not the
case. Despite the controversial opinions between the students and
the faculty, both groups agreed that AI and robotics should be introduced in medical curricula, either by lectures delivered by experts
in the field or by offering a course in AI and robotics. Also, Sit
et al. showed that most of the students wanted to incorporate AI into the medical curriculum due to their belief that this
would have a favorable effect on their future career . The same
research demonstrated that after 45 participants of the study’s sample received some teaching in AI, felt more ready to cooperate with
AI tools and were less likely to reject radiology as a carrier choice.
However, they reported that they still have no confidence and the
appropriate knowledge to use AI critically.
The primary strengths of this study are the large number of medical students who responded to the questionnaire and that there is
no other study assessing medical students’ and faculty’s perspectives
toward AI and robotics in medicine to the best of our knowledge.
A limitation of this study is the low response rate regarding faculty (23/63), which may lead to the recruitment of a nonrepresentative sample. Thus, selection bias may be introduced, limiting our
L. Sassis et al. / Journal of Artificial Intelligence for Medical Sciences 2(1-2) 76–84
ability to generalize our results to other medical schools. Also,
“familiarity” was assessed, but this term may not indicate actual
use of AI and robotics; therefore, some responses might have been
biased depending on how the participants considered the term
“familiarity.” This study could be improved by investigating both
students’ and faculty’s perspectives towards the impact of AI and
robotics in medicine separately and after implementing several sessions in these fields. Multi-center studies need to be carried out in
order for the external validity to be increased and evaluate the attitude of medical students and faculty toward AI and robotics in other
medical curricula.
5. CONCLUSIONS
This study showed that although most students and faculty were
slightly/moderately familiar with AI and robotics in medicine, they
indicated that AI and robotics should be integrated into the medical curricula. Based on these results, proper actions should be followed, such as preparing faculty to deliver AI and robotics courses
to ensure that students will be more confident and gain a better
insight into these concepts. The ultimate goal is to shape future
healthcare professionals to be thoroughly aware of AI and robotics
in order to have a crucial role in the evolution and utilization of AI
and robotics in modern medicine.
ETHICAL APPROVAL
Ethical approval of this study was obtained by the Cyprus National
Bioethics Committee (CNBC).
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Funding Statement
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS