Rivenson et al. Light: Science & Applications 8:85
Ofﬁcial journal of the CIOMP 2047-7538
 
www.nature.com/lsa
P E R S P E C T I V E
Op e n A c c e s s
Deep learning in holography and coherent
Yair Rivenson1,2,3, Yichen Wu
1,2,3 and Aydogan Ozcan
Recent advances in deep learning have given rise to a new paradigm of holographic image reconstruction and phase
recovery techniques with real-time performance. Through data-driven approaches, these emerging techniques have
overcome some of the challenges associated with existing holographic image reconstruction methods while also
minimizing the hardware requirements of holography. These recent advances open up a myriad of new opportunities
for the use of coherent imaging systems in biomedical and engineering research and related applications.
Introduction
Exponential advancements in computational resources
and algorithms have given rise to new paradigms in
microscopic imaging modalities that rely on computation
to digitally reconstruct and enhance images, surpassing
the capabilities of conventional microscopes. Among
these computational microscopy modalities, digital holographic microscopy (DHM) provides several unique
opportunities by encoding a complex 3D optical ﬁeld into
intensity modulations through the interference of scattered sample waves and a reference wave, which forms a
hologram of the sample. Some important advantages of
holography include label-free imaging of samples at a lowradiation dose, inference of the objects’ phase distribution
(especially useful for the imaging of, e.g., live cells and
other biological specimens within a liquid environment)1,2, and numerical 3D refocusing throughout the
sample volume by processing a single hologram, i.e.,
without any mechanical scanning. Despite these important advantages, digital holographic microscopy systems
are not as widely used as other microscopy modalities,
such as brightﬁeld or ﬂuorescence microscopes. The wide
applicability of digital holographic microscopes is partially
bottlenecked by some challenges: the “missing phase
problem” in holography requires phase recovery, which is
often implemented using iterative methods that demand
the acquisition of additional measurements using relatively complex and alignment-sensitive imaging set-ups;
furthermore,
coherence-related artifacts appear in the reconstructed
images in the form of, e.g., speckle noise and multiplereﬂection interference, which altogether degrade the
image contrast compared to, e.g., brightﬁeld or ﬂuorescence microscopy.
Recent developments in the ﬁeld of deep learning have
opened up exciting avenues for signiﬁcantly advancing
holography
circumventing some of these challenges of coherent imaging
systems while taking full advantage of their inherent
beneﬁts. We believe that this emerging body of exciting
work on deep learning in holography will be the key to the
wider-scale dissemination and adoption of holographic
imaging and sensing systems in the life sciences, biomedicine and engineering ﬁelds at large, and it has already
been applied to various important tasks in coherent
imaging, such as phase recovery3–6, super-resolution7,
phase unwrapping8,9 and label-free sensing10–12. These
methods are generally enabled by the supervised optimization of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
using accurately registered image data (Fig. 1a). CNNs
typically contain tens to hundreds of layers of convolution
kernels (ﬁlters), bias terms, and nonlinear activation
© The Author(s) 2019
OpenAccessThisarticleislicensedunderaCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0InternationalLicense,whichpermitsuse,sharing,adaptation,distributionandreproduction
in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If
material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit 
Correspondence: Aydogan Ozcan ( )
1Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of California, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA
2Bioengineering Department, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095,
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article.
These authors contributed equally: Yair Rivenson, Yichen Wu
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
functions,
biological
processing.
Through the process of training (which is a one-time
effort), the weights of these ﬁlters and biases of the neural
network are adjusted in a way that minimizes the error
between the network output image and the “gold standard” target labels in terms of a user-deﬁned cost or loss
function (for example, mean squared error loss13 (Fig.
1b)). This trained network can subsequently be used to
perform a predeﬁned image reconstruction task with a
single forward-pass through the network, yielding its
inference. This reconstruction process typically takes only
a fraction of a second (using, e.g., a standard graphics
processing unit, GPU) without the need for any iterations,
manual tuning of any hyperparameters or reﬁnement of
the physical assumptions made regarding the image
reconstruction model. In fact, this noniterative single
forward-pass reconstruction capability forms one of the
major advantages of deep-learning-based solutions to
inverse problems in imaging. In the following subsections,
we review some of these emerging deep-learning-enabled
holographic image reconstruction tasks and exemplify the
key opportunities that deep learning brings to the holography and coherent imaging ﬁelds.
Phase recovery and hologram reconstruction
One of the most important tasks in holography is phase
recovery, as an opto-electronic sensor is only sensitive to
the intensity of impinging light. The speciﬁcs of the phase
recovery process depend on the holographic encoding
strategy used, one of which is in-line holography, where
the sample wave and the reference wave copropagate in
the same direction. As an alternative encoding method, in
off-axis holography, there is an angle between the sample
and the reference wave directions14. In-line holography is
generally desirable in various microscopy applications
because of its simpler imaging conﬁguration and higher
space-bandwidth product (permitting higher resolution
over larger ﬁelds of view) compared with off-axis holography. For in-line holography, many optical and/or
numerical methods have been proposed to retrieve the
missing phase information analytically or iteratively15,
using, e.g., additional hardware to acquire measurements
at different axial distances, illumination angles, wavelengths, or polarization states, among other degrees of
freedom, where these additional measurements are used
as physical constraints for an analytical and/or iterative
reconstruction algorithm to converge to a solution.
Because multiple measurements are needed for the same
object, these systems are generally limited to quasi-static
objects. Furthermore, these algorithms are often timeconsuming and require tedious tuning of user-deﬁned
parameters for convergence to a satisfactory complexvalued image. In contrast to these physics-driven hologram reconstruction approaches, emerging data-driven
alternatives
demonstrated
holographic
reconstruction from a single hologram. These data-driven
approaches use accurately registered and labeled image
data to train a CNN; these high-quality image labels, used
as the ground truth for the training phase, can be obtained
from, e.g., known sample structures4 (Fig. 2a) or by using
a physics-based iterative reconstruction method3 (Fig. 2b).
After its training, the network can blindly transform a
distorted, low-quality image obtained from a single
hologram intensity into the desired high-quality label/
image3,4 (Fig. 2). In general, a better reconstruction
quality can be achieved through physics-based learning
approaches, for example, by ﬁrst refocusing the hologram
Data acquisition
Physical constraint
Image registration
Trained network
Free-space
propagation
constraint)
Network input
Error/loss function
Network output
Ground truth
Fig. 1 Training a deep neural network for coherent image reconstruction. a Training workﬂow of an image reconstruction deep neural network,
including data acquisition, physics-based constraints, image registration, and training. b Typical network training and testing procedure, where the
network learns to match the input image to a target label (ground-truth image) using a given loss/cost function
Rivenson et al. Light: Science & Applications 8:85
 
(without phase recovery) onto the object plane and then
using deep-learning-based inference (see, e.g., Fig. 2b, d).
It should be noted that the trained deep network can
output solutions that deviate from physics-based reconstructions as the network is charged with a certain
transformation that cleans twin-image artifacts (defocused replica of the object’s image that overlaps with the
real image due to the missing phase information) as well
as other interference-related artifacts such as multiple
reﬂection interference or out-of-focus fringes that are
present at the network input image (see, e.g., Fig. 2b, c).
As an example, a trained network, in its inference, rejected dust particles that were outside the sample plane3,
although those particles were physical objects imaged in
the recorded hologram. Stated differently, the network
interpreted these objects as out-of-focus noise, which is a
major advantage, as it cleans up the unwanted interference artifacts that are normally present in holographic
images due to coherence. As another major advantage,
deep-learning-based
reconstruction
methods also demonstrate a 4-fold to 30-fold increase in
the reconstruction speed compared with the state-of-theart iterative hologram reconstruction algorithms5,6. In
fact, these deep-learning-based hologram reconstruction
approaches have already been used to empower different
computational imaging and sensing devices, such as ﬁeldportable and cost-effective imaging ﬂow cytometers11,
enabling label-free and high-throughput screening of
large volumes of liquid samples in ﬁeld settings.
Depth-of-ﬁeld enhancement and autofocusing
A recent work5 further demonstrated the ability of a
trained deep neural network to perform simultaneously
autofocusing and phase recovery to generate an extended
depth-of-ﬁeld image from a single hologram measurement. This result could not be obtained by standard
iterative hologram reconstruction methods that are based
on wave propagation (Fig. 2c). In this deep-learning-based
framework, which is termed Holographic Imaging using
Deep Learning for Extended Focus (HIDEF), the network
is trained using pairs of randomly defocused (backpropagated) holograms and their corresponding in-focus,
phase-recovered images. HIDEF signiﬁcantly decreases
the time complexity of holographic image reconstruction
Network output
(phase image)
Network input
(raw hologram)
Propagate to
sample plane
Network input
(with twin image)
Raw hologram
Network output
(phase recovered)
Propagate within
sample volume
Network input
(with twin image + defocus)
Network output
(phase recovered, extended DOF)
Propagate to
sample plane
Raw hologram
Raw hologram
Network output
(phase recovered, denoised)
Multiheight
phase recovery
Network output
(high-resolution image)
Raw hologram
Network input
(with twin image + noise)
Network input
(low-resolution image)
Fig. 2 Deep-learning-based hologram reconstruction. a An end-to-end CNN was trained to transform a hologram directly to a phase image4.
Adapted with permission from ref. 4. b The raw hologram (i.e., without phase information) was numerically focused onto the sample plane and was
used as an input for the network to match the phase-recovered image3. The sample is a Pap smear specimen. Adapted with permission from ref. 3. c
The raw hologram was propagated to an approximate distance within a sample volume, and the deep network generated an extended depth-of-
ﬁeld reconstruction of the whole sample volume, also performing autofocusing5. The specimen is a 3D distributed aerosol sample. Adapted with
permission from ref. 5. d Similar to (b) but implemented on holograms under low-photon and poor-SNR conditions6. Adapted with permission from
ref. 6. e A CNN was trained to transform a low-resolution holographic reconstruction (created using iterative multiheight phase recovery) to an
equivalent high-resolution image of the same sample FOV7. The sample is a Pap smear specimen. Adapted with permission from ref. 7
Rivenson et al. Light: Science & Applications 8:85
 
simultaneous
refocusing
recovery of 3D distributed sample points, which are performed in parallel. HIDEF can be especially useful for
wide-ﬁeld, holographic imaging applications by digitally
bringing a large sample volume into focus in real time. For
instance, this deep-learning-based reconstruction method
was used to characterize particle aggregation-based biosensors over a wide imaging ﬁeld of view (FOV) greater
than 20 mm2 and achieved high throughput and the rapid
detection of viruses12. In another example, a portable and
cost-effective device that senses bioaerosols in the ﬁeld
was developed, which used HIDEF to rapidly reconstruct
the microscopic images of captured bioaerosols for their
automatic detection and label-free classiﬁcation, achieving an accuracy of >94% for different types of pollen and
mold spores10.
Resolution and SNR (signal-to-noise-ratio) enhancement
In addition to the reconstruction of holograms, deep
learning has also been used to perform resolution
enhancement in coherent imaging systems in two different ways7: (1) to surpass the pixel pitch sampling limit in
lensless holography systems (Fig. 2e) and (2) to enhance
the resolution in diffraction-limited, lens-based holography systems. In the former case, since modern image
sensors have a pixel pitch of ~1–2 µm, the resolution of a
lensless microscopy system is limited, especially for onchip holography due to its unit magniﬁcation. Conventionally, to surpass this limit, multiple images of the
same sample with subpixel shifts are taken to digitally
synthesize a high-resolution holographic image, which is
known as pixel super-resolution15. In ref.
7, a neural
network was trained to transform lower-resolution images
synthesized from fewer numbers (e.g., 1 or 4) of subpixelshifted measurements to match higher-resolution images
synthesized from more (e.g., 36) subpixel shifted measurements, which signiﬁcantly reduced both the number
of hologram measurements and the reconstruction computation time. In the latter case of lens-based coherent
imaging, the resolution and FOV are coupled to each
other by the space-bandwidth product of the objective
lens, where a higher-resolution image can be obtained
through a higher magniﬁcation and higher NA objective
lens at the cost of a smaller FOV. In ref. 7, another neural
lower-resolution
(lower-NA) holographic reconstructions into higher-NA
equivalent complex-valued images, which improved the
image resolution beyond the diffraction limit deﬁned by
the NA of the objective lens and increased the overall
space-bandwidth-product of the lens-based holographic
system while also enabling quantitative phase imaging
with better resolution and higher throughput (i.e., wider
FOV). In both of these cases, through experimental data,
with well-controlled imaging conditions and sample sets,
the deep neural networks learned to robustly perform
frequency extrapolation to infer higher-frequency features
without generating artifacts7. In addition to in-line holography, another beneﬁciary of deep-learning-based super
resolution in coherent imaging can be off-axis holography,
which has a smaller space-bandwidth product in comparison with that of in-line holography while offering a
superior overall sensitivity16.
Deep learning has also been used to perform denoising
of object images reconstructed from their holograms to
substantially increase the SNR of the output images6,17
(Fig. 2d). In one of these approaches17, the network was
trained using high-SNR images as the labels, along with
computationally simulated input images that had lower
SNRs. The trained network was then used to blindly
perform robust speckle noise reduction in experimentally
obtained image data. A similar framework6 was also used
to successfully retrieve the shape of an object from its
photon-starved hologram with an SNR that is close to one.
Brightﬁeld holography
One of the landmark attributes of holography is its
ability to encode the 3D information of the sample
volume using a snapshot 2D interference pattern, that is,
the hologram. However, a reconstructed hologram traditionally falls short in terms of its image contrast and axial
sectioning capability, which is compromised not only by
the twin image, self-interference and speckle artifacts but
also by the defocused object features within the sample
volume due to the large spatial and temporal coherence.
As a result, the digital refocusing of the volumetric sample
hologram onto different axial planes results in both infocus structures and out-of-focus spatial crosstalk from
other planes. Overall, the limited contrast generated in
holographic reconstruction might be considered one of
the signiﬁcant drawbacks of 3D coherent imaging compared with, for example, the images acquired by a high-
NA brightﬁeld scanning microscope.
Recently, deep learning has also been used to close this
holographic
microscopy
brightﬁeld incoherent microscopy18 (Fig. 3b). In this
deep-learning-based method, termed “Brightﬁeld Holography”, the neural network learns the cross-modality
transformation
numerically
propagated
complex-valued images of a snapshot hologram intensity
to equivalent images at the corresponding axial plane
obtained by a high-NA scanning brightﬁeld microscope,
matching the image contrast and the axial sectioning
capability of the latter. In other words, this brightﬁeld
holography method achieves the image quality and the
contrast expected from a brightﬁeld microscope but
without any mechanical volumetric axial scan, taking
advantage of the best of both imaging modalities, that is,
holography and brightﬁeld microscopy. This brightﬁeld
Rivenson et al. Light: Science & Applications 8:85
 
holography concept and the underlying cross-modality
transformation
data19,20 have the potential to facilitate next-generation
high-throughput volumetric imaging systems powered by
holography,
throughput, contrast and 3D sectioning capability using
much simpler imaging hardware. In fact, we highlight in
the next subsection another exciting opportunity created
by the same cross-modality image transformation framework for the holographic color imaging of label-free
(unstained) tissue samples.
Bringing color to holographic images of unstained
samples using cross-modality transformations
Unstained/label-free biological specimens, such as cells
and thin tissue sections, exhibit low contrast under a
standard brightﬁeld microscope, making it impossible to
create a meaningful diagnostic image. To generate a highcontrast image under incoherent illumination, a plethora
of labeling/staining techniques have been developed. One
of the most well-known and widely used techniques is
histochemical staining, which is considered to be the gold
standard in histopathology. In comparison to brightﬁeld
BP to 1237 μm
BP to 1357 μm
BP to 1177 μm
Raw hologram
Network input
(with twin image)
Cross-modality network
Network output
(sectioned)
Ground truth
(20×/0.75 NA)
Network input
(reconstructed phase)
Network output
(digitally stained)
Crossmodality
Histological staining
Scanning microscope
Ground truth
(stained slide)
Unstained slide
Fig. 3 Cross-modality transformations in holography. a Brightﬁeld holography18. A trained neural network brings the spatial and color contrast
and axial sectioning capability of a high-NA brightﬁeld microscope to holography. BP back-propagation. Adapted with permission from ref. 18. b
Phase staining21. A trained network takes a reconstructed holographic QPI of an unstained tissue sample as input and then outputs the equivalent
image of a histologically stained sample, imaged with a brightﬁeld microscope, virtually achieving staining color and contrast without histological
staining of the sample. Adapted with permission from ref. 21
Rivenson et al. Light: Science & Applications 8:85
 
miroscopy, coherent imaging systems, such as quantitative phase microscopy, provide an efﬁcient contrast
mechanism for label-free specimens through the phase
information
mechanism is not compatible with standard diagnostic
and sample analysis procedures that rely on more than
150 years of accumulated experience, trained experts/
professionals,
processing
algorithms.
address this challenge, a virtual histology staining framework based on cross-modality image transformation has
been demonstrated20,21. As shown in Fig. 3b, through its
training, a deep neural network learns to transform the
quantitative phase image (QPI) of a label-free tissue
sample imaged using a holographic microscope into an
equivalent image of the same tissue section imaged by a
brightﬁeld microscope after its histochemical staining. As
holography offers wide-ﬁeld and high-throughput QPI
over a large FOV (e.g., >20–30 mm2 per snapshot), this
virtual staining method using the phase contrast generated by the refractive index modulation of label-free tissue
samples has the potential to profoundly impact histopathology by eliminating the need for histological staining. This will signiﬁcantly reduce costs and the amount of
expert (histotechnologist) time and chemical reagents
required; additionally, this will preserve the tissue section
to be reused for further molecular analysis, as needed.
Virtual staining of the same tissue sample with multiple
types of stains, all in parallel, is also possible with this
approach, which is currently impossible to achieve with
standard histology methods.
Imaging through scattering media and diffraction
tomography
The applications of deep learning in coherent imaging
systems are not limited to holography, which is based on
the assumption of a single-scattering event. Using accurately labeled and cross-registered datasets of input
−output image pairs, a deep neural network can also be
trained to digitally reverse multiple-scattering events and
reconstruct a sample’s image even through scattering
media. For example, a deep neural network was successfully trained for image reconstruction through glass diffusers under coherent illumination22,23 (Fig. 4a). A related
method was also demonstrated to reconstruct and classify
handwritten digits from input images of speckle patterns
obtained through multimode ﬁber propagation over a
distance of up to 1 km 24 (Fig. 4b).
Deep learning has also been applied to optical diffraction tomography. In one of the earlier studies in this ﬁeld,
Kamilov et al. demonstrated that a trained, fully connected neural network can form an inverse model to
reconstruct the 3D refractive index distribution of cells
diffraction
tomography
recordings25
Recently, it has also been demonstrated that a CNN can
Ground truth
Diffraction tomography
Learning approach
Network input
Ground truth
measurements
Speckle images
for training the
Previously unseen
speckle patterns for
testing the CNN
Unseen diffusers for testing
Diffusers for training
Present method
Δn in XZ plane, y = 0
Δn in XZ plane, y = 0
Δn in XZ plane, y = 0
Fig. 4 Deep-learning-based imaging through complex media. a Imaging through a diffuser23. Reprinted with permission from ref. 23. b Imaging
through a multimode ﬁber24. Adapted with permission from ref. 24. c Learning-based diffraction tomography reconstruction25. Reprinted with
permission from ref. 25. d Speckle noise reduction in diffraction tomography27. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27
Rivenson et al. Light: Science & Applications 8:85
 
be trained and used for an ill-conditioned inverse imaging
problem, providing tomographic reconstruction of densely layered objects from limited angle intensity projection
recordings26. Another recent work has successfully utilized a generative adversarial network (GAN) for reducing
dynamic speckle noise in diffraction tomography images
(Fig. 4d), using unregistered pairs of input and label
images during the training process27.
Deep-learning-based holographic phase recovery, image
enhancement/reconstruction, and cross-modality image
transformations have profound and broad implications in
the ﬁeld of digital holography and coherent imaging systems, with numerous applications in biomedical imaging,
environmental sensing, and materials science, among
others. These data-driven image reconstruction methods
that are based on deep learning could also be useful for
different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum where
radiation is harmful to specimens, for example, in X-ray
or electron microscopy for probing material properties at
the nanoscale. Beyond phase recovery and image reconstruction in a QPI, super-resolution through a deep neural
network can further enhance the space-bandwidth product of emerging coherent imaging modalities and might
especially be impactful for parts of the spectrum that lack
high-pixel-count imagers, such as the infrared (IR) and
terahertz (THz) bands. Resolution enhancement could
also lead to more extensive uses of holography and
coherent imaging in high-resolution and high-throughput
microscopy applications, especially those involving portable devices for use in resource-limited settings. In
addition, deep-learning-based holography methods bypass
the classical trade-off between depth-of-ﬁeld and axial
resolution by enabling high-resolution snapshot volumetric image reconstruction with a signiﬁcantly extended
depth-of-ﬁeld, which opens up new avenues for highthroughput volumetric imaging applications such as the
rapid 3D imaging of cleared organs or tissue samples28.
Recent developments such as brightﬁeld holography18
and phase staining21 digitally introduce alternative contrast mechanisms to digital holography, which were not
deep-learning-based
data-driven
approaches were developed. These advances demonstrate the powerful potential of coherent imaging systems
that are combined with deep-learning-based statistical
image transformations to modify standard image formation, reconstruction and analysis workﬂows employed in a
QPI. We envision that these latest developments will
serve as a catalyst to accelerate the translation and widescale adoption of holography and coherent imaging
techniques
biomedical
applications.
Regarding life-science-related applications, live cells can
be imaged label-free with low phototoxicity at higher
frame rates by using these emerging deep-learningpowered methods and then digitally postprocessed to
provide multimodal transformations to other contrast
mechanisms for visualization and/or automatic classiﬁcation or segmentation.
One limitation of the presented deep learning approaches is the need for the creation of accurately registered
and matching image datasets to train the networks.
However, for various applications, the microscopy ﬁeld
provides an ideal framework for the acquisition of these
training image data thanks to the highly repeatable and
precise imaging instrumentation and alignment stages
that very well control the illumination light properties,
sample distances and orientation, which are quite different from, e.g., macroscale imaging under ambient light
conditions with traditional camera systems that do not
have the same level of control and repeatability as routinely possessed by microscopic imaging systems and
instrumentation. This makes the microscopy ﬁeld a
unique and powerful test bed for utilizing the full
potential of deep-learning-enabled image reconstructions
and transformations at the micro- and nanoscale. Having
emphasized this unique advantage of microscopy instrumentation for training neural networks, we also note that
a precise registration between the input and label images
is not an absolute necessity for deep learning microscopy,
and it should be considered as a practical recommendation for the training phase rather than a requirement. In
fact, there are various emerging implementations of deep
learning toward end-to-end trainable networks that aim
to solve inverse problems with no closed-form or iterative
solution29. In this regard, physical constraints, a priori
information or image alignment that feeds into the
training image dataset can help us regularize the convergence of a neural network for a given microscopic
imaging task and avoid potential hallucinations at the
network output (which is especially crucial for biomedical
applications). This, however, is not the only means of
achieving such competitive generalization performance,
unsupervised
approaches might bring fundamentally new insights to
future uses of deep learning in microscopy.
Despite the advantages brought by the precision of
microscopy
instrumentation, the transferability
learned model from one instrument to another remains
an issue to be addressed. To use a network model that was
trained using one microscopy instrument on a new
microscope (which was not part of the training process),
the concept of transfer learning30 can potentially be used.
In this process, a much smaller set of matched input and
ground-truth training image pairs can be used to rapidly
readjust the formerly trained neural network to work with
the new imaging hardware. This process is a one-time
effort and can be considered as an initial calibration step
Rivenson et al. Light: Science & Applications 8:85
 
for applications of deep learning in microscopy. In fact,
during the assembly of each new microscopy instrument,
similar calibration and quality control measures are physically implemented to guarantee that each new microscopy instrument performs nominally the same.
In summary, we are experiencing a true renaissance in
the holography and coherent imaging ﬁelds in general,
enabled by a new wave of powerful statistical tools
stemming from neural networks and data-driven learning
approaches. We believe this is just the beginning of a set
of transformative advances that this ﬁeld will go through,
which will not only fundamentally change our imaging
instruments and how they work but also open up a plethora of new applications that are not possible with
today’s imaging systems.
Author details
1Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of California, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 2Bioengineering Department, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 3California NanoSystems Institute (CNSI),
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 4Department of Surgery,
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA
90095, USA
Conﬂict of interest
A.O., Y.R., and Y.W. have patent applications on deep learning-based
microscopy and holography.
Received: 22 March 2019 Revised: 18 August 2019 Accepted: 18 August