Terahertz pulse shaping using diffractive surfaces
Muhammed Veli1,2,3, Deniz Mengu1,2,3, Nezih T. Yardimci
1,2,3, Yi Luo1,2,3, Jingxi Li
1,2,3, Yair Rivenson1,2,3,
Mona Jarrahi1,3 & Aydogan Ozcan
Recent advances in deep learning have been providing non-intuitive solutions to various
inverse problems in optics. At the intersection of machine learning and optics, diffractive
networks merge wave-optics with deep learning to design task-speciﬁc elements to alloptically perform various tasks such as object classiﬁcation and machine vision. Here, we
present a diffractive network, which is used to shape an arbitrary broadband pulse into a
desired optical waveform, forming a compact and passive pulse engineering system. We
demonstrate the synthesis of various different pulses by designing diffractive layers that
collectively engineer the temporal waveform of an input terahertz pulse. Our results
demonstrate direct pulse shaping in terahertz spectrum, where the amplitude and phase of
the input wavelengths are independently controlled through a passive diffractive device,
without the need for an external pump. Furthermore, a physical transfer learning approach is
presented to illustrate pulse-width tunability by replacing part of an existing network with
newly trained diffractive layers, demonstrating its modularity. This learning-based diffractive
pulse engineering framework can ﬁnd broad applications in e.g., communications, ultra-fast
imaging and spectroscopy.
 
1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 2 Department of
Bioengineering, University of California Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 3 California NanoSystems Institute (CNSI), University of
California Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. ✉email: 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 12:37 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1234567890():,;
nspired by neural interactions in human brain1, artiﬁcial
neural networks and deep learning have been transformative
in many ﬁelds, providing solutions to a variety of data processing problems, including for example image recognition2,
natural language processing3 and medical image analysis4. Datadriven training of deep neural networks has set the state-of-theart performance for various applications in e.g., optical microscopy4–10, holography11–16, and sensing17–20, among others.
Beyond these applications, deep learning has also been utilized to
solve inverse physical design problems arising in e.g., nanophotonics and plasmonics21–24. These advances cover a wide range of
engineering applications and have motivated the development of
new optical computing architectures25–31 that aim to beneﬁt from
the low-latency, power-efﬁciency and parallelization capabilities
of optics in the design of machine learning hardware. For
example, Diffractive Deep Neural Networks (D2NN)32 have been
introduced as an optical machine learning framework that uses
deep learning methods, e.g., stochastic gradient-descent and
error-backpropagation, to train a set of diffractive layers for
computing a given machine learning task as the light propagates
through these layers. Early studies conducted on this framework
showed its statistical inference capabilities, achieving >98%
numerical blind testing33,34 accuracy for the classiﬁcation of the
images of handwritten digits. Recently, the D2NN framework has
also been extended to harness broadband radiation in order to
design spatially-controlled wavelength de-multiplexing systems24;
however, this former work did not engineer the spectral phase
values at different frequencies of the input radiation and therefore
did not report any temporal wave control or pulse shaping.
In parallel to these recent advances at the intersection of optics
and machine learning, there has been major progress in optical
pulse shaping, including pulse compression for optical telecommunication35 and pulse stretching for chirped pulse ampli-
ﬁcation36. Dynamic, customizable temporal waveform synthesis
has been achieved using time37–39 or frequency domain40–42
modulation. Among different approaches, the Fourier-transform
based conﬁguration43, which relies on conventional optical
components such as lenses to establish a mapping between the
pixels of an optical modulation device and the spectral components of the input broadband light, is one of the most commonly
employed techniques. In various forms of its implementation, the
optical modulation device placed at the Fourier plane in between
two gratings can be a dynamic component e.g., a spatial light
modulator44–47, an acousto-optic modulator48,49, a movable
mirror50 or even a metasurface51, offering engineered dispersion
and wavefront manipulation, tailored for different applications.
However, these earlier pulse shaping techniques have restricted
utility at some parts of the electromagnetic spectrum, such as the
terahertz band, due to the lack of advanced optical components
that can provide spatio-temporal modulation and control of
complex wavefronts, covering both a broad bandwidth and a high
spectral resolution at these frequencies52,53. As a result, direct
shaping of terahertz pulses by independent control of the spectral
amplitude and phase of the input wavelengths has not been
achieved to date; instead, the synthesis of terahertz pulses has
been generally performed indirectly through the engineering of
the optical-to-terahertz converters or shaping of the optical pulses
that pump terahertz sources54–58. Previous work also demonstrated an active device using an external pump-induced inhomogeneous medium to shape input terahertz pulses59.
Here, we demonstrate the use of diffractive networks designed
by deep learning to all-optically shape pulses by simultaneously
controlling the relative phase and amplitude of each spectral
component across a continuous and wide range of frequencies
using only trainable diffractive layers, forming a small footprint,
compact and passive pulse engineering system. This framework
uses a deep learning-based physical design strategy to devise taskspeciﬁc diffractive systems that can shape various temporal
waveforms of interest. Following the digital training stage in a
computer, we fabricated the resulting diffractive layers (Fig. 1)
and experimentally demonstrated the success of our pulse shaping diffractive networks by generating pulses with various temporal widths using a broadband terahertz pulse as input. Despite
using passive diffractive layers, the presented pulse shaping networks offer temporal pulse-width tunability that is experimentally
demonstrated by varying the inter-layer distances within a fabricated diffractive network. We also investigated a physical
transfer learning approach to show the modularity of the design
space provided by our framework. In addition to engineering
terahertz pulses, the fundamental design approach that is presented here can be readily adapted to different parts of the
electromagnetic spectrum for shaping pulses. We believe that this
study extends the engineering and precise control of electromagnetic ﬁelds through deep learning-designed diffractive networks into time-domain shaping of pulses, further motivating the
development of all-optical machine learning and information
processing platforms that can better harness the 4D spatiotemporal information carried by light.
Synthesis of arbitrary temporal waveforms. Synthesis of arbitrary temporal waveforms through small footprint and compact
systems has been of great interest for various applications in e.g.,
tele-communications, ultra-fast imaging and spectroscopy, and it
represents a challenging inverse design problem. Speciﬁcally, it
requires accurate control of the complex-valued weights of the
spectral components across a wide bandwidth and with high
spectral resolution. We addressed this challenging inverse design
problem through the training of diffractive networks as shown in
Fig. 1c. The forward training model of our diffractive networks
formulates the broadband light propagation using the angular
spectrum representation of optical waves24. Based on the complex
dispersion information of a diffractive material, the thickness of
each diffractive feature (i.e., ‘neuron’) of a given diffractive layer is
iteratively
errorbackpropagation with respect to a target cost function (see the
“Methods” section). After the convergence of this deep learningbased training in a computer, we fabricated the resulting diffractive layers (Fig. 1c) using a 3D-printer to physically form our
pulse shaping network as shown in Fig. 1a. This diffractive network was then experimentally tested for its desired/targeted pulse
shaping capability using a terahertz time-domain spectroscopy
(THz-TDS) setup60 that provides a noise equivalent bandwidth of
0.1–5 THz (Fig. 1b, d).
Each one of our pulse shaping diffractive networks consists of 4
trained layers that process the input terahertz pulse to synthesize
a desired temporal waveform over an output aperture of 0.2 cm ×
0.2 cm. Based on this system layout and a given input pulse
proﬁle to be shaped (Fig. 2b), we trained and fabricated diffractive
networks that generate square pulses with different temporal
widths. For example, Fig. 2a demonstrates the diffractive layers of
a pulse shaping network that was trained to generate a 15.5 ps
square pulse by processing the spectrum carried by the input
demonstrates
time-domain
amplitude of the output waveform numerically computed (blue)
based on the trained diffractive layers and the corresponding
experimentally measured temporal waveform (orange), along
with the associated spectral amplitude and phase distributions.
The carrier frequency of the desired temporal waveform at the
output was a non-learnable, predetermined parameter set to be
0.35 THz to avoid water absorption bands in the terahertz regime
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 12:37 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
(depicted by the red arrows in Fig. 2b). The numerically predicted
output waveform (blue) in Fig. 2c indicates that a 4-layer
diffractive network can synthesize a square temporal waveform
with a pulse width of 15.69 ps without using any conventional
optical components, in a compact architecture that spans
approximately 250-times the carrier wavelength in the axial
direction. The pulse width of the temporal waveform created by
the 3D printed diffractive layers at the output aperture is
measured as 15.52 ps, closely matching the numerically predicted
result (15.69 ps). Similarly, a comparison of the output spectral
amplitude proﬁles for the numerical and experimental results
shows a good agreement in terms of the peak locations of the
main and side lobes, as well as the relative amplitude carried by
each spectral component. On the other hand, an examination of
the unwrapped phase proﬁles (experimental vs. numerical)
reveals that the 3D-fabricated, physical diffractive network could
not exactly create the sharp phase transitions at the expected
spectral locations, but rather generated smoothened transitions.
This smoothening contributes to some of the differences observed
between the experimentally measured and the numerically
calculated time-domain waveforms (Fig. 2c). The power efﬁciency
of this diffractive network was experimentally measured as
~0.51% at the carrier frequency (f0 = 355 GHz), quantiﬁed at the
output aperture, normalized with respect to the input; here we
should emphasize that >70% of the input optical power at the
carrier frequency is in fact lost due to absorption within the 3D
printed diffractive layers. Therefore, to create our diffractive
layers, the selection of a different fabrication material with a
much lower loss (e.g., polymers such as poly-methylpentene:
TPX)61–63 can signiﬁcantly boost the overall efﬁciency of these
diffractive pulse shaping networks. Other strategies to improve
the power efﬁciency include increasing the output aperture size
and introducing additional power-related penalty terms during
the training phase of the diffractive network (see the “Discussion”
Supplementary Fig. 1 further illustrates another diffractive
network that was designed to create a narrower square pulse at its
output aperture. At the end of its deep learning-based training,
the numerical forward model converged to the thickness proﬁles
shown in Supplementary Fig. 1a in order to synthesize a 10.96 ps
square pulse (blue) illustrated in Supplementary Fig. 1c. When
the diffractive layers depicted in Supplementary Fig. 1a were 3D
printed and experimentally tested using the setup shown in
Fig. 1d, the output pulse waveform was measured to have a
temporal width of 11.85 ps (orange curve in Supplementary
Fig. 1c), providing a good match to our numerical results, similar
to the conclusions reported in Fig. 2.
Beyond fabrication artefacts and misalignments observed in the
3D-printed diffractive networks, the variation of the input
terahertz pulse from experiment to experiment is one of the
signiﬁcant contributors for any mismatch between the numerical
and experimental output waveforms. The deep learning-based
Parabolic Mirror
THz Source
Delay Line
Femtosecond
Delay Line
Height (mm)
Fig. 1 Schematic of the pulse shaping diffractive network and a photo of the experimental setup. a 3D printed pulse shaping diffractive network that
generates a square pulse with a width of 15.57 ps. b The schematic of the THz-TDS setup used in our experiments. The red line represents the optical path
of a 780 nm femtosecond laser, and the blue line represents the terahertz beam. Dashed lines show the input and output apertures of the diffractive
network. c The physical system layout of the pulse shaping diffractive network design. The input and output apertures are squares, with edge lengths of
0.8 cm and 0.2 cm, respectively. Gray regions on the aperture planes represent aluminum coating to block light transmission. d The photo of the
experimental setup.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 12:37 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
design of the diffractive networks shown in Fig. 2 and
Supplementary Fig. 1 relies on a known input terahertz pulse
proﬁle that is experimentally measured over the input aperture.
To be able to take into account uncontrolled variations of the
input pulse proﬁle from run to run, we used 5 different
experimentally measured input pulse proﬁles (dashed curves in
Supplementary Figs. 2a–b) during the training phase of each
diffractive network. In the experimental testing phase, however,
the terahertz input pulse (light blue curve in Supplementary
Figs. 2a–b) slightly deviated from these input pulse proﬁles used
in the training, causing some distortions in the experimental
results shown in Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. 1, compared to
Height (mm)
Fig. 2 Pulse shaping diffractive network design and output results. a The thickness proﬁles of the resulting diffractive layers after deep learning-based
training in a computer. These diffractive layers synthesize a square pulse with a width of 15.69 ps over the output aperture for an input pulse shown in b.
b Normalized input terahertz pulse measured right after the input aperture (see Fig. 1); in time-domain (left) and spectral domain (right). The red arrows on
the measured spectral amplitude proﬁle represent the water absorption bands at terahertz frequencies. c Left: The numerically computed (blue) and the
experimentally measured (orange) output pulses in time domain. Top right: The normalized spectral amplitudes corresponding to the numerically
computed (blue) and the experimentally measured (orange) pulses. Bottom right: Unwrapped spectral phase distributions computed based on the
numerical forward model (blue) and the experimentally measured (orange) pulse.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 12:37 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
their numerically computed counterparts for the same diffractive
network models (also see Supplementary Fig. 3 and Supplementary Fig. 4).
To shed more light onto this, next we normalized the
experimentally measured spectral amplitude proﬁles depicted in
Fig. 2c and Supplementary Fig. 1c, based on the ratio between the
average spectral amplitudes carried by the input pulses used in
the training phase and the input pulse measured at the
experimental testing phase. This simple spectral normalization
procedure nulliﬁes the effect of input terahertz source variations
from experiment to experiment and provides us an opportunity
to better evaluate the accuracy of the complex-valued spectral
ﬁltering operation performed by the 3D-fabricated diffractive
network. Supplementary Figs. 2c and 2d demonstrate the
experimental spectral amplitudes and the corresponding temporal
waveforms at the network output before and after this spectral
normalization step for the diffractive networks shown in Fig. 2a
and Supplementary Fig. 1a, respectively. Following the spectral
normalization, the width of the square pulse created by the
diffractive network in Supplementary Fig. 1a, for example,
decreased from 11.85 ps to 10.49 ps, providing a better match
to the 11.07 ps that is predicted by our numerical forward model
(Supplementary Fig. 2d). A similar improvement using spectral
normalization was also observed for the diffractive network
shown in Fig. 2a, almost perfectly matching its numerical
counterpart in terms of the square pulse width, achieving 15.71
ps after the normalization step (Supplementary Fig. 2c).
These results highlight that experiment-to-experiment variability of our input terahertz pulse proﬁle causes it to deviate from
the input pulse proﬁles used in the training phase of our
diffractive network, creating some uncontrolled errors in the
output pulse proﬁle, which can be improved signiﬁcantly after the
spectral normalization step, as discussed above. To further
explore the pulse shaping capabilities of diffractive networks,
next we trained a set of generic diffractive networks that used/
assumed a ﬂat input spectrum during their training in order to
achieve a desired output waveform; stated differently, a generic
diffractive network is trained using an input pulse where all the
wavelengths have the same spectral amplitude and phase. To
accurately demonstrate the pulse shaping behavior of these
generic diffractive designs that were trained with ﬂat spectra, we
used spectral normalization based on the input pulse proﬁle,
experimentally measured at each run. For example, Supplementary Fig. 5a and 6 show the diffractive layers of a generic pulse
shaping network model that was trained to create a 15.5 ps square
pulse. Supplementary Fig. 5c reports the time-domain amplitude
of the output waveform numerically computed (blue) based on
these trained diffractive layers and the experimentally measured
temporal waveform (orange) along with the corresponding
spectral amplitude and phase distributions. The synthesized
pulse shape by the 3D-printed diffractive network closely matches
the numerically computed waveform using our forward model,
despite the water absorption bands that appear in our experimental results, illustrated by the red arrows in Supplementary
Fig. 5b. The power efﬁciency at the carrier frequency (f0 = 400
GHz) of this diffractive network was experimentally measured as
~0.97%. Figure 3 further demonstrates three additional generic
pulse shaping diffractive network models that were trained with a
ﬂat input spectrum and experimentally tested using our terahertz
setup to achieve different square pulses, with pulse widths of
11.25 ps, 13.45 ps, and 16.69 ps, respectively, demonstrating a
very good match to their numerical counterparts. The numerically computed peak frequencies for these three different
diffractive networks were 399.4 GHz, 396.1 GHz, and 399.4
GHz, which were measured experimentally as 399.1 GHz, 402.2
GHz, and 401.8 GHz, respectively. As we move towards higher
optical frequencies beyond 0.6 THz, the experimental spectral
amplitude distributions start to deviate from their numerically
predicted counterparts. Considering that the maximum material
thickness in our model is ~1 mm, at higher optical frequencies
corresponding to wavelengths below ~0.5 mm, the light may
travel more than 2 wavelengths inside a diffractive feature
(depending on the ﬁnal trained model) which will then violate the
thin modulation layer assumption in our forward model
contributing to some of the experimental errors observed in
diffractive
corresponding to a unique complex-valued modulation per
neuron (see “Methods” section) was chosen to be 0.5 mm due
to the limited lateral resolution of our 3D printer. Therefore, for
higher frequencies, the light ﬁelds are modulated at each
diffractive layer with 2D functions sampled at lower spatial rates,
which, in return, partially limits the design capabilities of our
diffractive networks at those smaller wavelengths of the pulse
bandwidth. Furthermore, the uneven surface proﬁle in 3D
printing combined with thickness variations induced by fabrication imperfections contribute to some additional sources of
experimental errors observed in our results.
To further demonstrate the design capabilities of our diffractive
pulse shaping framework, in addition to the square pulses with
various temporal widths reported earlier, we also trained three
new diffractive network models that were designed to output (1) a
chirped-Gaussian pulse (Supplementary Fig. 7), (2) a sequence of
positive and negative chirped Gaussian pulses, one following
another (Supplementary Fig. 8), and (3) a sequence of two chirpfree Gaussian pulses (Supplementary Fig. 9). These results report
a very good match, both in time and spectral domains, between
the target, ground-truth pulse proﬁles and the corresponding
output pulses synthesized by the trained diffractive networks,
clearly demonstrating the versatile nature of the presented
framework to synthesize arbitrary pulses, engineered through
the deep learning-based design of diffractive surfaces.
Pulse width tunability. Next, we demonstrated the temporal
width tunability of pulse shaping diffractive networks despite the
passive nature of their layers. By changing the axial distance
between successive diffractive layers by ΔZ, the temporal width
and the peak frequency of the output waveform can be tuned
without any further training or a change to the 3D printed diffractive layers. We demonstrated this pulse-width tunability using
the 3D printed diffractive network depicted in Supplementary
Fig. 5, but a similar tunability also applies to the network models
shown in Fig. 3. Since our diffractive networks used 30 mm layerto-layer distance in their design, we considered the ΔZ range to be
between −10 mm to 20 mm; for instance, when ΔZ is taken as
−10 mm, the axial distance between all the successive layers of
the diffractive network is set to be 20 mm. Within this axial
tuning range, Fig. 4a–h demonstrate the effect of changing this
layer-to-layer distance of an already designed/trained diffractive
network on the output waveform and its complex-valued spectrum. The results reveal that as the diffractive layers get closer to
each other axially, i.e., a negative ΔZ, the pulse-width of the
output waveform increases and the peak frequency decreases. For
instance, when the axial distance between each diffractive layer of
the design shown in Supplementary Fig. 5 is decreased by 5 mm
(ΔZ = −5 mm) as shown in Fig. 4d, the peak of the spectral
amplitude distribution shifts from 399.4 GHz to 349.1 GHz
according to our numerical forward model. The pulse-width of
the resulting square pulse at the output aperture was numerically
found to be 17.59 ps suggesting a longer pulse compared to 15.56
ps synthesized by the original design, ΔZ = 0 mm (Fig. 4d). The
experimentally measured pulse width with the same amount of
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 12:37 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
axial change in the layer-to-layer distance of the diffractive network revealed a 17.56 ps pulse after the spectral normalization
step, conﬁrming the tunability of our pulse shaping diffractive
network and also providing a very good match to our numerical
results (Fig. 4).
When the layer-to-layer distance is increased, i.e., a positive
ΔZ, the output square pulse gets narrower in time domain with
an accompanying shift in the peak frequency toward higher
values. Figure 4e demonstrates an example of this case with ΔZ =
5 mm, i.e., the distance between each diffractive layer is increased
to 35 mm. In this case, the experimentally measured and
numerically computed square pulses at the output plane have
frequencies
453.1 GHz,
corresponding pulse-widths of 14.3 ps and 13.97 ps, respectively,
once again conﬁrming the tunability of our pulse shaping
diffractive networks and demonstrating a very good agreement
between the numerical forward model and our experiments. As
we further increase ΔZ beyond 10 mm (depicted in Fig. 4f), the
time domain pulse continues to get narrower.
Modularity of diffractive pulse shaping network. To further
explore methods to alter a given fabricated diffractive network
and its output function, next we employed a Lego-like physical
transfer learning approach to demonstrate pulse-width tunability
by updating only part of a pre-trained network with newly trained
and fabricated diffractive layers, showing the modularity of a
diffractive pulse shaping network. For this aim, we took the pretrained network that experimentally synthesized a 15.57 ps square
waveform, noted as the original design in Fig. 5a, and further
trained only the last diffractive layer to synthesize a new desired
output waveform, i.e., a 12.03 ps square pulse, by keeping the ﬁrst
three layers as they are (already fabricated). We experimentally
validated this transfer learning approach as shown in Fig. 5b by
removing the existing last diffractive layer and inserting a newly
trained layer, fabricated using the same 3D printer. Numerical
and experimental results revealed very good match to each other
for the normalized output spectral amplitude over a wide frequency range, as well as for the normalized output ﬁeld waveform,
generating
pulse-widths
respectively. Next we took an alternative approach: this time, the
last two diffractive layers were replaced with new diffractive layers
trained to generate 12.03 ps square pulses. As illustrated in
Fig. 5c, with the addition of these two new diffractive layers to the
already existing ﬁrst two layers, the resulting new diffractive
network successfully demonstrated the synthesis of 12.14 ps and
12.39 ps waveforms at the output aperture for the numerical and
experimental waveforms, respectively. The peak frequency of the
Height (mm)
Experimental
Experimental
Experimental
Fig. 3 Experimental validation of different generic pulse shaping diffractive networks. From left to right, the numerically computed (blue) and the
experimentally measured (orange) normalized spectral amplitudes are illustrated with the inset plots showing the corresponding unwrapped spectral phase
proﬁles; the numerically calculated (blue) normalized output pulse and the experimentally measured (orange) normalized output pulse are also shown
along with the thickness proﬁles of the diffractive layers resulting from deep learning-based training for synthesizing the desired (ground truth) square
pulses with pulse-widths of (a) 10.52 ps, (b) 13.02 ps, and (c) 17.98 ps.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 12:37 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
new network model was calculated to be at 399.4 GHz and it was
experimentally measured to be at 399.8 GHz, showing once again
a very good match between our numerical forward model and
experimental results. Overall, the insertion of two newly trained
layers, when compared to a single newly trained layer added on
top of the existing layers of a 3D-fabricated network, provided us
improved performance for achieving the new pulse form that is
Δz = -10 mm
ΔΔz = -5 mm
ΔΔz = 10 mm
Δz = 15 mm
Δz = 20 mm
Fig. 4 Pulse width tunability of diffractive networks. a Numerically calculated and experimentally measured temporal pulse widths and (b) the
corresponding shifts in the center frequency are depicted as a function of the inter-layer distances of a pulse shaping diffractive network that was originally
trained for synthesizing a square pulse width of 15.50 ps (Δz = 0 mm, see Supplementary Fig. 5). c–h The numerically computed (blue) and the
experimentally measured (orange) normalized spectral amplitudes, with the inset plots showing the experimentally measured temporal waveform (red)
when the layer-to-layer distances are changed by (c) Δz = −10 mm, (d) Δz = −5 mm, (e) Δz = 5 mm, (f) Δz = 10 mm, (g) Δz = 15 mm and (h) Δz = 20
mm. The negative (positive) sign indicates that the inter-layer axial distances decrease (increase).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 12:37 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
Discussion
Our results reported in earlier sub-sections demonstrate direct pulse
shaping in terahertz part of the spectrum, where a complex-valued
spectral modulation function that is trained using deep learning
directly acts on terahertz frequencies through a passive diffractive
device, without the need for an external pump. The presented
learning-based approach can shape any input terahertz pulse through
diffraction and is fundamentally different from previous approaches
that indirectly synthesize a desired terahertz pulse through optical-toterahertz converters or shaping of the optical pump that interacts
with terahertz sources. This capability of direct pulse shaping in
terahertz band enables new opportunities that could not be explored
with indirect pulse shaping approaches. For example, precise engineering and synthesis of terahertz pulses with the state-of-the-art
methods is either not possible or very hard and costly to achieve,
including e.g., pulsed terahertz generation through quantum cascade
lasers64–66, solid-state circuits67,68, and particle accelerators69. Furthermore, the presented deep learning-based framework is quite
ﬂexible and versatile that can be used to engineer terahertz pulses
regardless of their polarization state, beam shape, beam quality or
aberrations of the speciﬁc terahertz generation mechanism.
The intrinsic pulse-width tunability of a given diffractive network
that is achieved by changing the axial layer-to-layer distance is an
interesting feature that we demonstrated numerically and experimentally: Fig. 4a shows various pulse-widths obtained at seven
different layer-to-layer distances using an existing network design.
As the layer-to-layer distance of a diffractive network design
increases, the temporal pulse-width at the output aperture gets
smaller, without any further training or fabrication of new diffractive layers. This opens up the opportunity to synthesize new
waveforms within a certain time window around the originally
designed output pulse. In addition to that, an axial distance change
between the existing layers of a diffractive network also shifts the
center frequency of the output pulse as shown Fig. 4b. As the
diffractive layers get closer to each other, we observed a red-shift in
the center frequency. Another related aspect of this pulse shaping
diffractive framework is its modularity to tune the output pulses
using a physical transfer learning approach. By training a new layer
(or layers) to replace part of an existing, pre-trained diffractive
network model, on demand synthesis of new pulses can be
achieved, as demonstrated in Fig. 5b–c. These results highlight some
of the unique features of diffractive pulse shaping networks and
Experimental
Experimental
Experimental
Height (mm)
Original Design
Fig. 5 Changing the output temporal waveform of a diffractive network by a physical transfer learning approach. a The temporal and spectral output
distributions (blue dashed box), synthesized by the original diffractive design that was trained to generate a 15.50 ps square pulse. b Replacing the last
diffractive layer with another, newly trained diffractive layer to synthesize a 12.03 ps square pulse at the output. The thickness proﬁle of the newly trained
diffractive layer is shown, together with the normalized spectral and temporal proﬁles synthesized by this new diffractive network in green dashed box.
c Replacing the last two diffractive layers with newly trained, two diffractive layers to synthesize a 12.03 ps square pulse at the output. The thickness
proﬁles of the newly trained diffractive layers are shown, together with the normalized spectral and temporal proﬁles synthesized by this new diffractive
network in red dashed box.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 12:37 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
how they can adapt to potential changes in the desired output pulse
The presented pulse shaping framework has a compact design,
with an axial length of approximately 250 × λ0, where λ0 denotes
the peak wavelength. Moreover, it does not utilize any conventional optical components such as spatial light modulators, which
makes it ideal for pulse shaping in terahertz part of the spectrum,
where high-resolution spatio-temporal modulation and control of
complex wavefronts over a broad bandwidth represent a signiﬁcant challenge. In addition to being compact and much simpler compared to previous demonstrations of pulse shaping in
terahertz spectrum, our results present the implementation of
direct pulse shaping in terahertz band, where the learned
complex-valued spectral modulation function of the diffractive
network directly acts on terahertz frequencies for pulse engineering. This capability enables new opportunities: when merged
with appropriate fabrication methods and materials, the presented pulse shaping approach can be used to directly engineer
terahertz pulses generated through quantum cascade lasers, solidstate circuits and particle accelerators. Another major advantage
of this deep learning-based approach is that it is versatile and can
be easily adapted to engineer terahertz pulses irrespective of their
polarization state, beam quality, as well as spectral/spatial
aberrations.
The experimentally measured power efﬁciency values reported
in our manuscript are ~1%. However, there are various design
strategies that can increase power-efﬁciency in diffractive pulse
shaping networks as detailed in table in Fig. 6 (also see the
“Methods” section). The diffractive networks reported in Fig. 6
were trained to synthesize 15.5 ps square pulses at their output
plane. As one can observe in Fig. 6, the power efﬁciency values of
the resulting diffractive models can be increased by more than an
order of magnitude by adjusting the training loss function,
increasing the output aperture size and using low absorption
materials. For example, as reported in the second column of table
in Fig. 6, when the material absorption is ignored during the
testing of a diffractive network model, a 2-fold wider output
aperture (i.e., 4 mm) provides a signiﬁcant improvement in the
power efﬁciency of the pulse shaping networks, reaching 60.37
and 61% for two different network models. On the other hand, if
the absorption of our 3D-printing material is taken into account
as part of the optical forward model, one can reach an efﬁciency
value of 17.84% by accordingly optimizing the training loss
function and using a 4 mm output aperture (see Fig. 6).
By comparing the top and bottom efﬁciency values for a given
training loss function and design strategy reported in Fig. 6, we
clearly see that the 3D-printing material used in this work
decreases the pulse shaping network efﬁciency 2–5 times, in
different designs, compared to an ideal, non-absorbing optical
material. As an alternative fabrication material for diffractive
pulse shaping networks, one can consider low-absorption polymers61–63 used in commercially available components designed
for THz wavelengths, such as TPX, which exhibits a two ordersof-magnitude smaller absorption coefﬁcient compared to the 3D
printing material used in our work. There have been various
fabrication
absorption
polymers70,71, which can be used to precisely control the thickness of these low-loss polymers with a relatively high-resolution
to manufacture pulse shaping diffractive networks with much
lower material absorption. To even further improve the output
efﬁciency of pulse shaping diffractive networks, anti-reﬂective
(AR) coatings over diffractive surfaces can also be utilized to
reduce back-reﬂections, similar to the AR-coated commercial
lenses and other optical components.
In conclusion, we presented a modular pulse shaping network
that synthesizes various pulse waveforms using deep learning.
Precise shaping of the spectral amplitude and phase proﬁle of an
arbitrary input pulse over a wide frequency range can be achieved
using this platform, which will be transformative for various
applications including e.g., communications, pulse compression,
ultra-fast imaging and spectroscopy. In addition to direct engineering of terahertz pulses, the presented diffractive pulse shaping
network can be utilized in different parts of the electromagnetic
spectrum by using appropriate fabrication technologies and
materials.
Terahertz setup. Figure 1 shows the schematic diagram of the terahertz timedomain spectroscopy (THz-TDS) setup that was used to measure the input and
output pulse proﬁles reported in this work. A Ti:sapphire laser (Coherent Mira HP)
is used to generate femtosecond optical pulses. The optical beam generated by the
laser is split into two parts. One part of the beam is used to pump a high-power
plasmonic photoconductive terahertz source to generate terahertz pulses72, which
are collimated with off-axis parabolic mirrors and guided to a high-sensitivity
plasmonic photoconductive terahertz detector60. The other part of the beam passes
through an optical delay line (Newport IMS300LM) and is focused onto the terahertz detector. As a result, an ultrafast signal which is directly proportional to the
incident terahertz ﬁeld is generated within the terahertz detector. The signal is
sampled with a 12.5 fs time-resolution over a 400 ps time-window by changing the
time delay between the terahertz and optical probe pulses incident on the detector,
ampliﬁed with a transimpedance pre-ampliﬁer (Femto DHPCA-100), and acquired
with a lock-in ampliﬁer (Zurich Instruments MFLI). For each measurement, 10
time-domain traces are collected and averaged. The described THz-TDS setup
provides a 90 dB signal-to-noise ratio over a 5 THz noise-equivalent-power
bandwidth.
Each one of the pulse shaping diffractive networks consists of 4 trained layers
that are separated by 3 cm as illustrated in Fig. 1. The diffractive layers, input and
output apertures, were fabricated using a 3D Printer (Objet30 Pro, Stratasys Ltd.).
The fabrication/preparation of each diffractive layer takes approximately 1.5–2 h. A
square input aperture (0.8 cm) and an output aperture (0.2 cm) are placed 3 cm
from the ﬁrst diffractive layer and 10 cm from the last diffractive layer, respectively
(Fig. 1c). The printed apertures were aluminum coated to prevent any light wave
passing through the regions outside of the aperture. After the design and printing
of the diffractive layers, they were placed at their corresponding locations inside a
3D printed holder that ensures robust alignment between the layers. During the
pulse shaping experiments, the diffractive network was directly placed between the
terahertz source and detector, coaxial with the terahertz input pulse emanating
from the source (Fig. 1b,d). After the alignment of the diffractive network, the
output pulse was measured and it was followed by the measurement of the
reference input pulse which was acquired by placing the same terahertz detector at
the input aperture, without any diffractive layers between the source and detector.
For generic diffractive networks that were trained with ﬂat input spectra, the
measured output pulse spectrum is normalized with respect to the measured
reference input pulse and its spectral amplitude is smoothened around water
absorption lines shown in Figs. 3–5 and Supplementary Fig. 5. The measured pulse
width at the network output is deﬁned as the width of the time interval that the
envelope of the pulse amplitude is at least 20% of its maximum (see e.g., Figs. 2–5).
Forward model. Our forward model considers the layers of a diffractive network as
thin modulation elements that are connected to the next layer through free space
propagation. The modulation of neurons at each layer can be modeled as:
Mn xi; yi; zi; λ
Þ ¼ An xi; yi; zi; λ
Þ exp jφn xi; yi; zi; λ
where M represents the complex transmission/reﬂection coefﬁcient. The ﬁeld
amplitude, phase, wavelength, and diffractive layer number are denoted by A, ϕ, λ
and n, respectively. Free space propagation between each layer is calculated based
on the Rayleigh–Sommerfeld formulation of diffraction that models a diffractive
feature as source of a secondary wave:
i x; y; z; λ
Þ ¼ z  zi
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Þ2þ y  yi
Þ2þ z  zi
i ðx; y; z; λÞ is the
secondary wave generated by the ith neuron on nth layer at location (xi, yi, zi),
respectively. Then, we can write the optical ﬁeld at layer n, at point (xi, yi, zi) as:
Un xi; yi; zi; λ
Þ ¼ Mn xi; yi; zi; λ
Un1 xk; yk; zk; λ
xi; yi; zi; λ
Network training. During the training of a pulse shaping diffractive network, one
of the 5 pulses measured at the input plane (Supplementary Figs. 2a–b) were
randomly selected as the input pulse at each iteration of the training model for the
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 12:37 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
Fig. 6 Power efﬁciency values of pulse shaping diffractive networks trained with different loss functions. These diffractive pulse shaping networks were
trained to generate a 15.5 ps square pulse with output aperture widths of 2 mm (left) and 4 mm (right), with their corresponding loss functions shown in
the leftmost column.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 12:37 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
diffractive networks reported in Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. 1; for the generic
diffractive network models reported in Figs. 3–5, Supplementary Fig. 5 and Supplementary Figs. 7–9, however, the input is modeled as a spectrally ﬂat Gaussian
beam with varying FWHM values over a wide frequency range (Supplementary
Fig. 10) and with a uniform phase proﬁle. The wave propagation is performed for
N = 300 discrete frequencies that were uniformly sampled between 3 GHz and
In our wave propagation through the diffractive layers, a 0.5 mm pixel (i.e.,
diffractive feature) size is assumed based on the lateral resolution of our 3D printer.
While a pixel size of 0.5 mm can create all the propagating modes of free-space for
frequencies below ~300 GHz, they can only excite plane waves over a subset of
the k-vectors supported by the free-space for the spectral components between
300 GHz and 1 THz73. Therefore, diffractive pulse shaping networks would in
general beneﬁt from higher resolution fabrication techniques with better lateral
resolution to more accurately control and engineer the complex-valued spectral
weights of a given desired pulse.
To calculate the Rayleigh–Sommerfeld integral more accurately, each pixel is
oversampled twice so that all 4 elements have the same thickness values in that 2 ×
2 grid. The thickness of each pixel, h, is composed of a base height (hbase) of
0.1 mm, which provides adequate mechanical stiffness to the fabricated diffractive
layer and a trainable modulation height (htr) that is between 0 and 1 mm, i.e.,
h ¼ hbase þ htr
To conﬁne the modulation height between 0 and 1 mm, we deﬁned htr over an
auxiliary training-related variable, ha, using:
htr ¼ 0:5 mm ´ 1 þ sin ha
In its general form, the amplitude and phase modulation of each neuron of a given
diffractive layer is a function of the layer thickness, incident wavelength, material
extinction coefﬁcient κ(λ) and refractive index n(λ), i.e.,
An x; y; z; λ
Þ ¼ exp  2πκ λ
φn x; y; z; λ
Þ ¼ 2πh n λ
ð Þ  nair
The material refractive index n(λ) and the extinction coefﬁcient κ(λ) are deﬁned as
the real and imaginary parts of the complex refractive index, ~n λ
ð Þ þ jκðλÞ,
determined by the dispersion of our 3D fabrication material24. Since we have
relatively small variations in the extinction coefﬁcient over the frequency band that
we utilized in this work, we ignored the material absorption during the training and
numerical simulations of diffractive layers.
After the wave propagation through diffractive layers, light goes through the
output square aperture of 2 mm width, which is placed right in front of the
hemisphere silicon lens which is 1.2 cm in diameter. Since the effective aperture of
this Si lens was signiﬁcantly restricted by the output aperture, it was modeled as a
uniform slab with a refractive index of 3.4 and 0.5 cm thickness. After the
propagation through the Si slab, the coherent integration of the optical waves
incident on the active area of the detector was computed to obtain the spectral ﬁeld
amplitude and phase for each frequency. The power efﬁciency was deﬁned as
Isensor;f0
Iinput;f0 for the peak/center frequency (f0) of given diffractive network design,
where Iinput;f0 and Isensor;f0 denote the power within the input and output apertures,
respectively.
Our loss function (L) used during the training phase has three components:
temporal loss term (Lt) which penalizes the mismatch between the target and the
output time waveforms, the power loss term (Lp), and the power surrounding the
detector region (Ls), i.e.,
L ¼ αLt þ βLp þ Ls
To calculate the temporal loss, Lt, ﬁrst the output temporal waveform is
reconstructed from the spectral ﬁeld amplitude and phase on the detector area, and
it is normalized. Then, the difference between the target temporal waveform and
the reconstructed output waveform is integrated over time:
ftarget  foutput
where ftarget and foutput denote the ground-truth, time-domain waveform and the
synthesized waveform by the diffractive network model at a training iteration. For a
given diffractive network model, foutput is computed by propagating the input waves
of all the spectral components from the input aperture to the output aperture. Next,
the complex-valued wave ﬁelds of these different wavelength components are
integrated over the sensitive area of the detector to obtain each complex-valued
spectral coefﬁcient at the output, which is followed by an inverse Fourier transform
operation over the resulting vector. Alternatively, the error term between a target,
time-domain pulse, ftarget, and the synthesized waveform by the diffractive network,
foutput, can directly be computed based on the complex-valued spectral coefﬁcients
without any inverse Fourier transform operation. However, in this case, since the
error is deﬁned based on the complex-valued target and output functions, two
separate error functions must be computed for the real and imaginary parts of the
spectral coefﬁcients and these two losses must be combined to compute the ﬁnal
loss term.
The analytical form of the square pulses used in this work can be written as:
ftargetðtÞ ¼ rectðbtÞ cosð2πf0tÞ, where f0 and b represent the carrier frequency and
the rectangular pulse-width, respectively. For the Gaussian pulses, however, the
analytical form of the target waveform can be written as:
ftarget tð Þ ¼Pn
i¼1 Ci cos 2πf0ðt  t0;iÞ
exp  t  t0;i
exp jqiðt  t0;iÞ2
where t0,i, Ci, pi and qi denote the time instant of the peak, magnitude, variance of
the low-pass envelope and the instantaneous angular chirpiness, respectively. The
number of desired pulses inside a targeted time-window is determined by n. For the
examples shown in Supplementary Figs. 7–9, the target time domain waveforms
were created by setting these parameters to [n = 1, t0 = 0, C1 = 1, p1 = 2.2 × 10−22,
q1 = 5.76 × 1021]; [n = 2, t0,1 = 0, t0,2 = 27 ps, C1 = 1, C2 = 0.5, p1 = p2 = 1.38
× 10−23, q1 = 6.25 × 1022 q2 = −6.25 × 1022]; and [n = 2, t0,1 = 0, t0,2 = 19 ps, C1 =
1, C2 = 1, p1 = p2 = 4.58 × 10−24, q1 = q2 = 0], respectively.
For the diffractive network designs shown in the last row of the table in Fig. 6,
we used a power loss term, Lp, deﬁned as:
if η < ηth
ω Iinput . Iinput and Isensor denote the power within the input and output
apertures for a given wavelength, respectively. For the diffractive network designs
shown in the last row of the table in Fig. 6, corresponding to 2 mm and 4 mm
output apertures, ηth was selected as 0.07 and 0.08, respectively. For the all
remaining designs reported in the manuscript, the power loss term is deﬁned as:
Itarget  Isensor
where Itarget is the total power of the target waveform at a given wavelength within
the input aperture, normalized with respect to the power of the input at the center
frequency, f0.
The last component of our loss function which represents the power
surrounding the detector aperture is deﬁned as:
ω Isurround
ω Ioutput plane
where Isurround is the total power at a given wavelength within the 5 mm × 5 mm
square region that is centered around the output aperture (excluding the output
aperture, i.e., it only measures the signal surrounding the output aperture) and
Ioutput plane is the total power at a given wavelength within the output plane.
The diffractive networks that synthesized 10.58 ps, 10.96 ps, 13.26 ps, 15.56 ps,
15.69 ps, and 17.94 ps square terahertz pulses were trained with α
β ratios of 6500,
500, 4500, 1500, 750,000, and 2500, respectively. For the physical transfer learning
approach, an α
β ratio of 8500 was used. For Supplementary Figs. 7 and 9, we used an
β ratio of 1500, and for Supplementary Fig. 8, we used α
β ¼ 15000.
Figure 6 reports a series of diffractive optical network designs that are trained to
create a square pulse of 15.5 ps at their output apertures, achieving different levels
of power efﬁciencies. Among these pulse shaping diffractive network models, the α
ratio was adjusted depending on the size of the output aperture. Speciﬁcally, the
diffractive networks targeting a 2 mm aperture at the output plane were trained
β ¼ 1500, and this ratio was reduced to 136 for the diffractive pulse shaping
systems with 4 mm wide output apertures. Finally, an α
β ratio of 150 was used for
the diffractive optical networks that were trained with the power efﬁciency loss
term described in Eq. (10).
In our training, Adam optimizer is used as a standard error backpropagation
method with a learning rate of 0.8 × 10−3 for the pulses reported in Supplementary
Figs. 7–9. For the diffractive networks synthesizing 10.96 ps and 15.69 ps square
pulses, on the other hand, the learning rate was set to be 10−3. For the rest of the
diffractive network models 10−4 was used as the learning rate. All the trainable
parameters were initialized as zero. Our designs used Python (v3.7.3) and
TensorFlow (v1.15.0) on a computer that has Nvidia Titan RTX graphical
processing unit, Intel Core i9 CPU and 128 GB of RAM with Windows 10
operating system. MATLAB 2016b is used to convert designed diffractive layers to
a 3D printable (.stl) ﬁle format.
Data availability
All the data and methods needed to evaluate the conclusions in this work are present in
the main text and the Supplementary Information. Any other relevant data are available
from the authors upon reasonable request.
Code availability
The codes used in this work use standard libraries that are publicly available using
TensorFlow.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 12:37 | | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
Received: 28 June 2020; Accepted: 20 November 2020;