An update on the double cascade scenario in two-dimensional
turbulence
G. Boﬀetta1 and S. Musacchio2
1Dipartimento di Fisica Generale and INFN,
Universit`a di Torino, via P.Giuria 1, 10125 Torino (Italy)
(2) CNRS, Lab. J.A. Dieudonn´e UMR 6621, Parc Valrose, 06108 Nice (France)
 
Statistical features of homogeneous, isotropic, two-dimensional turbulence is discussed on the
basis of a set of direct numerical simulations up to the unprecedented resolution 327682.
forcing the system at intermediate scales, narrow but clear inertial ranges develop both for the
inverse and for direct cascades where the two Kolmogorov laws for structure functions are, for the
ﬁrst time, simultaneously observed. The inverse cascade spectrum is found to be consistent with
Kolmogorov-Kraichnan prediction and is robust with respect the presence of an enstrophy ﬂux.
The direct cascade is found to be more sensible to ﬁnite size eﬀects: the exponent of the spectrum
has a correction with respect theoretical prediction which vanishes by increasing the resolution.
“Now, listen to me. You are living on a Plane. What you style Flatland is the
vast level surface of what I may call a ﬂuid on, or in, the top of which you and
your countrymen move about, without rising above it or falling below it.”
Flatland by E.A. Abbott
The existence of two quadratic inviscid invariants is the most distinguishing feature of
Navier Stokes equations in two dimensions. On this basis, R.H. Kraichnan predicted
many years ago the double cascade scenario: when the turbulent ﬂow is sustained by an
external forcing acting on a typical scale ℓf, an inverse cascade of kinetic energy E = 1/2⟨v2⟩
to large scales (ℓ≫ℓf) and a direct cascade of enstrophy Z = 1/2⟨ω2⟩to small scales
(ℓ≪ℓf) develop.
In inverse and direct ranges of scales the theory predicts the kinetic
energy spectrum E(k) ≃ε2/3k−5/3 and E(k) ≃η2/3k−3 with possible logarithmic corrections
( ). Here ε and η ≃k2
fε are respectively the energy and the enstrophy injection rate.
Navier-Stokes equations in two dimensions are now the prototypical model for turbulent systems displaying a double cascade scenario. From two-dimensional magneto-hydrodynamics, to many geophysical model (such as Charney-Hasegawa-Mima), to wave turbulence models, the picture originally developed by Kraichnan has found many fruitful
applications.
Despite the expansion of the ﬁelds of applicability, it is remarkable that the veriﬁcation of
Kraichnan’s theory, after more than 40 years from its formulation, is still partial. This is due
to several reasons. First of all, the diﬃculties to generate a laboratory ﬂow which is truly two
dimensional on a large range of scales, limits the experimental approaches. From a numerical
point of view, the situation in two dimensions is apparently very convenient with respect
to three dimensions. A deeper analysis shows that this is not the case, as the simultaneous
simulation of two inertial ranges requires very large resolutions. Moreover, because time
step is proportional to grid size, the computational eﬀort for simulating two-dimensional
turbulence can be even larger than in the three dimensional case.
In the present paper we report numerical results on the statistics of the two cascades
of two-dimensional turbulence on the basis of very high resolution (up to 327682) direct
numerical simulations. Together with previous results at lower resolutions (already reported
on ) we obtain strong indications that the classical Kraichnan scenario is recovered in the
limit of two inﬁnitely extended inertial ranges, although we are unable to address the issue
of possible logarithmic corrections in the direct cascade.
The motion of an incompressible (∇· u = 0) ﬂuid in two dimensions is governed by the
Navier–Stokes equations which are written for the scalar vorticity ﬁeld ω = ∇× u as
∂tω + u · ∇ω = ν∇2ω −αω + fω .
In (1) ν is the kinematic viscosity, fω is a forcing term and the friction term −αω removes
energy at large scales in order to reach a stationary state. Alternatively, one can consider
the quasi-stationary regime with α = 0 in which the integral scale grows, according to
Kolmogorov scaling, as L(t) = ε1/2t3/2. In this case, Galilean invariant statistics (i.e. velocity
structure functions or energy spectrum) is stationary at small scales ℓ< L(t). We remark
that the form of the friction term in (1) physically represents a crude approximation of the
eﬀects induced by bottom or air friction on a thin layer of ﬂuid .
We numerically integrate (1) by means of a standard, fully dealiased, pseudo-spectral
parallel code on a double periodic square domain of side Lx = Ly = 2π at spatial resolution
up to N = 32768. The forcing term fω in (1) is δ-correlated in time (in order to control
energy and enstrophy input) and peaked on a characteristic forcing scale ℓf. We use either
a Gaussian forcing with correlation function ⟨fω(r, t)fω(0, 0)⟩= Fδ(t) exp(−(r/ℓf)2) or a
forcing which has support on a narrow band of wavenumbers around kf = π/ℓf in Fourier
space. In both cases this ensures that energy and enstrophy input are localized in Fourier
space and only a limited range of scales around the forcing scale is aﬀected by the details of
the forcing statistics. More complex forcing, not localized in wavenumber space, can have a
direct eﬀect on inertial range scales . The forcing scale in all run is ﬁxed at ℓf = Lx/100
to allow the development of inertial ranges both at scales ℓ> ℓf (inverse cascade) and ℓ< ℓf
(direct cascade). For the largest simulation run (N = 32768) we study the inverse cascade in
the quasistationary regime with α = 0 and we stop the integration of (1) when L(t) < Lx to
avoid the pile-up of energy at the largest available scale. Table I reports the most important
parameters for the simulations.
The ﬁrst information we get from the Table is related to the direction of the energy
and enstrophy ﬂuxes. According to the original idea of Kraichnan on the double cascade,
in the ideal case of an inﬁnite inertial range all the energy (enstrophy) injected should be
transferred to large (small) scales. This can be thought as a limit case of a realistic situation
in which the inertial range has a ﬁnite extension because of the presence of large and small
2 × 10−5 5 × 10−6 2 × 10−6 1 × 10−6 2.5 × 10−7
TABLE I: Parameters of the simulations. N spatial resolution, ν viscosity, α friction, ℓf = π/kf
forcing scale, Rλ = Z3/2/ην Reynolds number for the direct cascade , ℓν = ν1/2/η1/6
dissipative scale, εI energy injection rate, εα friction energy dissipation rate (large-scale energy
ﬂux for run E), ηI enstrophy injection rate, ην viscous enstrophy dissipation rate, δ correction
to the Kraichnan spectral exponent in the direct cascade. Viscosity is tuned to have for all runs
kmaxℓν ≃3. For the run E, for which α = 0, εα is kinetic energy growth rate.
scale dissipation. The characteristic viscous scale ℓν and friction scale ℓα can be expressed
in terms of the energy (enstrophy) viscous dissipation rate εν (ην) and friction dissipation
rate εα (ηα) by the relations ℓ2
ν = εν/ην and ℓ2
α = εα/ηα. Energy and enstrophy balance
equations in stationary conditions give 
2 (ℓα/ℓf)2 −1
1 −(ℓν/ℓf)2
= (ℓα/ℓf)2 −1
1 −(ℓν/ℓf)2
Therefore with an extended direct inertial range, ℓν ≪ℓf, one has εν/εα →0, i.e. all the
energy injected goes to large scales. Moreover, if ℓα ≫ℓf one obtains ηα/ην →0 i.e. all the
enstrophy goes to small scales to generate the direct cascade. Indeed, from Table I we see
that increasing the resolution, i.e. ℓf/ℓν, the fraction of energy which ﬂows to large scales
increases. Because in our runs ℓα/ℓf is constant with resolution and because ℓν ∝ν1/2 we
expect that, according to (2), εν/εα ∝ν as indeed is shown in the inset of Fig. 1.
Most of the enstrophy (around 90%) is dissipated by small scale viscosity. We observe a
moderate increase of the large-scale contribution to enstrophy dissipation ηα by going from
run A to D. This is a ﬁnite size eﬀect because we have to increase the friction coeﬃcient
α with the resolution N in order to keep the friction scale ℓα ≃α−3/2ε1/2
constant when εα
grows. Indeed, for the run E without large-scale friction, the enstrophy ﬂux to small scales
almost balances the input.
FIG. 1: (Color online). (a) Energy and (b) enstrophy ﬂuxes in Fourier space for the runs of Table I.
Fluxes for runs D and E are computed from a single snapshot. Inset (c): ratio of viscous over
friction energy dissipation versus kinematic viscosity for the 5 runs, the line represents a linear ﬁt.
Figure 1 shows the energy and enstrophy ﬂuxes in Fourier space deﬁned as ΠE(k) ≡
0 E(k′)dk′ and ΠZ(k) ≡−∂t
0 k′2E(k′)dk′ (where E(k) is the energy spectrum and
the time derivative keeps the contribution from nonlinear terms in (1) only ). We observe
that, because resolution is changed by keeping ℓα ≫ℓf constant, the only eﬀect of increasing
resolution on the inverse cascade is the growth of εα/εI (i.e. ΠE(k)/εI) as discussed above,
while the extension of the inertial range does not change. Despite the limited resolution of
the inverse cascade inertial range (kf = 100), we observe an almost constant energy ﬂux
which develops independently on the presence of a direct cascade inertial range (run A). Of
course, because of the presence of the two energy sinks (viscosity and friction) a plateau
indicating a constant energy ﬂux is clearly observable for the largest resolution simulation
E only. On the contrary, the direct cascade does not develop for the small resolution runs
as the dissipative scale is very close to the forcing scale (see Table I). A constant enstrophy
ﬂux ΠZ(k) which extends over about one decade is on the other hand obtained for the most
resolved run E.
The behavior of the ﬂuxes around k ≃kf depends on the details of the injection: transition from zero to negative (positive) energy (enstrophy) ﬂux is sharp in the case of forcing
on a narrow band of wavenumber (run D and E) while it is more smooth for the Gaussian
forcing which is active on more scales.
FIG. 2: (Color online). Energy spectra for the simulation of Table I compensated with the inverse
energy ﬂux. Lines represent the two Kraichnan spectra Ck−5/3 (dashed) with C = 6 and k−3
(dotted). The inset shows the correction δ to the Kraichnan exponent for the direct cascade 3
obtained from the minimum of the local slope of the spectra in the range kf ≤k ≤kν as a function
of the viscosity. Errorbars are obtained from the ﬂuctuations of the local slope. The line has a
slope 0.38 and is a guide for the eye.
In Fig. 2 we plot the energy spectra of the diﬀerent runs compensated with the energy
ﬂux. In the inverse range k < kf a Kolmogorov spectrum E(k) = Cε2/3
α k−5/3 is clearly
observed for all simulations. The value of the Kolmogorov constant C ≃6 is compatible
with those obtained from more resolved inertial range and it is found to be independent
on the resolution. For what concerns the direct cascade, the spectrum is steeper than the
Kraichnan prediction k−3. This eﬀect is due to ﬁnite size eﬀects, as it reduces by increasing
the resolution. In order to quantify the recovery of the Kraichnan exponent, we computed
for all runs the local slope of the energy spectra in the range of wavenumber kf ≤k ≤kν.
A plateau for the slope in this range of scales deﬁnes the scaling exponent −(3 + δ) of the
energy spectrum in the direct cascade. In the inset of Fig. 2 we plot the measured value
of the correction δ as a function of the viscosity of the run. It is evident that, despite the
fact the classical exponent −3 is not observed, the indication is that it should eventually be
recovered in the inﬁnite resolution limit ν →0. It is interesting to observe that for the most
resolved run E, for which the enstrophy ﬂux is almost constant over a decade of wavenumbers
(see Fig. 1), the exponent of the energy spectrum still has a signiﬁcant correction δ ≃0.35.
We remark that a clear observation of Kraichnan k−3 spectrum in simulations is obtained
using some kind of modiﬁed viscosity only , while steeper spectra has also been
observed in simulations of (1) with a large scale forcing, i.e. resolving the direct cascade
only . Therefore also for the direct cascade our simulations support the picture for which
the statistics of one cascade is independent on the presence of the other cascade.
FIG. 3: (Color online). Third-order longitudinal velocity structure function S3(r) ≡⟨(δu∥(r))3⟩
for run E at ﬁnal time. The two lines represent the Kolmogorov laws (4) (continuous) and (5)
(dotted). Inset: compensation of S3(r) with εαr (circles) and with ηνr3 (triangles). Lines are the
coeﬃcient 3/2 (continuous) and 1/8 (dotted).
We now consider small scale statistics in physical space, starting from velocity structure
function Sp(r) ≡⟨(δu∥(r))p⟩(with (δu∥(r) = (u(x + r) −u(x)) · r/r). The Kolmogorov
relation, a consequence of constant energy (or enstrophy) ﬂux in the inertial range, together
with assumptions of homogeneity and isotropy, gives an exact prediction for the third-order
longitudinal velocity structure function S3(r) . For the inverse cascade it predicts
while for the direct cascade
The third-order velocity structure function for the simulation E is shown in Fig. 3. Both
Kolmogorov laws are clearly visible with the predicted coeﬃcients. We remark that this is
the ﬁrst time that the two fundamental laws (4) and (5) are observed simultaneously.
In Fig. 4 we plot velocity structure functions of diﬀerent orders together with the compensation with Kolmogorov scaling Sp(r) ≃(εαr)p/3. Although the range of scaling is very small,
the presence of a plateau in the inverse cascade range of scales conﬁrms that intermittency
corrections are very small or absent in the inverse cascade range .
Velocity structure functions are trivially dominated by the IR contribution in the direct
cascade range. Therefore to investigate higher order statistics of the direct cascade one
has consider either increments of velocity derivatives (e.g. vorticity increments) or velocity
second-diﬀerences (the latter having the advantage of being Reynolds-number-independent
in the limit of zero viscosity). A Kraichnan energy spectrum k−3 would correspond dimensionally to ﬂat vorticity structure functions, and indeed zero scaling exponents for p > 3
 or logarithmic structure functions are predicted in the limit of vanishing viscosity. Power-law intermittency corrections in the direct cascade of Navier-Stokes equations
are excluded by theory (while logarithmic corrections are in principle possible), but it is
known that the presence of a linear friction terms in (1) can both steepen the spectrum and
generate intermittency .
We have seen that in our simulations, even at highest resolution and without friction, we
observe a correction to the spectral exponent, and therefore we cannot expect to observe
theoretically predicted vorticity structure functions. Moreover, because of the limited resolution of the direct cascade, no clear scaling in vorticity structure functions is observed.
Nonetheless we can address the issue of intermittency by looking at the probability density
Sp(r)/(εα r)p/3
FIG. 4: (Color online). Longitudinal velocity structure function Sp(r) of order p = 2 (red squares),
p = 4 (blue circles) and p = 5 (pink triangles) from run E and compensated with Kolmogorov-
Kraichnan prediction (εαr)p/3.
functions of ﬂuctuations of vorticity at diﬀerent scales within the inertial range. The result,
for run E is shown in Fig. 5 for both velocity and vorticity increments. For what concerns
δu∥(r) we observe self-similar pdf in the inertial range of scales, in agreement with the normal scaling of Fig. 4. The shape of pdf is very close to Gaussian with a ﬂatness which is
around 3.3. On the contrary, vorticity increments δω(r) are deﬁnitely far from Gaussian
with tails which are found to be very close to exponentials. Nonetheless, the shape of the
pdf does not change substantially in the range of scale of the direct cascade, an indication
of small intermittency also in this case.
Velocity increments pdf in Fig. 5 cannot be exactly Gaussian as the energy ﬂux, proportional to S3(r), requires a positive skewness. Energy and enstrophy ﬂuxes are deﬁned
in physical space in terms of ﬁltered ﬁelds, as described in . We introduce a large
scale vorticity ﬁeld ωr ≡Gr ⋆ω and a large scale velocity ﬁeld ur ≡Gr ⋆u obtained from
convolution with a Gaussian ﬁlter Gr(x). From those ﬁelds, energy and enstrophy ﬂuxes
(x, t), representing the local transfer of energy/enstrophy from scales larger than r to
FIG. 5: (Color online). Probability density functions (pdf) of velocity longitudinal increments
δu∥(r) at scales r = 2.5ℓf (red outer line) r = 5.0ℓf (green middle line) and r = 10.0ℓf (blue inner
line) rescaled with rms values (left panel). Pdf of vorticity increments δω(r) at scales r = 0.2ℓf
(red inner line) r = 0.4ℓf (green middle line) and r = 0.8ℓf (blue outer line) rescaled with rms
values (right panel). Black curves are standard Gaussian. Data from run E.
scales smaller to r, are deﬁned as
(x, t) ≡−(ταβ)r∇α(vβ)r
(x, t) ≡−(σα)r∇αωr
where (ταβ)r = (vαvβ)r −(vα)r(vβ)r and (σα)r = (vαω)r −(vα)rωr.
Figure 6 shows the physical ﬂuxes averaged over space at ﬁnal time of simulation E.
The two range of scales for the energy and enstrophy cascades are evident for r/ℓf > 1 and
r/ℓf < 1 respectively. The ﬁnite mean values of ﬂuxes are the results of strong cancellation:
the ratio between the (absolute) mean value and the standard deviation at the scales r1 ≃
2.2ℓf and r2 ≃0.19ℓf corresponding to the peaks of the two ﬂuxes are −0.19 and 0.16
for energy and enstrophy respectively. The correlation among the two ﬂuxes is small: the
correlation coeﬃcient between Π(E)
r1 and Π(Z)
r2 is only C(r1, r2) ≃−0.17 conﬁrming the picture
of independence of the ﬂuxes in physical spaces already observed at lower resolution .
(E)>/εI , <Πr
FIG. 6: (Color online). Average energy (lower line, red squares) and enstrophy (upper line, blue
circles) ﬂuxes in physical space for run E normalized with energy/enstrophy inputs.
In conclusion, on the basis of very high resolution numerical simulations, we obtain strong
evidence that the double cascade theory developed by Kraichnan more than 40 years ago
is substantially correct. This result required massive resolution as two inertial ranges have
to be resolved simultaneously. It is worth remarking that, despite some eﬀort , the
clear observation of the two cascade is still lacking in experiments. We hope that our results
will stimulate further experimental investigations of the double cascade scenario.
Numerical simulations has been performed within the DEISA Extreme Computing Initiative program “Turbo2D”.