Segmenting Video Into Classes of Algorithm-Suitability
Oisin Mac Aodha1,2
Gabriel J. Brostow1
Marc Pollefeys2
1University College London
2ETH Zurich
 
Given a set of algorithms, which one(s) should you apply
to, i) compute optical ﬂow, or ii) perform feature matching?
Would looking at the sequence in question help you decide?
It is unclear if even a person with intimate knowledge of
all the different algorithms and access to the sequence itself
could predict which one to apply. Our hypothesis is that the
most suitable algorithm can be chosen for each video automatically, through supervised training of a classiﬁer. The
classiﬁer treats the different algorithms as black-box alternative “classes,” and predicts when each is best because of
their respective performances on training examples where
ground truth ﬂow was available.
Our experiments show that a simple Random Forest classiﬁer is predictive of algorithm-suitability. The automatic
feature selection makes use of both our spatial and temporal video features. We ﬁnd that algorithm-suitability can be
determined per-pixel, capitalizing on the heterogeneity of
appearance and motion within a video. We demonstrate our
learned region segmentation approach quantitatively using
four available ﬂow algorithms, on both known and novel
image sequences with ground truth ﬂow. We achieve performance that often even surpasses that of the one best algorithm at our disposal.
1. Introduction
Standard data sets help us measure overall progress for
speciﬁc computer vision challenges such as object recognition, stereo, feature description, and optical ﬂow. Data
sets with good variety help highlight both generalist “winners,” and special-purpose algorithms with winning strategies for speciﬁc situations. These evaluations are useful for
researchers planning a new strategy, but practitioners can
have trouble capitalizing on these rankings. A practitioner
looks to these scores when picking which algorithm to trust
for processing a new set of images. We propose a metaalgorithm, that saves the practitioner from this forced decision, and balances the advantages of generalist vs. special
purpose algorithms.
To a limited extent, each algorithm could be used to selfassess its own performance, as is typically done for stereo
and optical ﬂow. Most algorithms seeking to optimize a
non-convex energy term at test time, know only that once
converged, a local minimum has been reached. The room
for doubt increases if multiple algorithms, whether competing or collaborating, are solving the same problem using different energy functions or priors. Each “expert” will
be satisﬁed, reporting with its own conﬁdence that it has
reached an optimum. Our proposed approach addresses situations in general, where some form of gold standard is
available in a training stage, but not at test time.
One example of such situations, and the one we use
throughout this paper as a test case for our meta-algorithm,
is the optical ﬂow problem. To solve this task, we consider a
set of k constituent algorithms working in parallel, and treat
them as black boxes. Although it is difﬁcult or expensive
to obtain ground truth ﬂow data, just enough is available
( , ) to allow some supervised training. We do not
train a linear gold standard measure of success that would
calibrate the different algorithms’ conﬁdences against each
other globally, or pairwise like . Instead, we seek out
the correlation between good performance by a constituent
algorithm, and speciﬁc local situations that can be discerned
statistically from the image sequence.
Figure 1. Per-pixel segmentation results. A) The ﬁrst image from
a two frame sequence (#18 Sponza1) which is processed as test input to our pre-trained classiﬁer. B) The classiﬁer segments the
image, predicting where each of the four algorithms should give
the most accurate estimate of optical ﬂow. Color-coding of the
pixels indicates the predicted class i.e. algorithm: red=BA ,
green=TV , yellow=HS , and blue=FL . C) The
end-point error for the predicted ﬂow. While the average end-point
error based on our prediction does not reach the optimal possible
score (0.988 vs. 0.762 pixels), it outperforms the single best algorithm (TV) at our disposal (1.006 pixels).
The semantic segmentation community has been developing successful techniques to ﬁnd correlations between
object-classes and appearance (e.g. and ). We pose
our algorithm-suitability problem as a form of “semantic”
segmentation, where the best meaning or label to associate
with a given pixel is the algorithm that is predicted to yield
the best accuracy. We assume that implementations of all
the algorithms under consideration are available, and that
instead of speed, accuracy is the only relevant objective.
Recognizing that not all ﬂow algorithms have been ported
to leverage GPU processing, we accept the ﬁxed cost of
running all of them on a given sequence as acceptable, in
pursuing the highest accuracy. For choosing among optical ﬂow algorithms (or in a later experiment, descriptormatching strategies), we speculated that this choice could
reasonably be correlated with the contents of both images in
a sequence. For this reason, our feature vector is computed
by analyzing both spatial and temporal characteristics.
This research makes the following main contributions:
• a general segmentation framework for learning to separate pixels by algorithm-suitability,
• improved accuracy for optical ﬂow computed using
known constituent algorithms (see Figure 1), and
• a system for easily producing synthetic ground truth
data for both optical ﬂow and descriptor-matching.
Experiments show that a special case of the new segmentation approach achieves our initial goal of deciding which
algorithm is most suited for which part of a video. We also
demonstrate how our segmentation can be used to classify
which pixels should not be expected to yield accurate optical ﬂow estimates (or descriptor matches).
2. Related Work
Raykar et al. describe a generic iterative strategy for
computing a standard by which to measure multiple experts,
when no gold standard exists. The technique is an improvement over following the majority vote when some experts
are better than others. Our problem formulation is different, however, because we cannot assume that one expert is
consistently better or worse, independent of the image data
being considered.
Learned algorithm selection is shown by Yong et al. 
for the speciﬁc task of image segmentation. They used an
SVM for learning and performed their experiments on 1000
synthetic images of 2D squares, circles, etc., with additive
noise, demonstrating what is actually online learning for algorithm selection. Working with 14 constituent real-time
tracking algorithms, Stenger et al. developed a learning framework that trained the expected error of each algorithm, given its conﬁdence values. Then during testing,
the best-performing pairs of algorithms could be cascaded
or run in parallel to track a hand or head. This approach
is very ﬂexible for situations where one task is being accomplished at a time. Alt et al. describe a supervised
learning approach for assessing which planar patches will
be difﬁcult for tracking. Using this pre-selection of reliable
templates they report an improved detection rate for an existing tracking-by-detection system.
Our situation is different in that various image regions
need attention from different algorithms simultaneously.
The region-segmentation and labeling of Shotton et al. 
is a closer ﬁt to our needs for dense and parallel k-way classiﬁcation. Where they have color features as the input data,
we use a bank of spatiotemporal features, and their learning
algorithm was a forest of extremely randomized trees ,
while we use the simple Random Forests of .
Muja and Lowe have presented a unique approach
to algorithm-selection, that is quite valuable in the context
of feature matching and beyond. Similar to us, they argue
that algorithm-suitability is data-dependent. Their system
searches a parameter space, where the algorithm itself is
just one of the parameters, to ﬁnd an approximate nearestneighbor strategy (algorithm and settings). The automatically determined strategy is based on the target data itself,
such as a database of SIFT descriptors , and desired
preferences for optimizing lookup speeds versus memory.
There, the training data is the same as the test data, so their
optimization is deterministic, while our algorithm suitability must be learned, so we can predict which segments are
suited for which strategy, just by looking at a video.
Optical Flow
Of the existing approaches to computing
optical ﬂow, the iterative FusionFlow is still very different technically, but the closest to our approach in terms
of its philosophy. They compute a discrete optimization on
continuous-valued ﬂow-ﬁelds (with another continuous optimization “clean-up”), by performing a minimal cut on an
extended graph. The extended graph consists of auxiliary
binary-valued labels to represent either accepting a newly
proposed ﬂow vector at that location, or keeping the current
ﬂow estimate. The similarity to our work is that in each
such iteration of FusionFlow, the new proposed solution
could be viewed as a competing strategy or algorithm, offering a potentially lower energy than the current estimate, at
least in some spatial neighborhood. Both algorithms beneﬁt
from good proposed solutions, but the beneﬁts for our algorithm are more direct (see Section 3.1) and we have no ﬂowspeciﬁc pre- or post-processing. FusionFlow is quite ﬂexible and could potentially be modernized with more competitive starting-proposals than the 200+ based on Lucas-
Kanade and Horn and Schunk , but the authors indicate that because of their energy function, the computed
minimum eventually gives a score extremely close to the energy of the ground truth solution (e.g. E = 1613 vs. 1610).
One advantage of our approach is that no one energy function need be employed universally throughout an image sequence.
A thorough understanding of existing energy functions
allowed Bruhn et al. to formulate a new Combined
Local-Global (CLG) method, aptly named “Lucas/Kanade
Meets Horn/Schunk”. Their new 2D energy term (and its
3D variant) combined the local robustness to noise offered
by algorithms such as Lucas-Kanade , with the regularized smoothness and dense ﬂow of global algorithms, such
as Horn and Schunk . This approach is still one of the
top performers for the Yosemite sequence. Also, they compute a conﬁdence criterion based on this new energy term,
and demonstrate that it is partly correlated with actual accuracy. The challenge they describe has been one of our
driving motivations, namely, that one has few if any reliable conﬁdence measures, beyond the chosen energy function itself. That problem is compounded when comparing
multiple algorithms with different energy-minimization objectives.
The nonparametric FRAME model of Zhu et al. optimized its texture synthesis by picking out ﬁlters from a
ﬁlter bank, whose responses are correlated with neighborhoods in the training image. That approach is very ﬂexible, adaptively using potentially many ﬁlters, including
non-linear ones which ﬁlter large sub-images. Since then,
Roth and Black’s Fields of Experts (FoE) has gained a
following by augmenting FRAME, extending Markov random ﬁelds with the capability to learn ﬁlters that model local ﬁeld potentials. The completely data-driven nature of
FoE is very attractive, and Woodford et al. showed
a method that trains with 5x5 cliques in a comparatively
short time. Roth and Black have further demonstrated FoE
for the purpose of modeling an optical ﬂow prior . In
 , they used range-images of known scenes with separately obtained real camera motions to learn a model of motion ﬁelds, which are different from optical ﬂow. Here, they
still had to manually monitor convergence of the learning,
but in testing, demonstrated superior results using these spatial statistics as priors for the aforementioned 2D Bruhn et
al. ﬂow algorithm. FoE’s expert functions are less ﬂexible than the FRAME model by design: they can be nonlinear, but need to be continuous, and the log of an expert
has to be differentiable with respect to both the expert’s parameters and the (necessarily) linear ﬁlter responses. For
our task however, non-linear “ﬁlters” are used for computing posteriors (see Section 4).
Sun et al. adapted their spatial FoE model of optical ﬂow, learning a relationship between image and ﬂow
boundaries, this time with a parameterization of spatiotemporal brightness inconstancy. The steered model of ﬂow and
the generalized data term are learned on the painstakingly
prepared ground truth ﬂow data of Baker et al. . In our
experiments, we too train on this data and also have no need
for sequence-speciﬁc parameter tuning, and we achieve better scores simply by virtue of leveraging multiple black-box
algorithms that are effective in their own right.
An important result of the FoE line of research is the
ﬁnding, that with careful optimization procedures, a good
generalist algorithm’s priors about local responses to linear ﬁlters should be learned from representative training
data. Different low-dimensional “experts” in this setting
are not unique algorithms, but are instead measures, being
combined to model high dimensional probability distributions of parameterized statistics. Our goal is much simpler, non-parametric, and complementary: to establish the
discriminability between visual situations given competing
strategies or algorithms, in this case, for computing optical
ﬂow. For example, the algorithms with FoE-based priors
trained with different sized cliques (5x5 for , 9x9 for
 ) could be evaluated as different strategies in our framework.
The online Middlebury Optical Flow Evaluation currently ranks over 30 algorithms. To test our hypothesis, we
need a set of these as constituent algorithms, where they
each have at least some unique properties. For simplicity,
we chose the four algorithms for which an author’s implementation was most readily available: Werlberger et al.’s
FlowLib , Wedel et al.’s TV-L1-improved , Black
and Anandan , and Horn and Schunck . For brevity,
we will refer to them as FL, TV, BA, and HS, respectively.
3. Algorithm-Selection as Segmentation
The applicability of most algorithms is situation-speciﬁc,
and we wish to classify those situations automatically. Interest point detectors, such as Good Features to Track 
or Harris-Stephens corners , are already a form of binary segmentation for algorithm-selection purposes. Local
neighborhoods are labeled as either regions of interest or
not, depending on their appearance in one frame. Such segmentations have the expectation that only certain regions
can be reliably tracked or matched in subsequent frames.
We expand on this binary algorithm-suitability philosophy with a probabilistic formulation that allows for a kway pairing: accuracy should be improved if each part of
an image sequence is handled by the most suitable of k algorithms. The proposed approach is most appropriate in
situations where either no good single algorithm exists, or
where a generalist algorithm makes mistakes in places that
some specialist algorithm does not. Ideally, we could discern these situations correctly, or could assign a (k + 1)’th
label in places where no algorithm is suitable, producing a
complete segmentation.
To reiterate, the single classiﬁer is taking the place of
the multiple algorithm-speciﬁc energy terms or conﬁdence
measures. Being probabilistic, the posteriors of different
classiﬁers can be compared to each other, which is shown
to be especially useful when k = 2.
3.1. Choice of Learning Algorithm
The classiﬁcation algorithm for this approach needs to
be multiclass, able to handle large amounts of data, and be
robust to noise. We have selected the Random Forests algorithm developed by Breiman . We also experimented
with Boosted Trees and SVMs and noted slightly worse performance and an increase in training time. Random Forests
is an ensemble of decision trees which averages the predictions of the trees to assign the class labels. It makes use
of bagging to uniformly sample (with replacement) subsets
from the dataset to train the decision trees. It then uses the
remaining data to estimate the error for that particular tree.
During training, each node in the tree is presented with a
random subset of the feature vector. Random Forests have
the advantage of being fast to train and inherently parallelizable. Additionally, they can handle large datasets and also
estimate the importance of the input variables. Caruana et
al. provide a thorough evaluation of Random Forests on
high dimensional data.
4. Available Features
Algorithm selection is posed as a standard supervised
learning problem with training data of the form:
D = {(xi, ci)|xi ∈Rd, ci ∈Zk}n
with n being the number of training examples, k the number of algorithms and d the dimensionality of the feature
vector. When constructing a feature vector for optical ﬂow,
the goal is to include any image features that could be indicative of places where the different algorithms succeed
and break down. Given an image pair I1 and I2 (where
I = f(x, y) is a grayscale image), a feature vector is computed for each pixel in the ﬁrst image. While certainly not
exhaustive, the following combined single and multi-frame
information used in our prototype feature set already produces good results:
Appearance: Highly textured regions provide little challenge for modern optical ﬂow algorithms. By taking
the gradient magnitude of the image it is possible to
measure the level of “texturedness” of a region:
g(x, y, z) = ||∇I1||,
The notation g(x, y, z) indicates that the function is
evaluated at an x, y position and level z in the image pyramid. Additionally, the distance transform is
calculated on edge detected images:
d(x, y, z) = disTrans(||∇I1|| > τ),
The intuition is that image edges may co-occur with
motion boundaries, and the higher the distance from
them, the lower the chance of occlusion. We also experimented with other appearance features such as the
convolution with banks of Gabor features to capture
neighborhood information. Qualitatively, they did not
contribute to the overall results and so were excluded.
Time: Some ﬂow algorithms can break down at motion
discontinuities.
Identifying these regions could be
a cue for improving ﬂow accuracy. One method to
ﬁnd these regions is to do simple image differencing.
Through experimentation, we found that a more robust approach was to take the derivative of the proposed ﬂow ﬁelds. This is done by taking the mean of
the different candidate algorithms’ ﬂow and calculating the gradient magnitude in the x and y directions,
tx = ||∇¯u|| and ty = ||∇¯v|| respectively.
Photo Constancy: One estimate of conﬁdence for an optical ﬂow algorithm is to measure the photoconsistency
residual r. This is done by subtracting the intensity in
the second image from the ﬁrst at the predicted location of the pixel. Due to the discrete nature of image
space, we perform bicubic interpolation to interpolate
the intensity values in the second image. The residual error, measured in intensity, is calculated independently for each of the k candidate ﬂow algorithms:
ri(x, y, k) = I1(x, y)−bicubic(I2(x+ui(k), y+vi(k)))
Scale: Most effective approaches to optical ﬂow estimation
utilize scale space to compute ﬂow for big motions.
With this in mind, all of these features, with the exception of the residual error, are calculated on an image
pyramid with z = levels and a rescaling factor
The result for optical ﬂow is a 44 dimensional feature vector
xi, computed for each of the pixels in the ﬁrst image:
{g(x, y, ), d(x, y, ), tx(x, y, ),
ty(x, y, ), r(x, y, [1, k])}
5. Synthetic Data
Several techniques have been proposed to generate
ground truth optical ﬂow data from real image sequences.
The popular Middlebury optical ﬂow dataset approximated
ﬂow by painting a scene with hidden ﬂuorescent texture and
imaging it under UV illumination . The ground truth ﬂow
is then computed by tracking small windows in the high resolution UV images, and performing a brute-force search in
the next frame. The high resolution ﬂow ﬁeld is then downsampled to produce the ﬁnal ground truth. This technique,
while successful, is extremely time consuming and restrictive in the types of scenes that can be captured (restricted to
lab environments). Liu et al. use human assistance to
annotate motion boundaries in image sequences as a preprocessing step for layer-wise optical ﬂow estimation. While
this approach is more practical, it still relies on the accuracy
of the ﬂow estimation algorithm used.
Synthetically generated sequences have been used as an
alternative to natural images for optical ﬂow evaluation
since the introduction of the famous Yosemite sequence
by Barron et al. .
These have the advantage of being quick to generate and can beneﬁt from advances in
computer graphics to create highly realistic scenes. Using
complex geometry, detailed texture, and global illumination
techniques, it is now possible to generate realistic sequences
with consumer 3D computer graphics packages. Currently
there is no publicly available way to generate ground truth
data of high resolution photo-real synthetic images.
We have developed a plugin for Maya which allows the
user to generate ground truth optical ﬂow for a given image
pair. An example output of the system is shown in Figure 2.
The system works by casting a ray from the camera center,
through the image plane and into the scene until it intersects
an object. Then, this point is projected back into the second
camera (respecting occlusions in the scene) and the optical
ﬂow is calculated from the position difference with respect
to the ﬁrst image plane. An advantage of the system is that
the texture and lighting of the scene is independent of the
geometry. This creates the possibility for re-rendering the
same scene using different illumination and textures, without altering the ground truth. As the system calculates intersections between projected rays and scene objects, occlusions are noted and therefore not erroneously labeled with
incorrect ﬂow (black regions in Figure 2). Additionally,
there is no restriction on camera baseline or object motion
and the same system can create data for image descriptor
evaluation. The generated sequences and the software to
create additional ground truth optical ﬂow for experiments
is available online.
6. Experiments
Optical Flow
In all the experiments, we used the same
learning system described in Section 3.1, and unless otherwise stated, k = 4, so we are predicting which one of
the four constituent optical ﬂow algorithms (BA, TV, HS,
FL) to trust at each pixel. The algorithms were used with
their default or most-successful published settings, though
in practice, the same algorithm with different parameters
could be treated by our meta-algorithm as distinct classes.
For comparison purposes, we designed a baseline hybrid
from our own experiences of using these algorithms. Having analyzed the results of the four algorithms on all eight
Middlebury training sequences, we noted in particular the
(A) Frame One
(B) Ground Truth Flow
Figure 2. Unlimited Ground Truth Optical Flow Data A) Example frame from a two frame sequence (#9 Crates1), generated by
our system. The scene was modeled in Maya and rendered using
Mental Ray to include global illumination. B) Ground truth optical ﬂow between the two frames. The ﬂow ﬁeld color is displayed
inset and coded using the same format as . Black values in the
ﬂow image indicate areas of occlusion between the two frames.
performance for areas of low and high texture, and motion
discontinuities. While FL performs the best overall, BA was
the best in areas of high texture. Texture is measured simply by thresholding the gradient magnitude of the image,
||∇I1|| > t, and dilating the result with a 5 pixel ball structuring element to mask which pixels would be associated
with “class” BA. With a threshold of t = 10, the new algorithm, called the Trivial Combination (TC), was also used
in our tests.
We used image pairs with ground truth ﬂow from three
sources: the eight Middlebury training sequences , two
Middlebury-like sequences from , and nine of our own
challenging synthetic sequences, for a total of 19. In line
with the evaluation of , the reported scores are the average end point error across the whole image. The error is
not reported for areas known to have no ﬂow, and for a 10
pixel boundary region around the edge of the image. Table 1 lists the main results for our algorithm, and additional
illustrations of the performance of the different learning parameter settings are in the Supplemental Materials, as are
qualitative results of ﬂow computed on real images without
ground truth.
Leave-one-out tests were performed to make the best use
of available training data. Due to the redundancy present
when multiple algorithms could give the correct ﬂow for a
pixel, we pre-select a subset of the available data on which
to train. We only train on examples where the end point error between the best performing algorithm and the second
best for a particular pixel is greater than a threshold of 0.3
pixels. This reduces the amount of training data but also
allows the selection of examples which are most discriminative. It also prevents training on areas of similar error.
The trained forest reveals feature usage that is almost equal
throughout the feature vector. Balanced usage of features
indicates that none of our available features is especially
better or worse than the others.
We did a separate experiment to compute our results
on the Middlebury test sequences. We trained our system
on just the eight Middlebury sequences, and our reported
end point errors are as follows, Army: 0.1, Mequon: 0.35,
Schefﬂera: 0.63, Wooden: 0.22, Grove: 0.91, Urban: 0.62,
Yosemite: 0.15, and Teddy: 0.74. These results place us
between “Occlusion bounds”’ and “Multicue MRF” on the
online Middlebury table, which means we appear to outperform BA and HS, but not TV or FL on that data set. This
shortfall compared to two of our constituent algorithms is
surprising, though our implementations of FL and TV are
known to differ from those used in the competition. Interestingly, we currently outperform the FoE and other hybrid
algorithms described in Section 2.
ROC of Optical Flow Confidence − Urban2
FL Decision Confidence − Urban2
Average Epe
Confidence Thresholding (Error Training 1 pixel) − Urban2
FL EPE − Urban2
Figure 3. FL Decision Conﬁdence. Left) the top ﬁgure shows the
ROC curve of conﬁdence in FL’s optical ﬂow for computing a pixel
ﬂow of less than 1 end point error for the Urban2 sequence. The
bottom left ﬁgure shows that by choosing a high probability, the
average end point error is kept low, at the expense of the number
of pixels where ﬂow was estimated. The classiﬁer allows the user
to trade off error versus coverage. Right) on the top, the same
conﬁdences are plotted spatially, revealing high uncertainty near
object discontinuities and at the image boundaries. The bottom
plots the true FL end point error for all pixels.
Another test of our hypothesis involved trying the k = 2
case, where one algorithm is the leading optical ﬂow strategy in our cohort, FL, and the other “strategy” is to not
report ﬂow for a given pixel, expressly avoiding making
a ﬂow estimate whose error is anticipated to be too big (1
pixel end point error in this case). A perfect classiﬁer would
only assign the FL label to pixels that would be estimated
to within one pixel of the true vector. This test was also
done as leave-one-out from our set of 16 sequences, and the
plot of the Urban2 sequence in Figure 3 is a representative
of the other tests. The main beneﬁt of this binary classiﬁer
is that the conﬁdence is now measured as the probability of
computing a pixel ﬂow of less than 1 pixel end point error.
Had we used the algorithm’s own energy function, the con-
ﬁdence could not be directly compared to a similar binary
classiﬁer for each other ﬂow algorithm.
Our unoptimized code for the classiﬁer is implemented
in C, though features and other visualization functions are
computed in MATLAB. Running on an Intel Core 2 Quad
2.4Ghz with 3.25Gb RAM, computing all the ﬂow estimates takes approximately 5min. for the 640x480 images
we tested, and generating the feature vector takes another
1 min. Random Forest takes 1hr 15mins to train on all our
data in the leave-one-out experiments. However, once it is
trained and the features are computed, it takes on the order
of seconds to compute a prediction.
Feature Matching
Using the same self evaluation strategy as in optical ﬂow, we conducted an experiment on feature matching. We trained our algorithm on images from
nine different scenes, ranging from two to 10 images per
scene. The images are made up of sequences from Mikolajczyk’s dataset and our own synthetically generated
training images. The scenes exhibit changes due to rotation, scale, image blur, afﬁne transformation, illumination
and large viewpoint changes. 65,000 interest points were
extracted using the Harris-Hessian-Laplacian interest point
detector and described using the SIFT algorithm. For each
SIFT descriptor, a feature vector was computed, consisting of the Euclidean distance ratios between the ﬁrst four
closest matched features in the second images and in the
same image. The intention of using this self similarity measure was to reduce false positives due to repeating structures. For the scenes from Mikolajczyk, ground truth correspondence is provided by a homography relating each image pair. For our synthetic data, we have the ground truth
correspondences by virtue of our system. Correspondence
is measured against the nearest neighbor distance ratio test
of Lowe . Normally, given two features from separate
images, they are considered a match if the distance ratio between the ﬁrst and second closest features is below a threshold and the position of the feature in the second image is
less than 1.5 pixels from the ground truth. Mikolajczyk also
use a region overlap error to verify that the descriptors are
describing the same area in the images, but due to the large
viewpoint changes present in our data, this is not applicable. We tested our classiﬁer on 5000 features from the graf-
ﬁti sequence . Figure 4 shows the ROC curve obtained
by sweeping the probability given by the classiﬁer. It also
displays the performance of SIFT matching by varying the
distance ratio threshold t. The curve shows that the classi-
ﬁer outperforms the standard SIFT matching criterion.
7. Conclusions
The results of the learning experiments indicate that at
least for optical ﬂow and feature matching, it is indeed pos-
Image Sequence
RubberWhale
Dimetrodon
BrickBox1*
BrickBox2*
YosemiteSun
Table 1. Leave-1-Out Tests Results of leave-one-out end-point pixel error testing of ﬂow with 19 image pairs. Sequences marked with an
asterisk were generated as described in Section 5. Rows show how each optical ﬂow algorithm fared on a given test-sequence: BA=Black
and Anandan , TV=Wedel et al.’s TV-L1-improved , HS=Horn and Schunck , FL= Werlberger et al.’s FlowLib , Triv-
Combo= our baseline hybrid, Ours= our proposed meta-algorithm, and OptCombo= the lowest error attainable with a discrete combination
of all four constituent algorithms. The lowest error for each sequence, excluding the optimal, is highlighted in bold.
ROC Curve − Mikolajczyk Graffiti
Number of Correct Matches − Mikolajczyk Graffiti
Threshold (Probability)
Number of Correct Matches
Figure 4. SIFT Decision Conﬁdence. Left) ROC curve showing the result of classiﬁcation for self evaluation for SIFT feature
matching. The classiﬁcation approach performs better than standard SIFT matching strategies that rely simply on a distance ratio,
e.g. 0.8. Right) The ﬁgure shows the number of correct features
matched as the probability from the classiﬁer is increased. It can
be seen from the diagram that a conservative threshold on the probability would result in fewer matches.
sible to estimate a correct classiﬁcation of pixels based on
algorithm suitability. Here, optimally correct classiﬁcation
would mean that any segments with the same class label will
be best handled by that one-among-k available algorithms.
While our predictions about where to use each constituent
algorithm only approximate that optimal labeling, we show
that on average, results based on our labeling often outperform even a universally-good constituent algorithm working individually.
Algorithms for both the tasks we examined, ﬂow and description, have various criteria for assessing their own performance or conﬁdence. One of the beneﬁts of the proposed framework, at least for practitioners, is that instead
of using algorithm-speciﬁc heuristics, the goal itself is used
with training data, to learn a uniﬁed “success classiﬁer.” In
practice, this means that parts of an image sequence can be
identiﬁed and excluded automatically and more adaptively,
when deemed too hard. This approach applies even to the
k = 1 case, squeezing more accuracy out of the already
good FlowLib and SIFT algorithms.
A secondary contribution of this work is our new system for synthesizing image sequences, producing ground
truth suitable for both optical ﬂow and feature description
experiments. We are releasing this system for general use to
aid research where algorithms could beneﬁt from extended
training data. By leveraging existing tools in the computer
graphics community, each scene with potentially complex
geometry and motion can have one set of ground truth correspondences, while rendering endless variants of the image
sequence by changing the lighting and textures. We provide
code to run the experiments in this paper, code for generating synthetic data, and sample data on our website. We
hope that that this encourages experiments using new and
unusual constituent algorithms.
7.1. Limitations & Future Work
While the proposed meta-algorithm can produce better
results than the constituent algorithms alone, limitations and
new challenges have come to light. The optimal labelings
clearly exist, but still elude us. One hope is that further
meaningful correlations between the input data and the class
labels could be discovered by expanding the variety of features available to the classiﬁer, beyond those proposed in
Section 4.
Building our classiﬁer on a standard Random Forest has
proven advantageous in many ways, but limits the utility of
some of the training data. As with most discrete multi-class
classiﬁers, each training example speciﬁes that one algorithm is most-suitable, while the rest are equally unsuitable.
This effectively ignores the fact that, for optical ﬂow for
example, the second-best algorithm could give an end-point
estimate 10 times closer than the fourth-best. Equally, when
the difference between the top two algorithms is minimal,
our current system is forced to either ignore the example
completely, or expend effort trying to learn to distinguish
between equals.
We chose to validate our hypothesis mostly on the example application of optical ﬂow. There are many other
applications, such as stereo, where multiple competing algorithms vie to be universally best, and it would be interesting to try our learned segmentation approach there. Random Forests can handle more than ﬁve or six classes in
general, but exactly how far our approach will scale is unclear. A particular goal for the future would be the development of new specialist algorithms, which would be terrible on their own, but could nicely complement the generalist algorithms. Our experiments here were designed to be
most-faithful to the state-of-the-art, so we simply included
the four algorithms for which the authors’ implementations
were immediately available.
Finally, our approach ignores the cost of processing
times, which is currently acceptable, but O(k) in the number of algorithms under consideration. One strategy could
be to optimize the forest subject to the computational cost
of each algorithm. Overall, the proposed method learns to
segment by algorithm-suitability through analyzing features
in two frames at a time, which could be used intermittently
for long sequences if faster processing is required.
Acknowledgements
We thank the authors who provided reference implementations of their algorithms and data. Funding for this research was provided by the Microsoft Innovation Cluster
for Embedded Software.