Rahman et al. Light: Science & Applications 10:14
Ofﬁcial journal of the CIOMP 2047-7538
 
www.nature.com/lsa
A R T I C L E
O p e n A c c e s s
Ensemble learning of diffractive optical networks
Md Sadman Sakib Rahman1,2,3, Jingxi Li
1,2,3, Deniz Mengu1,2,3, Yair Rivenson1,2,3 and Aydogan Ozcan
A plethora of research advances have emerged in the ﬁelds of optics and photonics that beneﬁt from harnessing the
power of machine learning. Speciﬁcally, there has been a revival of interest in optical computing hardware due to its
potential advantages for machine learning tasks in terms of parallelization, power efﬁciency and computation speed.
Diffractive deep neural networks (D2NNs) form such an optical computing framework that beneﬁts from deep
learning-based design of successive diffractive layers to all-optically process information as the input light diffracts
through these passive layers. D2NNs have demonstrated success in various tasks, including object classiﬁcation, the
spectral encoding of information, optical pulse shaping and imaging. Here, we substantially improve the inference
performance of diffractive optical networks using feature engineering and ensemble learning. After independently
training 1252 D2NNs that were diversely engineered with a variety of passive input ﬁlters, we applied a pruning
algorithm to select an optimized ensemble of D2NNs that collectively improved the image classiﬁcation accuracy.
Through this pruning, we numerically demonstrated that ensembles of N = 14 and N = 30 D2NNs achieve blind
testing accuracies of 61.14 ± 0.23% and 62.13 ± 0.05%, respectively, on the classiﬁcation of CIFAR-10 test images,
providing an inference improvement of >16% compared to the average performance of the individual D2NNs within
each ensemble. These results constitute the highest inference accuracies achieved to date by any diffractive optical
neural network design on the same dataset and might provide a signiﬁcant leap to extend the application space of
diffractive optical image classiﬁcation and machine vision systems.
Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the emergence of deep
learning1, which has facilitated powerful solutions to an
array of intricate problems in artiﬁcial intelligence, including image classiﬁcation2,3, object detection4, natural language processing5, speech processing6, bioinformatics7,
optical microscopy8,9, holography10–12, sensing13, and many
more14. Deep learning has become particularly popular
because of the recent advances in the development of
advanced computing hardware and the availability of large
amounts of data for training deep neural networks. Algorithms such as stochastic gradient descent and error
backpropagation enable deep neural networks to learn the
mapping between an input and the target output distribution by processing a large number of examples. Motivated
by this major success enabled by deep learning, there has
also been a revival of interest in optical computing15–28,
which has some important and appealing features, such as
(1) parallelism provided by optics/photonics systems, (2)
potentially improved power efﬁciency through passive and/
or low-loss optical interactions, and (3) minimal latency.
As a recent example of an entirely passive optical
computing system, diffractive deep neural networks
(D2NNs)18,23,25,29–34 have been demonstrated to perform
all-optical inference and image classiﬁcation through
the modulation of input optical waves by successive
diffractive surfaces trained by deep learning methods, e.g.,
stochastic gradient descent and error backpropagation.
Earlier generations of these diffractive neural networks
achieved >98% blind testing accuracies in the classiﬁcation of handwritten digits (MNIST) encoded in the
amplitude or phase channels of the input optical ﬁelds
© The Author(s) 2021, corrected publication 2021
OpenAccessThisarticleislicensedunderaCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0InternationalLicense,whichpermitsuse,sharing,adaptation,distributionandreproduction
in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If
material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit 
Correspondence: Aydogan Ozcan ( )
1Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
2Bioengineering Department, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095,
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
These authors contributed equally: Md Sadman Sakib Rahman, Jingxi Li
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
and were experimentally demonstrated using terahertz
wavelengths along with 3D printing of the resulting diffractive layers/surfaces that form a physical network. In a
D2NN fabricated with linear materials in which nonlinear
optical processes including surface nonlinearities are
negligible, the only form of nonlinearity in the forward
optical model occurs at the opto-electronic detector
plane. Without the use of any nonlinear activation function, the D2NN framework still exhibits depth feature as
its statistical inference and generalization capabilities
improve with additional diffractive layers, which was
demonstrated both empirically18,25 and theoretically34.
The same diffractive processing framework of D2NNs has
also been utilized to design deterministic optical components, e.g., ultra-short pulse shaping, spectral ﬁltering and
wavelength division multiplexing30,32.
To further improve the inference capabilities of optical
computing hardware, coupling diffractive optical systems
with jointly trained electronic neural networks that form
opto-electronic hybrid systems has also been reported19,25,29, where the front end is optical/diffractive and
the back end is all-electronic. Despite all this progress,
there is still much room for further improvements in the
diffractive processing of optical information. Here, we
demonstrate major advances in the optical inference and
generalization capabilities of the D2NN framework by
feature engineering and ensemble learning over multiple
independently trained diffractive neural networks, where
we exploit the parallel processing of optical information.
To create this advancement, we ﬁrst focus on diversifying
the base D2NN models by manipulating their training
inputs by means of spatial feature engineering. In this
approach, the input ﬁelds are ﬁltered in either the object
space or the Fourier space by introducing an assortment
of curated passive ﬁlters before the diffractive networks
(see Fig. 1). Following the individual training of 1252
class score
Diffractive
plane mask
plane mask
Diffractive
Diffractive
Diffractive
Diffractive
Diffractive
Fig. 1 Schematic diagram of the ensemble diffractive network system. a Example of a D2NN using a feature-engineered input, where an input
mask with a passive transmission window opened at a certain position is employed against the object plane. An object from the CIFAR-10 image
dataset is shown as an example and is encoded in either the amplitude channel or the phase channel of the input plane of the diffractive network.
b Same as in (a) but using a passive input mask placed on the Fourier plane of a 4-f system; here, a bandpass ﬁlter is shown as an example. c An
ensemble D2NN system, formed by N different feature-engineered D2NNs, is shown where each diffractive network of the ensemble takes the form
of (a) or (b). The ﬁnal ensemble class score is computed through a weighted summation of the differential detector signals obtained from the
individual diffractive networks. Through feature engineering and ensemble learning, we achieved blind inference accuracies of 62.13 ± 0.05%,
61.14 ± 0.23% and 60.35 ± 0.39% on the CIFAR-10 test image dataset using N = 30, N = 14 and N = 12 D2NNs, respectively. The standard deviations
are calculated through 3 repeats using the same hyperparameters
Rahman et al. Light: Science & Applications 10:14
 
unique D2NNs with various features, we used an iterative
pruning strategy to obtain ensembles of D2NNs that work
in parallel to improve the ﬁnal classiﬁcation accuracy by
combining the decisions of the individual diffractive
classiﬁers. Based on this feature engineering and iterative
pruning strategy, we numerically achieved blind testing
accuracies of 61.14 ± 0.23% and 62.13 ± 0.05% (referring
to the mean ± standard deviation, which was calculated
using three independent runs) on the classiﬁcation of
CIFAR-1035 test images with ensemble sizes of N = 14
and N = 30, respectively. Stated differently, 14 D2NNs (30
D2NNs) selected through this pruning approach work in
parallel to collectively reach an optical inference accuracy
of 61.14 ± 0.23% (62.13 ± 0.05%) on the CIFAR-10 test
images, which provides an improvement of >16% over the
average classiﬁcation accuracy of the individual D2NNs
within each ensemble, demonstrating the ‘wisdom of the
crowd’. This image classiﬁcation performance is the
highest achieved to date by any diffractive optical network
design applied on the same dataset. We believe that this
substantially improved inference and generalization performance provided by feature engineering and ensemble
learning of D2NNs marks a major step in opening up new
avenues for optics-based computation, machine learning
and machine vision-related systems, beneﬁting from the
parallelism of optical systems.
Ensemble learning refers to improving the inference
capability of a system by training multiple models instead
of a single model and combining the predictions of the
constituent models (known as base models, base learners
or inducers). It is also possible to learn how to combine
the decisions of the base learners, which is known as
meta-learning36
learners).
learning is beneﬁcial for several reasons37; if the size of the
training data is small, the base learners are prone to
overﬁtting and, as a result, suffer from poor generalizability to unseen data. Combining multiple base learners
helps to ameliorate this problem. In addition, by combining different models, the hypothesis space can be
extended, and the probability of getting stuck in a local
minimum is reduced. An important aspect to consider
when generating ensembles is the diversity of the learned
base models37. The learned models should be diverse
enough to ensure that different models learn from different attributes of the data, such that through their
‘collective wisdom’, the ensemble of these models can
eliminate the implicit variance of the constituent models
and substantially improve the collective inference performance. One approach to enrich the diversity of the
base models is to manipulate the training data used to
train different classiﬁers, making them learn different
features of the input space in each trained model.
In addition to the training of these unique and independent classiﬁers, pruning methods that aim at ﬁnding small
ensembles while also achieving competitive inference
performance are also very important37.
Based on these considerations, Fig. 1a, b depict the two
types of D2NNs29 (base learners) selected to constitute
our ensemble diffractive system. The difference between
these two types lies in the placement of the input mask
(passive) used to ﬁlter out different spatial features of the
object ﬁeld to variegate the information fed to the base
D2NN classiﬁers. In the structure of Fig. 1a, the input
ﬁlter is placed on the object plane, whereas the structure
of Fig. 1b uses an input ﬁlter on the Fourier plane of a 4-f
system placed before the D2NN. Further heterogeneity is
introduced by diversifying the input ﬁlter proﬁles for both
types of D2NNs depicted in Fig. 1a, b (see Supplementary
Table S1). For example, input ﬁlters with transmissive
(rectangular,
Hamming, or Hanning windows) and in different locations are used at the object plane. The input ﬁlters used at
the Fourier plane also vary in terms of their pass/stop
bands (see the “Materials and methods” section for more
details). In designing the object plane ﬁlters, we used
windows of various shapes and sizes and in various
locations to help the individual D2NNs independently
learn the object features at different spatial positions and
windows of the input plane. Similar considerations were
also made during the design of the Fourier plane ﬁlters.
Although a ﬁltering operation at the Fourier plane can be
represented by an equivalent convolution on the object
plane, the two types of input ﬁlters serve different purposes. The spatial domain ﬁlters provide attention (similar
to the attention mechanism used in deep learning38) to
spatial features and regions of interest at the input plane,
while the Fourier plane ﬁlters provide different engineered
point spread functions and convolution operations that
are uniformly applied over the entire sample ﬁeld of view;
in this sense, these two sets of ﬁlters complement each
other in the desired inference task.
To further improve the diversity of the base models,
the input object information is encoded into either the
phase channel with four different dynamic ranges or the
amplitude channel of the illumination ﬁeld. Using all of
these different hyperparameter choices and their combinations, 1252 unique D2NN classiﬁers were trained to
form the initial network pool. In total, 340 of these networks had the input object information encoded in the
amplitude channel, while 912 of them had phase-encoded
inputs; 276 of the amplitude-encoded D2NNs had an
input ﬁlter located on the object plane, and 64 had an
input ﬁlter located on the Fourier plane; 656 of the phaseencoded-input networks had a ﬁlter on the object plane,
and 256 had a ﬁlter on the Fourier plane. For these 1252
unique D2NN classiﬁers, each diffractive neural network
Rahman et al. Light: Science & Applications 10:14
 
subsequently acts on the ﬁltered version of the input
image, and therefore, the trained diffractive layers of each
base D2NN directly act on the space domain information
(not on the frequency or Fourier domain).
The preparation of this initial set of 1252 unique D2NNs
was followed by iterative pruning, with the aim of
obtaining ensembles of signiﬁcantly reduced size, i.e., with
a much smaller number of D2NNs (base models) in the
ensemble. Ensemble pruning was performed by assigning
weights to each class score provided by the individual
D2NN classiﬁers and deﬁning the ensemble class score
as a weighted sum of the individual class scores. At each
iteration of ensemble pruning, the weights were optimized
through gradient descent and error backpropagation
method to minimize the softmax-cross-entropy (SCE) loss
between the predicted ensemble class scores and their
one-hot labelled ground truth, and the set of weights
providing the highest accuracy were chosen (see the
“Materials and methods” section). Then, the ‘signiﬁcance’
of the individual D2NNs in a given state of the ensemble
was quantiﬁed and ranked by the absolute summation (i.e.,
the L1 norm) of their weights, based on which a certain
fraction of the networks was then eliminated from the
ensemble due to their relatively minor contributions. In
addition to this greedy search, periodic random elimination of the individual classiﬁers from the ensemble was
also used in the pruning process to expand the solution
space (see the “Materials and methods” section for details).
Based on this pruning process, the iterative search
algorithm resulted in a sequence of D2NN ensembles
with gradually decreasing sizes. To select the ﬁnal
ensemble with a desired size (i.e., the number of unique
networks), we set a maximum limit on the ensemble size
(referred to as the ‘maximum allowed ensemble size’, i.e.,
Nmax) and searched for the D2NN ensemble that achieves
the best performance in terms of inference accuracy on
the validation dataset (i.e., the test dataset was never used
during the pruning phase). As we followed this procedure
for different values of the pruning hyperparameters,
D2NN ensembles with different sizes and blind testing
accuracies were created; we repeated our search three
times for each set of hyperparameters, which helped us
quantify the mean and standard deviation of the inference accuracy for the resulting D2NN ensembles. We
repeated the pruning process three times for each combination of hyperparameters and reported the mean
and standard deviation over these repeats in the form of
mean ± standard deviation. Based on these analyses,
Fig. 2a reveals that as the maximum allowed ensemble
increases,
accuracies
increase; Fig. 2b shows a similar trend reporting the blind
testing accuracies as a function of N, i.e., the number of
D2NNs in the selected ensemble. Figure 2c further
reports the relationship between N and Nmax during the
pruning process, which indicates that on average, these
two quantities vary linearly (with a slope of ~1).
ri : (i), T = 10, m = 1
ri : (i), T = 20, m = 10
ri : (ii), T = 20, m = 1
ri : (iii), T = 10, m = 3
ri : (iii), T = 20, m = 1
ri : (iii), T = 20, m = 3
ri : (ii), T = 20, m = 3
ri : (iii), T = 10, m = 1
ri : (ii), T = 20, m = 10
ri : (ii), T = 10, m = 1
ri : (ii), T = 10, m = 3
ri : (ii), T = 10, m = 10
ri : (i), T = ∞, m = 1
ri : (iii), T = ∞, m = 1
ri : (ii), T = ∞, m = 1
ri : (i), T = 10, m = 3
ri : (i), T = 10, m = 10
ri : (i), T = 20, m = 1
ri : (i), T = 20, m = 3
Maximum allowed ensemble size,
Selected ensemble size,
Selected ensemble size, N
Maximum allowed ensemble size,
Ensemble accuracy
Ensemble accuracy
Fig. 2 Inference accuracy of the D2NN ensembles as a function of Nmax and N. a Variation in the blind testing accuracy as a function of the
maximum allowed ensemble size (Nmax) during the pruning; b Variation in the blind testing accuracy as a function of the selected ensemble size (N);
c Relationship between Nmax and N. The symbols in the legend denote different pruning hyperparameters used in our ensemble selection process;
also see Fig. 4 and Table 1
Rahman et al. Light: Science & Applications 10:14
 
While the results reported in Fig. 2a, b demonstrate
the signiﬁcant gains achieved through the ensemble
learning of diffractive networks, they also highlight a
diminishing return on the blind inference accuracy of
the ensemble with an increasing number of D2NNs
selected. For example, with ensemble sizes of N = 14
and N = 30 D2NNs, we achieved blind inference and
image classiﬁcation accuracies of 61.14 ± 0.23% and
62.13 ± 0.05%, respectively, on the CIFAR-10 test dataset. Increasing the ensemble size to, e.g., N = 77 D2NNs,
resulted in a classiﬁcation accuracy of 62.56% on the
same test dataset. Because of this diminishing return
achieved by larger ensemble sizes, we further focused
on the case of Nmax = 14 to better explore this optimal
point: Table 1 reports the blind testing accuracies
(means ± standard deviations) achieved for different
pruning hyperparameters for a maximum allowable
ensemble size of 14. These results summarized in
Table 1 reveal that, although not intuitive, the periodic
random elimination of diffractive models during the
pruning process results in better classiﬁcation accuracies than pruning with no random model elimination;
see the columns in Table 1 with T = ∞, where T refers
to the interval between periodic random elimination of
D2NN models. In Table 1, the best average blind testing
accuracy (61.14 ± 0.23%) that was achieved for Nmax =
14 is highlighted with a green box. For three individual
repeats of the pruning process using the same hyperparameters, the classiﬁcation accuracies achieved by the
resulting 14 D2NNs were 60.88, 61.33 and 61.21%.
Figure 3 further presents a detailed analysis of the latter
N = 14 ensemble that achieved a blind testing accuracy
of 61.21%, which is the median for the 3 repeats. Six of
the selected base D2NN classiﬁers have input ﬁlters on
the object plane, while the remaining eight have input
ﬁlters on the Fourier plane (Fig. 3a). Figure 3b shows
the magnitudes of the class-speciﬁc weights optimized
for the base classiﬁers of this N = 14 ensemble. Even if
these optimized weights are ignored and made all to be
equal to 1, the same diffractive ensemble of 14 D2NNs
achieves a similar inference accuracy of 61.08%, a small
reduction from 61.21%.
In addition, Fig. 3c shows the true positive rates for each
class, corresponding to the individual members of N = 14
Comparison of the blind testing accuracy results achieved under different pruning hyperparameters, with a
maximum allowed ensemble size of Nmax = 14 (see Fig. 4).
For the reported classiﬁcation accuracies, the means and standard deviations are from the three independent repeats of the pruning process using the same
hyperparameters. The lower table describes the schemes used for ri denoted by (i), (ii) and (iii). The green box highlights the D2NN ensemble achieving the best
average blind testing accuracy (N = 14), and the red box highlights the D2NN ensemble achieving the best average blind testing accuracy per network (N = 12)
Rahman et al. Light: Science & Applications 10:14
 
D2NNs as well as the ensemble. The improvements in the
true positive rates of the ensemble over the mean performance
individual
classiﬁers
data classes lie between 13.47% (for class 0) and 19.98%
(for class 6). Figure 3d further presents a comparison of
the classiﬁcation accuracies of the individual diffractive
Mask transmittance
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Class specific weights
Accuracy (%)
Network indices
Network indices
True positive rate (%)
Network indices
Diffractive
plane mask
Diffractive
plane mask
Fig. 3 An ensemble of N = 14 D2NNs achieves a blind classiﬁcation accuracy of 61.21% on the CIFAR-10 test dataset. a Input ﬁlters/masks
used before each of the D2NNs that form the ensemble. For D2NNs 1 and 5–9, the input ﬁlters are on the object plane. For the remaining D2NNs (i.e.,
D2NNs 2–4 and 10–14), the input ﬁlters are on the Fourier plane. The input ﬁlters corresponding to the networks with phase-encoded inputs are
enclosed within a border/frame (D2NNs 5–14), while the inputs of D2NNs 1–4 are amplitude-encoded. The dynamic range of the input phase
encoding is represented by the border colour; red: 0–π/2, green: 0–π, blue: 0–3π/2, purple: 0–2π. b Class-speciﬁc weights for each D2NN of the
ensemble. If one ignores these class-speciﬁc weights and replaces them with all ones, the blind inference accuracy slightly decreases to 61.08%, from
61.21%. c True positive rates of the individual diffractive networks compared against their ensemble for different classes. d Test accuracy of the
individual networks compared against their ensemble. The dotted lines show the classiﬁcation performance improvement (~16.6%) achieved by the
diffractive ensemble over the mean performance of the individual D2NNs. Three repeats with the same hyperparameters resulted in a blind
classiﬁcation accuracy of 61.14 ± 0.23%, where 61.21% represents the median, as detailed in this ﬁgure
Rahman et al. Light: Science & Applications 10:14
 
classiﬁers compared against their ensemble. Through
these comparative analyses reported in Fig. 3c, d, it is
evident that the performance of the ensemble is signiﬁcantly better than any individual D2NN in the
ensemble, demonstrating the ‘wisdom of the crowd’
achieved through our pruning process.
In Table 1, we also report another metric, i.e., ‘the
accuracy per network’, which is the average accuracy
divided by the number of networks in the ensemble, to
reveal the performance efﬁciency of the ensembles that
achieve at least a 60% average blind testing accuracy for
performance
achieved in Table 1 based on this metric is highlighted
with a red box: N = 12 unique D2NNs selected by the
pruning process with Nmax = 14 achieved a blind testing
accuracy of 60.35 ± 0.39%, where the accuracy values for
the individual 3 repeats were 60.77, 60.00 and 60.29%.
Details of the latter ensemble with a blind testing accuracy of 60.29%, which is the median for the 3 repeats, can
be found in Supplementary Fig. S1, revealing the selected
input ﬁlters and the class-speciﬁc weights of the 12
D2NNs in this ensemble.
Our results reveal that encoding the input object
information in the amplitude channel of some of the base
D2NNs and in the phase channel of the other D2NNs
helps to diversify the ensemble. Supplementary Table S2
further conﬁrms this conclusion by reporting the blind
testing accuracies achieved when the initial ensemble
consists of only the 912 D2NNs whose input is encoded in
the phase channel. A direct comparison of Table 1 and
Supplementary Table S2 reveals that including both types
of input encoding (phase and amplitude) within the
ensemble helps improve the inference accuracy. Using
only phase encoding for the input of D2NNs, the best
average blind testing accuracy achieved using Nmax = 14
was 60.74 ± 0.17% with an ensemble of N = 14 D2NNs. A
detailed description of the median of these D2NN
ensembles with a classiﬁcation test accuracy of 60.65% is
provided in Supplementary Fig. S2. Supplementary Fig. S3
shows the details of another phase-only input encoding
ensemble with N = 12 D2NNs, achieving a blind testing
accuracy of 60.43%.
Furthermore, it is noteworthy that the top 10 D2NNs in
terms of their individual blind testing accuracies from the
initial pool of 1252 networks were not selected in any of
the D2NN ensembles of Fig. 3 and Supplementary Figs.
S1, S2 and S3. This ﬁnding corroborates our conjecture
that the individual performance of a base model might not
be indicative of its performance within an ensemble. In
fact, several of the base D2NNs selected in the ensembles
of Fig. 3 and Supplementary Figs. S1, S2 and S3 had blind
accuracies
accuracies of the best models (not chosen in any of the
ensembles) were >50%.
Thus far, the pruning strategy that we have investigated
is based on assigning weights to each differential class
score of the individual D2NNs. Based on a differential
detection scheme29, these class scores are computed
through the normalized difference of the signals from the
class detector pairs. To further explore whether this
weight assignment can be improved, we also considered a
more general case, where the trainable weights are
assigned not only to the class scores but also to each of
the detectors, representing a broader solution space
compared to differential balanced detection29. We optimize this augmented set of weights in two different
schemes: (1) the detector signal weights are optimized
simultaneously with the class score weights in each
iteration of the pruning process, and (2) the detector
signal weights and the class score weights are alternatively
optimized in different iterations (see the “Materials and
methods” section for details). The results of these alternative pruning strategies are shown in Supplementary
Tables S3 and S4. With Nmax = 14, the best testing
accuracy reported using optimization scheme (1) was
61.02%; when using optimization scheme (2), we achieved
a blind test accuracy of 61.35%. Compared to the previous
classiﬁcation accuracy (61.14%) achieved using only the
weights assigned to class scores, these new results present
a very similar performance. This comparative analysis
further conﬁrms our previous observation that although
the weights are vital for ensemble pruning, their ultimate
effect on the inference accuracy is not substantial.
Discussion
Although forming an ensemble of separately trained
D2NNs ensues a major improvement in the classiﬁcation
generalization
performance
diffractive
networks, further improvements could reduce the performance gap with respect to state-of-the-art electronic
neural networks. The classiﬁcation accuracies of widely
known all-electronic classiﬁers on the greyscale CIFAR-
10 test image dataset can be summarized as follows29:
37.13% for support vector machine (SVM)39, 66.43% for
LeNet40, 72.64% for AlexNet2, and 87.54% for ResNet3.
While the blind testing accuracy for an ensemble of
N = 30 unique diffractive optical networks (62.13 ±
0.05%) comes close to the performance of LeNet, which
was the ﬁrst demonstration of a convolutional neural
network (CNN), there is still a large performance gap
with respect to the state-of-the-art CNNs, and this fact
suggests that there might be more room for improvement, especially through a wider span of input feature
engineering within larger pools of D2NNs, forming a
much richer and more diverse initial condition for
iterative pruning.
The presented improvement in the classiﬁcation performance of D2NNs obtained with feature engineering
Rahman et al. Light: Science & Applications 10:14
 
and ensemble learning is not cost-free. Due to the multiple optical paths that are part of this framework, the
number of diffractive layers and the opto-electronic
detectors to be fabricated and used increases in proportion to the number of networks (N) used in the ﬁnal
ensemble, which results in an increased complexity for
the optical network setup. The required training time
also increases signiﬁcantly because of the need for a large
number of individual networks in the initial pool, which
was 1252 individual D2NNs in our case. However, this
training process is a one-time effort, and the inference
time or latency remains the same by virtue of the parallel
processing capability of the diffractive optical system;
stated differently, the information processing occurs
through diffraction of light within each D2NN of the
ensemble, and because all of the individual diffractive
networks of an ensemble are passive devices that work in
parallel, we do not expect a slowdown in the inference
speed. In addition, the detection circuitry complexity of
the diffractive optics-based solutions is still minimal
compared to its electronic counterparts, and the hardware complexity of D2NN ensembles can be reduced
even further by using an additive sum of the individual
class scores instead of the weighted sum at the cost of a
very small reduction in the inference accuracy. For
example, for the ensemble of D2NNs depicted in Fig. 3, if
a simple additive sum of the individual class scores is
used instead of the optimized class-speciﬁc weights, the
blind classiﬁcation accuracy reduces only slightly from
61.21% to 61.08%. This ﬁnding suggests that a further
reduction in the hardware complexity is attainable with a
very small reduction in the inference accuracy by discarding the speciﬁc weights of the class scores. However,
these weights still play a very signiﬁcant role in the
pruning process, as they help in our selection of the
diffractive models to be retained in each iteration during
ensemble pruning by measuring/quantifying the signiﬁcance of the individual networks in an ensemble (see
the “Materials and methods” section). Some of the
drawbacks associated with the relatively increased size
and complexity of optical hardware should also become
less restrictive since advances in integrated photonics and
fabrication technologies have led to continuous miniaturization of opto-electronic devices41. The physical
dimensions of an individual D2NN model with a ﬁxed
number of diffractive layers are dictated by the illumination
wavelength.
longitudinal
dimension of the D2NN designs used in our models is
~240 λ, which refers to the distance between the input
and the output planes, and the lateral dimension is
~100 λ, which refers to the width of each diffractive layer.
Using state-of-the-art fabrication technologies, it is possible to create diffractive structures with a feature size of
a few hundred nanometres42,43, potentially extending the
application of diffractive systems to, e.g., the visible
spectrum. The realization of D2NNs in the visible spectrum would also signiﬁcantly reduce the overall size of
the ensemble. In addition to these 3D nanofabrication
technologies
multiphoton
polymerization,
multilayer photolithographic methods44 could also be
used for the fabrication of D2NN systems. For the same
purpose, nanoimprint lithography and roll-to-roll patterning techniques45,46 might be less expensive alternatives to some of these relatively costly fabrication
techniques. Such miniaturized D2NNs operating at visible wavelengths would also present 3D alignment challenges, requiring high-resolution structuring of freespace diffractive layers, which need to be precisely
aligned with each other. Recent work on the design of
misalignment-resilient31 D2NN models could be useful
for practical implementations of such diffractive systems
operating at visible wavelengths. Furthermore, while the
miniaturization of D2NN systems with the currently
available large-area nanofabrication methods is feasible
to support an ensemble of diffractive networks that
operate at visible wavelengths, high-throughput fabrication and integration of miniaturized optical components
such as ﬁlters and lenses might be challenging due to the
relative bulkiness of such optical components. However,
the recently emerging research in meta-surface-based ﬂat
optics47,48 has enabled signiﬁcant miniaturization of traditionally bulky optical components, and this research
could be further utilized for practical realizations of
miniaturized D2NN ensembles.
In addition to the issues of hardware complexity and
size, to maintain a desired signal-to-noise (SNR) ratio at
the output detectors, the optical input (illumination)
power of the system needs to be increased in proportion
to the ensemble size. However, due to the availability of
various high-power laser sources, this higher demand for
illumination power of the system should not be a signiﬁcant obstacle for its operation. While the use of highpower lasers might not offer a cost-effective solution, alloptical object detection and classiﬁcation applications
that require extremely fast inference on the spot (e.g., for
threat detection) might still justify their use. In addition,
since D2NNs are inherently passive, the availability of
low-loss materials for the fabrication of diffractive layers
might lead to power-efﬁcient diffractive networks, partially offsetting the high-power illumination requirement. Furthermore, given that broadband diffractive
networks have already been reported to process pulsed
optical inputs30,32,33, the utilization of pulsed lasers, such
as those that are widely used in telecommunications and
microscopy applications, might help to provide sufﬁcient
SNR at each detector plane of the ensemble. Another
potential solution to reduce the input power requirement could be to time-gate the illumination signals to
Rahman et al. Light: Science & Applications 10:14
 
different diffractive networks at the cost of some increase
in the inference time by illuminating each individual
D2NN of the ensemble sequentially, i.e., one by one.
The passive nature of a physically fabricated D2NN
model, while an advantage in terms of power requirements,
is also a disadvantage, as it creates limitations for dynamically changing datasets. Incorporating dynamic spatial
light modulators (SLMs) to implement the diffractive layers
would augment the D2NN framework to become reconﬁgurable at the cost of additional hardware complexity and
power. Furthermore, diffractive networks have been shown
to beneﬁt from transfer learning, where the performance of
an already fabricated D2NN can be improved by inserting
new additional diffractive layers or replacing some of the
existing diffractive layers with newly trained layers18,32
beneﬁting from the modularity of the D2NN design.
Another partial limitation of the proposed approach is the
computation time that is needed for the training of the initial
diffractive ensemble. In this paper, we trained a total of 1252
D2NNs, which resulted in a relatively large computational
burden and a long training time. However, this is a one-time
effort, and a signiﬁcant reduction in the training time might
be possible through further optimization of the numerical
implementation of our optical forward models. Furthermore, since our investigation of the optimized ensembles
after the pruning stage revealed that many types of ﬁlters
were rarely represented/selected in the ﬁnal ensembles (see
Supplementary Table S1), there is also the possibility to
signiﬁcantly reduce the total number of diffractive networks
to be trained as part of the initial ensemble.
Finally, the diffractive networks reported in this work
utilize coherent illumination and operate at a single illumination
wavelength.
diffractive networks that can process a continuum of
wavelengths30,32,33, which lends itself to the possibility of
multiplexing the object information at different wavelength
channels of the illumination. The inference accuracy of an
ensemble diffractive model might beneﬁt from this wavelength diversity by utilizing diffractive networks that process
speciﬁc colour channels (e.g., red, green and blue), either
jointly or individually. These are promising research directions for future D2NN ensemble designs that might further
enhance their blind inference performance.
In summary, we signiﬁcantly improved the statistical
inference and generalization performance of D2NNs using
feature engineering and ensemble learning. We independently trained 1252 unique D2NNs that were diversely
engineered with various passive input ﬁlters. Using a
pruning algorithm, we searched through these 1252
D2NNs to select an ensemble that collectively improves
the image classiﬁcation accuracy of the optical network.
Our results revealed that ensembles of N = 14 and N = 30
D2NNs achieve blind testing accuracies of 61.14 ± 0.23%
and 62.13 ± 0.05%, respectively, on the classiﬁcation of
CIFAR-10 test images, which constitute the highest
inference accuracies achieved to date by any diffractive
optical neural network design applied to this dataset.
The versatility of the D2NN framework stems from its
applicability to different parts of the electromagnetic
spectrum and the availability of miscellaneous fabrication
techniques such as 3D printing and lithography. Together
with further advances in the miniaturization and fabrication of optical systems, the presented results and the
underlying platform might be utilized in a variety of
applications, e.g., ultrafast object classiﬁcation, diffractionbased optical computing hardware, and computational
imaging tasks.
Materials and methods
Implementation of D2NNs
As the basic building block of our diffractive ensemble,
all the individual D2NN base classiﬁers presented in this
paper consist of ﬁve successive diffractive layers, which
modulate the phase of the incidence optical ﬁeld and are
connected to each other by free-space propagation in air.
The propagation model we used was formulated based
on the Rayleigh-Sommerfeld diffraction equation18,25,
assuming that each diffractive feature (or ‘neuron’) on the
diffractive layers serves as a source of modulated secondary waves, which jointly form the propagated wave
ﬁeld. The presented results and analyses of this manuscript are broadly applicable to any part of the electromagnetic spectrum as long as the diffractive features and
the physical dimensions are accordingly scaled with
respect to the wavelength of light. Using a coherent illumination wavelength of λ, for all the diffractive network
designs, the size of each neuron and the axial distance
between two successive diffractive layers were set to be
~0.5 λ and 40 λ, respectively, which guarantees an adequate diffraction cone for each neuron to optically communicate with all the neurons of the consecutive layer and
enables the diffractive optical network to be ‘fully connected’. Each photodetector at the output plane of a
D2NN is assumed to be a square of width 6.4 λ. Since
we employed a differential detection scheme here29, the
detectors were divided into two groups, namely, positive
detectors and negative detectors, and were collectively
used to compute the differential class scores for network
k, i.e., Zck, through the following equation:
ck denote the optical signals from the
positive and negative detectors for class c, respectively.
Since the dataset used in this paper, i.e., the CIFAR-10
image dataset, has 10 classes, and a pair of positive
and negative detectors constitutes the score for each
Rahman et al. Light: Science & Applications 10:14
 
class, therefore, there are a total of 20 detectors at the
detector/output plane of a single D2NN. An empirical
factor of K = 0.1, also called the ‘temperature’ coefﬁcient
in the machine learning literature49, was a non-trainable
hyperparameter utilized to achieve more efﬁcient convergence during the training phase by dividing Eq. 1 by K.
In addition, the input object was encoded either in the
amplitude or in the phase channel of the input illumination, which is assumed to be a uniform plane wave
generated by a coherent source. The phase encoding of
the input objects took values from either of the following
four intervals: 0–0.5π, 0–π, 0–1.5π or 0–2π.
Feature engineering of diffractive networks
We used two types of feature-engineered diffractive network architectures: one diffractive architecture employed
an input ﬁlter placed on/against the object plane that ﬁlters
the spatial signals directly, while the other architecture used
an input ﬁlter placed on the Fourier plane of a 4-f system to
ﬁlter certain spatial frequency components of the object.
Unless the ﬁlters are speciﬁcally mentioned to be trainable,
these input ﬁlter designs were pre-deﬁned, keeping the
transmittance of their pixels constant during the training of
the diffractive networks (see Supplementary Table S1 for
examples). Each feature-engineered diffractive network
subsequently acts on the ﬁltered input image, directly
processing the input information on the spatial domain, not
the frequency or Fourier domain.
The object plane ﬁlters are designed to be the same size
as the object, containing transmissive patterns, the amplitude distribution of which takes one of the following forms:
(1) 2D Gaussian functions deﬁned with variable shapes and
centre positions; (2) multiple superposed 2D Gaussian
functions deﬁned with variable centre positions; (3) 2D
Hamming/Hanning functions deﬁned with variable centre
positions; (4) square windows of different sizes at variable
centre positions; (5) multiple square windows at variable
centre positions; (6) patch-shaped windows rotated at
variable angles; (7) circular windows at variable centre
positions; (8) sinusoidal gratings with variable periods and
orientations; (9) Fresnel zone plates with variable x-y spatial positions; and (10) superpositions of Gaussian functions and square windows at variable spatial x-y positions.
For the second type of D2NN with a Fourier plane input
ﬁlter, using the same Rayleigh-Sommerfeld diffraction
equation mentioned above, we numerically implemented a
4-f system with two lenses; the ﬁrst lens transforms the
object information from the spatial domain to the frequency
domain, and the second lens does the opposite. On the
Fourier plane that is 2f distance away from the object plane,
a single amplitude-only input ﬁlter, designed in one of the
following forms, is employed: (1) various combinations of
circular/annular passbands, which are deﬁned by specifying
a series of equally spaced concentric ring-like areas, such
that it can serve as a low/high-pass, single-band-pass or
multi-band-pass ﬁlter or (2) a single trainable layer enabling
the system to learn an input spatial frequency ﬁlter on its
own. On the output image plane of the 4-f system that is 4f
distance away from the object plane, a square aperture is
placed with the same size as the object or 1.5 times the size
of the object before feeding the resulting complex-valued
ﬁeld into the diffractive network. In the numerical implementation, the lens has a focal length f of ~145.6 λ and a
diameter of 104 λ.
For each type of input ﬁlter design, the number of
trained base D2NNs and some input ﬁlter examples can
be found in Supplementary Table S1.
Training details
All the D2NNs and their weighted ensembles in this
paper were numerically implemented and trained using
Python (v3.6.5) and TensorFlow (v1.15.0, Google). An
Adam optimizer50 with the default parameters from
TensorFlow was used to calculate the back-propagated
gradients during the training of the individual optical
models and the ensemble weights. The learning rate,
starting from an initial value of 0.001, was set to decay at a
rate of 0.7 every 8 epochs. The publicly available CIFAR-10
dataset consists of 50,000 training images and 10,000 test
images35. The training images were split into sets of 45,000
and 5000 images for training and validation, respectively.
All the blind testing accuracies reported in this paper
(individual D2NN and ensemble models) were evaluated
on the 10,000 test images, which were never used during
the training of the individual networks nor during the
optimization of the weights for the ensemble pruning
(detailed in the following subsection). Since the images in
the original CIFAR-10 dataset contain three colour channels (red, green and blue) and monochromatic illumination is used in our diffractive optical network models,
the built-in rgb_to_grayscale function in TensorFlow was
applied to convert these colour images to greyscale. In
addition, to enhance the generalization capability of the
trained D2NNs, we randomly ﬂipped the images (left to
right) with a probability of 0.5 while training. For training
the individual D2NNs, we used a batch size of 8, trained
each model for 50 epochs using the training image set and
selected the best model based on the classiﬁcation performance on the validation image set. The D2NN loss
function for a given network k was the softmax-crossentropy between the differential class scores zck and their
one-hot labelled ground-truth vector g:
D2NN Loss ¼ E
c¼1 exp zck
where E[.] denotes the expectation over the training
images in the current batch, C=10 denotes the total
Rahman et al. Light: Science & Applications 10:14
 
number of classes in the dataset, and gc represents the cth
entry of the ground-truth label vector g.
Ensemble pruning
The method we followed for ensemble pruning
involved iterative elimination of the D2NN members
from the initial pool of 1252 unique networks based on
a quantitative metric, which is indicative of an individual network’s ‘signiﬁcance’ in the collective inference
process. However, since a member’s individual performance supremacy might not always translate to an
improvement in the ensemble, during the iterative
process, we occasionally eliminated some members
randomly. Ensemble pruning with intermittent random
elimination of members was found to result in better
performing ensembles compared to pruning without
random elimination, as detailed in the “Results” section
and Table 1.
Our pruning method (see Fig. 4) was initiated with an
ensemble that consisted of all the n0 = 1252 individually
trained D2NN models. An ensemble class score zc was
deﬁned as:
where zck is the score predicted for class c by member/
network k (Eq. 1) and wck is the corresponding classspeciﬁc weight. The weight vectors wk ¼ wck
c¼1, k = 1,
2, …, n0, were optimized by minimizing the softmaxcross-entropy loss of the class scores predicted by the
ensemble of D2NNs; C=10 denotes the total number of
(i + 1)% T
Form a set Sd,i of
last nd,i networks in
the sorted pool
Form a set Sd,i of nd,i
networks randomly picked
from last pni networks in
the sorted pool
Initialize and optimize
class specific weights
wk for the networks in
the pool Si to maximize
Initial pool
Sort the pool of
networks based
and store the
nd,i = ni (1 − ri)
ni+ 1 = 1 ?
nd,i = ni m (1− ri)
Fig. 4 Flow chart of the ensemble pruning process. The meaning of the symbols is as follows: i is the iteration number; S is the set of ensembles,
resulting after each iteration; Si is the ensemble after iteration i; ni is the number of networks in the ensemble after iteration i; wk is the weight vector
for network k; T is the interval between the random eliminations of D2NNs; Sd,i is the set of networks to eliminate from the ensemble in iteration i; nd,i
is the number of networks to eliminate from the ensemble in iteration i; ri is the fraction of networks to retain in iteration i; m is the ratio of the
number of randomly eliminated networks to the number of networks eliminated based on ranking; p is the fraction of the networks in the ensemble
to which random elimination is applied. At the end of the pruning process, S comprises a series of D2NN ensembles (formed by Si) of gradually
decreasing size
Rahman et al. Light: Science & Applications 10:14
 
classes in our dataset. To reduce overﬁtting of the weights
to the training data examples, an L2 loss term was also
included in our pruning loss function:
Pruning loss ¼ E
c¼1 exp zc
where α is set to 0.001, E[.] denotes the expectation over
the image batch, and gc represents the cth entry of the
ground-truth label vector g. During the optimization of the
backpropagation
algorithm, all the image samples in the validation set were
fed into the ensemble model (i.e., the batch size equals 5 K);
using training images for weight optimization during
ensemble pruning resulted in overﬁtting and therefore
was not implemented. The class-speciﬁc weights were
optimized using the gradient descent algorithm (Adam50)
for 10,000 steps. After optimizing the weights, the
individual members/networks were ranked based on a
quantitative metric. An intuitive choice for this metric is
the individual prediction accuracy of each network.
However, a better metric for measuring the signiﬁcance
of individual networks in an ensemble was found to be the
L1 norm of the individual weight vectors optimized for the
validation accuracy. The superiority of the weight L1 norm
as a metric was substantiated by the fact that it consistently
resulted in ensembles achieving much better blind testing
accuracies. After ranking the members based on their
weight vectors, a certain fraction of them was eliminated
from the bottom (i.e., the lowest-ranked members), and the
procedure was repeated with the reduced ensemble until
only one member was left in the ensemble. As mentioned
earlier, at every T-th iteration of the pruning process, this
member/network elimination was performed randomly
instead of via ranking-based elimination. However, to avoid
elimination of the members with the largest weights,
random elimination was selected within a fraction p of the
networks counted from the bottom; p was 2/3 in our case.
Once the pruning process was complete (see Fig. 4), a
maximum allowable ensemble size (Nmax) was set, and the
ensemble with the best performance on the validation
dataset and satisfying the size limit was chosen. The test
image dataset was never used during the pruning process.
To further explore an extended weight assignment
scheme, we used a modiﬁed version of Eq. 3:
ck are the newly introduced weights
assigned to the positive and the negative detector of each
detector pair, respectively. Accordingly, the pruning loss
deﬁned in Eq. 4 was changed to be:
Pruning loss ¼ E
c¼1 exp zc
where α and β are both empirically set to 0.001. During
the pruning process, when weight assignment scheme (1)
described in the Results section was used, all the weights
ck were simultaneously optimized for 10,000
iterations. In weight assignment scheme (2) described
in the “Results” section, the optimization of wck and
ck) was performed alternatively; each time, one
group of weights was optimized for 100 iterations, and in
total, 50 cycles were used to obtain an equivalent number
of total iterations (10,000), the same as in scheme (1).
For all the training and optimization tasks detailed
above, we used multiple desktop computers all with one
or two GTX 1080 Ti graphical processing units (GPUs,
Nvidia Inc.), Intel® Core™i7-8700 central processing
units (CPUs, Intel Inc.) and 64 GB of RAM, running
the Windows 10 operating system (Microsoft Inc.).
The typical training time for one D2NN model on a single
GPU is ~3 h. The time required for the iterative ensemble
pruning process depends on the pruning hypermeters,
varying between 0.75 and 7.5 h.
Acknowledgements
The Ozcan Research Group at UCLA acknowledges the support of Fujikura
Author details
1Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 2Bioengineering Department, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 3California NanoSystems Institute
(CNSI), University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
Author contributions
M.S.S.R. performed the exploration of the feature engineering with object
space input ﬁlters and devised the pruning algorithm. J.L. performed the
exploration of the feature engineering with Fourier space input ﬁlters. D.M.
assisted in validating the numerical models of the diffractive systems. All the
authors analysed the results and participated in the discussion of the results.
M.S.S.R., J.L., and A.O. wrote the manuscript with suggestions from all the
authors. A.O. initiated and supervised the project.
Data availability
All the data and methods needed to evaluate the conclusions of this work are
presented in the main text and the Supplementary Information. Additional
data can be requested from the corresponding author.
Code availability
The deep learning models reported in this work used standard libraries and
scripts that are publicly available in TensorFlow.
Rahman et al. Light: Science & Applications 10:14
 
Conﬂict of interest
A.O., M.S.S.R., J.L., D.M. and Y.R. are co-inventors in a patent application on the
presented framework.
Supplementary information is available for this paper at 
10.1038/s41377-020-00446-w.
Received: 9 September 2020 Revised: 27 November 2020 Accepted: 30
November 2020
Published online: 11 January 2021