Transfer Learning for Activity Recognition: A Survey
Diane Cook1, Kyle D. Feuz1, and Narayanan C. Krishnan1
1Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Washington State University,
Pullman WA, USA
Many intelligent systems that focus on the needs of a human require information about the
activities being performed by the human. At the core of this capability is activity recognition,
which is a challenging and well-researched problem. Activity recognition algorithms require
substantial amounts of labeled training data yet need to perform well under very diverse
circumstances. As a result, researchers have been designing methods to identify and utilize subtle
connections between activity recognition datasets, or to perform transfer-based activity
recognition. In this paper we survey the literature to highlight recent advances in transfer learning
for activity recognition. We characterize existing approaches to transfer-based activity recognition
by sensor modality, by differences between source and target environments, by data availability,
and by type of information that is transferred. Finally, we present some grand challenges for the
community to consider as this field is further developed.
Machine Learning; Activity Recognition; Transfer Learning; Smart Environments
1. Introduction
Researchers in the artificial intelligence community have struggled for decades trying to
build machines capable of matching or exceeding the mental capabilities of humans. One
capability that continues to challenge researchers is designing systems which can leverage
experience from previous tasks into improved performance in a new task which has not been
encountered before. When the new task is drawn from a different population than the old,
this is considered to be transfer learning. The benefits of transfer learning are numerous; less
time is spent learning new tasks, less information is required of experts (usually human), and
more situations can be handled effectively. These potential benefits have lead researchers to
apply transfer learning techniques to many domains with varying degrees of success.
One particularly interesting domain for transfer learning is human activity recognition. The
goal of human activity recognition is to be able to correctly classify the current activity a
human or group of humans is performing given some set of data. Activity recognition is
important to a variety of applications including health monitoring, automatic security
surveillance, and home automation. As research in this area has progressed, an increasing
number of researchers have started looking at ways transfer learning can be applied to
reduce the training time and effort required to initialize new activity recognition systems, to
make the activity recognition systems more robust and versatile, and to effectively reuse the
existing knowledge that has previously been generated.
Correspondence and offprint requests to: Diane Cook, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA 99163, USA. .
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Knowl Inf Syst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 01.
 
Knowl Inf Syst. 2013 September 1; 36(3): 537–556. doi:10.1007/s10115-013-0665-3.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
With the recent explosion in the number of researchers and the amount of research being
done on transfer learning, activity recognition, and transfer learning for activity recognition,
it becomes increasingly important to critically analyze this body of work and discover areas
which still require further investigation. Although recent progress in transfer learning has
been analyzed in 
and several surveys have been conducted on activity recognition no one has specifically looked into the intersection
of these two areas. This survey, therefore, examines the field of transfer-based activity
recognition and the unique challenges presented in this domain. For an overview of the
survey, see Figure 1 which illustrates the topics covered in this survey and how they relate to
each other.
2. Background
Activity recognition aims to identify activities as they occur based on data collected by
sensors. There exist a number of approaches to activity recognition that vary depending on the underlying sensor technologies that are used to monitor
activities, the alternative machine learning algorithms that are used to model the activities
and the realism of the testing environment.
Advances in pervasive computing and sensor networks have resulted in the development of
a wide variety of sensor modalities that are useful for gathering information about human
activities. Wearable sensors such as accelerometers are commonly used for recognizing
ambulatory movements (e.g., walking, running, sitting, climbing, and falling) . More recently,
researchers are exploring smart phones equipped with accelerometers and gyroscopes to
recognize such movement and gesture patterns .
Environment sensors such as infrared motion detectors or magnetic door sensors have been
used to gather information about more complex activities such as cooking, sleeping, and
eating. These sensors are adept in performing location-based activity recognition in indoor
environments just as GPS is used for outdoor environments
 . Some activities such as washing dishes, taking medicine, and
using the phone are characterized by interacting with unique objects. In response,
researchers have explored the usage of RFID tags and shimmer sensors for tagging these
objects and using the data for activity recognition . Researchers have also used
data from video cameras and microphones as well .
There have been many varied machine learning models that have been used for activity
recognition. These can be broadly categorized into template matching/transductive
techniques, generative, and discriminative approaches. Template matching techniques
employ a kNN classifier based on Euclidean distance or dynamic time warping. Generative
approaches such as näive Bayes classifiers where activity samples are modeled using
Gaussian mixtures have yielded promising results for batch learning. Generative
probabilistic graphical models such as hidden Markov models and dynamic Bayesian
networks have been used to model activity sequences and to smooth recognition results of
an ensemble classifier . Decision
trees as well as bagging and boosting methods have been tested .
Discriminative approaches, including support vector machines and conditional random
fields, have also been effective and
Cook et al.
Knowl Inf Syst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
unsupervised discovery and recognition methods have also been introduced . The traditional
approaches to activity recognition make the strong assumption that the training and test data
are drawn from identical distributions. Many real-world applications cannot be represented
in this setting and thus the baseline activity recognition approaches have to be modified to
work in these realistic settings. Transfer based activity recognition is one conduit for
achieving this.
2.1. Transfer Learning
The ability to identify deep, subtle connections, what we term transfer learning, is the
hallmark of human intelligence. Byrnes defines transfer learning as the
ability to extend what has been learned in one context to new contexts. Thorndike and
Woodworth first coined this term as they explored how
individuals transfer learned concepts between contexts that share common features. Barnett
and Ceci provide a taxonomy of features that influence transfer learning in humans .
In the field of machine learning, transfer learning is studied under a variety of different
names including learning to learn, life-long learning, knowledge transfer, inductive transfer,
context-sensitive learning, and metalearning . It is also closely related
to several other areas of machine learning such as self-taught learning, multi-task learning,
domain adaptation, and co-variate shift. Because of this broad variance in the terms used to
describe transfer learning it is helpful to provide a formal definition of transfer learning
terms and of transfer learning itself which will be used throughout the rest of this paper.
2.2. Definitions
This survey starts with a review of basic definitions needed for discussions of transfer
learning as it can be applied to activity recognition. Definitions for domain and task have
been provided by Pan and Yang :
Definition 2.1 (Domain)—A domain D is a two-tuple (χ, P(X)). χ is the feature space of
D and P(X) is the marginal distribution where X = {x1, …, xn} ∈ χ.
Definition 2.2 (Task)—A task T is a two-tuple (Y, f()) for some given domain D. Y is the
label space of D and f() is an objective predictive function for D. f() is sometimes written as
a conditional probability distribution P(y|x). f() is not given, but can be learned from the
training data.
To illustrate these definitions, consider the problem of activity recognition using motion
sensors. The domain is defined by a feature space which may represent the n-dimensional
space defined by n sensor firing counts within a given time window and a marginal
probability distribution over all possible firing counts. The task is composed of a label space
y which consists of the set of labels for activities of interest, and a conditional probability
distribution consisting of the probability of assigning a label yi ∈ y given the observed
instance x ∈ χ.
Using these terms, we can now define transfer learning. In this paper we specify a definition
of transfer learning that is similar to that presented by Pan and Yang 
but we allow for transfer learning which uses multiple source domains.
Cook et al.
Knowl Inf Syst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Definition 2.3 (Transfer Learning)—Given a set of source domains DS = Ds1, …, Dsn
where n > 0, a target domain, Dt, a set of source tasks TS = Ts1, …Tsn where Tsi ∈ TS
corresponds with Dsi ∈ DS, and a target task Tt which corresponds to Dt, transfer learning
helps improve the learning of the target predictive function ft() in Dt where Dt ∉ DS and Tt
This definition of transfer learning is broad and encompasses a large number of different
transfer learning scenarios. The source domains can differ from the target domain by having
a different feature space, a different distribution of instances in the feature space, or both.
The source tasks can differ from the target task by having a different label space, a different
predictive function for labels in that label space, or both. The source data can differ from the
target data by having a different domain, a different task, or both. However, all transfer
learning problems rely on the basic assumption that there exists some relationship between
the source and target areas which allows for the successful transfer of knowledge from the
source to the target.
2.3. Scenarios
To further illustrate the variety of problems which fall under the scope of transfer-based
activity recognition, we provide illustrative scenarios. Not all of these scenarios can be
addressed by current transfer learning methods. The first scenario represents a typical
transfer learning problem solvable using recently developed techniques. The second scenario
represents a more challenging situation that pushes the boundaries of current transfer
learning techniques. The third scenario requires a transfer of knowledge across such a large
difference between source and target datasets, that current techniques only scratch the
surface of what is required to make such a knowledge transfer successful.
2.3.1. Scenario 1—In one home which has been equipped with multiple motion and
temperature sensors, an activity recognition algorithm has been trained using months of
annotated labels to provide the ground truth for activities which occur in that home. A
transfer learning algorithm should be able to reuse the labeled data to perform activity
recognition in a new setting. Such transfer will save months of man-hours annotating data
for the new home. However, the new home has a different layout as well as a different
resident and different sensor locations than the first home.
2.3.2. Scenario 2—An individual with Parkinson’s disease visits his neurosurgeon twice a
year to get an updated assessment of his gait, tremor, and cognitive health. The medical sta3
perform some gait measurements and simulated activities in their office space to determine
the effectiveness of the prescribed medication, but want to determine if the observed
improvement is reflected in the activities the patient performs in his own home. A learning
algorithm will need to be able to transfer information between different physical settings, as
well as time of day, sensors used, and scope of the activities.
2.3.3. Scenario 3—A researcher is interested in studying the cooking activity patterns of
college students living in university dorms in the United States. The research study has to be
conducted using the smart phone of the student as the sensing mechanism. The cooking
activity of these students typically consists of heating up a frozen snack from the refrigerator
in the microwave oven. In order to build the machine learning models for recognizing these
activity patterns, the researcher has access to cooking activities for a group of grandmothers
living in India. This dataset was collected using smart home environmental sensors
embedded in the kitchen and the cooking activity itself was very elaborate. Thus the learning
algorithm is now faced with changes in the data at many layers; namely, differences in the
sensing mechanisms, cultural changes, age related differences, different location settings and
Cook et al.
Knowl Inf Syst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
finally differences in the activity labels. This transfer learning from one setting to another
diverse setting is most challenging and requires significant progress in transfer learning
domain to even attempt to solve the problem.
These scenarios illustrate different types of transfer that should be possible using machine
learning methods for activity recognition. As is described by these situations, transfer may
occur across several dimensions. We next take a closer look at these types of transfer and
use these descriptors to characterize existing approaches to transfer learning for activity
recognition.
2.4. Dimensions of Analysis
Transfer learning can take many forms in the context of activity recognition. In this
discussion we consider four dimensions to characterize various approaches to transfer
learning for activity recognition. First, we consider different sensor modalities on which
transfer learning has been applied. Second, we consider differences between the source and
target environments in which data is captured. The third dimension is the amount and type
of data labeling that is available in source and target domains. Finally, we examine the
representation of the knowledge that is transferred from source to target. The next sections
discuss these dimensions in more detail and characterize existing work based on alternative
approaches to handling such differences.
3. Modality
One natural method for the classification of transfer learning techniques is the underlying
sensing modalities used for activity recognition. Some techniques may be generalizable to
different sensor modalities, but most techniques are too specific to be generally applicable to
any sensor modality other than that for which they are designed to work with. This is usually
because the types of differences that occur between source and target domains are different
for each sensor modality. These differences and their effect on the transfer learning
technique are discussed in detail in Section 4. In this section we consider only those
techniques which have empirically demonstrated their ability to operate on a given sensor
The classification of sensor modalities itself is a difficult problem and indeed creating
precise classification topology is outside of the scope of this paper. However, we roughly
categorize sensor modalities into the following classifications, video cameras, wearable
devices, and ambient sensors. For each sensor modality, we provide a brief description of
the types of sensors which are included and a summary of the research works performing
transfer learning in that domain. In this section we do not describe the transfer learning
algorithms used in the papers as that will be discussed in the other dimensions of analysis.
3.1. Video Sequences
Video cameras are one of the first sensor modalities in which transfer learning has been
applied to the area of activity recognition . Video
cameras provide a dense feature-space for activity recognition which potentially allows for
extremely fine-grained recognition of activities. Spatio-temporal features are extracted from
video sequences for characterizing the activities occurring in them. Activity models are then
learned using these feature representations.
One drawback of video processing for activity recognition is that the use of video cameras
raises more issues associated with user privacy. In addition, cameras need to be well
positioned and track individuals in order to capture salient data for processing. Activity
recognition via video cameras has received broad attention in transfer learning research
Cook et al.
Knowl Inf Syst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 .
3.2. Wearable sensors
Body Sensor Networks are another commonly used sensing mechanism to capture activity
related information from individuals. These sensors are typically worn by the individuals.
Strategic placement of the sensors helps in capturing important activity related information
such as movements of the upper and lower parts of the body that can then be used to learn
activity models. Sensors in this category include, inertial sensors such as accelerometers and
gyroscopes, sensors embedded in smart phones, radio frequency identification sensors and
tags. Researchers have applied transfer learning techniques to both activity recognition using
wearable accelerometers and activity recognition using smartphones but we have not seen
any transfer learning approaches applied to activity recognition using RFID tags. This may
be due in part to the relatively low use of RFID tags in activity recognition itself.
Within wearable sensors, two types of problems are generally considered. The first is the
problem of activity recognition itself ,
and the second is the problem of user localization, which can then be used to increase the
accuracy of the activity recognition algorithm . Both problems present interesting challenges for
transfer learning.
3.3. Ambient Sensors
Ambient sensors represent the broadest classification of sensor modalities which we define
in this paper. We categorize any sensor that is neither wearable nor video camera into
ambient sensors. These sensors are typically embedded in an individual’s environment. This
category includes a wide variety of sensors such as motion detectors, door sensors, object
sensors, pressure sensors, and temperature sensors. As the name indicates, these sensors
collect a variety of activity related information such as human movements in the
environment induced by activities, interactions with objects during the performance of an
activity, and changes to illumination, pressure and temperature in the environment due to
activities. Researchers have only recently begun to look at transfer learning applications for
ambient sensors with the earliest work appearing around 2008 . Since then the field of transfer learning for activity recognition using
ambient sensors has progressed rapidly with many different research groups analyzing the
problem from several different angles .
3.4. Crossing the sensor boundaries
Clearly, transfer learning within individual sensor modalities is progressing. Researchers are
actively developing and applying new techniques to solve a variety of problems within any
given sensor modality domain. However, there has been little work done that tries to transfer
knowledge between any two or more sensor modalities. Kurz et al. and
Roggen et al. address this problem using a teacher/learner model
Cook et al.
Knowl Inf Syst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
which is discussed further in Section 5. Hu et al. introduce a transfer
learning technique for successfully transferring some knowledge across sensor modalities,
but greater transfer of knowledge between modalities has yet to be explored.
4. Physical Setting Differences
Another useful categorization of transfer learning techniques is the types of physical
differences between a source and target dataset across which the transfer learning techniques
can achieve a successful transfer of knowledge. In this section, we describe these differences
in a formal setting and provide illustrative examples drawn from activity recognition.
We use the terminology for domain, task and transfer learning defined in Section 2 to
describe the differences between source and target datasets. These differences can be in the
form of the feature-space representation, the marginal probability distribution of the
instances, the label space, and/or the objective predictive function. When describing transfer
learning in general, using such broad terms allows one to encompass many different
problems. However, when describing transfer learning for a specific application, such as
activity recognition, it is convenient to use more application specific terms. For example,
differences in the feature-space representation can be thought of in terms of the sensor
modalities and sampling rates and differences in the marginal probability distribution can be
thought of in terms of different people performing the same activity, or having the activity
performed in different physical spaces.
Even when limiting the scope to activity recognition, it is still infeasible to enumerate every
possible difference between source and target datasets. In this survey we consider some of
the most common or important differences between the source and target datasets including
time, people, devices, space, sensor types, and labels. Table 1 summarizes the relationship
between each of these applied differences and the formal definitions of transfer learning
differences.
Differences across time, people, devices, or sensor sampling rates result in differences in the
underlying marginal probability distribution, the objective predictive function, or both.
Several papers focus specifically on transferring across time differences , differences between people
 , and differences between devices . For WiFi localization, Pan et al. assume that the source and target spaces are in the same building. Applying transfer
learning to video clips from different spaces usually results in handling issues of background
differences and/
or issues of camera view angle .
Differences in the labels used in the datasets are obviously reflected by differences in the
label space and the objective predictive function. Compared to the other differences
Cook et al.
Knowl Inf Syst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
discussed previously, transferring between differences in the label space has received much
less attention in the current literature .
One of the largest differences between datasets occurs when the source and target datasets
have a different sensor modality. This makes the transfer learning problem much more
difficult and relatively little work has been done in this direction. Hu and Yang have started
work in this direction in . Additionally, Calatroni et al. , Kurz et al. and Roggen et al. take a different
approach to transferring across sensor modality by assuming a classifier for the source
modalities can act as an expert for training a classifier in the target sensor modality.
5. Data Labeling
In this section we consider the problem of transfer learning from the perspective of the
availability of labeled data. Traditional machine learning uses the terms supervised learning
and unsupervised learning to distinguish learning techniques based on the availability and
use of labeled data. To distinguish between source and target labeled data availability we
introduce two new terms, informed and uninformed, which we apply to the availability of
labeled data in the target area. Thus, informed supervised (IS) transfer learning implies that
some labeled data is available in both the target and source domains. Uninformed supervised
(US) transfer learning implies that labeled data is available only in the source domain.
Informed unsupervised (IU) transfer learning implies that labeled data is only available in
the target domain. Finally, uninformed unsupervised (UU) transfer learning implies that no
labeled data is available for either the source or target domains. One final case to consider is
teacher/learner (TL) transfer learning, where no training data is directly available. Instead a
previously-trained classifier (the Teacher) is introduced which operates simultaneously with
the new classifier to be trained (the Learner) and provides the labels for observed data
instances.
Two other terms that are often used in machine learning literature and may be applicable
here are inductive and transductive learning. Inductive learning refers to learning techniques
which try to learn the objective predictive function. Transductive learning techniques, on the
other hand, try to learn the relationship between instances. Pan and Yang extend the definitions of inductive and transductive learning to transfer learning, but
the definitions do not create a complete taxonomy for transfer learning techniques. For this
reason, we do not specifically classify recent works as being inductive or transductive in
nature, but we note here how the inductive and transductive definitions fit into a
classification based upon the availability of labeled data.
Inductive learning requires that labeled data be available in the target domain regardless of
its availability in the source domain. Thus, most informed supervised and informed
unsupervised transfer learning techniques are also inductive transfer learning techniques.
Transductive learning, however, does not require labeled data in the target domain.
Therefore, most uninformed supervised techniques are also transductive transfer learning
techniques. Table 2 summarizes this general relationship.
Several researchers have developed and applied informed, supervised transfer learning
techniques for activity recognition. These techniques have been applied to activity
recognition using wearables and to
activity recognition using cameras .
Cook et al.
Knowl Inf Syst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Research into transfer-based activity recognition using ambient sensors has almost
exclusively focused on uninformed supervised transfer learning , but a few algorithms are
able to take advantage of the labeled target data if it is available . This focus on uninformed supervised
transfer learning is most likely due to the allurement of building an activity recognition
framework that can be trained offline and later installed into any user’s space without
requiring additional data labeling effort. Wearables have also been used for uninformed
supervised transfer learning research as have cameras .
Despite the abundance of research using labeled source data, research into transfer learning
techniques for activity recognition in which no source labels are available is extremely
sparse. Pan et al. have applied an uninformed unsupervised technique,
transfer component analysis (TCA) to reduce the distance between domains by learning
some transfer components across domains in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space using
maximum mean discrepancy. We are unaware of any other work for uninformed
unsupervised transfer-based activity recognition. We are also unaware of any work on
informed unsupervised transfer-based activity recognition. The lack of research into
informed unsupervised transfer-based activity recognition is not surprising because the idea
of having labeled target data available and not having labeled source data is counterintuitive
to the general principle of transfer learning. However, informed unsupervised transfer
learning may still provide significant benefits to activity recognition.
The teacher/learner model for activity recognition is considerably less studied than the
previously discussed techniques. However, we feel that this area has significant promise for
improving transfer learning for activity recognition and making activity recognition systems
much more robust and versatile. Roggen et al. , Kurz et al. , and Calatroni et al. apply the teacher/learner model to develop
an opportunistic system which is capable of using whatever sensors are currently contained
in the environment to perform activity recognition.
In order for the teacher/learner model to be applicable, two requirements must be met. First,
an existing classifier (the teacher) must already be trained in the source domain. Second, the
teacher must operate simultaneously with a new classifier in the target domain (the learner)
to provide the training for the learner. For example, Roggen et al. 
equip a cabinet of drawers with an accelerometer for each drawer and then a classifier is
trained to recognize which drawer of the cabinet is being opened or closed. This classifier
becomes the teacher. Then several wearable accelerometers are attached to the person
opening and closing the drawers. Now, a new classifier is trained using the wearable
accelerometers. This classifier is the learner. When the individual opens or closes a drawer,
the teacher labels the activity according to its classification model. This label is given to the
learner which can then be used as labeled training data in real-time without the need to
supply any manually labeled data.
The teacher/learner model presents a new perspective on transfer learning and introduces
additional challenges. One major challenge of the teacher/learner model is that the accuracy
of the learner is limited by the accuracy of the teacher. Additionally, the system’s only
source of a ground truth comes from the teacher and thus the learner is completely reliant
upon the teacher. It remains to be explored whether the learner can ever outperform the
Cook et al.
Knowl Inf Syst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
teacher and if it does so, whether it can convince itself and others of this superior
performance. Finally, while the teacher/learner model provides a convenient way to transfer
across different domains, an additional transfer mechanism would need to be employed to
transfer across different label spaces.
6. Type of Knowledge Transferred
Pan and Yang describe four general classifications for transfer
learning in relation to what is transferred, instance transfer, feature-representation transfer,
parameter transfer, and relational-knowledge transfer.
6.1. Instance Transfer
Instance transfer reuses the source data to train the target classifier, usually by re-weighting
the source instances based upon a given metric. Instance transfer techniques work well when
χs = χt i.e., the feature space describing the source and target domains are same. They may
also be applied after the feature representation has first been transferred to a common
representation between the source and target domains.
Several researchers have applied instance transfer techniques to activity recognition.
Hachiya et al. develop an importance weighted least-squares
probabilistic classification approach to handle transfer learning when P(Xs) ≠ P(Xt) (i.e., the
co-variate shift problem) and apply this approach to wearable accelerometers. Venkatesan et
al. extend the AdaBoost
framework proposed by Freund and Schapire to include costsensitive boosting which tries to weight samples from the source domain according to their
relevance in the target domain. In their approach, samples from the source domain are first
given a relevance cost. As the classifier is trained, those instances from the source domain
with a high relevance must also be classified correctly. Xianming and Shaozi apply
TrAdaBoost (a different transfer learning extension of AdaBoost) to action recognition in video clips . Lam et al. weight
the source and target data differently when training an SVM to recognize target actions from
video clips . Training a typical SVM involves solving the following
optimization problem:
is the ith datapoint and yi, ξi are the label and slack variable associated with
the normal to the hyperplane. C is the parameter that trades o3 between training accuracy
and margin size. However, to allow for the different source and target weights, they solve
the following optimization:
where the parameters are the same as before except the first n datapoints are from the source
data and the last m datapoints are from the target data.
Unlike the previous instance-based approaches which weight the source instances based on
similarity of features between the source and target data, Zheng et al. 
use an instance-based approach to weight source instances based upon the similarity
Cook et al.
Knowl Inf Syst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
between the label information of the source and target data. This allows them to transfer the
labels from instances in the source domain to instances in the target domain using webknowledge to relate the two domains . Taking a
different approach, several researchers use the real-time teacher/learner model discussed in the previous section to
transfer the label of the current instance in the source domain to the instance in the target
6.2. Feature-Representation Transfer
Feature-representation transfer reduces the differences between the source and target feature
spaces. This can be accomplished by mapping the source feature space to the target feature
space such as f : χs → χt, by mapping the target feature space to the source feature space
such as g : χt → χs, or by mapping both the source and target feature spaces to a common
feature space such as g : χt → χ and f : χs → χ. This mapping can be computed manually
 or learned as part of the transfer learning algorithm .
When the mapping is part of the transfer learning algorithm a common approach is to apply
a dimensionality reduction technique to map both source and target feature-space into a
common latent space . For example, Chattopadhyay et al. use Isomap
 to map both the source and target data into a
common low-dimensional space after which instance-based transfer techniques can be
In some cases, meta-features are first manually introduced into the feature space and then
the feature space is automatically mapped from the source domain to the target domain
 . An example of this is the
work of Rashidi and Cook . They first assign a location label to
each sensor indicating in which room or functional area the sensor is located. Then activity
templates are constructed from the data for both the source and target data, finally a
mapping is learned between the source and target datasets based upon the similarity of
activities and sensors .
6.3. Parameter Transfer
Parameter transfer learns parameters which are shared between the source and target tasks.
One common use of parameter transfer is learning a prior distribution shared between the
source and target datasets. For example, one technique models the source
and target tasks using a Gaussian Mixture Model which share a prior distribution, another
algorithm learns a target classifier using a set of pre-trained classifiers as
prior for the target classifier, and van Kasteren et al. propose a
method to learn the parameters of a Hidden Markov Model using labeled data from the
source domain, and unlabeled data from the target domain. Later they extend this work to
learn hyperparameter priors for the HMM instead of learning the parameters directly .
Another common example of parameter transfer assumes the SVM parameter w can be split
into two terms: w0, which is the same for both the source and target tasks, and v, which is
specific to the particular task. Thus ws = w0 + vs and wt = w0 + vt. Several works adopt this
approach .
Using a different approach to parameter transfer, a transfer learning algorithm can extract knowledge from the
Cook et al.
Knowl Inf Syst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
source domain to impose additional constraints on a quadratically-constrained quadratic
program optimization problem for the target domain. Along a similar line of thought, Zhao
et al. use information extracted from the source domain
to initialize cluster centers for a k-means algorithm in the target domain.
6.4. Relational-Knowledge Transfer
Relational-knowledge transfer applies to problems in which the data is not independent and
identically distributed (i.i.d.) as is traditionally assumed but can be represented through
multiple relationships . Such problems are usually represented with a
network or graph. Relational-knowledge transfer tries to transfer the relationships of in the
source domain to the target domain. This type of transfer learning is not heavily explored,
and as far as we are able to determine, no research is currently being pursued in transfer
learning for activity recognition using relational-knowledge transfer.
7. Summary
The previous sections analyzed a large body of transfer-based activity recognition research
along four different dimensions. Looking at each dimension separately provides an orderly
way to analyze so many different papers. However, such separation may also make it
difficult to see the bigger picture. Table 3, therefore, summarizes the classification of
existing works along these four dimensions.
8. Grand Challenges
Although transfer-based activity recognition has progressed significantly in the last few
years, there are still many open challenges. In this section, we first consider challenges
specific to a particular sensor modality and then we look at challenges which are
generalizable to all transfer-based activity recognition.
As can be seen in Table 5, performing transfer-based activity recognition when the source
data is not labeled has not received much attention in current research. Outside the domain
of activity recognition, researchers have leveraged the unlabeled source data to improve
transfer in the target domain but such techniques have yet to be applied to
activity recognition.
Another area needing more attention is relational-knowledge transfer for activity recognition
as indicated in Table 6. Relational-knowledge transfer requires that there exist certain
relationships in the data which can be learned and transfered across populations. Data for
activity recognition has the potential to contain such transferable relationships indicating
that this may be an important technique to pursue. See for examples of relational-knowledge transfer.
Tables 4–6 also indicate several more niche areas which could be further investigated. For
example, in the video camera domain, most of the work has focused on informed supervised
parameter-based transfer learning, while the other techniques have not been heavily applied.
Similarly, transferring across different labels spaces is a much less studied problem in
transfer-based activity recognition. Finally, we note that parameter-based transfer learning is
also less studied for the ambient sensor modality.
The current direction of most transfer-based activity recognition is to push the limits on how
different the source and target domains and tasks can be. The scenarios discussed in Section
2 illustrate the importance of continuing in this direction. More work is needed to improve
Cook et al.
Knowl Inf Syst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
transfer across sensor modalities and to transfer knowledge across multiple differences.
Instead of transferring learning from one smart home environment to another, can we
transfer from a smart home to a smart workplace or smart hospital? We envision one day
chaining multiple transfers together to achieve even greater diversity between the source and
target populations.
As researchers continue to expand the applicability of transfer learning, two natural
questions arise. First, can we define a generalizable distance metric for determining the
difference between the source and target populations? Some domain-specific distances have
been used in the past, but it would be useful if we had a domain-independent distance
measure. This measure could be used to facilitate comparisons between different transfer
learning approaches as well as provide an indication of whether transfer learning should
even be applied in a given situations. Such a measure would need to indicate how the source
and target data differ (feature-space, marginal probabilities, label-space, and, objective
predictive function) as well as quantify the magnitude of the differences. Second, can we
detect and prevent the occurrence of negative transfer effects. Negative transfer effects occur
when the use of transfer learning actually decreases performance instead of increasing
performance. These two questions are actually related, because an accurate distance metric
may provide an indication of when negative transfer will occur for a given transfer learning
technique. Rosenstein et al. look at the question of when to use transfer learning in
 . They empirically show that when two
tasks are of sufficient dissimilarity, negative transfer occurs. Mahmud and Ray define a
distance metric for measuring the similarity of two tasks based on the conditional
Kolmogorov complexity between the tasks and prove some theoretical bounds using this
distance measure .
This survey has reviewed the current literature regarding transfer based activity recognition.
We discussed several promising techniques and consider the many open challenges that still
need to be addressed in order to progress the field of transfer learning for activity
recognition.