Vol.:(0123456789)
AI and Ethics 2:851–867
 
COMMENTARY
Blind spots in AI ethics
Thilo Hagendorff1
Received: 11 August 2021 / Accepted: 25 November 2021 / Published online: 9 December 2021
© The Author(s) 2021
This paper critically discusses blind spots in AI ethics. AI ethics discourses typically stick to a certain set of topics concerning principles evolving mainly around explainability, fairness, and privacy. All these principles can be framed in a way
that enables their operationalization by technical means. However, this requires stripping down the multidimensionality of
very complex social constructs to something that is idealized, measurable, and calculable. Consequently, rather conservative, mainstream notions of the mentioned principles are conveyed, whereas critical research, alternative perspectives, and
non-ideal approaches are largely neglected. Hence, one part of the paper considers specific blind spots regarding the very
topics AI ethics focusses on. The other part, then, critically discusses blind spots regarding to topics that hold significant
ethical importance but are hardly or not discussed at all in AI ethics. Here, the paper focuses on negative externalities of AI
systems, exemplarily discussing the casualization of clickwork, AI ethics’ strict anthropocentrism, and AI’s environmental
impact. Ultimately, the paper is intended to be a critical commentary on the ongoing development of the field of AI ethics.
It makes the case for a rediscovery of the strength of ethics in the AI field, namely its sensitivity to suffering and harms that
are caused by and connected to AI technologies.
Keywords  AI ethics · Artificial intelligence · Fairness · Privacy · Explainability · Externalities
1  Introduction
In 2016, Nature published an article by Crawford and
Calo, entitled “There is a blind spot in AI ethics” . The
researchers argued for a more fine-grained technology
assessment of AI systems, instead of repeatedly discussing the same small set of either obvious, futuristic, or very
abstract ethical issues. The statement on blind spots in AI
ethics is half a decade old, and claims about the field of AI
ethics per se are rather generalizing. However, AI ethics discourses have changed significantly along the way, with new
theories, frameworks, differentiations, and guidelines being
developed. Nevertheless, in this paper, I once again want to
make the case that current AI ethics has severe blind spots
and that, again in the words of Crawford, this time from her
2021 book Atlas of AI, a “new era of critique” is muchneeded. This new era of critique must embrace a more “radical” ethical approach. Being radical, stemming from Latin
“rādīx” (“root”), nudges to ask more fundamental questions
that do not mainly focus on how to optimize isolated technical artefacts but on a wider context of their deployment.
AI ethics tacitly positions its locus of activity within narrow system boundaries and is often limited to questions of a
“value sensitive” design and appropriate implementation of
AI systems. It often does this instead of asking whether these
systems should be developed or applied in certain domains
in the first place. This would require broadening the analytic scope, and envisioning social fields at large instead
of isolated, small contexts. In technology ethics, this step
towards focusing on socio-technical assemblages is common
sense and promoted by the actor-network theory, science
and technology studies, new materialism, and other major
theories . AI ethics would be wise to follow suit. This
would allow for a more “radical” approach that can critically
deliberate the many externalities of AI by considering the
full-stack supply chain of this technology.
It is very hard to find papers on AI ethics that question
the use of particular AI applications per se or that challenge
the mismatch between AI’s inherent logic of automation and
the genuinely human-centered requirements of many social
domains. Involuntarily, this reveals an affirmative bedrock
* Thilo Hagendorff
 
Cluster of Excellence “Machine Learning: New Perspectives
for Science”, University of Tuebingen, Tübingen, Germany
AI and Ethics 2:851–867
of the discipline where “red lines” are only mentioned in
the most obvious areas like autonomous weapon systems
or AI-guided human rights violations. Papers in AI ethics
implicitly see AI as an inevitability, as a natural next step or
progression of technology. AI is “better” than pre-AI technologies, hence the very task ethics has to accomplish is to
ensure “ethical” or “trustworthy AI”. However, it is wrong
to assume that the goal is ethical AI. Rather, the primary
aim from which detailed norms can be derived should be
a peaceful, sustainable, and just society. Hence, AI ethics
must dare to ask the question where in an ethical society
one should use AI and its inherent principle of predictive
modeling and classification at all. It is a major weakness of
AI ethics to simply condone AI systems being applied in
more and more areas of society, merely because it fits existing (dys-)functional logics of companies, schools, police
stations, and the like.
Accordingly, AI ethics often reduces its scrutiny to design
decisions and frequently disregards the economic or political
situatedness of the technological systems in question. The
problem is that even under conditions under which all major
requirements of AI ethics principles are fulfilled (meaning
that AI systems produce fair outputs, are explainable, privacy-preserving, robust, and accountable), AI applications
can be used to exacerbate environmental damages, foster
social oppression, support unethical business models, and
other problematic developments. AI ethics often frames AI
applications as isolated technical artefacts or entities that
can be optimized by experts who apply technical solutions
to technical problems that are depicted as problems of ethical AI. Contrary to this position, this paper argues that AI
applications must not be conceived in isolation but within
a larger network of social and ecological dependencies and
relationships.
With that in mind, it should be noted that AI applications
often harm individuals from already marginalized and vulnerable communities . AI is in many cases a technique
of rule, an application for monitoring and controlling people
that is often in the hands of societal groups that already
possess significant power . It can exacerbate social inequalities and sustain existing economic structures in which
the privileged “are processed more by people, the masses
by machines” . Policing techniques tend to criminalize
poverty , companies automatically sort customers into
opaque reputation silos based on patterns of their daily lives
 , weapons-grade communication techniques are utilized
to deform political opinion formation , AI applications are built to assist with or conduct torture , social
media platforms intentionally foster addictive behavior via
AI-based information filters , and many more. The
list must remain arbitrary and fragmentary since examples
of AI misuse are plenty. On the other hand, and strikingly,
AI applications that are explicitly deployed in contexts of
care, nurture, help, welfare, social or ecological responsibility are relatively rare —with the field of medical AI
as well as a variety projects in the area of Beneficial AI as
potential exceptions where AI is explicitly applied for the
social good . This is likely due to AI’s inherent logic of
statistical prediction and classification that may be of less
use in these contexts.
Ultimately, one can pose the question which side prevails,
the good or the bad use cases. Obviously, this issue cannot
be answered scientifically. However, empirical research on
the values that are embedded in AI research offer sobering
results . Among highly cited AI papers that were published at top machine learning conferences, values like performance, building on past work, generalization, efficiency,
quantitative evidence, novelty, or understanding are prevalent and prioritized in stark disfavor of values of societal
needs, justice, diversity, critique, and other ethical principles
that are covered extremely seldomly, if at all. The prioritized
values seem to be mere technical issues, but are indirectly
laden with sociopolitical implications that revolve around
power centralization, benefiting already wealthy industries,
and disregarding the interests of underprivileged social
groups. This can be demonstrated by the selection of performance metrics, which is a value-laden choice in itself,
by the preference for large datasets which favor those few
organizations that are able to obtain and process them, by
the conservative approach to generalization, where the past
is assumed to be equal to the future, by the relative equalization of efficiency and scalability, which again favors powerful actors in the information technology field, by focusing on
novelty in relation to past work while denigrating rectifying
arguments or critique on existing considerations, and many
more. All in all, papers in AI research are motivated by the
needs of the community itself, not by the needs of society
at large. Furthermore, the papers hardly mention risks and
expose a significant blindness to potential harms, even when
socially contentious applications in areas like surveillance
or misinformation are being researched . Notwithstanding this point, industry involvement in machine learning
research is on the rise, while conflicting interests between
corporations and public institutions are seldomly disclosed
 . With these aspects in mind, AI ethics should definitively dare to become more “radical” in the aforementioned
sense. It should not be a mere heel lifter for technical solutions in fairness, explainability, or privacy, that are evolving
around technical values themselves, but go beyond that.
Moreover, most of the major AI ethics initiatives have
significant methodological shortcomings . They
choose a principled approach and stipulate a list of rules
and standards, suggesting that this has a governing effect
on AI research and development. However, as more and
more papers on AI metaethics show, many approaches
in AI ethics, among them the prevalent principled,
AI and Ethics 2:851–867
deontological approach, fail in many regards. Typically, AI
ethics approaches have no reinforcement mechanisms , they are often used for mere marketing purposes ,
they are not sensitive to different contexts and situations
 , they are naïve from a moral psychology perspective
in not considering effects of bounded ethicality , they
hardly have any influence on behavioral routines of practitioners , they fail to address the technical complexity
of AI, for instance by only focusing on supervised machine
learning applications and disregarding ethical implications
of deep reinforcement learning etc. , while at the same
time being technologically deterministic , they use terms
and concepts that are often too abstract to be put into practice , etc. To improve the latter shortcoming, AI ethics
recently underwent a practical turn, stressing its will to put
principles into practice and to finally have a tangible effect.
But the typologies and guidelines on how to put AI ethics into practice stand by the principled approach instead
of focusing on virtues, for instance . Thus, they
stand by the problems of deontology, although at least one
significant effect of the practical turn should be that ethics guidelines finally acquired a certain degree of relevance
in their potential to guide decision-making routines in AI
engineers and researchers. This paper, however, explicitly
does not focus on these methodological questions. Instead,
it is focused on the selection of topics that are deemed to be
important in AI ethics.
AI ethics has steered itself into a situation in which
it has somewhat restricted lines of thought regarding the
issues it is focusing on. Hence, this paper is restricted to
the question of which topics and issues AI ethics actually attends to. During the last decade, roughly 100 AI
ethics guidelines have appeared, while the assumption
that newer guidelines were inspired by older ones seems
feasible, since they are often very similar . Accordingly, meta-analysis on these guidelines found that they
comprise a consensus on a certain set of principles , namely explainability, fairness, privacy, safety,
and accountability. These principles appear reasonable at
first glance since they address AI-specific problem areas.
However, a topic rarely discussed in this context is that
many of these principles stand in tension to or even contradict each other. Fairness necessarily comes at the price
of accuracy, privacy compromises quality and efficiency of
services, transparency can undermine safety, etc. . In
spite of this, these reoccurring principles are the result of
the relative “autopoiesis” of the AI ethics discourse, where
one code of ethics is composed of or at least inspired by
other codes of ethics, thus the codes are often mere echoes of each other. However, this has transported AI ethics
into a self-referential state in which it becomes difficult to
think outside of the box. This has also caused a significant
redundancy in AI ethics. At the same time, topics that have
high ethical significance, but are not part of the established
discourse, tip over the edge. A common denominator of
these topics is that they cannot be solved technically or
occur as externalities outside of the “capitalistic centers”.
Part of the self-constriction of AI ethics is its metrification and the focus on issues that can be idealized, rendered
calculable, and that can be remedied by genuine technical
solutions. These issues mainly revolve around explainability, fairness, safety, accountability, and privacy.
In other words, the technically oriented AI community develops technical means that have socially relevant
ramifications and seem to require technical rectifications.
AI ethics then takes up these predetermined issues and
enriches them philosophically. In this process, however,
AI ethics often loses track of its strength, namely its sensitivity to harms and suffering as well as its productive
power to devise positive visions for human flourishing.
Strikingly, large parts of AI ethics are more concerned
with the quest for post hoc model explanations, privacy
preserving data set processing, auditing frameworks for
learning algorithms, etc. than AI’s enormous ecological
footprint, crowdworker exploitation, experiments on live
animal’s brains to achieve more brain-like neural nets,
feminized AI personas, the trickling down of tools that
were once used only by intelligence or military agencies
to civilian contexts, and many more pressing issues. This
way, AI ethics statements corroborate business-as-usualapproaches , where at most, it can act as a “bicycle
brake on an intercontinental aircraft” .
This paper is intended to draw attention to the forgotten
issues of AI ethics and to propel the AI ethics discourse
forwards. It has two parts. The first part is on specific
blind spots with regard to the particular topics AI ethics
focusses on. It critically discusses AI ethics’ emphasis on
issues that are deemed to be calculable or, in other words,
the narrow emphasis on idealized, technical solutions for
sociotechnical problems. The three examples that are discussed are explainability, fairness, and privacy. AI ethics
discourses deliver conceptual contexts for these principles
and repeatedly stress their importance, but as of yet fail to
think further, meaning to question the conservative meaning and alignment that are given to these principles. The
second part discusses blind spots regarding topics which
are hardly mentioned in the AI ethics discourse despite
their significant ethical importance that clearly exceed the
importance of many traditional AI ethics’ principles. Here,
especially negative externalities of AI systems are scrutinized. Ultimately, this paper is intended to be a critical
contribution to the ongoing development of AI ethics. The
hope that is connected to it is that it can influence AI ethics
in a way that brings back the field’s particular strength,
namely its sensitivity to tangible harms that are caused by
and connected to technologies of AI.
AI and Ethics 2:851–867
2  In focus: calculable issues
When sifting through guidelines for AI ethics, a certain
set of reoccurring principles that builds core requirements
for trustworthy AI can be observed. As mentioned in the
introduction, at least three meta-studies on AI ethics
guidelines confirm that explainability, fairness, privacy, safety, and accountability are mentioned
in almost every code of ethics. Strikingly, most of these
principles can be operationalized in mathematical terms
and can thus be implemented via technical means. For
instance, explainability can be provided by model simplifications , privacy standards can be satisfied by
differential privacy , safety can be strengthened by
red teaming exercises or technically versed safety audits
 , etc. Other ethical issues that are less calculable or
harder to process mathematically are mentioned rather
rarely, as meta-studies on AI ethics guidelines reveal .
Explainability, fairness, privacy, and related topics are
so appealing for AI practitioners since these issues can
be solved via proposing metrics that can quantify ethical principles using theories with clear target states and
idealized conditions. One could even claim that AI ethics
only reinforces existing practices of resolving technical
problems in AI research and development that are done
In the following, the paper exemplarily takes up three
of the arguably most important AI ethics principles,
namely explainability, fairness, and privacy, and elaborates on some of the shortcomings of these principles. It
ultimately touches on the question whether their central
role in AI ethics is justified. Interestingly, the focus on a
calculable approach of dealing with ethical issues has led
to the adoption of very conservative mainstream notions
of fairness, privacy, etc. that regularly undermine critical research and alternative perspectives on these very
values. This becomes clear, for instance, regarding the
essentialization of race and gender in fairness-aware
machine learning , the individualistic data protection perspective in AI privacy , and many more.
Again, the reason for this lies in the necessity of stripping
down the multidimensionality of very complex social
constructs to something that is measurable and calculable. The following three subchapters are supposed to
paradigmatically shed light on some of the reasons why
the three mentioned AI ethics principles could profit from
critical perspectives. Ultimately, the purpose of the arguments brought forward is not to go into detail, but to provide a short glimpse on why AI ethics should widen its
scope and recognize the many shortcomings of perceiving
sociotechnical problems through the lens of calculability,
ideal theory, and technical solutionism.
2.1  Example 1: explainable AI systems
One of the most discussed principles of AI ethics is the
request for interpretability, transparency, or explainability
 . One of the reasons for the importance of explainable AI stressed by researchers is its strong connection to fairness. Explainable machine behavior can underpin efforts to
detect biases, it helps to make AI systems more trustworthy
due to its potential to increase the confidence that a model
will work as expected, it allows the inference of causal relationships in data, etc. In the end, the quest for explainability
results from the complexity of machine learning models that
simply exceed human capabilities for information processing—which often fuel enthusiastic claims of “superhuman”
machines. Complexity reduction, though, can be achieved
technically via visualizations, the segmentation of solution
space for local explanations, the computation of the sensitivity a feature has upon model outputs, by trying to find simplified models with similar performances, by extracting relevant examples that relate to certain machine behaviors or by
text explanations or other symbols that represent a model’s
functioning . While it should be relatively obvious that
explainability can be achieved via technical solutions, this
topic has evoked many papers from philosophy . But
while philosophers can undoubtedly come up with valuable
conceptual analyses or term interpretations, they cannot contribute to the core problem, that is making machine learning architectures actually explainable. At best, philosophers
can define benchmarks and goals that practitioners then
may strive to achieve, but even in this regard, only genuine
technical expertise can be the bedrock to map out tangible
steps that show whether the goals can be achieved in the first
place or not. In practice, however, philosophical conceptual
work and the explainable AI community seem in many cases
to be detached from each other due to different bodies of
knowledge, vocabularies, level of detail, scientific journals,
etc. All in all, with regards to discourses on explainability,
it seems that practical philosophy or, specifically, AI ethics,
just goes along with what AI experts are doing anyway. In
that process, AI ethics deems exactly those topics to be of
importance that the technical community is dedicated to,
but lacks its own compass and sensitivity to weighty ethical
Having that said, it can even be questioned whether
explainability is intrinsically valuable at all . An AI system that is explainable in human terms can be seen as mere
means to an end, namely, to foster fairness, trust, accountability, or individual control over decision-making processes.
But explainability itself may be seen as an “empty” value
that has no meaning besides its instrumental value to make
the achievement of other values possible. In addition to that,
explaining AI means to give a list of facts about an AI system, but it is unclear at what point this list can be deemed to
AI and Ethics 2:851–867
not require further explanation . On top of that, knowledge about the process that led an AI system to a particular
decision-making behavior does not simply transition to a
justification for that very behavior that reaches beyond the
mere description of a causal process in a technical artefact,
comprising for instance a justification of whether a certain type of algorithmic decision making is an appropriate,
acceptable solution for a given problem at all.
The argument that explainability is an “empty” value
could also hold true in another regard, where it could be
argued that fully explainable AI applications would make
the use of AI redundant since in situations where humans
possess full knowledge on whether given considerations and
explanations for a decision are acceptable they could also
make the decision themselves . But since humans usually do not possess such knowledge, AI systems that offer
explanations of their own decision-making would not be of
much help. Hence, in domains where it is paramount that
decision-making should not be opaque, black box machine
learning should be replaced by “old-fashioned” types of
automation or genuine human decision-making. In addition, even perfectly explainable models do not ensure that
they are not used for unethical purposes in any way. Very
often, explainable AI researchers demand that especially in
high-stakes contexts like jurisdiction, criminal prosecution,
loan approval, medical diagnosis, or military decisions, the
explainability of AI-driven decision-making is of utmost
importance. On the flipside, such claims implicitly entail
that AI applications can legitimately be used in the mentioned context, if they just fulfill explainability as well as
some other common principles. This, however, can support
stifling the question whether one should use AI applications
in these context at all, since the applications scenarios per
se may be unethical.
2.2  Example 2: algorithmic fairness
The quest for fair AI has become so prevalent that sometimes, it dwindles to an unreflected end in itself. This can
exemplarily be demonstrated through the discourse on facial
recognition systems that have higher error rates in particular
demographic groups, especially in females and people of
color , since these demographic groups are underrepresented in training datasets. But what does it actually
mean to criticize missing accuracy in commercial and statecontrolled facial recognition systems? It can definitely be
problematic when errors in classifiers lead to groundless
suspicion, biased social sorting processes, or other misjudgments. But fair facial recognition systems, which are implicitly demanded when criticizing machine biases, remain a
problem when they are used to harm people. Tacitly, discourses in AI fairness ensure “inclusiveness” of marginalized demographic groups in algorithmic decision-making,
but, depending on the context of application, this only makes
it easier for companies and governments to recognize and
surveil these groups. Machine bias in facial recognition systems, however, may allow some individuals to gain “temporary advantages by partially obscuring [themselves] from
the eyes of the white supremacist state” . Drawing on a
somewhat far-fetched argument, it could even be stated that
in this context, “machine bias” is just another term of the
otherwise celebrated privacy-enhancing technology that is
obfuscation . Instead of a more “radical” approach that
stresses the need to prohibit harmful surveillance technologies , as suggested above, the AI ethics discourse
falls into the “framing trap” , assuming that these technologies are legitimate as soon as they fulfil fairness criteria.
Taking up an idea from Fazelpour and Lipton , one
can differentiate between ideal and non-ideal methodological approaches to machine fairness . An ideal approach
constructs idealized conditions, presumes clear target states,
defines concrete evaluative standards, stipulates requirements for perfect justice, etc. Moreover, ideal fairness aims
to treat similar individuals similarly, to have an eye on protected groups, to measure magnitudes of disparity, and the
like. On the flipside, non-ideal approaches are less static and
abstract, do not claim to possess ideal standards, are more
sensitive to the complexities and causes of different types of
interwoven injustices, and can better inform policy-makers
on how to mitigate concrete cases of unfairness by using
incremental strategies. Moreover, whereas algorithmic fairness is framed in comparative terms, according to Fazelpour
and Lipton , non-ideal approaches can also work with
non-comparative injustices, where fairness is determined
by considering the deserts and merits of specific individuals instead of comparing outcomes for different individuals
against each other. Furthermore, ideal approaches can define
particular fairness criteria. Algorithms that satisfy these criteria are deemed to be axiomatically fair, disregarding cases
that may have been overlooked and causes of unfairness
that are not covered by the necessarily limited definition. In
this context, a much-cited paper from Kleinberg et al. 
shows that no method of algorithmic fairness can satisfy
different fairness conditions at once, rendering fairness an
unachievable ideal. The paper’s insights, that are approved
by succeeding papers , can simply be reinterpreted as
an affirmation of a non-ideal world in which perfect justice
is an unachievable ideal. Here, one must not succumb to the
naturalistic fallacy and mix the description of actual unfairness with normative arguments about how fairness ought to
be achieved or cannot be achieved in a certain sense at all.
Non-ideal fairness, though, acknowledges the existence of
different and at the same time often vague, imperfect fairness
notions without claiming that fairness should not be an ideal
that should be fulfilled whenever possible.
AI and Ethics 2:851–867
Fazelpour and Lipton’s paper marks a starting
point in sketching out the often narrow and shortened fairness concepts in the quest for unbiased AI. Considering
the long history of critiquing theories of justice, it can be
noted that humans know other forms of social coexistence
worth striving for besides justice—which puts the massive
effort for fair machine learning in a completely new perspective. Without a doubt, justice is important and dispositions to foster it can hardly be questioned. But it is not an
absolute value. Especially in cases where the goods that
need to be distributed are not scarce, distributive justice is
not a necessity. Equity comes into play under conditions of
scarcity and limitations, when benevolence becomes suppressed and egoistic habitudes can cause individual suffering . Otherwise, when goods are not scarce, it may
well be that the call for fair (algorithmic) decision-making
tacitly emerges from less accepted motives like envy and
suspicion. Moreover, many “goods” cannot be distributed
evenly at all, which for instance holds true for relationships
of recognition or other kinds of cultural and social capital
 . Further, considerations of fair machine learning
build on rules of reciprocity. Instead of ensuring fairness,
the case could also be made for goodwill or even love 
that transcends the idea of mutual self-interest inherent
in these rules. Goodwill is an extension on perspectives
of altruism and disinterestedness that must, by its very
nature, be excluded from machine learning related fairness
calculations. The same holds true for the idea of extending considerations of justice to components of attention
to the individual situatedness of persons. Rule-governed
processes in fair machine learning should be augmented
by ethically versed judgements, sensitivity for individual
cases, and complex forms of neutrality . Exemplarily,
this can mean making the transition from merely focusing
on the avoidance of unfair disadvantages towards particular sociodemographic subgroups to questioning the production of privileges like whiteness or maleness . In
this context, it can be noted that while fairness is typically
conceptualized via attributes of gender, race, nation or disability, these categories can in some cases be too strict.
Hence, it may be a problem to formally encode and treat
them as fixed instead of relational, social constructs or
phenomena . Furthermore, when claiming that false
negatives and false positives must be equally distributed
across these protected groups , AI fairness researchers must keep in mind that even if the goal of algorithmic
fairness is achieved in this regard, on a different level of
fairness, affected individuals still have different means to
register, contest, and legally appeal to unfair algorithmic
decision-making. Balancing errors does not mitigate this,
unfairness remains part of the respective sociotechnical
assemblage.
2.3  Example 3: privacy preserving machine
Privacy is among the principles mentioned most often in AI
ethics . Similar to principles on fairness and explainability, it must be assumed that this is due to the fact that privacy
issues in the AI field can be solved via technical solutions,
at least when privacy discussions do not concern the question of whether it is acceptable to use algorithmic decisionmaking in certain social contexts at all. Privacy, in theory, is
supposed to ensure an individual’s autonomy and self-determination, to be a defense against intrusions of government
bodies or companies, to allow individuals to be unobserved
when engaging in intimate social relations, to facilitate free
opinion formation, etc. . Since AI tools often rely
on large amounts of personal data and are enablers of mass
surveillance and personalized marketing as well as nudging
techniques, which are notoriously privacy-sensitive fields,
the tools are regarded as threats to informational as well
as decisional privacy. To counteract these threats, legally
established measures like the right for rectification or erasure, informed consent, purpose limitation, data minimization, independent privacy impact assessments, etc. are put to
use in addition to privacy preserving techniques. Here, two
technical solutions are mainly proposed, namely differential
privacy and k-anonymization . These techniques
imply altering datasets by adding noise or by manipulating
them in such a way that complicates the identification of
individuals. This, however, does not necessarily provide full
privacy or full protection against re-identification. Moreover,
making datasets more protective of privacy comes at the
price of accuracy. On the flipside, implementing differential
privacy can enable access to new data sources that hitherto
could not be obtained due to privacy concerns . This
way, privacy-enhancing measurements can actually lead to
an increase in the amount of collected sensitive behavioral
However that may be, AI ethics promotes these technical
as well as legal solutions against privacy violations. The
solutions’ theoretical background, though, is based on classical and individualistic notions of privacy, which in turn
are based on the idea of hiding sensitive information, of
controlling data, or of restricting access to intimate details
that are tied to a particular person . Newer trends in
informational privacy research, however, are extending the
idea of privacy violations from a merely individualistic data
protection perspective towards notions of interdependent,
group, collective, or predictive privacy . These concepts deal with interconnected settings where an individual’s
privacy is bound to others’ decisions, with precautionary
measures that aim at collectively avoiding ethically problematic cases of predictive analytics, with algorithmically
assembled groups of individuals, and the like. In short, new
AI and Ethics 2:851–867
research shows that privacy or data protection is a cause that
can only be addressed collectively.
Apart from that, more and more research questions the
alleged high value of privacy—which also casts doubt on
the massive importance privacy enjoys in AI codes of ethics.
Privacy, with its focus on “hiding” identity factettes, personal information, and intimacy, can actually be an adversary of freedom, emancipation, security, and ultimately
democracy . Democratic processes are thwarted when
political retribution can only be avoided by secrecy. Privacy
allows individuals to shelter from political and economic
abuse of power, but thus tacitly accepts it as a fact that cannot be changed . Marginalized groups cannot challenge
discrimination by remaining in hiding. Diversity is disguised
by privacy, whereas non-conformism is actually widespread
in modern societies due to networked publics that rely on
surveillance techniques . Furthermore, privacy promotes
algorithmic discrimination since the less one knows about
an individual the more one relies on inaccurate stereotypes
and coarse group identities . Moreover, restrictive privacy policies in health data access do not only prevent the
removal of taboos regarding diseases and disabilities but
also thwart public health researchers from using valuable
information that can ultimately save countless lives .
Beyond that, privacy promotes opportunism by the way of
problematic changes of roles depending on the social context. Last but not least, it can protect detrimental norm violations and undermine legitimate criminal prosecution . In
short, researchers even question to what extent privacy and
secrecy actually have a record of fostering societal equality
and freedom . Privacy avoids confronting prejudices and
injustice and helps to avoid conflicts. Hence, social wrongs
stay the same. This does not mean that privacy cannot help
in mitigating social ills, but it is a workaround. It can alleviate symptoms, but it does not address root causes. It is a
relic from the bourgeoisie’s upcoming, but it is increasingly
superseded by other values that characterize postmodern,
networked information societies. Here, publicity rather
than privacy is the default condition, and available big data
allow for probabilistic inferences on people’s most intimate
traits even when they want to keep them secret . All
these considerations point to the necessity of reconsidering
whether technical and legal measures for privacy protection
are rightly so salient in AI ethics—or whether other topics should become more prominent. Ultimately, AI ethics’
privacy principles aim at protecting sensitive personal information , be it by manipulating datasets in order to obfuscate them or by protesting against AI-driven inferences. But
neither the datasets nor the inferences are the problem. The
real issue is unfair social discrimination and intolerance
that renders some information “sensitive” since its disclosure would initiate oppressive measures . For AI ethics, at least when taking the “radical” approach seriously
by addressing ethical issues at their roots, this means being
more careful when protesting against AI-based inferences on
sexual orientations, personality traits, health conditions etc.
instead of stressing the growing importance of tolerance in
post-privacy societies.
3  Out of focus: negative externalities
The previous chapter was concerned with specific blind
spots with regard to the topics AI ethics focusses on. This
chapter, then, is on blind spots with regard to the topics that
are hardly or not discussed in AI ethics at all. These omitted topics are of significant ethical importance, and their
common denominator is negative externalities. To describe
and critically assess these externalities is, apart from very
few exceptions, not part of AI ethics’ language game. But
what are the externalities about? In short, AI applications
are mainly part of an “imperial lifestyle” that is based
on exclusiveness and possesses “capitalistic centers” as well
as a suppressed “outside” on which it deflects all sorts of
costs. As I want to explain in the course of this chapter, AI
infrastructures directly as well as indirectly externalize their
various costs on low-wage clickworkers, persons affected by
ecological damages, exploited mineworkers, animals in laboratories, etc. These externalities of AI are massively underrepresented in the AI ethics discourse. Rather, it focuses on
aspects that occur in the “capitalistic centers”, like algorithmic discrimination, privacy issues or AI safety.
The term “negative externalities” originally stems
from economics. Here, externalities occur when an entity,
meaning a person or company, affects the welfare of other
persons or companies in a way that is outside the market
mechanism and that is not compensated . Hence,
externalities cause indirect monetary or other kinds of
social costs to individuals. Speaking in non-economic
terms, externalities affect noninvolved third parties who
did not consent to the effects the actions of particular
first parties have on them. The classic example of negative externalities are cases of air, water, or noise pollution caused by private companies . From a
psychological perspective, negative externalities emerge
as a problem due to cultural boundaries, group affiliations, and ingroup favoritism that engender
little empathic concern for harm in people if this harm
occurs in social contexts that are “invisible” or outside
of one’s own circle of cultural perception. From a postcolonialist perspective, negative externalities are the result
of colonial mechanisms of power, economics, and culture
which emerge from advanced technologies like AI 
and affect peripheries of metropoles or centers of power
in economically developed countries, typically in the
Western world or Global North. In the AI field, negative
AI and Ethics 2:851–867
externalities are also caused by the development as well
as application of AI systems and also affect outgroup
members, for instance when AI systems are beta-tested in
vulnerable communities or unfold in countries with
fragile democracies, restricted access to human rights protection, or severe poverty . These externalities, meaning negative effects on unrelated third parties that typically live outside of western capitalist centers are hardly
discussed in AI ethics. It comes as no surprise that even
in the origins of AI ethics guidelines themselves, there is
a severe under-representation of geographic areas such as
Africa, Central Asia, or South and Central America .
In general, the key debates in the AI discourse are framed
by means of Western values, contexts, and concerns. However, it should be one of ethics’ core strengths to overcome
ingroup perspectives and emphasize outgroup concerns.
AI ethics very often fails to do so. In the following, three
subchapters paradigmatically shed light on some of the
negative externalities that are typically overlooked. These
are the ramifications of AI regarding precarious, low wage
clickwork and the impact of AI systems on animals as well
as ecosystems.
Discussing these topics in the context of AI ethics,
though, provokes the critical question of the area of responsibility of the discipline per se. One could argue that AI ethics does not address the blind spots discussed in this chapter
for reasons of modularity, since other fields of applied ethics—where AI ethics is a subfield—are already covering
them. Obviously, it makes little sense to broaden the branch
of AI ethics in a way that it “invades” these other fields. Such
an argument, though, may require assuming clear boarders
between the fields, which do not exist. In theory, applied ethics follows a certain taxonomy. However, the different fields
define themselves mainly via the relation to a particular topic
or social system , whereas significant overlaps instead
of monolithic approaches occur—especially in the field of
digital ethics, as a recent scientometric analysis revealed
 . Information ethics overlaps with Internet ethics which
overlaps with ethics of technology which overlaps with robot
ethics, and so on. In the same vein, AI ethics builds a fringed
cluster of AI-related topics and can intersect, among others, with business, animal, or environmental ethics, if the
issue in question just bears a clear connection to AI technologies. Hence, in the following, I will argue that AI ethics could improve by shedding light on hitherto strongly
disregarded issues that revolve around negative externalities
that are directly connected to the use and development of
AI systems, without ceding them to other fields of applied
ethics which would be less apt to discuss them. Ultimately,
chaining together various sub-disciplines can support ethical decision-making frameworks, but one discipline has to
take the lead, whereas AI ethics should do so in the topics
that are to be discussed in the following three subchapters.
3.1  Example 4: precarious annotation work
AI technologies tend to be mythologized . And the
more they are mythologized, the more a necessity emerges to
hide demythologizing factors. These factors revolve around
the dependence of today’s AI technologies on human participation—despite that they are heralded as the next step in
automatization. In many cases, AI harnesses human labor
and behavior that is digitized by various tracking methods.
This way, AI does not create intelligence, but captures it
by tracking human cognitive and behavioral abilities .
Without empirically aggregating recordings of human
behavior, or, in other words, the “predatory extractive practices” of “data colonialism” , many parts of machine
learning would not be possible. An extensive infrastructure
for “extracting” valuable personal data or “capturing”
 human behavior in distributed networks builds the bedrock for the computational capacity called AI. This functions
via user-generated content, expressed or implicit relations
between people, as well as behavioral traces . Here,
data are not the “new oil”, not a resource to be “mined”, but
a product of human everyday activities that is capitalized by
a few companies. For supervised machine learning, AI’s current main method, datasets that are generated continuously
as a by-product of digital technologies must be augmented
with annotations to render them utilizable. This is where AI
creates new kinds of precarious labor.
AI development has two sides. On one hand, the “centers”
of technology development, the luxurious, celebrated, nonhierarchical, playful workspaces at Google, Apple, Facebook
etc., which are seen as the “birthplaces” of AI technologies . On the other hand, the “margins” of technology development: the hidden, low-status, low-wage labor at
clickwork or labeling factories . The clickwork industry is the invisible backbone of many AI technologies, and
the growing market for third-party data labeling solutions
was worth $1.7B in 2019 and will likely reach $4.1B by
2024 . Despite its size and the ever-increasing amount
of workload that is required, the according labor is mostly
hidden and will likely not go away any time soon, even
though significant efforts are being made to come up with
methods for synthetic or fewer labels , not least
because of the massive cost savings that could be made in
case manual clickwork could become automatized or superfluous. However, where the tech industry currently “fails”
to replace handiwork with algorithms, clickworkers have to
step in. They work on digital “assembly lines” where they
are turned into a “computational service” . They take
care of repetitive, dull, and exhaustive data preparation and
labeling work, transcribing audio files, putting texts into
structured databases, marking objects on images, rate search
results, moderate abusive content, etc. Basically, working
conditions are as bad as the market tolerates . Workers
AI and Ethics 2:851–867
are typically excluded from minimum wage or other worker
protection laws . Occasionally, the labelling is even
done by prison inmates . Roughly speaking, the typical
pattern of the supply of labor by the Global South for the
Global North is perpetuated. Here, recruiters can practice
“labor arbitrage”, buying labor from where it is cheapest,
which results in a “race to the bottom” in wage rates .
Moreover, clickworkers often do not know what the purpose of their work is, which can lead to a situation where
they unwittingly support the development of military AI,
for instance .
With very few exceptions , AI ethics is mute
concerning the “human in the loop”, the “backstage” of
AI-based automatization. While in business ethics, ethical
considerations regarding the various branches of the gig
economy are essential part of the discourse , AI
ethics should shed light on a particularly shrouded type of
gig economy, namely the data annotation industry that is in
many cases, the essential backbone for training data preparation and hence model training in machine learning. There
are barely any voices demanding fair and generous wages for
clickworkers, a diversity of tasks instead of highly repetitive
ones, the provision of task contexts and transparency, the
organization of workers via labor unions, the preparation
for times when labeling work can be automatized itself, or
the augmentation of datasheets for datasets with information
about labeling processes, to name just a few examples how
things could be improved. Instead, AI ethics problematizes
the potential labor displacement of taxi and truck drivers, the
displacement of journalists, shop assistants, and the like. In
general, much attention is focused on labor displacement in
masculinized professions, whereas for instance secretarial
labor, which is mainly done by women and which can
be automatized to a high degree is less present in public
debates . Apart from that, AI ethics very rarely sheds
light on the emergence of a growing clickwork industry that,
instead of technically replacing human workforces ,
generates new kinds of work. This situation resembles times
when “computers were women” . Nowadays, however,
the marginalized clickworkers mainly situated in the Global
South have become the human backbone of computing.
3.2  Example 5: anthropocentrism in AI ethics
AI ethics is strictly anthropocentric. It is tailored to humans
and mostly turns a blind eye on animals. Only a single, very
recent study mentions the role of “nonhumans” in AI ethics
 . The study, however, lacks obvious empirical examples
for AI’s impact on animals and remains very abstract, for
instance by speculating about malevolent artificial general
intelligence and its ramifications for animal populations. In
addition to that, a few short articles in AI ethics address the
question of how autonomous vehicles should behave when
encountering animals . In general, however, AI ethics
is similar to many other scientific disciplines like sociology or psychology where animals are largely disregarded
despite it making perfect sense to include them due to their
similarity to humans, their mental capabilities, their ability
to suffer, their intrinsic value, their moral status, etc. In fact,
AI has a significant impact on animals in many regards—and
vice versa. Animal brains are used to inspire model architectures and animal capabilities are harnessed as a
benchmark to measure AI performance . Hence, animals are affected by the research on and development of this
technology since it partially relies on animal testing. Here,
one could again argue that AI ethics is the wrong discipline
to discuss these issues, especially since animal ethics itself
has a long history of reflecting on animal experiments and
animal exploitation . Similar to other fields of
applied ethics that overlap and blend into each other, AI
ethics is indeed not supposed to conduce discussions of the
foundations of animal ethics, but it has an obligation to take
ethical issues into account that are directly associated and
entangled with research and development of AI systems. In
the same vein, AI ethics discusses algorithmic discrimination without shunting it off to social, business, or other fields
of applied ethics. It discusses accountability despite its origin in law, autonomous weapon systems without leaving it
to military ethics, medical decision-making irrespective its
affiliation to medical ethics, and so on. Similarly, AI ethics
should, for instance, not ignore animal testing that is solely
done for the purpose of developing advanced, increasingly
brain-like AI architectures .
The path that led to the success of brain-inspired, deep
neural networks traces back to Rosenblatt’s idea of the “perceptron” . Here, insights into the functionality of neurons, which were heavily dependent on animal experiments,
were used to develop new techniques for information processing, where neurons are simulated by computer programs.
Perceptrons receive, similar to biological neurons, inputs,
where the sum of the inputs determines whether the perceptron meets a threshold value and gives an output in the form
of 1 or 0. This principle is the very fundamentum for today’s
multi-layered neural nets. Especially, the development of
convolutional neural networks were originally inspired by
single-cell recordings of mammalian visual cortex .
Moreover, current research in “AI attention” is inspired by
the primate visual system . In this approach, artificial
neural networks do not process entire images but focus on
certain areas of an image instead. Not least, reinforcement
learning, another method where intelligent agents act in a
way that maximizes certain rewards, was partly inspired
by studies in animal psychology . Moreover, current
research aims at mapping the layout of neurons of a cubic
millimetre of rat brain, using cutting-edge brain imaging
tools. Said tools are for instance infrared lasers scanning the
AI and Ethics 2:851–867
brain of fixed living animals and microscopes to scrutinize
slices of rat and mouse brain, unravelling information on
neural circuitries to be able to build more brain-like artificial
neural nets .
In short, parts of AI research draw upon animals or animal experiments. Advanced neuroimaging or single-cell
recording techniques are used in in vivo experiments, visualizing processes in the brain on different levels of magnification, ranging down to single synapses . In vivo methods often mean that brains of living animals are penetrated,
which comprises stereotaxis surgery, a “survivable procedure” where animals are held in place via clamps,
after which a craniotomy—a surgical removal of a part of
the cranial bone to expose the brain—is performed with a
drill to access the brain. Despite brain imaging or recording techniques, further “tools” from genetic bioengineering
granted more and more insight into the inner “functionality”
of mammalian brains. To increase the statistical power of
experiments, preferably large sample sizes, meaning a great
number of animals such as rodents, are used. Despite being
required to anesthetize the animals via gas or pharmacological agents, it must be assumed that the animals subjected
to neurobiological experiments suffer severe and prolonged
post-surgery pain as well as distress from captivity, behavioral experiments, and various other sources . The ethical
implications of such types of experiments are not discussed
in AI ethics at all despite the fact that the experiments serve
the exact purpose of propelling AI research and to make AI
less “artificial” by copying properties of biological brains
in artificial neural nets . Here, AI ethics can
draw on arguments of a large corpus of research in animal
ethics as well as a long tradition of ethical considerations
with regard to laboratory animal welfare to critically point at the fact that in AI research animals are primarily seen as carriers and suppliers of data who are not
directly morally considerable. This perspective, namely that
animals possess a moral status, is ‘common sense’ within
animal ethics. Regardless of whether one argues that animals
should simply not be harmed or whether one grants
them rights , completely ignoring their interests is
considered ethically wrong. AI ethics, however, has nothing
to say on that.
Despite AI research and its conjunction with animal
experiments, animals play a further role in the AI world as
they are also controlled by AI. AI builds the foundation of
modern surveillance technologies, where sensors produce
too much data for human observers to sift through. These
surveillance technologies are not solely directed towards
humans, but also towards animals, especially farmed animals. The confinement of billions of farmed animals requires
technology that can be employed to monitor, restrict and
suppress the animal’s agency . This has recently been
reinforced by AI technologies . Animals are
analyzed via camera vision-based systems for herd “management” purposes such as tracking, fattening control, or facial
recognition . Advanced closed-circuit television systems are used to automatically detect and track pigs, allowing the automatic detection of potential health problems
without human observation. Robots drive through poultry
houses and collect “layers”, which are floor eggs not placed
in the designated nest boxes. Acoustic data analytic tools
listen to “poultry” birdcalls and process the audio files so
that they can be used as early warning systems to detect diseases. Feeding sensors in combination with predictive analytics are used for “performance” prediction. Support vector
machine classifiers analyzing sensor data are used to detect
early symptoms of lameness in cows. On cockroach farms,
AI systems process sensor data for features like the insects’
temperature, food intake and humidity to ensure an optimal
growth environment. Robot vehicles driving around in factory farms for “broilers” are supposed to move the animals
around to improve the feed conversion ratio. In “processing
plants”, intelligent robot arms equipped with cameras are
used for “poultry deboning”, cutting animal bodies apart
with greater efficiency than human butchers. Besides AI
applications that directly aim at animal control, various AI
methods are used to optimize fodder compositions, design
vaccines, and to analyze animal’s genetics.
In short, animals in factory farms are exposed to an environment that is increasingly surveilled and controlled by
the means of AI. In that, factory farming bears resemblance
to modern information societies at large. While AI-based
surveillance that is directed at humans is heavily discussed
in science and mass media, though, animal surveillance is
seldomly mentioned , if ever, despite its significant
ethical implications that range from the commodification
of sentient beings to the even greater emotional distances
in the human perception of animal suffering. Ultimately, AI
ethics turns a blind eye on the role neurobiological animal
experiments play in inspiring model architectures as well as
the many areas where animals’ conduct of life is subject to
AI tools. With that said, this paper stresses the importance
of overcoming the anthropocentrism inherent in AI ethics to
perceive AI-related suffering in all relevant contexts.
3.3  Example 6: AI systems’ ecological footprint
Ecosystem services do not only have an unprecedented monetary value for humans , but they are the very reason
for the possibility of human life on earth. Over-exploitation
of ecosystems harms future generations , poor and
already underprivileged people , animals , and
many more. Whereas the building industry, agroindustry,
or transport industry seem to be main drivers of ecosystem
destruction and climate change, the information and communication industry also play a tangential role. This holds
AI and Ethics 2:851–867
especially true for the AI field. The term “AI” bears a linguistic similarity to the term “cloud”. The notion of cloud
computing suggests that it lacks materiality, that it is invisible and placeless, that data are “stored in the troposphere”
 , where in fact, big data is anything but transcendent
or amorphous. It is grounded in fragile physical infrastructures, cables, hardware, routers, server buildings, power
grids, cooling systems, satellites, etc., all of whom require
natural resources. A similar situation unfolds with AI. The
term “artificial intelligence” again suggests something
immaterial, a mental quality that has seemingly no physical
implications. This could not be farther from the truth. To
appreciate this, one must switch from a data level, where the
real material complexities of AI systems are far out of sight,
to an infrastructural level and to the complete supply chain.
Here, and first of all, it becomes visible that the cloud and
AI systems are intrinsically intertwined. The cloud builds
the necessary condition of AI, and the material implications of the cloud cling onto AI, too. These implications
are far-reaching and manifest themselves in global networks
of cable infrastructures, labor division, logistics, distribution, and manifold externalities. These networks comprise
lithium, tin, cobalt and other mines that deliver essential
minerals for electronic components or batteries that are part
of every digital mobile device, smelters and refiners that
produce acidic, radioactive, and otherwise harmful waste
products, storage systems and warehouses for logistics and
transportation operations, energy and water hungry data
centers, affiliated cooling systems, diesel powered generators for backup purposes in cases of blackouts, data annotation factories, collection operations for toxic electronic waste
consisting of technical devices with a lifespan of a few years,
and many more . All these mining, shipping, manufacturing, and garbage incineration operations are heavily
destructive, have a high burden on ecosystems, and come
at the cost of human lives, child labor, wildlife populations,
natural habitats, toxins in the ground, water, and air, public health, political instability and tensions and low wage
labor markets. The material conditions that allow AI usage,
especially rare earth elements or “conflict minerals”, are
also triggers for military operations, violence, murder, and
migration that surround the already brutal and slavery-like
industry of mining .
AI systems are not just demanding in terms of material resources, they also require a lot of energy. Electronic
machines, in contrast to combustion engines, can in principle
be used sustainably by consuming electricity from renewable energy sources. In practice, however, in many countries,
only small proportions of electricity are renewable .
Accordingly, powering the computational resources that
are required to collect large amounts of training data and to
train, test, and apply large AI models comes with a significant carbon footprint . Strubell et al. conducted
a life cycle assessment of several large AI models and found
out that they can emit around three hundred thousand kilograms of carbon dioxide equivalent. The reason for this lies
in the many ways machine learning methods go along with
a “bigger is better” approach which prioritizes accuracy
over efficiency with costly trial and error processes
which span from practitioners intuitively setting up model
parameters all to neural architecture search and other tuning and automated optimization processes. Ultimately, the
information and communication industry, which incorporates the AI field, has a carbon footprint that is bigger than
that of the aviation industry . But while there is flight
shame, there is no such remorse for AI use, although some
AI ethics researchers have tentatively started to develop a
critical perspective on the role that AI has in contributing to
climate change . Much of this is dependent
on where training servers are located, which energy grid
is used, how long models are trained, and what hardware
accelerators are in use . However, even under perfect
conditions where only renewable energy sources are used, it
seems likely that AI remains a polluting technology in many
industry sectors due to the business purposes it is utilized
for. On one hand, AI technologies are heralded as technical
solutions to the climate crisis by helping to develop lowemission infrastructures, operate smart grids, help foster sustainable consumption and production, etc. . On the
other hand, AI technologies are used to buttress industries
and business models that are environmentally harmful—let
alone rebound effects in industries that are deemed to be
sustainable . In this regard, the tip of the iceberg is
the collaboration between the largest AI companies and the
fossil fuel industry which does not only comprise
the optimization of oil and gas extraction, but goes so far as
to actively support climate change deniers . However,
the fact that in theory, AI technologies can in sum enable
more than inhibit the accomplishment of targets defined by
the sustainable development goals , may be a reason
4  Conclusion
Modern AI ethics is a field in the making. It has undergone
different phases, from its early beginning that was mainly
characterized by the composition of various lists and frameworks of ethical principles to its current state that can be
described as a practical turn, whereby principles are to be
translated into practice . However, this rather fast
and self-critical methodological advancement of the field
is contrasted by a relative standstill in terms of the topics
that are discussed. AI ethics is tantamount to a certain set of
reoccurring issues that are mainly evolving around explainability, fairness, privacy, accountability, safety, and a few
AI and Ethics 2:851–867
more. The selection of topics, so it seems, is dictated by a
dynamic where AI ethics is reacting to those sociotechnical
problems for which AI practitioners can formulate technical
solutions. Since these solutions, such as fairness checklists,
differential privacy, post hoc explainability approaches, etc.,
are heavily researched in the AI field, AI ethics reacts to
these trends by enriching them with conceptual considerations. However, in this process, AI ethics tends to lose its
actual strength, namely its sensitivity to harms and suffering
as well as its ability to recognize externalities which require
overcoming ingroup perspectives and emphasizing outgroup
concerns. This paper is a comment on the related shortcomings of AI ethics. It makes the case for a broadening of the
topics AI ethics is concerned with as well as for a more critical perspective on the current set of topics that also allows
alternative standpoints on explainability, fairness, privacy,
and the like.
Ultimately, the widely established, narrow technical
definitions of AI ethics principles have the severe disadvantage of evoking the notion that only experts in the field
are capable of reasonable AI governance. This eliminates
a more inclusive social and political governance approach,
or in other words, true democratic oversight. The AI ethics
discourse demarcates “the public” from “stakeholders” or
experts such as machine learning practitioners, businesspersons, professional ethicists, or software engineers who are
those who educate others . Via public engagement, communication offensives, citizen science, youth competitions,
science days, or mere advertisement posters, the public is
supposed to get a glimpse of the otherwise incomprehensible
complexity of AI research. But by maintaining the notion of
a purely technical solutionism for ethical issues that are connected to AI technologies and that apparently revolve mainly
around explainability, fairness, or privacy, citizens who are
not in the field and who will typically not be able to gain
sufficient technical insights are subject to a fake inclusion.
Rudimentary democratic oversight is simulated, but as long
as genuine sociopolitical, multidimensional approaches for
AI technology assessments are not considered and as long
as AI ethics stays in its restricted tailoring of topics that only
comprise design decisions but not broader social systems,
AI governance will remain an elitist project. This can likely
be to the disfavor of many societal groups, whereas citizen
inclusion will remain a mere lip service. The latter will only
be able to trust, which may also explain the inflationary use
of the term “trustworthy AI”. Trust is a mechanism for the
reduction of complexity . This mechanism seems to
become more important the more inscrutable the veil of
programming code and statistical models becomes. Trust
enables the suppression of moments of insecurity, masking
risks. But in doing so, trust is itself a risky endeavor. The
resulting benefits of a trust relation may not counterbalance
the disadvantage of the breach of trust. Trusting too much is
always imprudent. That is why mistrust can be very important, especially regarding powerful technological artefacts.
Mistrust leads to a situation where individuals do not ignore
risks, but perceive them as such and react appropriately.
Trustworthy AI may thus be the wrong goal to aim at.
Authors' contributions  TH is the sole author and wrote the manuscript.
Funding  Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt
DEAL. This research was supported by the Cluster of Excellence
“Machine Learning—New Perspectives for Science” funded by the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy—Reference Number EXC
2064/1—Project ID 390727645.
Availability of data and materials  Not applicable.
Code availability  Not applicable.
Declarations
Conflicts of interest  None.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
copy of this licence, visit