ORIGINAL RESEARCH
ead and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC),
which originates from the squamous epithelium of the
upper aerodigestive tract, accounts for more than 60 000
new cases of cancer and 13 000 deaths yearly in the United
States (1). Risk factors for HNSCC include tobacco exposure, alcohol dependence, and infection with oncogenic viruses (2). Treatment of HNSCC depends on the stage and
consists of a combination of surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy. Early-stage HNSCC is typically treated with
single modality therapy, either surgery or radiation, while
advanced stages are typically treated with two or three modalities. Most patients with HNSCC undergo imaging
before treatment (3), with CT being the most common
modality. Imaging provides anatomic details regarding the
extent of tumor spread, which is an integral part of the
American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) tumor,
node, and metastasis (TNM) staging system (4). Other essential components of the evaluation of HNSCC involve
histologic and molecular analyses of tissue samples (5–7).
Current standard therapies for HNSCC achieve a
40%–50% 5-year median cure rate (8). New molecular
target treatments are in development to improve these
outcomes (9–11). To improve tumor classification, the
eighth edition of the AJCC TNM staging system (12)
includes details beyond anatomy, such as extracapsular spread and human papillomavirus (HPV) status
for patients with HNSCC. While perineural invasion,
which is associated with an increased risk of local recurrence and cervical metastasis, and lymphovascular
invasion are not currently used for diagnosis, multiple
studies have shown their presence to negatively affect
survival (13–16). Taken together, these histopathologic
This copy is for personal use only. To order printed copies, contact 
Purpose:  To determine the performance of CT-based radiomic features for noninvasive prediction of histopathologic features of tumor
grade, extracapsular spread, perineural invasion, lymphovascular invasion, and human papillomavirus status in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC).
Materials and Methods:  In this retrospective study, which was approved by the local institutional ethics committee, CT images and clinical data from patients with pathologically proven HNSCC from The Cancer Genome Atlas (n = 113) and an institutional test cohort
(n = 71) were analyzed. A machine learning model was trained with 2131 extracted radiomic features to predict tumor histopathologic
characteristics. In the model, principal component analysis was used for dimensionality reduction, and regularized regression was used
for classification.
Results:  The trained radiomic model demonstrated moderate capability of predicting HNSCC features. In the training cohort and the
test cohort, the model achieved a mean area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of 0.75 (95% confidence interval
[CI]: 0.68, 0.81) and 0.66 (95% CI: 0.45, 0.84), respectively, for tumor grade; a mean AUC of 0.64 (95% CI: 0.55, 0.62) and 0.70
(95% CI: 0.47, 0.89), respectively, for perineural invasion; a mean AUC of 0.69 (95% CI: 0.56, 0.81) and 0.65 (95% CI: 0.38, 0.87),
respectively, for lymphovascular invasion; a mean AUC of 0.77 (95% CI: 0.65, 0.88) and 0.67 (95% CI: 0.15, 0.80), respectively, for
extracapsular spread; and a mean AUC of 0.71 (95% CI: 0.29, 1.0) and 0.80 (95% CI: 0.65, 0.92), respectively, for human papillomavirus status.
Conclusion:  Radiomic CT models have the potential to predict characteristics typically identified on pathologic assessment of HNSCC.
Supplemental material is available for this article.
© RSNA, 2020
CT-based Radiomic Signatures for Predicting
Histopathologic Features in Head and Neck Squamous
Cell Carcinoma
Pritam Mukherjee, PhD*  •  Murilo Cintra, MD, PhD*  •  Chao Huang  •  Mu Zhou, PhD  •  Shankuan Zhu, PhD  •
A. Dimitrios Colevas, MD  •  Nancy Fischbein, MD  •  Olivier Gevaert, PhD
From the Department of Medicine, Stanford Center for Biomedical Informatics Research (BMIR), Stanford, Calif (P.M., M.C., C.H., M.Z., O.G.); Department of Radiology,
Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil (M.C.); Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, Chronic Disease Research Institute, School of
Public Health, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, China (C.H., S.Z.); Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine (A.D.C.), Department of Radiology
(N.F.), and Department of Biomedical Data Science (O.G.), Stanford University, 1265 Welch Rd, Stanford, CA 94305-5479. Received June 13, 2019; revision requested
August 12; revision received January 8, 2020; accepted January 22. Address correspondence to O.G. (e-mail: ).
Supported by the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering of the National Institutes of Health under award number R01EB020527. The content is solely
the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health. M.C. was supported by São Paulo State Foundation
for Teaching and Research (FAPESP). C.H. and S.Z. were supported by the China Scholarship Council (201606320087) and the China Medical Board (CMB) Collaborating
Program (15-216). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
*P.M. and M.C. contributed equally to this work.
Conflicts of interest are listed at the end of this article.
Radiology: Imaging Cancer 2020; 2(3):e190039  •    •  Content codes:
radiology-ic.rsna.org  n  Radiology: Imaging Cancer Volume 2: Number 3—2020
Radiomic Staging of Head and Neck Cancer
Materials and Methods
Study Design
In this retrospective study, we analyzed two different HN-
SCC cohorts: a cohort for developing the model (The Cancer Genome Atlas [TCGA] HNSCC cohort ) and a
Stanford HNSCC cohort for validating the model. For both
data sets, inclusion criteria were patients with histologically
confirmed noncutaneous HNSCC who underwent contrast
material–enhanced CT of the head and neck before treatment. The exclusion criteria included the following: (a)
patients with only posttreatment CT, (b) patients with no
contrast-enhanced pretreatment CT scans, (c) patients for
whom the contrast-enhanced pretreatment CT images were
obscured by metal artifacts, and (d) patients with no CT
scans of the head and neck area, even in the presence of a
histologic diagnosis (Fig 1).
For the TCGA data set, the demographic and clinical
data characteristics were acquired from the Genomic Data
Commons Data Portal ( while
CT scans of matched TCGA-HNSC patients (n = 163) were
downloaded from The Cancer Imaging Archive (36) (https://
wiki.cancerimagingarchive.net/) in July 2017. Analysis of
this data set was conducted consistent with TCGA and The
Cancer Imaging Archive data use agreement and did not
require institutional review board approval. Of the original 163 patients from the TCGA cohort, 50 patients were
removed for having no pretreatment CT (35 of 50 [70%]),
for having severe metallic artifacts in the oral cavity (seven
of 50 [14%]), or for lack of contrast-enhanced images (eight
of 50 [16%]). A total of 113 patients from the TCGA were
For model validation, a retrospective Stanford HNSCC
cohort (n = 74) was acquired between September 1997 and
July 2017. The pathologic findings were made by the physicians, radiologists, and pathologists during treatment of the
patients. The Stanford HNSCC data were obtained from
features (ie, tumor grade, lymphovascular invasion, perineural invasion, extracapsular spread, and HPV status) are not
currently assessed by radiologists. A noninvasive quantitative analysis of these features could be clinically useful, particularly in cases in which biopsies are difficult to obtain
or when there is tumor heterogeneity, to aid in treatment
planning and consequently improve treatment decisions
and prediction of prognosis.
In a typical radiomics workflow, computer vision algorithms
are used to convert radiographic images into a large number
of predefined image features (17) that may capture quantitative information reflecting tumor characteristics (17–20) that
may not be visually apparent to a radiologist. These features
can be leveraged using machine learning methods to predict
diagnosis, prognosis, and molecular properties in several cancers (17,21–26), including head and neck cancer (27–33).
For example, Kuno et al (31) showed significant association
of CT radiomic texture features with treatment response
for patients (n = 62) with primary HNSCC, and Zhang et
al (34) found that CT texture
and histogram analysis are associated with overall survival in
patients with locally advanced
HNSCC. Our hypothesis was
that radiomic analysis of CT
images of whole-tumor volumes can noninvasively predict
relevant histopathologic characteristics of HNSCC essential for patient diagnosis and
management. Our aim was to
develop radiomics models to
predict histopathologic features
of HNSCCs using CT images.
Abbreviations
AJCC = American Joint Committee on Cancer, AUC = area under
the receiver operating characteristic curve, CI = confidence interval,
CV = cross validation, HNSCC = head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma, HPV = human papillomavirus, PCA = principal component analysis, TCGA = The Cancer Genome Atlas
Radiomics features extracted from CT images showed moderate performance for predicting histopathologic features such as tumor grade,
extracapsular spread, lymphovascular invasion, perineural invasion,
and human papillomavirus status in head and neck cancers.
Key Points
n This modeling approach demonstrated moderate area under the
receiver operating characteristic curve for predicting tumor grade,
extracapsular spread, lymphovascular invasion, perineural invasion, and human papillomavirus status, with the best performance
achieved for predicting human papillomavirus status.
n Radiomic CT features of head and neck carcinoma reflect tumor
heterogeneity and may have the potential to predict histopathologic characteristics.
Consort diagram demonstrates inclusion and exclusion criteria from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) cohort
and test cohort. HN = head and neck, HNSCC = head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
Radiology: Imaging Cancer Volume 2: Number 3—2020  n  radiology-ic.rsna.org
Mukherjee et al
CT Image Acquisition
Statistics of various CT image acquisition parameters used in the training
and test cohorts are summarized in
Table 1. Iodinated contrast material
was used for contrast enhancement of
the CT scans.
Image Segmentation
All images were read and processed
in the Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM)
format. A radiologist (M.C.) with
more than 10 years of experience
in head and neck imaging examined each axial image of patient
CT data and identified gross tumor
volumes, delineating the area of the
tumor in each section. For this, we
used the pencil tool of a DICOM
viewer ( All
segmented tumors were validated
by the same radiologist within 3
months after the first segmentation.
During the process of segmentation, artifacts around the tumor
(airway, fat, bone, and muscle) were
maximally avoided. Only tumor tissue, including solid and/or necrotic
components, was included in the regions of interest. The regions of interest of the tumors were saved, and
all pixels of the background outside
the regions of interest of the volume
of the gross tumor were set to zero
before radiomic feature extraction
Studied Endpoints
We studied five endpoints related
to HNSCC: extracapsular spread,
perineural invasion, lymphovascular
invasion, tumor grade, and HPV status. All endpoints were considered as
binary in the model: grade 3 against
grade 1 and 2 for tumor grade, and
presence or absence of extracapsular spread, lymphovascular invasion, and perineural invasion. HPV status was determined by MassARRAY spectrometry technology (Agena
Bioscience; San Diego, Calif) for the TGCA cohort, while
p16 status was used as a proxy for HPV status for the validation cohort.
Radiomic Feature Extraction
Three-dimensional tumor segmentations were first resampled to isometric voxels size of 1 mm × 1 mm × 1 mm, and
Stanford Hospital with institutional review board approval
from Stanford University for this retrospective study. Data
were deidentified, and informed consent from patients was
waived. We reviewed the medical records and obtained the
clinical, histologic, and CT imaging data in accordance with
the institutional review board guidelines. A subset of the patients (for whom the HPV status was available) in the Stanford HNSCC cohort was used in Huang et al (37). Of the
original 74 patients, three (three of three [100%]) were excluded due to severe metallic artifacts in the oral cavity.
Table 1: CT Protocols for Training and Test Cohorts
TCGA Cohort
(Training, n = 113)
Stanford Cohort
(Test, n = 71)
Barretos Cancer Hospital
16 (14.16)
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
16 (14.16)
Johns Hopkins University
University of Pittsburgh
University of Miami
Vanderbilt University Medical Center
38 (33.62)
MD Anderson Cancer Center
25 (22.12)
Stanford Hospital
Slice thickness (mm)
54 (47.78)
20 (28.15)
47 (41.59)
40 (56.32)
CT manufacturer
Siemens Healthineers (Erlangen, Germany)
28 (24.80)
GE Healthcare Systems (Milwaukee, Wis)
52 (46.20)
Toshiba Medical Systems (Tokyo, Japan)
Philips Medical Systems (Best, the Netherlands)
27 (23.90)
Picker International (Cleveland, Ohio)
Peak kilovoltage
Convolution kernels
FC04, FC08, FC12
Note.—Unless otherwise indicated, data are the number of patients, with percentages in
parentheses. Percentage totals may not equal 100 due to rounding. TCGA = The Cancer
Genome Atlas.
radiology-ic.rsna.org  n  Radiology: Imaging Cancer Volume 2: Number 3—2020
Radiomic Staging of Head and Neck Cancer
ters. We used the up-resampling technique to deal with unbalanced sampling: This technique randomly samples, with
replacement, the minority class to be the same size as the
majority class. For dimensionality reduction, we used principal component analysis (PCA), which reduces the number
of features by extracting new ones that represent a chosen
percentage of variance of the initial radiomic features (43).
In our study, we used PCA features representing at least
80% of the variance. Next, for classification, we used sparse
logistic regression with an L1 penalty. The L1 penalty tends
to assign nonzero weights to a small number of features and
set the weights of remaining features to zero. This is similar
to the absolute shrinkage and selection operation regression
method, where a L1 penalty is added to the loss function to
encourage sparsity in the selected features (44). Thus, it effectively performs feature selection by using a least absolute
shrinkage and selection operator on the feature weights.
Unsupervised Analysis
For unsupervised analysis, hierarchic clustering with the
Euclidean distance was used to cluster both features and patients. The grouping of features was then visualized with a
heatmap created using the ComplexHeatmap package in R
Statistical Analysis
We used the two-tiered evaluation strategy illustrated in Figure 3. We first used the development cohort (ie, TCGA) in
combination with 10-fold cross validation (CV) that was
repeated 10 times by varying the assignment of samples to
folds to evaluate the prediction of clinical parameters. Next,
we extracted the optimal hyperparameters to construct a final
model using the TCGA cohort and validated these models
in the test cohort. We evaluated the model according to the
receiver operating characteristic curve, accuracy, sensitivity,
and specificity average of all iterations. We used the R software ( version 3.3.2, for all statistical analysis, and the models were implemented using R caret
package and the glmnet package (42,44). With statistical
tests, P < .05 was considered significant.
2131 quantitative image features were then extracted. These
quantitative image features are categorized into four groups:
(a) intensity-based features, (b) size and shape features, (c)
texture features, and (d) filter-based features, as previously
reported (23,39,40). Briefly, intensity-based features are
calculated directly from the attenuation (Hounsfield intensity units), including first-order features, such as minimum,
maximum, mean, or variance, and statistical features based
on histograms of the intensity values. Next, shape and size
features were used to quantify the three-dimensional shape
and size of the tumors (eg, volume and surface area). Texture features are calculated on the basis of the spatial relationships between voxels and are further subdivided into
histogram of gradients, local binary patterns, gray-level cooccurrence matrix, gray-level run length matrix, gray-level
size zone matrix, and neighboring gray tone difference matrix features. Finally, the filter-based features consist of two
subgroups: wavelet and Gabor features. In this case, wavelet
and Gabor transformations were further applied to extract
filter-transformed features for feature groups (a) and (c).
The filter-based features capture higher-level abstraction
of the imaging objects. All feature extraction was implemented with an in-house developed pipeline (available at
 using Matlab 2016a (MathWorks, Natick, Mass). Description of all
features and their feature classes are provided in Appendix
E1 (supplement).
Machine Learning
The features obtained for the training set and the validation set were first harmonized using ComBat ( 
com/Jfortin1/ComBatHarmonization) to address latent heterogeneity in features due to differences in CT acquisition
parameters (40,41). Next, we removed radiomic features
with near zero variation features using the R caret package
(R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria)
(42). The remaining features were z-score normalized by setting the standard deviation to one and the mean to zero.
Next, we used machine learning algorithms in combination
with dimensionality reduction to predict clinical parame-
Example segmentation at axial postcontrast CT imaging. A, Squamous cell carcinoma of supraglottic larynx with anterior extralaryngeal
extension. B, Left floor of mouth squamous cell carcinoma invading the genioglossus muscle and crossing the midline. C, Oropharynx squamous cell
carcinoma including the base of the tongue with extension to the oral tongue.
Radiology: Imaging Cancer Volume 2: Number 3—2020  n  radiology-ic.rsna.org
Mukherjee et al
Tumor and Patient Characteristics from the Training and Test
To develop radiomics signatures of HNSCC clinical parameters, we extracted 2131 radiomic features from the entire tumor volume of pretreatment CT images from the TCGA and
test cohorts. We selected 113 patients from the TCGA cohort
as the development cohort, and we then validated models in
an independent test cohort of 71 patients. For HPV status, we
used a subset of data from patients for whom this information
was available: 82 of 113 (73%) patients in the TCGA cohort
and 52 of 71 (73%) patients in the validation cohort. In both
cohorts, we only used data from patients with the target-class
information and excluded the others.
There was no significant difference between the cohorts regarding sex, TNM clinical stage, and tumor grade (Table 2).
Differences were observed between the two cohorts for smoking (Fisher exact P value, <.001, ignoring missing values) and
alcohol history (Fisher exact P value, <.001, ignoring missing
values). The TCGA cohort contained a higher percentage of
patients with smoking and alcohol history compared with that
of the test cohort (Table 2). Concerning perineural invasion
and primary site of the tumor and considering patients for
whom the data were available, most patients in the TCGA cohort had positive perineural invasion, more than 50% of which
were from the oral cavity, while in the test cohort most tumors
were from the oropharynx (36 of 71 [51%]) with no perineural invasion (37 of 50 [74%]). Significant differences also exist
between the cohorts with regard to HPV status, with 25 of 82
(30%) patients in the TCGA cohort being HPV positive, compared with 38 of 52 (73%) patients in the validation cohort.
A possible reason for such a large difference is that the proportion of oropharyngeal cancers is much higher in the validation
cohort than in the TCGA cohort (51% and 22%, respectively)
based on the demographics of HNSCC at our institution, and
Machine learning workflow for (left) training and (right) test cohort. Data analysis framework embedded with
nested stratified repeated cross validation. The inner loop was used to train and select out the optimal binary classifier based
only on radiomic features, while the outer loop was used to generate different resampling splits to evaluate the generalization
performance of the optimal models. PCA = principal component analysis.
Table 2: Clinical Summary Statistics of the Training and
Test Cohorts
Characteristic
TCGA Cohort
Stanford Cohort
Average age (y)
59.8 (26–87)*
63.6 (28–88)*
Smoking status
Not available
Alcohol consumption
Not available
Clinical stage T
Clinical stage N
Clinical stage M
110 (97.3)
Table 2 (continues)
radiology-ic.rsna.org  n  Radiology: Imaging Cancer Volume 2: Number 3—2020
Radiomic Staging of Head and Neck Cancer
the prevalence of the HPV-positive subtype is much larger in
the oropharynx than in other locations in the head and neck.
Unsupervised Analysis
To perform a descriptive analysis of the radiomic features,
we used unsupervised clustering to evaluate any grouping of
features according to scanner differences (Table 1). We observed that there was no grouping of features according to the
parameters evaluated (Fig 4).
Supervised Analysis in the TCGA Cohort
For each patient CT image in the TCGA cohort (n = 113), we
performed manual segmentation of the whole-tumor volume
and then used this volume for radiomic features extraction.
This extraction resulted in 2131 features in our pipeline. After
harmonization using ComBat, the radiomic features were used
in a multivariate model to predict each endpoint using regression analysis. First, the model extracted new features through
PCA representing at least 80% of the variance, which resulted
in 25–35 features, depending on the endpoint and training
subset during CV. We also collected the optimal hyperparameters of the model retained in each optimal least absolute shrinkage and selection operator classifier across the outer CV loop of
the nested stratified 10 × 10–fold CV. Finally, we evaluated the
performance in the training cohort through the outer 10-fold
CV loop using the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) metric.
We measured the performance of our model for five different endpoints: HPV status, tumor grade, perineural invasion,
lymphovascular invasion, and extracapsular spread (Table 3).
The model demonstrated a moderate ability to predict HPV
status, tumor grade, and extracapsular spread, with a mean
AUC of the 10 × 10–fold CV of 0.71, 0.75, and 0.77, respectively. Perineural invasion and lymphovascular invasion demonstrated a mild performance, with a mean AUC of 0.64 and
0.69, respectively.
Table 2 (continued): Clinical Summary Statistics of the
Training and Test Cohorts
Characteristic
TCGA Cohort
Stanford Cohort
Clinical stage
Not available
Tumor grade
Not available
Perineural invasion
Not available
Oral cavity
Oropharynx
Hypopharynx
HPV status
Not available
Note.—Unless otherwise indicated, data are the number of
patients, with percentages in parentheses. Percentages may not
equal 100 due to rounding. HPV = human papillomavirus,
TCGA = The Cancer Genome Atlas.
* Data in parentheses are ranges.
Heatmaps represent unsupervised analysis of radiomic features in the rows and patients in the columns. The color scale reflects the
Euclidean distance between radiomic features (red = high distance, white = 0 distance, purple = low Euclidean distance). The left panel is the Stanford
cohort, and the right panel is The Cancer Genome Atlas cohort.
Radiology: Imaging Cancer Volume 2: Number 3—2020  n  radiology-ic.rsna.org
Mukherjee et al
External Validation of the TCGA Prediction Model
After extracting the best hyperparameters from the 10 outer
CV loops on the training cohort, we built a final model on
the TCGA data and tested the modeling in a test cohort. Our
model for HPV status showed strong validation performance,
with a mean AUC of 0.80 (Fig 5). The tumor grade and extracapsular spread models demonstrated moderate validation
ability with an AUC of 0.66 and 0.67, respectively, in the test
cohort. The perineural invasion and lymphovascular invasion models achieved an AUC of 0.70 and 0.65, respectively
(Table 4).
Robustness Analysis
Because all of the tumor segmentations were done by a single radiologist, we performed robustness analysis using in silico image perturbations
following Zwanenburg et al (46), as
in Huang et al (37) and Kim et al
(47). Specifically, we used the RVC
pipeline comprising rotation (R),
volume adaptation (V), and contour
randomization (C) using the same
parameters as used in Zwanenburg et
al (46). We performed the robustness
analysis on the features obtained after
dimensionality reduction using PCA
on the training set, since these are
the features for the logistic regression
classifier. For the 29 features obtained
by PCA (explaining about 80.3% of
the total variance), we obtained a
mean intraclass correlation coefficient (48) of 0.75 ± 0.09 (standard
deviation), which implies that the features obtained after PCA
were quite robust to variation in tumor segmentations.
Discussion
Our data show that a whole-tumor volumetric radiomic CT
analysis can allow noninvasive prediction of relevant histopathologic HNSCC parameters for diagnosis and influencing patient treatment compared with the reference standard
of tissue sampling. We present CT-based radiomics models
that show strong-to-moderate power to predict HPV status,
extracapsular spread, tumor grade, lymphovascular invasion,
and perineural invasion. Our results show the feasibility of a
noninvasive examination to predict HNSCC parameters that
are correlated with prognosis by using radiomic signatures.
We validated our model in an external cohort, and the results
demonstrated satisfactory performance for predicting HPV
status, extracapsular spread, and tumor grade. This study can
motivate larger studies that may lead to updated models and
an increase in predictive performance.
Regarding radiomics in HNSCC, other investigators have
primarily studied the relationship between radiomic features
and treatment response or survival. Bogowicz et al (49) demonstrated that a radiomic CT signature predicts local tumor
control in patients with HNSCC treated with definitive radiation therapy and chemotherapy and achieved an AUC of 0.75
and 0.78 for training and validation, respectively. Parmar et al
(50) demonstrated an association of radiomic feature clusters
with prognosis (concordance index, 0.68), HPV status (AUC,
0.58), and stage (AUC, 0.77). Recently, Leijenaar et al (20)
considered the prediction of HPV (p16) status in a multicenter
cohort (n = 778) of patients with oropharyngeal HNSCC and
reported an AUC of 0.76 in a validation set comprising a randomly chosen 20% of the full cohort (n = 150). Further, they
reported no significant difference in AUC when including or
Table 3: Performance Metrics to Predict Histopathologic Parameters in the TCGA
Histopathologic
Sensitivity
Specificity
Tumor grade: G3 vs
0.75 (0.68,
0.72 (0.67,
0.83 (0.76,
0.48 (0.37,
Perineural invasion
0.64 (0.55,
0.54 (0.44,
0.57 (0.44,
0.51 (0.42,
Lymphovascular
0.69 (0.56,
0.51 (0.44,
0.64 (0.56,
0.180 (0.7,
Extracapsular spread
0.77 (0.65,
0.69 (0.61,
0.04 (0.04,
0.85 (0.77,
HPV status
0.71 (0.29, 1.0) 0.66 (0.35,
0.83 (0.31, 1.0) 0.76 (0.28, 1.0)
Note.—Performance metrics are the mean from repeated hold-out samples: 10 × 10-fold
cross validation. Unless otherwise indicated, numbers in parentheses are the 95% confidence
interval. AUC = area under the receiver operating characteristic curve, HPV = human papillomavirus.
Receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC) shows the results of
prediction analysis on the test cohort for human papillomavirus (HPV) status with a
mean area under the curve (AUC) of 0.80.
radiology-ic.rsna.org  n  Radiology: Imaging Cancer Volume 2: Number 3—2020
Radiomic Staging of Head and Neck Cancer
excluding CT scans with artifacts in
training and validation sets. They
also confirmed the well-established
fact that HPV-positive oropharyngeal HNSCCs are associated with
better prognosis compared with
HPV-negative cancers. We report
considerably better results in predicting HPV status (mean AUC, 0.80 in
an external validation cohort).
Tumor grade is an important
prognostic indicator for HNSCC,
and the histologic classification consists of three different types: well differentiated, moderately differentiated, and poorly differentiated. Ahn
et al (51) investigated the efficacy of
histogram analysis of apparent diffusion coefficient maps at MRI to
predict HNSCC grade and found
a significant difference in the mean
apparent diffusion coefficient value of the tumor volume using
a b value of 2000 sec/mm2. We found an AUC of 0.75 and
0.66 in the training and testing cohorts, respectively, for tumor
grade using our CT-based model.
Perineural invasion is defined as the movement of cancer cells
into the neural space, usually into small nerves. The diagnosis is
based on histologic samples, and perineural invasion is associated with local-regional recurrence and decreased survival (52).
Routine CT or MRI can often identify perineural spread, which
is macroscopic perineural growth along major peripheral neural branches (53), but such imaging cannot identify perineural
invasion. In our study we observed a mean AUC of 0.64 in the
TCGA cohort and 0.70 in the test cohort. Extracapsular spread
is another histologic prognostic factor that relates to extension
of tumor beyond the lymph node capsule in nodal metastasis.
It is correlated with increased risk of local recurrence and distant metastases (54) and is now part of the eighth edition of
the AJCC Cancer Staging Manual. Url et al tested the efficacy of
radiologists to assess extracapsular spread on CT scans in a retrospective study, reporting a sensitivity of 73% and specificity of
91% for extracapsular spread with two blinded radiologists (55).
To our knowledge, no previous study tried to correlate radiomic
CT features of the primary tumor to predict extracapsular spread
in HNSCC. Our results show that radiomics of the primary tumor is not able to achieve the same performance for identifying
extracapsular spread as radiologists, likely because our radiomic
feature extraction is limited to the study of the primary lesion
only. However, it showed a significant nonrandom prediction
performance on independent validation (AUC, 0.67), suggesting that the radiographic appearance of the primary tumor reflects extracapsular spread.
Our study had several limitations. First, our study was retrospective and had a relatively small cohort size. Second, the
TCGA cohort was a multi-institutional cohort and hence is
heterogeneous in terms of CT acquisition parameters such as
slice thickness, pixel spacing, and exposure. Previous studies
show that acquisition parameters, especially slice thickness,
pixel spacing, and gray-level discretization can have a considerable effect on radiomic texture features (56–60). We resampled
the images prior to feature extraction, mitigating the effect of
varying slice thickness and pixel spacing to a large extent. We
used ComBat to further harmonize the radiomic features, and
we expected the features obtained by linearly combining the
normalized raw features in the PCA step to be even less sensitive to the variability of CT acquisition parameters. Third, all
tumor segmentations were performed by a single radiologist.
To address this limitation, we performed robustness analysis
using in silico image perturbations following the method of
Zwanenburg et al (46). Fourth, our model did not include
clinical information (eg, smoking status) that could potentially
improve performance (49). Our data set had a wide range of
tumor sizes, and in the case of small tumors, some of the radiomic feature extraction may have been compromised by partial volume effects (61). Additionally, we assessed patient images from only one time point. Comparing radiomic features
of the same patient before and after treatment can also provide
additional new information (62).
In conclusion, our model demonstrated the potential to
predict tumor characteristics typically based on tissue examination (eg, HPV status, tumor grade, lymphovascular
invasion, extracapsular spread) in HNSCC in a noninvasive
way for individual patients. Continued development of radiomics will be needed to determine the best operating points
for each radiomic signature, leading to the desired sensitivity and specificity. Future studies with standardized cohorts
likely will lead to an increase of the performance of HNSCC
radiomics based on the internal CV results. Thus, our work
contributes to the body of evidence that radiomics can predict not only patient outcome and prognosis, but also histopathologic tumor characteristics for patients with HNSCC.
The continued development of radiomic signatures has the
promise to contribute to a more personalized and potentially
improved treatment for HNSCC.
Table 4: Performance Metrics Using the TCGA Cohort for Training and Assessment of the Test Set
Histopathologic
Sensitivity
Specificity
Tumor grade, G3 vs
0.66 [0.45,
0.73 (40/55)
0.70 (10/14)
[0.61, 0.85]
0.73 (30/41)
[0.62, 0.90]
Perineural invasion
0.70 [0.47,
0.71 (29/41)
0.78 (7/9)
[0.42, 0.84]
0.69 (22/32)
[0.42, 0.85]
Lymphovascular
0.65 [0.38,
0.68 (28/41)
0.70 (7/10)
[0.60, 0.78]
0.68 (21/31)
[0.55, 0.81]
Extracapsular spread
0.67 [0.15,
0.73 (11/15)
0.33 (1/3)
[0.20, 0.49]
0.83 (10/12)
[0.72, 1.0]
HPV status
0.80 [0.65,
0.71 (29/41)
0.65 (20/31)
[0.54, 0.82]
0.9 (9/10)
[0.78, 1.0]
Note.—Unless otherwise indicated, numbers in parentheses are proportions of patients and
numbers in brackets are 95% confidence intervals. AUC = area under the receiver operating
characteristic curve.
Radiology: Imaging Cancer Volume 2: Number 3—2020  n  radiology-ic.rsna.org
Mukherjee et al
Author contributions: Guarantors of integrity of entire study, P.M., M.C., O.G.;
study concepts/study design or data acquisition or data analysis/interpretation, all
authors; manuscript drafting or manuscript revision for important intellectual content, all authors; approval of final version of submitted manuscript, all authors;
agrees to ensure any questions related to the work are appropriately resolved, all
authors; literature research, P.M., M.C., C.H., M.Z., O.G.; clinical studies, M.C.,
M.Z., A.D.C., N.F., O.G.; statistical analysis, P.M., M.C., C.H., O.G.; and manuscript editing, all authors
Disclosures of Conflicts of Interest: P.M. disclosed no relevant relationships.
M.C. disclosed no relevant relationships. C.H. disclosed no relevant relationships. M.Z. disclosed no relevant relationships. S.Z. disclosed no relevant relationships. A.D.C. Activities related to the present article: grants from Abbvie,
AstraZeneca, Atara, Bristol-Squibb Pharmaceuticals, CellSight Technologies,
Cullinan, Exelis, Innate Pharma, Tessa Therapeutics, and Threshold Pharmaceuticals; consulting fees from Aduro Biotech, Atara, Biopharma, Biotherapeutics,
COTA, Cue, IQVIA RDS, KeyQuest Health, Loxo Oncology, PRA Health Sciences, Pfizer, and Rakuten Medical. Activities not related to the present article:
employment with Stanford University. Other relationships: disclosed no relevant relationships. N.F. disclosed no relevant relationships. O.G. disclosed no
relevant relationships.