Theory of fractional-L´evy kinetics for cold atoms diﬀusing in optical lattices
D. A. Kessler1 and E. Barkai1
1Department of Physics, Institute of Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials, Bar Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel
Recently, anomalous superdiﬀusion of ultra cold 87Rb atoms in an optical lattice has been observed
along with a fat-tailed, L´evy type, spatial distribution. The anomalous exponents were found to
depend on the depth of the optical potential. We ﬁnd, within the framework of the semiclassical
theory of Sisyphus cooling, three distinct phases of the dynamics, as the optical potential depth is
lowered: normal diﬀusion; L´evy diﬀusion; and x ∼t3/2 scaling, the latter related to Obukhov’s model
 of turbulence. The process can be formulated as a L´evy walk, with strong correlations between
the length and duration of the excursions. We derive a fractional diﬀusion equation describing the
atomic cloud, and the corresponding anomalous diﬀusion coeﬃcient.
PACS numbers: 05.40.Fb,37.10.Jk
Very recently, Sagi et al studied experimentally the
diﬀusion of ultra-cold 87Rb atoms in a one dimensional
optical lattice. Starting with a very narrow atomic cloud
they recorded the time evolution of the density of the particles, here denoted P(x, t) (normalized to unity). Their
work employed the well-known Sisyphus cooling scheme
 . As predicted theoretically by Marksteiner, et al. ,
the diﬀusion of the atoms was not Gaussian, so that the
assumption that the diﬀusion process obeys the standard
central limit theorem is not valid in this case. An open
challenge is to determine the precise nature of the nonequilibrium spreading of the atoms, in particular the dynamical phase diagram of the various diﬀerent types of
behaviors exhibited as the depth of the optical potential
is varied. In the anomalous diﬀusion data was compared to the set of solutions of the fractional diﬀusion
equation 
= Kν∇νP(x, t),
with β = 1, so that the time derivative on the left
hand side is a ﬁrst-order derivative. The fractional space
derivative on the right hand side is a Weyl-Rietz fractional derivative . Here the anomalous diﬀusion coeﬃcient Kν has units cmν/sec. A fundamental challenge is
to derive fractional equations from a microscopic theory,
without invoking power-law statistics in the ﬁrst place.
Furthermore, the solutions of such equations exhibits diverging mean-square displacement ⟨x2⟩= ∞, which violates the principle of causality , which permits physical
phenomena to spread at ﬁnite speeds. So how can fractional equations like Eq. (1) describe physical reality?
We will address this paradox in this work.
The solution of Eq. (1) for an initial narrow cloud is
given in terms of a L´evy distributions (see details below).
The L´evy distribution generalizes the Gaussian
distribution in the mathematical problem of the sum of
a large number of independent random variables, in the
case where the variance of summands diverges, physically
corresponding to scale free systems. L´evy statistics and
fractional kinetic equations have found several applications , including in the context of sub-recoil laser
cooling . Here our aim is to derive L´evy statistics and
the fractional diﬀusion equation from the semi-classical
picture of Sisyphus cooling.
Speciﬁcally we will show
that β = 1 and relate the value of the exponent ν to the
depth of the optical lattice U0, deriving an expression for
the constant Kν. Furthermore, we discuss the limitations
of the fractional framework, and show that for a critical
value of the depth of the optical lattice, the dynamics
switches to a non-L´evy behavior (i.e.
a regime where
Eq. (1) is not valid); instead it is related to Richardson-
Obukhov diﬀusion found in turbulence. Thus the semiclassical picture predicts a rich phase diagram for the
atomistic diﬀusion process.
We will then compare the
results of this analysis to the experimental ﬁndings, and
see that there are still unresolved discrepancies between
the experiment and the theory. Reconciling the two thus
poses a major challenge for the future.
Model and goal.
In this article we investigate the
spatial density of the atoms, P(x, t).
The trajectory
of a single particle is x(t) =
0 p(t)dt/m where p(t) is
its momentum. Within the standard semiclassical picture of Sisyphus cooling, two competing mechanisms describe the dynamics. The cooling force F(p) =
−αp/[1 + (p/pc)2] acts to restore the momentum to the
minimum energy state p = 0.
Momentum diﬀusion is
governed by a diﬀusion coeﬃcient which is momentum
dependent, D(p) = D1 + D2/[1 + (p/pc)2]. The latter
describes momentum ﬂuctuations which lead to heating
(due to random emission events). We use dimensionless
units, time t →tα, momentum p →p/pc, the momentum
diﬀusion constant D = D1/(pc)2α and x →xmα/pc.
For simplicity, we set D2 = 0 since it does not modify
the asymptotic |p| →∞behavior of the diﬀusive heating
term, nor that of the force and therefore does not modify
our main conclusions. The Langevin equations
dt = F(p) +
describe the dynamics in phase space.
Here the noise
term is Gaussian, has zero mean and is white ⟨ξ(t)ξ(t′)⟩=
 
Schematic presentation of momentum of the particle
versus time. The times between consecutive zero crossings are
called the jump durations τ and the shaded area under each
excursion are the random ﬂight displacements χ. The τ’s and
the χ’s are correlated, since statistically a long jump duration
implies a large displacement.
δ(t −t′). The now dimensionless cooling force is
The stochastic Eq. (2) gives the trajectories of the standard Kramers picture for the semi-classical dynamics in
the optical lattice which in turn was derived from microscopical considerations .
From the semiclassical treatment of the interaction of the atoms with the
counter-propagating laser beams, we have D = cER/U0,
where U0 is the depth of the optical potential and ER
the recoil energy, and the dimensionless parameter c 
depends on the atomic transition involved . For
p ≪1, the cooling force Eq. (3) is harmonic, F(p) ∼−p,
while in the opposite limit, p ≫1, F(p) ∼−1/p. The
eﬀective potential V (p) = −
0 F(p)dp = (1/2) ln(1+p2)
is asymptotically logarithmic, V (p) ∼ln(p) when p is
large. This large p behavior of V (p) is responsible for
several unusual equilibrium and non-equilibrium properties of the momentum distribution while the new
experiment demands a theory for the spatial spreading.
The heart of our analysis is the mapping of the
Langevin dynamics to a recurrent set of random walks.
The particle along its stochastic path in momentum space
crosses p = 0 many times when the measurement time is
long. Let τ > 0 be the random time between one crossing
event to the next crossing event, and let −∞< χ < ∞be
the random displacement (for the corresponding τ). As
schematically shown in Fig. 1, the process starting at the
origin with zero momentum is deﬁned by the sequence of
jump durations, {τ(1), τ(2), ....} with corresponding displacements {χ(1), χ(2), · · ·}, with χ(1) ≡
R τ(1)+τ(2)
p(τ)dτ, etc. The total displacement x
at time t is a sum of the individual displacements χ(i).
Since the underlying Langevin process is continuous, we
need a more precise deﬁnition of this process. We deﬁne
τ as the time it takes the particle with initial momentum
pi to reach pf = 0 for the ﬁrst time, where eventually we
take pi →pf. Similarly, χ is the displacement of the particle during this ﬂight. The probability density function
(PDF) of the displacement χ is denoted q(χ) and of the
jump durations g(τ).
As shown by Marksteiner, et al. , these PDFs exhibit power law behavior
g (τ) ∝τ −3
q (χ) ∝|χ|−4
as a consequence of the logarithmic potential, which
makes the diﬀusion for large enough p only weakly
bounded. It is this power-law behavior, with its divergent second moment of the displacement χ for D > 1/5,
which gives rise to the anomalous statistics for x. Importantly, and previously overlooked, there is a strong
correlation between the jump duration τ and the spatial
extent of the jumps χ. These correlations have important
consequences, including the ﬁniteness of the moments of
P(x, t) and the D > 1 dynamical phase we obtain below.
These correlations are responsible, in particular, for the
ﬁniteness of the moments of P(x, t). Physically, such a
correlation is obvious, since long jump durations involve
large momenta, which in turn induce a large spatial displacement. The theoretical development starts then from
the quantity ψ(χ, τ), the joint probability density of χ
and τ. From this, we construct a L´evy walk scheme which relates the microscopic information ψ(χ, τ) to
the atomic packet P(x, t) for large x and t.
Scaling theory for anomalous diﬀusion.
We rewrite
the joint PDF ψ(χ, τ) = g(τ)p(χ|τ), where p(χ | τ) is the
conditional probability to ﬁnd a jump length of χ for a
given jump duration τ.
Numerically, as shown if Fig.
2, we observed that the conditional probability scales at
large times like
p(χ|τ) ∼τ −γB(χ/τ γ)
and γ = 3/2 and B(·) is a scaling function.
To analytically obtain the scaling exponent γ = 3/2 note that
dτψ (χ, τ), giving
∝|χ|− 1+ 1+1/D
Here τ0 is a time scale after which the long time limit in
Eq. (4) holds and is irrelevant for large χ. Comparing
Eq. (6) to the second of Eqs. (4) yields the consistency
condition 1 + (1 + 1/D)/(2γ) = 4/3 + 1/(3D) and hence
γ = 3/2, as we observe in Fig. 2.
|χ| / (2Dτ)
3/2 p( |χ| | τ )
Airy Distribution
D = ∞, τ = 10
D = 0.4, τ = 10
D = 0.4, τ = 10
D = 0.4, τ = 10
The scaled conditional probability (2Dτ)3/2p(|χ|
versus |χ|/(2Dτ)3/2 for τ = 104, 105, and 106, for the case
D = 0.4, from simulations, showing the convergence to an
asymptotic scaling form. Also shown is the D →∞limit for
τ = 104, as well as the analytic result for τ →∞, the Airy
distribution .
It is interesting to note that p(χ|τ) in the case of
free diﬀusion (corresponding to the limit D →∞) has
been previously considered by mathematicians 
and shown to obey the scaling relation Eq.
B given by the so-called Airy distribution . In
the case of ﬁnite D, an analytic formula for p(χ|τ) can
be constructed using the Feynman-Kac formalism ,
giving for asymptotically long walks both γ = 3/2 and a
closed form expression for the scaling function B(·). For
our current purposes, however, we do not need the exact form of B; what is important is the scaling behavior,
and the fact that, B falls of rapidly for large argument,
ensuring ﬁnite moments of this function.
Given our scaling solution for p(χ|t), and hence ψ(χ, t),
the next step is to construct a theory for the spreading of the particle packet using tools developed in the
random walk community . One ﬁrst obtains 
a Montroll-Weiss type of equation for the Fourier-
Laplace transform of P(x, t), eP(k, u), in terms of eψ(k, u),
the Fourier-Laplace transform of the joint PDF ψ(χ, τ):
eP(k, u) =
1 −eψ(k, u)
Fourier-Laplace
τ −3/2B(|χ|/τ 3/2)[1 −
0 ψ(τ)dτ]. The last step is then
to invert Eq. (7) back to the x, t domain.
We now explain why L´evy statistics describes the diffusion proﬁle P(x, t) when 1/5 < D < 1, provided that x
is not too large. The key idea is that, for x’s which are
large, but not extremely large, the problem decouples,
and eψ(k, u) can be expressed as a product of the Fourier
transform of q(χ), ˜q(k) and the Laplace transform of g(τ),
˜g(u). This is valid as long as x ≪t3/2, since otherwise
paths where χ ∼t3/2 are relevant, for which the correlations are strong, as we have seen. The long-time, large-x
behavior of P(x, t) in the decoupled regime is then governed by the small-k behavior of ˜q(k) and the small u
behavior of ˜g(u). When the second moment of q(χ) diverges, i.e. for D > 1/5, the small-k behavior of ˜q(k) is
determined by the large-χ asymptotics of q(χ) as given
in Eq. (5), q(χ) ∼xν
∗/|χ|1+ν, where we have introduced
the parameter
When the ﬁrst moment of τ is ﬁnite, i.e.
for D < 1,
the small-u behavior of ˜g(u) is determined by the ﬁrst
moment, ⟨τ⟩: ˜g(u) ∼1 −u⟨τ⟩. From these follow the
small-k, small-u behavior of eP(k, u):
eP(k, u) ∼
u + Kν|k|ν
where Kν = πxν
∗/(⟨τ⟩Γ(1 + ν) sin πν
⟨τ⟩can be calculated via appropriate backward Fokker-
Planck equations. They both vanish as the magnitude of
the initial momentum of the walk goes to zero, but their
ratio has a ﬁnite limit, so that Kν, upon returning to
dimensionfull units, is
√π(3ν −1)ν−1Γ
32ν−1[Γ(ν)]2 sin
eP(k, u), as given in Eq. (9), is in fact precisely the symmetric L´evy distribution in Laplace-Fourier space with
index ν, whose (x, t) representation is (see Eq. (B17) of
(Kνt)1/ν Lν,0
It is easy to see that this distribution is the solution of the
fractional diﬀusion equation, Eq. (1), with β = 1 and an
initial distribution located at the origin. This justiﬁes the
use of Eq. (1) in Ref. for 1/5 < D < 1 and provides
ν and Kν in terms of the experimental parameters. We
can verify this behavior in simulations, as shown in the
upper panel of Fig. 3, where we see excellent agreement
to our theoretical prediction, Eqs. (11) and (10), without
any ﬁtting.
The lower panel of Fig.
3 illustrates the cutoﬀon
the L´evy distribution, which is found at distances x ∼
Beyond this length scale, the density falls oﬀ
rapidly. This, as noted above, is the result of the correlation between χ and τ, as there are essentially no
walks with a displacement greater than the order of
(1+3ν)/2 P(x,t)
FIG. 3. Upper panel: t1/νP(|x|, t) versus |x|/t1/ν for D =
2/5, i.e. ν = 7/6.
The theory: L´evy PDF Eq.
Kν Eq. (10), perfectly matches simulations without ﬁtting.
Lower panel: t(1+3ν)/2P(|x|, t) versus |x|/t3/2 for D = 2/5,
showing the universal crossover from power-law to Gaussian
behavior at |x| ∼t3/2
This cutoﬀensures the ﬁniteness of the mean
square displacement, using the power law tail of the
L´evy PDF Lν(x) ∼x−(1+ν) and the cutoﬀwe get:
t−(1/ν)(x/t1/ν)−(1+ν)x2dx ∼t4−3ν/2, for
2/3 < ν < 2, in agreement with . As noted in the introduction, if we rely on the fractional diﬀusion equation,
Eq. (1), naively, we get ⟨x2⟩= ∞. Thus the fractional
equation must be used with care, realizing its limitations
in the statistical description of the moments of the distribution and its tails.
When D < 1/5, the diﬀusion
is normal since the variance of the walk displacement is
The Obukhov-Richardson phase, D > 1. When the average jump duration, ⟨τ⟩, diverges, i.e., for D > 1, the dynamics of P(x, t) enters a new phase. Since the L´evy index ν approaches 2/3 as D approaches 1, x scales like t3/2
in the limit. Due to the correlations, x cannot grow faster
than this, so in this regime, P(x, t) ∼t−3/2h(x/t3/2),
which clearly describes a correlated phase. This scaling
is that of free diﬀusion, namely momentum diﬀuses like
p ∼t1/2 and hence the time integral over the momentum
scales like x ∼t3/2. Indeed, in the absence of the logarithmic potential, namely in the limit D ≫1 Eq. (2)
P (x, t) ∼
This limit describes the Obukhov model for a tracer particle path in turbulence, where the velocity follows a simple Brownian motion . These scaling properties
are related to Kolmogorov’s theory of 1941 (see Eq. (3)
in ) and to Richardson’s diﬀusion ⟨x2⟩∼t3 .
Eq. (12) is valid when the optical potential depth is small
since D →∞when U0 →0. This limit should be taken
with care, as the observation time must be made large
before considering the limit of weak potential.
opposite scenario, i.e. U0 →0 before t →∞, we expect
ballistic motion, |x| ∼t, since then the optical lattice has
not had time to make itself felt .
The relation to Brownian excursions. Our work shows
a surprising connection between the dynamics of cold
atoms to the problem of the area under a Brownian excursion , constrained random walks that start at
the origin and return there for the ﬁrst time after t steps.
This non-trivial problem has applications in computer
science and graph theory and recently to the properties
of ﬂuctuating interfaces . Here it corresponds to
the calculation of p(χ|τ) for the case of D →∞corresponding to free diﬀusion, since χ is the area under the
random walk path in a single excursion (see Fig. 1). The
current problem with ﬁnite D constitutes an interesting
generalization of the problem to logarithmically biased
random walks, which has the same scaling exponent but
a D-dependent distribution, which in analogy with the
term Brownian excursion, we entitle a Bessel excursion.
The term Bessel excursion stems from the fact that mathematically speaking, diﬀusion in momentum space in a
non-regularized potential ln(p) corresponds to a process
called the Bessel process . A Bessel excursion is
the Langevin path p(t′) over the time interval 0 ≤t′ ≤τ
such that the path starts on p0 →0 and ends on the
origin, but is constrained to stay positive (if pi > 0) or
negative (if pi < 0). In we will provide a detailed
account on these constrained random paths.
Discussion of the experiment and summary. Our work
shows a rich phase diagram of the dynamics, with two
transition points. For deep wells, D < 1/5, the diﬀusion is Gaussian, while for 1/5 < D < 1 we have L´evy
statistics, and for D > 1 Richardson-Obukhov scaling,
x ∼t3/2, is found.
We have shown that the correlations between jump durations τ and displacements χ are
crucial for the behavior of the tails of the distribution
of the total displacement x and are responsible for the
ﬁniteness of its second moment. When D > 1 the correlations become strong, leading to a breakdown of decoupled L´evy diﬀusion. So far, experiments have not detected these transitions, though clearly demonstrated
that the change in optical potential depth, controls the
anomalous exponents in the L´evy spreading packet. In
particular so far the experiment showed at most ballistic behavior, with the spreading exponent δ, deﬁned by
x ∼tδ, always less than unity. This might be related
to our observation that to go beyond ballistic motion,
δ > 1, one must take the measurement time to be very
long. A more serious problem is that, in the experimental ﬁtting of the diﬀusion front to the L´evy propagator,
an additional exponent was introduced to describe
the time dependence of the full width at half maximum.
In contrast, our semi-classical theory shows that a single exponent ν is needed within the L´evy scaling regime
1/5 < D < 1, with the spreading exponent δ = 1/ν.
This might be related to the cutoﬀof the tails of L´evy
PDF which demands that the ﬁtting be performed in the
central part of the atomic cloud. On the other hand we
cannot rule out other physical eﬀects not included in the
semiclassical model. For example it would be very interesting to simulate the system with quantum Monte Carlo
simulations, though we note that these are not trivial in
the |x| ∼t3/2 regime since the usual simulation procedure introduces a cutoﬀon momentum, which may give
rise to an artiﬁcial ballistic motion.
Thus while there
is some tantalizing points of contact between the theory and experiment, achieving full agreement will require
more study.
This work was supported by the Israel Science Foundation. We thank A. Dechant, E. Lutz, Y. Sagi and N.
Davidson for discussions.
 Y. Sagi, M. Brook, I. Almog, and N. Davidson,
1109.1503v1[quant-ph] .
 Y. Castin, J. Dalibard, and C. Cohen-Tannoudji, in Light
Induced Kinetic Eﬀects on Atoms, Ions and Molecules,
edited by L. Moi, S. Gozzini, C. Gabbanini, E. Arimondo,
and F. Strumia .
 S. Marksteiner, K. Ellinger, and P. Zoller, Phys. Rev. A
53, 3409 .
 A. I. Saichev and G. M. Zaslavsky, Chaos 7, 753 .
 R. Metzler, E. Barkai,
and J. Klafter, Europhys. Lett.
46, 431 .
 R. Metzler and J. Klafter, Phys. Rep. 339, 1 .
 See the discussion in Ref. where the unphysical nature of L´evy ﬂights is discussed and the resolution in
terms of L´evy walks is addressed.
 J. P. Bouchaud and A. Georges, Phys. Rep. 195, 127
 M. F. Shlesinger, G. M. Zaslavsky, and J. Klafter, Nature
363, 31 .
 J. Klafter, M. F. Shlesinger,
and G. Zumofen, Physics
Today 49, 33 .
 G. M. Viswanathan, S. V. Buldyrev, S. Havlin, M. G. E.
da Luz, E. P. Raposo,
and H. E. Stanley, Nature 401,
911 .
 E. Barkai, A. V. Naumov, Y. G. Vainer, M. Bauer, and
L. Kador, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 075502 .
 G. Margolin, V. Protasenko, M. Kuno,
and E. Barkai,
J. Phys. Chem. B 110, 19053 .
 P. Barthelemy, J. Bartolotti, and D. S. Wiersma, Nature
453, 495 .
 N. E. Humphries, N. Queiroz, J. R. M. Dyer, N. G. Pade,
M. K. Musyl, K. M. Schaeferand, D. W. Fuller, J. M.
Brunnschweiler, T. K. Doyle, J. D. R. Houghton, G. C.
Hays, C. S. Jones, L. R. Noble, V. J. Wearmouth, E. J.
Southall, and D. W. Sims, Nature 465, 1066 .
 F. Bardou, J. P. Bouchaud, A. Aspect, and C. Cohen-
Tannoudji, L´evy Statistics and Laser Cooling .
 For atoms in molasses with a Jg = 1/2 →Je = 3/2
Zeeman substructure in a lin ⊥lin laser conﬁguration
c = 12.3 . Refs. give c = 22. As pointed out
in diﬀerent notations are used in the literature.
 E. Lutz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 190602 .
 H. Katori, S. Schlipf, and H. Walther, Phys. Rev. Lett.
79, 2221 .
 P. Douglas, S. Bergamini,
and F. Renzoni, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 96, 110601 .
 D. A. Kessler and E. Barkai, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105,
120602 .
 O. Hirschberg, D. Mukamel,
and G. M. Sch¨utz, Phys.
Rev. E 84, 041111 .
 J. Klafter, A. Blumen, and M. F. Shlesinger, Phys. Rev.
A 35, 3081 .
 A. Blumen, G. Zumofen,
and J. Klafter, Phys. Rev. A
40, 3964 .
 E. Barkai and J. Klafter, in Chaos, Kinetics and Nonlinear Dynamics in Fluids and Plasmas:
Proceedings
of a workshop held in Carry-Le Rouet, France 16-21
June 1997, Lecture Notes in Physics, Vol. 511, edited
by S. Benkadda and G. M. Zaslavsky pp. 373–394.
 D. A. Darling, Ann. Probab. 11, 803 .
 G. Louchard, J. Appl. Probab. 21, 479 .
 L. Takacs, Adv. Appl. Probab. 23, 557 .
 S. N. Majumdar and A. Comtet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,
225501 .
 S. N. Majumdar and A. Comtet, J. Stat. Phys. 119, 777
 D. A. Kessler and E. Barkai, (in preparation).
 A. Dechant, E. Lutz, D. A. Kessler, and E. Barkai, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 107, 240603 .
 A. M. Obukhov, Adv. Geophys. 6, 113 .
 A. Baule and R. Friedrich, Phys. Lett. A 350, 167 .
 L. F. Richardson, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 110, 709
 A. J. Bray, Phys. Rev. E 62, 103 .
 G. Schehr and P. Le Doussal, J. Stat. Mech.: Theory and
Expts. 2010, P01009 .