The Logic of Design as a Conceptual Logic
of Information
Luciano Floridi1,2
Received: 7 April 2017 / Accepted: 23 May 2017 / Published online: 14 June 2017
© The Author(s) 2017. This article is an open access publication
Abstract In this article, I outline a logic of design of a system as a speciﬁc kind of
conceptual logic of the design of the model of a system, that is, the blueprint that
provides information about the system to be created. In section two, I introduce the
method of levels of abstraction as a modelling tool borrowed from computer science. In section three, I use this method to clarify two main conceptual logics of
information (i.e., modelling systems) inherited from modernity: Kant’s transcendental logic of conditions of possibility of a system, and Hegel’s dialectical logic of
conditions of in/stability of a system. Both conceptual logics of information analyse
structural properties of given systems. Strictly speaking, neither is a conceptual
logic of information about (or modelling) the conditions of feasibility of a system,
that is, neither is a logic of information as a logic of design. So, in section four, I
outline this third conceptual logic of information and then interpret the conceptual
logic of design as a logic of requirements, by introducing the relation of “sufﬁcientisation”. In the conclusion, I argue that the logic of requirements is exactly what
we need in order to make sense of, and buttress, a constructionist (poietic) approach
to knowledge.
Keywords Conceptual logic · Design · Dialectical logic · Hegel · Kant ·
Requirements · Transcendental logic
& Luciano Floridi
 
Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, 1 St Giles, Oxford OX1 3JS, UK
The Alan Turing Institute, 96 Euston Road, London NW1 2DB, UK
Minds & Machines 27:495–519
DOI 10.1007/s11023-017-9438-1
1 Introduction
This article is about understanding the conceptual logic of design1 of a system.
Philosophy is often concerned with the study of structural properties of systems—
whether empirical, like political organisations, or conceptual, like scientiﬁc theories
—and their dynamics.2 Before the advent of modern mathematical logic, such
structural studies might have been considered to be part of logic broadly
understood.3 Today, this would be very misleading. But so would be the use of
labels such as “informal logic” and “philosophical logic” ,
already appropriated by other branches of philosophy. So, for lack of a better
expression, I shall refer to such structural studies as “conceptual logic”. A
conceptual logic is what we have in mind when we ask questions about the abstract
properties, principles, mechanisms, or dynamics characterising or underpinning
systems like international relations, a bureaucracy, or the internal arrangement of
elements in a device to perform a speciﬁc task. A conceptual logic focuses on
formal features that are independent of speciﬁc implementations or idiosyncratic
contingencies, on types rather than tokens, on invariants and their mutual relations,
and on state transitions that are generalisable. This much is obvious. What remains
unclear is exactly what further qualiﬁes as a conceptual logic of a system.
Later in the article, I shall use a more precise vocabulary and talk about the
“model” (semantic information about) of a “system” (the referent “abouted” by
some semantic information). Anticipating, this means that the question I intend to
address can already be phrased more precisely by asking: what is the conceptual
logic of modelling (i.e., generating a description of some structural properties of) a
system? Note that, once unpacked, this question is not ontological but epistemological: it is not about the intrinsic logic of a system in itself, but rather about the
logic of the model of a system. If this is unclear, compare the conceptual logic of a
watch with the conceptual logic of the design of a watch. The focus is really about a
conceptual logic of design of a system understood as a speciﬁc kind of conceptual
logic of information about (the design of the model of) a system; and not any kind of
information, but that particular kind we call semantic or factual information, i.e.
information about something. For some philosophers it may be obvious that the
logic of a model of a system is the logic of the system. I am not so sure, and I often
doubt it but, most importantly, this is not an issue that needs to be resolved here. We
can all refrain from stepping into any ontological discussion, and phrase anything
that we need to discuss epistemologically, and therefore more safely in terms of
commitment. If, as a bonus, some people may believe that we pay one and get two,
1 For a philosophical analysis of the debate on the concept of design Parsons is a great source. The
book is also an essential starting point to frame the proposal made in this article. It dedicates quite some
space to the debate on modernism. It is a must read for anyone interested in understanding the conceptual
nature of design together with the excellent Dunne and Raby . These works, together with Barthes
 and Flusser , have deeply inﬂuenced my views on the topic.
2 See Alexander , p. 8.
3 For an enlightening reconstruction of the late modern developments of logic between Kant and Frege
see Heis .
L. Floridi
as it were, that is, if anyone is convinced that, by developing a conceptual logic of
the model we shall also have obtained a conceptual logic of the system, I shall not
complain, but neither shall I join them.
Formulating all this more carefully and clearly, and providing a reasonable answer
will require several steps. The ﬁrst thing to do, in section two, will be to introduce
some standard terminology and the methodology of levels of abstraction. This is a
modelling tool borrowed from computer science. I will need it in the rest of the article
to make sense of the nature of conceptual logic. In section three, I shall clarify that we
have inherited from modernity two main conceptual logics of information understood
as logics of modelling systems: Kant’s and Hegel’s. Both are useful to analyse the
structural properties of systems. So both are implicitly used by many disciplines. Yet I
shall argue that neither is by nature a conceptual logic of modelling as designing, even
though they have been repurposed to fulﬁl such a task, partly because they easily lend
themselves to this, and partly because they were the only conceptual logics available.
A logic of design is a third conceptual logic that is still missing and needs to be
developed.4 Thus, this article can also be read as a call to action for, and a ﬁrst
stepping-stone in the direction of, the full articulation of a conceptual logic of design
in general, so that we may go beyond practitioners’ rules of thumb and recipes for best
practices.5 In section four, I shall outline the conceptual logic of design as the logic of
requirements. In the conclusion, I shall argue that the logic of requirements is exactly
what we need to make sense of, and buttress, a constructionist approach to how we
model systems informationally, that is, a shift from a representationalist (mimetic) to a
constructionist (poietic) understanding of knowledge.
2 On the Very Idea of Levels of Abstraction
In order to introduce the method of abstraction and the concept of “level of
abstraction” (LoA), let us begin with a few examples.6 Imagine Alice asks Bob the
price of an item, let’s say a second-hand car. Bob gives her the following answer:
5000. The question concerned a variable, namely the price x of the car in question,
and Alice received an exact numerical value for the variable, yet something is
missing. She still has no idea about the price because she does not know the type of
the variable: is it British pounds, US dollars, euros…? Of course, the context usually
4 As excellent, indeed now classic examples, see Munari , Arup , Norman . For more
recent case-based studies see Buurman and Ro¨lli .
5 This is not a new invitation. In Simon , pp. 121–125, Herbert Simon discusses “The Logic of
Design”. Simon acknowledges that First Order Logic (FOL) does not deliver what is needed. However,
his approach moves towards a logic of design as heuristics, i.e. a logic of searching for “candidates” for a
good solution, within a space of possible worlds in which a variety of solutions for a problem is available.
As the reader will see, in this article I share the same view about FOL, but I take a different direction, in
favour of a logic of design in terms of a logic of requirements. The two approaches are not incompatible
and probably complementary. To put it simply, in a personal discussion with Simon at Carnegie Mellon,
we agreed that his interest was in a logic that would help to identify the right answers, whereas mine was
and still is in a logic that would help to design the right questions.
6 The reader interested in a more technical treatment and further applications may wish to consult Hoare
 and Floridi . I am grateful to Hoare for pointing out the relevance of that text.
The Logic of Design as a Conceptual Logic of Information
helps. If Alice is in England and Bob is a local car dealer, her question should be
understood as concerning the price in British pounds and so should the answer. This
is trivial, you may think. Grice’s conversational rules obviously apply .
It is, and they do. But this is also a crucial assumption, easily forgotten. In
November 1999, NASA lost the $ 125 m Mars Climate Orbiter (MCO) because the
Lockheed Martin engineering team used British (also known as Imperial) units of
measurement, while the agency’s team used the metric system for a key spacecraft
operation. As a result, the MCO crashed into Mars.7 Assuming that contexts will
always disambiguate the types of your variables paves the way to costly mistakes.
This is why the idea of a “level of abstraction” plays an absolutely crucial role in
how we handle any information process carefully, and so in how we negotiate our
interactions with the world, and therefore in how we develop our philosophy and
ethics of information. This is so even when a speciﬁc LoA is wrong or left implicit,
as in the MCO example. So what is a LoA exactly?
The method of abstraction comes from modelling in science, where the variables
in the model correspond to observables in reality, all others being abstracted. The
terminology has been inﬂuenced by an area of computer science, called Formal
Methods , in which discrete mathematics is used to specify and
analyse the behaviour of information systems. Despite that heritage, the idea is not
at all technical and, for the purposes of this article, no mathematics is required.8 Let
us consider another everyday example.
Suppose we join Alice, Bob, and Carol at a party. They are in the middle of a
conversation. Alice is a collector and potential buyer; Bob tinkers in his spare time;
and Carol is an economist. We do not know the subject of their conversation, but we
are able to hear this much:
Alice observes that it (whatever the reference of “it” is) has an anti-theft device
installed, is kept garaged when not in use, and has had only a single owner;
Bob observes that its engine is not the original one, that its body has been
recently re-painted, but that all leather parts are very worn;
Carol observes that the old engine consumed too much, that it has a
stable market value, but that its spare parts are expensive.
The participants view the “it” according to their own interests, which orient the
choice of their conceptual interfaces or, more precisely, of their own levels of
abstraction. We may guess that they are probably talking about the second-hand car
we already met at the beginning of this section, but, if you check carefully, it could
be a motorcycle, or even an airplane, since any of these three artefacts would satisfy
the descriptions provided above by A, B, and C. Whatever the reference is, it
provides the source of information under discussion. We shall call this “it” the
system. A LoA consists of a collection of observables, each with a well-deﬁned
7 “Mars Climate Orbiter Mishap Investigation Board Phase I Report” (Press release). NASA: ftp://hq.
nasa.gov/pub/pao/reports/1999/MCO_report.pdf.
8 For a recent, mathematical implementation of the method of abstraction see in particular Le Goc and
Vilar .
L. Floridi
possible set of values or outcomes. For the sake of simplicity, let us assume that
Alice’s LoA matches that of an owner, Bob’s that of a mechanic, and Carol’s that of
an insurer. Each LoA (imagine a computer interface) makes possible a determinate
analysis of the system. We shall call the result or output of such analysis a model of
the system. Evidently, a system may be described at a range of LoAs and so one can
have a range of models. We are now ready for a more formal deﬁnition.
We saw that a “typed variable” is understood as a variable qualiﬁed to hold only
a declared kind of data. For example, if Bob asks Alice for her telephone number,
whatever the latter is (variables), he expects natural numbers to be the type of the
variables she will provide. Since the system investigated may be entirely abstract or
ﬁctional the term “observable” should not be confused here with “empirically
perceivable”. Historically, it might be an unfortunate terminological choice, but,
theoretically, an observable is just an interpreted typed variable; that is, a typed
variable together with a statement of what feature of the system under consideration
it represents. For example, a set of data could have natural numbers as a type and
telephone number as a feature of the system. A level of abstraction (LoA) is a ﬁnite
but non-empty set of observables, which are expected to be the building blocks in a
theory characterized by their very choice. An “interface” (called a “gradient of
abstractions”) consists of a collection of LoAs and is used in analysing a system
from varying points of view or, to be more precise, at varying LoAs.
Models are the outcome of the analysis of a system developed at some LoA(s).
The method of abstraction consists in formalizing the model. This often happens
implicitly, and only in qualitative rather than quantitative terms, by using the
concepts just introduced (and others relating to system behaviour which we do not
need here). In the previous example, Alice’s LoA might consist of observables for
STORAGE, and
HISTORY; Bob’s might consist of
observables for ENGINE CONDITION, EXTERNAL BODY CONDITION, and INTERNAL CONDITION;
and Carol’s might consist of observables for RUNNING COST, MARKET VALUE, and
MAINTENANCE COST. For the purposes of discussion, the interface might consist of the
set of all three LoAs. In this case, the LoAs happen to be disjoint, but in general they
do not have to be. LoAs can be nested, disjoint, or overlapping and may, but do not
have to be, hierarchically related, or ordered in some scale of priority, or support
some syntactic compositionality. A particularly important case is that in which one
LoA includes another. Suppose, for example, that Dave joins the discussion and
analyses the system using a LoA that includes those of Alice and Bob. Dave’s LoA
might match that of a buyer. Then Dave’s LoA is said to be more concrete, ﬁnely
grained, or lower than Alice’s or Bob’s, each of which is said to be more abstract,
more coarsely grained, or higher; for both Alice’s and Bob’s LoAs abstract some
observables that are available at Dave’s. Basically, Dave can obtain all the
information about the system that Alice and Bob might have, for example the name
of the previous owner, and that it is rather expensive to maintain, and so he can
obtain some information that is, in principle, unavailable to one or the other of them,
since Alice does not know about running costs and Bob has no clue about the
ownership history.
A LoA qualiﬁes the level at which a system is considered. One should rely on the
method of abstraction in order to refer to the LoA at which the properties of the
The Logic of Design as a Conceptual Logic of Information
system under analysis can sensibly be discussed. In general, it seems that many
uninteresting disagreements might be clariﬁed, if the various interlocutors could
make their LoAs explicit and precise. Yet a crucial clariﬁcation is in order. It must
be stressed that a clear indication of the LoA at which a system is being analysed
allows pluralism without endorsing relativism. One may refer to this middle-ground
position as relationism. When one criticizes a position as relativistic, or when one
objects to relativism, one should not equate such positions to non-absolutist, as if
there were only two alternatives, e.g. as if either moral values were absolute or
relative, or truths were either absolute or relative, objective or subjective, observerindependent or observer-dependent. The method of abstraction enables one to avoid
exactly such false dichotomies, by showing that a subjectivist position, for example,
need not be relativistic, but only relational. To use a simple example: Alice may be
tall when compared to Bob, but not when compared to someone in the basketball
team. It does not mean that her height changes, but only that she is or is not tall
depending on the frame of reference, that is, on the LoA. Relativism is really the
equivalent of an “anything goes” position. Now, it is a mistake to think that
“anything goes” as long as one makes explicit the LoA, because LoAs are mutually
comparable and assessable. Consider again the example of Alice’s telephone
number. There might be some signiﬁcant differences in the way in which Alice
communicates it to Bob. She might add a plus and the relevant country code at the
beginning, thus modifying the overall type of the information provided. She might
omit the plus, the country code, and the city code, if it is a local number. So there is
quite a lot of ‘relationism’ (‘it depends on…’) but no ‘relativism’: it would be silly
to conclude that any LoA would do. A string of letters would not work, nor would a
mix of letters and numbers, or numbers and non-alphanumeric symbols, or an
endless string. Using a different example, when we are asked to provide the number
of our credit card, the type is (a ﬁnite number of) of natural numbers. This is why an
interface can easily constrain the sort of input required. In general, only some LoAs
are possible and, among those, some are better than others. Relativism, as a position
about the interchangeability of LoAs at no epistemic cost, is simply mistaken
because, crucially, the assessment and corresponding preference is usually dictated
by the purpose driving the original request for information. Deciding whether Alice
is tall depends on the purpose for which we are asking the question in the ﬁrst place.
The implicit LoA may easily be the average population height. She may be a tall
child. Or it may be an old army parameter according to which someone below a
speciﬁc height cannot be recruited. This is clearly not relativism, because one may
challenge the appropriateness of the LoAs in question on perfectly reasonable and
justiﬁable grounds.
Introducing an explicit reference to the LoA clariﬁes that:
the model of a system is a function of the available observables;
different interfaces may be correctly ranked depending on how well they
satisfy modelling speciﬁcations (e.g. informativeness, coherence, elegance,
explanatory power, consistency with the data, etc.) and the purpose orienting
the choice of the LoA (LoAs are teleologically oriented);
L. Floridi
different analyses can be correctly compared provided that they share the
Let us now agree that a system is characterized at a given LoA by the properties it
satisﬁes at that LoA. Systems are often dynamic: they change, and this means that
some of those properties change value. The evolution of a changing system is
captured at a given LoA and at any instant by the values of its observables (the
attributes of the system). Thus, a system can be thought of as having states,
determined by the value of the properties that hold at any instant of its evolution, for
then any change in the system corresponds to a state change and vice versa.
Generalizing, this enables one to view any system as having states and transitions.
The lower the LoA, the more detailed the observed changes and the greater the
number of state components required to capture the change. Each change
corresponds to a transition from one state to another. A transition may be nondeterministic. Indeed, it will typically be the case that the LoA under consideration
abstracts the observables required to make the transition deterministic. As a result,
the transition might lead from a given initial state to one of several possible
subsequent states.
We have now moved from a static to a dynamic observation of a system,
analysed as a transition system. The notion of a “transition system” provides a
convenient means to support the identiﬁcation of the necessary and sufﬁcient
criteria for agency, being general enough to embrace the usual notions like
automaton and process.9
A transition system comprises a (non-empty) set S of states and a family of
operations, called the transitions on S. Each transition may take input and may yield
output, but, at any rate, it takes the system from one state to another and in that way
forms a relation on S. If the transition does take input or yields output, then it
models an interaction between the system and its environment and so is called an
external transition; otherwise the transition lies beyond the inﬂuence of the
environment (at the given LoA) and is called internal. It is to be emphasized that
inputs and outputs are, like states, observed at a given LoA. Thus, the transitions
that model a system are dependent on the chosen LoA. At a lower LoA, an internal
transition may appear external; at a higher LoA an external transition may appear
Returning to our example, the system being discussed by Alice might be further
qualiﬁed by state components for location, whether in-use, whether turned-on,
whether the anti-theft device is engaged, history of owners, and energy output. The
operation of garaging the system might take as input a driver, have the effect of
placing the system in the garage with the engine off and the anti-theft device
engaged, leaving the history of owners unchanged, and outputting a speciﬁc amount
of energy. The ‘in-use’ state component could non-deterministically take either
value, depending on the particular instantiation of the transition. Perhaps the system
is not in use, being garaged for the night; or perhaps the driver is listening to a
9 For a formal treatment of much more than is required in this context, the reader might wish to consult
Arnold and Plaice .
The Logic of Design as a Conceptual Logic of Information
programme broadcast on its radio in the quiet solitude of the garage. The precise
deﬁnition depends on the LoA. Alternatively, if speed were observed but time,
accelerator position, and petrol consumption abstracted, then accelerating to 60
miles per hour would appear as an internal transition.
We can now use the method of abstraction and the concept of LoA to make
explicit the ontological commitment of a theory, in the following way.
A theory comprises at least a LoA and a model. The LoA allows the theory to
analyse a given system and to elaborate a model that identiﬁes some properties of
the system at the chosen LoA (see Fig. 1).
The ontological commitment of a theory—the grey triangle—can be clearly
understood by distinguishing between a committing and a committed component
within the scheme. On the one hand, a theory commits itself ontologically by opting
for a speciﬁc LoA. Compare this to the case in which one has chosen a speciﬁc kind
of car (say a Volkswagen Polo) but has not yet bought one. On the other hand, a
theory is ontologically committed in full by its model, which is therefore the bearer
of the speciﬁc commitment. The analogy here is with the speciﬁc car one has
actually bought (that blue, four-wheeled, etc. speciﬁc vehicle in the car park that one
owns). To summarize, by adopting a LoA, a theory commits itself to the existence
of some speciﬁc types of observables characterizing the system and constituting the
LoA (by deciding to buy a Volkswagen Polo one shows one’s commitment to the
existence of that kind of car), while, by adopting the ensuing models, the theory
commits itself to the corresponding tokens (by buying that particular vehicle, which
is a physical token of the type Volkswagen Polo, one commits oneself to that token,
e.g. one has to insure it). Figure 2 summarizes this distinction.
By making explicit the ontological commitment of a theory, it is clear that the
method of abstraction plays an absolutely crucial role in philosophy, especially if
the latter is understood as conceptual design. Quine once wrote that:
The very notion of an object at all, concrete or abstract, is a human
contribution, a feature of our inherited apparatus for organizing the amorphous
welter of neural input. […] Science ventures its tentative answers in manmade concepts, perforce, couched in man-made language, but we can ask no
analysed at
belongs to
Fig. 1 The scheme of a theory
L. Floridi
better. The very notion of object, or of one and many, is indeed as parochially
human as the parts of speech; to ask what reality is really like, however, apart
from human categories, is self-stultifying. It is like asking how long the Nile
really is, apart from parochial matters of miles or meters.10
This section may be read as an attempt to clarify what ‘human categories’ in the ﬁrst
quotation above means, in terms of a less parochial method of LoA. We can now
use the method to clarify what a conceptual logic is, in the next section.
3 Two Modern Conceptual Logics of Information
What kind of structural LoA could one focus on, when analysing a system? A
simple taxonomy may be given in terms of a past-oriented, present-oriented and, as
we shall see, a future-oriented approach (let me warn the reader that what follows
contains signiﬁcant simpliﬁcations, some probably controversial).
Imagine that one is interested in understanding the genesis of a system, how it
came to be, or what brought it about. This is the purpose orienting the choice of LoAs.
One then focuses on modelling the conditions of possibility of a system under
investigation (Fig. 3). This is clearly a past-oriented approach, consistent with causal,
genetic, or genealogical forms of reasoning that lead to a particular modelling or
conceptualisation of reality, with the identiﬁcation of necessary and (perhaps) jointly
sufﬁcient conditions, with investigations about what must have been the case for
something else to be the case. The approach goes hand in hand with an interest in the
natural sciences, or any discipline that tries to mimic their logic. One looks at a
system and tries to understand what brought it about. As the reader may have already
guessed, this conceptual logic ﬁnds its roots in Kant’s transcendental logic.
It is tempting and not impossible to use Kant’s transcendental logic as a logic of
construction as design. I mentioned above the compatibility between the natural
sciences and Kant’s transcendental logic, but the latter has also been employed in
analysed at
belongs to
O-committing
O-committed
Fig. 2 The SLMS (System-LoA-Model-Structure) scheme with ontological commitment
10 Quine , p. 6 and p. 9.
The Logic of Design as a Conceptual Logic of Information
jurisprudence, for example, in order to look at normative systems in terms of ideal
or hypothetical conditions of construction of a system. This is not an incorrect
repurposing of it, but it does stretch its nature. It is true that the reasoning that takes
one from a system to its conditions of possibility can also be adopted to move from
the conditions of possibility (now to be understood as requirements of feasibility) to
the system itself. But while the former move is univocal, the latter is not, unless one
of the two following conditions is satisﬁed, each of which is problematic. Either one
already knows what system one is going to obtain anyway, and so it is actually
begging the question. Or the system is entirely constrained by its conditions of
possibility, which now become both necessary and jointly sufﬁcient to deliver it. In
this case, the assumption is that the transcendental conditions constrain the issuing
system univocally. This is unlikely to say the least, because it hardly ever happens.
Just think of the requirements prompting the design of a house. I shall come back to
this limit case of design below, when I shall deﬁne it as “degenerate” in the
mathematical sense of the word. For the time being, let me stress that such a
degenerate approach seems implicitly adopted by Kant and neo-Kantians of various
orientations. The issue may be explained with an Italian analogy. Even in the
apparently constrained case of a pizza, you can backtrack an actual pizza in front of
you uniquely to the ingredients used and a general backing recipe followed, but if
you have the ingredients and the general baking recipe they may lead to a variety of
pizzas (deep pan? ﬁlled crusts? Chicago style? More Neapolitan? Preferably
Roman?), because there can be quite a lot of room for variations, and the pizza you
started from is unlikely to be the only one feasible and may not even be the best, or
the most interesting, in terms of full exploitation of the ingredients and the backing
recipe itself. In Kant, it is the univocal relation between conditions of possibility of
a system and its requirements of feasibility that supports the whole transcendental
project. And this is so because Kant is mainly concerned about guaranteeing the
objectivity of knowledge even when knowledge is no longer representational. Kant
cannot ground the univocal nature of knowledge (“this is what the world looks
like”) on the univocal nature of the reality it refers to (“this is the way the world is”)
because this is a strategy open to representationalism but not to constructivism. So
analysed at
belongs to
O-committing
O-committed
conditions of possibility
Fig. 3 Transcendental logic
L. Floridi
he replaces the univocal nature of a represented reality in itself with the univocal
genesis and relationship knowledge enjoys in its encounter with reality in itself. In
other words, realism is guaranteed by the fact that the set of ingredients plus the
recipe lead to only one pizza and that pizza leads back to only one recipe and set of
ingredients. Likewise, in Kelsen’s Pure Theory of Law Kelsen , for example,
the crucial concept of basic norm (Grundnorm) seems to play a twofold role. It is
used to refer to the basic order or rule that forms an underlying basis for a legal
system understood as a hierarchical relationship of norms, akin to a ﬁrst principle or
axiom. It therefore works as a point of origin or source for all law, which obtains
legitimacy from it. Yet it remains inevitably ambiguous whether the Grundnorm and
the issuing construction is an as-if model of how the law that exists may be
reconstructed, in closer similarity to a transcendental analysis, or a hypothetical
blueprint of how the law that may, but does not yet, exist should be constructed. The
tension is unresolvable because the two interpretations look at the same road, from
system to model and from model (now blueprint) to system. So, from a “degenerate”
analysis, the answer is that the Grundnorm is both a blueprint and a model. But this
solution is challenged by the fact that, historically, there is a recursive relation
between the blueprint for the design of a system that is then analysed by a model
that turns into a blueprint for a new system, and so forth. I shall return to the
recursive nature of any design process in section four. For now, what I am
suggesting here is that we should take the univocity of the transcendental as
problematic, indeed untenable in most cases, and probably in all interesting cases.
Certainly the American pragmatists’ view of the a priori and hence of the
transcendental conditions of possibility of knowledge is already signiﬁcantly not
univocal.11 In particular, I share C. I. Lewis’s neo-Kantian “conceptualistic
pragmatism”,12 according to which empirical knowledge is the outcome of the
exercise of the constructive activities of the mind on the data (Lewis’ sensuous
‘give’) offered by the world, but the set of a priori concepts that are used in such a
process are not only biologically determined, but they are also the historical product
of the knower’s social and cognitive circumstances as well; pragmatically and not
absolutely, contrary to Kant. In the vocabulary of this article, they are historical
LoAs, which admit of alternatives and preferential choice, where the choice of the
right LoAs (the right set of a priori concepts) depends on purpose-oriented,
pragmatic considerations, and it is modiﬁable and hence improvable, depending on
the success achieved. This means that, in Lewis, there is no equation of univocity.
Once you socialise and historicise the transcendental—as we should here, given that
the method of abstraction is driven by a contextually justiﬁed choice of purposes—it
becomes very difﬁcult to accept the Kantian equation:
11 See Rosenthal .
12 See Lewis . As it is clear from Floridi , I am utterly unconvinced by Lewis’ later
naturalism as presented in Lewis because it seems to me to exchange Kant’s logical univocity for a
biological, impoverished version that is even more controversial. Having freed the transcendental from its
unvocal relationship with the construct, Lewis seems to put it back inside a smaller cage of univocal
relation with successful behaviour and planning. The point is that we should me more, not less Kantian
than Kant, so to speak.
The Logic of Design as a Conceptual Logic of Information
conditions of possibility ¼ requirements of feasibility
 $ designed system
in which one set of conditions works both as the set of conditions of possibility and
as the set of conditions of feasibility to which only one designed system corresponds, and vice versa. The truth is that, in most design cases, the identity and the
double implication are hardly ever justiﬁed. Fortunately, instead of resolving the
tension, it may be preferable to bypass it by sticking to the natural vocation of
transcendental logic as a logic of re-construction. This becomes easier once a proper
logic of design as construction becomes available, as I intend to show below. But
before this, we need to look at another alternative.
One may wish to understand not the past genesis but the current (presentoriented) state of dynamics of a system. If this is the purpose orienting the choice of
the LoA, then one does not look at what brought about the system, but focuses
instead on modelling the conditions of in/stability of a (transition) system under
investigation (Fig. 4). This approach is consistent with polarised and procedural
ways of reasoning, with the identiﬁcation of contrasts and their resolutions (or lack
thereof), with present-oriented analyses of processes (evolutions, developments),
and mutual interactions. The approach goes hand in hand with an interest in the
social and human sciences, especially economics, history, law, and political science,
although the natural sciences have also been approached from this perspective, if
with remarkable lack of persuasiveness (consider Marxist–Leninist analyses of
scientiﬁc theories such as quantum mechanics). One looks at a system and tries to
understand what dynamic equilibria keep it stable or unstable. In this case too, the
reader may have already guessed that this conceptual logic ﬁnds its roots in Hegel’s
dialectics. As with transcendental logic, dialectics has been stretched to repurpose it
as a logic of design, most famously by Marx. The outcome is unconvincing insofar
as the state transitions of the system identiﬁed by the logic, e.g. a speciﬁc political
organisation of a society, are at the same time necessary and yet open to steering or
inﬂuence. As in Kant, in Hegel too we deal with a logic of necessity: what must
have been the case for the system to be what it is, or what will have to be the case
analysed at
belongs to
O-committing
O-committed
conditions of in/stability
Fig. 4 Dialectical logic
L. Floridi
given that the system is what it is. In fact, design needs a logic of “sufﬁciency”, as I
shall explain presently.
From the previous sketch it follows that modernity has been dominated by two
main conceptual logics of information: Kant’s and Hegel’s. Both can be seen at
work, methodologically, in philosophers such as Marx (Hegel) and Husserl (Kant).
Yet they are not incompatible and can also easily be found interacting, e.g. in game
theory. Indeed, part of the difﬁculty in understanding Foucault, for example, is due
to the fact that his genealogical approach often switches between a transcendental
and a dialectical conceptual logic of information.
Both conceptual logics model systems as something given, whether in the natural
universe, as more signiﬁcantly in Kant, or in human history, as more inﬂuentially in
Hegel. Thus both move from the system to the model, broadly understood as a
description of (information about) it, looking for generalities and patterns. Both are
constructionist in a broad sense of the term: they look at how a system came to be
and its dynamics. One is then reminded that German idealism is among the most
constructionist-friendly approaches in the history of philosophy. Yet strictly
speaking neither is a conceptual logic of construction as design, which moves from
the model—now understood as a prescription or blueprint—to its implementation,
as a realised system that does not precede the model. That is, neither is in itself
primarily a logic of design, although both have been stretched and repurposed to
fulﬁl this role. In this case, the goal is to understand the future-oriented possibility of
construction of the system. One then focuses on modelling the conditions of
feasibility of the system under investigation (Fig. 5). As I have argued elsewhere
Floridi , one important consequence is that, asking whether a logic of design
is a priori or a posteriori, means not having grasped the shift from mimesis to
poiesis.13 A designer’s knowledge is a very signiﬁcant case of what is known as the
maker’s knowledge. This is the sort of knowledge that Alice enjoys when she holds
the information (true content) that Bob’s coffee is sweetened because she just put
analysed at
belongs to
O-committing
O-committed
conditions of feasibility
Fig. 5 The logic of design
13 The classic on mimesis is of course Auerbach . I have introduced the idea of homo poieticus in
Floridi and further discussed it in Floridi and Sanders .
The Logic of Design as a Conceptual Logic of Information
two spoons of sugar in it herself, i.e., because she designed the system that way. Her
knowledge is contingent, synthetic, weakly a priori (ab anteriori), and uninformative,
in the technical sense that she cannot be informed about the sugar in the coffee by
hearing a public announcement stating that there is sugar in the coffee. This is why I
agree with Ammon that designing is not an empirical kind of experimenting
(contrary to widespread methodological claims) but more an independent epistemic
praxis through which one can acquire genuine ab anteriori knowledge.
The lack of a logic of design is not just a scholarly gap, or a source of overinterpretations of transcendental logic and dialectical logic in our philosophical
reasoning. It is a particularly pressing problem because of a signiﬁcant shift in how
we prioritise forms of knowledge and sciences in particular.
For a long time, and at least since Greek philosophy, our epistemic culture has
privileged a mimetic view of knowledge and hence science, as a description of
reality, whether geometrical, physical, biological, chemical, or human, for example.
Astronomy provided a kind of regulative ideal. For this reason, still nowadays, our
philosophy of science tends to focus more on physics than on any other discipline.
However, as our knowledge of reality has progressed and become more reﬁned, as
our need to investigate reality has increasingly relied on technology, experiments,
and artefacts, and as our ability to create, control and modify aspects of the world
has grown, our epistemic outlook has become increasingly constructionist, that is,
poietic.14 Today, it would be perfectly reasonable to say that the most inﬂuential
sciences and scholarly disciplines that shape our world and our implicit, cultural
understanding of it are architecture, computer science, economics, engineering, and
law. They all do much more than just describe their objects, they actually contribute
to construct them, and, in the case of engineering and computer science, empower
other sciences to construct their own, through new artefacts, technologies,
simulations, algorithms, and data-based research. Poietic, as opposed to mimetic
science, relies on a conceptual logic of construction that does not start from the
system to analyse it in terms of a model, but actually starts from the model (the
blueprint) to realise the system. In this case understanding is constructing. Or, as
Vile´m Flusser insightfully put it:
the factory of the future will have to be the place where homo faber becomes
homo sapiens sapiens because he has realised that manufacturing means the
learning—i.e.
acquiring,
producing,
information.15
This information manufacturing, this poietic knowledge, is implicitly based on a
logic of design. We ﬁnd its roots in Kant and Hegel, as I tried to show above, but it
is under-theorised. Such a conceptual logic of semantic information modelling as
designing is consistent with creative forms of reasoning, with the identiﬁcation and
exploitation of constraints and affordances, and hence the satisfaction of requirements, with future-oriented analyses of what systems could be built and could work,
often recursively, and with engineering sciences broadly understood. It is a logic of
14 For a defence of constructionism see Floridi .
15 Flusser is a gem, full of remarkable insights. The quotation comes from p. 50.
L. Floridi
sufﬁcient rather than necessary conditions, in a speciﬁc sense that I shall explain in
the next section.16
4 The Logic of Design as a Logic of Requirements
The search for a logic of design is not (and it would be suspicious if it were) entirely
new. Carnap, for example, who described philosophy as conceptual engineering, is a
great representative of the German tradition, beginning at least with Kant and going
all the way at least to Wittgenstein’s Tractatus, in which philosophical analysis is
expected to unearth the deep, conceptual structures of knowledge, language, and
semantics. This is design of some sort:
The programme of rational reconstruction set out in 1922-3 had given great
prominence to a notion of ‘structure’ that remained somewhat enigmatic. And
though ‘structure’ itself was purely logical or analytic, its application instance
in the ‘constructive’ project of the Aufbau sought to capture the component of
knowledge that Helmholtz and Poincare had said was all we ultimately could
know about the world: ‘What science can attain to is not the things themselves
but only the relations among the things; apart from these relations there is no
knowable reality’ . Carnap, as we saw, had taken this
further, and built his project of rational reconstruction on the idea that ‘every
science is a science only insofar as the study of structures [Strukturlehre] is
contained in it’ (above, p. 163). Did this make our knowledge of ‘structure’
itself a form of synthetic knowledge? And ﬁnally, even if ‘structure’ was purely
logical, where did the principles of logic come from? All Carnap’s great role
models in logic had answered this last question by gesturing toward a special
source of knowledge, different from the empirical - the principles of logic were
synthetic a priori, or traceable to a ‘logical source of knowledge’ that gives us
our ability to grasp ‘thoughts’ residing in a ‘third realm’ distinct from the ﬁrst
realm of physical objects and the second realm of subjective consciousness.17
However, Carnap, analytic philosophers, and structuralists and deconstructionists of
all kinds, seem to forget that structures are not only unveiled, investigated, known,
discovered, reconstructed or deconstructured. They are also, and perhaps today
above all, designed. What does this mean?
Keeping in mind the risk just highlighted, it is obvious that architecture, the
design discipline par excellence, provides a great heuristics to clarify what a logic of
design may be. According to the American Institute of Architects, there are ﬁve
phases of design.18 The taxonomy is popular and rather uncontroversial. It provides
16 On a poietic epistemology see Floridi {Floridi 2016 #147; Floridi, forthcoming
#147; Floridi, forthcoming #146; Floridi 2004 #269}. Information manufacturing should not be confused
with the contemporary movement known as information architecture, which is really about how to
manage available information in ways that make it more accessible, see for the example the entertaining
Covert and Fenton or a standard textbook treatment in Morville et al. .
17 Carus , p. 185.
18 AIA website: 
The Logic of Design as a Conceptual Logic of Information
an excellent starting point. I shall paraphrase and summarise it below, with only
minor adaptations and a signiﬁcant proviso19:
Phase 1: Originate This is the thinking phase in which one realises that something
new (in our terminology, a new system) needs to be built in order to satisfy a
particular purpose. It is the “needing” moment of the project.
Phase 2: Focus This is the phase in which one deﬁnes the system’s requirements
(these are broadly understood as scope, features, purpose, or functionality, more
on this presently) that the system must have in order to satisfy the purpose. It is
the “vision” moment for the project.
Phase 3: Design This is the phase in which one models the system’s requirements.
It is the “shaping” moment of the project.
Phase 4: Build This is the phase in which one constructs the system. It is the
“making” moment of the project.
Phase 5: Use20 This is the last phase in which the system is ﬁnally available and
starts satisfying its purpose. It is the “testing” moment of the project.
The proviso to be added is that the ﬁve phases can easily be recursive. If any phase,
including Phase 5, is unsatisfactory, one may go back all the way to Phase 1.
Indeed, the phases are often recursive in many design contexts in which fast
prototyping has become ordinary. 3D printing has had a profound inﬂuence on this
more cyclical approach. This holds true in architecture as well. Of course, one does
not build whole architectural systems to re-do them if unsatisﬁed. The difference
lies in the longer, diachronic time scale. For example, the reﬁnement of the Doric,
Ionic, and Corinthian orders of architecture took a long time, but it was no less
recursive than the trial and error one may experience in designing a web page for a
customer. Rome was not built in a day, but this does not mean that it was not built
recursively through the centuries. And we saw above that Kant’s transcendental
logic may be in a recursive relation with the logic of design: what is initially a
blueprint is translated into a ﬁrst system, which is then analysed by a model that can
become a new blueprint for a revised system, and so forth. All this highlights the
fact that design is not limited to the creation/implementation of systems anew, but
also applies to the repurposing or improving of existing systems, relying on repeated
iteration with, sometimes, small adjustments, in a variety of time-scales.
As it is obvious, the logic of design may cover all ﬁve phases. If we ignore Phase
1, as the moment when one realises that a new system to fulﬁl a speciﬁc goal is
needed, then during Phases 4–5 one veriﬁes and validates (in the design, not the
philosophical sense of the two terms) the system that is being built, that is, one
checks its “ﬁtness for purpose”. During the veriﬁcation stage, one evaluates whether
the system is being developed in the right way, e.g. by checking for consistency.
And during the validation stage, one evaluates whether the right system is being
19 I am very grateful to James Williams for having called my attention to the potentially misleading
nature of architecture as an apparently non-recursive area of design.
20 “Occupy” in the original text. I modiﬁed the terminology slightly to cover all kinds of designs not just
the design of buildings.
L. Floridi
developed, e.g. by evaluating the correctness of the ﬁnal system with respect to
users’ needs. Both stages are methodological. It is the step from Phase 2 to Phase 3
that is signiﬁcantly inferential and can then be deﬁned correctly as belonging to the
conceptual logic of design: the satisfaction of a speciﬁc purpose leads to the
identiﬁcation of some requirements which then lead to the design of a speciﬁc
system that implements them in order to satisfy the purpose, with all the necessary
loops in recursive reﬁnements. This should sound familiar: it means that
architectural design contains within itself an inferential stage—the passage from
Phase 2 to Phase 3—that is fully captured by system engineering. This is our next
In system engineering,21 one provides the speciﬁcation for a system (S) to be
designed by describing an explicit, non-empty, ﬁnite, and complete set of
requirements {R1, …, Rn} to be satisﬁed by S. Such requirements in {R1, …,
Rn} can be non-functional or functional, or, to use a more classic terminology, may
refer to the form or the function of the system. Non-functional requirements are also
simply known as requirements tout court. They deﬁne a system’s architecture, that
is, what the system is supposed to be. For example, a refrigerator’s main nonfunctional requirement is that its compartment is thermally insulated and easily
accessible in order to store food. Functional requirements are also known as
functions. They deﬁne a system’s behaviour, that is, what the system is supposed to
do. In our example, a refrigerator main functional requirement is to maintain a
constant temperature a few degrees above the freezing point of water, inside its
easily accessible, thermally insulated compartment. The distinction is crucial and it
has philosophical implications too, so it is important to keep it clear and ﬁrm in
mind. For example, Kant’s formulations of the categorical imperative have often
been seen as formal, motivational features of an agent’s behaviour, i.e. as functional
requirements. However, from a system engineering design perspective, and a more
consistent interpretation of Kant’s autonomous dictates of reason, they are better
understood as non-functional requirements, namely universalizability and noninstrumentalisation, i.e. what a categorical imperative is supposed to be. Finally,
there is a third sense in which one may speak of requirements, and that is when
resources needed to build a system are under discussion. This is not going to play a
role in the logic of design discussed in this article, but it is an obvious constraint,
both practically (e.g., funding) and theoretically (e.g. computational power or
memory, two resources that translate into time and space, which then translate into
complexity issues). Figure 6 summarises the previous analysis and taxonomy.
It turns out that the inferential step in the logic of design from Phase 2 to Phase 3
concerns the relation between a set of requirements (in the comprehensive sense of
“requirements” just clariﬁed), on the one hand, and a system that implements them
(more or less satisfactorily), on the other. In other words, the (conceptual) logic of
design turns out to be the (conceptual) logic of requirements. But then, exactly what
21 On the philosophy of design in engineering and architecture see the collection of essays in Vermaas
et al. .
The Logic of Design as a Conceptual Logic of Information
kind of designing relation between requirements and system are we discussing? This
is not a classic entailment as understood in First Order Logic (FOL).22 In FOL, we
are acquainted with the relation of satisfaction: a truth-structure Α satisﬁes a set of
sentences Γ if and only if Α models Γ, that is: Α ╞Γ.23 By analogy, one may argue
that the system S satisﬁes (models) a set of requirements, that is, we could use the
double turnstile to formalise the design relation between a system and the
requirements thus:
S ╞{R1, …, Rn}.
There is, however, a difﬁculty. Read literally, such a formula would mean that S
necessitates {R1, …, Rn}. This is obviously not true in our case. Recall the difﬁculty
of using transcendental or dialectical logic for design purposes. The set of
requirements logically precedes and “conduces” to S, and S does not have a relation
of necessitation with respect to the requirements it implements: a fridge does not
necessitate “preserving food”, it is rather this requirement that makes the fridge a
sufﬁcient solution. There is still a relation of satisfaction, but it needs to be reinterpreted. So let me introduce to mean that whatever is on the left “sufﬁcientises”
Fig. 6 Elements of system design
22 Opting for a modal logic approach only seems to complicate instead of solving the problem. This is not
to say that Modal Logic cannot be helpful to study patterns of inference in design reasoning and
rationalisation, see for example Galle .
23 One of the anonymous referees correctly remarked that the notion of satisfaction referred to from FOL
and underlying classic entailment is restricting the meta-theory of the language to its semantics. I see this
as a non-problematic element because the object of the analysis developed in this article is semantic
information. I agree with the reviewer that “the strategy in use to deﬁne a more formal approach to the
logic of design can very well be constrained to syntactic relations”.
L. Floridi
(“makes sufﬁcient”) whatever is on the right as an implementation. This no longer
resembles a deduction.24 One may object that
The other feasible strategy is the pattern language proposed by Alexander,25
where a deductive relation, between the design requirements, or as he called it
the tendency, and the form [of the system], is constructed.26
However, it is questionable whether Alexander’s work may be so interpreted. For
example, in Alexander he writes:
There is no legitimate sense in which deductive logic can prescribe physical
form for us. (p. 8)
And even if there may be some cases in which it may be correct to speak of a
deductive relation, this only means that there are some “degenerate” (in the
mathematical, technical sense of the word)27 cases of design in which the
requirements are so completely constraining as to make possible one and only one
system that satisﬁes all of them and no others. We saw above that such cases are
neither representative nor interesting. Note, however, that the inferential relation is
not an induction or abduction either.28 One may call it a “conduction”. We can now
{R1, …, Rn} ╡S
to formalise the design relation between a set of requirements and what they
conduce to in terms of a system that sufﬁces to satisfy them. For example, the set of
two requirements that indicate that we should design a system that seats one person
“sufﬁcientises” several solutions, without necessitating any of them in particular:
{seat, one-person} ╡Chair
{seat, one-person} ╡Stool
{seat, one-person} ╡Pouf
How we identify the requirements is a matter of analysis, sometimes of necessity,
but sometimes of choice. Recall the rejection of the “Kantian equation”: the same
set of requirements may lead to a variety of systems understood as solutions that
24 Note that this is in contrast with the interpretation provided by Zeng and Cheng , who argue that
the logic of design is a recursive kind of deductive logic. Unfortunately their analysis confuses different
levels of abstraction as well as different stages of development of design, and it seem to resemble some
kind of Aristotelian practical syllogism. When the relation between requirements and system is deductive
we are dealing with.
25 Alexander et al. and Alexander . Both references are in the original quotation.
26 Zeng and Cheng , p. 140.
27 In mathematics a “degenerate” case is a special, limit case which is non-representative of the class of
objects under discussion, for example a geometrical point is a degenerate circle with radius = 0.
28 The temptation of interpreting the logic of design as abduction in Peircean terms is recurrent. March
 defends a logic of design as a logic of abduction, but in a problem-solving context, see also Goel
 , who seeks to extend March’s approach. Kroll and Koskela re-proposes the abductive
interpretation but refers only to March not to March .
The Logic of Design as a Conceptual Logic of Information
satisfy them, and the choice of which solution may be preferable, or whether the set
needs to be revised, is pragmatic, but not determined, and can be as much linked to
biological and social frameworks as to cultural, personal, or even accidental
circumstances. In terms of choice, for example, demaking a video game means
remaking it for an older platform, that is, it’s a self-imposed challenge to require
simpler graphics and sound, and simpliﬁed gameplay to see what a video game
would be like, if it had been conceived and produced for an older hardware or
software generation. The same applies to so-called “constrained writing”. Green
Eggs and Ham, the famous children’s book, uses only 50 different words because of
a $50 bet by Theodor Geisel, also known as Dr. Seuss, with Bennett Cerf.29
Once the requirements have been identiﬁed (and often this is a process of
discovery that needs recursive revisions as the design process progresses) then
choosing between the different systems “sufﬁcientised” by the requirements, and
deciding how to implement the preferred choice, become a matter of policy, that is,
the application of a deliberate set of principles in order to guide the decision and
achieve the wanted outcome. This is why there is no ultimate designed system in the
world that does not encapsulate autonomy and choice, even if implicitly and
inadvertently.30
We can now extend this analysis to make sense of four standard cases, in analogy
with the double turnstile in mathematical logic.
If a consistent but boundless set of requirements is provided, that is, if a system
can be designed that can satisfy any non empty set of requirements, then in
practice there is no such system, but in theory one may be referring to the set of
all systems:
{R1, …} ╡{S1,…}
In FOL, this would be analogous to a boundless set of premises that entails a
boundless set of conclusions; more an intellectual curiosity than something
useful for any design purpose.
If an inconsistent set of requirements is provided, that is, if nothing goes and
there is no system that can be designed that can ever satisfy such a set (imagine
the requirements for a perpetual motion machine), then there is only the set, not
followed by any system (the empty set):
{R1, …, Rn, R1, …, Rn} ╡{}
In FOL, this would be analogous to a contradictory set that entails any
conclusion. And in the same way that a contradictory set is false in all possible
worlds, likewise a set of requirements that is inconsistent is good for no
29 From a similar perspective, one may argue that War and Peace is a transcendental novel: 
salon.com/2015/01/11/leo_tolstoys_theory_of_everything/.
30 I am grateful to Mariarosaria Taddeo for having pointed out the need for this further clariﬁcation.
L. Floridi
purpose, which means, it is useless for any design. One may use this
terminology to speak of impossible systems.
If no requirements are provided, that is, if anything goes and there are no
constraints (think of the design of a drug that works like a panacea), then the
empty set of requirements sufﬁcientises S:
In FOL, this would be analogous to a tautology. And in the same way as a
tautology is true in all possible worlds, likewise a system the design of which is
unconstrained by any requirement is a system good for any purpose, which
means, it is magical or, more seriously, useless.
Finally, if a consistent and ﬁnite set of requirements, for example {seat, oneperson, back} conduces to a unique system, namely a chair, that is, if only one
system can satisfy them, then we have a double relation of sufﬁcientisation:
{R1, …, Rn} ╞S.
In FOL, this would be analogous to a relation of double entailment. This is the
“degenerate” case in which a set of requirements sufﬁcientises only one system
which satisﬁes only one set of requirements.
The previous analysis helps one to see that optimization in design consists in any
improvement in the number or nature of the requirements and/or in their
implementation according to some pre-established purpose. And efﬁcient design
is the implementation of a set of requirements such that it is impossible to satisfy
any one of them more without satisfying at least one of them less (Pareto
efﬁciency).
As in FOL, what interesting systems one may design (what interesting theorems
one may prove) is a matter of talent, intuition, hard work, opportunity, good fortune,
free thinking and imagination, and many other variables that are hard to pin down.
As Donald Scho¨n correctly put it, the designer (or indeed the logician and the
philosopher and anyone who creatively designs solutions) is
like a chess master who develops a feeling for the constraints and the
potentials [affordances in the terminology of this article] of certain conﬁgurations of pieces on the board.31
So the conceptual logic I have suggested here is more in line with an early analysis
provided by William Fawcett who was critical of logico-mathematical approaches
to the logic of design:
So what is the distinctive ‘logic of design’? The author prefers the point of
view that the identity of design lies in empirical considerations, rather than in
31 Scho¨n , p. 104 see also Parsons , p. 49.
The Logic of Design as a Conceptual Logic of Information
modes of inference; and in purely empirical terms it has been conﬁrmed that
design is a more difﬁcult task than analysis.32
There is no Leibnizian “calculemus” in the logic of design. There can be very little
naturalised expediency as there is a qualitative gap between the design of a nest and
the design of NEST (the smart thermostat). Nevertheless, the mechanism lying
behind good design and good logic is clear. There are three conceptual logics of
information as modelling of a system, and the third one is the logic of design as a
logic of requirements.
5 Conclusion
In the previous pages, I have sought to outline a conceptual logic of information
understood as (1) a transcendental logic of past conditions of possibility of a system
(Kant), or as (2) a dialectical logic of present conditions of in/stability of a system
(Hegel), or as (3) a design logic of future conditions of feasibility of a system. I then
characterised (3) as a conceptual logic of requirements and introduced the relations
of “sufﬁcientisation”. The last comment I wish to make is about why a conceptual
logic of information as design is particularly important today. Four reasons seem to
be salient.
First, the digital re-ontologises our world by transforming the very
nature of our concepts and their related phenomena. It does this by decoupling
hitherto coupled elements such as presence and location, law and territoriality,
ownership and use, successful agency and intelligence. Such decoupling ﬂuidiﬁes
both things and ideas about things, making possible the design and redesign of both.
In short, the digital provides more affordances and fewer constraints as new
requirements for our creative, design efforts. We need a logic of design as a logic of
requirements to make the most of such increased opportunities.
Second, the digital poses new challenges, conceptual and ethical. Such
challenges are open, that is, they are problems that may be solved in more than
one way by rational, well-informed, and open-minded (i.e., not stubborn)
interlocutors. This openness calls for a clear understanding of how we design the
solutions, how such solutions can better satisfy the requirements that motivate them,
and how the requirements may evolve and be improved in order to fulﬁl the driving
purposes. In short, it calls for a logic of design and sufﬁcientisation driven by the
right policies.
Third, and probably as a consequence of the previous two reasons, a conceptual
logic of information as design is particularly important today because our
knowledge of the world is increasingly constructionist. I already mentioned the
fact that some of the most inﬂuential sciences and intellectual endeavours of our
time, including Architecture, Computer Science, Economics, and Engineering and
Jurisprudence do not just study their systems, they mainly build and modify them.
32 Fawcett p. 85.
L. Floridi
The more science shifts from a mimetic to a poietic approach to the world the more
we shall need a logic of design. Kant and Hegel were on the right track.
And ﬁnally, because the essence of philosophy is not logic, but design. Logic is
only a second-best compromise, in the absence of design. So it is time for
philosophy to equip itself not only with a transcendental and a dialectical logic but
also with a logic of requirements to devise new answers to the philosophical
questions posed by the information revolution. Philosophical questions are ultimate
but not absolute questions, which are not answerable empirically or mathematically,
but are open to informed and rational disagreement.33 The best way to address them
is by developing philosophy as conceptual design, and this requires its own logic.
Acknowledgements I discussed previous versions of this article as a speaker at the following meetings:
UNILOG’2015 5th World Congress and School on Universal Logic, ; 9th
IA Summit 2015 ; Lectio Commandiniana, Universita` degli Studi di
Urbino ; Copernicus Lecture, Universita` degli Studi di Ferrara ; Seminario di Logica, Universita` degli Studi di Milano ; keynote, European
Information Architecture summit EuroIA 2017 . I am indebted to
Jean-Yves Be´ziau; Vincenzo Di Maria and Luca Rosati; Pierluigi Graziani and Gino Tarozzi; Matteo V.
d’Alfonso; Marcello D’Agostino and Corrado Sinigaglia; and ﬁnally Raffaella Angus and Francis
Rowland respectively, for their kind invitations, and to the participants in such meetings for the fruitful
opportunity to discuss my ideas and to receive much helpful feedback. Massimo Durante, Giuseppe
Primiero, Mariarosaria Taddeo, Sandra Wachter, and James Williams provided some very signiﬁcant
feedback that hugely improved what became the penultimate version of this article. David Sutcliffe
kindly copyedited the ﬁnal draft. Finally, I am grateful to the two anonymous reviewers for their
constructive feedback.
Open Access
This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License ( which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s)
and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.