elifesciences.org
Pigott et al. eLife 2014;3:e04395. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395
Mapping the zoonotic niche of Ebola virus
disease in Africa
David M Pigott1†, Nick Golding1†, Adrian Mylne1, Zhi Huang1, Andrew J Henry1,
Daniel J Weiss1, Oliver J Brady1, Moritz UG Kraemer1, David L Smith1,2,
Catherine L Moyes1, Samir Bhatt1, Peter W Gething1, Peter W Horby3,
Isaac I Bogoch4,5, John S Brownstein6,7, Sumiko R Mekaru8, Andrew J Tatem9,10,13,
Kamran Khan4,11, Simon I Hay1,12*
1Spatial Ecology and Epidemiology Group, Department of Zoology, University of
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom; 2Sanaria Institute for Global Health and Tropical
Medicine, Rockville, United States; 3Epidemic Diseases Research Group, Centre for
Tropical Medicine and Global Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom;
4Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada; 5Divisions of Internal Medicine and Infectious Diseases, University
Health Network, Toronto, Toronto, Canada; 6Department of Pediatrics, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, United States; 7Children's Hospital Informatics Program,
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, United States; 8Children's Hospital Informatics
Program, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, United States; 9Department of
Geography and Environment, University of Southampton, Southampton, United
Kingdom; 10Fogarty International Center, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
United States; 11Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto,
Canada; 12Fogarty International Center, National Institutes of Health, Bethseda,
United States; 13Flowminder Foundation, Stockholm, Sweden
Abstract Ebola virus disease (EVD) is a complex zoonosis that is highly virulent in humans. The
largest recorded outbreak of EVD is ongoing in West Africa, outside of its previously reported and
predicted niche. We assembled location data on all recorded zoonotic transmission to humans and
Ebola virus infection in bats and primates . Using species distribution models, these
occurrence data were paired with environmental covariates to predict a zoonotic transmission
niche covering 22 countries across Central and West Africa. Vegetation, elevation, temperature,
evapotranspiration, and suspected reservoir bat distributions define this relationship. At-risk areas
are inhabited by 22 million people; however, the rarity of human outbreaks emphasises the very
low probability of transmission to humans. Increasing population sizes and international connectivity
by air since the first detection of EVD in 1976 suggest that the dynamics of human-to-human
secondary transmission in contemporary outbreaks will be very different to those of the past.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395.001
Introduction
Ebola viruses have for the last forty years been responsible for a number of outbreaks of Ebola virus
disease (EVD) in humans , with high case fatality rates typically around 60–70%,
but potentially reaching as high as 90% . The most recent outbreak
began in Guinea in December 2013 and has subse­
quently spread to Liberia, Sierra Leone and Nigeria . The unprecedented size and scale
of this ongoing outbreak has the potential to destabilise already fragile economies and healthcare
*For correspondence: simon.
 
†These authors contributed
equally to this work
Competing interests: See page 20
Funding: See page 21
Received: 18 August 2014
Accepted: 31 August 2014
Published: 08 September 2014
Reviewing editor: Prabhat Jha,
University of Toronto, Canada
Copyright Pigott et al. This
article is distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License, which
permits unrestricted use and
redistribution provided that the
original author and source are
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Epidemiology and global health | Microbiology and infectious disease
Pigott et al. eLife 2014;3:e04395. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395
Research article
systems , and fears of international spread of a Category A Priority Pathogen 
have made this a massive focus for international public health . This has led to the current
outbreak being declared a Public Health Emergency of International Concern on the 8 August 2014
 .
The Filoviridae, of which Ebolavirus is a constituent genus, belong to the order Mononegavirales.
Two other genera complete the family: Marburgvirus, itself responsible for a number of outbreaks of
haemorrhagic fever across Africa and Cuevavirus, recently isolated from bats in northern Spain .
Five species of Ebolavirus have been isolated to date ; the earli­
est recognised outbreaks of EVD were reported in Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of the Congo
[DRC]) and Sudan in 1976 .
The causative viruses were isolated and later identified to be distinct species,
Zaire ebolavirus (EBOV) and Sudan ebolavirus (SUDV). A third species of Ebolavirus, Reston ebolavirus,
was isolated from Cynomologus monkeys imported from the Philippines to a facility in the United
States, where they experienced severe haemorrhaging . Whilst serological evi­
dence of infection with this species has been reported in individuals in the Philippines , no pathogenicity has been reported beyond primates and porcids . In 1994 a fourth species, Tai Forest ebolavirus was isolated from a
veterinarian who had autopsied a chimpanzee in Côte d’Ivoire , though the
virus has not been detected subsequently. The final species, Bundibugyo ebolavirus, was responsible
for an outbreak of EVD in Uganda in 2007 , as well as a more recent outbreak in
the DRC .
Initial analysis suggested that the viruses isolated from the current outbreak, originating in Guinea,
formed a separate clade within the five Ebolavirus species . Subsequent re-analysis
eLife digest Since the first outbreaks of Ebola virus disease in 1976, there have been numerous
other outbreaks in humans across Africa with fatality rates ranging from 50% to 90%. Humans can
become infected with the Ebola virus after direct contact with blood or bodily fluids from an infected
person or animal. The virus also infects and kills other primates—such as chimpanzees or gorillas—
though Old World fruit bats are suspected to be the most likely carriers of the virus in the wild.
The largest recorded outbreak of Ebola virus disease is ongoing in West Africa: more people
have been infected in this current outbreak than in all previous outbreaks combined. The current
outbreak is also the first to occur in West Africa—which is outside the previously known range of
the Ebola virus.
Pigott et al. have now updated predictions about where in Africa wild animals may harbour the
virus and where the transmission of the virus from these animals to humans is possible. As such, the
map identifies the regions that are most at risk of a future Ebola outbreak. The data behind these
new maps include the locations of all recorded primary cases of Ebola in human populations—the
‘index’ cases—many of which have been linked to animal sources. The data also include the locations
of recorded cases of Ebola virus infections in wild bats and primates from the last forty years. The
maps, which were modelled using more flexible methods than previous predictions, also include
new information—collected using satellites—about environmental factors and new predictions of
the range of wild fruit bats.
Pigott et al. report that the transmission of Ebola virus from animals to humans is possible in
22 countries across Central and West Africa—and that 22 million people live in the areas at risk.
However, outbreaks in human populations are rare and the likelihood of a human getting the
disease from an infected animal still remains very low. The updated map does not include data
about how infections spread from one person to another, so the next challenge is to use existing
data on human-to-human transmission to better understand the likely size and extent of current
and future outbreaks. As more people live in, and travel to and from, the at-risk regions than ever
before, Pigott et al. note that new outbreaks of Ebola virus disease are likely to be very different to
those of the past.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395.002
Epidemiology and global health | Microbiology and infectious disease
Pigott et al. eLife 2014;3:e04395. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395
Research article
of the same sequences however, indicated that these isolates instead nest within the Zaire ebolavirus
lineage , and diverged from Central Africa strains approximately ten
years ago .
Which reservoir species are responsible for maintaining Ebola transmission between outbreaks is
not well understood , but over the last decade significant progress has been
made in narrowing down the list of likely hosts (Figure 1). Primates have long
been known to harbour filoviral infections, with the first Marburg strains identified in African green
monkeys in 1967 . Significant mortality has also been reported
in wild primate populations across Africa, most notably in gorilla (Gorilla gorilla) and chimpanzee (Pan
troglodytes) populations . The
high case fatality rates recorded in the great apes combined with their declining populations and
limited geographical range, indicate they are likely dead-end hosts for the virus and not reservoir
species . A large survey of small mammals in and around Gabon identified three
species of bats which were infected with Ebola viruses—Hypsignathus monstrosus, Epomops franqueti
and Myonycetris torquata . Subsequent serological surveys and evidence linking the potential source of human outbreaks to bats lend support to the hypothesis of a bat reservoir. This, coupled with repeated detection
of Marburgvirus in the fruit bat Rousettus aegypticus and the only isolations of
Cuevavirus also from bats , all support the suspicion
that Chiroptera play an important role in the natural life-cycle of the filoviruses.
Humans represent a dead-end host for the virus, with only stuttering chains of transmission
reported between humans in the majority of previous outbreaks and no indication that humans can reintroduce the virus back into reservoir species . The incubation period in humans ranges from two days to three weeks, after which a
variety of clinical symptoms arise, affecting multiple organs of the body. At the peak of illness, haem­
orrhaging shock and widespread tissue damage can occur and can eventually lead to death within
6–16 days . Human-to-human transmission is mainly through direct
unprotected contact with infected individuals and cadavers, with infectious particles detected in a
number of different body fluids . The typical outbreak profile is
defined by an index individual that has recently
come into contact with the blood of another
mammal through either hunting or the butcher­
ing of animal carcasses .
Whilst it has been difficult to identify the zoonotic
source for the index cases of some outbreaks, a
recurring theme of hunting and handling bush­
meat is suspected . For some outbreaks, including the most
recent, the initial source of zoonotic transmission
has not been identified. In subsequent human-tohuman transmission, the highest risk activities are
those that bring humans into close contact with
infected individuals. These include medical set­
tings where insufficient infection control precau­
tions have been taken, as well as home care and
funeral preparations carried out by families or
close friends . As the condi­
tions required for transmission are culturally and
contextually dependent, opportunities for sus­
tained transmission are highly heterogeneously
distributed. Typically, chains of infection do not
exceed three or four sequential transmission
events, although occasionally (and particularly in
Figure 1. The epidemiology of Ebola virus transmission
in Africa. Of the suspected reservoir species, 1, 2 and
3 represent the three bat species from which Ebola
virus has been isolated (Hypsignathus monstrosus,
Myonycteris torquata and Epomops franqueti) and
n represents unknown reservoirs of the disease yet to
be discovered. Of the susceptible species, A represents
Pan troglodytes, B Gorilla gorilla and m represents
other organisms susceptible to the disease, such as
duikers. H represents humans. Blue arrows indicate
unknown transmission cycles or infection routes and
red arrow routes have been confirmed or are suspected.
Adapted from Groseth et al. .
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395.003
Epidemiology and global health | Microbiology and infectious disease
Pigott et al. eLife 2014;3:e04395. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395
Research article
Table 1. Locations of outbreaks of Ebola virus disease in humans
Date range
South Sudan
Jun–Nov 1976
 
Sep–Oct 1976
 
 
South Sudan
Jul–Oct 1979
 
Côte d’Ivoire
Tai Forest
 
Nov 1994–Feb 1995
Mekouka and
Andock mining
 
Jan–Jul 1995
Mwembe Forest
 
Jan–Mar 1996
Mayibout 2
 
Jul 1996–Jan 1997
 
Oct 2000–Feb 2001
Rwot-Obillo
 
Gabon & ROC
Oct 2001–Mar 2002
Entsiami, Abolo
and Ambomi
 
Etakangaye
Grand Etoumbi
Dec 2002–Apr 2003
Yembelangoye
 
Nearby hunting
Oct–Dec 2003
 
Apr–May 2005
Odzala National
 
May–Nov 2007
Mombo Mounene 2
 
Aug–Dec 2007
 
Nov 2008–Feb 2009
 
Nakisamata
 
July–Oct 2012
 
Nov 2012–Jan 2013
Luwero District
 
Dec 2013 -
 a single individual may be responsible for directly infecting a large number
of others . In the outbreak in Gabon in 1996, a single person was responsible for
infecting ten other individuals whilst in the 1995 outbreak in the DRC, thirty five
cases resulted from one individual . Secondary transmission can be restricted by
effective case detection and isolation measures . Where this
cannot be achieved, either due to a lack of infrastructure, poor understanding of the disease, or
distrust of medical practices, secondary cases can continue to occur . As the number of infections grows, the ability of healthcare systems to control
the further spread diminishes and the risk of a large outbreak increases.
The recent outbreak in Guinea and surrounding countries indicate that the previous paradigm for
Ebola outbreaks is shifting . The last 40 years of EVD outbreaks were
accompanied by considerable changes in demographic patterns throughout Africa. There has been a
large increase in population size coupled with increasing urbanisation . African populations have also become better connected internally and
internationally . Only recently have we begun to under­
stand the dynamic nature of these travel patterns which have been clearly demonstrated to influence
disease transmission over different temporal and spatial scales . Changes in land use and penetration into previously remote areas of rainforest bring humans
into contact with potential new reservoirs , while changes in human mobility and con­
nectivity will likely have profound impacts on the dispersion of Ebola cases during outbreaks. These
conditions are thought to have a major role in setting the stage for the current outbreak.
This paper aims to define the areas suitable for zoonotic transmission of Ebolavirus (i.e., those
routes defined in Figure 1 excluding human-to-human transmission) through species distribution
modelling techniques. The fundamental niche of a species can be conceptualised as the confluence of
environmental conditions that support its presence in a particular location . Species
distribution models quantitatively describe this niche based on known occurrence records of the
organism and their associated environmental conditions, enabling predictions of the likely geographic
distribution of the species in other regions . The era of satellites and
geographical information systems has made high resolution global data on environmental conditions
increasingly available . Species distribution modelling using
flexible machine learning approaches have been successfully applied to map the global distributions
of disease vectors and pathogens such as dengue , influenza
 and leishmaniasis .
Previous studies applied the GARP (Genetic Algorithm for Rule-set Production) species distribution
modelling approach to the locations of 12 Ebola outbreaks in humans
between 1976 and 2002 to map the likely distribution of Ebola viruses and as
a mechanism to identify potential reservoir hosts .
Here we update and improve the maps of the zoonotic transmission niche of EVD by: (i) incorporating
more recent outbreak data from outside the formerly predicted niche of EVD; (ii) integrating for the first
time data on outbreaks in primates and the occurrence of the virus in the suspected Old World fruit
bat (OWFB) reservoirs; (iii) using new satellite-derived information on bespoke environmental covari­
ates from Africa, including new distribution maps of the OWFB; and (iv) using new increasingly flexible
niche mapping techniques in the modelling framework. To elucidate the relevance of these maps for trans­
mission, we have also calculated the population at risk of primary spillover outbreaks from the zoonotic
niche of EVD in Africa, and we investigated the changing nature of the populations within this niche.
Reported EVD outbreaks
In total, 23 outbreaks of Ebola virus were identified in humans across Africa, consisting of a hypothe­
sised 30 independent primary infection events (Table 1; Figure 2). These outbreaks span the last
40 years from the first outbreaks in 1976 to the five outbreaks that have occurred since 2010 (Table 1).
The locations of the index cases span from West Africa, with the most westerly outbreak ongoing in
Guinea, to Gabon, the Republic of Congo (ROC), the DRC, South Sudan and Uganda. Before December
Epidemiology and global health | Microbiology and infectious disease
Pigott et al. eLife 2014;3:e04395. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395
Research article
Figure 2. The locations of Ebola virus disease outbreaks in humans in Africa. (A) Illustrates the 23 reported outbreaks of Ebola virus disease through
time, with the area of each circle and its position along the y-axis representing the number of cases. The onset year is represented by the colour as per
(B). (B) Shows a map of the index cases for each of these outbreaks. (C–H) Show these outbreaks over a series of time periods. Numbers refer to
outbreaks as listed in Table 1. In (B–H) the species of Ebola virus responsible for the outbreak is illustrated by the symbol shape, the number of resulting
cases and onset date by symbol colour. The most recent outbreak (#23) is indicated in orange. Countries in which zoonotic transmission to humans has
been reported or is assumed to have occurred are coloured in blue. In each map the Democratic Republic of Congo is outlined for reference.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395.005
2013, a total of 2322 cases had occurred from Ebolavirus infections, a number already overtaken by
the likely underreported current case count of the ongoing outbreak >2250 (Figure 2A).
Of the four viruses circulating in Africa, Zaire ebolavirus has been responsible for the most outbreaks
(13), followed by Sudan ebolavirus (7) and Bundigbuyo ebolavirus with just two outbreaks in 2007/8
and 2012. Tai Forest has caused one confirmed infection in humans, from which the patient recovered
 . Although outbreaks have been reported since 1976,
there was an absence of reported outbreaks in humans for 15 years between 1979 and 1994 and the frequency of outbreaks
has increased substantially post 2000 (Figure 2A).
Reported Ebola virus infections in animals
A total of 51 surveyed locations reporting infections in animals were identified in the literature since
the discovery of the disease (Table 2; Figure 3). These comprised 17 infections in gorillas (Gorilla
gorilla), nine infections in chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes), 18 in OWFB and 2 in duikers (Cephalophus
spp.). A large proportion of the great ape cases originated from the ROC/Gabon border, coinciding
with the main known distributions of both chimpanzees and gorillas 
and representing a period of well-documented great ape Ebola outbreaks in and around the Lossi
Animal Sanctuary . All animal isola­
tions of Ebola viruses have come from countries that have also reported index cases of human out­
breaks, with the exception of several seropositive bats from a survey in southern Ghana.
Epidemiology and global health | Microbiology and infectious disease
Pigott et al. eLife 2014;3:e04395. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395
Research article
Table 2. Locations of reported infections with Ebola virus in animals
Date range
Côte d’Ivoire
Oct–Nov 1994
Tai Forest
Chimpanzee
 
Mayiboth 2
Chimpanzee
 
Near Booue
Chimpanzee
 
Lope National
Chimpanzee
 
Gabon & ROC
Mendemba/Lossi
Animal Sanctuary
Chimpanzee
 
Gabon & ROC
Mendemba/Lossi
Animal Sanctuary
 
Gabon & ROC
Mendemba/Lossi
Animal Sanctuary
Cephalophus
 
 
 
Medemba and
neighbouring
Chimpanzee
and Gorilla
 
 
Various bat
 
 
Grand Etoumbi
 
 
Chimpanzee
 
Lossi Animal
 
Lossi Animal
 
Lossi Animal
Chimpanzee
 
Lossi Animal
 
Lossi Animal
 
Lossi Animal
Cephalophus
 
Various bat
 
Lossi Animal
 
Lossi Animal
Chimpanzee
 
Various bat
 
Near Mbomo
National Park
 
Near Mbomo
National Park
Hypsignathus
monstrosus
 
Near Mbomo
National Park
Myonycteris
 
Table 2. Continued on next page
Epidemiology and global health | Microbiology and infectious disease
Pigott et al. eLife 2014;3:e04395. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395
Research article
Date range
 
Jan–Jun 2004
 
 
Near Franceville
 
Near Franceville
Myonycteris
 
Near Lambarene
franqueti and
Hypsignathus
monstrosus
 
Near Mbomo
National Park
 
Near Mbomo
National Park
Hypsignathus
monstrosus
 
Near Mbomo
National Park
Myonycteris
 
Odzala National
 
Near Tchibanga
Various bat
 
Near Mbomo
National Park
 
Near Mbomo
National Park
Hypsignathus
monstrosus
 
Near Mbomo
National Park
Myonycteris
 
Near Franceville
 
 
Hypsignathus
monstrosus
 
Epomophorus
 
 
Epomophorus
 
 
Near Franceville
 
ROC = Republic of Congo.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395.006
Table 2. Continued
Predicted distribution of suspected reservoir species of bats
Three species of bats, Hypsignathus monstrosus, Myonycteris torquata and Epomops franqueti,
were identified as the most likely candidates to be reservoir species for Ebola viruses due to high
Epidemiology and global health | Microbiology and infectious disease
Pigott et al. eLife 2014;3:e04395. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395
Research article
Figure 3. The locations of reported Ebola virus infection in animals in Africa. (A) Shows the locations of reported Ebola virus infection in animals. (B–D)
Show these records in animals over three different time periods. Numbers refer to records as listed in Table 2. In all panels, the species in which infection
was detected is given by symbol shape and the year recorded by symbol colour. Blue countries represent locations where zoonotic transmission to
humans has been reported or is assumed to have occurred. In each map the Democratic Republic of Congo is outlined for reference.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395.007
seroprevalence and the isolation of RNA closely related to Zaire ebolavirus . In total, 239 locations were identified from the Global Biodiversity
Information Facility (GBIF) : 67 for H. monstrosus (Figure 4A), 52 for M. torquata
(Figure 4B) and 120 for E. franqueti (Figure 4C). Distribution models for all three species demon­
strated predictive skill (indicated by an area under the curve (AUC) greater than 0.5) as follows:
H. monstrosus AUC 0.63 ± 0.04; M. torquata AUC = 0.59 ± 0.04; E. franqueti AUC = 0.58 ± 0.03,
n = 50 submodels for all three species. In addition, each species was broadly predicted within its
considered expert opinion range (Figure 4A–C) . The marginal effect plots
(not shown) were strongly influenced by land surface temperature (LST) and vegetation (as measured
by the enhanced vegetation index [EVI]). The predicted combined distribution of these species
(Figure 4D), covers West and Central Africa, specifically the moist forests of the northeastern,
western and central Congo basin, and Guinea, as well as the Congolian coastal forest ecoregions
 .
Predicted environmental suitability for zoonotic transmission of Ebola
The predicted environmental niche for zoonotic transmission of EVD is shown in Figure 5. All coun­
tries with observed index cases of EVD (n = 7, hereafter Set 1) have areas of the highest environmen­
tal suitability (see list in Table 1). In addition, areas of high environmental suitability for zoonotic
Epidemiology and global health | Microbiology and infectious disease
Pigott et al. eLife 2014;3:e04395. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395
Research article
Figure 4. Predicted geographical distribution of the three species of Megachiroptera suspected to reservoir Ebola
virus. (A) Shows the distribution of the hammer-headed bat (Hypsignathus monstrosus), (B) The little collared fruit
bat (Myonycteris torquata) and (C) Franquet's epauletted fruit bat (Epomops franqueti). In each map, the locations
of reported observations of each species, extracted and curated from the Global Biodiversity Information Facility
 and used to train each model are given as grey points (H. monstrosus, n = 67; E. franqueti, n = 120
and M. torquata, n = 52). Expert opinion maps of the known range of each species, generated by the IUCN , are outlined in grey. The colour legend represents a scale of the relative probability that the species
occurs in that location from 0 (white, low) to 1 (green, high). Area under the curve statistics, calculated under a
stringent ten-fold cross validation procedure, are 0.63 ± 0.04, 0.59 ± 0.04 and 0.58 ± 0.03 for H. monstrosus,
M. torquata and E. franqueti respectively. (D) Is a composite distribution map giving the mean, relative probability
of occurrence from (A–C).
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395.008
transmission are predicted in a further 15 countries where, to date, index cases of the four African
species of Ebolavirus have not been recorded. These are Nigeria, Cameroon, Central African Republic
(CAR), Ghana, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Angola, Tanzania, Togo, Ethiopia, Mozambique, Burundi, Equatorial
Guinea, Madagascar and Malawi (hereafter Set 2).
The AUC for the Ebola model was relatively high (AUC = 0.85 ± 0.04, n = 500 submodels) indicating
that the model could strongly distinguish regions of environmental suitability for EVD. Enhanced veg­
etation index had the greatest impact on the distribution (relative contribution [RC] of 65.3%) followed
by elevation (RC = 11.7%), night-time land surface temperature (LST) (RC = 7.7%), potential evapo­
transpiration (PET) (RC = 5.7%) and combined bat distribution (RC = 3.8%). Marginal effect plots are
presented in Figure 5—figure supplement 2.
In total, 22.2 million people are predicted to live in areas suitable for zoonotic transmission of
Ebola. The vast majority, 21.7 million (approximately 97%), live in rural areas, as opposed to urban or
peri-urban areas . Of these, 15.2 million are in Set 1
and 7 million are in Set 2. In terms of ranked populations at risk, DRC, Guinea and Uganda are highest
Epidemiology and global health | Microbiology and infectious disease
Pigott et al. eLife 2014;3:e04395. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395
Research article
Figure 5. Predicted geographical distribution of the zoonotic niche for Ebola virus. (A) Shows the total populations
living in areas of risk of zoonotic transmission for each at-risk country. The grey rectangle highlights countries in
which index cases of Ebola virus disease have been reported (Set 1); the remainder are countries in which risk of
zoonotic transmission is predicted, but in which index cases of Ebola have not been reported (Set 2). These
countries are ranked by population at risk within each set. The population at risk Figure in 100,000 s is given above
each bar. (B) Shows the predicted distribution of zoonotic Ebola virus. The scale reflects the relative probability that
zoonotic transmission of Ebola virus could occur at these locations; areas closer to 1 (red) are more likely to harbour
zoonotic transmission than those closer to 0 (blue). Countries with borders outlined are those which are predicted
to contain at-risk areas for zoonotic transmission based on a thresholding approach (see ‘Materials and methods’).
Figure 5. Continued on next page
Epidemiology and global health | Microbiology and infectious disease
Pigott et al. eLife 2014;3:e04395. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395
Research article
in Set 1 and Nigeria, Cameroon and CAR are top in Set 2. For a full listing of these populations living
in areas of risk, see the stacked bar plot in Figure 5A.
National level demographic and mobility changes
Over the 40 year period since discovery of EVD, the total population living in those countries pre­
dicted to be within the zoonotic niche has nearly tripled (from 230 million to 639 million) and the
proportion of the population in these countries living in an urban (rather than rural) setting has changed
from 25.5% to 59.2% (Figure 6).
Data on the connectivity of human populations over this period were not available. We can infer
however, intuitively, empirically and theoretically that rates of popu­
lation movement within a country will scale directly in proportion to population growth.
International connectivity by airline traffic
Records of passenger seat capacity are available since 2000 and show substantive increases over the
period in Set 1 (from 2.96 to 4.77 million, a fractional change of 1.61) and Set 2 (from 5.6 to 15.6 mil­
lion, a change of 2.8) (Figure 7A). More specific data on passenger volumes show almost universally
similar increases since 2005 with Set 1 nations changing from 2 million to 2.5 million, a fractional
change of 1.22 and Set 2 changing from 5 million to 7.9 million, a change of 1.57 (Figure 7B).
Global analysis of airline passenger volumes demonstrates that international connectivity has
increased amongst all global regions and national income strata (Figure 8). Total passenger volumes
The area under the curve statistic, calculated under a stringent 10-fold cross-validation procedure is 0.85 ± 0.04.
Solid lines represent Set 1 whilst dashed lines delimit Set 2. Areas covered by major lakes have been masked white.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395.009
The following figure supplements are available for figure 5:
Figure supplement 1. Covariates used in predicting zoonotic transmission niche of Ebola.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395.010
Figure supplement 2. Marginal effect plots for each covariate used in the Ebola virus distribution model.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395.011
Figure supplement 3. Comparison of predictions for zoonotic niche of Ebola virus excluding the Guinea outbreak.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395.012
Figure 5. Continued
Figure 6. Changes in national population for countries predicted to contain areas at-risk of zoonotic Ebola virus transmission. For each country the
population (in millions) is presented for three time periods as three bars. Each stacked bar gives the rural (green) and urban (blue)
populations of the country. The grey rectangle highlights countries in which index cases of Ebola virus diseases have been reported (Set 1); the remain­
der are countries in which risk of zoonotic transmission is predicted, but where index cases have not been reported (Set 2). The fractional change in
population between 1976 and 2014 is given above each set of bars.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395.013
Epidemiology and global health | Microbiology and infectious disease
Pigott et al. eLife 2014;3:e04395. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395
Research article
Figure 7. Changes in international flight capacity and traveller volumes for countries predicted to contain areas at-risk of zoonotic Ebola virus transmis­
sion. The grey rectangle highlights countries in which index cases of EVD have been reported (Set 1). The remainder are countries in which risk of
zoonotic transmission is predicted, but where index cases have not been reported (Set 2). (A) Shows changes in annual outbound international seat
capacity . (B) Depicts changes in annual outbound international passenger volume by country . For each country, the fractional change in volume is given above each set of bars. Note that only one bar is presented for South
Sudan as data for this region prior to formation of the country in 2011 were unavailable.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395.014
have increased by a third from 9.5 to over 14 million during the eight year window where
records are available. The largest increases have occurred in WHO regions outside of the
sub-Saharan African region (AFRO) (Figure 8A,B). In 2012, almost half of the final destinations of those
travelling from these at-risk countries were to other AFRO nations (47%). Other frequent destinations
were in Europe (EURO; 27%) and the Eastern Mediterranean (EMRO; 13%). Similarly, analysis of pas­
senger volumes by World Bank national income groupings (Figure 8C,D) show that in
2012 40% of all passenger final destinations were to low or low-middle income countries.
Discussion
Summary of the main findings
We have re-evaluated the zoonotic niche for EVD in Africa. In doing so we have (i) used all existing
outbreaks to assemble an inventory of index cases (n = 30); (ii) added to this all confirmed records of
Ebola virus in animals (n = 51); (iii) assembled more accurate and contemporary environmental covari­
ates including new maps of the distribution of confirmed OWFB reservoirs of the disease; and (iv) used
Epidemiology and global health | Microbiology and infectious disease
Pigott et al. eLife 2014;3:e04395. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395
Research article
Figure 8. Numbers of airline passengers arriving from at-risk countries to other countries stratified by major geographic regions and national income
groups. (A) Shows the locations of WHO regions (AFRO–African Region; AMRO–Region of the Americas; EMRO–Eastern Mediterranean Region;
EURO–European Region; SEARO–South-East Asian Region; WPRO–Western Pacific Region). (B) Displays the numbers of passengers arriving in each of
these regions from countries predicted to contain areas at risk of zoonotic Ebola virus transmission (Sets 1 and 2) in 2005 and 2012. (C) Shows the income
tiers of all countries as defined by the World Bank. (D) Displays the total numbers of passengers arriving in countries in each of these income strata from
at-risk countries in 2005 and 2012. The number above each pair of bars indicates the fractional change in these numbers of incoming passengers
between 2005 and 2012.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395.015
the latest niche modelling techniques to predict the geographic distribution of potential zoonotic
transmission of the disease. Using these predictions we have estimated the populations at risk
of EVD both in countries which have confirmed index cases (Set 1, n = 7) and those for which we
predict strong environmental suitability for outbreaks (Set 2, n = 15). In all countries at risk we
show that since the discovery of EVD in 1976, urban and rural populations have increased and
have become more interconnected both within and across national borders. During the last 40 years
the increasing size and connectivity of these populations may have facilitated the subsequent spread
of EVD outbreaks. These factors underline a change in the way in which EVD interacts with human
populations.
Interpreting the zoonotic niche
The remote and isolated nature of Ebola zoonotic transmission events, paired with the relatively poor
diagnostics and understanding of the disease transmission routes in early outbreaks, mean that underreporting of previous outbreaks is probable. An increasing understanding and description of a broader
range of symptoms used in case definitions of EVD also increase the possibility that past outbreaks may have been misattributed to different dis­
eases . This poor detectability of EVD also clearly limits capacity to accurately
Epidemiology and global health | Microbiology and infectious disease
Pigott et al. eLife 2014;3:e04395. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395
Research article
identify the locations and transmission routes of index cases . We must assume, as has been done previously ,
that the first reported cases are representative of the true location of the index cases. Where possible
we have represented this geographic uncertainty by attributing the index case to a wide-area polygon
which then incorporated this uncertainty into the mapping process (see ‘Materials and methods’).
The relationship between the EVD niche and the environmental covariates (Figure 5—figure
supplement 2), particularly the high relative contribution of the vegetation index, underscore that
there are clear environmental limits to transmission of the virus from animals to humans, and that
ecoregions dominated by rainforest are the primary home of such zoonotic cycles. Our analysis has
shown that the zoonotic niche of the pathogen is more widespread than previously predicted or
appreciated , most notably in West Africa.
This analysis used information from all human outbreaks and animal infections to delineate the
likely zoonotic niche of the disease. Further analysis, excluding the existing outbreak focussed in
Guinea from the dataset used to train the model (Figure 5—figure supplement 3), still resulted in
prediction of high suitability in this region, with the presumed index village located within 5 km of an
at-risk pixel. This implies that the eco-epidemiological situation in Guinea is very similar to that in past
outbreaks, mirroring phylogenetic similarity in the causative viruses . The ecological similarity between the past and current outbreaks also lends support to
the notion that the scale of this outbreak is more heavily influenced by patterns of human-to-human
transmission than any expansion of the zoonotic niche.
Interpreting population at risk
It is important to appreciate that this zoonotic niche map delineates areas in which populations are
at-risk of zoonotic transmission of EVD (Figure 5B). It does not predict the likelihood of EVD spill­
over, the likelihood of an outbreak establishing, or its subsequent rate of spread within a population.
Increasing human encroachment and certain cultural practices sometimes linked with poverty, such as
bushmeat hunting, result in increasing exposure of humans to animals which may harbour diseases
including Ebola . Increasing human population may accel­
erate the degree of risk through these processes but spatially refined information on these factors is
not available comprehensively. It is hoped that as the understanding of the risk factors for zoonotic
transmission of Ebolavirus to humans increases, it will be possible to incorporate this information into
future risk mapping assessments.
Previous considerations of the geographic distribution of EVD have used human outbreaks alone.
We have updated this work to include the last decade of outbreaks, as well as disaggregated out­
breaks where evidence suggests multiple independent zoonotic transmission events overlap in space
and time. Furthermore, our modelling process accommodates uncertainty in geopositioning of these
index cases by utilising both point and polygon data. In addition, we include occurrence of infection
in wildlife, important to the wider scale of zoonotic transmission (Figure 1), which in total has increased
the dataset used in the model to 81 occurrences. The rareness of EVD outbreaks and the prevalence
of detectable Ebola virus in reservoir species suggests that there will always be a limited set of obser­
vation data when compared to mapping of more prevalent zoonoses . The results
demonstrate predictive skill using a stringent validation procedure, however, indicating strong model
performance even with this relatively limited observation dataset.
A broad zoonotic niche is predicted across 22 countries in Central and West Africa. Whilst sev­
eral of these countries have reported index cases of EVD, others have not, although serological evi­
dence in some regions points to possible underreporting of small-scale outbreaks .
With improved ecological understanding, particularly with improvements to our knowledge of specific
reservoir species and their distributions, it may be possible to delineate areas not at risk due to the
absence of these species.
Despite relatively a large population living in areas of risk and the widespread practice of bush­
meat hunting in these predicted areas , Ebolavirus is rare both in suspected animal reservoirs and in terms of human outbreaks (Table 1). There is some indication
however, that the frequency of Ebola outbreaks has increased since 2000, as shown in Figure 2A. We
have shown that the human population living within this niche is larger, more mobile and better inter­
nationally connected than when the pathogen was first observed. As a result, when spillover events do
Epidemiology and global health | Microbiology and infectious disease
Pigott et al. eLife 2014;3:e04395. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395
Research article
occur, the likelihood of continued spread amongst the human population is greater, particularly in
areas with poor healthcare infrastructure .
Whilst rare in comparison to other high burden diseases prevalent in this region, such as malaria
 , Ebola outbreaks can have a considerable economic and
political impact, and the subsequent destabilisation of basic health care provisioning in affected
regions increases the toll of unrecorded morbidity and mortality of more common infectious dis­
eases , throughout and after the epidemic period. The
number of concurrent infections during the present outbreak represents a significant strain on health­
care systems that are already poorly provisioned and
many other Set 1 and Set 2 countries rank amongst the lowest per capita healthcare spenders. These
considerations should be paramount when international organizations debate the financing require­
ments for the improvement of healthcare needed in the region and the urgency with which new thera­
peutics and vaccines can be brought into production .
Together, these considerations necessitate prioritisation of efforts to reinforce and improve
existing surveillance and control, and encourage the development of therapeutics and vaccines.
The national population at risk estimates presented here would be a strong rationale for improving,
prioritising and stratifying surveillance for EVD outbreaks and diagnostic capacity in these countries.
We believe it would be prudent to test OWFB species in Set 2 countries for Ebola virus , particularly during the bat breeding season to maximise chances of isolation in order
to clarify the outbreak risk in these countries. In all Set 1 and Set 2 countries, raising awareness about
the risk presented by reservoir bats and incidental primate hosts and the modes of transmission of
this disease could be of value. Finally, increasing our capacity to rapidly map ever changing biolog­
ical threats is also a core need .
Interpreting International connectivity
The increasing connectedness of the Africa region means that EVD is now a problem of international
concern. While most EVD secondary transmission occurs locally and is likely transported via ground
transit , the potential for international spread of infection is possible, as dem­
onstrated by the importation of the disease from Liberia to Nigeria, culminating in further secondary
transmission in Lagos . The aetiology of EVD infection and disease progression means
that an international outbreak propagated by air travel remains unlikely, particularly in high-income
countries better able to handle EVD cases . Nevertheless, a non-negligible threat remains,
particularly in the low and middle income destinations and the rapid increase in global connectivity of
these at-risk regions indicates that international airports could see more imported cases .
Future work
We have focussed on reanalysing the zoonotic niche for EVD transmission and the characterisation of
the populations at risk to improve the landscape in which future risk and impact of EVD outbreaks can
be discussed. During the current emergency much of the work will concentrate on routes of secondary
transmission in the human population—conceptually the red arrow of the H box in Figure 1. An impor­
tant task is to stratify the risk of EVD spread both within and between countries and identify the most
likely pathways of spread for characterisation and surveillance. Our next priority therefore is to inves­
tigate aspects of secondary human-to-human transmission by documenting the rate of geographic
spread of EVD during the past and ongoing epidemics to help understand changes in these patterns
in the historical record. Simulating these movements in a real landscape of population movement pat­
terns, inferred from population movements assessed by mobile phones and other data , as well as parametric movement models is a logical next step, and can be
used in future targeting of interventions and potential new treatments for both the current and future
outbreaks .
As previously discussed, whilst there is the risk of human travel during the latent phase of infection,
and therefore potential for international spread, the high pathogenicity during infectiousness (immo­
bilising infected persons) and the likely rapid and effective isolation measures implemented in regions
with strong health care systems, limit the pandemic potential of EVD. Nevertheless, improvement of
international containment plans and informed discussions of potential risks to airline carriers and pop­
ulations of other regions will be supported by knowledge of local, regional and international popula­
tion flows. Assessing these flows by air traffic volumes is an ongoing priority.
Epidemiology and global health | Microbiology and infectious disease
Pigott et al. eLife 2014;3:e04395. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395
Research article
There are several other zoonotic viral haemorrhagic fevers (for example Marburgvirus, Lassa
fever, hantaviral infections and arenaviruses) that are of similar public health and biosecurity concern
 , due to their high virulence and mortality and their potential to cause outbreaks and
spread internationally. Despite this their geographical distributions are poorly understood . Many of the methods applied here can be adapted to these diseases and improve our geo­
graphical understanding of the risk presented by these pathogens.
We are in the midst of a public health emergency that will likely last for many more months and which has brought EVD to global attention. We emphasise that the maps of zoonotic trans­
mission presented here do not enable assessment of secondary transmission rates in human popula­
tions, but they do act as an evidenced-based indicator of locations with potential for future zoonotic
transmission and thus outbreaks. Interestingly, early reports of another independent zoonotic out­
break in the DRC are in predicted at-risk areas. An improved understanding of the spatial
extent of the zoonotic niche can only help future efforts in biosurveillance.
Materials and methods
Methodological overview
A boosted regression tree (BRT) modelling framework was used to generate predictive risk maps of
the zoonotic Ebola virus niche in Africa. This methodology combines regression trees, where trees are
built according to optimal decision rules based on how binary decisions best accommodate a given
dataset , and boosting, which selects the tree that minimises the loss
function. In doing so, a parameter space is defined which captures the greatest amount of variation
present in the dataset. In order to train the model, four component datasets were compiled: (i) a com­
prehensive dataset of the reported locations of Ebola virus transmission from a zoonotic reservoir to a
human; (ii) a dataset of the locations of Ebola virus infections in suspected reservoir and (non-human)
susceptible host species (iii) a suite of ecologically relevant environmental covariates for Africa,
including predicted distribution maps of suspected reservoir bat species and (iv) background (or
pseudo-absence) records representing locations where zoonotic Ebola virus has not been reported.
This study was limited to the African continent since no natural outbreaks of EVD have occurred out­
side the continent . Only Reston ebolavirus has a distribution reported outside of Africa,
focussed in the Philippines, but has never been reported as pathogenic in humans; as a result this
species was not included in the analysis.
Identifying index cases and reconstructing zoonotic transmission events
in space and time
Tables detailing proven outbreaks of Ebola virus, initially sourced from the scientific literature and from health reporting organisations , were used to coordinate searches of the
formal scientific literature using Web of Science and PubMed for each specific outbreak. Relevant
papers were abstracted and where possible outbreak-specific epidemiological surveys were sourced.
The citations in these references were obtained in order to reconstruct the outbreak in detail and to
identify the most probable index case. Index cases were defined as any human infection resulting from
interaction with non-human sources of the disease. Some of these cases arose from presumed interac­
tions with zoonotic reservoirs or hosts, such as primates and other mammals during hunting trips
 or butchering of bats . Any cases arising from existing human infections are considered as secondary infections
rather than index cases. Similar to methodology employed elsewhere , the site,
or supposed site, of this zoonotic transmission event was geopositioned using Google Earth. For loca­
tions where precise geographic information (e.g., geographic coordinates of a hunting camp) was
provided by the authors, these were used. Where precise geographic information could not be accu­
rately geopositioned, a geographic area (termed a polygon) was defined covering the reported region.
In several cases only the first reported patient could be identified, with the source of infection unknown.
With these outbreaks the location of the first patient was geopositioned under the assumption that an
initial zoonotic spillover event occurred in the vicinity of this location. In two outbreaks multiple inde­
pendent zoonotic transmission events were identified , and each unique event was geopositioned and included in the model as separate enti­
ties. Table 1 catalogues the outbreaks used in this study.
Epidemiology and global health | Microbiology and infectious disease
Pigott et al. eLife 2014;3:e04395. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395
Research article
Assembling a database of reported infections in animals
A literature search was conducted in Web of Science using the search term “Ebola” that returned 8635
citations. The abstracts were examined and for those that contained possible data on animal Ebola
infection, the full text was obtained. The sampling site or location of the animal in the study was identi­
fied and geopositioned using Google Maps. These locations were recorded either as precise locations
or as polygons, as with human index cases. Records for which local transmission of Ebola virus was
deemed unlikely (e.g., seropositive primates tested in containment facilities several years after their
capture) were excluded from the study. The non-human Ebola virus occurrence data collected are
detailed in Table 2, including the diagnostic methods used.
GenBank isolates
The open access sequence database GenBank was searched using MESH Umbrella
search terms for Ebola virus, returning 181 results. These were then manually cross-referenced with
the existing human and animal Ebola information, collected above, and 30 duplicates were removed.
For the remaining isolates, original references and GenBank information fields were examined, but
as there was insufficient information to establish precise location of isolation and/or whether the iso­
late represented an index case for any of these data sources, they were excluded from subsequent
Covariates assembled and used in the analyses
A suite of ecologically relevant gridded environmental covariates for Africa was compiled, each having
a nominal resolution of 5 km × 5 km. The environmental covariates used in this analysis were: elevation
 ; the mean value, and a measure of
spatial variation (range, described below) between 2000 and 2012 of Enhanced Vegetation Index
(EVI), daytime Land Surface Temperature (LST) and night-time LST; and mean potential evapotranspi­
ration from 1950–2000 (Figure 5—figure supplement 1).
The EVI and LST datasets were derived from satellite imagery collected by NASA's Moderate
Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) remote sensing platform . EVI is
a metric designed to characterise vegetation density and vigour based on the ratio of absorbed pho­
tosynthetically active radiation to near infrared radiation . LST is a modelled prod­
uct derived from emissivity as measured by the MODIS thermal sensor , which is
correlated, though not synonymous with air temperature, and effective for differentiating landscapes
based on a combination of thermal energy and properties of surface types. The MODIS datasets uti­
lized in this research (EVI was derived from the MCD43B4 product and the MOD11A2 LST product was
used directly) were acquired as composite datasets created using imagery collected over multiple
days, a procedure that results in products with 8-day temporal resolutions. Despite compositing, the
EVI and LST datasets contained gaps due to persistent cloud cover found in forested equatorial
regions, and these gaps were filled using a previously described approach . The
EVI and LST datasets were then aggregated from their native 1 km × 1 km spatial resolution to a final
5 km × 5 km resolution, calculating both the mean and the range of the values of the subpixels
making up each larger pixel. These spatial summaries therefore characterise both the mean tem­
perature in each location as well as the degree of spatial heterogeneity within that pixel. This is of
interest as humans and susceptible species are more likely to come into contact in transitional areas
(e.g., boundary areas between areas of highly suitable susceptible species habitat and areas heavily
utilised by humans). The final covariate production step consisted of summarising temporally across
the 13-year data archive to produce synoptic datasets devoid of annual or seasonal anomalies .
Implicated bat reservoir distributions
Over recent years, significant research has been undertaken in investigating the role bats have to play
in the transmission cycle of Ebola viruses and evidence of asymptomatic
infection in fruit bats has been documented to varying extents . In order to incorporate this potential driver
of Ebola virus transmission into the model we developed predicted distribution maps for three species
of fruit bat implicated as primary reservoirs of the disease: Hypsignathus monstrosus, Epomops franqueti
and Myonycteris torquata. The evidence was strongest for these three species having a reservoir role
Epidemiology and global health | Microbiology and infectious disease
Pigott et al. eLife 2014;3:e04395. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395
Research article
as Ebola virus RNA has been
detected in all three. Whilst a handful of other bat species have been found to be seropositive, no
further viral isolations have been recorded .
Whilst expert opinion range maps for these species exist , there is some
disagreement with independently-sourced occurrence data (all archived in the Global Biodiversity
Information Facility). As a result, a predictive modelling approach was used to create a continuous
surface of habitat suitability for these species which we then included as a predictor in the model.
Occurrence data for all Megachiroptera in Africa was extracted from GBIF using the
R packages dismo and taxize . To remove apparently
erroneous records in the GBIF archive all occurrence records more than 100 km from the species
known ranges, as determined by expert-opinion range maps , were excluded,
as were duplicate records and those located in the ocean. This resulted in a total dataset of 1341
unique occurrence records.
The occurrence database was then used to train separate boosted regression tree species distri­
bution models to predict the likely distribution of each of these suspected reser­
voir species. For each model, occurrence records for the target species (H. monstrosus, n = 67;
E. franqueti, n = 120; and M. torquata, n = 52) were considered presence records and occurrence
records of all other species were used as background records. This procedure is designed to account
for the potentially biasing effect of spatial variation in recording of Megachiroptera occurrences
 .
For each species we ran fifty submodels each trained to a randomly selected bootstrap of this
dataset, subject to the constraint that each bootstrap contained a minimum of 10 occurrence and
10 background records. Each submodel was fitted using the gbm.step subroutine 
in the dismo R package. In each submodel the background records were down weighted so that the
weighted sum of presence records equalled the weighted sum of background records in order to maximise the discrimination capacity of the model. We generated a prediction
map from each of these submodels and calculated both the mean prediction and 95% confidence
interval around the prediction for each 5 km × 5 km pixel for each species.
Model accuracy was assessed by calculating the mean area under the curve (AUC) statistic for
each submodel under a stringent 10-fold cross validation for each submodel and obtaining the mean
and standard deviation across all 50 submodels. Under this procedure the dataset was split into ten
subsets, each containing approximately equal numbers of presence and background points. The
ability of a model trained on each subset to predict the distribution of the other 90% of records was
assessed by AUC and the mean value taken. As so few presence records were used to train each fold
model (i.e., around 5 presence records for M. torquata up to 12 for E. franqueti), this represents a
very stringent test of the model's predictive capacity. Additionally, to prevent inflation of the accu­
racy statistics due to spatial sorting bias, these statistics were estimated using a pairwise distance
sampling procedure . Consequently, the AUC statistics presented here are lower
than would be returned by standard procedures but gives a more realistic quantification of the
model's ability to extrapolate predictions to new regions . We also gen­
erated marginal effect plots with associated uncertainty intervals and relative contribution statistics
(how often each covariate was selected during the model fitting process) as quantification of the
sensitivity of the model to the different covariates. These allow us to make inferences about the
ecological relationship between each species and its environment as well as to identify where this
relationship is most uncertain.
To generate a single surface describing the distribution of the bat reservoir species to be used
as a covariate in the subsequent Ebola modelling, the three mean prediction distribution maps
were merged by taking the average habitat suitability for each of the three bat species at each
Ebola distribution modelling
The Ebola virus occurrence dataset was supplemented with a background record dataset generated
by randomly sampling 10,000 locations across Africa, biased towards more populous areas as a proxy
for reporting bias . We fitted 500 submodels to bootstraps of this dataset. To
account for uncertainty in the geographic location of those occurrences reported as polygons, for each
submodel one point was randomly selected from each of these occurrence polygons. This Monte
Epidemiology and global health | Microbiology and infectious disease
Pigott et al. eLife 2014;3:e04395. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395
Research article
Carlo procedure enabled the model to efficiently integrate over the environmental uncertainty associated
with imprecise geographic data. A bootstrap sample was then taken from each of these datasets and
used to train the BRT model using the same procedure and weighting of background records as for
the bat distribution models. Similarly, we generated a prediction map from each of these models and
calculated both the mean prediction and corresponding 95% confidence intervals for each pixel and
analysed prediction accuracy using the same stringent cross validation and sensitivity analysis proce­
dure as for the bat distribution models (detailed above).
The predicted distribution map produced by this approach represents the environmental suita­
bility of each pixel for zoonotic Ebola virus transmission. This may be interpreted as a relative prob­
ability of presence in the sense that more suitable pixels are more likely to contain zoonotic
transmission than less suitable pixels, though not an absolute probability that transmission occurs in
a given pixel. Similarly, the presence of zoonotic transmission increases the risk of transmission to a
human, though this is also contingent on how humans interact with these zoonotic pools, through
hunting or other activities.
Population living in areas of environmental suitability for zoonotic
transmission
In order to identify areas which are likely to be at risk of transmission of Ebolavirus from zoonotic res­
ervoir hosts to humans, the continuous map of the predicted environmental suitability for zoonotic
transmission (shown in Figure 5) was converted into a binary map classifying pixels as either at risk
or not at risk. A pixel was assumed to be at risk if its predicted environmental suitability for zoonotic
Ebola virus transmission was greater than 0.673, the lowest suitability value predicted at the locations
of known transmission to humans (point records of human index cases). Countries containing at least
one at-risk pixel are shown in Figure 5B—those countries that previously report an index case were
defined as Set 1; countries with at least one at-risk pixel with no previous index cases of EVD were
categorised as Set 2. The number of people living in at-risk areas in each of these countries was calcu­
lated by summing the estimated population of at-risk pixels using population density maps from the
AfriPop project and the proportion of those living in urban,
periurban and rural areas was evaluated using the Global Rural Urban Mapping Project .
The R code used for all of the analysis has been made available on an open source basis (https://
github.com/SEEG-Oxford/ebola_zoonotic).
National level demographic and mobility data
For three separate years , total national populations were retrieved and the
proportion of rural to urban populations noted from World Bank statistics . To
describe global air travel patterns from Set 1 and Set 2 countries, flight schedules data from the
Official Airline Guide, reflecting an estimated 95% of all commercial flights worldwide, were analysed
between 2000 and 2013 to calculate the annual volume of seats on direct flights that depart from each
predicted country and which have an international destination. Complementing these seat capacity
data, worldwide data on anonymised, individual passenger flight itineraries from the International Air
Transport Association were analysed between 2005 and 2012 to calculate the
annual volume of international passenger departures out of each Set 1 and Set 2 country. The IATA
dataset represents an estimated 93% of the world's commercial air traffic at the passenger level and
includes points of departure and arrival and final destination information for travellers as well as their
connecting flights.
Acknowledgements
We thank Katherine Battle, Maria Devine and Kirsten Duda for proof-reading and Jane Messina for
creating Figure 1. We also thank Andrew Rambaut for his comments on the final draft.
Additional information
Competing interests
SIH: Reviewing editor, eLife. The other authors declare that no competing interests exist.
Epidemiology and global health | Microbiology and infectious disease
Pigott et al. eLife 2014;3:e04395. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395
Research article
Grant reference
University Of Oxford
Sir Richard Southwood
Graduate Scholarship
David M Pigott
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
OPP1053338
Nick Golding
Medical Research Council
Peter W Gething
Biotechnology and Biological
Sciences Research Council
Studentship
Oliver J Brady
German Academic Exchange
Graduate Scholarship
Moritz UG Kraemer
U.S. National Library of Medicine
R01LM010812
John S Brownstein,
Sumiko R Mekaru
7th Framework Programme for
Research and Technological
Development (EU FP7)
Peter W Horby
Canadian Institutes of Health Research
Isaac I Bogoch,
Kamran Khan
Wellcome Trust
Adrian Mylne,
Simon I Hay
RAPIDD program of the
Science & Technology Directorate
Andrew J Tatem,
Simon I Hay
Fogarty International Center
Andrew J Tatem,
Simon I Hay
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
OPP1106023
Zhi Huang,
Andrew J Henry,
Catherine L Moyes
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
OPP1068048
Daniel J Weiss,
Samir Bhatt
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
OPP1093011
Catherine L Moyes,
John S Brownstein,
Sumiko R Mekaru,
Simon I Hay
National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases
U19AI089674
Andrew J Tatem
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
OPP1106427
Andrew J Tatem
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
OPP1032350
Andrew J Tatem
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the
decision to submit the work for publication.
Author contributions
DMP, Advised and assembled the outbreak and animal infection data, Wrote the article;
NG, Extracted the bat data, Conducted all of the analysis, Drafting or revising the article;
AM, Assembled and geo-positioned the outbreak and animal infection data, Drafting or revising
the article; ZH, Geo-positioned the outbreak and animal infection data, Provided all maps,
Drafting or revising the article; AJH, Analysed international flight data, Helped assemble maps,
Drafting or revising the article; IIB, Assisted with international transportation analysis, Edited the
final draft of the article; SRM, Assisted in geopositioning, Drafting or revising the article; AJT,
Provided information on urban change and migration data, Drafting or revising the article; KK,
Provided data, Conducted all analyses on international air traffic patterns, Drafting or revising
the article; DJW, Assembled the covariate layers, Drafting or revising the article; SB, Extracted
Ebola information from GenBank, Drafting or revising the article; OJB, Screened GenBank data,
Provided Figure 2A, Drafting or revising the article; MUGK, DLS, CLM, Analysis and interpreta­
tion of data, Drafting or revising the article; PWG, Assembled the covariate layers, Drafting or
revising the article; PWH, JSB, Advised on international public health context, Edited the final
draft of the article; SIH, Conceived the work and analysis, Wrote content and edited the article
at all stages of development, Acts as guarantor of the paper
Epidemiology and global health | Microbiology and infectious disease
Pigott et al. eLife 2014;3:e04395. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04395
Research article
Author ORCIDs
David M Pigott,
 
Nick Golding,
 
David L Smith,
 
Simon I Hay,