doi:10.1038/nature09710
Genetic history of an archaic hominin
group from Denisova Cave in Siberia
David Reich1,2*, Richard E. Green3,4*, Martin Kircher3*, Johannes Krause3,5*, Nick Patterson2*, Eric Y. Durand6*, Bence Viola3,7*,
Adrian W. Briggs1,3, Udo Stenzel3, Philip L. F. Johnson8, Tomislav Maricic3, Jeffrey M. Good9, Tomas Marques-Bonet10,11,
Can Alkan10, Qiaomei Fu3,12, Swapan Mallick1,2, Heng Li2, Matthias Meyer3, Evan E. Eichler10, Mark Stoneking3,
Michael Richards7,13, Sahra Talamo7, Michael V. Shunkov14, Anatoli P. Derevianko14, Jean-Jacques Hublin7, Janet Kelso3,
Montgomery Slatkin6 & Svante Pa¨a¨bo3
Using DNA extracted from a finger bone found in Denisova Cave in southern Siberia, we have sequenced the genome of an
archaic hominin to about 1.9-fold coverage. This individual is from a group that shares a common origin with
Neanderthals. This population was not involved in the putative gene flow from Neanderthals into Eurasians; however,
thedata suggestthat it contributed 4–6% ofits geneticmaterial tothe genomes ofpresent-dayMelanesians.We designate
this hominin population ‘Denisovans’ and suggest that it may have been widespread in Asia during the Late Pleistocene
epoch. Atooth found in Denisova Cave carries a mitochondrialgenome highly similar tothatof the finger bone. This tooth
shares no derived morphological features with Neanderthals or modern humans, further indicating that Denisovans
have an evolutionary history distinct from Neanderthals and modern humans.
Less than 200,000 years ago, anatomically modern humans (that is,
humans with skeletons similar to those of present-day humans)
appeared in Africa. At that time, as well as later when modern humans
appeared in Eurasia, other ‘archaic’ hominins were already present in
Eurasia.InEuropeandwestern Asia,hominins definedasNeanderthals
on the basis of their skeletal morphology lived from at least 230,000
years ago before disappearing from the fossil record about 30,000 years
ago1. In eastern Asia, no consensus exists about which groups were
present. For example, in China, some have emphasized morphological
affinities between Neanderthals and the specimen of Maba2, or between
Homo heidelbergensis and the Dali skull3. However, others classify these
specimens as ‘early Homo sapiens’4. In addition, until at least 17,000
years ago, Homo floresiensis, a short-statured hominin that seems to
represent an early divergence from the lineage leading to present-day
humans5–7,waspresentontheislandofFloresinIndonesiaandpossibly
elsewhere.
DNA sequences retrieved from hominin remains offer an approach
complementary to morphology for understanding hominin relationships. For Neanderthals, the nuclear genome was recently determined
to about 1.3-fold coverage8. This revealed that Neanderthal DNA
sequences and those of present-day humans share common ancestors
on average about 800,000 years ago and that the population split of
Neanderthal and modern human ancestors occurred 270,000–
440,000 years ago. It also showed that Neanderthals shared more
genetic variants with present-day humans in Eurasia than with present-day humans in sub-Saharan Africa, indicating that gene flow
from Neanderthals into the ancestors of non-Africans occurred to
an extent that 1–4% of the genomes of people outside Africa are
derived from Neanderthals8. In addition, ten partial and six complete
mitochondrial (mt)DNA sequences have been determined from
Neanderthals9–17. This has shown that all Neanderthals studied so
far share a common mtDNA ancestor on the order of 100,000 years
ago10, and in turn, share a common ancestor with the mtDNAs of
present-day humans about 500,000 years ago10,18,19 (as expected, this is
older than the Neanderthal–modern human population split time of
270,000–440,000 years ago estimated from the nuclear genome8). One
of these mtDNA sequences has also shown that hominins carrying
mtDNAs typical of Neanderthals were present as far east as the Altai
Mountains in southern Siberia13.
In 2008, the distal manual phalanx of a juvenile hominin was excavated at Denisova Cave. This site is located in the Altai Mountains in
southern Siberia, and is a reference site for the Middle to Upper
Palaeolithic of the region where systematic excavations over the past
25 years have uncovered cultural layers indicating that human occupation at the site started up to 280,000 years ago20. The phalanx was
found in layer 11, which has been dated to 50,000 to 30,000 years ago.
This layer contains microblades and body ornaments of polished
stone typical of the ‘Upper Palaeolithic industry’ generally thought
to be associated with modern humans, but also stone tools that are
more characteristic of the earlier Middle Palaeolithic, such as sidescrapers and Levallois blanks21–23.
Recently, we used a DNA capture approach10 in combination with
high-throughput sequencing to determine a complete mtDNA genome
from the Denisova phalanx. Surprisingly, this mtDNA diverged from
the common lineage leading to modern human and Neanderthal
mtDNAs about one million years ago19, that is, about twice as far back
in time as the divergence between Neanderthal and modern human
mtDNAs. However, mtDNA is maternally inherited as a single unit
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
1Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. 2Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA. 3Department of Evolutionary Genetics,
Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig 04103, Germany. 4Department of Biomolecular Engineering, University of California, Santa Cruz 95064, USA. 5Institut fu¨r
Naturwissenschaftliche Archa¨ologie, University of Tu¨bingen, Tu¨bingen 72070, Germany. 6Department of Integrative Biology, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, USA. 7Department of
Human Evolution, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig 04103, Germany. 8Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA. 9Division of Biological Sciences,
University of Montana, Missoula, Montana 59812, USA. 10Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA. 11Institute of
Evolutionary Biology (UPF-CSIC), 08003 Barcelona, Spain. 12CAS-MPS Joint Laboratory for Human Evolution and Archeometry, Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100044, China. 13Department of Anthropology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z1, Canada. 14Palaeolithic Department, Institute of
Archaeology & Ethnography, Russian Academy of Sciences, Siberian Branch, Novosibirsk 630090, Russia.
D E C E M B E R
| N A T U R E |
Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
without recombination, and therefore is subject to chance events such
as genetic drift, as well as gene flow and positive selection. In contrast,
the nuclear genome comprises tens of thousands of unlinked, mostly
neutrally evolving loci. This allows for analyses of genetic relationships
that are robust to the stochasticity of genetic drift, and are much less
affected bypositive selection.ToclarifytherelationshipoftheDenisova
individual to other hominin groups, we have therefore sequenced the
Denisova nuclear genome and analysed its genomic relationships to
Neanderthals and present-day humans. We have also attempted to
clarify the chronology of hominin occupation of the cave and have
identified a tooth from this group of hominins among material excavated in Denisova Cave.
DNA sequence determination
The entire internal portion of the phalanx sample was used for DNA
extraction in our clean-room facility, where procedures to minimize
contamination from present-day human DNA are rigorously implemented24,25 (Supplementary Information section 1). The DNA was
treated with two enzymes: uracil-DNA-glycosylase, which removes
uracil residues from DNA to leave abasic sites26, and endonuclease
VIII, which cuts DNA at the 59 and 39 sides of abasic sites. Subsequent
incubation with T4 polynucleotide kinase and T4 DNA polymerase
was used to generate 59-phosphorylated blunt ends that are amenable
to adaptor ligation. Because the great majority of uracil residues occur
close to the ends of ancient DNA molecules, this procedure leads to
only a moderate reduction in average length of the molecules in the
library, but a several-fold reduction in uracil-derived nucleotide
misincorporation27.
Two independent sequencing libraries (SL3003 and SL3004) were
created from the DNA, using a modified Illumina protocol28 where a
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is used to add a 7-nucleotide index
(in this case 59-GTCGACT-39) to the library molecules. This index
ensures that the libraries are not contaminated by other sequencing
libraries when they are taken out of the clean room to be sequenced29.
The libraries were sequenced on the Illumina Genome Analyser IIx
platform for 101 cycles from each end of the molecules and an additional 7 cycles for determination of the index until almost every
unique sequence in the libraries had been seen multiple times, that
is, almost every clone present in the libraries has been sequenced
(Supplementary Information section 1). Bases were called using the
machine-learning algorithm Ibis30 and an overlap of at least 11 bases
was required for paired-end reads to be fused to full-molecule-size
DNA sequences that were further analysed. This results in a greatly
reduced error rate27, although it removes the few molecules that are
above 191 nucleotides in length from analysis (,0.1% in SL3003 and
,0.2% in SL3004). Sequences were mapped using the program
BWA31 to the human (hg18/NCBI 36) and the chimpanzee
(panTro2/CGSC 2.1) genomes as well as to the inferred ancestral
genome of these species (from the six-way Enredo-Pecan-Ortheus
alignment)32. PCR duplicates were identified and used to further
increase sequence accuracy by calling consensus sequences.
A total of 82,227,320 sequences mapped uniquely (mapping
quality $30) to the human genome, yielding about 5.2 gigabases of
DNAsequences(1.9-foldgenomiccoverage),and72,304,848sequences
mapped uniquely to the chimpanzee genome. When the substitutions
inferred to have occurred on the Denisova and the present-day human
lineages were compared, the relative numbers of different classes of
nucleotide substitutions are remarkably similar, and the excess number
of candidate substitutions on the Denisova lineage relative to the
present-day human lineage is only 1.7-fold (Supplementary Fig. 2.2
and Supplementary Table 2.4). This reflects an improvement in error
rateovertheNeanderthalgenomebyoveranorderofmagnitude8andis
mainly due to the enzymatic removal of uracil residues from the
Denisova DNA27. We estimate that most errors in the Denisova DNA
sequences are due to low genomic coverage rather than to any features
typical of ancient DNA.
Human DNA contamination estimates
Although rigorous measures to prevent contamination of the experiments by DNA from present-day humans were implemented at all
laboratory steps, it is impossible to completely prevent contamination
because bone samples as well as reagents may be contaminated before
they enter the clean-room facility. To estimate the levels of contamination in the sequences produced we used three approaches (Supplementary Information section 3).
First, we estimated the level of mtDNA contamination using 276
sequence positions where the Denisova mtDNA differs from .99% of
present-day human mtDNAs. For library SL3003, we observed 7,433
unique sequences that covered such positions and 7,421 were of the
Denisova type. For library SL3004 the corresponding numbers were
5,042 and 5,036, indicating that the mtDNA contamination in the
libraries is on the order of 0.2% (95% confidence interval (CI): 0.1–
0.3%) and 0.1% (CI: 0.1–0.3%), respectively.
Second, we identified sequences that are unique to the Y chromosome8. If the individual from whom the phalanx derives is female,
the number of such sequences represents the extent of male DNA
contamination. We found zero and three such Y chromosomal
sequences in the two libraries, respectively, whereas 1,449 and 696 are
expected if the individual is male. Thus, the bone derives from a female
and male DNA contamination in the two libraries is on the order of
0.00% (CI: 0.00–0.25%) and 0.43% (CI: 0.09–1.26%), respectively.
Third, to estimate the extent of nuclear DNA contamination we
used one library to identify positions where the Denisova individual
carries an ancestral, that is, chimpanzee-like, sequence variant that
among present-day humans is derived and not known to vary. We
then examined sequences that map at these positions in the other
library and determined if they carry the ancestral sequence or the
derived sequence. Observation of a derived sequence in the second
library could be due to one of three possibilities: that the DNA fragment in question comes from present-day human contamination;
that the Denisova individual is heterozygous at the position in question; or that there has been a sequencing error. We implemented a
maximum likelihood method that uses the number of independent
observations of ancestral and derived states across positions to coestimate contamination along with heterozygosity and sequencing
error as nuisance parameters (Supplementary Information section 3).
From this analysis, both libraries are inferred to have contamination
rates of less than 1%.
Ancestral features and duplications
The Denisova draft genome sequence allows features that are ancestral
in the Denisova genome and derived in present-day humans to be
identified. We previously described a set of 10.5 million single nucleotide differences and about half a million insertion/deletions (indels)
inferred to be due to changes that occurred on the human lineage since
the split from the common ancestor with the chimpanzee8. Of these,
4,267,431 (40.5%) single nucleotide differences and 105,372 (22.0%)
indels are covered by the Denisova sequences. We identified 129
inferred amino substitutions and 14 indels in the coding sequences
of genes where the Denisova individual carries the ancestral alleles at
positions where present-day humans carry derived alleles and are not
known to vary (Supplementary Information section 4). We also identified 90 such sites in 59 untranslated regions (UTRs), 392 in 39 UTRs,
two in microRNA genes and 104 in human accelerated regions. When
we compared the Denisova and Neanderthal genomes we found that
they carry the same assigned state at single nucleotide differences in
87.9% of the ancestral positions and 97.7% of the derived positions.
The results for indels are similar: 87.6% for ancestral states and 98.6%
for the derived states (Supplementary Table 4.3).
We analysed the segmental duplication content of the Denisova
genome by detecting regions with an excess read depth (Supplementary Information section 5). In a three-way comparison of Denisova,
Neanderthal and present-day human genomes, we found an excess of
RESEARCH ARTICLE
| N A T U R E
| 2 3 / 3 0
D E C E M B E R
Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
private Denisova duplications (2.27 megabases (Mb)) compared with
duplications that were private in Neanderthals (0.60 Mb) or presentday humans (1.32 Mb). These regions were identified based on signatures of both excess read depth and increased sequence divergence,
making them unlikely to be artefacts. We also identified two regions
where the duplication architecture of Denisova is more similar to that
of chimpanzee than to that of either Neanderthals or present-day
humans, including two chromosomal regions associated with neurological disease in humans: spinal muscular atrophy on 5q13 (including SMN2, one of the most recent gene duplications in the human
lineage) and neuropsychiatric disease on 16p12.1.
Relationship to Neanderthals and modern humans
A fundamental question is whether the Denisova individual is an outgroup to Neanderthals and modern humans, as the mtDNA suggests19,
whether it is a sister group to Neanderthals or to modern humans, or
whether it falls within the range of variation of either of these two
groups. We addressed this by estimating the divergence between the
Denisova and the human genome reference sequence as a fraction of
the divergencebetweenpresent-day humans and the common ancestor
shared with the chimpanzee. To do this, we scored the frequency with
which the Denisova genome carries the human versus the chimpanzee
state at positions where the human and chimpanzee reference genomes
differ; assuming constant evolutionary rates (Supplementary Information section 2). We restricted this analysis to the parts of the human
reference genome that are of African ancestry33 as gene flow from
Neanderthals to non-Africans8 could otherwise complicate these analyses.TheDenisovagenomedivergedfromthereferencehumangenome
11.7% (CI: 11.4–12.0%) of the way back along the lineage to the human–
chimpanzee ancestor. For the Vindija Neanderthal, the divergence is
12.2% (CI: 11.9–12.5%). Thus, whereas the divergence of the Denisova
mtDNAtopresent-dayhumanmtDNAsisabouttwiceasdeepasthatof
Neanderthal mtDNA19, the average divergence of the Denisova nuclear
genome from present-day humans is similar to that of Neanderthals.
A possible explanation for the similar divergence of the Denisova
individual and Neanderthals from present-day Africans is that they
both descend from a common ancestral population that separated
earlier from ancestors of present-day humans. Such a scenario would
predict a closer relationship between the Denisova individual and
Neanderthals than between either of them and present-day humans.
To test this prediction, we estimated the divergence between pairs of
seven ancient and modern genomes (Denisova, Neanderthals, French,
Han, Papuan, Yoruba and San), using an approach where we correct
for error rates in each genome based on the assumption that each has
thesamenumberoftrue differences from chimpanzee(Supplementary
Information section 6). The average divergence between Denisova and
Vindija Neanderthals is estimated to be 9.84% of the way to the
chimpanzee–human ancestor; that is, less than the average 12.38%
divergence of both from present-day Africans. Assuming 6.5 million
years for human–chimpanzee divergence, this implies that DNA
sequences of Neanderthals and the Denisova individual diverged on
average640,000yearsago,andfrompresent-dayAfricans804,000years
To analyse further the relationship of the Denisova individual and
Neanderthals, we aligned Denisova, Neanderthal and Yoruba sequences
to the chimpanzee genome, picked a single sequence at random to represent each group, and examined sites where two copies of a derived and
one copy of an ancestral allele were observed. Sequencing errors are
expected to make a negligible contribution at such sites. The number of
sites where the Denisova individual and Neanderthal cluster to the exclusion of the Yoruba and chimpanzee is 46,362, compared with an average
of 22,012 sites for the other two possible patterns (Yoruba and Denisova,
or Yoruba and Neanderthal). This excess of sites where Denisova and
Neanderthal cluster supports the view that the Denisova individual and
Neanderthalsshareacommonhistorysinceseparatingfromtheancestors
of modern humans (Supplementary Information section 6).
A Neanderthal-specific bottleneck
The fact that the Denisova nuclear genome on average shares a more
recent common ancestor with Neanderthal than with present-day
humans raises the question of whether the overall DNA sequence
divergence of the Denisova individual falls inside the group morphologically and geographically defined as Neanderthals, or if it represents a sister group to Neanderthals.
To investigate this question, we took advantage of the fact that in
addition to the three individuals from Vindija Cave, Croatia, from which
most of the Neanderthal genome sequences were produced, we have
determined nuclear DNA sequences from three further Neanderthal
individuals from Russia, Spain and Germany8. Of these, the 60,000–
70,000-year-old skeleton of a Neanderthal child found in Mezmaiskaya
Cave, Russia, is both oldest and geographically closest to the Denisova
individual. Using the 56 Mb of autosomal DNA sequences determined
from this specimen8, we estimate that the DNA sequence divergence
between the Vindija and Mezmaiskaya Neanderthals corresponds to
a date of 140,000 6 33,000 years ago (Supplementary Information
section 6) (Fig. 1). This remarkably low divergence—which is about
one-third of the closest pair of present-day humans that we analysed—
is in agreement with the observation that diversity among Neanderthal
mtDNAs is low relative to present-day humans10 and indicates that the
Vindija and Mezmaiskaya Neanderthals descend from a common
ancestral population that experienced a drastic bottleneck since separating from the ancestors of the Denisova individual.
To understand further the bottleneck in the history of Vindija and
Mezmaiskaya Neanderthals, we examined four-way alignments of the
Vindija Neanderthalgenomesequence,theMezmaiskaya Neanderthal,
the Denisova individual and the chimpanzee genome. At transversion
substitutions where two copies of the derived alleles are observed, we
detect 924 substitutions that cluster the Vindija and Mezmaiskaya
Neanderthals, 80 that cluster Vindija and Denisova, and 81 that
cluster Mezmaiskaya and Denisova. This corresponds to at least a
65% probability that the DNA sequences in the Neanderthals share
a common ancestor more recently than their split from the ancestor of
the Denisova individual (Supplementary Information section 7). It is
much higher than the 15–20% probability associated with the ‘Out of
Africa’bottleneckcommontopresent-daynon-Africans34.Ifwereplace
the Mezmaiskaya Neanderthal in this analysis with a Neanderthal from
El Sidron, Spain, or from Feldhofer, Germany, results are qualitatively
similar although numbers are smaller (Supplementary Information
section 7). Thus, we conclude that late Neanderthals across a broad
geographical range have a population history distinct from that of the
Denisova individual in that they share a strong population bottleneck
not experienced by the ancestors of the Denisova individual. We call
Mezmaiskaya 1
Vindija 33.26
Vindija 33.25
Vindija 33.16
Figure 1 | A neighbour-joining tree based on pairwise autosomal DNA
sequence divergences for five ancient and five present-day hominins.
Vindija 33.16,Vindija 33.25 andVindija 33.26 referto thecataloguenumbers of
the Neanderthal bones.
ARTICLE RESEARCH
D E C E M B E R
| N A T U R E |
Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
the group to which this individual belonged Denisovans in analogy to
Neanderthals, as Denisovans are described for the first time based on
molecular data from Denisova Cave just as Neanderthals were first
described based on skeletal remains retrieved in the Neander Valley
in Germany.
No Denisovan gene flow into all Eurasians
We have previously shown that Vindija Neanderthals share more
derived alleles with non-Africans than with Africans, consistent with
Neanderthals contributing 1–4% of the genomes of present-day
humans across Eurasia8. To investigate the extent to which the
Denisova individual shares this pattern, we examined alignments of
sets of four genomes, each consisting of an African (Yoruba or San),
a Eurasian (French or Han), an archaic hominin (Neanderthal or
Denisovan)andthechimpanzee.Werandomlysampledoneallelefrom
each of the three hominins, and counted all transversion differences
between the African and the Eurasian where the archaic individual
carries the derived allele (the ‘D statistics’ of ref. 8). Neanderthals match
the French genome on average 4.66 0.7% more often than they match
the Yoruba genome (Table 1). Although the Denisova individual also
matches the French more than the Yoruba genome, this skew is significantly less strong at 1.86 0.5%. The estimates of D statistics were
quantitatively consistent (within two standard deviations) for all other
choices of Eurasian and African populations (Table 1). These findings
indicate that the archaic component of the Eurasian gene pool is less
closely related to the Denisova individual than to Neanderthals.
We also examined 13 genomic regions that we previously identified
as candidates for a contribution of archaic genetic material into non-
Africans, based on their deeper genetic divergences in non-Africans
than in Africans8. Using ‘tag SNPs’ that are informative about whether
a haplotype is from the lineage unique to non-Africans, we find that
the Denisova individual matches the deeply diverged non-African
haplotype in 6 cases, whereas Neanderthals do so in 11 cases (Supplementary Information section 7). Thus, both Neanderthals and
Denisovans are more related than would be expected by chance to
these genomic segments, but the signal in Denisovans is weaker.
These analyses indicate that Neanderthals are more closely related
than Denisovans to the population that contributed to the gene pool
of the ancestors of present-day Eurasians. The fact that Eurasians
share some additional affinity with the Denisova individual relative
to Africans is compatible with a scenario in which Denisovans shared
some of their history with Neanderthals before the gene flow from
Neanderthals into modern humans occurred.
Denisovan gene flow into the ancestors of Melanesians
Although the Denisova individual derives from a population that was
not directly involved in the gene flow from Neanderthals to Eurasians,
it is possible that Denisovans admixed with the ancestors of presentday people in some parts of the Old World. To investigate this, we
analysed the relationship of the Denisova genome to the genomes of
938 present-day humans from 53 populations that have been genotyped at 642,690 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)35. We
Table 1 | Sharing of derived alleles between present-day and archaic hominins
Source of data
for H1 and H2
D(H1, H2, Neanderthal, chimpanzee)
D(H1, H2, Denisova, chimpanzee)
Eurasian/Eurasian*
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
African/African*
Melanesian/Melanesian*
Bougainville
This study
Eurasian/African*
This study
This study
This study
This study
Eurasian/Melanesian*
This study
Bougainville
This study
This study
Bougainville
This study
This study
Bougainville
This study
This study
Bougainville
This study
Melanesian/African*
This study
Bougainville
This study
We present the D statistic D(H1, H2, X, chimpanzee), the normalized difference between the number of sites at which the derived allele in an archaic read from X matches human sample H1 (nBABA) and human
sample H2 (nBABA); thus, its value is D 5 (nBABA 2 nABBA)/(nBABA 1 nABBA). We restrict to autosomal transversion substitutions, compute standard errors (s.e.) from a block jackknife, and highlight (dagger symbol)
the D statistics that are more than Z . 3 s.d. from zero. Both Neanderthals and Denisovans match Eurasians more than the Africans, but the signals are consistently and significantly stronger when X 5 Neanderthal
than when X 5 Denisova. The slight numerical differences with Table 4 of ref. 8 are due to differences in the data filtering. Here we restrict to comparisons of present-day human samples that were sequenced by the
same protocol (the five individuals sequenced in ref. 8, or the seven in this study); Supplementary Table 8.2 presents the complete set of pairwise comparisons.
* Comparison.
{ D statistics that are more than Z . 3 s.d. from zero.
RESEARCH ARTICLE
| N A T U R E
| 2 3 / 3 0
D E C E M B E R
Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
scored each of these present-day humans based on their relative
proximity to Neanderthals and the Denisova individual at positions
where we have high-quality data for both the Neanderthal and
Denisova genomes (Supplementary Information section 8). Using
the means of the 53 populations, the first two principal components
separate the populations into three groups (Fig. 2): first, the 7 sub-
Saharan African populations; second, a group of 44 non-African
populations as well as one north African group; and third, Papuan
and Bougainville populations from Melanesia. When individuals
from selected populations are analysed separately, the Papuan and
Bougainville islanders remain distinct from almost all individuals
outside Africa (Supplementary Fig. 8.1b). Thus, with respect to their
relationship to Neanderthals and Denisovans, the Melanesian populations stand out relative to other non-African populations.
To explore this further, we analysed the relationship of the Denisova
genome to the genomes of five present-day humans that we previously
sequenced to about fivefold coverage8 (a Yoruba and a San genome
fromAfrica,aFrenchgenomefromEurope,a HangenomefromChina
and a Papuan genome from Melanesia), as well as seven present-day
humans that we sequenced to 1–2-fold coverage for thisstudy (a Mbuti
genome from Africa, a Sardinian genome from Europe, a Mongolian
genome from Central Asia, a Cambodian genome from South-East
Asia, an additional Papuan genome from Melanesia, a Bougainville
islander genome from Melanesia, and a Karitiana genome from South
America) (Supplementary Information section 9). We used the D
statistic8 to test if various pairs of present-day humans share equal
numbers of derived alleles with the Denisova individual. To do this,
we restricted comparisons to pairs of present-day humans sequenced
at the same time to minimize the chance that differences in sample
processing could affect the results. We find that the fivefold coverage
Papuan individual shares 4.0 6 0.7% more alleles with the Denisova
individual than does the French individual, and we observed a similar
skew in all 10 comparisons of Melanesian and other non-African
populations (Table 1). When we stratified the data by base substitution
class and chromosome, the D statistics are qualitatively unchanged
(Supplementary Information section 10). Similarly, the D statistics
are consistent for all depths of read coverage, indicating that mapping
errors, for example due to segmental duplications, are not likely to
explaintheseresults.Finally,differencesinsequencingerrorrateacross
samples cannot explain the observed D statistics (Supplementary
Information section 10).
Under the assumption that gene flow explains these observations,
we determined the direction of this gene flow by asking whether
Melanesians and other Eurasians share derived alleles with Africans
equally often. If the gene flow was entirely into the ancestors of the
Denisovan individual, we would not expect this to affect the relationshipofAfricans toMelanesiansand other Eurasiansandthuswewould
expect them to share derived alleles equally often with Africans.
However, we find that derived alleles in Africans match Melanesians
3.4 6 0.4% less often than other non-Africans (Z 5 10.8). Because this
skew is seen without using Denisovan data it cannot be explained by
gene flow into Denisovans or, for example, by contamination of the
Denisova sample by present-day Melanesian DNA. Thus, at least some
of the putative gene flow must have been into Melanesians (Supplementary Information section 8).
When we compare the skew in the fraction of derived alleles shared
withthetwoarchaichomininstowhatwouldbeexpectedforindividuals
of 100% Neanderthal or Denisova ancestry, respectively (Supplementary Information section 8 and ref. 8), we estimate that 2.56 0.6% of the
genomes of non-African populations derive from Neanderthals, in
agreementwithourpreviousestimateof1–4%8.Inaddition,weestimate
that 4.86 0.5% of the genomes of Melanesians derive from Denisovans.
Altogether, as much as 7.46 0.8% of the genomes of Melanesians may
thus derive from recent admixture with archaic hominins.
A model of population history
To understand the implications of the relationships observed among
the Denisovaindividual,the Neanderthalsand present-dayhumans, we
fit the D statistics described in the previous sections to a parameterized
model of population history. The D statistics for the Denisova individual differ in two important ways from those for the Neanderthal.
First,theDenisovaindividualsharesfewerderivedalleleswitheitherthe
French or Han Chinese populations than do the Neanderthals. Second,
the Denisova individual shares more derived alleles with the Papuans
than do the Neanderthals. We are able to fit the data with a model that
assumes the Denisovans are a sister group of Neanderthals with a
population divergence time of one-half to two-thirds of the time to
the common ancestor of Neanderthals and humans. After the divergence of the Denisovans from Neanderthals, there was gene flow from
Neanderthals into the ancestors of all present-day non-Africans. Later
there was admixture between the Denisovans and the ancestors of
Melanesians that did not affect other non-African populations. This
model is illustrated in Fig. 3 and is described in detail in Supplementary
Information section 11.
Other, more complex models could also explain the data. For
example, a model that invokes only gene flow from Denisovans to
Melanesian ancestors outside Africa and assumes four subpopulations
in Africa that existed between the times of the origin of Denisovan and
Neanderthal ancestors and the ancestors of present-day Eurasians
could also fit the data (Supplementary Fig. 11.4). However, because
barriers to gene flow between such subpopulations would have to
persist for hundreds of thousands of years to create the observed
patterns, such a model is less plausible on biological grounds than a
model that invokes two instances of gene flow outside Africa.
Discordance of mtDNA and nuclear histories
The population history indicated by the nuclear genome is different
from that indicated by the mtDNA phylogeny. There are two possible
explanations for this. One is that the mtDNA lineage was introduced
into Denisovan ancestors by admixture from another hominin lineage
for which we have no data. The other is that the discordance is the
result of ‘incomplete lineage sorting’, that is, the random assortment
Eigenvector 2
Eigenvector 1
Bougainville
Non-African
Figure 2 | Relationship of present-day populations to the Denisova
individual and Neanderthals based on 255,077 SNPs. Principal component
analysis of the means of 53 present-day human populations projected onto the
top two principal components defined by Denisova, Neanderthal and
chimpanzee. The seven ‘African’ populations are San, Mbuti, Biaka, Bantu
Kenya, Bantu South Africa, Yoruba and Mandenka; the ‘Non-African’
populations are 44 diverse groups from outside Africa except for Papuan and
Bougainville islanders.
ARTICLE RESEARCH
D E C E M B E R
N A T U R E
Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
of genetic lineages due to genetic drift which may have allowed a
divergent mtDNA lineage to survive in Denisovans by chance while
becoming lost in Neanderthals and modern humans. A large ancestral
population size makes incomplete lineage sorting more likely to
occur. In Supplementary Information section 11, we show that given
reasonable assumptions about the size of the ancestral populations,
the discordance of the mtDNA phylogeny with that indicated by the
nuclear DNA can be explained either by a small amount of admixture
from another archaic hominin or by incomplete lineage sorting. Thus,
the data do not allow us to favour one hypothesis over the other.
A tooth from Denisova Cave
In 2000, a hominin tooth was discovered in layer 11.1 of the south
gallery of Denisova Cave (Fig. 4a, b). The tooth is from a young adult
and therefore from another individual than the phalanx which stems
from a juvenile (Supplementary Information section 12). To elucidate
therelationshipofthetoothtotheindividualfromwhichthephalanxis
derived, we extracted DNA from 50 mg of dentin from the root of the
tooth and prepared a sequencing library (Supplementary Information
section 13). About 0.17% of random DNA sequences determined
from this library aligned to the human genome, whereas the rest is
likely to represent microbial contamination common in ancient bones.
We therefore used a novel DNA capture approach36 to isolate mtDNA
sequences from the sequencing library. A total of 15,094 sequences
were identified which allowed the complete mtDNA genome to be
assembled at an average coverage of 58-fold. This sequence differs at
two positions from the mtDNA of the phalanx whereas it differs at
about 380 positions from both Neanderthal and present-day humans.
The time since the most recent common ancestor of the two mtDNAs
from Denisova Cave is estimated to be 7,500 years, with a 95% upper
bound of 16,000 years (Supplementary Information section 13). We
conclude that the tooth and the phalanx derive from two different
individuals that are probably from the same hominin population.
Morphology of the Denisova molar
The tooth is an almost complete left, probably third, but possibly
second, upper molar (Fig. 4b). The crown is trapezoidal and tapers
strongly distally, with bulging lingual and buccal walls giving the
tooth an inflated appearance (Supplementary Information section
12). The roots are short but robust and strongly flaring.
Overall, the tooth is very large (mesiodistal diameter, 13.1 mm;
buccolingual, 14.7 mm). As a third molar, it is outside the range of
normal size variation of all fossil taxa of the genus Homo, with the
exception of H. habilis and H. rudolfensis, and comparable to
Australopithecines (Fig. 4c). Compared to second molars, it is larger
African (Afr)
Melanesian
Vindija Neanderthal (V)
Denisova (D)
Figure 3 | A model of population history compatible with the data. N
denotes effective population size, t denotes time of population separation, f
denotes amount of gene flow and tGF denotes time of gene flow.
M3 mesiodistal
M3 buccolingual
Australopithecus afarensis (n = 14)
Australopithecus africanus (n = 12)
Homo habilis (n = 7)
African Homo erectus
Indonesian Homo erectus
Chinese Homo erectus (n = 7)
Early AMH (n = 6)
Neanderthals (n = 14)
Upper Palaeolithic (n = 11)
European Homo heidelbergensis
Atapuerca SH
Figure 4 | Morphology of the Denisova molar. a, b, Occlusal (a) and mesial
(b) views. c, Comparison of the Denisova molar to diverse third molars, in a
biplotofthemesiodistalandbuccolinguallengths (inmm). AMH, anatomically
modern humans; SH, Sima de los Huesos. Supplementary Fig. 12.1 presents a
similar comparison to second molars.
RESEARCH ARTICLE
| N A T U R E
| 2 3 / 3 0
D E C E M B E R
Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
than Neanderthals or early modern humans, but similar to H. erectus
and H. habilis (Supplementary Fig. 12.1).
Besides size, it is also distinguished from most Neanderthal third
molars by the absence of hypocone reduction, and from both second
and third Neanderthal molars by the presence of a large talon basin
and the strong flare of the crown. Furthermore, it lacks the lingual
hypocone projection seen in all Neanderthal first and many second
molars, and has strongly diverging roots, unlike the closely spaced and
frequently fused roots of Neanderthals.
It is of particular interest to compare the Denisova molar to Middle
Pleistocene hominins from China, where H. erectus and other archaic
forms, sometimes interpreted as H. heidelbergensis, may have survived
until recently. Unfortunately, very few of these fossils preserve third
upper molars. Of the few examples that are available, most differ from
the Denisova molar by their strongly reduced size. Second molars are
more frequent than third molars, and most have a trapezoidal shape
like Denisova, but they do not have the lingually skewed position of the
hypocone and metacone and the strong basal flare of the crown.
The Denisova molar supports the DNA evidence that the Denisovan
population is distinct from late Neanderthals as well as from modern
humans. In fact, the primitive traits of the Denisova tooth suggest that
Denisovans may have been separated from the Neanderthal lineage
before Neanderthal dental features are documented in Western
Eurasia (.300,000 years BP) (Supplementary Information section 12),
although we cannot exclude the possibility that the Denisovan dental
morphology results from a reversion.
Stratigraphy and dating
The small size of both the phalanx and the tooth precludes direct
radiocarbon dating. We instead dated seven bone fragments found
close to the hominin remains in layer 11 in the east and south galleries.
To ensure that they were associated with human occupation of the
cave we chose bones that have evidence of human modification,
including a rib with regular incisions and a bone projectile point blank
generally associated with Upper Palaeolithic cultural assemblages. In
the south gallery, where modified bones were not available, we used
herbivore bones (Supplementary Information section 12).
Four of the seven dates are infinite dates older than 50,000 years BP
(uncalibrated), whereas three are finite dates between 16,000 and
30,000 years BP (Supplementary Table 12.1). The rib with incisions
and the projectile point blank are about 30,000 and 23,000 years BP,
respectively. Together with three previous dates23 this shows that layer
11 contains cultural remains from at least two different time periods,
one period older than 50,000 years BP and one more recent period.
However, the stratigraphy is complicated by the discovery of a wedgeshaped area close to the area where the phalanx was found that is likely
to be disturbed (Supplementary Information section 12). Hominin
remains large enough to allow direct radiocarbon dates may eventually be discovered in the cave, but a reasonable hypothesis is that the
phalanx and molar belong to the older occupation.
Discussion
The molecular preservation of the Denisova phalanx is exceptional in
that the fraction of endogenous relative to microbial DNA is about
70%. By contrast, in all Neanderthal remains studied so far the relative
abundance of endogenous DNA is below 5%, and typically below 1%.
Furthermore, the average length of hominin DNA fragments in the
Denisova phalanx is 58 base pairs (bp) (SL3003) and 74 bp (SL3004)
in spite of the enzymatic treatment that removes uracil residues and
decreases the average fragment size, whereas in most well-preserved
Neanderthal samples it is 50 bp or smaller without this treatment.
Thus, although many Neanderthals are preserved under conditions
apparently similar to those in Denisova Cave, the Denisova phalanx is
one of few bones found in temperate conditions that are as well preserved as many permafrost remains37,38. It is not clear why this is. It is
not due to some condition that affects all hominin remains in
Denisova Cave because the fraction of endogenous DNA in the tooth
is 0.17%; that is, typical of other Late Pleistocene hominin remains. It
is possible that a rapid desiccation of the tissue after death, which
would limit degradation of the DNA by endogenous enzymes as well
as microbial growth, has allowed this exceptional preservation.
The Denisova individual and the population to which it belonged
carry some exceptionally archaic molecular (mtDNA) as well as morphological (dental) features. Nevertheless, the picture that emerges
from analysis of the nuclear genome is one where the Denisova population is a sister group to Neanderthals. Three possibilities could
account for how such archaic features have come to be present in
Denisovans. One possibility is that these features were retained in
Denisovans but became lost in modern humans and Neanderthals.
A second, not mutually exclusive, possibility is that they entered the
Denisova population through gene flow from some even more
diverged hominin. Although such gene flow cannot be detected with
the current mtDNA and nuclear DNA data, further sequencing of
other hominin remains may in the future allow testing for it. A third
possibility that could account for the apparently archaic dental morphology, but not the mtDNA, is a reversal to ancestral traits.
After they diverged from one another, Denisovans and Neanderthals
had largely separate population histories as shown by a number of
observations. First, patterns of allele sharing indicate that Denisovan
ancestors did not contribute genes at a detectable level to present-day
people all over Eurasia whereas Neanderthals did8. Thus, Neanderthals
at some point interacted with ancestors of present-day Eurasians independently of Denisovans. Second, the genetic diversity of Neanderthals
across their geographical range in the last thirty or forty thousand years
of their history was extremely low, indicating that they experienced one
or more strong genetic bottlenecks independently of the Denisovans.
Third, our results indicate that Denisovans but not Neanderthals contributed genes to ancestors of present-day Melanesians. Fourth, the
dental morphology shows no evidence of any derived features seen in
Neanderthals. In fact, dental remains from the Sima de los Huesos of
Atapuerca,forwhichagesbetween350,000and600,000yearshavebeen
proposed39,40, already carry Neanderthal-like morphological features
that are not seen in the Denisova molar.
An interesting question is how widespread Denisovans were. A
possibility is that they lived in large parts of East Asia at the time
when Neanderthals were present in Europe and western Asia. One
observation compatible with this possibility is that Denisovan relatives seem to have contributed genes to present-day Melanesians but
not to present-day populations which currently live much closer to
the Altai region such as Han Chinese or Mongolians (Table 1). Thus,
they have at least at some point been present in an area where they
interacted with the ancestors of Melanesians and this was presumably
not in southern Siberia. Further studies of both molecular and morphological features of hominin remains across Asia should clarify how
widespread Denisovans were and how they were related to archaic
hominins other than Neanderthals.
The Denisova individual belongs to a hominin group that shares a
common ancestor with Neanderthals but has a distinct population
history. We define this group based on genomic evidence and call it
Denisovans, but refrain from any formal Linnaean taxonomic designations that would indicate species or subspecies status for either
Neanderthals or Denisovans. In our view, these results show that on
the Eurasian mainland there existed at least two forms of archaic
hominins in the Upper Pleistocene: a western Eurasian form with
morphological features that are commonly used to define them as
Neanderthals, and an eastern form to which the Denisova individuals
belong. In the future, when more complete genomes from these and
other archaic hominins will be sequenced from remains that allow
more morphological features to assessed, their relationships will
become even better understood. This will be an important endeavour
as the emerging picture of Upper Pleistocene hominin evolution is one
in which gene flow among different hominin groups was common.
ARTICLE RESEARCH
D E C E M B E R 2 0 1 0
| V O L 4 6 8
| N A T U R E
Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
METHODS SUMMARY
The thirteen sections of the Supplementary Information provide a full description
of the methods.
Received 15 August; accepted 30 November 2010.
Hublin, J.J.The originofNeandertals. Proc.NatlAcad. Sci.USA106, 16022–16027
Pope, G. G. Craniofacial evidence for the origin of modern humans in China. Am. J.
Phys. Anthropol. 35, (Suppl. 15), 243–298 .
Rightmire, G. P. Brain size and encephalization in early to Mid-Pleistocene Homo.
Am. J. Phys. Anthropol. 124, 109–123 .
Wu, X. & Poirier, F. E. Human Evolution in Asia .
Brown, P. et al. A new small-bodied hominin from the Late Pleistocene of Flores,
Indonesia. Nature 431, 1055–1061 .
Morwood, M. J. et al. Archaeology and age of a new hominin from Flores in eastern
Indonesia. Nature 431, 1087–1091 .
Morwood, M. J. et al. Preface: research at Liang Bua, Flores, Indonesia. J. Hum. Evol.
57, 437–449 .
Green, R. E. et al. A draft sequence of the Neandertal genome. Science 328,
710–722 .
Beauval, C. et al. A late Neandertal femur from Les Rochers-de-Villeneuve, France.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 7085–7090 .
10. Briggs, A. W. et al. Targeted retrieval and analysis of five Neandertal mtDNA
genomes. Science 325, 318–321 .
11. Caramelli, D. et al. A highly divergent mtDNA sequence in a Neandertal individual
from Italy. Curr. Biol. 16, R630–R632 .
12. Green, R. E. et al. A complete Neandertal mitochondrial genome sequence
determined by high-throughput sequencing. Cell 134, 416–426 .
13. Krause, J. et al. Neanderthals in central Asia and Siberia. Nature 449, 902–904
14. Krings, M. et al. A view of Neandertal genetic diversity. Nature Genet. 26, 144–146
15. Lalueza-Fox, C. et al. Mitochondrial DNA of an Iberian Neandertal suggests a
population affinity with other European Neandertals. Curr. Biol. 16, R629–R630
16. Orlando, L. et al. Revisiting Neandertal diversity with a 100,000 year old mtDNA
sequence. Curr. Biol. 16, R400–R402 .
17. Serre, D. et al. No evidence of Neandertal mtDNA contribution to early modern
humans. PLoS Biol. 2, e57 .
18. Endicott, P., Ho, S. Y. & Stringer, C. Using genetic evidence to evaluate four
palaeoanthropological hypotheses for the timing of Neanderthal and modern
human origins. J. Hum. Evol. 59, 87–95 .
19. Krause, J. et al. The complete mitochondrial DNA genome of an unknown hominin
from southern Siberia. Nature 464, 894–897 .
20. Derevianko,A. P. etal.Paleoenvironmentand Paleolithic HumanOccupation of Gorny
Altai [in Russian] .
21. Derevianko, A. The Paleolithic of Siberia: New Discoveries and Interpretations .
22. Derevianko, A. P. et al. Archaeology, Geology, and the Pleistocene and Holocene
Palaeogeography of the Mountainous Altai [in Russian] .
23. Derevianko,A.P.,Shunkov,M.V.&Volkov,P.V.APaleolithicbracelet fromDenisova
cave. Archaeol. Ethnol. Anthropol. Eurasia 34, 13–25 .
24. Green, R. E. et al. The Neandertal genome and ancient DNA authenticity. EMBO J.
28, 2494–2502 .
25. Rohland, N. & Hofreiter, M. Comparison and optimization of ancient DNA
extraction. Biotechniques 42, 343–352 .
26. Lindahl, T. et al. DNA N-glycosidases: properties of uracil-DNA glycosidase from
Escherichia coli. J. Biol. Chem. 252, 3286–3294 .
27. Briggs, A. W. et al. Removal of deaminated cytosines and detection of in vivo
methylation in ancient DNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 38, e87 .
28. Meyer, M. & Kircher, M. Illumina sequencing library preparation for highly
multiplexed target capture and sequencing. Cold Spring Harb. Protoc. 2010,
doi:10.1101/pdb.prot5448 .
29. Briggs, A. W. et al. Patterns of damage in genomic DNA sequences from a
Neandertal. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104, 14616–14621 .
30. Kircher, M., Stenzel, U. & Kelso, J. Improved base calling for the Illumina Genome
Analyzer using machine learning strategies. Genome Biol. 10, R83 .
31. Li, H. & Durbin, R. Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows-Wheeler
transform. Bioinformatics 25, 1754–1760 .
32. Paten, B. et al. Enredo and Pecan: genome-wide mammalian consistency-based
multiple alignment with paralogs. Genome Res. 18, 1814–1828 .
33. Reich, D. et al. Reduced neutrophil count in people of African descent is due to a
regulatory variant in the Duffy antigen receptor for chemokines gene. PLoS Genet.
5, e1000360 .
34. Keinan, A., Mullikin, J. C., Patterson, N. & Reich, D. Measurement of the human
allele frequency spectrum demonstrates greater genetic drift in East Asians than
in Europeans. Nature Genet. 39, 1251–1255 .
35. Li, J. Z. et al. Worldwide human relationships inferred from genome-wide patterns
of variation. Science 319, 1100–1104 .
36. Maricic, T., Whitten, M. & Pa¨a¨bo, S. Multiplexed DNA Sequence Capture of
Mitochondrial Genomes Using PCR Products. PLoS ONE 5, e14004 .
37. Poinar, H. N. et al. Metagenomics to paleogenomics: large-scale sequencing of
mammoth DNA. Science 311, 392–394 .
38. Rasmussen, M. et al. Ancient human genome sequence of an extinct Palaeo-
Eskimo. Nature 463, 757–762 .
39. Bischoff, J. L. et al. High-resolution U-series Dates from the Sima de los Huesos
Hominids Yields 6001‘
266 kyrs: Implications for the Evolution of the Early
Neanderthal Lineage. J. Archaeol. Sci. 34, 763–770 .
40. Bischoff, J. L. et al. The Sima de los Huesos Hominids Date to Beyond U/Th
Equilibrium (.350kyr) and Perhaps to 400–500 kyr: New Radiometric Dates. J.
Archaeol. Sci. 30, 275–280 .
Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at
www.nature.com/nature.
Acknowledgements We thank C. Bustamante, A. I. Krivoshapkin, M. Lachmann,
R. Nielsen, K. Pruefer, A. Tsybankov, L. Vigilant and W. Zhai for comments;
K. Finstermeier for graphics work; the MPI-EVA sequencing group, R. Schultz and
S. Weihnachtsmann for technical support; and P. Fujita, A. Hinrichs and K. Learned for
designing the UCSC genome browser portal to the Denisova data. The Presidential
Innovation Fund of the Max Planck Society and the Krekeler Foundation provided
financial support. M.S. was supported by a US National Institutes of Health grant
(R01-GM40282). The National Science Foundation provided an International
Postdoctoral Fellowship (OISE-0754461) to J.M.G., a Fellowship in Biological
Informatics to P.L.F.J. and a HOMINID grant (1032255) to D.R.
Author Contributions J.Kr., T.M., Q.F. and M.M. performed the experiments; D.R., R.E.G.,
M.K., J.Kr., N.P., E.Y.D., A.W.B., U.S., P.L.F.J., T.M., J.M.G., T.B.-M., C.A., S.M., H.L., E.E.E.,
M.St., J.Ke., M.Sl. and S.P. analysed genetic data; B.V., M.R., S.T., M.V.S., A.P.D. and J.-J.H.
analysed archaeological and anthropological data; D.R. and S.P. wrote and edited the
manuscript.
Author Information The raw sequence data from the two Denisova fossils, the seven
present-day humans, and the tooth mtDNA have been deposited in the European
Nucleotide Archive at EMBL-EBI under accession numbers ERP000318, ERP000121
and FR695060, respectively. The alignments of Denisova sequence reads to the
human and chimpanzee genomes are accessible for browsing and download from
 Reprints and permissions information is available
at www.nature.com/reprints. The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Readers are welcome to comment on the online version of this article at
www.nature.com/nature. Correspondence and requests for materials should be
addressed to D.R. ( ), B.V. ( )
or S.P. ( ).
RESEARCH ARTICLE
N A T U R E
| V O L 4 6 8
| 2 3 / 3 0
D E C E M B E R 2 0 1 0
Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved