IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 10, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001
Active Contours Without Edges
Tony F. Chan, Member, IEEE, and Luminita A. Vese
Abstract—In this paper, we propose a new model for active contours to detect objects in a given image, based on techniques of
curve evolution, Mumford–Shah functional for segmentation and
level sets. Our model can detect objects whose boundaries are not
necessarily defined by gradient. We minimize an energy which can
be seen as a particular case of the minimal partition problem. In
the level set formulation, the problem becomes a “mean-curvature
flow”-like evolving the active contour, which will stop on the desired boundary. However, the stopping term does not depend on
the gradient of the image, as in the classical active contour models,
but is instead related to a particular segmentation of the image. We
will give a numerical algorithm using finite differences. Finally, we
will present various experimental results and in particular some
examples for which the classical snakes methods based on the gradient are not applicable. Also, the initial curve can be anywhere in
the image, and interior contours are automatically detected.
Index Terms—Active contours, curvature, energy minimization,
finite differences, level sets, partial differential equations, segmentation.
I. INTRODUCTION
HE BASIC idea in active contour models or snakes is to
evolve a curve, subject to constraints from a given image
, in order to detect objects in that image. For instance, starting
with a curve around the object to be detected, the curve moves
toward its interior normal and has to stop on the boundary of the
be a bounded open subset of
its boundary.
be a given image, and
parameterized curve.
In the classical snakes and active contour models (see , ,
 , ), an edge-detector is used, depending on the gradient
of the image
, to stop the evolving curve on the boundary of
the desired object. We briefly recall these models next.
The snake model is:
are positive parameters. The first two terms
control the smoothness of the contour (the internal energy),
while the third term attracts the contour toward the object in
Manuscript received June 17, 1999; revised September 27, 2000. This work
was supported in part by ONR under Contract N00014-96-1-0277 and NSF Contract DMS-9626755. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Prof. Robert J. Schalkoff.
The authors are with the Mathematics Department, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1555 USA (e-mail: ;
 ).
Publisher Item Identifier S 1057-7149(01)00819-3.
the image (the external energy). Observe that, by minimizing
the energy (1), we are trying to locate the curve at the points
, acting as an edge-detector, while keeping a
smoothness in the curve (object boundary).
A general edge-detector can be defined by a positive and decreasing function , depending on the gradient of the image
For instance
, a smoother version of
, is the convolution of the image
with the Gaussian
. The function
is positive in
homogeneous regions, and zero at the edges.
In problems of curve evolution, the level set method and in
particular the motion by mean curvature of Osher and Sethian
 have been used extensively, because it allows for cusps,
corners, and automatic topological changes. Moreover, the discretization of the problem is made on a fixed rectangular grid.
is represented implicitly via a Lipschitz function ,
, and the evolution of the curve is
given by the zero-level curve at time of the function
Evolving the curve
in normal direction with speed
to solve the differential equation 
where the set
defines the initial contour.
A particular case is the motion by mean curvature, when
is the curvature of the level-curve of
passing through
. The equation becomes
A geometric active contour model based on the mean curvature motion is given by the following evolution equation :
edge-function with
is constant;
initial level set function.
1057–7149/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE
CHAN AND VESE: ACTIVE CONTOURS WITHOUT EDGES
Its zero level curve moves in the normal direction with speed
and therefore stops on the desired
boundary, where
vanishes. The constant
is a correction term
chosen so that the quantity div
remains always positive. This constant may be interpreted as a
force pushing the curve toward the object, when the curvature
becomes null or negative. Also,
is a constraint on the area
inside the curve, increasing the propagation speed.
Two other active contour models based on level sets were
proposed in , again using the image gradient to stop the
curve. The first one is
is a constant, and
are the maximum and
minimum values of the magnitude of the image gradient
. Again, the speed of the evolving curve becomes zero on the
points with highest gradients, and therefore the curve stops on
the desired boundary, defined by strong gradients. The second
model is similar to the geometric model , with
Other related works are and .
The geodesic model is
This is a problem of geodesic computation in a Riemannian
space, according to a metric induced by the image
the minimization problem (3) consists in finding the path of
minimal new length in that metric. A minimizer
will be obtained when
vanishes, i.e., when the curve
is on the boundary of the object. The geodesic active contour
model (3) from also has a level set formulation
Because all these classical snakes and active contour models
rely on the edge-function
, depending on the image gradient
, to stop the curve evolution, these models can detect only
objects with edges defined by gradient. In practice, the discrete gradients are bounded and then the stopping function
is never zero on the edges, and the curve may pass through
the boundary, especially for the models in , – . If the
is very noisy, then the isotropic smoothing Gaussian
has to be strong, which will smooth the edges too. In this paper,
we propose a different active contour model, without a stopping
edge-function, i.e. a model which is not based on the gradient
of the image
for the stopping process. The stopping term is
based on Mumford–Shah segmentation techniques . In this
way, we obtain a model which can detect contours both with or
without gradient, for instance objects with very smooth boundaries or even with discontinuous boundaries (for a discussion on
different types of contours, we refer the reader to ). In addition, our model has a level set formulation, interior contours are
automatically detected, and the initial curve can be anywhere in
the image.
The outline of the paper is as follows. In the next section we
introduce our model as an energy minimization and discuss the
relationship with the Mumford–Shah functional for segmentation. Also, we formulate the model in terms of level set functions
and compute the associated Euler–Lagrange equations. In Section III we present an iterative algorithm for solving the problem
and its discretization. In Section IV we validate our model by
various numerical results on synthetic and real images, showing
the advantages of our model described before, and we end the
paper by a brief concluding section.
Other related works are , , , and on active
contours and segmentation, and on shape reconstruction from unorganized points, and finally the recent works 
and , where a probability based geodesic active region
model combined with classical gradient based active contour
techniques is proposed.
II. DESCRIPTION OF THE MODEL
Let us define the evolving curve
, as the boundary of an
open subset
). In what follows,
denotes the region
, and outside
denotes the
Our method is the minimization of an energy based-segmentation. Let us first explain the basic idea of the model in a simple
case. Assume that the image
is formed by two regions of approximatively piecewise-constant intensities, of distinct values
. Assume further that the object to be detected is represented by the region with the value
. Let denote its boundary
. Then we have
inside the object [or inside (
outside the object [or outside (
)]. Now let us
consider the following “fitting” term:
is any other variable curve, and the constants
depending on
, are the averages of
and respectively outside
. In this simple case, it is obvious that
boundary of the object, is the minimizer of the fitting term
This can be seen easily. For instance, if the curve
is outside
the object, then
. If the curve
inside the object, then
. If the curve
is both inside and outside the object, then
. Finally, the fitting energy is minimized if
i.e., if the curve
is on the boundary of the object. These basic
remarks are illustrated in Fig. 1.
In our active contour model we will minimize the above fitting term and we will add some regularizing terms, like the
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 10, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001
Consider all possible cases in the position of the curve. The fitting term
is minimized only in the case when the curve is on the boundary of the object.
length of the curve
, and (or) the area of the region inside
Therefore, we introduce the energy functional
, defined by
Area inside
are fixed parameters. In almost
all our numerical calculations (see further), we fix
Therefore, we consider the minimization problem:
Remark 1: In our model, the term Length
re-written in a more general way as Length
If we consider the case of an arbitrary dimension
can have the following values:
. For the last expression, we use
the isoperimetric inequality , which says in some sense that
is “comparable” with Area inside
Area inside
is a constant depending only on
A. Relation with the Mumford–Shah Functional
The Mumford–Shah functional for segmentation is 
Curve C = f(x; y):
(x; y) =g propagating in normal direction.
is a given image,
are positive parameters. The solution image
obtained by minimizing this functional is formed by smooth regions
and with sharp boundaries, denoted here by
A reduced form of this problem is simply the restriction of
to piecewise constant functions , i.e.,
each connected component
. Therefore, as it was also
pointed out by D. Mumford and J. Shah ,
on each connected component
. The reduced case is called the
minimal partition problem.
Our active contour model with
a particular case of the minimal partition problem, in which we
look for the best approximation
, as a function taking
only two values, namely
and with one edge
, represented by the snake or the active
This particular case of the minimal partition problem can be
formulated and solved using the level set method . This is
presented in the next section.
B. Level Set Formulation of the Model
In the level set method ,
is represented by the zero
level set of a Lipschitz function
, such that
Recall that
is open, and
. We illustrate in Fig. 2
the above assumptions and notations on the level set function
, defining the evolving curve
. For more details, we refer the
reader to .
For the level set formulation of our variational active contour
model, we replace the unknown variable
by the unknown variable
, and we follow .
Using the Heaviside function
, and the one-dimensional
Dirac measure
, and defined, respectively, by
CHAN AND VESE: ACTIVE CONTOURS WITHOUT EDGES
(in the sense of distributions), we express the terms in the energy
in the following way (see also ):
Then, the energy
can be written as
We note that,
as defined in (5), solution of our model
as a particular case of the Mumford–Shah minimal partition
problem, can simply be written using the level set formulation
fixed and minimizing the energy
with respect to the constants
, it is easy to express
these constants function of
(i.e. if the curve has a nonempty
interior in
(i.e. if the curve has a
nonempty exterior in
). For the corresponding “degenerate”
cases, there are no constrains on the values of
are in fact given by
Remark 2: By the previous formulas, we can see that the energy can be written only function of
, which is the characteristic function of the set
. Let us denote it by
can rewrite the energy in the new form
Therefore, we can consider the new minimization problem
among characteristic functions of sets with finite perimeter in
a e means almost everywhere with respect to the
Lebesgue measure.
We expect, of course, to have existence of minimizers of the
, due to several general results: our model
is a particular case of the minimal partition problem, for which
the existence has been proved in (assuming that
is continuous on
), and also in and , for more general data
. Also, the existence for the general Mumford–Shah segmentation problem has been proved in . On the other hand, it can
be easily shown, by the lower-semicontinuity of the total variation
and classical arguments of calculus of variations, that our minimization problem (8) has minimizers (this
can be an alternative proof of the existence). In this paper, the
level set function
is used only to represent the curve and it
has many numerical advantages, but the problem could also be
formulated and solved only in terms of characteristic functions.
In order to compute the associated Euler–Lagrange equation
for the unknown function
, we consider slightly regularized
versions of the functions
, denoted here by
regularization of
. We will give further examples of such approximations. Let
us denote by
the associated regularized functional, defined
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 10, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001
Two different regularizations of the (top) heaviside function and
(bottom) delta function  .
fixed, and minimizing
with respect to
, we deduce the associated Euler–Lagrange equation for
Parameterizing the descent direction by an artificial time
the equation in
the initial contour) is
denotes the exterior normal to the boundary
denotes the normal derivative of
at the boundary.
III. NUMERICAL APPROXIMATION OF THE MODEL
First possible regularization of
functions, as proposed in , is
Detection of different objects from a noisy image, with various
shapes and with an interior contour. Left: u
and the contour. Right:
the piecewise-constant approximation of u . Size =
100  100,
(x; y) =  (x   50:5) + (y   50:5) + 48:5,  = 0:1  255 , no
reinitialization, cpu = 4:60 s.
In this paper, we introduce and use in our experiments the following
regularization of
These distinct approximations and regularizations of the functions
) are presented in Fig. 3. As
, both approximations converge to
. A difference is that
has a small support, the interval
is different of zero everywhere. Because our energy is nonconvex (allowing therefore many local minima), the solution
may depend on the initial curve. With
, the algorithm sometimes computes a local minimizer of the energy,
CHAN AND VESE: ACTIVE CONTOURS WITHOUT EDGES
Detection of three blurred objects of distinct intensities. Size = 100
(x; y) =  (x   15) + (y   60) + 12,  = 0:01  255 , no
reinitialization, cpu = 48:67 s.
Detection of lines and curves not necessarily closed. Size = 64  64,
(x; y) =  (x   32:5) + (y   32:5)
+ 30,  = 0:02  255 , no
reinitialization, cpu = 2:88 s.
while with
, the algorithm has the tendency to compute a global minimizer. One of the reasons is that the Euler–Lagrange equation for
acts only locally, on a few level curves
Grouping based on Kanizsa’s “proximity rule.” Size: 64  64,
(x; y) =  (x   32:5) + (y   32:5)
+ 30,  = 2  255 , no
reinitialization, cpu = 5:76 s.
Grouping based on chromatic identity. Size: 64  64,
 (x   32:5) + (y   32:5) +30:5,  = 2 255 , no reinitialization, cpu
; but using
, the equation acts on all level curves. In this way, in practice,
we can obtain a global minimizer, independently of the position
of the initial curve; moreover, this allows to automatically detect interior contours (see Section IV). We mention that, in order
to extend the evolution to all level sets of
, another possibility
is to replace
(see ). In our paper, we work
, to remain close to the initial minimization problem.
The problem of extending the evolution to all level sets of
was solved here using the approximation
, which is
different of zero everywhere.
To discretize the equation in
, we use a finite differences
implicit scheme. We recall first the usual notations: let
space step,
be the time step, and
grid points, for
approximation of
. The finite
differences are
The algorithm is as follows (we essentially adopt the method
from for the discretization of the divergence operator and
the iterative algorithm from ): knowing
, we first compute
using (6) and (7), respectively. Then, we
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 10, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001
Object with smooth contour. Top: results using our model without edge-function. Bottom: results using the classical model (2) with edge-function.
by the following discretization and linearization
This linear system is solved by an iterative method, and for more
details, werefer the reader to .
When working with level sets and Dirac delta functions, a
standard procedure is to reinitialize
to the signed distance
function to its zero-level curve, as in and . This prevents the level set function to become too flat, or it can be seen
as a rescaling and regularization. For our algorithm, the reinitialization is optional. On the other hand, it should not be too
strong, because, as it was remarked by Fedkiw, it prevents interior contours from growing. Only for a few numerical results
we have applied the reinitialization, solving the following evolution equation :
is our solution
at time . Then the new
, such that
is obtained at the steady state of (10).
The solution
of (10) will have the same zero-level set
and away from this set,
will converge to 1. To
discretize the equation (10), we use the scheme proposed in 
Finally, the principal steps of the algorithm are:
• Initialize
by (6) and (7).
• Solve the PDE in
from (9), to obtain
• Reinitialize
locally to the signed distance function to the
curve (this step is optional).
• Check whether the solution is stationary. If not,
and repeat.
We note that the use of a time-dependent PDE for
crucial. The stationary problem obtained directly from the minimization problem could also be solved numerically, using a similar finite differences scheme.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We conclude this paper by presenting numerical results
using our model on various synthetic and real images, with
different types of contours and shapes. We show the active
contour evolving in the original image
, and the associated
piecewise-constant approximation of
(given by the averages
). In our numerical experiments, we generally choose
the parameters as follows:
(the step space),
(the time step). We only use the
approximations
of the Heaviside and Dirac delta
functions (
), in order to automatically detect interior
contours, and to insure the computation of a global minimizer.
Only the length parameter
, which has a scaling role, is not
the same in all experiments. If we have to detect all or as many
objects as possible and of any size, then
should be small.
If we have to detect only larger objects (for example objects
formed by grouping), and to not detect smaller objects (like
CHAN AND VESE: ACTIVE CONTOURS WITHOUT EDGES
Detection of a simulated minefield, with contour without gradient.
Size = 100  100,
(x; y) =  (x   50:5) + (y   50:5) + 47,  =
0:2  255 , no reinitialization, cpu = 144:81 s.
points, due to the noise), then
has to be larger. We will give
the exact value of
each time, together with the initial level set
, and the cpu time, in seconds, of our calculations,
performed on a 140 MHz Sun Ultra 1 with 256 MB of RAM.
In Fig. 4, we show how our model works on a noisy synthetic
image, with various shapes and an interior contour, which is automatically detected, without considering a second initial curve.
Due to the level set implementation, the model allows automatical change of topology.
In Fig. 5, we show that our model can detect different objects
of different intensities, and with blurred boundaries. Again, the
interior contour of the torus is automatically detected. This is
also due to the fact that the velocity has a global dependence, and
the curve is automatically attracted toward the objects. In this
example we also show that the initial curve does not necessarily
surround the objects.
In Fig. 6, we show how we can detect lines and curves (not
necessarily closed) in a noisy image. The final level set function
is zero on the curves and negative outside the curves.
Europe night-lights. Size =
118  113,
 (x   59:) + (y   57:)
0:05  255 , five iterations
of reinitialization, cpu = 32:74 s.
In the next examples (Figs. 7 and 8) we consider images with
“contours without gradient” or “cognitive contours” (see ).
We also illustrate here the role of the length term as a scale
parameter: if
is small, then also smaller objects will be detected; if
is larger, then only larger objects are detected, or objects formed by grouping. In Fig. 7, we show that our algorithm
can detect objects defined by grouping according to Kanizsa’s
“proximity rule.” In Fig. 8 we show how the grouping is based
on the chromatic resemblance or identity, among objects of the
same shape.
We next consider an image with very smooth contours. In
Fig. 9 top, we show results obtained using our model, while
in Fig. 9 bottom, we show the results obtained with a classical
active contour model based on the edge-function
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 10, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001
Spiral from an art picture. Size = 234  191,  = 0:0000033  255 , five iterations of reinitialization, cpu = 108:85 s.
the geometric model (2)], by which the curve cannot detect the
smooth boundary.
In Fig. 10, we validate our model on a very different problem:
to detect features in spatial point processes in the presence of
CHAN AND VESE: ACTIVE CONTOURS WITHOUT EDGES
Detection of the contours of a plane from a noisy image. Size = 87  53, t = 0:01,  = 0:17 255 ,
(x; y) =  (x   45) + (y   39) + 6,
one iteration of reinitialization, cpu = 2:87 s.
substantial cluster. One application is the detection of minefields using reconnaissance aircraft images that identify many
objects that are not mines. These problems are usually solved
using statistical methods (see and ). By this application,
we show again how our model can be used to detect objects
or features with contours without gradient. This is not possible
using classical snakes or active contours based on the gradient.
A similar application is presented in Fig. 11, where the white
points are Europe night-lights.
We also show examples on real noisy images, with different
types of contours or shapes, illustrating all the advantages of
our model: the ability of detecting smooth boundaries, scale
adaptivity, automatic change of topology, and robustness with
respect to noise.
In Fig. 12, we consider an art picture from the Los Angeles
Times by Brian Forrest. Here,
from Remark 1, Section II
[we have Length
in the energy, with
instead of
Examples of images for which the averages “inside” and “outside”
the objects are the same.
]. The initial curve is the boundary of the image. After a
time, a curve in the middle of the image appears and expands
until merges with the initial evolving curve.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 10, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001
Grouping based on shape identity. In our model, we replaced u from
Fig. 14 top left, by the curvature of the level curves of u (Fig. 14 top right). Size
= 64  64,  = 0:05  255 ,
(x; y) =  (x   32:5) + (y   32:5) +
30:5, 5 iterations of reinitialization, cpu = 10:20 s.
Grouping based on orientation identity. In our model, we replaced u
from Fig. 14 bottom left, by the orientation of the normal to the level curves
of u (Fig. 14 bottom right). Size: 64  64,  = 0:025  255 ,  = 0:02 
(x; y) =  (x   32:5) + (y   32:5) + 30, five iterations of
reinitialization, cpu = 10:25 s.
Finally, in Fig. 13, the algorithm detects the contours of a
plane from a real noisy image.
Of course that our model has its limitations. For instance, it
will be interesting to extend the model to the general case of the
Mumford–Shah functional.
On the other hand, there are objects which cannot be detected using the intensity average only. For instance, we show
in Fig. 14 two such examples, together with the averages inside
and outside the objects, which are practically the same (left and
middle). One way to overcome this difficulty, would be to use
other informations from the initial image
, like the curvature
(see Fig. 14 top right), or the orientation of level sets (see Fig. 14
bottom right). In this framework, we refer the reader to .
For the results from Figs. 15 and 16, we replaced in our
by curvature
orientation
respectively (the angle
of the normal to the level curves). Other discriminants may be
considered.
V. CONCLUDING REMARKS AND DISCUSSIONS
In this paper, we proposed an active contour model based
on Mumford–Shah segmentation techniques and the level set
method. Our model is not based on an edge-function to stop the
evolving curve on the desired boundary. Also, we do not need to
smooth the initial image, even if it is very noisy and in this way,
the locations of boundaries are very well detected and preserved.
By our model, we can detect objects whose boundaries are not
necessarily defined by gradient or with very smooth boundaries,
for which the classical active contour models are not applicable.
Finally, we can automatically detect interior contours starting
with only one initial curve. The position of the initial curve can
be anywhere in the image, and it does not necessarily surround
the objects to be detected. We validated our model by various
numerical results.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank J.-M. Morel and G. Sapiro
for suggesting us the references on Kanisza’s work and Paragios–Deriche work , , respectively, to R. Fedkiw, M. J.
Black, and S. Ruuth for valuable conversations, and especially
to S. Osher for the very useful discussions in the “level set collective” at UCLA. Finally, they wish to thank all three unknown
referees for their general and detailed comments and suggestions, which helped very much to improve the presentation of
the paper.