Postgrad Med J 1997; 73: 701 - 704 ©) The Fellowship of Postgraduate Medicine, 1997
Techniques in medical education
Information technology in medical
education: current and future
applications
GA Mooney, JG Bligh
Information technology has the
potential to revolutionise the way
medicine is learned by students
and healthcare professionals. This
potential was recognised by the
General Medical Council in their
1993 report Tomorrow's doctors
in which the need for future generations of doctors to be familiar
with the application and scope of
information
technology
described.
This paper focuses on
the use of computers as aids to
learning medicine and discusses
two key applications of information technology to medical education: multimedia and the internet.
The current use and potential for
these areas of information technology are described and future
developments discussed.
information technology, education, internet, multimedia
IT awareness among
Liverpool medical students,
* 92% use computers daily, most
commonly word processors and
video games
* 90% want to know more about
* 40% perceive a need for help using a
* 19% find computers difficult to use
* 47% thought they would be using a
computer as a doctor
* 25% used computers at school
*n=1 16 (53% male, 47% female)
Medical Education Unit,
Faculty of Medicine,
The University of Liverpool,
Liverpool L69 3BX, UK
Accepted 30 October 1996
A rising tide of information technology (IT)
is sweeping through medical
eduction, providing learners with easier and more effective access to a wider
variety and greater quantity of information. Following the trend of all new
technologies, it is the younger generations who are more able to adapt and react
to new technology. This was reflected in a 1995 IT awareness survey of 116 new
medical undergraduate students in Liverpool, mostly aged 19 years. The survey
was conducted using a questionnaire comprising 17 questions in the form of
tick boxes and Likert scales. The results are summarised in box 1. These results
show that a high percentage of the new students had used a computer before,
mainly to word-process and play video games.
As IT plays an interestingly larger role in primary and secondary education
we can expect that with each new intake of medical students, their knowledge
and expectations of IT will grow. It is this increasing demand for IT in medical
curricula that has the greatest potential to influence how medicine is taught and
learned. This is reflected in developments in medical courses around Britain
where medical schools are moving towards providing learning materials on
computer.1 2 Over the last decade there have been two key developments in IT
that provide new opportunities for medical education. These are multimedia
Breakthroughs
in computer hardware
(eg, PentiumTM
processors) have made it possible to deliver the power of the older, bigger
mainframe computer in affordable desktop and laptop computers.
coupled with major developments in software, in window, mouse and pointer
interfaces for computer operating systems, now makes it possible for the nontechnical computer-user
that only programmers and
technicians were previously capable of. For example, users can connect their
computer to networks (eg, the internet) to send and receive information and
they can use electronic mail to communicate with people around the world.
Multimedia and the internet complement one another with the internet
providing a means for instantly delivering multimedia information to an
international audience. The following sections describe and discuss multimedia
and the internet and illustrate how they are currently being used for medical
education.
Multimedia
Multimedia computers can display information using a wide variety of formats
such as sound, digital video, animation, pictures and text. Multimedia is not
synonymous with CD-ROM. Although multimedia software is often stored on
CD-ROM, because of the amount of storage space audio and digital video
require, software
is only multimedia
if it uses mutiple media to display
information. For example, although the Oxford Textbook of Medicine is stored
on CD-ROM, this program uses text alone to display information and is
therefore not a multimedia program. However, EncartaTM,
a commercial
encyclopaedia produced by Microsoftg, is a multimedia program because it
uses digital video, audio, animation, graphics and text to present information.
A typical specification for a machine capable of running multimedia software
is given in box 2. This specification gives a realistic bare minimum required to
run multimedia programmes. The specifications in brackets show the industry
standard for multimedia computers in July 1996. This specification will be out
of date by the time this paper goes to press, giving an indication ofhow fast IT is
Multimedia in medicine is primarily used in computer-based learning (CBL)
programmes primarily for undergraduate medical students. However, as CBL
becomes an integral part of undergraduate medical curricula and further
develops in terms of educational sophistication, materials for postgraduate and
Mooney, Bligh
Specification of a multimedia
* a fast 75 MHz processor chip (eg,
PentiumTM) (133 MHz)
* a 16-bit sound board (32-bit)
* a 1-MB video display board (4 MB)
* a Quad Speed CD-ROM drive (x 6
* 8 MB of Random Access Memory
(RAM) (16 MB)
aaadea,.:;
''.1 ..............
-if Y<e .........................
............
......... .......,,
*bfat FoawVevif' =
s,qflhaqbe
olf.foOfat
.....du#Xti.si
b ... Ft... b
.~~ ...........hd
oadiadmff dw
-rpooyokaed.0effl od hff lQ1
A:isafrBIfgspfeymolybo
..........
,....,, ,,-- , ,.,,=
A screen from Microsoft Bodyworks '
Categorisation of CBL
* information resources: reference/
literature databases (eg, Medline)
* electronic textbooks: textbooks
converted into electronic format
(usually CD-ROM)
* tutorial: sequential lessons (usually
multimedia) aimed at teaching
specific subjects (eg, anatomy of the
* mind tools: programs to help
learners organise and plan learning
(eg, personal information manager)
and structure and record knowledge/
information (eg, mindmap)
* study guides: programs designed
to support an educational process
(eg, problem-based or task-based
...~~~~~~~~ ~~~~~~ ...'. ''..:.::.....
screen from RALE(3'
auscultation program
professional learning should become available. There are many CBL programs
for medicine that use multimedia to present and provide access to different
types of information. For example, digital video clips of surgical procedures,
animated anatomical structures and aural commentaries to accompany text.
1 shows a screen from one such medical multimedia program that
provides the user with both two- and three-dimensional images of the human
skeleton. The 2D image can be used to identify structures and find out about
their function. The 3D image lets the user rotate the skeleton around 360° to
explore the relationships between the component parts.
There are different types of medical multimedia designed to address different
learning needs. Box 3 shows the different categories of CBL programs in order
of their educational sophistication. CBL programs classified as information
resources are the most simple in terms of educational design and are primarily
used as aids to finding information quickly. The 'mind tools' and 'study guides'
program' offer the greatest potential for medical education for both undergraduates, postgraduates and healthcare professionals by encouraging an
enquiry-driven approach to learning where the learner explores and investigates
information to build links and relationships and form ideas and hypotheses.
These activities are key to adult learning3 and will play a major part in new
medical curricula, in particular problem-based courses.4 'Mind tools' and
'study guides' are not only the most educationally sophisticated, they also
require sophisticated computer programming techniques. Therefore, to develop
these types of CBL program there needs to be a multidisciplinary approach that
draws on medical education, computer science and medical content.5
Multimedia has the potential to provide learners with educational experiences
that traditional
text-based methods cannot
interactive
consultations). If, however, multimedia is used to demonstrate the technical
capabilities of a computer and not set in an educational context, as is the case
'electronic'
textbooks and
'tutorials',
true value of
multimedia is lost. An example of a heart auscultation CBL tutorial program
which uses multimedia as an effective aid to learning is illustrated in figure 2.6
This program, RALE, uses animation combined with digital sound to illustrate
the structure and function of the heart and the sounds associated with normal
function and abnormal pathologies.
Multimedia programs are often described as 'interactive' and this is especially
the case with educational programs. From an IT perspective 'interactive' is used
to describe communication between a user and a computer. For many medical
multimedia CBL programs this communication consists of 'button clicking'
(eg, to show a picture or play a video clip) or 'electronic page turning'(eg, to go
to another part of the program). This is the lowest level of interactivity where
the computer is performing tasks (eg, showing a picture) requested by the user.
This level of interactivity could be described as 'reactivity' and it is therefore
somewhat misleading to describe CBL programs of this nature as 'interactive'.
Truly interactive CBL programs aim to establish an educational 'conversation'
between a user and a computer. This can be achieved using features such as
feedback on strengths and weaknesses and progress charts linked to learning
activities and self-assessment.
It will take considerable computer power to
develop a truly 'intelligent' program that can react to individual student's
questions.
The internet (world wide web)
The internet is a global network of computers that allow information to be
viewed or transferred from one computer to another. It offers facilities such as
electronic mail, information transfer and the ability to search for information.
The internet was until recently accessed using a 'command line interface' which
required users to type in commands to perform tasks such as connecting to a
computer, sending electronic mail or retrieving information and could only
display text. The internet was therefore mainly used by computer programmers
and technicians.
The world wide web (web) has changed the way the internet is used and who
it can be used by. The web replaces the internet's 'command line interface' to
provide a graphical user-interface which enables people with various technical
abilities to use the internet. The web can display multimedia information and
help users perform difficult tasks (eg, transferring information) with the click of
a button. Figure 3 shows a typical screen from the internet and some web
addresses of medical interest are given in box 4. For the purpose of this paper
the terms 'internet' and 'web' will be used interchangeably.
A personal internet network account is required to access the web. Academic
organisations, such as universities, usually provide an account free of charge for
Information technology in medical education
Some medically oriented web
American Medical Association:
 
British Medical Journal:
 
Postgraduate Medical Journal:
 
Virtual Hospital:
 
Visible Human Project:
 
Yahoo search facility:
http:Hlwww.yahoo.com/
.............'.'.''. '.
,.............................. .................... ... ........... .....
.........................
................................. .....................
......;{.E.r.........
...............
's.............
........ , -
A typical web screen viewed using
Netscape(R
...:..::.:
Liverpool's
virtual desktop
medical education
their staff and students. Alternatively an internet account can be hired from a
commercial supplier (eg, Compuserve, Daemon). A software program known
as a 'web browser' is also required in order to view web pages. The browser
converts web pages stored in 'hyper text markup language' format (HTML)
into multimedia information. HTML was designed to enable the faster transfer
of information across the internet. There are a variety of browsers available
including Microsoft Internet ExplorerTM, NCSA MosaicTM and Netscape
NavigatorTM of which the latest versions can be retrieved (downloaded) from
the appropriate internet sites for free.
Web pages have an address, also known as a Universal Resource Locator
(URL), which tells the computer in which country the internet page is located,
what type of company/institution the page belongs to, the location of the page in
the country (ie, City), and the name of the file to be accessed. To view a web
page you therefore give the web browser the address of the page you wish to
view (eg, the University of Liverpool's URL is 
Every Web address starts with 'http://' which tells the 'browser' how to decode
the information it receives from the Web.
The internet is primarily used in medical education to provide users with
access to lecture notes, references, course materials and personal information.
For example, a lecturer could make his/her lecture slides accessible on the
internet. Tutorials addressing specific subject areas (eg, the treatment of breast
cancer) may also be delivered on the internet and provide learners access to
core texts and reference materials and self-assessment questions
multiple choice). Internet-based tutorials, lecture notes, etc, can be accessed
from anywhere in the world connected to the internet
(eg, a tutorial in
Liverpool can be accessed by students in Harvard). This offers great potential
for distance learning courses, both national and international. Because the
course materials are stored in one place revisions can be made instantly
available to all students. However, course materials produced using HTML, the
standard mark-up language
for the web, cannot be made
intelligent
interactive because HTML is not a programming language (eg,
manipulate information or make decisions).
The web is a continually evolving technology. Probably the most significant
development at this time is release of the programming language JavaTM (similar
to the C programming language) developed by Sun Microcomputers. Programs
written using JavaTM are run over the internet via web pages. This means
developers using JavaTM will, by the time this paper goes to press, be able to
produce intelligent and interactive web pages to provide the same functionality
that some CD-ROM-based programs offer. To run JavaTM programs, however,
a JavaTM-compatible web browser is required (eg, Netscape Navigatori
2 or later).
The future
IT is advancing at such a pace that there is a continual flow of innovations
offering new and exciting opportunities for medical education. We are currently
at the dawn of virtual reality (VR) systems that enable users to explore and
interact with real-time 3D worlds. Some VR programs already exist, although
expensive powerful computer equipment is required to use them. There are
already basic VR programs that will run on standard multimedia desktop
computers and be accessed over the internet. These VR programs are based on
the virtual reality modelling language (VRML) which enables 3D worlds to be
built and made interactive. VRML (pronounced vermal) can transmit 3D
worlds over the internet and standard web browsers now have plug-in programs
that let users view and interact with these worlds. VRML has great potential for
medical education, enabling learners to interact and manipulate structures. For
example, a 3D anatomical representation of the heart could be modelled, using
VRLM, to beat (including sound) in real time. Learners could, in this case,
explore the pumping mechanisms of the heart in three dimensions from inside
or outside of the heart. An example of a VRML world is illustrated in figure 4
which shows
a VR desktop for Liverpool's problem-based study-guides.2
Desktop video conferencing is another development on the horizon which
offers great potential for medical education and practice. Although video
conferencing has been available for quite some time,
it required expensive
equipment and was costly to run because satellite time often needed to be
bought. There are a range of desktop video conferencing packets that connect
to standard multimedia computers and can use the conventional telephone
relatively
inexpensive
conventional telephone networks and the internet are relatively inexpensive
conferencing
Mooney, Bligh
undergraduate, postgraduate and professional medical education in helping
distance-based learners to communicate with their peers and tutors more
effectively and more naturally.
Conclusions
Multimedia and the internet present great opportunities
to support and
enhance medical
education. They provide
learners with
quantities of information which can be searched and viewed in a variety of
ways (eg, digital video, sound). The internet, in particular, can help learners
from different countries to participate in, for example, tutorials and communicate with other learners and tutors. However, neither multimedia and the
internet are currently being used to their full potential. The vast majority of
CBL materials produced for medicine are in effect electronic textbooks which
have very few educational benefits over paper-based texts. This may be the
result of poor development approaches,7 where the emphasis is placed on
technology as opposed to education. Producing educationally effective CBL
materials requires a three-pronged approach encompassing computer science,
medical education and medical content,8 with an emphasis on educational
structure. Technology is in a position now to offer great potential for teaching
medicine. The
technologists with the expertise of medical educators, clinicians and basic
scientists in efforts to design and develop innovative approaches towards
medical education that utilise IT to its full potential for maximum educational
1 Harden RM, Smyth JJ. Computer-based study
guides II: educational components and advantages. Med Teach 1994; 16, 315-21.
2 Mooney GA, Bligh JG, Leinster SJ, Warenius
HM. An electronic study guide for problem
based learning, Med Educ 1995; 29, 397-402.
3 Entwistle N. Styles of teaching and learning: an
integrated
of educational psychology for
teachers and lecturers London: David
Fullen Publishers, 1988.
4 Bligh JG. Problem-based learning in medicine:
an introduction. Postgrad Med J 1995; 71, 323-
production ofcomputer-based learning materials
for medical education. Med Educ
6 Pasterkamp H. Computer assisted learning of chest
auscultation:
respiration
laboratory
environment. Knowledge, information and medical
education Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers, 1991.
7 Gray DE, Black TR. Prototyping of computerbased training materials. Comput Educ 1993; 3,
8 Mooney GA. A model for the development of
courseware.
thesis, The
University of Liverpool, Harold-Cohen Library,
Liverpool L69 3BX, UK, 1995.