Efficiency and Cost of Economical Brain
Functional Networks
Sophie Achard, Ed Bullmore*
Brain Mapping Unit, Department of Psychiatry, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
Brain anatomical networks are sparse, complex, and have economical small-world properties. We investigated the
efficiency and cost of human brain functional networks measured using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
in a factorial design: two groups of healthy old (N ¼ 11; mean age ¼ 66.5 years) and healthy young (N ¼ 15; mean age ¼
24.7 years) volunteers were each scanned twice in a no-task or ‘‘resting’’ state following placebo or a single dose of a
dopamine receptor antagonist (sulpiride 400 mg). Functional connectivity between 90 cortical and subcortical regions
was estimated by wavelet correlation analysis, in the frequency interval 0.06–0.11 Hz, and thresholded to construct
undirected graphs. These brain functional networks were small-world and economical in the sense of providing high
global and local efficiency of parallel information processing for low connection cost. Efficiency was reduced
disproportionately to cost in older people, and the detrimental effects of age on efficiency were localised to frontal and
temporal cortical and subcortical regions. Dopamine antagonism also impaired global and local efficiency of the
network, but this effect was differentially localised and did not interact with the effect of age. Brain functional
networks have economical small-world properties—supporting efficient parallel information transfer at relatively low
cost—which are differently impaired by normal aging and pharmacological blockade of dopamine transmission.
Citation: Achard S, Bullmore E Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks. PLoS Comput Biol 3(2): e17. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030017
Introduction
Small-World Brain Networks
Complex networks, from ecosystems to metabolic pathways,
occur in diverse ﬁelds of biological science . Nervous
systems are complex networks at multiple scales of time and
space. It has been shown that brain anatomical and functional
networks are topologically intermediate between highly
regular lattices and random graphs . In other words,
brain networks have characteristically small-world properties
of dense or clustered local connectivity with relatively few
long-range connections mediating a short path length
between any pair of neurons or regions in the network .
Small-world topology is an attractive model for brain network
organization because it could support both segregated and
distributed information processing , confer resilience
against pathological attack , and minimise wiring costs
 . From an evolutionary perspective, it can be argued that
small-world brain networks have been competitively selected
to solve the economic problem of maximising information
processing efﬁciency while minimising costs .
Hypotheses and Study Design
To test directly the hypothesis that small-world brain
functional networks have economical properties, we measured global and local efﬁciency of parallel information
processing, as a function of cost, in networks derived from
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data. Economical network organization has been previously deﬁned in
terms of high efﬁciency E on the basis of low cost K .
Efﬁciency was deﬁned as a function of the minimum path
length between regions; the most simple measure of cost was
deﬁned as the number of edges or connections in the
network; both metrics were expressed in proportion to the
maximum efﬁciency and cost of a comparable network
comprising all possible connections between regions .
We predicted that brain functional networks would
generally demonstrate economical small-world properties
of high global and local efﬁciency for low cost. The
functional connectivity between each possible pair of N ¼
90 regional fMRI time series was ﬁrst estimated in the lowfrequency interval 0.06–0.11 Hz using wavelet correlation
analysis . The resulting wavelet correlation matrices (one
for each participant in the study) were then thresholded to
produce a set of undirected graphs representing the brain
functional network for each participant, and the efﬁciency
of each network was measured as a function of variable cost
in the range 0.01  K  0.5, which is equivalent to 1%–50%
of all possible edges in a (fully connected) network of N ¼ 90
We were also interested to test the subsidiary hypothesis
that the economical performance of small-world brain
functional networks would be adversely affected by normal
aging and by pharmacological blockade of dopamine neurotransmission. We therefore acquired and analysed fMRI data
from two age-deﬁned groups of healthy volunteers—a young
group (N¼15; mean age¼24.7 years) and an older group (N¼
11; mean age ¼ 66.5 years)—each scanned in a no-task or
resting state on two separate occasions following oral
Editor: Karl J. Friston, University College London, United Kingdom
Received October 3, 2006; Accepted December 18, 2006; Published February 2,
Copyright:  2007 Achard and Bullmore. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original author and source are credited.
Abbreviations: ANOVA, analysis of variance; BOLD, blood-oxygen-level-dependent; fMRI, functional magnetic resonance imaging; MRI, magnetic resonance
imaging; OP, old people after placebo; OS, old people after sulpiride; YP, young
people after placebo; YS, young people after sulpiride
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: 
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org
February 2007 | Volume 3 | Issue 2 | e17
administration either of placebo or of sulpiride 400 mg, a
selective dopamine D2 receptor antagonist.
Methodological Motivations
Given the very large number of ways in which a dataset of
this complexity could be analysed, it is reasonable to ask how
this particular sequence of operations—wavelet correlation
analysis followed by thresholding and economical small-world
analysis of the resulting graphs—was motivated a priori.
We used wavelets for estimation of functional connectivity
in these data because of prior evidence indicating that
cortical fMRI time series often have long memory in time
(slowly decaying positive autocorrelation), or a 1/f power
spectrum in the frequency domain . This property
argues against measuring functional connectivity between a
pair of fMRI time series by estimation of their covariance or
correlation in the time domain, or their coherence in the
frequency domain, because both time- and frequencydomain estimators of association are not properly estimable
for long memory processes . The wavelet domain, on the
other hand, is technically advantageous for analysis of long
memory and potentially nonstationary fMRI time series .
For example, the wavelet coefﬁcients of a long memory
process are stationary, and wavelet-based estimators of the
correlation between two long memory processes have been
shown to have desirable statistical properties . An
additional advantage of wavelet-based connectivity analysis,
shared in common with approaches in the frequency
domain, is that it allows us to focus on the functional
association between brain regions subtended by activity in a
deﬁned frequency interval or wavelet scale. This is attractive
for an application to resting-state fMRI data because there is
prior evidence indicating that functional connectivity between regions is typically greatest at frequencies less than 0.1
Hz , whereas non-neural sources of resting state
correlations, such as aliased cardiorespiratory effects, are
subtended by higher frequencies . (We return in the
Discussion section to the question of what oscillations or
correlations at these so-called infraslow frequencies might
represent.)
The rationale for thresholding was simply that we wished to
focus attention on the topology of relatively sparse (low-cost)
networks, representing the strongest functional connections
or largest wavelet correlations. This is broadly justiﬁed by
the known sparsity of anatomical connections in non-human
and human nervous systems; in Caenorhabditis elegans, for
example, less than 6% of all possible unweighted synaptic
connections exist between neurons . There are, of course,
methods for analysis of functional connectivity matrices that
do not demand preliminary thresholding; one could perhaps
apply principal component analysis to the wavelet correlation matrix to produce frequency-speciﬁc eigenimages.
However, here we were interested primarily in the topological properties of networks or graphs—and thresholding
is a necessary step in the derivation of graphs, whether
weighted or unweighted, from any continuous measure of
association between variables. The choice of threshold then
becomes a critical issue which we addressed by estimating
and integrating network efﬁciency over a range of correlation thresholds equivalent to costs in the range 0.01  K 
0.5 (see Results).
The main motivation for our adoption of the relatively
novel metrics of network efﬁciency, ﬁrst deﬁned by Latora and
Marchiori , was our hypothetical interest in directly
estimating the economical performance of small-world brain
functional networks. We note that global and local efﬁciency
have previously been estimated for anatomical networks in
macaque and cat cortex (see Table 1); however, there has
been no previous application of these economical smallworld metrics to human brain functional network analysis.
Global efﬁciency (Eglobal, Equation 1) is inversely related to
the ‘‘classical’’ small-world metric of average minimum path
length, L . Thus, a small-world network will have Eglobal
greater than (L less than) a regular lattice but Eglobal less than
(L greater than) a random network. This strong inverse
relation might suggest that the two metrics are of equal
merit in any application; however, efﬁciency offers a number
of technical and conceptual advantages. First, average
minimum path length was deﬁned only for connected
graphs, i.e., graphs in which all nodes are connected as part
of one giant cluster or large subgraph, yet application of
high thresholds to correlation matrices may result in one or
more of the less strongly connected regions becoming
disconnected from the giant cluster. In this case, the path
length between the disconnected region and the rest of the
network will be inﬁnite, whereas the contribution of the
disconnected region to the global efﬁciency of the network
will be zero. Thus, inverting path length in the calculation of
global efﬁciency simpliﬁes the numerical issues in estimating
efﬁciency of unconnected regions. More generally, we can
see that inversion of path length also has the intuitively
desirable effect of weighting global efﬁciency by the
contribution of the most highly connected regions or
‘‘hubs,’’ whereas average minimum path length is weighted
by the least connected regions or ‘‘diaspora.’’
Second, average minimum path length was deﬁned only for
unweighted graphs (in which the connections or edges
between nodes are all assigned equal value 1); whereas the
efﬁciency metrics are applicable both to unweighted and
weighted graphs . Here we will focus mostly on the simpler case of
unweighted graph analysis but we also rehearse the formulation of efﬁciency metrics for weighted graphs and
report some additional results for analysis of brain networks
weighted by the strength of functional association between
regions. Third, path length provides a measure of the
network’s capacity for serial information transfer between
nodes, whereas global efﬁciency is a measure of the network’s
capacity for parallel information transfer between nodes via
multiple series of edges. Since there is strong prior evidence
that the brain supports massively parallel information
processing, it seems conceptually preferable to adopt
efﬁciency metrics of brain functional network topology.
Brain Functional Networks Have Economical Small-World
Properties
Global and local efﬁciency of brain networks were
compared with the same parameters estimated in a random
graph and a regular lattice over a range of network costs. As
expected, efﬁciency monotonically increased as a function of
cost in all networks; the random graph had higher global
efﬁciency than the lattice; and the lattice had higher local
efﬁciency than the random graph, for costs in the range 0 
K  0.5; see Figure 1.
The efﬁciency curves of the brain networks were intermediate between these limiting cases: brain networks had
global efﬁciency greater than the lattice but less than the
random graph, and local efﬁciency greater than random but
less than lattice. This characteristically small-world behaviour
of the brain networks was most consistently seen for low-cost
to medium-cost networks, 0.05  K  0.34, comprising
between 5% and 34% of the 4,005 possible edges in a network
of 90 nodes.
Importantly, in this small-world cost regime, 0.05  K 
0.34, global and local efﬁciency of brain networks was greater
than cost. The difference between global efﬁciency and cost—
called cost efﬁciency—typically had a maximum positive
value in networks comprising about 850 edges or 21% of the
possible edges in the network, i.e., Max(Eglobal  K) when K ;
0.2; see Figure 2.
Age Impairs Economical Performance of Small-World Brain
Older people had reduced global and local efﬁciency of
brain functional networks compared with younger people, as
shown by the summary statistics on economical parameters of
sparse networks with K ; 0.1 (Table 1 and Figure 3) or by
inspection of the individual network efﬁciency estimates
(Figure 3). This detrimental effect of age on global efﬁciency
was statistically signiﬁcant (ANOVA [analysis of variance], F ¼
8.96, df ¼ 1,24, p ¼ 0.006), as was the effect of age on local
efﬁciency (ANOVA, F ¼ 4.41, df ¼ 1,24, p ¼ 0.05). Results of
post-hoc t-tests are also shown in Figure 3.
Age-related differences in efﬁciency were not unique to the
single threshold used to generate low-cost networks with K ;
Figure 1. Small-World Properties of Human Brain Functional Networks
Global and local efficiency (y-axis) as a function of cost (x-axis) for a
random graph, a regular lattice, and brain networks. For all networks,
global and local efficiency increase with cost; the random graph has
greater global efficiency than the lattice; the lattice has greater local
efficiency than the random graph. On average, over all subjects in each
group, young brain networks (black broken lines) and old brain networks
(red broken lines) have efficiency curves located between the limiting
cases of random and lattice topology. The small-world regime is
conservatively defined as the range of costs 0.34  K  0.5 for which
the global efficiency curve for the old networks is greater than the global
efficiency curve for the lattice.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030017.g001
Table 1. Efficiency E and Cost K Parameters for Brain Networks
C. elegans
(Standard Deviation)
Max (Eglobal  K)
Results for macaque, cat, and C. elegans are as reported by Latora and Marchiori for anatomically connected cortical and neuronal networks. Results for YP, YS, OP, and OS are
obtained by comparable analysis of functionally connected human cortical networks (N ¼ 15 for young group; N ¼ 11 for old group). The cost-efficiency parameter, Max (Eglobal  K), is the
maximum difference between global efficiency and cost over the small-world cost regime 0.05 , K , 0.34, and it is evaluated by calculating the difference over a range of thresholds
applied to the wavelet correlation measures of functional connectivity between regions in the human fMRI data; see Figure 2 for illustration.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030017.t001
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org
February 2007 | Volume 3 | Issue 2 | e17
Economical Brain Networks
0.1. As shown in Figure 4, older people had reduced global
and local efﬁciency over the entire range of network costs
comprising the small-world regime, 0.05  K  0.34. The
integrals of the global and local efﬁciency curves were used as
summary measures of network efﬁciency over the small-world
regime, and analysis of variance conﬁrmed detrimental
effects of age on integrated global efﬁciency (F ¼ 8.47, df ¼
1,24, p ¼ 0.008) and integrated local efﬁciency (F ¼ 6.19, df ¼
1,24, p ¼ 0.02).
Age also signiﬁcantly reduced the maximum-cost efﬁciency
(ANOVA, F¼6.82, df¼1,24, p¼0.015); see Table 1 and Figure 3.
Dopamine Blockade Impairs Economical Performance of
Small-World Brain Networks
A single dose of sulpiride, compared with placebo, reduced
global and local efﬁciency of low-cost networks, with K ; 0.1,
in both young and old people, although drug effects were
more variable in the older age group (see Table 1 and Figure
3). The detrimental effect of drug on global efﬁciency was
signiﬁcant (ANOVA, F ¼ 9.43, df ¼ 1,24, p ¼ 0.005), as was its
effect on local efﬁciency (ANOVA, F ¼ 14.36, df ¼ 1,24, p ¼
0.0009). Results of post-hoc t-tests are also shown in Figure 3.
There were no signiﬁcant age by drug interactions on global
or local efﬁciency.
Drug-related effects on efﬁciency were evident not only in
the low-cost network with K ; 0.1 but also in terms of global
and local efﬁciency curves integrated over the small-world
cost regime, 0.05  K  0.34 (Figure 4). The detrimental
effect of sulpiride on integrated global efﬁciency was
signiﬁcant (ANOVA, F ¼ 5.40, df ¼ 1,24, p ¼ 0.03), as was its
effect on integrated local efﬁciency (ANOVA, F ¼ 6.11, df ¼
1,24, p ¼ 0.02). There were no signiﬁcant age by drug
interactions on integrated global or local efﬁciency.
There was no signiﬁcant effect of drug on maximum-cost
efﬁciency.
Figure 3. Efficiency Measures for Low-Cost Brain Functional Networks, with K ; 0.1, in All Participants
(Top row) Within-subject effects of dopamine antagonism (sulpiride 400 mg) on global efficiency (left column), local efficiency (middle column), and
maximum cost efficiency (right column): data on younger subjects are denoted by black lines and black triangles, data on older subjects by red lines
and red triangles.
(Bottom row) Box-plots showing median, interquartile range, and range for global efficiency, local efficiency, and maximum-cost efficiency in each age
group after each treatment. Each horizontal line and the associated number represent the p-value of a post-hoc t-test: there were consistent pairwise
differences in global efficiency related to age (YP–OP and YS–OS), less consistent age-related differences in cost efficiency (YP–OP), and no significant
post-hoc effects of age on local efficiency; however, there were consistent pairwise differences in local efficiency related to drug treatment (YP–YS and
OP–OS), and a significant effect of drug on global efficiency in young people (YP–YS).
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030017.g003
Figure 2. Economical Properties of Human Brain Functional Networks
Efficiency (y-axis) as a function of cost (x-axis) for two individual brain
networks: a young subject following placebo (left panel) and an older
subject following placebo (right panel). For both subjects, local efficiency
(red lines) and global efficiency (green lines) increase monotonically with
cost; and cost efficiency (the difference between global efficiency and
cost; blue lines) has its maximum value when 0.2  K  0.4. The low-cost
threshold, K ; 0.1, associated with the sparse networks reported in
Figures 3 and 5, is shown as a black vertical line in each graph.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030017.g002
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org
February 2007 | Volume 3 | Issue 2 | e17
Economical Brain Networks
Age and Drug Effects on Network Efficiency Are
Differentially Localised
The regional efﬁciency of each node is a measure of its
connectivity to all other nodes of the network; highly
connected nodes or ‘‘hubs’’ will have high regional efﬁciency.
When the 90 brain regional nodes were ranked in order of
decreasing regional efﬁciency (using data acquired in young
people following placebo [YP]), we found that the hubs of the
network were predominantly larger regions of unimodal or
multimodal association cortex, whereas smaller limbic/paralimbic regions often had relatively low regional efﬁciency; see
Figure 5. A broadly similar pattern was found in data
acquired from older subjects following placebo (Figure 5),
indicating that association cortical areas tend to be hubs of
the brain functional network regardless of age (and treatment
with sulpiride; unpublished data).
However, multiple univariate analysis of variance showed
that older age was associated with signiﬁcantly reduced nodal
efﬁciency of several regions of frontal and temporal neocortex; paralimbic and limbic regions including hippocampus, parahippocampal gyrus, amygdala, and dorsal cingulate
gyrus; and subcortical regions including pallidum and
thalamus; see Table 2 for details and Figure 6 for a network
map of brain regions with signiﬁcantly reduced nodal
efﬁciency due to older age. The less extensive effects of
dopamine blockade on regional efﬁciency were most clearly
evident in temporal neocortex and dorsal cingulate gyrus;
Table 2 and Figure 6.
Discussion
Economical Models of Brain Function
It is well-recognised that the metabolic costs of building
and functionally resourcing the brain are large in proportion
to the total energy budget of the body . There is evidence
that many aspects of brain anatomy can be explained in terms
of minimising axonal wiring or metabolic running costs
 . It therefore seems likely that one of the selection
pressures driving brain evolution has been minimisation of
costs—favoring a high density of short-range local connections. However, it also seems likely that brains have evolved to
support greater diversity and adaptivity of sensorimotor and
cognitive functions, presumably by enhancing the neuronal
infrastructure for information processing—and this would be
expected to favor selection of a few long-range connections
mediating efﬁcient information transfer between spatially
distributed regions . We can surmise that, broadly
speaking, brains might have been competitively selected to
maximise cost efﬁciency of parallel information processing in
large-scale networks.
There is data in support of this hypothesis from computational modeling studies by Sporns et al. , which showed
that graphs computationally evolved for high complexity of
dynamic behaviour had a sparse, small-world topology of
edges between connected nodes. However, there have been
no previous efforts directly to measure economical parameters of brain networks derived empirically from human
functional neuroimaging data. Here, we have shown that
human brain functional networks have topological properties
that would be expected on the hypothesis of economic
selection: high efﬁciency of parallel information transfer at
low cost, e.g., about 35% of maximum efﬁciency for 10% of
maximum cost (Table 1).
Effects of Age and Dopamine Blockade on Economical
Network Parameters
We have also shown that the economical small-world
properties of these networks are deleteriously affected by
both older age and blockade of dopamine D2 receptors.
In both age groups, the hubs of the functional networks
were predominantly larger regions of multimodal and
unimodal association cortex. This observation replicates
prior studies in independent samples , implicating
recently evolved association cortical regions as critical nodes
in monkey and human brain anatomical and functional
networks. The deleterious effects of older age on network
performance could be localized in terms of reduced regional
efﬁciency of hubs such as dorsal cingulate, middle frontal,
Figure 4. Efficiency Measures Estimated and Integrated over the Small-
World Regime of Network Costs, 0.05  K  0.34
(Rows 1,2) Global (left) and local (right) efficiency curves for young (black
lines) and older (red lines) people after placebo (row 1) and sulpiride
(Row 3) Within-subject effects of dopamine antagonism on integrated
global efficiency (left) and integrated local efficiency (right): data on
younger subjects are denoted by black lines and black triangles, data on
older subjects by red lines and red triangles.
(Row 4) Box-plots showing median, interquartile range, and range for
integrated global efficiency (left) and integrated local efficiency (right) in
each age group after each treatment.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030017.g004
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org
February 2007 | Volume 3 | Issue 2 | e17
Economical Brain Networks
and inferior temporal gyri. However, there was also clear
evidence for age-related deﬁcits in efﬁciency of topologically
more peripheral limbic and paralimbic regions, notably
hippocampus, parahippocampal gyrus, and amygdala.
Pharmacological blockade of dopamine D2 receptors by a
single dose of sulpiride 400 mg was also acutely associated
with impaired global and local efﬁciency of the networks.
These effects were less salient and extensive than the effects
of age, and in the older group there was considerable
between-subject variability in drug effects. Dopamine transmission is known to play an important role in modulating the
frequency, phase, and spatial coherence of endogenous
Figure 5. Effect of Age on Regional Efficiency
Brain regions ranked in order of decreasing regional efficiency: ‘‘hubs’’ have high regional efficiency and tend to be larger regions of association cortex
in both young (left panel) and old people (right panel); ‘‘diaspora’’ have low regional efficiency and tend to be smaller regions of limbic/paralimbic
cortex. Each box-plot shows median, interquartile range, and range for individual estimates of regional efficiency in each age group following placebo;
boxes are color-coded to differentiate primary sensory or motor cortex (red), unimodal or multimodal association cortex (beige), limbic or paralimbic
cortex (turquoise blue), and subcortical nuclei (periwinkle blue).
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030017.g005
Table 2. Significant Effects of Age and Drug Treatment on Nodal Efficiency of Regions in a Low-Cost Brain Functional Network with K
Brain Regions
Age Effects
Drug Effects
Sup orbitofrontal, R (0.018)
Inf orbitofrontal, R (0.045)
Mid frontal gyrus, L (0.028)
Sup temporal gyrus, L (0.048)
Inf temporal gyrus, L (0.008)
Inf temporal gyrus, L (0.003)
Heschl’s gyrus, R (0.014)
Inf temporal gyrus, R (0.044)
Mid temporal gyrus, L (,0.001)
Heschl’s gyrus, L (,0.001)
Heschl’s gyrus, R (0.025)
Superior temporal pole, L (0.016)
Supramarginal gyrus, L (0.01)
Inf occipital gyrus, L (0.02)
Limbic/paralimbic
Dorsal cingulate gyrus, R (0.007)
Dorsal cingulate gyrus, R (0.004)
Hippocampus, R (0.02)
Parahippocampal gyrus, R (,0.001)
Amygdala, R & L (,0.001)
Insula, L (0.02)
Subcortical
Pallidum, L (0.04)
Pallidum, R (,0.001)
Thalamus, L (0.05)
Figures in parentheses are p-values for the main effects of age or drug estimated by two-way, mixed-effects analysis of variance. These regional effects are also represented in anatomical
space by the network diagrams in Figure 6.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030017.t002
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org
February 2007 | Volume 3 | Issue 2 | e17
Economical Brain Networks
oscillations in the basal ganglia and cortex . Our data
suggest more speciﬁcally that dopaminergic afferentation
may normally contribute to optimising the economical
performance of small-world brain functional networks, and
pharmacological antagonism of this modulatory input impairs network efﬁciency by an effect most clearly localised to
dorsal cingulate and lateral temporal cortical hubs.
Since increasing age has been consistently associated with
loss of dopamine cell bodies and decreased density of
dopamine projections to striatum and cortex, contributing
to age-related cognitive decline , it is conceivable that
the effects of age on economical network performance might
be mimicked by the effects of dopamine receptor antagonism. This was true in the broad sense that the D2 receptor
blockade, like older age, reduced global and local network
efﬁciency: both factors degraded the relatively optimal
network performance demonstrated by young people following placebo. More locally, both age and sulpiride impaired
regional efﬁciency of dorsal cingulate gyrus, which is known
to receive a major dopaminergic input and to be vulnerable
to regressive changes in normal aging. However, the effects of
age were generally more salient and extensive, involving
several frontal and limbic/paralimbic regions that were not
signiﬁcantly affected by sulpiride. We conclude that attenuated dopamine transmission may contribute to age-related
impairments in functional network efﬁciency, but it seems
likely that additional mechanisms must be invoked to account
for the topological marginalisation of medial temporal and
frontal regions in older people. For example, this functional
observation might be related to structural neuroimaging
evidence for grey and white matter deﬁcits of frontal and
temporal regions due to normal aging .
Low-Frequency Oscillations and Correlations in fMRI
Many previous studies of fMRI data acquired in a no-task
or ‘‘resting’’ state have demonstrated signiﬁcant interregional correlations subtended by very-low-frequency oscillations, less than 0.1 Hz . Various possible
causes have been considered for these observations including instrumental, vasomotor , and neuronal mechanisms.
fMRI studies using rapid sampling rates, i.e., short repetition
times (TR), have shown that low-frequency power or
coherence is unlikely to represent (possibly aliased) signals
related to the cardiac or respiratory cycles . On the
other hand, multisecond periodicities or infraslow oscillations have been reported in both local ﬁeld potential
recordings from rat basal ganglia and monkey cortex
 and the surface EEG in humans . These
electrophysiological data, unconfounded by the vascular or
systemic cardiorespiratory effects that can complicate
interpretation of blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD)
signals, suggest that coherent neuronal oscillations exist at
very low frequencies and could represent a plausible
substrate for the low-frequency oscillations and correlations
observed using fMRI. The cognitive implications of these socalled ‘‘resting state networks,’’ and their relationships to
large-scale brain systems coherently oscillating at higher
frequencies , remain to be elucidated. One important
limitation of the existing fMRI literature on low-frequency
connectivity is that it has focused predominantly on data
acquired in resting or no-task states, which are experimentally uncontrolled and are not well-designed to clarify the
signiﬁcance of low-frequency correlations for cognitive
An additional caveat in interpretation of these results is
that dopaminergic drugs may have effects on BOLD signals
that are mediated by dopamine receptors on the small
arterial walls of the cerebral vasculature rather than by
neuronal receptors (see Honey and Bullmore for a review
of issues in pharmacological studies using fMRI). This
interpretation of our fMRI data is difﬁcult to rule out
completely without access to complementary electrophysiological data showing similar effects of sulpiride on lowfrequency brain networks. However, we have previously
reported that the effects of sulpiride on parameters of
Figure 6. Anatomical Representation of Brain Functional Networks
Highlighting Regional Effects of Age and Dopamine Receptor Antagonism
Brain functional networks for one young person following placebo (top
row) and one old person following placebo (bottom row). These
networks were constructed by thresholding the individual wavelet
correlation matrices to derive sparse networks with equal cost, K ; 0.1:
regional nodes are shown as dots or circles in a sagittal view of the right
side of the brain; strong functional connections are shown as undirected
edges between nodes. The size of regional nodes is proportional to the
significance of age-related or drug-related reductions in regional
efficiency: red nodes, efficiency reduced by older age; blue nodes,
efficiency reduced by sulpiride; purple nodes, efficiency reduced by both
older age and sulpiride. See Table 2 for anatomical detail concerning
locations of significant difference in regional efficiency.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030017.g006
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org
February 2007 | Volume 3 | Issue 2 | e17
Economical Brain Networks
human cortical response to somatosensory stimulation were
similar whether measured by fMRI or by evoked potentials,
implying that measurements of sulpiride’s effects on BOLD
signal change can indeed reﬂect an underlying change in
neuronal activity .
Materials and Methods
Sample. Thirty healthy human volunteers were recruited in two age
groups: 17 younger participants aged 18–33 years, mean age ¼ 24.3
years, nine male; and 13 older participants aged 62–76 years, mean age
¼ 67.3 years, six male. Recruitment was via locally placed advertisements, followed by telephone screening using a standard questionnaire. Exclusion criteria included a history of neurological or
psychiatric disorder, current treatment with vasoactive or psychotropicmedication,or anycontraindications to MRI orstudydrug. Prior
to functional MRI scanning, each participant also had an electrocardiogram and a structural MRI scan reviewed as normal by a
physician.
The two age groups were matched on education and on crystallised
IQ, as estimated by the National Adult Reading Test . Older
volunteers also completed the Mini Mental State Examination, and a
minimum score of 28 was required for participation .
All participants gave informed consent in writing. The study was
approved by the Addenbrooke’s National Health Service Trust Local
Research Ethics Committee, Cambridge, UK.
Experimental design. We used a double-blind placebo-controlled
crossover design, each participant attending for two study sessions
separated by at least one week. In one session, subjects received an
oral placebo; in the other session, subjects received a single oral dose
of sulpiride 400 mg, a selective dopamine D2 receptor antagonist.
The order of treatments was randomized, and both treatments were
administered four hours before functional MRI. Prior pharmacokinetic data have shown that the time to maximum plasma concentration of sulpiride is three hours after an oral dose, and plasma levels
remain close to maximum until six hours after dosing.
Functional MRI data acquisition and pre-processing. Each participant was scanned lying quietly at rest with eyes closed for 9 min, 37.5
s. Gradient-echo echoplanar imaging (EPI) data depicting BOLD
contrast were acquired using a Medspec S300 scanner (Bruker
Medical, operating at 3.0 T in the Wolfson
Brain Imaging Centre (Cambridge, UK). We acquired 525 volumes
with the following parameters: number of slices, 21 (interleaved); slice
thickness, 4 mm; interslice gap, 1 mm; matrix size, 64 3 64; ﬂip angle,
908; repetition time (TR), 1100 ms; echo time, 27.5 ms; in-plane
resolution, 3.125 mm. The ﬁrst seven volumes were discarded to allow
for T1 saturation effects, leaving 518 volumes available for analysis of
resting state connectivity in each subject.
Each dataset was corrected initially for geometric displacements
because of head movement and co-registered with the Montreal
Neurological Institute gradient-echo echoplanar imaging (EPI)
template image, using an afﬁne transform implemented in SPM2
software ( Four datasets (two young, two
old) that had been affected by head movement in excess of 3 mm
translation, or 0.38 rotation, in x, y, or z dimensions, were discarded.
The remaining data were not spatially smoothed before regional
parcellation using the anatomically labeled template image validated
previously by Tzourio-Mazoyer et al. . This parcellation divides
each cerebral hemisphere into 45 anatomical regions of interest.
Regional mean time series were estimated for each individual by
averaging the fMRI time series over all voxels in each of 90 regions.
Each regional mean time series was further corrected for the effects
of head movement by regression on the time series of translations
and rotations of the head estimated in the course of initial movement
correction by image realignment. The residuals of these regressions
constituted the set of regional mean time series used for wavelet
correlation analysis.
Wavelet correlation analysis and graph construction. Wavelet
transforms effect a time-scale decomposition that partitions the
total energy of a signal over a set of compactly supported basis
functions, or little waves, each of which is uniquely scaled in
frequency and located in time. Wavelet analysis is naturally wellsuited to analysis of fractal signals that have long memory or 1/f
properties, as is typical of cortical fMRI time series in the resting state
 ; see Bullmore et al. for a review of wavelet methods for fMRI
data analysis. Beran and Percival and Walden are excellent
general texts concerning long memory processes and wavelet analysis
of time series, respectively.
Here we adopted a wavelet transform as a basis to estimate the
scale-dependent correlations between each of 4,005 possible pairs of
the N ¼ 90 cortical and subcortical fMRI time series extracted from
each individual dataset. We ﬁrst used the maximum overlap discrete
wavelet transform (MODWT) to decompose each regional mean time
series into wavelet coefﬁcients at four scales . Then we estimated
the pairwise inter-regional correlations between wavelet coefﬁcients
at each scale. This resulted in a set of four f90 3 90g scale-speciﬁc
wavelet correlation matrices Wm for each of m ¼ 1,2,3,. . .M subjects
 . Because of prior data indicating that inter-regional correlations
in resting state fMRI data are particularly salient at frequencies below
0.1 Hz , we restricted our attention to the scale 3 waveletcorrelation matrices which represented functional connectivity in the
frequency interval 0.06–0.11 Hz.
To analyze graphical properties of brain functional networks, each
wavelet correlation matrix Wm must be thresholded to create an
adjacency matrix Am, the ai,j elements of which are either 1, if the
absolute value of the wavelet correlation between nodes i and j, wi,j,
exceeds a threshold value R, or 0, if it does not. Each adjacency matrix
deﬁnes an unweighted graph G comprising N ¼ 90 regional nodes
connected by K undirected edges corresponding to its nonzero
elements, ai,j 6¼ 0. We deﬁne the degree of each node, ki, i ¼ 1,2,3,. . .N,
as the number of edges connecting it to the rest of the graph. We also
deﬁne the subgraph Gi as the set of nodes that are nearest-neighbours
of the ith node, i.e., the nodes in Gi are each directly connected by a
single edge to the index node, and by deﬁnition, the node i does not
belong to the subgraph Gi. The total number of edges in a graph K,
divided by the maximum possible number of edges (N2  N)/2, is a
simple estimator of network cost K .
Clearly the choice of threshold value 0  R  1 will have a major
effect on the topology of the resulting networks: conservative
thresholds, R ! 1, will generate sparsely connected graphs (with
small number of edges K, low-cost K); more lenient thresholds, R !
0, will generate more densely connected graphs (with large number
of edges K, high-cost K), inevitably including a number of edges
representing spurious or statistically nonsigniﬁcant correlations
between regions. We adopted two complementary approaches to
the choice of threshold. First, we thresholded all matrices using a
single, conservative threshold chosen to construct a sparse graph
with mean degree k ¼ 2log(N) ¼ 9 and total number of edges K ¼ 405,
equivalent to K ; 0.1 or 10% of the maximum number of edges
possible (4,005) in a network of 90 nodes. This allowed us to minimise
the number of spurious edges in each network, to compare low-cost
networks between subjects while maintaining an equivalent number
of edges in each network, and to compare the topological properties
of brain networks to those of equally sized random networks which
require k . log(N) to be estimable. However, any single threshold
admits the criticism that the topological properties of the resulting
graph may be uniquely dependent on the precise threshold value. We
therefore also thresholded each matrix repeatedly over a range of
costs and estimated the efﬁciency of the resulting graphs at each
threshold value. This allowed us to compare network efﬁciency as a
function of cost between age groups and treatment conditions in a
way that was relatively independent of the precise choice of
threshold. As shown in Figure S1, brain networks were not fully
connected over the entire range of network costs, but the size of the
giant connected cluster or largest subgraph was generally greater
than 80% of the total number of regions in the network.
All data analysis and visualization was implemented in opensource, R-based software ‘‘brainwaver,’’ freely downloadable at http://
www.wbic.cam.ac.uk/;sa428/brainwaver.
Efﬁciency and cost of small-world brain networks. Small-world
networks were originally deﬁned by Watts and Strogatz as having
characteristic path length L less than a regular lattice and local
clustering C greater than a random graph. It has since been shown
that the inverse of the harmonic mean of the minimum path length
between each pair of nodes, Li,j, is a measure of the global efﬁciency of
parallel information transfer Eglobal in the network :
We can likewise deﬁne the nodal (or regional) efﬁciency as the inverse
of the harmonic mean of the minimum path length between an index
node, i, and all other nodes in the network:
EnodalðiÞ ¼
Furthermore, the clustering coefﬁcient introduced by Watts and
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org
February 2007 | Volume 3 | Issue 2 | e17
Economical Brain Networks
Strogatz can be regarded as a measure of the local efﬁciency of
information transfer in the immediate neighbourhood of each node
NGiðNGi  1Þ
where NGi is the number of nodes in the subgraph Gi. The local
efﬁciencies for each node can be averaged over all nodes to estimate
the mean local efﬁciency of the graph. Since the ith (index) node is
not an element of the subgraph Gi, by deﬁnition the local efﬁciency
can also be understood as a measure of the fault tolerance of the
network, indicating how well each subgraph exchanges information
when the index node is eliminated.
Global and local efﬁciency of brain functional networks can be
compared with the same parameters estimated in random graphs and
regular lattices with the same number of edges and nodes. Smallworld properties of the brain networks are diagnosed by global
efﬁciency greater than a comparable lattice (but less than a random
graph) and local efﬁciency greater than a random graph (but less than
a lattice); see Figure 1.
Global and local efﬁciency, and the number of edges K, for a given
network can be normalised by dividing these quantities by the
maximum efﬁciencies and number of edges that would be observed in
the ideal case that the graph included all possible N(N 1)/2 edges. By
this normalization, we have 0  fEglobal,Elocal,Kg  1. Here we deﬁne
the cost efﬁciency as the difference between global efﬁciency and
cost, Eglobal  K, which will be positive in the case of an economical
Weighted brain functional networks. The computation of efﬁciency and cost can be generalised to weighted graphs. In this case, we
require a weighting matrix D (same dimension, N 3 N, as the
corresponding adjacency matrix A of the graph), whose dij elements
represent additional information about the cost of the edges.
Dijkstra’s algorithm can be used to search the weighted edge matrix
to ﬁnd the shortest weighted path length li,j between each pair of
nodes in the graph, i.e., the minimum value of the sum of weights over
all possible paths between nodes i and j . The efﬁciency of
communication between nodes i and j is then measured by global,
regional, and local efﬁciency of the weighted graph, simply derived
from Equations 1–3 by substituting Li,j with li,j. The cost of the
weighted graph is deﬁned by the sum of the weights between the
connected nodes, K ¼ P
i6¼j2Gdi,j. As for unweighted graph analysis,
efﬁciency and cost parameters can be normalised with respect to the
maximum values observed when all the nodes of the graph are
connected.
The main concern in modeling weighted networks is the choice of
a weighting matrix. For a spatially embedded network like the brain it
would generally be appropriate to use some measure of physical
distance between nodes as a weighting factor. However, the length of
axonal tracts between human brain regions is not yet well-known. An
alternative weighting factor, more easily estimated, is a measure of
the functional distance between connected regions, e.g., di,j ¼ 1  wi,j,
where wi,j is the wavelet correlation coefﬁcient for regions i and j. See
Figure S2 for an analysis of functionally weighted networks that is
directly comparable to the analysis of unweighted networks reported
in Figure 4 on the basis of the same experimental data. It can be seen
that the pattern of results for unweighted and functionally weighted
networks is very similar in these data.
Comparison of network parameters between age and treatment
groups. To assess the signiﬁcance of group differences in unweighted
network topology, we used a two-way mixed-effects ANOVA model
comprising age (young, old) as a between-subject factor, drug
(placebo, sulpiride) as a within-subject factor, and the age by drug
interaction. This model was separately ﬁtted to each of the following
dependent variables: global and local efﬁciency of sparsely thresholded networks with K ; 0.1; global and local efﬁciency curves
integrated over the small-world regime of costs, 0.05  K  0.34;
maximum-cost efﬁciency; and nodal efﬁciency for each region in the
individually estimated brain functional networks. If main effects were
signiﬁcant by ANOVA, post-hoc t-tests were also conducted for the
following comparisons: young people after placebo (YP) versus old
people after placebo (OP), young people after sulpiride (YS) versus
old people after sulpiride (OS); YP versus YS; OP versus OS.
Note that the results of the multiple ANOVAs entailed for a
region-by-region analysis of nodal efﬁciency were regarded as
signiﬁcant if p , 0.05, i.e., there was no correction for multiple
comparisons. The data on regional localization of effects of aging and
dopamine blockade on network efﬁciency should therefore be
regarded as exploratory in nature.
Supporting Information
Figure S1. Giant Connected Cluster or Largest Subgraph Size as a
Function of Cost for Young Brain Networks (Black Lines) and Old
Brain Networks (Red Lines) Following Placebo (Left) and Sulpiride
As expected, the percentage of regions connected to the largest
subgraph increases to a maximum value of 100% as a monotonically
increasing function of cost. In the small-world regime of costs, 0.05 
K  0.34, the giant connected cluster or largest subgraph generally
includes at least 80% of all possible regions.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030017.sg001 (26 KB EPS).
Figure S2. Efﬁciency Measures Estimated and Integrated over the
Small-World Regime of Costs, 0.05  K  0.34, for Weighted Networks
(Rows 1,2) Global (left) and local (right) efﬁciency curves for young
(black lines) and older (red lines) people after placebo (row 1) and
sulpiride (row 2).
(Row 3) Within-subject effects of dopamine antagonism on integrated
global efﬁciency (left) and integrated local efﬁciency (right): data on
younger subjects are denoted by black lines and black triangles, data
on older subjects by red lines and red triangles.
(Row 4) Box-plots showing median, interquartile range, and range for
integrated global efﬁciency (left) and integrated local efﬁciency
(right) in each age group after each treatment.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030017.sg002 (52 KB EPS).
Acknowledgments
The work was conducted in the Wellcome Trust/Medical Research
Council Behavioural and Clinical Neurosciences Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. We thank Dr. Alexa Morcom for support
in data acquisition.
Author contributions. EB conceived and designed the experiments
and performed the experiments. SA and EB analyzed the data,
contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools, and wrote the paper.
Funding. This neuroinformatics research was supported by a
Human Brain Project grant from the US National Institute of
Bioengineering and Biomedical Imaging and the US National
Institute of Mental Health.
Competing interests. The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.