Ineffectiveness of cognitive forcing strategies
to reduce biases in diagnostic reasoning: a
controlled trial
Jonathan Sherbino, MD Med*; Kulamakan Kulasegaram, BHSc3; Elizabeth Howey, BSc3;
Geoffrey Norman, PhD3
Objectives: Cognitive forcing strategies (CFS) may reduce error
arising from cognitive biases. This is the first experimental test
to determine the effect of CFS training in medical students.
Methods: Students were allocated to CFS training or control
during a 4-week emergency medicine rotation (n 5 191). At the
end of the rotation examination, students were tested using
computer-based cases. Application of CFS could enable
reduction of diagnostic error, as evidenced by identifying
multiple correct diagnoses for the two cases prone to search
satisficing bias (SSB) and uncommon diagnoses for the two
cases prone to availability bias (AB). Two ‘‘false positive’’
cases were included to test for possible ‘‘oversearching.’’
Results: There were 145 students in the intervention and 46 in
the control group. For the SSB cases, 52% of students with CFS
training and 48% in the control group initiated a search for the
second diagnosis (x2 5 0.13, df 5 1, p 5 0.91). More than half
(54%) correctly identified the second diagnosis in the CFS
group, and 48% identified it in the control group. The difference
was not significant (x2 5 2.25, df 5 1, p 5 0.13). For the second
diagnosis in the false positive cases, 64% of the CFS group and
77% of the control group incorrectly identified it. There were no
significant differences between groups (x2 5 2.38, df 5 1, p 5
0.12). In the AB cases, only 45% in each group identified the
uncommon correct diagnosis (x2 5 0.001, df 5 1, p 5 0.98).
Conclusions: The educational interventions suggested by
experts in clinical reasoning and employed in our study to teach
CFS failed to show any reduction in diagnostic error by novices.
Objectifs: Les strate´gies de «forc¸age» cognitif (SFC) peuvent
re´ duire le nombre d’erreurs de´ coulant de la partialite´
cognitive. Il s’agit du premier essai expe´rimental visant a`
de´terminer l’effet de la formation fonde´e sur les SFC, sur les
e´tudiants en me´decine.
Me´thodes: Les e´tudiants ont rec¸u la formation fonde´e sur les
SFC ou la formation habituelle durant un stage de 4 semaines
en me´decine d’urgence (n 5 191). A` la fin de l’examen relatif au
stage, les e´tudiants ont e´te´ soumis a` une analyse de cas
informatise´e. L’application des SFC pourrait permettre une
re´duction du nombre de diagnostics errone´s, comme en
te´moignent la possibilite´ de plus d’un bon diagnostic concernant deux cas susceptibles de donner lieu au biais de
recherche passable (BRP) et la pose de diagnostics rares
concernant deux cas susceptibles de donner lieu au biais de
disponibilite´ (BD). La liste comprenait e´galement deux cas «faux
positifs» pour ve´rifier la possibilite´ de «recherche excessive».
Re´sultats: Le groupe expe´rimental comptait 145 e´tudiants et le
groupe te´moin, 46. En ce qui concerne les cas susceptibles du
BRP, 52% des e´tudiants ayant rec¸u une formation fonde´e sur les
SFC et 48% des e´tudiants ayant rec¸u la formation habituelle ont
entrepris une recherche sur le deuxie`me diagnostic (x2 5 0.13;
fonction de re´partition [F(x)] 5 1; p 5 0.91). Plus de la moitie´
(54%) des sujets du groupe de SFC a conside´re´, a` juste titre, le
deuxie`me diagnostic comme bon contre 48% dans le groupe
te´moin. L’e´cart n’e´tait pas significatif (x2 5 2.25; F(x) 5 1; p 5
0.13). En ce qui concerne le deuxie`me diagnostic dans les cas
«faux positifs», 64% des e´tudiants du groupe de SFC et 77% des
e´tudiants du groupe te´moin ont pose´ le mauvais diagnostic. La`
encore, l’e´cart n’e´tait pas significatif entre les deux groupes (x2
5 2.38; F(x) 5 1; p 5 0.12). Quant aux cas susceptibles du BD,
seulement 45% des participants dans chacun des groupes a
bien reconnu le diagnostic rare (x2 5 0.001; F(x) 5 1; p 5 0.98).
Conclusion: Les interventions didactiques pre´conise´es par des
experts en raisonnement clinique et applique´es dans l’e´tude
de´crite ici, visant a` enseigner les SFC n’ont pas permis de re´duire
le nombre de diagnostics errone´s, pose´s par les e´tudiants.
Keywords: cognitive error, diagnostic reasoning, instructional methods, medical education
From the *Division of Emergency Medicine, Department of Medicine, and 3Program for Educational Research and Development, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON.
Correspondence to: Dr. Jonathan Sherbino, McMaster Clinic 2nd Floor, Hamilton General Hospital Site, 237 Barton Street East, Hamilton, ON
L8L 2X2; .
This article has been peer reviewed.
CJEM 2014;16(1):34-40
 Canadian Association of Emergency Physicians
DOI 10.2310/8000.2013.130860
ORIGINAL RESEARCH N RECHERCHE ORIGINALE
2014;16(1)
CJEM N JCMU
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A number of studies have described the prevalence
of diagnostic error.1–4 In primary care settings, an
estimated 7 to 17% of cases have some type of
diagnostic error associated with them.5 In the emergency department, medical error occurs in 3% of visits,
with 70% of
these errors
being classified
diagnostic error.6
Although most cases of diagnostic error are detected
and resolved prior to serious patient harm, serious
consequences can ensue. In fact, a substantial proportion of malpractice suits are related to diagnostic
Despite the systematic description of the phenomenon, few studies have identified the root cause of
diagnostic error. Although studies of medical management errors typically describe a multifactorial cause,
some authors have claimed cognitive errors committed
by physicians as the major, but easily correctable,
source. Specifically, cognitive biases, the systematic
errors of reasoning independent of specific content
knowledge, are thought to play a significant role in
diagnostic error.7–11
The central claim of these authors is that cognitive
biases are the result of rapid, nonanalytic reasoning
that neglects appropriate evidence and failure to
employ a slower, conscious decision-making process,
necessary for the correct diagnosis.7,9 Multiple biases
exist. Croskerry has catalogued 32 possible biases that
may arise in diagnostic situations.12 One example is
‘‘search satisficing bias’’ (SSB), a form of premature
closure that occurs when the search for additional
evidence stops once an obvious or prominent diagnosis
is reached. This may lead physicians to miss a potential
second diagnosis that may be detected through further
investigation. Another example is ‘‘availability bias,’’ in
which a clinician makes a diagnostic decision on the
ease of recall of similar cases and ignores base rates.
Kahneman and colleagues established cognitive biases
as universal features of human cognition using studies
of everyday decision making by psychology undergraduates.11 The influence of such biases in the
different context of medical diagnostic error has been
researched in a very limited manner.13
This lack of evidence has not discouraged the promotion of training programs to minimize cognitive bias.10,11,14
Croskerry proposed that metacognitive training at the
novice stage can decrease the impact of cognitive biases in
future decision making.7,8 Specifically, these programs
claimed that metacognitive techniques (termed cognitive
forcing strategies [CFS]) can identify specific biases,
promote self-monitoring, and develop approaches to
diagnoses.7,8,10,11,14
promise and widespread promotion, CFS programs have
very limited evidence for their success in preventing
diagnostic error in educational settings. Apart from a small
pilot study conducted by Sherbino and colleagues,15 no
experimental evidence on the efficacy of a CFS program
exists. The failure of CFS training in that study is limited
by the small sample and lack of an adequate control group.
This study is an extension of the previous work using
a larger sample of learners, longer follow-up, and a
control group. The objective of this study was to
determine the effect of CFS training on diagnostic
error in senior medical students.
Study design
This was a prospective, controlled trial of an education
intervention. Ethics approval was granted by the
McMaster University Faculty of Health Sciences
Research Ethics Board.
Study setting and population
Senior medical students (final year of a 3-year curriculum) in clerkship at McMaster University completed a
4-week emergency medicine (EM) rotation in groups of
15 to 18 students. Participants in each rotation were
recruited at the start of rotation and enrolled in the
study for the duration of the rotation. A total of 198
participants
September 2009 to February 2011.
Study protocol
The methods used in this study are identical to those
described elsewhere.15 The first eight rotations were
allocated to receive CFS training, and the following
three rotations served as controls. The initiation of the
study in the middle of the final year of medical school
(and bridging two respective class years) ensured that
there was equitable distribution of previous clinical
experience between the experimental and control
groups. Recruitment of an equal number of controls
was interrupted by a curriculum redesign of the EM
Ineffectiveness of cognitive forcing strategies
2014;16(1)
CJEM N JCMU
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
instructional week of each rotation. The educational
intervention consisted of a 90-minute, interactive,
case-based seminar of 15 students and one instructor
standardized
PowerPoint slides. The curriculum was refined based
on feedback
from local educational experts
medical students who piloted the initial version.
Students were taught two biases: search satisficing
and availability. With SSB, the clinician may identify
one diagnosis but miss a second. With availability
clinicians
incorrect,
diagnosis. Training session facilitators were expert
EM clinicians experienced with teaching CFS. For
each instructional case, the provided information
demographics,
complaint,
medications, allergies, vital signs, general appearance,
examination
respiratory examinations), and digital images of either
an electrocardiogram (ECG) or an x-ray. The design
and delivery of CFS teaching were modeled after
Croskerry’s commonly cited model.9 The educational
intervention was refined with feedback from the pilot
sample and local CFS experts.
The seminar introduced cognitive biases, the prevalence and effect of diagnostic error, and the application to
specific pathologies. CFS teaching included self-monitoring
during decision making, potential bias identification, and
active employment of a cognitive process to counter a
potential bias. Students then individually practiced CFS
using given clinical cases by developing a diagnosis and
treatment plan for each case. Feedback was provided to
the group based on the range of responses once the
correct diagnosis was revealed. Generalizability of these
biases was also taught. Students were explicitly told that
each bias can occur in multiple contexts. They were
provided with examples and invited to contribute their
own examples to the group discussion.
On alternate rotations, diagnostic tests and biases
were counterbalanced. For the first group, SSB was
taught using x-rays and availability bias using ECGs,
and for the second group, search satisficing was taught
with ECG materials and availability with x-rays.
(Specific materials differed because the task requirements were different.)
The control group received no specific, scheduled
instruction on CFS. During their first instructional
(i.e., nonclinical) week of the rotation, the 90-minute
session was left for self-directed study.
Measurements
At the end of the 4-week rotation, a 2-hour mandatory,
computer-based examination was conducted as part
of the clerkship rotation. As a component of the
48-question examination, students were presented with
six testing cases as part of the examination. Each testing
case used a free text box asking the student to input the
correct diagnosis(es) as appropriate (Appendix). At the
conclusion of the end-of-rotation examination, students
were informed that the six questions relating to CFS
training were not included in their written examination
score. Students could request that their blinded,
anonymous information be removed from pooled
analysis. Blinded answers were scored by one of the
expert authors using a predesigned scoring rubic.
Each case consisted of a clinical vignette (including a
detailed history and physical examination) and either
an x-ray or an ECG, which the students used to
establish a diagnosis. All correct diagnoses were
recorded. All cases were designed by expert clinicians
and pilot tested. Six cases were associated with
potential biases, with the others serving as filler. SSB
consisted of one case using an x-ray and one using an
ECG. Each case had two correct diagnoses. Two ‘‘false
positive’’ search satisficing cases, for which there is
no correct second diagnosis, were also included to
determine if students were ‘‘oversearching’’ for a
secondary diagnosis. Availability bias was tested with
one case using an x-ray and one case using an ECG, for
which a common diagnosis was possible but incorrect,
whereas an uncommon diagnosis was correct. A list of
cases and diagnoses is presented in Table 1.
Data analysis
All analyses were conducted with the Cochran-Mantel-
Haenszel x2 test of conditional independence with case
type (x-ray/ECG) as the stratification variable. The
Breslow-Day x2 test of homogeneity was used to
determine if performance varied between x-ray and
ECG cases. For SSB, we compared the proportion of
students in the CFS group and the control group who
searched for a second diagnosis and the proportion
whose second diagnosis was correct. Similarly, the
proportion that identified a second diagnosis was
Sherbino et al
2014;16(1)
CJEM N JCMU
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
compared for the false positive cases (for which there was
no second diagnosis). For availability bias, we compared
the proportion that identified the uncommon diagnosis.
All analyses were conducted using SPSS version 16 (SPSS
Inc., Chicago, IL). There was no a priori determination
of what constituted an educationally significant improvement in performance because there is no previous
research in this field to guide such an estimate.
However, based on our sample size, we had 80% power
to detect a difference of 20% with a two-tailed alpha
value of 0.05 when comparing the intervention group to
the control group to detect a second diagnosis for the
SSB cases and to identify the uncommon, correct
diagnosis in the availability bias cases.
Of the 198 potential students, 145 students were
enrolled in the intervention group and 46 in the
control group. Seven students were unavailable for
follow-up because their clinical placement was in a
distant community site, which used a paper examination instead of the computerized version. Overall
proportions for each group are reported below by bias
and case type, along with the results of the analysis. No
effect of counterbalancing was detected using the
Breslow-Day test of homogeneity for all analyses.
Thus, the subgroups were collapsed into comparisons
of experimental versus control groups.
For the SSB cases, 52% of students with CFS
training and 48% in the control group initiated
a search for the second diagnosis (x2 5 0.13, df 5 1,
p 5 0.91). Of these, 54% correctly identified the
second diagnosis in the CFS group and 48% did so in
the control group; the difference was not significant (x2
5 2.25, df 5 1, p 5 0.13; Table 2).
False positive cases were designed to see if CFS
oversearching
diagnosis. Sixty-four percent of the CFS group and
77% of the control group incorrectly identified a
second diagnosis. There were no significant differences
between groups (x2 5 2.38, df 5 1, p 5 0.12; Table 3).
In the availability bias cases, only 45% of the
participants in both groups identified the uncommon
correct diagnosis, with no difference between groups
(x2 5 0.001, df 5 1, p 5 0.98; Table 4).
Table 2. Performance on search satisficing bias cases
Correctly identified
first diagnosis (%)
Searched for
second diagnosis (%)
Correctly identified
second diagnosis (%)
CFS training
144 (99.5)
CFS 5 cognitive forcing strategies.
Table 1. Cases and diagnoses
Diagnostic test
Primary diagnosis
Secondary diagnosis
Search satisficing
Metacarpal fracture
Distal phalynx dislocation
Search satisficing
ST elevation myocardial infarction
Atrial fibrillation
Primary diagnosis
Examples of incorrect additional diagnoses
False positive
Pediatric supracondylar fracture
Olecranon, radial head, capitulum, trochelar
fractures, etc.
False positive
Sinus bradycardia
First and second-degree AV blocks; ST
segment changes consistent with cardiac
ischemia, etc.
‘‘Uncommon’’ correct diagnosis
Examples of ‘‘common’’ incorrect diagnoses
Availability
Pulmonary abscess
Pneumonia, lung cancer, etc.
Availability
Pericarditis
ST elevation myocardial infarction, left
ventricular hypertrophy, etc.
AV 5 atrioventricular; ECG 5 electrocardiogram.
Ineffectiveness of cognitive forcing strategies
2014;16(1)
CJEM N JCMU
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
DISCUSSION
This study builds on our earlier work by using a larger
sample size, increasing the period of follow-up, and
employing a control group.15 Similar to the earlier
study, we found that for both biases, CFS training
resulted in only half of the experimental group
avoiding a diagnostic error and making the correct
diagnosis(es). However, this was not significantly
different from the diagnostic accuracy of the control
group. In both the experimental and control groups,
the proportion of participants identifying a second
diagnosis was as high for the false positive cases as the
true search satisficing cases. CFS training (as implemented in this study) had no impact on preventing
diagnostic error.
One possible explanation for the failure of CFS in
this study is that it purports to target biases arising
from nonanalytic reasoning. If novices are not using
nonanalytic reasoning, CFS may be of little benefit.
The overall diagnostic accuracy of both experimental
and control groups suggests that these ‘‘novices’’ may
sufficient
experience
nonanalytic
reasoning. There is some evidence that novices do
tend to rely on conscious, analytic reasoning, employing algorithms or feature counts to determine a
diagnosis.16 Kulatunga-Moruzi and colleagues showed
that preclerkship medical students relied on analytic
and deliberate strategies to make diagnoses when
presented with dermatologic slides.17
A second explanation is that a ‘‘ceiling’’ on analytic
processing was achieved, and the benefits of CFS could
not be accessed. Most analytic processes are limited by
the amount of working memory of the learner, as well
as the intrinsic and extrinsic cognitive load of the
activity.18 Further encouragement to engage in additional circumspection (particularly in a novice, where,
by definition, more analytic than nonanalytic reasoning
is carried out) may simply overwhelm an individual’s
cognitive load without any effect on outcomes.19
Third, the six cases may not have been complex
enough to benefit from analytic reasoning (by definition, CFS is a form of analytic reasoning). A number of
studies have suggested that analytic reasoning benefits
complex or ambiguous cases, but in straightforward (i.e.,
simple) cases, diagnostic accuracy is not improved,
whether nonanalytic or analytic reasoning is used.20–22
that this hypothesis may be incorrect.23 In a study
of participants completing the Medical Council of
Canada’s Qualifying Examination Part 2, participants
were exposed to a range of simple and complex clinical
cases (e.g., subconjunctival hemorrhage, glyburideinduced hypoglycemia in acute renal failure). The time
to diagnosis was inversely proportional to the accuracy
of the diagnosis. Our results suggest that analytic
reasoning (which requires a longer diagnostic process)
does not necessarily lead to improved accuracy, regardless of the complexity of the case. Thus, the failure of
CFS (i.e., analytic reasoning) to improve diagnostic
accuracy in this study seems congruent with our
previous work.
Finally, there is
also reason to
assumption that diagnostic errors arise via nonanalytic
reasoning and that interventions should be designed to
counter the biasing of this reasoning process. There is
Table 3. Performance on false positive cases
Correctly identified diagnosis (%)
Identified a second (nonexistent) diagnosis (%)
CFS training
111 (76.5)
CFS 5 cognitive forcing strategies.
Table 4. Performance on availability bias cases
Identified common incorrect diagnosis (%)
Identified uncommon correct diagnosis (%)
CFS training
141 (97.2)
CFS 5 cognitive forcing strategies.
Sherbino et al
2014;16(1)
CJEM N JCMU
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
considerable evidence that encouragement to use both
analytic and nonanalytic strategies, where possible, is
of advantage to novices.24–27 The few studies that have
examined cognitive biases in medical experts find that
they may be more susceptible to bias than novices. For
example, Eva and colleagues showed that experienced
physicians were prone to the primacy effect, a cognitive
bias describing the tendency to choose an incorrect
diagnosis when its features are presented earlier in the
case,26 in comparison with features of the correct
diagnosis that are presented later.28 This suggests the
intriguing possibility that the primary beneficiaries of
CFS may be experts and not novices, in contrast to the
arguments suggested in diagnostic reasoning editorials.
Future research should explore this hypothesis.
LIMITATIONS
This study is limited by the restricted range of diagnoses
and diagnostic tests used to evaluate CFS. A wider range
of clinical cases and diagnostic information may
constitute a more thorough assessment of CFS. The
artificial testing situation may also have influenced the
effectiveness of CFS. Although there were no significant
differences detected between groups, there was some
suggestion that the control group had slightly lower
accuracy and slightly higher false positive rates.
This study is also limited by the imbalance of the
size and lack of randomization between the experimental and control groups. Contamination between
experimental and control groups were composed of
different medical school years, thus potentially mitigating contamination. Nonetheless, these issues might
mean that a type II error occurred, where a difference
between groups is present, but the study did not detect
A final limitation of this study is that the follow-up
assessment of participants occurred more than 3 weeks
after instruction. Education experts would question the
impact of a single intervention to change a cognitive
bias at a remote testing interval. Our previous pilot
study demonstrated no effect in the immediate testing
period.15 Nonetheless, multiple educational reinforcements of CFS may increase the impact on diagnostic
errors. However, the CFS training in this study is
consistent with the other education sessions offered
during the EM rotation and adheres to the educational
design for CFS training advocated in the literature.7,8
CONCLUSION
The educational interventions suggested by experts in
clinical reasoning and employed in our study to teach
cognitive forcing strategies failed to show any reduction in diagnostic error by novices. Future studies with
more experienced physicians are required to see if CFS
may be effective in this population.
Competing interests: This study was funded through a peerreviewed grant from the Medical Council of Canada.