The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)
ERNIE 2.0: A Continual Pre-Training Framework for Language Understanding
Yu Sun, Shuohuan Wang, Yukun Li, Shikun Feng, Hao Tian, Hua Wu, Haifeng Wang
Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
{sunyu02, wangshuohuan, tianhao, wu hua, wanghaifeng}@baidu.com
Recently pre-trained models have achieved state-of-the-art
results in various language understanding tasks. Current pretraining procedures usually focus on training the model with
several simple tasks to grasp the co-occurrence of words or
sentences. However, besides co-occurring information, there
exists other valuable lexical, syntactic and semantic information in training corpora, such as named entities, semantic
closeness and discourse relations. In order to extract the lexical, syntactic and semantic information from training corpora,
we propose a continual pre-training framework named ERNIE
2.0 which incrementally builds pre-training tasks and then
learn pre-trained models on these constructed tasks via continual multi-task learning. Based on this framework, we construct
several tasks and train the ERNIE 2.0 model to capture lexical,
syntactic and semantic aspects of information in the training data. Experimental results demonstrate that ERNIE 2.0
model outperforms BERT and XLNet on 16 tasks including
English tasks on GLUE benchmarks and several similar tasks
in Chinese. The source codes and pre-trained models have
been released at 
Introduction
Pre-trained language representations such as ELMo , OpenAI GPT , BERT , ERNIE 1.0 1 and XLNet have been proven to be effective for improving
the performances of various natural language understanding
tasks including sentiment classiﬁcation ,
natural language inference , named
entity recognition and so on.
Generally the pre-training of models often train the model
based on the co-occurrence of words and sentences. While
in fact, there are other lexical, syntactic and semantic information worth examining in training corpora other than cooccurrence. For example, named entities like person names,
location names, and organization names, may contain conceptual information. Information like sentence order and
Copyright c⃝2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1In order to distinguish ERNIE 2.0 framework and the ERNIE
model, the latter is referred to as ERNIE 1.0. 
sentence proximity enables the models to learn structureaware representations. And semantic similarity at the document level or discourse relations among sentences allow
the models to learn semantic-aware representations. In order to discover all valuable information in training corpora,
be it lexical, syntactic or semantic representations, we propose a continual pre-training framework named ERNIE 2.0
which could incrementally build and train a large variety of
pre-training tasks through continual multi-task learning.
Our ERNIE framework supports the introduction of various customized tasks continually, which is realized through
continual multi-task learning. When given one or more new
tasks, the continual multi-task learning method simultaneously trains the newly-introduced tasks together with the
original tasks in an efﬁcient way, without forgetting previously learned knowledge. In this way, our framework can
incrementally train the distributed representations based on
the previously trained parameters that it grasped. Moreover,
in this framework, all the tasks share the same encoding networks, thus making the encoding of lexical, syntactic and
semantic information across different tasks possible.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:
• We propose a continual pre-training framework ERNIE
2.0, which efﬁciently supports customized training tasks
and continual multi-task learning in an incremental way.
• We construct three kinds of unsupervised language processing tasks to verify the effectiveness of the proposed
framework. Experimental results demonstrate that ERNIE
2.0 achieves signiﬁcant improvements over BERT and XL-
Net on 16 tasks including English GLUE benchmarks and
several Chinese tasks.
• Our ﬁne-tuning code of ERNIE 2.0 and models pre-trained
on English corpora are available at 
PaddlePaddle/ERNIE.
Related Work
Unsupervised Learning for Language
Representation
It is effective to learn general language representation by
pre-training a language model with a large amount of unan-
% ! %&$'&
Figure 1: The framework of ERNIE 2.0, where the pre-training tasks can be incrementally constructed, the models are pre-trained
through continual multi-task learning, and the pre-trained model is ﬁne-tuned to adapt to various language understanding tasks.
notated data. Traditional methods usually focus on contextindependent word embedding. Methods such as Word2Vec
 and GloVe learn ﬁxed word embeddings based on word
co-occurring information on large corpora.
Recently, several studies centered on contextualized language representations have been proposed and contextdependent language representations have shown state-ofthe-art results in various natural language processing tasks.
ELMo proposes to extract contextsensitive features from a language model. OpenAI GPT enhances the context-sensitive embedding
by adjusting the Transformer . BERT
 , however, adopts a masked language
model while adding a next sentence prediction task into the
pre-training. XLM integrates
two methods to learn cross-lingual language models, namely
the unsupervised method that relies only on monolingual
data and the supervised method that leverages parallel bilingual data. MT-DNN achieves a better result
through learning several supervised tasks in GLUE together based on the pre-trained model, which
eventually leads to improvements on other supervised tasks
that are not learned in the stage of multi-task supervised
ﬁne-tuning. XLNet uses Transformer-XL
 and proposes a generalized autoregressive
pre-training method that learns bidirectional contexts by maximizing the expected likelihood over all permutations of the
factorization order.
Continual Learning
Continual learning 
aims to train the model with several tasks in sequence so that
it remembers the previously-learned tasks when learning the
new ones. These methods are inspired by the learning process
of humans, as humans are capable of continuously accumu-
  
 
Figure 2: The different methods of continual pre-training.
lating the information acquired by study or experience to
efﬁciently develop new skills. With continual learning, the
model should be able to performs well on new tasks thanks
to the knowledge acquired during previous training.
The ERNIE 2.0 Framework
As shown in Figure 1, the ERNIE 2.0 framework is built
based on an widely-used architecture of pre-training and ﬁnetuning. ERNIE 2.0 differs from the previous pre-training ones
in that, instead of training with a small number of pre-training
objectives, it could constantly introduce a large variety of pretraining tasks to help the model efﬁciently learn the lexical,
syntactic and semantic representations. Based on this, ERNIE
2.0 framework keeps updating the pre-trained model with
continual multi-task learning. During ﬁne-tuning, the ERNIE
model is ﬁrst initialized with the pre-trained parameters, and
would be later ﬁne-tuned using data from speciﬁc tasks.
Continual Pre-training
The process of continual pre-training contains two steps.
Firstly, We continually construct unsupervised pre-training
tasks with big data and prior knowledge involved. Secondly,
We incrementally update the ERNIE model via continual
multi-task learning.
Pre-training Tasks Construction
We can construct different kinds of tasks at each time, including word-aware tasks,
 

 
Figure 3: The structure of the ERNIE 2.0 model. The input embedding contains the token embedding, the sentence embedding,
the position embedding and the task embedding. Seven pre-training tasks belonging to different kinds are constructed in the
ERNIE 2.0 model.
  
Figure 4: The architecture of multi-task learning in the
ERNIE 2.0 framework, in which the encoder can be recurrent
neural networks or a deep transformer.
structure-aware tasks and semantic-aware tasks2. All of these
pre-training tasks rely on self-supervised or weak-supervised
signals that could be obtained from massive data without
human annotation. Prior knowledge such as named entities,
phrases and discourse relations is used to generate labels
from large-scale data.
Continual Multi-task Learning
The ERNIE 2.0 framework aims to learn lexical, syntactic and semantic information from a number of different tasks. Thus there are two
main challenges to overcome. The ﬁrst is how to train the
tasks in a continual way without forgetting the knowledge
learned before. The second is how to pre-train these tasks
in an efﬁcient way. We propose a continual multi-task learning method to tackle with these two problems. Whenever a
new task comes, the continual multi-task learning method
ﬁrst uses the previously learned parameters to initialize the
model, and then train the newly-introduced task together
with the original tasks simultaneously. This will make sure
2For the detailed information of these tasks, please refer to the
next section.
that the learned parameters encodes the previously-learned
knowledge. One left problem is how to make it trained more
efﬁciently. We solve this problem by allocating each task N
training iterations. Our framework needs to automatically
assign these N iterations for each task to different stages of
training. In this way, we can guarantee the efﬁciency of our
method without forgetting the previously trained knowledge
Figure 2 shows the difference among our method, multitask learning from scratch and previous continual learning.
Although multi-task learning from scratch could train multiple tasks at the same time, it is necessary that all customized
pre-training tasks are prepared before the training could proceed. So this method takes as much time as continual learning does, if not more. Traditional continual learning method
trains the model with only one task at each stage with the
demerit that it may forget the previously learned knowledge.
As shown in Figure 4, the architecture of our continual
multi-task learning in each stage contains a series of shared
text encoding layers to encode contextual information, which
can be customized by using recurrent neural networks or a
deep Transformer consisting of stacked self-attention layers . The parameters of the encoder can
be updated across all learning tasks. There are two kinds of
loss functions in our framework. One is the sentence-level
loss and the other one is the token-level loss, which are similar to the loss functions of BERT. Each pre-training task has
its own loss function. During pre-training, one sentence-level
loss function can be combined with multiple token-level loss
functions to continually update the model.
Fine-tuning for Application Tasks
By virtue of ﬁne-tuning with task-speciﬁc supervised data,
the pre-trained model can be adapted to different language
understanding tasks, such as question answering, natural language inference, and semantic similarity. Each downstream
3For more details, please refer to Table 7 in the experiment
Token-Level Loss
Sentence-Level Loss
Prediction
Token-Document
Reordering
Encyclopedia
BookCorpus
IR Relevance Data
Discourse Relation Data
Table 1: The Relationship between pre-training task and pre-training dataset. We use different pre-training dataset to construct
different tasks. A type of pre-trained dataset can correspond to multiple pre-training tasks.
task has its own ﬁne-tuned models after being ﬁne-tuned.
ERNIE 2.0 Model
In order to verify the effectiveness of the framework, we
construct three different kinds of unsupervised language processing tasks and develop a pre-trained model called ERNIE
2.0 model. In this section we introduce the implementation
of the model in the proposed framework.
Model Structure
Transformer Encoder
The model uses a multi-layer
Transformer as the basic encoder like
other pre-training models such as GPT ,
BERT and XLM . The transformer can capture the contextual information for each token in the sequence via self-attention, and
generate a sequence of contextual embeddings. Given a sequence, the special classiﬁcation embedding [CLS] is added
to the ﬁrst place of the sequence. Furthermore, the symbol
of [SEP] is added as the separator in the intervals of the
segments for the multiple input segment tasks.
Task Embedding
The model feeds task embedding to represent the characteristic of different tasks. We represent different tasks with an id ranging from 0 to N. Each task id is
assigned to one unique task embedding. The corresponding
token, segment, position and task embedding are taken as
the input of the model. We can use any task id to initialize
our model in the ﬁne-tuning process. The model structure is
shown in Figure 3.
Pre-training Tasks
We construct three different kinds of tasks to capture different aspects of information in the training corpora. The wordaware tasks enable the model to capture the lexical information, the structure-aware tasks enable the model capture the
syntactic information of the corpus and the semantic-aware
tasks aims to learn semantic information.
Word-aware Pre-training Tasks
Knowledge Masking Task
ERNIE 1.0 
proposed an effective strategy to enhance representation
through knowledge integration. It introduced phrase masking
and named entity masking and predicts the whole masked
phrases and named entities to help the model learn the dependency information in both local contexts and global contexts.
We use this task to train an initial version of the model.
Capitalization Prediction Task
Capitalized words usually
have certain speciﬁc semantic information compared to other
words in sentences. The cased model has some advantages
in tasks like named entity recognition while the uncased
model is more suitable for some other tasks. To combine the
advantages of both models, we add a task to predict whether
the word is capitalized or not.
Token-Document Relation Prediction Task
predicts whether the token in a segment appears in other segments of the original document. Empirically, the words that
appear in many parts of a document are usually commonlyused words or relevant with the main topics of the document. Therefore, through identifying the frequently-occurring
words of a document appearing in the segment, the task can
enable the ability of a model to capture the key words of the
document to some extent.
Structure-aware Pre-training Tasks
Sentence Reordering Task
This task aims to learn the relationships among sentences. During the pre-training process
of this task, a given paragraph is randomly split into 1 to m
segments and then all of the combinations are shufﬂed by
a random permuted order. We let the pre-trained model to
reorganize these permuted segments, modeled as a k-class
classiﬁcation problem where k = m
n=1 n!. Empirically, the
sentences reordering task can enable the pre-trained model
to learn relationships among sentences in a document.
Sentence Distance Task
We also construct a pre-training
task to learn the sentence distance using document-level information. This task is modeled as a 3-class classiﬁcation
problem. ”0” represents that the two sentences are adjacent in
the same document, ”1” represent that the two sentences are
in the same document, but not adjacent, and ”2” represents
that the two sentences are from two different documents.
Semantic-aware Pre-training Tasks
Discourse Relation Task
Beside the distance task mentioned above, we introduce a task to predict the semantic
or rhetorical relation between two sentences. We use the
data built by Sileo et.al to train a pretrained model for English tasks. Following the method in
Sileo et.al , we also automatically construct
a Chinese dataset for pre-training.
IR Relevance Task
We build a pre-training task to learn
the short text relevance in information retrieval. It is a 3-class
classiﬁcation task which predicts the relationship between a
query and a title. We take the query as the ﬁrst sentence and
the title as the second sentence. The search log data from a
commercial search engine is used as our pre-training data.
There are three kinds of labels in this task. The query and
title pairs that are labelled as ” 0” stand for strong relevance,
which means that the title is clicked by the users after they
input the query. Those labelled as ”1” represent weak relevance, which implies that when the query is input by the
users, these titles appear in the search results but failed to be
clicked by users. The label ”2” means that the query and title
are completely irrelevant and random in terms of semantic
information.
Experiments
We compare the performance of ERNIE 2.0 with the state-ofthe-art pre-training models. For English tasks, we compare
our results with BERT and XLNet on GLUE. For Chinese tasks, we compare the
results with that of BERT and the previous ERNIE 1.0 model on several Chinese
datasets. Moreover, we will compare our method with multitask learning and traditional continual learning.
Corpus Type
English(#tokens)
Chinese(#tokens)
Encyclopedia
BookCorpus
IR Relevance Data
Discourse Relation Data
Table 2: The size of pre-training datasets.
Pre-training and Implementation
Pre-training Data
Similar to that of BERT, some data in
the English corpus are crawled from Wikipedia and Book-
Corpus. Besides we also collect some data from Reddit and
use the Discovery data as our discourse
relation data. For the Chinese corpus, we collect a variety
of data, such as encyclopedia, news, dialogue, information
retrieval and discourse relation data from a search engine.
The details of the pre-training data are shown in Table 2.
The relationship between pre-training task and pre-training
dataset is shown in Table 1.
Pre-training Settings
To compare with BERT , We use the same model settings of transformer as
BERT. The base model contains 12 layers, 12 self-attention
heads and 768-dimensional of hidden size while the large
model contains 24 layers, 16 self-attention heads and 1024dimensional of hidden size. The model settings of XLNet
 are same as BERT.
Table 3: The Experiment settings for GLUE dataset
ChnSentiCorp
NLPCC-DBQA
Table 4: The Experiment Settings for Chinese datasets
ERNIE 2.0 is trained on 48 NVidia v100 GPU cards for
the base model and 64 NVidia v100 GPU cards for the large
model in both English and Chinese. The ERNIE 2.0 framework is implemented on PaddlePaddle, which is an end-toend open source deep learning platform developed by Baidu.
We use Adam optimizer that parameters of which are ﬁxed
to β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.98, with a batch size of 393216 tokens.
The learning rate is set as 5e-5 for English model and 1.28e-4
for Chinese model. It is scheduled by decay scheme noam
 with warmup over the ﬁrst 4,000 steps
for every pre-training task. By virtue of ﬂoat16 operations,
we manage to accelerate the training and reduce the memory
usage of our models. Each of the pre-training tasks is trained
until the metrics of pre-training tasks converge.
Fine-tuning Tasks
English Task
As a multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding, General Language
Understanding Evaluation (GLUE) is usually applied to evaluate the performance of models. We also test the performance
of ERNIE 2.0 on GLUE. Speciﬁcally, GLUE covers a diverse
range of NLP datasets, the details is shown (Wang et al.
Chinese Tasks
We executed extensive experiments on 9
Chinese NLP tasks, including machine reading comprehension, named entity recognition, natural language inference,
semantic similarity, sentiment analysis and question answer-
Task(Metrics)
BASE model
LARGE model
CoLA (Matthew Corr.)
SST-2 (Accuracy)
MRPC (Accurary/F1)
STS-B (Pearson Corr./Spearman Corr.)
QQP (Accuracy/F1)
MNLI-m/mm (Accuracy)
QNLI (Accuracy)
RTE (Accuracy)
WNLI (Accuracy)
AX(Matthew Corr.)
Table 5: The results on GLUE benchmark, where the results on dev set are the median of ﬁve runs and the results on test set are
scored by the GLUE evaluation server ( The state-of-the-art results are in bold. All of
the ﬁne-tuned models of AX is trained by the data of MNLI.
ERNIE 1.0BASE
ERNIE 2.0BASE
ERNIE 2.0LARGE
ChnSentiCorp
NLPCC-DBQA
Table 6: The results of 9 common Chinese NLP tasks. ERNIE 1.0 indicates model released by . The
reported results are the average of ﬁve experimental results, and the state-of-the-art results are in bold.
Pre-training method
Pre-training task
Training iterations (steps)
Fine-tuning result
Continual Learning
Knowledge Masking
Capital Prediction
Token-Document Relation
Sentence Reordering
Multi-task Learning
Knowledge Masking
Capital Prediction
Token-Document Relation
Sentence Reordering
continual Multi-task Learning
Knowledge Masking
Capital Prediction
Token-Document Relation
Sentence Reordering
Table 7: The results of different methods of continual pre-training. We use knowledge masking, capital prediction, tokendocument relation and sentence reordering as our pre-training tasks. we sample 10% training data from our whole pre-training
corpus. We train the model with 4 tasks altogether from scratch in multi-task learning method and train the model in 4 stages in
other two learning methods. We train different tasks in different stages. The learning order of these tasks is the same as the above
tasks listed. To compare the result fairly, each of these 4 tasks are updated in 50,000 steps . The size of pre-training model is
same as ERNIE base. We choose MNLI-m, SST-2 and MRPC as our ﬁne-tuning dataset. The ﬁne-tuning result is average of ﬁve
random start. the ﬁne-tuning experiment set is same as Table 3.
ing. Speciﬁcally, the following Chinese datasets are chosen
to evaluate the performance of ERNIE 2.0 on Chinese tasks:
• Machine Reading Comprehension (MRC): CMRC
2018 , DRCD , and
DuReader .
• Named Entity Recognition (NER): MSRA-NER (Levow
• Natural Language Inference (NLI): XNLI .
• Sentiment Analysis (SA): ChnSentiCorp 4.
• Semantic Similarity (SS): LCQMC , and
BQ Corpus .
• Question Answering (QA): NLPCC-DBQA 5.
Implementation Details for Fine-tuning
Detailed ﬁne-tuning experimental settings of English tasks
are shown in Table 3 while that of Chinese tasks are shown
in Table 4.
Experimental Results
Results on English Tasks
We evaluate the performance
of the base models and the large models of each method on
GLUE. Considering the fact that only the results of the single
model XLNet on the dev set are reported, we also reports the
results of each method on the dev set. In order to obtain a
fair comparison with BERT and XLNet, we run a single-task
and single-model 6 ERNIE 2.0 on the dev set. The detailed
results on GLUE are depicted in Table 5.
As shown in the BASE model columns of Table 5, ERNIE
2.0BASE outperforms BERTBASE on all of the 10 tasks and obtains a score of 80.6. As shown in the dev columns of LARGE
model section in Table 5, ERNIE 2.0LARGE consistently outperforms BERTLARGE and XLNetLARGE on most of the tasks
except MNLI-m. Furthermore, as shown in the LARGE model
section in Table 5, ERNIE 2.0LARGE outperforms BERTLARGE
on all of the 10 tasks, which gets a score of 83.6 on the GLUE
test set and achieves a 3.1% improvement over the previous
SOTA pre-training model BERTLARGE.
Results on Chinese Tasks
Table 6 shows the performances
on 9 classical Chinese NLP tasks. It can be seen that ERNIE
1.0BASE outperforms BERTBASE on XNLI, MSRA-NER,
ChnSentiCorp, LCQMC and NLPCC-DBQA tasks, yet the
performance is less ideal on the rest, which is caused by the
difference in pre-training between the two methods. Speciﬁcally, the pre-training data of ERNIE 1.0BASE does not contain instances whose length exceeds 128, but BERTBASE is
pre-trained with the instances whose length are 512. From
the results, it can be also seen that the proposed ERNIE
2.0 makes further progress, which signiﬁcantly outperforms
BERTBASE on all of the nine tasks. Furthermore, we train a
large version of ERNIE 2.0. ERNIE 2.0LARGE achieves the
4 classiﬁcation
5 
6which mean the result without additional tricks such as ensemble and multi-task losses.
best performance and creates new state-of-the-art results on
these Chinese NLP tasks.
Comparison of Different Learning Methods
In order to analyze the effectiveness of the continual multitask learning strategy adopted in our framework, we compare
this method with two other methods as shown in ﬁgure 2. Table 7 describes the detailed information. For all the methods,
we assume that the training iterations are the same for each
task. In our settings, each task can be trained in 50k iterations,
with 200k iterations for all of the tasks. As it can be seen,
multi-task learning trains all the tasks in one stage, continual
pre-training trains the tasks one by one, while our continual
multi-task learning method can assign different iterations
to each task in different training stages. The experimental
result shows that continual multi-task learning obtains the
better performance on downstream tasks compared with the
other two methods, without sacriﬁcing any efﬁciency. The
result also indicates that our pre-training method can trains
the new tasks in a more effective and efﬁcient way. Moreover,
the comparison between continual multi-task learning, multitask learning and traditional continual learning shows that the
ﬁrst two methods outperform the third one, which conﬁrms
our intuition that traditional continual learning tends to forget
the knowledge it has learnt when there is only one new task
involved each time.
Conclusion
We proposed a continual pre-training framework named
ERNIE 2.0, in which pre-training tasks can be incrementally
built and learned through continual multi-task learning in a
continual way. Based on the framework, we constructed several pre-training tasks covering different aspects of language
and trained a new model called ERNIE 2.0 model which is
more competent in language representation. ERNIE 2.0 was
tested on the GLUE benchmarks and various Chinese tasks.
It obtained signiﬁcant improvements over BERT and XLNet.
In the future, we will introduce more pre-training tasks to the
ERNIE 2.0 framework to further improve the performance
of the model. We will also investigate other sophisticated
continual learning method in our framework.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Key Research and
Development Project of China (No. 2018AAA0101900).