Mixture Model Mapping of Brain Activation
in Functional Magnetic Resonance Images
Brian S. Everitt* and Edward T. Bullmore
Department of Biostatistics and Computing, Institute of Psychiatry, London, UK
Abstract: We report on a novel method of identifying brain regions activated by periodic experimental
design in functional magnetic resonance imaging data. This involves ﬁtting a mixture distribution with
two components to a test statistic estimated at each voxel in an image. The two parameters of this
distribution, the proportion of nonactivated voxels, and the effect size can be estimated using maximum
likelihood methods. Standard errors of the parameters can also be estimated. The ﬁtted distribution can be
used to derive brain activation maps and two examples are described, one involving a visual stimulation
task, the other an auditory stimulation task. The method appears to have some advantages over direct use
of the P-values corresponding to each voxel’s value of the test statistic. Hum. Brain Mapping 7:1–14,
r 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
Key words: ﬁnite mixture model; brain activation mapping; fMRI; alternative hypothesis
INTRODUCTION
There is already an extensive literature on statistical
methods for the analysis of functional magnetic resonance images of the brain [e.g., Rabe-Hesketh et al.,
1997]. In general, these methods involve estimating
some measure of the experimentally determined signal
at each voxel of the image, and testing this statistic
against its null distribution. The usual approach is then
to consider a voxel ‘‘activated’’ by the experimental
design if its test statistic has an associated P-value
which is lower than some predetermined threshold.
Within this general framework, opinions differ as to
the most suitable model for the experimental effect;
the most appropriate way of ﬁtting a model to time
series data that are likely to demonstrate residual, i.e.,
unmodelled, temporal autocorrelation; and how to
choose the threshold P-value against which to judge
departure from the null hypothesis of no activation.
In this paper, we introduce an alternative approach
for identifying activation in the voxels of an image,
which involves ﬁtting a simple ﬁnite mixture model
[Everitt and Hand, 1981] to the observed distribution
of the estimated test statistics. The mixture has two
components, one corresponding to the distribution of
the test statistic under the null hypothesis of no
activation, and the other to its distribution under the
alternative hypothesis of activation. Each component
is explicitly speciﬁed to have a particular form. The
parameters in the proposed model can be estimated by
maximum likelihood methods and their standard errors obtained simply from the inverse of a Hessian
matrix. The results from ﬁtting the model are estimates
both of the proportion of activated voxels, and of the
overall effect size, i.e., the parameter that characterizes
the activation distribution. In addition, for each voxel,
an estimated posterior probability that it is activated
can be determined. These probabilities can be used to
produce activation maps.
Contract grant sponsor: Wellcome Trust.
*Correspondence to: B.S. Everitt, Department of Biostatistics and
Computing, Institute of Psychiatry, London SE5 8AF, UK.
E-mail: 
Received for publication 1 December 1997; accepted 1 May 1998
r Human Brain Mapping 7:1–14 r
r 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
FORMULATION OF A MIXTURE MODEL
Bullmore et al. showed that the magnetic
resonance (MR) signal change induced by periodic
experimental design can be modelled by the sum of a
sine wave and a cosine wave at the experimentally
determined frequency of alternation between contrasting cognitive or sensorimotor conditions. The amplitude of the sine wave g may be understood to measure
the magnitude of MR signal change related to neural
activation, and the amplitude of the cosine wave d to
measure hemodynamically mediated delay. From these
two amplitudes, Bullmore et al. derived a test
statistic, the fundamental power quotient (FPQ), which
they use as the basis of separating voxels into activated
and nonactivated. The statistic is given by
where gˆ and dˆ are estimates of g and d and sˆ is an
estimate of the assumed common standard error of
each estimate. Under the null hypothesis of no experimentally determined signal change (nonactivation),
TFPQ 5 2 3 FPQ has a chi-squared distribution with
two degrees of freedom. In the presence of an experimental effect in a voxel (activation) there will be an
increase in amplitude of the sine wave but no corresponding increase in the amplitude of the cosine wave.
In this case then, sˆ is assumed to have a normal
distribution with zero mean and unit variance, and sˆ a
normal distribution with mean greater than zero (say
µ), but again with a variance of one. Consequently in
the presence of an experimental effect the test statistic,
TFPQ will have a noncentral chi-squared distribution
with noncentrality parameter l 5 µ2 and again two
degrees of freedom.
It follows, therefore, that the distribution of the test
statistic over all voxels in an image, both activated and
not activated, can be modelled by a mixture of these
two component distributions: chi-squared with two
degrees of freedom and the appropriate noncentral
chi-squared. If p denotes the proportion of nonactivated voxels in an image comprising N voxels in total,
the mixture distribution can be written down more
formally as follows:
f(x; µ, p) 5 pf1(x) 1 (1 2 p)f2(x; µ)
where f1 is the appropriate chi-squared (null) distribution and f2 the appropriate noncentral chi-squared
(alternative) distribution. Explicitly, f1 and f2 are as
If the observed values of the test statistic are represented as x1, x2, ..., xN, the log-likelihood of the data (L)
is given by:
log f(xi; µ, p)
The parameters p and µ may be estimated in the usual
way by maximizing L, using any one of a variety of
optimization methods. The method used in the numerical examples given later is from Gay and is
implemented in S-Plus as the function nlminb. This
method maximizes L, constraining p to lie in the
interval (0,1).
Having found estimates of p and µ (pˆ and µˆ), an
estimated posterior probability for activation can be
assigned to each voxel using
Pr(activated0xi) 5
(1 2 pˆ)f2(xi; µˆ, pˆ)
f(xi; µˆ, pˆ)
where xi represents the value of the test statistic TFPQ
for voxel Pi. All voxels in the image which have an
estimated posterior probability of activation greater
than some arbitary threshold value–a value of 0.5
would appear to be an obvious choice, can then be
classiﬁed as activated.
MIXTURE MODELLING OF SIMULATED DATA
Three data sets were simulated by sampling N51,000
observations from the distribution f(x;µ,p), deﬁned in
TABLE I. Results from ﬁtting the mixture model to three
simulated data sets*
Data set 1
0.487 (0.017)
4.00 (0.052)
Data set 2
0.483 (0.045)
2.01 (0.095)
Data set 3
0.258 (0.045)
2.02 (0.074)
* Initial parameter values used in all cases were the values used to
generate the data. Each data set consisted of 1,000 observations.
r Everitt and Bullmore r
Observed histograms and ﬁtted (solid line) distributions for three sets of data, each with 1,000
observations simulated from the mixture distribution deﬁned in Equation (2). Data set 1, p 5 0.5,
µ 5 4; data set 2, p 5 0.5, µ 5 2; data set 3, p 5 0.2, µ 5 2.
Equation (2). The data sets differed in terms of the
proportion of nonactivated voxels, p, and the size of
the noncentrality parameter, l 5 µ2. The results are
shown in Table I. Identical parameter estimates to
those shown were obtained from a number of different
starting values for the two parameters. For accurate
estimates, large sample sizes are likely to be neededwhen p is far from 0.5 and/or µ is small. For imaging
data, however, this is unlikely to be a problem since the
number of voxels, N, will in general be large. The
histograms of the observations and the ﬁtted distributions are shown in Figure 1.
Observed distribution (histogram) and ﬁtted mixture distribution (solid line) for the statistic
TFPQ 5 2 3 FPQ observed at 26,535 voxels in the visual stimulation data.
r Everitt and Bullmore r
Mixture model activation map of visual simulation data derived from estimated posterior
probabilities of activation for the 26,535 voxels. Threshold for the posterior probabilities 5 0.5. Each
slice of data is displayed in the standard anatomical space of Talairach and Tournoux .
Activation map for visual stimulation data derived from thresholding the P-values of the statistic
TFPQ at 0.05.
Activation map for visual stimulation data derived from thresholding the P-values of the statistic TFPQ at
(Experience on simulated data sets suggested that
the number of terms necessary to accurately evaluate f2
given by Equation (4), for the values of µ likely to be
encountered in practice, is at least 20.)
Standard errors of the parameters can be found
relatively simply from the inverse of the estimated
Hessian matrix (for details see Appendix). The estimated standard errors for the three simulated data sets
are shown in Table I.
MIXTURE MODELLING OF FMRI DATA
Functional MRI data were acquired on a GE Signa
1.5 T system (General Electric, Milwaukee, WI) retro-
ﬁtted with an ANMR operating console (ANMR,
Woburn, MA) at the Maudsley Hospital, London. One
hundred single-shot T*2-weighted gradient echo echoplanar images depicting blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) contrast [Ogawa et al., 1990] were acquired at each of 14 near-axial noncontiguous planes
parallel to the AC-PC line: TE 5 40 msec, TR 5 3 sec,
in-plane resolution 5 3 mm, slice thickness 5 7 mm,
interslice skip 5 0.7 mm, number of signal averages 5 1.
Images were acquired from a healthy male volunteer
during the following periodically designed experi-
Perspective plots of estimated posterior probabilities of activation for four slices of the visual
stimulation data.
TABLE II. Parameter estimates for visual stimulation
fMRI data*
Starting values
Final values
0.9659 (0.0018)
3.467 (0.0559)
0.9659 (0.0018)
3.467 (0.0559)
* Upper limit for r in Equation (4) was set at 25.
r Everitt and Bullmore r
ments, each of which involved a regular and repeated
contrast between two (A and B) contrasting sensory
conditions:
●Visual stimulation: A, the subject was exposed to
30 sec of 8 Hz photic stimulation; B, the subject
was exposed to 30 sec of darkness. This cycle was
repeated 5 times in the course of a 5-min experiment. The subject was instructed to lie quietly in
the scanner with his eyes open.
●Auditory-verbal stimulation: A, the subject heard
a written narrative read aloud to him for 39 sec; B,
the subject heard nothing but the continuous
background noise of the scanner for 39 sec. The
cycle was repeated ,5 times in the course of a
5-min experiment. The subject was instructed to
lie quietly in the scanner.
After motion correction [Brammer et al., 1997], the
fMRI time series, 5Yt6, t 5 1, 2, 3, . . . , 99, at each voxel
was ﬁtted to the following sinusoidal regression model:
Yt 5 g sin (vt) 1 d cos (vt)
1 g8 sin (2vt) 1 d8 cos (2vt)
1 g9 sin (3vt) 1 d9(3vt)
1 a 1 bt 1 rt
where v is the angular frequency of alternation between experimental conditions (2 a/60 radians in
these data), and a 1 bt represents a (nuisance) linear
trend. Since the residual terms 5rt6 are temporally
autocorrelated, the model is ﬁtted by pseudogeneralized least squares, modelling the residuals as a ﬁrst-
Perspective plots of 1 - P-value for the statistic TFPQ for four slices of the visual stimulation data.
r Mixture Model Mapping r
order autoregressive process [Bullmore et al., 1996]. An
estimate of the standardized power at fundamental
frequency v was derived at each voxel from the
estimated coefficients gˆ, dˆ as in Equation (1), and
represented in a parametric FPQ map. FPQ maps were
interpolated to 21 slices and registered in the standard
space of Talairach and Tournoux as described by
Brammer et al. .
For the visual stimulation data, this analysis yielded
26,535 estimates of the test statistic TFPQ at 21 nearaxial slices through the brain. The overall distribution
is illustrated by a histogram in Figure 2.
Fitting the mixture model given by Equation (2) to
these data with two different sets of starting values for
the two parameters, p and µ, gives the results shown in
Table II. The ﬁnal values obtained are identical in each
case, although the number of iterations of the optimization technique needed to reach these values differed.
The estimated standard error of p is very small and
leads to an approximate 95% conﬁdence interval for
the parameter of (0.9623, 0.9695). The corresponding
conﬁdence interval for the parameter µ calculated
from its estimated standard error is (3.3452, 3.5788).
(The estimated covariance between the parameter
estimates was 0.000059; it must be remembered that
because of spatial correlations of the TFPQ statistic in
fMRI data, that the standard errors of the two parameters in the mixture are likely to be underestimated.
Correcting the resulting conﬁdence intervals to allow
for spatial correlation will be taken up in a later paper.)
The ﬁtted distribution is superimposed on the observed histogram in Figure 2.
Using the estimated parameter values in Equation
(6), estimated posterior probabilities of activation were
calculated. Voxels having values above 0.5 were colored black, against a white background of nonactivated intracerebral voxels, to form a simple mixture
model map of brain activation; see Figure 3 for selected
slices. This may be compared with the corresponding
maps obtained from thresholding the P-values of the
test statistic directly at 0.05 (Fig. 4) and 0.01 (Fig. 5).
The latter is very similar to the mixture model map.
A more dramatic image of the activation can be
obtained from a perspective plot of the posterior
probabilities of activation for particular slices, as shown
in Figure 6. (Bivariate interpolation, using the method
described in Akima , was used to produce these
plots.) It is of interest to compare these with perspective plots of one minus the P-value for each pixel, for
the same slices (Fig. 7); the areas of activation are now
not so immediately apparent. The explanation of the
difference is seen if 1 - P-values are plotted against
posterior probabilities for all the voxels (see Fig. 8).
The initial steepness of the graph shows that posterior
probabilities close to zero map to 1 - P-values from
0–0.9 and above.
Plot of 1 - P-values against posterior probabilities for all voxels of
the visual stimulation data.
Plot of 1 - P-values against posterior probabilities for voxels for
which the latter is greater than 0.4 (visual stimulation data).
r Everitt and Bullmore r
By replotting Figure 8 for only those voxels with
posterior probabilities of activation above 0.4 (see
Fig. 9), the equivalence of P-values and posterior
probabilities in the area of most interest is displayed.
For these data, a posterior probability of 0.5 is seen to
be equivalent to a P-value of approximately 0.008; this
is the reason, of course, why Figures 3 and 5 are very
Figure 10.
Mixture model activation map of auditory stimulation data derived from the estimated posterior
probabilities of activation for the 28,317 voxels, thresholded at 0.5.
r Mixture Model Mapping r
Moving on to the auditory data which consisted of
28,317 estimates of TFPQ at 22 near-axial slices through
the brain, the parameter estimates and their estimated
standard errors were pˆ 5 0.997 (0.000387), µˆ 5 4.852
(0.144563). Here the estimated proportion of activated
pixels is very small. The resulting mixture model map
for 15 slices is shown in Figure 10, and the perspective
plots of posterior probabilities of activation for the
most interesting slices in Figure 11.
For this example, the plot corresponding to Figure 9
is shown in Figure 12.
In this case, the P-value equivalent to a posterior
probability of 0.5 is approximately 0.00023.
DISCUSSION
The proposed method is novel in the context of
existing statistical methods for functional MR image
analysis because it entails explicit consideration of the
alternative distribution of a test statistic, as well as its
null distribution. The particular mixture model we
have speciﬁed in this paper is applicable to the distribution of standardized power at the (fundamental)
frequency of alternation between baseline and activation conditions in a periodic experimental design.
Under the null hypothesis (of no experimentally determined effect), we have modelled the distribution of the
fundamental power quotient (FPQ), multiplied by a
factor of two, as chi-squared with two degrees of
freedom. Under the alternative hypothesis (of experimentally determined signal change or ‘‘activation’’),
we have modelled the distribution of 2 3 FPQ as
noncentral chi-squared with two degrees of freedom.
The technique could easily be extended to other
relevant test statistics having null and alternative
distributions different from those used here. By using a
Figure 11.
Perspective plots of estimated posterior probabilities of activation for four slices of the auditory
stimulation data.
r Everitt and Bullmore r
mixture with more than two components, the method
could also be extended to situations where it was
believed that voxels activated in several, widely separated regions of the brain were not distributed under a
single alternative distribution, but under two or possibly more alternative distributions.
The results of ﬁtting a mixture distribution to fMRI
data are of interest for two main reasons.
First, mixture model parameters summarize the
experimental effect over the whole image in a holistic
and unconditional way. The estimated parameters, 1 pˆ and µˆ, have a ready interpretation in terms of the
proportion of activated voxels in the image and the
‘‘average’’ size of the experimental effect over all
activated voxels. They could therefore potentially be
used as omnibus statistics to summarize the experimental response over an entire image, or to compare the
extent and/or strength of response between two groups
of images. As omnibus statistics, estimated mixture
model parameters have a number of attractive properties. They have, for example, an associated measure of
their variability, namely the standard errors estimated
from the Hessian matrix (although note previous
caveat about exaggerated precision). These can be
used to produce conﬁdence intervals for each parameter. A conﬁdence interval for p that included the value
one would be indicative of no activation. Additionally,
the values at the upper ends of the two conﬁdence
intervals could be used to produce ‘‘conservative’’
activation maps if required. To compare two groups of
images, estimated p and µ values for each image could
be used to calculate group means, and then a conﬁdence interval for their difference could be calculated
from the estimated standard errors associated with
each image.
Second, the estimated posterior probabilities of activation assigned to each voxel by the mixture model
approach appear to identify activated regions far more
distinctly than the P-values associated with the test
statistic of each voxel. In Figure 6, for example, the
peaks of activation in the occipital cortex rise steeply
from a ﬂat plateau of unactivated brain regions; this
picture contrasts dramatically with the much less
informative perspective plot of 1 - P-values for the
same data shown in Figure 7.
Both the mixture approach and the direct use of
P-values are, in essence, ‘‘thresholding’’ techniques,
and from plots such as those shown in Figures 8 and 9
it is possible to assess the equivalence between particular posterior probability values and P-values. So, for
example, if a posterior probability threshold of 0.5 was
used for most data sets (and in the absence of information about the costs of identifying activated voxels as
nonactivated and vice versa, this value seems sensible), it could, by applying the mixture method, be
converted into the corresponding P-value for each
particular data set. Some investigators (including the
current authors) might ﬁnd this a more appealing
approach than searching for an acceptable correction
to apply to the P-values.
CONCLUSIONS
The mixture model approach described in this paper
appears to be a simple but relatively effective approach
to the problem of identifying areas of activation in
fMRI experiments, given the values of a particular
statistic estimated at each voxel. Activation maps
derived from the estimated posterior probabilities are
equivalent to those derived directly from the P-values
of the test statistic for some particular threshold signiﬁcance level. The advantages of the mixture approach
are that it avoids the need to consider how to correct
P-values and it provides standard errors for the esti-
Figure 12.
Plot of 1 - P-values against posterior probabilties for voxels for
which the latter is greater than 0.4 (auditory stimulation data).
r Mixture Model Mapping r
mated parameters that might be used to provide a
range of activation maps from ‘‘generous’’ to ‘‘conservative.’’
In addition to deriving activation maps for individual subjects, the estimated parameters that result
from the mixture model might also be useful for
comparing activation between different groups of subjects, and for characterizing individual images. By
introducing different and/or more component distributions into the mixture, the approach should be capable
of modelling other aspects of fMRI data.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
E.T.B. is supported by the Wellcome Trust. We thank
our colleagues in the Brain Image Analysis Unit,
Institute of Psychiatry (London, UK), particularly Drs.
Mick Brammer and Ian Wright, for their material
support in developing these ideas.