NANOSCALE PHASE SEPARATION IN
COLOSSAL MAGNETORESISTANCE
MATERIALS:
LESSONS FOR THE CUPRATES? ⋆
Elbio Dagotto1, Jan Burgy2 and Adriana Moreo3
National High Magnetic Field Lab and Department of Physics, Florida State
University, Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA
A recent vast experimental and theoretical eﬀort in manganites has shown that the
colossal magnetoresistance eﬀect can be understood based on the competition of
charge-ordered and ferromagnetic phases. The general aspects of the theoretical description appear to be valid for any compound with intrinsic phase competition. In
high temperature superconductors, recent experiments have shown the existence of
intrinsic inhomogeneities in many materials, revealing a phenomenology quite similar to that of manganese oxides. Here, the results for manganites are brieﬂy reviewed
with emphasis on the general aspects. In addition, theoretical speculations are formulated in the context of Cu-oxides by mere analogy with manganites. This includes
a tentative explanation of the spin-glass regime as a mixture of antiferromagnetic
and superconducting islands, the rationalization of the pseudogap temperature T ∗
as a Griﬃths temperature where clusters start forming upon cooling, the prediction
of “colossal” eﬀects in cuprates, and the observation that quenched disorder may
be far more relevant in Cu-oxides than previously anticipated.
1: 
2: 
3: 
⋆To appear in the Proceedings of the post-µSR2002 Superconductivity Workshop,
Williamsburg, VA., June 3-7, 2002, edited by A.J. Millis, S. Uchida, Y.J. Uemura.
 
28 November 2018
INTRODUCTION
The physics of transition-metal-oxides and other related compounds appears dominated by states that are microscopically and intrinsically inhomogeneous in the most interesting ranges of temperatures and carrier densities. The
two most relevant examples are the manganites in the regime of colossal magnetoresistance (CMR), and cuprates at hole densities in the underdoped region. In manganites the inhomogeneities arise from phase competition between
ferromagnetic metallic and charge-ordered insulating phases. In cuprates the
competition occurs between antiferromagnetic insulating and superconducting or metallic states. Microscopic theoretical approaches must consider this
phenomenon for a proper description of manganites and cuprates. Homogeneous states can at best describe these compounds on large length scales, at
a phenomenological level.
The experimental evidence for the presence of inhomogeneous states, particularly in manganites but also to some extent in cuprates, is simply overwhelming, and it will not be comprehensibly reviewed here. Several theoretical
studies have also produced considerable evidence for the intrinsic tendency
of electrons in these materials to induce competing states that are expected
to separate microscopically. Some of these theoretical studies were reported
even before the inhomogeneous states were clearly identiﬁed in experiments,
highlighting the remarkable cross-fertilization between theory and experiments
that exists in this area of investigation . Reviews on this topic, in the manganite context, are already published . Moreover, a book on the subject
by one of the authors will be available soon . The reader can ﬁnd in these
references hundreds of citations covering both theoretical and experimental
aspects. In this short contribution, frequent references to will be made
to save space, and reduce the overlap with that previous literature. In the
cuprate context, the issue of inhomogeneities is not as universally accepted
as in manganites, although important recent observations point in that direction. The potential relevance of electronic phase separation was remarked
in that context many years ago by Kivelson and others . The conference
proceedings contained in this volume provide one of the best sources of information and references for Cu-oxides inhomogeneities. Uemura has also
discussed extensively the importance of these inhomogeneities to understand
the cuprates. Readers are encouraged to consult the above mentioned literature to ﬁnd the relevant papers in this context, since in the present manuscript
we will not address the details of the remarkable evidence on self-organization
in transition oxides. Only a small subset of references, mainly by the authors
for simplicity, is cited but the current eﬀort is vast, involving dozens of groups.
This manuscript is divided in two parts. First, we focus on the recent proposal
 that manganite phase competition is in fact the origin of the famous
CMR eﬀect, showing that the inhomogeneities can lead to observable consequences. In such an analysis, it will become clear that analogous interesting
phenomena can potentially be observed when any pair of phases are in close
competition . A second kind of phase separation near ﬁrst-order transitions
is described below, involving phases with the same electronic density as ﬁrst
observed experimentally by Cheong and collaborators and then also theoretically by Moreo et al. . As a natural consequence, the second portion
of the contribution focuses on qualitative predictions that are made for the
cuprates, based on the lessons learned in the manganite context. In fact, one of
the main messages to the readers will be that manganites and cuprates share
a similar phenomenology that leads to the potentially important speculations
presented here.
INHOMOGENEITIES IN MANGANITES AND OTHER COM-
Manganites are interesting materials for at least three reasons:
(1) First, they have remarkable magnetotransport properties. Figure 1 illustrates this phenomenon with the example of Pr1−xCaxMnO3 at hole doping
x=0.30 . In the absence of magnetic ﬁelds, this material is insulating. However, relatively small ﬁelds of a few Teslas are suﬃcient to induce a metal
insulator transition at low temperatures. In this regime the resistivity changes
by several orders of magnitude, producing a truly colossal eﬀect. The state
induced by the magnetic ﬁelds is a poor metal –the residual zero temperature
resistivity is high– and it is ferromagnetic. Note that ﬁelds of order 1T are
small when compared with other typical electronic scales in a single crystal,
but unfortunately they are still too large for applications in computers.
(2) A second reason for studying these compounds is the rich phase diagram
they have. In Fig. 2 the example of La1−xCaxMnO3 is shown . The phase
diagram contains a ferromagnetic (FM) metallic phase similar to the phase
induced in Fig. 1 upon the application of a magnetic ﬁeld. In addition, Fig. 2
exhibits many other phases, notably a charge-ordered (CO) and antiferromagnetic (AF) phase at hole densities x=0.50 and beyond. This phase is also
orbitally ordered , showing here that a new degree of freedom adds to the
charge and spin, leading to complex patterns of symmetry breaking. It will be
argued below that the competition of these two phases is crucial to understand
the CMR . The insulating state above the Curie temperature TC is also
nontrivial, and plays a key role in the CMR phenomenon.
(3) The third reason for studying manganites is the presence of intrinsic inhomogeneities, even in the best crystals available. Figure 3 is reproduced from
Figure 1. Temperature dependence of the resistivity of Pr1−xCaxMnO3 at x=0.3
and various magnetic ﬁelds. The inset is the phase diagram in the temperature-magnetic ﬁeld plane, with the hatched region denoting hysteresis. From .
 , where the phase diagram of La1−xCaxMnO3 is shown again, but this time
including brief statements taken from the experimental literature that highlights the presence of inhomogeneities. Words such as “polarons”, “clusters”,
“multidomains”, “AF-FM coexistence” and related ones are ubiquitous in the
experimental literature. These materials appear to have a tendency toward
an inhomogeneous state, and typical length scales mentioned often are of a
few lattice spacings (nanoscale). The pioneering experiments in this context
are reviewed in Refs. , and the details will not be repeated here. Among
the most recent experiments are those of Renner et al. using Scanning
Tunneling Microscopy (STM) applied to Bi1−xCaxMnO3 in the regime of high
hole doping and room temperature. The results are reproduced in Fig. 4.
They show atomic resolution features in the surface of this compound and the
presence of two types of charge ordering (upper panel): checkerboard and homogeneous. The former is associated with the CO/AF state, while the latter is
presumably the FM state. In Fig. 5, dark-ﬁeld electron microscopy results for
(La1−yPry)1−xCaxMnO3 are also reproduced, this time from Uehara et al. .
This material has a clear competition CO/AF vs. FM that can be tuned by
varying the relative amount of La and Pr. The upper panel illustrates the low
Figure 2. Phase diagram of La1−xCaxMnO3, from Cheong and Hwang . The
notation is standard. The marked hole density fractions appear to have more importance than others. According to modern theories, the canted regimes (CAF) may
correspond to mixtures of AF and FM regions.
temperature results showing the presence of coexisting metallic and insulating
regions. Their size is very large, at the submicrometer scale. If this type of
experiment is indeed testing intrinsic properties of crystals, this large length
scale introduces limitations on the theoretical considerations.
It will be argued later that motivations (1), (2), and (3) are actually interconnected. The rich phase diagram (2) causes phase competition and concomitant
inhomogeneities (3), which themselves induce CMR (1). The details are in the
following sections.
Recent investigations have shown that inhomogeneities are present in other
compounds as well. Consider, for instance, the widely publicized remarkable
STM results by the group of Davis , where a wide distribution of d-wave
superconducting gaps was observed at the surface of Bi2212 in the superconducting regime. The size of the clusters was found to be in the nanometer
range. This occurs both in the optimal and underdoped regimes. Note that
the universality of this property is still under discussion and inhomogeneities
may not be as prominent in other cuprates such as YBCO . But at the
very least, measurements in the much studied Bi2212 material must be reanalyzed in view of the recently discovered inhomogeneities. In addition, there
are dozens of papers that have reported stripe-like structures, particularly in
Figure 3. Schematic phase diagram of La1−xCaxMnO3, from Moreo et al. . The
words added refer to statements reproduced from the experimental literature, at the
density and temperature of those experiments, as well as the technique used (NMR,
Neutrons, etc). The use of words such as droplets, domains, polarons, clusters, and
others indicate a tendency toward inhomogeneous behavior, present in most of the
phase diagram.
La2−xSrxCuO4 in the underdoped regime. This is another manifestation of
the intrinsic tendency toward microscopically inhomogeneous states (the list
of references simply too long to be reproduced here). Finally, recent scanning
SQUID microscopy study by Iguchi et al. have reported the existence of
diamagnetic activity above Tc in La2−xSrxCuO4. The phenomenon is found at
temperatures as high as 80 K, which is remarkable! The size of the superconducting islands was found to be as large as several micrometers.
Adding to the evidence of inhomogeneous states in cuprates, recently indications of clustered states in Eu-based compounds have been reported in . In
this reference, the analogies with manganites were discussed and emphasized.
Previously, it was widely believed that ferromagnetic polarons in Eu semiconductors were responsible for their properties. However, the most recent results
 suggest a distribution of clusters of diﬀerent sizes that may contain several carriers each. These are not polarons (one carrier with a spin distortion
around) but more complex structures. The same observation regarding the
relevance (or lack of it) of polarons is valid for cuprates and manganites as
well. Their inhomogeneities cannot be visualized as “polarons”.
Finally, in ruthenates the possibility of orbital ordering has been recently
A. Atomic scale image of phase segregation at 299 K. From Renner
et al. . The white broken line separates an insulating charge-ordering region
from a more metallic and homogeneous phase. The compound is Bi1−xCaxMnO3
with x=0.76. B. Intensity proﬁle extracted along the straight line shown in A. Note
the diﬀerence in amplitude over the Mn sites in the ordered region due to charge
ordering. C. Spectroscopic signature of phase separation. The spectra were acquired
in the location of the crosses. Two clearly distinct results are obtained.
proposed . In addition, large MR eﬀects have been unveiled in bilayer Ruoxides . Phase competition was also found in the single layer ruthenate
 . It seems that (Ca,Sr)-based ruthenates may behave similarly as other
materials mentioned here. Nickelates, cobaltites, and other compounds add to
the list where the inhomogeneities dominate in their ground state properties
(for a far longer list than presented here, and more details, see Chs. 20 and
22 of ).
ELECTRONIC PHASE SEPARATION IN MANGANITES
On the theory front, most of the work carried out in the area of manganites
uses models with two relevant degrees of freedom. One of them are the localized
Figure 5. Dark-ﬁeld images for (La1−yPry)1−xCaxMnO3, from Uehara et al. .
Panel (a) shows the coexistence of insulator CO and metal FM regions, at 20 K
and y=0.375. Panel (b) corresponds to y=0.4 and T=17 K, while panel (c) is also
at y=0.4 but for T=120 K. The latter shows the development of nanoscale charge
disordered domains at T>TC.
t2g spins and the other are the mobile eg carriers. The latter has two relevant
orbitals per Mn-ion. As a consequence, typical Hamiltonians involve: (1) The
hopping of eg electrons regulated by a 2×2 hopping matrix with an overall
scale t (the hopping amplitude). (2) A local Hund coupling JH that enforces
alignment of spins between the eg and t2g spins (experimentally the spin of
Mn3+ is known to take the maximum value S=2, compatible with a large
Hund coupling). (3) A relatively small Heisenberg antiferromagnetic coupling
JAF between the localized t2g spins, which, however, plays an important role in
regimes where there are competing states of similar energy. In addition, either
on-site Coulombic interactions with couplings U, U′, and J in the standard
notation (Ch. 4 of ), or an interaction between the electrons and Jahn-Teller
(JT) phonons –regulated by a dimensionless coupling λ– are incorporated. In
the approach favored by the present authors, the latter is used. In addition, if
one further assumes that the phonons are classical, Monte Carlo simulations
can be carried out without substantial technical diﬃculties . Moreover,
evidence shows that Coulomb interactions can be mimicked by combined large
λ and JH (Ch.8 of ), and it is expected that Coulombic or JT dominated
models will lead to analogous behavior, at least at low temperatures.
Using this type of models, Yunoki et al. and later several others (see 
for references) have unveiled a clear signal of “electronic phase separation” in
the manganite context. This type of phase separation manifests as a discontinuity in the density of carriers as the chemical potential µ varies, for example
in a Monte Carlo simulation. It was observed that even if µ changes smoothly,
there are electronic densities that can never be stabilized. If the system is
forced to have such densities (for example working in the canonical ensemble),
then the ground state separates spontaneously into two macroscopic regions,
each carrying the phase at the extremes of the density discontinuity found
varying µ. At least for the one-orbital model (restricting the number of relevant eg orbitals to one), the separation involves AF hole-undoped and FM
hole-doped phases . For two orbitals the situation is more complicated and
it involves the orbital degree of freedom . Electronic phase separation is
a robust eﬀect, and its presence in manganite models is not in doubt. The
reader can ﬁnd a discussion and the actual evidence of this behavior in 
and Ch. 6 of . The word electronic in front of phase separation is used here
to remark the diﬀerent densities of the two competing phases. It is widely
accepted that if the tail 1/r of the Coulomb interaction is incorporated, the
macroscopic phase separation mutates into a microscopic eﬀect, with the formation of clusters in the nanoscale range (see and Ch. 6 of ). This has
implications for the rationalization of the results of Uehara et al. where
submicrometer clusters were reported.
It is important to state that electronic phase separation in models of cuprates
has been proposed even before the recent work in manganites. In the cuprate
context, the proposed separation involves the AF insulator and either a metal
or a superconductor (see for instance the work of Kivelson and collaborators in
Ref. ). Phase separation appears clearly in the famous t-J model, although
it is still under much discussion whether it occurs at realistic values of J/t
An interesting observation is that in regimes of temperatures, couplings, and
densities that have cluster coexistence, there is a pseudogap in the density of
states (DOS) (see Fig.6). This occurs, for example, at densities where phase
separation exists by lowering the temperature to T=0. Intuitively, at intermediate temperatures precursors of phase separation must be present in the form
of coexisting clusters. The existence of this pseudogap feature was remarked
theoretically in . Photoemission experiments have also unveiled a similar
behavior in bilayer manganites . It is expected that pseudogaps would appear in the density of states in the regimes of inhomogeneities, as a natural
consequence of the competition between a metal (ﬂat DOS) and an insulator (gapped DOS). As discussed later, this should occur in CMR manganites
above the Curie temperature as well, since phase competition is expected in
that regime. A pseudogap is well known to exist in underdoped copper oxide
materials as well.
−1.5 −1.0 −0.5 0.0
Figure 6. (a) DOS of the one-orbital model using a 10×10 cluster at inﬁnite Hund
coupling, and temperature T=1/30 in units of the hopping. The four lines from the
top correspond to densities of mobile carriers equal to 0.90, 0.92, 0.94 and 0.97.
The inset has results at density 0.86. (b) DOS for the two-orbital model using a
20-site chain, electronic density 0.7, Hund coupling 8, and λ=1.5. The three lines at
the chemical potential from the top correspond to temperatures T=1/5, 1/10, and
1/20. Both (a) and (b) are reproduced from Moreo et al. , where more details
can be found. (c) DOS in the presence of disorder, from . W is the strength
of disorder, and shown are results for the one-orbital model on a chain of 20 sites,
with temperature T=1/75 (hopping units), Hund coupling 8, and density 0.87. This
corresponds to a regime of phase separation for zero disorder. The disorder stabilizes
the system, and creates a pseudogap. For more details see .
GENERAL ASPECTS OF PHASE COMPETITION IN THE
PRESENCE OF QUENCHED DISORDER
The discovery of electronic phase separation in manganite models described
in the previous section, and the resulting nanoscale coexisting clustered-state
upon the introduction of 1/r Coulomb eﬀects, provides a ﬁrst approximation toward the understanding of the physics of manganites (Fig. 3). This
possible explanation is robust on theoretical grounds and compatible with
experimental data. However, it is important to analyze phase separation in
more general terms. In fact, the experiments of Uehara et al. show clusters of sizes in the submicrometer scale involving two phases (varying y in
(La1−yPry)1−xCaxMnO3 it is possible to interpolate between FM and CO
states at constant x). The electronic density of these coexisting clusters is
likely the same since diﬀerent densities would lead to large energy penalizations due to the accumulation of charge.
The results of the previous section can be reformulated as a ﬁrst order transition as a function of the chemical potential µ, as shown in Fig. 7. Let us now
Figure 7. Schematic representation of the electronic phase separation phenomenon
in the T-µ plane. The notation is standard.
consider a similar ﬁrst-order transition, but now varying an arbitrary parameter instead of µ. This transition could occur at constant electronic density,
changing for example the hopping amplitude t (which can eﬀectively be done
by chemical substitution as in (La1−yPry)1−xCaxMnO3). In this case the 1/r
Coulomb interaction will not lead to such dramatic consequences (nanoclusters) as in the electronic phase separation case. However, quenched disorder
produces interesting results. To carry out this type of calculations, recently
Burgy et al. used an Ising spin “toy model”, with couplings J1, J2 and J4
at distances 1,
5 lattice spacings. It is expected that the general
aspects of the results will not be severely aﬀected by the details of the model.
The Hamiltonian was selected such that two phases are in competition in the
model under investigation. In Fig. 8 they are called phases “O1” and “O2”
(in practice FM and AF “collinear” phases, respectively). The reader should
not be deterred by the fact that the present convention for “O1” diﬀers from
that in . The model is invariant under the transformation (J1,J2,J4) →(-
J1,J2,-J4), hence the FM and AF states are interchangeable. The couplings are
selected such that in the absence of disorder the phase diagram is as shown
in Fig. 8 with dashed lines. A ﬁrst-order transition separates the two phases
at low temperatures. This is similar to Fig. 7 but now varying one of the couplings (J2) in the model, rather than the chemical potential. The critical value
is J2c=0.7J1, but its actual value is a numerical detail not believed to be of
relevance.
Quenched disorder is introduced by adding a random component to J2 since
it is this coupling that must be varied to transform from one phase to the
other. The random component is taken from a box distribution centered at
zero, of total width W. From the study of Imry and Wortis it is to be
expected that disorder will transfrom a ﬁrst-order transition into a continuous one. Simulations indicate a rich phase diagram when the two phases
compete and disorder is introduced. The results for two typical values of W
are in Fig. 8, reproduced from . At values of J2 far from the region of
competition, the disorder strength used is not suﬃcient to alter the value of
RE1-xSrxMnO3
conducting
La2−xSrxCuO4
Phase diagram of the “toy model” of Ising variables with J1-J2-J4
couplings in two dimensions (J4=0.2J1 to induce a clear ﬁrst-order transition at low
temperature, and J1=1 provides the energy scale). This phase diagram is believed
to represent the behavior of any pair of competing phases. Disorder is introduced
into the coupling J2 that allows the system to change from phase 1 to phase 2, which
in this case are ferromagnetic and collinear, respectively. Details of the deﬁnition
of the disorder, lattices and techniques used, can be found in the original reference
Burgy et al. . TO1 and TO2 are the true ordering temperatures, while T ∗is the
clean-limit ordering temperature, which survives as a rapid “crossover” for cluster
formation when disorder is introduced. The insets are phase diagrams of Mn-oxides
on the left (private communication from Y. Tokura and Y. Tomioka), and the single
layer cuprate on the right.
the critical temperatures. However, in the region of competition near J2c, far
more dramatic eﬀects are observed. For “weak” disorder, both critical temperatures are appreciably reduced around J2c, although still the general shape
of the phase diagram resembles bicritical or tricritical behavior. This is one
class of results that may be observed in experiments, as reported recently in
Pr0.55(Ca1−ySry)0.45MnO3 . On the other hand, for “large” disorder the
reduction in the critical temperatures is far more dramatic, and it leads to
a region without long-range order even at T=0. An example of this could be
(La1−xTbx)2/3Ca1/3MnO3, reported in .
If we are correct in assuming that the general aspects of the problem remain
for more realistic competing phases, it is then predicted that in materials
with phase competition two types of phases diagrams are to be expected for
diﬀerent strengths of the disorder (namely, the weak and strong disorder cases
of Fig. 8). In the insets of the same ﬁgure, two experimentally determined
phase diagrams are shown with features reminiscent of those in the theoretical
calculation. On the right, is the well known phase diagram of La2−xSrxCuO4
that in the underdoped regime shows a clear depletion of both the N´eel and
superconducting (SC) critical temperatures, forming a region widely known
as the “spin glass”. It is tempting to speculate that this region is actually
produced by phase competition between AF (perhaps containing stripes) and
SC states. The actual form of the state is discussed below. On the left inset of
Fig. 8 is the phase diagram of the Sr-based x=0.45 manganite as determined
by Tomioka and Tokura . Note the presence of a deep reduction in the
critical temperatures, generating a feature that resembles “quantum critical”
behavior. Both insets have qualitative similarity with the theoretical study,
and it is natural to believe that this is not accidental.
STATES OF RELEVANCE IN THE REGION OF PHASE COM-
PETITION AND PREDICTION OF T ∗
What sort of states are induced in the region of competition upon the introduction of disorder? Typical results are shown in Fig. 9, where averages
over a few hundred Monte Carlo sweeps are shown. On the left, the state is
dominated by the white color. In our convention that means that in most of
the sites of the lattice the order parameter is not well developed, namely, as
time evolves the values of the order parameters ﬂuctuate leading to a net zero
result. This is the picture of a standard paramagnet, and it occurs at temperatures above the original critical temperature of the “clean” (not disordered)
limit. This temperature will play a key role in the following and we denote it by
T ∗. This is a Griﬃths temperature. Griﬃths eﬀects appear to be substantially
magniﬁed when disorder is introduced in regions of phase competition .
In the middle of Fig. 9 the state between the actual critical temperature TO1
and T ∗is presented. This state will lead us to a rationalization of the CMR
eﬀect, as described below. It still contains some paramagnetic (white) areas,
but now it is clear that there are regions that have quasi-static local order and
clusters are formed. These clusters are denoted in the ﬁgure with three grey
colors as indicated in the caption. Some of them have the order that will become truly dominant below TO1 (which is actually a Curie temperature in the
example considered). However, these clusters can randomly have a positive or
negative order parameter, leading to a globally disordered state. If Heisenberg
variables –instead of Ising– would have been considered, then the orientation
of the local order parameters of the clusters would point in arbitrary directions, but still leading to a global cancellation. In addition to these clusters, in
Figure 9. Typical spin conﬁgurations representative of dominant states in the toy
model, generated by the MC simulation. Shown are averages over nearly 100 MC
sweeps. The coupling and temperature for the three cases (1-2-3) are those marked
in Fig.8. The conventions used are the following: the darkest regions correspond
to the FM phase with positive order parameter; the next dark tone is FM with
negative order parameter; the light grey is the competing collinear phase; while
white corresponds to a paramagnetic region. The original colors can be found in
Burgy et al. .
the ﬁgure one can observe small islands of the competing phase, namely, the
phase that will become stable upon further increasing couplings. The ﬂuctuations in the disorder create regions where J2 is locally larger than the critical
value, and the other phase is stabilized.
It is easy to imagine that transport in such a complicated environment is
quite complicated. Consider, for instance, a spin-up electron that crosses the
sample coupled to the “toy model” states of relevance by a Hund coupling,
as it occurs when eg and t2g degrees of freedom are considered. Movement
within the spin-up locally ordered regions should be nearly ballistic for small
clusters. However, for the spin-down regions as well as the competing phase
regions (that contain spins up and down in stripes) the movement of the
spin-up electron is not favored. They act as “insulators” for the up species of
electrons. These insulating regions will increase the resistivity dramatically.
There is no obvious easy channel for the ﬂow of charge from one side of the
sample to the other in this context. We will see below that this translates into
a huge resistivity.
Finally, as the temperature is lowered further, then either the spin up or down
clusters dominate, a percolation occurs and the dominance of one “color” is
found in simulations (as shown in Fig. 9-3). This state will be favorable for
transport of at least one spin species of electrons, although it is still inhomogeneous. Note the interesting formation of domain-walls in the FM order
parameter, through the stabilization of the competing phase .
GENERALIZATION OF TOY MODEL RESULTS TO REAL
MANGANITES
Calculations such as those reported in the previous section cannot be performed directly using realistic models for manganites. These models involve
many degrees of freedom, some of them quantum mechanical (e.g. the eg
electrons). Such complex system cannot be easily simulated in clusters large
enough to see percolative physics (although they can be studied fairly well
to obtain phase diagrams in the absence of disorder). However, the results
obtained with the toy model were easy to understand and they seem general
enough to be valid under several other circumstances as well. Thus, we believe
that in real manganites the competition between the FM and CO/AF states
in the presence of sources of disorder also leads to a phase diagram as shown
in Fig. 8, and to states as in Fig. 9 simply changing the labeling of the phases.
As a consequence, two interesting conjectures can be made for manganites inspired by the study of simpler systems: (1) We believe that the CMR state has
a “clustered” structure, with preformed FM and CO/AF clusters and even PM
regions. Figure 10 shows a sketch of this state. It has no global net moment,
but locally there is order (see also ). (2) There has to be a T ∗scale in Mnoxide real systems that correspond to a Griﬃths temperature where clusters
start forming. This temperature is larger than the true ordering temperatures.
Figure 10. Proposed state for manganites in the CMR regime. FM clusters are
locally formed, but with random orientations of the order parameter. The insulator
forms walls between the FM metallic regions.
To test these assumptions, calculations must be carried out to check the presence of a CMR eﬀect in a clustered state. This will be the goal of the next
section. In addition, the T ∗new scale should be observable in real materials. Some experimental results are described below that have reported results
compatible with the clustered state and the existence of T ∗.
POSSIBLE EXPLANATION OF THE CMR EFFECT
From the spin toy model discussed before, it is not possible to obtain the resistivity directly. However, it is possible to make reasonable assumptions that
would allow us to obtain a rough estimation of that resistivity. As described
in the previous section, we will consider electrons with either spin up or down
moving in the background of the spins generated by the Monte Carlo simulations (represented in the various regimes by the three typical states shown
in Fig. 8). For each state, simple rules can be established that would allow us
to write a random resistor network approximation to the problem. The reader
can ﬁnd some details in , but the idea is simple: from the perspective of, say,
the spin-up electron then (1) a low resistance in the eﬀective network should
connect FM regions with the positive magnetization; (2) a high (or inﬁnite)
resistance links the positive and negative magnetization FM regions (due to
the Hund coupling spin-up electrons do not propagate in the negative moment
FM areas); and (3) an intermediate resistance links the FM positive moment
Resistivity
Figure 11. Resistance close to J2c, obtained from the MC conﬁgurations of the
toy model J1-J2-J4 by a suitable translation to manganite language of the many
phases, supplemented by mild assumptions on the individual resistances that form
the resistor network (see text and Ref. ). Note the large value of the zero-ﬁeld
resistance in the intermediate temperature region with preformed clusters, where
there is a global cancellation of the order parameters (black is FM with positive
moment, dark grey is FM with negative moment and light grey is the phase competing with FM). Resistances including an external ﬁeld Hs (in units of J1) are also
shown. There is a strong dependence of the resistance with external ﬁeld, leading
to a huge MR ratio, comparable to experiments. The snapshots on the right correspond to typical conﬁgurations before (upper panel) and after (lower panel) a ﬁeld
Hs = 10−2J1 is turned on (for details see ). The inset shows similar behavior in
3D (see Fig. 12).
and PM regions. Analogous rules can be setup for spin-down electrons. By this
procedure, for each Monte Carlo generated “snapshot”, a resistor network is
constructed, and then solved iteratively using the Kirchoﬀequations.
The resistance (or resistivity) vs. temperature obtained by the procedure outlined in the previous paragraph is shown in Fig. 11, for a coupling J2 close
to J2c. In the absence of magnetic ﬁelds, a huge peak is found at intermediate temperatures in qualitative agreement with experimental results, and
also with the theoretical expectations as described in the previous section.
The state between TO1 and T ∗, with its clustered and messy structure, is very
detrimental for transport of charge, and the results of the resistor network
approximation conﬁrm this guess.
The most spectacular result is the dependence of the resistance with magnetic
ﬁelds, also contained in Fig. 11. Consider, for example, a tiny ﬁeld of just
10−3J1 in the natural units of the problem. This ﬁeld is found to reduce the
peak in the resistivity by 50%, an enormous eﬀect! For a ﬁeld of 10−2J1 the
peak has basically disappeared in the scale of Fig. 11. This eﬀect found in
simulations is quite similar in scale to those reported experimentally. Similar
results are found in 3D simulations (Fig. 12), although of smaller magnitude
(work is still in progress in this contex, see ).
3D J1-J2 Ising model
Resistivity
Figure 12. (left) Phase diagram of the J1-J2 toy model using a three dimensional
lattice. The couplings were selected such that ferromagnetic and collinear (or A-AF)
phases are in competition. The T ∗scale is indicated. Results are quite similar to
those in two dimensions. (right) Resistivity vs temperature, at the external ﬁelds
indicated. A large magnetoresistance is observed. The calculation was done using
similar resistor network rules as in two dimensions. Details, such as couplings used
and strength of disorder, can be found in .
What is the physics behind the results in Fig. 11? Consider also in Fig. 11
(right panels) a typical state found in the simulations at zero ﬁeld, in the
temperature range of interest. As described before, it contains regions with
positive and negative magnetization as well as insulating domains. The key
issue for the present discussion is the relatively robust size of the preformed
ferromagnetic clusters. Suppose the magnetic ﬁeld has a sign such that it favors the positive magnetization. The negative magnetization clusters involve
dozens of spins and in this respect they behave like giant eﬀective spins. Such
a giant spin can rotate in spin space under the inﬂuence of a tiny magnetic
ﬁeld. The eﬀect is large not because the ﬁeld is large, but because the preformed eﬀective spin is large! In fact the bottom right panel of Fig. 11 shows
the net eﬀect of adding a magnetic ﬁeld of 10−2J1. The regions with negative magnetization have ﬂipped to positive, the insulating regions separating
positive from negative magnetizations have melted away (since they are no
longer needed), and now several channels for transport are opened for spin-up
electrons. A small magnetic ﬁeld produces huge changes in transport due to
the existence of preformed ferromagnetic clusters! We believe that these ideas
have captured the essence of the CMR paradox, although much more work is
certainly needed to fully reﬁne them.
PHASE COEXISTENCE ABOVE TC and EXPERIMENTAL
DETERMINATION OF T ∗
At present, several exciting experiments are being carried out to study the
existence of a T ∗new scale in manganites. We cannot review them all here for
lack of space, but the reader can consult Ch. 19 of for a more detailed discussion, preliminary information, and additional citations. For our purposes,
here we will only describe the recent work of Adams et al. where neutron
scattering results for La1−xCaxMnO3 with x=0.30 were reported in a wide
range of temperatures. Some results are in Fig. 13. The authors of Ref. 
studied diﬀuse scattering in the vicinity of a Bragg peak. Some features at
particular values of the momenta are identiﬁed as caused by the presence of
“uncorrelated” Jahn-Teller polarons. The intensity of one of those momenta
vs. temperature is in Fig. 13 (a). Below the Curie temperature the signal is
small, while in the range experimentally investigated the intensity is nearly
constant above TC. This behavior does not follow the resistivity of the system,
which has a large peak at TC, and it rapidly decreases both below and above
that ordering temperature. Then, the uncorrelated polarons (namely, a state
dominated by a gas of independent fairly heavy polarons) is not the state of
relevance for manganites, since it does not correlate with the resistivity.
On the other hand, in Fig. 13 (b), results of the same experiment but at other
momenta are shown. They correspond to the signal attributed to “correlated
polarons”, which manifest as a weak peak in the vicinity of the dominant
Bragg peak. This feature in the neutron intensity indicates that polarons are
not independent, but they form a structure that seems to resemble closely the
Temperature (K)
Counts in 10 min
Temperature (K)
Counts in 7 min
polaron peak
central peak
resistivity
Figure 13. (a) Temperature dependence of the diﬀuse polaron scattering (uncorrelated polarons) for La1−xCaxMnO3 (x=0.30). Note that above TC the results are
nearly temperature independent in the range investigated. (b) Temperature dependence of the intensity of the “polaron peak” –corresponding to charge ordering–
compared to the central peak intensity discovered by Lynn et al. , as well as the
resistivity. The data have been scaled so the peak heights match. It was concluded
that “The similarity of the data indicates a common origin”. From Adams et al.
 , where more details can be found.
CE-state of half-doped manganites . Then, the correlated polaron signal
should be more properly referred to as CE-clusters or charge-ordered clusters,
and they correspond to small islands of a phase (CO/AF) that becomes stable
by changing the chemical composition. The key result of Ref. (Fig. 13 (b))
is that the intensity corresponding to the charge-ordered clusters behaves as
a function of temperature quite similarly as the resistivity does. Adams et al.
 write that “The similarity of the data indicate a common origin.” Then,
the coexistence of CE-like clusters, with the FM clusters known to exist in
the same regime and, probably, paramagnetic regions as well, forms a
complex state whose existence is correlated with the anomalous behavior found
in transport measurements. Following the neutron peak intensity related with
charge-ordered clusters vs. temperature would allow for a determination of
T ∗when the signal vanishes. These conclusions are supported by a variety of
measurements by several groups in addition to those described here (for a list
see Ch. 19 of ). T ∗in materials such as La1−xCaxMnO3 (x=0.30) appears to
be located in the neighborhood of 400 K . Adding to these results, recent
studies by Argyriou et al. have also reported a T ∗in bilayered manganites
that appears to correspond to a glassy transition, at a temperature well above
the ordering temperatures. Work in this important and exciting subarea of
manganite physics is just starting, and many surprises will likely be found in
the near future.
LESSONS FOR THE CUPRATES
The results for manganites described above, with inhomogeneities clearly found
both in experimental and theoretical investigations, appear to originate in
phase competition. The general considerations mentioned during the discussion of this problem indicate that phase competition between any pair of fairly
diﬀerent ordered phases should lead to a similar phenomenology. In particular,
the results of Fig. 8 should apply to the superconductivity vs. AF insulator
competition in high temperature superconductors. As a consequence, by mere
analogy with manganites it is possible to list some properties that cuprates
may have if indeed they behave similarly as other transition metal oxides .
The results of the present discussion when applied to cuprates can be labeled
as “speculations” at this point, since it is diﬃcult to carry out detailed calculations for Cu-oxides. However, they are “educated” speculations that deserve
serious consideration and they may help clarifying the complicated behavior
of cuprates in the underdoped regime. Note, once again, that the readers are
encouraged to consult the literature presented here (e.g. and ) as well
as the rest of these proceedings, to ﬁnd other papers with analogous ideas.
Percolative concepts in cuprates have been around for some time, although
they have not been at the forefront of the theoretical developments.
The potential similarities cuprates-manganites lead to the following possibilities:
* The phase diagram of La2−xSrxCuO4 in one inset of Fig. 8 is believed to
contain a spin-glass phase. From the main result of the same ﬁgure, this phase
could instead arise from a mixture of SC and AF clusters. The diﬀerent orientations of the order parameters in diﬀerent clusters could lead to their global
cancellation (the order parameter for SC contains a phase factor that could
randomly change from cluster to cluster). The implication, then, is that the
phase transition SC-AF in the clean limit with no sources of disorder could
have ﬁrst-order characteristics, as sketched in Fig. 14 (a). This is reminiscent
of the behavior in organic superconductors and in SO(5) theories of superconductivity .
* The famous pseudogap temperature scale would be in this context just the
Griﬃths temperature of Fig. 8, namely, a remnant of the clean limit phase
transition below which the system orders locally. The results of Iguchi et al.
 with superconducting regions in La2−xSrxCuO4 even at temperatures as
high as 80 K, suggest that indeed Tc could be much higher than previously
believed in this context.
* Percolative eﬀects may exist in cuprates as well, as they seem to be present
in manganites. This is a natural consequence of the inhomogeneous picture for
conducting
Figure 14. (a) Conjectured phase diagram for high-temperature superconductivity
 . Black lines should be the actual phase boundaries without disorder. The shaded
region is conjectured to have metallic (SC) and insulating (AF) coexisting regions
in the real materials. (b) Resistivity ρab vs T, from a random-resistor network calculation as in Ref. , where details can be found. A 50×50 cluster was used, with
ρab for insulating (optimal doping) fraction p=1.0 (0.0) taken from LSCO x=0.04
(0.15) data [H. Takagi et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 2975 . See also Y. Ando et
al., cond-mat/0104163]. The inset labels are the p fractions at 100 K, all of which
are smoothly reduced with decreasing T until percolation to a SC state occurs at
the underdoped regime. Some rough calculations of resistivities using random
resistor networks have been already presented (see Fig. 14 (b), reproduced
from , and also Ref. ).
* Although not discussed in detail in this paper, studies in Mn-oxides have
brought forward the ideas of Imry and Ma about phase competition using the
Random Field Ising Model . In this context, when a cluster of radius R
is created inside a region dominated by a competing phase, near a ﬁrst-order
transition, the energy penalization due to the surface is positive and grows
as Rd−1 where d is the dimension. On the other hand, the ﬂuctuations in
the disorder strength grow as Rd/2, from standard considerations involving
random numbers. A balance between the two occurs at d=2, widely believed
to be the critical dimension of the problem. This dimension is of relevance for
two-dimensional cuprates. Eﬀects of this nature could be at work in bilayered
manganites as well. If Heisenberg variables are used instead of Ising variables,
it can be shown that the critical dimension increases to 4, and the ideas may
even apply in three dimensional systems.
* If it is correct that cuprates and manganites are both described by the same
phenomenological approach contained in Fig. 8, then there has to be an analog in Cu-oxides of the “colossal” MR in Mn-oxides! From the discussion in
previous sections it seems that CMR occurs when preformed FM clusters are
rapidly aligned by an external magnetic ﬁeld. In the SC vs. AF case, supercon-
ducting clusters may be preformed with a basically random phase. If one could
have an external ﬁeld that favors the alignment of these phases, this theory
predicts that rapidly a SC state should be generated. However, there is no external ﬁeld that we know that can produce this alignment. An approximation
would be to bring the sample in the clustered regime in close proximity to
a system already superconducting. This would favor the phase alignment. In
fact, there are already results in the literature reporting a “colossal proximity
eﬀect” in YBCO, that may be a manifestation of the theory discussed here
 . This is an exciting area of research that may lead to many surprises.
* Disorder may play a role in cuprates far more important than previously
anticipated. By carefully growing samples with as little disorder as possible,
the Tc should grow, having T ∗as the best value possible. Purely phenomenological studies in this context by Attﬁeld et al. , both for manganites and
cuprates, lead to similar conclusions. Recent results by Eisaki et al. also
suggest that carefully prepared samples have higher critical temperatures than
previously believed. Could it be that a new generation of ultra-clean samples
is needed to make progress in high temperature superconductors? This is not
a pleasant thought, but we may need even better crystals than currently available to unveil the proper phase diagram of Cu-oxides.
* Finally, note that materials such as CeCoIn5 heavy-fermions appear to have a
phase diagram quite similar to those of cuprates, including a pseudogap regime
and a T ∗ . We feel that it is unlikely that totally diﬀerent mechanism are
at work in these families of compounds. Thus, the explanation for pseudogap
and T ∗must be simple and general, and the one described above satisﬁes
these requirements. We do not believe that exotic two dimensional states are
responsible for these features.
CONCLUSIONS
In recent years the key role of inhomogeneities in transition metal oxides
and related compounds has been unveiled. The evidence in manganites is
very strong, both in theory and experiments. The competing phases here are
CO/AF and FM. The existence of preformed clusters and its easy alignment
with modest magnetic ﬁelds leads to a large magnetoresistance. Phase separation appears to be at the heart of this phenomenon. By mere analogy with
the Mn-oxide phenomenology, speculations can be made for cuprates as well.
The spin-glass phase could arise from SC vs. AF phase competition, and the
pseudogap T ∗could be a Griﬃths temperature where local clusters start forming. Colossal eﬀects could be present in Cu-oxides, a challenging concept. The
importance of inhomogeneities in cuprates is slowly being unveiled by experiments, and these notorious deviations from an homogeneous state must be
considered in any serious theoretical description of the still poorly understood
high temperature superconductors.
This work was supported by NSF grant DMR-0122523 and by MARTECH.