Learning Attitudes and Attributes from Multi-Aspect Reviews
Julian McAuley, Jure Leskovec, Dan Jurafsky
Abstract—Most online reviews consist of plain-text feedback
together with a single numeric score. However, there are multiple dimensions to products and opinions, and understanding
the ‘aspects’ that contribute to users’ ratings may help us to
better understand their individual preferences. For example,
a user’s impression of an audiobook presumably depends on
aspects such as the story and the narrator, and knowing their
opinions on these aspects may help us to recommend better
products. In this paper, we build models for rating systems in
which such dimensions are explicit, in the sense that users leave
separate ratings for each aspect of a product. By introducing
new corpora consisting of ﬁve million reviews, rated with
between three and six aspects, we evaluate our models on three
prediction tasks: First, we uncover which parts of a review
discuss which of the rated aspects. Second, we summarize
reviews, by ﬁnding the sentences that best explain a user’s
rating. Finally, since aspect ratings are optional in many of
the datasets we consider, we recover ratings that are missing
from a user’s evaluation. Our model matches state-of-the-art
approaches on existing small-scale datasets, while scaling to the
real-world datasets we introduce. Moreover, our model is able
to ‘disentangle’ content and sentiment words: we automatically
learn content words that are indicative of a particular aspect as
well as the aspect-speciﬁc sentiment words that are indicative
of a particular rating.
I. INTRODUCTION
Online reviews, consisting of numeric ratings and plaintext feedback, are a valuable source of data for tasks such
as product recommendation, summarization, and sentiment
analysis. Making effective use of such reviews means understanding why users evaluated products the way they did.
Did a user dislike an audiobook because of the narrator or
because of the story? If a user prefers toys of a certain brand,
is it because that brand’s toys are fun, or because they are
educational? If a user describes a beer as having ‘grapefruit
tones’, what feature of the beer does this refer to, and are
the words ‘grapefruit tones’ praise or criticism?1
Naturally, users’ opinions are multifaceted, and answering
such questions means understanding the different aspects
that contribute to their evaluation. For example, consider
the beer-rating website BeerAdvocate, one of the datasets
included in our study. When a user evaluates a beer, their
opinion is presumably inﬂuenced by the beer’s look, smell,
taste, and feel (palate). Furthermore, their opinions about
such aspects may be conﬂicted: if a beer has a bad taste but
a good palate, it might be described as having ‘stale hops,
but a velvety body’; how can we learn that ‘body’ refers to
1This is an extended version of our ICDM paper .
‘Partridge in a Pear Tree’, brewed by ‘The Bruery’
Dark brown with a light tan head, minimal lace and low retention.
Excellent aroma of dark fruit, plum, raisin and red grape with
light vanilla, oak, caramel and toffee. Medium thick body with
low carbonation. Flavor has strong brown sugar and molasses
from the start over bready yeast and a dark fruit and plum ﬁnish.
Minimal alcohol presence. Actually, this is a nice quad.
Smell: 4.5
Overall: 4
Figure 1. An example review from BeerAdvocate (of the beer ‘Partridge in
a Pear Tree’, a Californian Quadrupel). Each review consists of ﬁve ratings
and free-text feedback. Our goal is to assign each of the sentences to one of
the ﬁve aspects being evaluated (in this example the six sentences discuss
look, smell, feel, taste, taste, and overall impression, respectively).
palate, ‘hops’ refers to taste, and ‘stale’ and ‘velvety’ refer
to negative and positive sentiments about those aspects?
To answer this, we consider product rating systems in
which such aspects are explicit, in the sense that reviews
include multiple ratings , corresponding to different
aspects of each product. For example, users of BeerAdvocate provide ratings for each of the four sensory aspects
mentioned above, in addition to their overall opinion. An
example review from this corpus is shown in Figure 1.
We consider three tasks on this type of data: First, can
multi-aspect ratings be used as a form of weak supervision
to learn language models capable of uncovering which
sentences discuss each of the rated aspects? For example,
using only multi-aspect rating data from many reviews (and
no other labels), can we learn that ‘medium thick body with
low carbonation’ in Figure 1 refers to ‘feel’? Moreover,
can we learn that the word ‘warm’ may be negative when
describing the taste of a beer, but positive when describing
its color? Second, can such a model be used to summarize
reviews, which for us means choosing a subset of sentences
from each review that best explain a user’s rating? And third,
since ratings for aspects are optional on many of the websites
we consider, can missing ratings be recovered from users’
overall opinions in addition to the review content?
Although sophisticated models have been proposed for
this type of data , , , , our primary goal
is to design models that are scalable and interpretable. In
terms of scalability, our models scale to corpora consisting
of several million reviews. In terms of interpretability, while
topic-modeling approaches learn distributions of words used
 
to describe each aspect , , , , we separately
model words that describe an aspect and words that describe
sentiment about an aspect; in this way we learn highly
interpretable topic and sentiment lexicons simultaneously.
A. Present work
We introduce a new model, which we name Preference
and Attribute Learning from Labeled Groundtruth and Explicit Ratings, or PALE LAGER for short. We introduce
corpora of ﬁve million reviews from BeerAdvocate, Rate-
Beer, Amazon, and Audible, each of which have been
rated with between three and six aspects. PALE LAGER
can readily handle datasets of this size under a variety of
training scenarios: in order to predict sentence aspects, the
model can be trained with no supervision (i.e., using only
aspect ratings), weak supervision (using a small number of
manually-labeled sentences in addition to unlabeled data),
or with full supervision (using only manually-labeled data).
Using expert human annotators we obtain groundtruth labels
for over ten thousand of the sentences in our corpora.
We ﬁnd that while our model naturally beneﬁts from
increasing levels of supervision, our unsupervised model
already obtains good performance on the tasks we consider,
and produces highly interpretable aspect and sentiment lexicons. We discover that separating reviews into individual
aspects is crucial when recovering missing ratings, as con-
ﬂicting sentiments may appear in reviews where multiple
aspects are discussed. However, we ﬁnd that this alone is not
enough to recover missing ratings, and that to do so requires
us to explicitly model relationships between aspects.
Our segmentation task is similar to those of , ,
 , where the authors use aspect ratings to label and rank
sentences in terms of the aspects they discuss. The same
papers also discuss summarization, though in a different
context from our own work; they deﬁne summarization in
terms of ranking sentences across multiple reviews, whereas
our goal is to choose sentences that best explain a user’s
multiple-aspect rating. More recently, the problem of recovering missing aspect ratings has been discussed in , .
Unlike topic modeling approaches, which learn word
distributions over topics for each aspect, PALE LAGER
simultaneously models words that discuss an aspect and
words that discuss the associated sentiment. For example,
from reviews of the type shown in Figure 1, we learn
that nouns such as ‘body’ describe the aspect ‘feel’, and
adjectives such as ‘thick’ describe positive sentiment about
that aspect, and we do so without manual intervention or
domain knowledge. For such data we ﬁnd that it is critical
to separately model sentiment lexicons per-aspect, due to
the complex interplay between nouns and adjectives .
B. Contributions
We introduce a new dataset of approximately ﬁve million
reviews with multi-aspect ratings, with over ten thousand
manually annotated sentences. The data we introduce requires a model that can be trained on millions of reviews in
a short period of time, for which we adapt high-throughput
methods from computer vision. The models we propose
produce highly interpretable lexicons of each aspect, and
their associated sentiments.
The tasks we consider have been studied in , ,
 (segmentation and ranking) and , (rating
prediction). Although these previous approaches are highly
sophisticated, they are limited to corpora of at most a few
thousand reviews. We use complete datasets (i.e., all existing
reviews) from each of the sources we consider, and show
that good performance can be obtained using much simpler
The main novelty of our approach lies in how we model
such data. For each aspect we separately model the words
that discuss an aspect and words that discuss sentiment about
an aspect. In contrast to topic models, this means that we
learn sentiment-neutral lexicons of words that describe an
aspect (which contain nouns like ‘head’, ‘carbonation’, and
‘ﬂavor’ in our BeerAdvocate data), while simultaneously
learning sentiment lexicons for each aspect (which contain
adjectives like ‘watery’, ‘skunky’, and ‘metallic’).
C. Further related work
Reviews consisting of plain-text feedback and a single
numeric score have proved a valuable source of data in many
applications, including product recommendation , feature
discovery , review summarization , and sentiment
analysis , among others. Understanding the multifaceted
nature of such ratings has been demonstrated to lead to
better performance at such tasks , , . Matrix
factorization techniques use nothing but numeric scores
to learn latent ‘aspects’ that best explain users’ preferences,
while clustering and topic-modeling approaches use nothing
but review text to model ‘aspects’ in terms of words that
appear in document corpora , , . While such
approaches may accurately model the data, the topics they
learn are frequently not interpretable by users, nor are they
representative of ratable aspects. This is precisely the issue
addressed in , which attempts to uncover latent topics
that are in some way similar to aspects on which users vote.
 and used multi-aspect ratings as a means to
summarize review corpora. As in our work, the authors of
 use topic-models to identify ‘topics’ whose words are
highly correlated with the aspects on which users vote, and
like us they apply their model to assign aspect labels to
sentences in a review. Some more recent works that deal
with multi-aspect rating systems are , , , , .
Finally, examine whether similar models can be applied
without explicit aspect ratings, so that ratable aspects might
be uncovered using only overall ratings.
A number of works model the relationship between aspects and opinions on aspects , . In sentiment
is associated with objective product features; similarly, 
assigns sentiment labels to different product ‘facets’ in a
corpus of camera reviews, where users manually specify
facets that are important to their evaluation. and 
demonstrate that sentence aspects can be inferred from
sentence sentiment, and they also introduce a publiclyavailable dataset which we include in our study.
Noting that aspect ratings are optional in many multiaspect review systems, the problem of recovering missing
ratings is discussed in , and more recently in .
First, we conﬁrm their ﬁnding that multiple-aspect rating
prediction depends on having separate sentiment models
for each aspect. We then extend their work by explicitly
modeling relationships between aspects.
Our work is also related to the discovery of sentiment lexicons , . Unlike topic-modeling approaches, whose
‘topics’ are per-aspect word distributions, our goal is to
separately model words that discuss an aspect and words
that discuss sentiment about an aspect. Lexicon discovery
is discussed in , and has been used for review summarization by , though such approaches require considerable
manual intervention, and are not learned automatically. The
use of language in review systems such as those we consider
is discussed in and , whose ﬁndings are consistent
with the lexicons we learn.
II. DATASETS
The beer-rating websites BeerAdvocate and RateBeer allow users to rate beers using a ﬁve-aspect rating system.
Ratings are given on four sensory aspects (feel, look, smell,
and taste), in addition to an overall rating. From BeerAdvocate we also obtain reviews of Pubs, which are rated in
terms of food, price, quality, selection, service, and vibe.
All Amazon product reviews allow users to rate items in
terms of their overall quality. The Toys & Games category
allows users to provide further feedback, by rating products
in terms of fun, durability, and educational value.
Finally, the audiobook rating website Audible allows users
to rate audiobooks in terms of the author and the narrator,
in addition to their overall rating.
These datasets are summarized in Table I. The ‘CC’
column shows the average correlation coefﬁcient across all
pairs of aspects. Our Pubs data has the lowest correlation
between aspects, and in fact some aspects are negatively
correlated (price is negatively correlated with both food and
service, as we would expect for pub data).
We brieﬂy mention a variety of other websites that provide similar rating systems, including TheBeerSpot, BeerPal,
Yahoo! Hotels, Yahoo! Things to Do, TigerDirect, BizRate,
TripAdvisor, and DP-Review, among others.
We also obtained the CitySearch dataset used in , .
This dataset consists of 652 reviews, which are labeled
using four aspects (food, ambiance, price, and staff). This
data differs from our own in the sense that aspects are
not determined from rating data (CitySearch includes only
overall ratings), but rather aspects and user sentiment are
determined by human annotators. Sentiment labels are per
sentence (rather than per review), so to use their data
with our method, we treat their sentiment labels (positive,
negative, neutral, and conﬂicted) as four different ratings. We
adapt our method so that ratings are indexed per sentence
rather than per aspect, though we omit details for brevity.
A. Groundtruth labels
Since we wish to learn which aspects are discussed in
each sentence of a review, to evaluate our method we
require groundtruth labels for a subset of our data. Our
ﬁrst author manually labeled 100 reviews from each of our
datasets, corresponding to 4,324 sentences in total. Labels
for each sentence consist of a single aspect, in addition to
an ‘ambiguous/irrelevant’ label.
For our BeerAdvocate data, we obtained additional annotations using crowdsourcing. Using Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk, we obtained labels for 1,000 reviews, corresponding
to 9,245 sentences. To assess the quality of these labels, we
computed Cohen’s kappa coefﬁcient (to be described in Section IV-D), a standard measure of agreement between two
annotators. Unfortunately, the Mechanical Turk annotations
agreed with our own labels in only about 30% of cases,
corresponding to κ = 0.11, which is not signiﬁcantly better
than a random annotator (the 4% of sentences labeled as
‘ambiguous’ were not used for evaluation).
To address this, we used the crowdsourcing service oDesk,
which allows requesters to recruit individual workers with
speciﬁc skills. We recruited two ‘expert’ beer-labelers based
on their ability to answer some simple questions about beer.
Both annotators labeled the same 1,000 reviews independently, requiring approximately 40 hours of work. These
experts agreed with a kappa score of 0.93, and obtained
similar scores against the 100 reviews labeled by our ﬁrst
author (who is also a beer expert).
Since RateBeer reviews are similar to those of BeerAdvocate, rather than annotating reviews from both corpora, from
RateBeer we obtained annotations from non-English reviews
(which are far more common in the RateBeer corpus). We
identiﬁed 1,295 Spanish and 19,998 French reviews, and
annotated 742 sentences from the two corpora, again with
the help of expert labelers.
Code, data, and groundtruth labels shall be released at
publication time.
III. THE PALE LAGER MODEL
PALE LAGER models aspects, and ratings on aspects, as
a function of the words that appear in each sentence of a
review. Our goal is to simultaneously learn which words
discuss a particular aspect, and which words are associated
with a particular rating. For example, in our BeerAdvocate
data, the word ‘ﬂavor’ might be used to discuss the ‘taste’
DATASET STATISTICS.
Beer (beeradvocate)
feel, look, smell, taste, overall
Beer (ratebeer)
feel, look, smell, taste, overall
Pubs (beeradvocate)
food, price, quality, selection, service, vibe
Toys & Games (amazon)
durability, educational, fun, overall
Audio Books (audible)
author, narrator, overall
aspect, whereas the word ‘amazing’ might indicate a 5star rating. Thus if the words ‘amazing ﬂavor’ appear in
a sentence, we would expect that the sentence discusses
‘taste’, and that the ‘taste’ aspect has a high rating. As a
ﬁrst approximation, nouns can be thought of as ‘aspect’
words, and adjectives as ‘sentiment’ words; we ﬁnd that this
intuition closely matches the parameters we learn.
We ﬁrst introduce the notation used throughout the paper.
Suppose our review corpus (R, V) consists of reviews R =
{r1 . . . rR} and ratings V = {v1 . . . vR}. Next assume that
each review ri is divided into sentences s ∈ri, and that each
rating vi is divided into K aspects {vi1 . . . viK} (e.g. ratings
on smell, taste, overall impression, etc.). Finally, assume that
each sentence is further divided into words, w ∈ris.
We assume that each sentence in a review discusses a
single aspect; alternately we could model one aspect per
word or per paragraph, though one aspect per sentence
matches what appears in existing work , , .
Our goal is to differentiate words that discuss an aspect
from words that discuss the associated sentiment. To do so,
we separate our model into two parameter vectors, θ and
φ, which respectively encode these two properties. In our
model, the probability that a sentence s discusses a particular
aspect k, given the ratings v associated with the review, is
P (θ,φ)(aspect(s) = k | sentence s, rating v) =
aspect weights
sentiment weights
The normalization constant Zs is
θkw + φkvkw
Note that θk is indexed by the aspect k, so that we learn
which words are associated with each of the K aspects.
Alternately, φkvk is indexed by the aspect k, and the rating
for that aspect vk; this way, for each aspect we learn
which words are associated with each star rating. While
using θ and φ together has no more expressive power than
using φ alone, we ﬁnd that separating the model in this
way is critical for interpretability. Another option would be
to have a single sentiment parameter φvk for all aspects;
however, we ﬁnd that each aspect uses different sentiment
words (e.g. ‘delicious’ for taste, ‘skunky’ for smell), so it is
beneﬁcial to learn sentiment models per-aspect .
Assuming that aspects for each sentence are chosen independently, we can write down the probability for an entire
review (and an entire corpus) as
p(θ,φ)(aspects|R, V) =
p(θ,φ)(aspect(s)|s, vi). (3)
We will now show how to learn aspect labels and parameters
so as to maximize this expression.
IV. LEARNING
We describe three learning schemes, which use increasing
levels of supervision in the form of sentence labels. As we
show in Section VI, increased supervision leads to higher
accuracy, though even without supervision we can obtain
good performance given enough data.
A. Unsupervised Learning
Unsupervised learning proceeds by choosing the parameters (ˆθ, ˆφ) and the latent aspect assignments ˆt so as to
maximize the log-likelihood of the corpus:
(ˆθ, ˆφ), ˆt = argmax
log p(θ,φ)(t|R, V)
corpus probability
regularizer
Optimization proceeds by coordinate ascent on (θ, φ) and
t, i.e., by alternately optimizing
log p(θ,φ)i(t|R, V)
log p(θ,φ)(ti|R, V) −Ω(θ, φ) (6)
until convergence, i.e., until ti = ti−1. Optimizing (eq. 5)
merely consists of maximizing (eq. 1) independently for
each sentence. Noting that the model is concave in (θ, φ),
optimization of (eq. 6) proceeds by gradient ascent, where
partial derivatives can be easily calculated. We regularize
using the squared ℓ2 norm, Ω(θ, φ) = ||θ||2
2 + ||φ||2
Being a local optimization procedure, coordinate ascent is
sensitive to initialization. We initialize θ by setting θk,k = 1
for each aspect k (e.g. θtaste,‘taste′ = 1). In practice this
means that initially a sentence is assigned to an aspect
if it explicitly mentions the name of that aspect. Other
parameters were initialized randomly; we selected the model
with the highest log-likelihood among 64 random restarts.
Finally, we note that (eq. 1) is underconstrained, in the
sense that adding a constant to θkw and subtracting the same
Both our segmentation and summarization tasks can be expressed as weighted bipartite graph cover. Each of the sentences at left (from a
BeerAdvocate review) must be matched to an aspect. The optimal cover is highlighted using bold edges. For the segmentation task (left graph), ﬁve nodes
are constrained to match to each of the ﬁve aspects, ensuring that each aspect appears at least once in the segmentation (the remaining two unconstrained
aspects are both ‘smell’ in this case). The summarization task (right graph) includes precisely one node for each aspect, so that each aspect is summarized
using the sentence that most closely aligns with that aspect’s rating.
constant from φk·w has no effect on the model. To address
this, we add an additional constraint that
φkvw = 1, for all k, w.
This has no effect on performance, but in our experience
leads to signiﬁcantly more interpretable parameters.
B. Enforcing Diversity in the Predicted Output
An issue we encountered with the above approach is
that ‘similar’ aspects tended to coalesce, so that sentences
from different aspects were erroneously assigned a single
label. For example, on BeerAdvocate data, we noticed that
‘smell’ and ‘taste’ words would often combine to form
a single aspect. From the perspective of the regularizer,
this makes perfect sense: ratings for ‘smell’ and ‘taste’ are
highly correlated, and similar words are used to describe
both; thus setting one aspect’s parameter vector to zero
signiﬁcantly reduces the regularization cost, while reducing
the log-likelihood only slightly.
To address this, we need to somehow enforce diversity in
our predictions, that is, we need to encode our knowledge
that all aspects should be discussed. In practice, we enforce
such a constraint per-review, so that we choose the most
likely assignments of aspects, subject to the constraint that
each aspect is discussed at least once. We ﬁnd this type of
constraint in computer vision applications: for example, to
localize a pedestrian, we might encode the fact that each of
their limbs must appear exactly once in an image . Instead
of matching image coordinates to limbs, we match sentences
to aspects, but otherwise the technology is the same. In ,
such a constraint is expressed as bipartite graph cover, and
is optimized using linear assignment.
We construct a bipartite graph for each review r, which
matches |r| sentences to |r| aspects. From (eq. 1) we deﬁne
the compatibility between a sentence s and aspect k:
{θkw + φkvkw}.
Next we deﬁne edge weights in terms of this compatibility
function. Noting that each of the K aspects must be included
in the cover, our weight matrix A(r) is deﬁned as
each of the K aspects must have a matching sentence
if 1 ≤l ≤K
other sentences can match any aspect
and the optimal cover is given by
ˆf = argmax
which is found using the Kuhn-Munkres algorithm.
This entire procedure is demonstrated in Figure 2, where
the assignment matrix A(r) is visualized using a weighted
bipartite graph, so that ˆf becomes a cover of that graph. The
nodes on the left of the graph correspond to the sentences in
the review, while the nodes on the right correspond to their
assignments. K of the nodes on the right are constrained
to match each of the K aspects, while the remaining nodes
may match to any aspect.
The same bipartite matching objective can also be used for
our summarization task. Here, our goal is to predict for each
aspect the sentence that best explains that aspect’s rating.
Using the compatibility function of (eq. 8), our goal is now
to choose the K sentences that are most compatible with the
K aspects. This idea is depicted on the right of Figure 2.
These constraints are discarded for reviews with fewer than
K sentences.
If the hard constraint that every aspect must be discussed
proves too strong, it can be relaxed by adding additional
‘unconstrained’ nodes: for example, adding two additional
nodes would mean that each review must discuss at least
K −2 unique aspects. Alternately, in datasets where aspects
are easily separable (such as CitySearch), this constraint can
be discarded altogether, or discarded at test time. However,
for datasets whose aspects are difﬁcult to distinguish (such
as BeerAdvocate), this constraint proved absolutely critical.
C. Semi-Supervised Learning
The semi-supervised variant of our algorithm is no different from the unsupervised version, except that the probability
is conditioned on some fraction of our groundtruth labels t′,
i.e., our optimization problem becomes
(ˆθ, ˆφ), ˆt = argmax
log p(θ,φ)(t|R, V, t′)
corpus probability
regularizer
In addition, we initialize the parameters θ and φ so as to
maximize the likelihood of the observed data t′.
D. Fully-Supervised Learning
Given fully-labeled data, it would be trivial to choose
ˆθ and ˆφ so as to maximize the log-likelihood of (eq. 4).
However, a more desirable option is to learn parameters so
as to directly optimize the criterion used for evaluation.
Cohen’s kappa statistic is a standard accuracy measure
for document labeling tasks . It compares an annotator or
algorithm’s performance to that of a random annotator:
κ(a, b) = P(a agrees with b) −1/K
κ = 0 corresponds to random labeling, 0 < κ ≤1
corresponds to some level of agreement, while κ < 0
corresponds to disagreement. If two annotators a and b label
a corpus with aspects t(a) and t(b), then
P(a agrees with b) = 1 −∆0/1(t(a), t(b)),
where ∆0/1 is the 0/1 loss. Critically, since kappa is a
monotonic function of the 0/1 loss, a predictor trained to
minimize the 0/1 loss will maximize Cohen’s kappa statistic.
We train a predictor based on the principle of regularized
risk minimization, i.e., we optimize
ˆθ, ˆφ = argmin
∆0/1(t(θ,φ), t′)
empirical risk
regularizer
so that ˆθ and ˆφ are chosen so as to minimize the 0/1 loss
on some training data t′ provided by an annotator.
If not for the diversity constraint of Section IV-B, optimization of (eq. 14) would be independent for each sentence,
and could be addressed using a multiclass SVM or similar technique. However, the diversity constraint introduces
structure into the problem so that predictions cannot be made
independently. Thus we require an optimization technique
designed for structured output spaces, such as that of .
The use of bipartite graph cover objectives in structured
learning is addressed in , where an objective similar to
that of (eq. 10) is used to match keypoints in images. We
adapt their framework to our problem, which can be shown
to minimize a convex upper bound on (eq. 14).
V. LEARNING TO PREDICT RATINGS FROM TEXT
In many websites with multiple aspect ratings, ratings for
aspects are optional, while only ‘overall’ ratings are mandatory. For example, our 10,989 Audible reviews represent only
those where all three aspects (author, narrator, overall) were
rated. In total there were 199,810 reviews in our crawl that
included an overall vote but were missing an aspect rating.
Predicting such missing ratings may help us to understand
why users voted the way they did. We will learn models for
this task from users who entered complete ratings.
A na¨ıve solution would be to learn parameters γkvkw for
each aspect k and rating vk, using fully-rated reviews as
training data. That is, each rating vik for review ri and aspect
k would be predicted according to
ik = argmax
We shall see in Section VI that this proves ineffective
when users have mixed feelings about different aspects:
both positive and negative words appear together in reviews,
making it difﬁcult to ‘tease-apart’ users’ opinions.
An appealing solution to this problem consists of using
segmented text to predict ratings for each aspect, i.e.,
ik = argmax
δ(ˆtis = k)
sentences labeled with aspect k
However, we found that this approach also performs poorly,
even when highly accurate sentence labels are available .
A simple explanation is that different aspects are highly
correlated: for example, when learning na¨ıve predictors from
unsegmented text on BeerAdvocate data as described in
(eq. 15), we found that the word ‘skunky’ was among the
strongest 1-star predictors for all aspects, even though the
word clearly refers only to smell. Not surprisingly, a product
that smells ‘skunky’ is unlikely to be rated favorably in terms
of its taste; by predicting ratings from segmented text as in
(eq. 16), we fail to exploit this correlation.
Instead, the model we propose uses segmented text, but
explicitly encodes relationships between aspects. Our model
is depicted in Figure 3. In addition to conditioning on
segmented text, the ‘smoothness’ term α encodes how likely
two ratings are to co-occur for different aspects:
δ(tis = k)
For example, αsmell,taste,1,5 encodes the penalty for a 1-star
‘smell’ vote to co-occur with a 5-star ‘taste’ vote; in practice
α prevents such an unlikely possibility from occurring.
We train each of the above predictors (eqs. 15, 16, and 17)
so as to minimize the ℓ2 error of the prediction compared
to the groundtruth ratings used for training, i.e.,
(ˆγ, ˆα) = argmin
k̸=overall
−vik||2 + Ω(γ, α).
We optimize this objective using a multiclass SVM in the
case of (eqs. 15 and 16), though for (eq. 17) the term α
introduces dependencies between ratings, so we again use
structured learning techniques as in Section IV-D .
Figure 3. Graphical model for predicting ratings from segmented text. Grey
nodes represent observations, whereas white nodes represent variables. The
model incorporates both segmented text and relationships between aspects.
VI. EXPERIMENTS
We evaluate PALE LAGER on our segmentation, summarization, and rating prediction tasks. Segmentation requires
us to predict aspect labels for each sentence in our review
corpora, while summarization requires us to choose one
sentence per aspect for each review. For the ﬁrst two
tasks we report the accuracy (i.e., the fraction of correct
predictions), which is related to Cohen’s kappa by (eq. 12).
For rating prediction we report the ℓ2 error of the predicted
ratings, after scaling ratings to be in the range . Even
in the largest experiments we report, PALE LAGER could be
trained in a few hours using commodity hardware.
We randomly split groundtruth data from each of our corpora into training and test sets. Our unsupervised algorithm
uses entire corpora, but ignores groundtruth sentence labels;
our semi-supervised algorithm also uses entire corpora, and
conditions on the labeled training data; our fully-supervised
algorithm uses only the labeled training data. All algorithms
are evaluated on groundtruth labels from the test set. For our
rating prediction task, we further split our unlabeled data into
training and test sets, so that our segmentation algorithms
are not trained using the ratings we are trying to predict.
A. Review Segmentation
Figure 4 (top) shows the performance of PALE LAGER on
the seven datasets we consider. As expected, semi-supervised
learning improves upon unsupervised learning (by 45% on
average), and fully-supervised learning outperforms semisupervised learning by a further 17%; the sole exception
occurs on Audible data, which is possibly due to overﬁtting.
Despite the good performance of our unsupervised method
on BeerAdvocate data, it performs poorly on non-English
RateBeer data. The simplest explanation is merely the
paucity of non-English data, revealing that while this task
can be approached without supervision, it requires many
reviews to do so (though this could be addressed using
seed-words). Once we add supervision, we observe similar
performance across all three beer datasets.
As a baseline we compare PALE LAGER to Latent Dirichlet Allocation . We train LDA with different numbers
topics, and use our training labels to identify the optimal
correspondence between topics and aspects (so in this sense
CITYSEARCH RESULTS, USING ACCURACY SCORES FROM .
Always label as ‘food’
MultiGrain LDA 
Segmented Topic Models 
Local LDA 
Support Vector Machine
PALE LAGER, unsupervised
PALE LAGER, semi-supervised
PALE LAGER, fully-supervised
the process is semi-supervised). Our semi-supervised model
outperforms this baseline in 5 out of 7 cases and by 48% on
average; two exceptions occur in datasets where users tend to
focus on their overall evaluation and do not discuss aspects
(e.g. toy reviews rarely discuss durability or educational
value). We acknowledge the existence of more sophisticated
variants of LDA, though we are not aware of suitable
alternatives that scale to millions of reviews; we used Online
LDA as implement in Vowpal Wabbit , which required
a few hours to train on our largest dataset.
In all experiments fully-supervised learning outperforms
semi-supervised learning, even though the semi-supervised
algorithm has access to both labeled and unlabeled data. An
explanation is that our semi-supervised algorithm optimizes
the log-likelihood, while the fully-supervised algorithm directly optimizes the accuracy score used for evaluation. It
is certainly possible that by using latent-variable structured
learning techniques our fully-supervised algorithm could be
extended to make use of unlabeled data .
1) Performance on CitySearch data: To our knowledge,
the 652 review CitySearch dataset from , is the only
publicly-available dataset for the aspect labeling task we
consider. In Table II we report published results from .
For comparison we used the same seed-words as in their
study, which aid performance signiﬁcantly. Note that in this
dataset supervision takes the form of per-sentence ratings,
rather than per-aspect ratings, though our method can be
adapted to handle both. PALE LAGER is competitive with
highly sophisticated alternatives, while requiring only a few
seconds for training. The supervised version of our model,
which jointly models text and ratings, outperforms (by 7%)
an SVM that uses text data alone. Overall, this is a promising
result: our method is competitive with sophisticated alternatives on a small dataset, and scales to the real-world datasets
we consider.
B. Review Summarization
In the context of our model, summarization means identifying a subset of sentences that best explain a user’s
multiple-aspect rating. Speciﬁcally, for each review ri and
aspect k, we choose the sentence that maximizes the score
for that aspect given the aspect’s rating vik, as described
in Section IV. This setup is motivated by the ﬁndings of
beeradvocate
audiobooks
ratebeer (French) ratebeer (Spanish)
citysearch
Segmentation task, accuracy (higher is better)
LDA, K topics, semi-supervised
LDA, 10 topics, semi-supervised
LDA, 50 topics, semi-supervised
PALE LAGER, unsupervised
PALE LAGER, semi-supervised
PALE LAGER, fully-supervised
beeradvocate
audiobooks
ratebeer (French) ratebeer (Spanish)
citysearch
Summarization task, accuracy (higher is better)
LDA, K topics, semi-supervised
LDA, 10 topics, semi-supervised
LDA, 50 topics, semi-supervised
PALE LAGER, unsupervised
PALE LAGER, semi-supervised
PALE LAGER, fully-supervised
beeradvocate
audiobooks
ratebeer (French)
ratebeer (Spanish)
mean squared error
Rating prediction (lower is better)
SVM, unsegmented text only
SVM, segmented text only
Structured-SVM, unsegmented text and rating model
PALE LAGER, unsupervised segmentation and rating model
PALE LAGER, semi-supervised segmentation and rating model
PALE LAGER, fully-supervised segmentation and rating model
Performance of PALE LAGER and baselines on our segmentation task (top), our summarization task (middle), and our rating prediction task
(bottom). Results are shown in terms of accuracy (higher is better) and mean squared error (lower is better).
Maxent classiﬁer (AUC = 0.88)
PL, unsupervised (AUC = 0.79)
PL, semi-sup. (AUC = 0.84)
PL, fully-sup. (AUC = 0.90)
Maxent classiﬁer (AUC = 0.95)
PL, unsupervised (AUC = 0.85)
PL, semi-sup. (AUC = 0.92)
PL, fully-sup. (AUC = 0.97)
Maxent classiﬁer (AUC = 0.74)
PL, unsupervised (AUC = 0.75)
PL, semi-sup. (AUC = 0.78)
PL, fully-sup. (AUC = 0.86)
Maxent classiﬁer (AUC = 0.66)
PL, unsupervised (AUC = 0.72)
PL, semi-sup. (AUC = 0.73)
PL, fully-sup. (AUC = 0.79)
Maxent classiﬁer (AUC = 0.83)
PL, unsupervised (AUC = 0.75)
PL, semi-sup. (AUC = 0.77)
PL, fully-sup. (AUC = 0.82)
Precision recall curves for sentence ranking (blue curves are the PALE LAGER model). Like in , we ﬁnd that our unsupervised method
achieves performance close to that of a fully-supervised Maximum Entropy classiﬁer. However, we also report that our semi-supervised method matches
the performance of the maxent classiﬁer, and our fully supervised method outperforms maximum entropy classiﬁcation signiﬁcantly. In terms of Mean
Average Precision, Maxent = 0.82 (fully-supervised), PALE LAGER = 0.76 (unsupervised), 0.81 (semi-supervised), 0.87 (fully-supervised).
 ; they show that users prefer summaries that discuss
sentiments about various aspects of a product, rather than
merely the aspects themselves.
Results for this task are shown in Figure 4 (middle).
As before, increased supervision improves performance in
almost all cases (semi-supervised learning beats unsupervised learning by 34%, and fully-supervised learning further
improves performance by 17%). Note that summarization is
not necessarily ‘easier’ than segmentation, and both have
higher scores on different datasets. Summarization is easiest
when users discuss a variety of aspects, while segmentation
is easiest when users primarily discuss ‘easy to classify’
aspects. In practice, performance on both tasks is highly
correlated. For this task, PALE LAGER outperforms LDA
signiﬁcantly, since LDA incorrectly labels infrequentlydiscussed aspects, and doesn’t make use of rating data.
1) Aspect Ranking: Some works deﬁne summarization
in terms of ranking , , . For each aspect, probabilities are computed for each sentence, which are sorted
to produce a ranking. Summarization can then be cast
as retrieving the most relevant sentences for each aspect.
Although the data from are not available, for the sake
of comparison we reproduce their experimental setup and
baselines.
Figure 5 shows aspect ranking results on BeerAdvocate
data. On their own data, reported that their unsupervised
method performed only 5% worse than a fully-supervised
maxent classiﬁer. We report a similar result for our own
unsupervised method (MAP=0.76 vs. 0.82), though we ﬁnd
that unsupervised learning outperforms maxent classiﬁcation
for two out of ﬁve aspects. Furthermore, our semi-supervised
algorithm matches the performance of maxent classiﬁcation,
and our fully-supervised method outperforms it by 7%.
Aspect words θk
2-star sentiment words φk,2
5-star sentiment words φk,5
Word-cloud visualization of aspect parameters θk and sentiment parameters φkvk learned from BeerAdvocate data. Word sizes reﬂect the
weights θkw and φkvkw for each word w. Rows show different aspects k; the left column shows ‘aspect’ weights θk, the center column shows 2-star
‘sentiment’ weights φk,2, and the right column shows 5-star sentiment weights φk,5 (1-star sentiment weights proved too unwholesome for publication).
Parameters in this ﬁgure were learned using the unsupervised version of our model.
C. Rating Prediction
In many of the datasets we consider, only ‘overall’ ratings
are compulsory while aspect ratings are optional. In this
section we try to recover such missing aspect ratings. To
measure performance on this task we train on half of our
reviews to predict ratings for the other half. Naturally we
ensure that none of the data used for evaluation were used
during any stage of training, i.e., the segmentation models
used in this experiment were not trained using the reviews
on which we predict ratings.
Rating prediction performance is shown in Figure 4 (bottom). We exclude Pubs data as it includes no overall rating,
and CitySearch data as ratings are per-sentence rather than
per-review. As expected, ratings predicted from unsegmented
text are inaccurate, as conﬂicting sentiments may appear for
different aspects. More surprisingly, using segmented text
does not solve this problem (in fact it is 32% worse), even
when we have accurate aspect labels. A similar result was
reported by , who found that models capable of segmenting text from ratings are not necessarily good at predicting
ratings from text, and in fact such models do not outperform
simple Support Vector Regression baselines. This occurs
because aspect ratings are correlated, and predicting ratings
from segmented text fails to account for this correlation.
Our pairwise rating model, which explicitly models relationships between aspects, largely addresses this issue.
Combining our rating model with unsegmented text already
decreases the error by 23% compared to the SVM baseline, and combining our rating model with segmented text
decreases the error by a further 22%.
While segmented text improves upon unsegmented text,
the level of supervision has little impact on performance
for rating prediction. This is surprising, since supervision
affects segmentation performance signiﬁcantly, and in some
cases we obtain good performance on rating prediction
even when aspect labels are inaccurate. To understand this,
note that our unsupervised algorithm learns words that
are highly correlated with users’ ratings, which ultimately
means that the labels it predicts must in some way be
predictive of ratings, even if those labels are incorrect from
the perspective of human annotators. Pleasingly, this means
that we can train a model to predict aspect ratings using
an unsupervised segmentation model; in other words good
performance on our rating prediction task can be achieved
without the intervention of human annotators.
D. Qualitative Analysis
We now examine the aspect and sentiment lexicons
produced by our model. Figure 6 visualizes the learned
parameters θk and φkvk for the unsupervised version of
our segmentation model on BeerAdvocate data. We make
a few observations: First, the weights match our intuition,
e.g. words like ‘carbonation’, ‘head’, ‘aroma’, and ‘ﬂavor’
match the aspects to which they are assigned. Second,
the highest weighted words for ‘aspect’ parameters are
predominantly nouns, while the highest weighted words
for ‘sentiment’ parameters are predominantly adjectives;
this conﬁrms that aspect and sentiment words fulﬁl their
expected roles. Third, we ﬁnd that very different words are
used to describe different sentiments, e.g. ‘watery’ has high
weight for feel and taste, but not for look and smell; the
study ‘Old Wine or Warm Beer’ discusses how nouns
and adjectives interact in this type of data, supporting our
decision to model ‘aspect’ and ‘sentiment’ words separately,
and to include separate sentiment parameters for each aspect.
To explain why ‘corn’ is a 2-star smell and taste word,
note that corn is not normally an ingredient of beer. It is
used in place of barley in inexpensive, mass-produced beers
(so called ‘adjuncts’), which account for many of the 1- and
2-star reviews in our corpus; thus it is not surprising that the
word has negative connotations among beer enthusiasts.
VII. CONCLUSION
By introducing corpora of ﬁve million reviews from ﬁve
sources, we have studied review systems in which users
provide ratings for multiple aspects of each product. By
learning which words describe each aspect and the associated sentiment, our model is able to determine which parts
of a review correspond to each rated aspect, which sentences
best summarize a review, and how to recover ratings that are
missing from reviews. We learn highly interpretable aspect
and sentiment lexicons, and our model readily scales to the
real-world corpora we consider.
Acknowledgements. We thak oDesk, and especially Paul
Heymann, for their assistance and support in obtaining
groundtruth labels. This research has been supported in
part by NSF IIS-1016909, CNS-1010921, CAREER IIS-
1149837, IIS-1159679, Albert Yu & Mary Bechmann Foundation, Boeing, Allyes, Samsung, Intel, Alfred P. Sloan
Fellowship and the Microsoft Faculty Fellowship.